A Ternary of Paradoxes (Jan Baptista van Helmont (trans. Walter Charleton), 1650)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: the 1650 London edition translated, illustrated and amplified by Walter Charleton (https://archive.org/details/ternaryofparadox00helm). Van Helmont's three paradoxes in the landmark Charleton English edition: the magnetic cure of wounds, the nativity of tartar in wine, and the image of God in man — the foundational English text of Helmontian iatrochemistry.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TERNARY 

PARADOXES 

C  Magnetick  Cure  of  Wounds. 
ThesNativity  of  Tartar  in  Wine. 
Clmage  of  God  in  Man. 

Written  originally  byJob.'Bapt.VanHelmont,  and 
Tranflated,  Illuftrated,  and  Ampliated 

BY 

WALTER  CHA%LETO^ 

Do&or  in  Phyfick,  and  Phyfician  to 
the  late  King. 


SnfbeEia  apudplures  hujufmodi  Sanationis  Facilitate  atqttece- 
leritas  permanent  adhuc  dndnm  ;  vulgienim  labile  &ctiofum  in- 
genium,  in  arduis  ac  infolitis,  ad  judicia  ejufdem  femper  tenoris 
promptum^  ob  facilitatem,  ideocjue  flaccidttmefi.  Diabolic*  enim 
fratidi  tantam  reftitutionum  benignitatem  libentius  confecratfiudm 
Divin*  bomtati,  human*  natttrt  conditori,  Amatori,  Salvatori, 
pauper umq ft e patri.  Kutler. 

LONDON , 
Printed  by  fames  Flejher  for  William  Lee,  dwellingin 
FUetftreer,  at  the  fign  of  the  Turks  head.  i6$o. 


To  the  truly  Noble,  by  the  right  of 
Blood,Vhtue  and  Learning, 

WILLIAM 

Vifcount  Brouucker  of  Lyons,  Baron  Brouncker 
of  Newcaftle,  &c. 

My  very  good  Lord, 

Mong  other  Difparagements  of 
this  life,  collected  andfumdupin 
my  frequent  retirements  and  con- 
centrations of  my  Minde ,  my 
Thoughts  have  j  mo  e  then  once, 
glanced  on  the  exceeding  vanity  of 
that  Heroick  difeaje,  incident  to  the  heft  tempered  Souls, 
the  infatiate  Appetite  of  pofthume  Glory.  J.nd 
though  Imuft  not  but  confejs,  this  originary  FeaVer  ele- 
mented in  the  innate  Ardor  and  Scintillations  of  thofe 
Sparks  of  Divinity,  Tbhich  now  lie  raked  up  in  the 
Mafs  or  Chaos,  of  our  eclipfed Nature  -,  and  that  by  the 
light  of  thefefecret  Flajhes,  may  be  difcovered  the  Im- 
mortality of  that  Semideity,  or  noble  Effence,  for  a 
while  immured  in  walls  of  Clay  :  yet  when  I  make  re* 
fleftions  on  the  unconcemment ,  and  happy  infenfility 
of  the  Soul,  once  fled  home,  to  an  indijfoluble  Union  with 

J  x  the 


The  Epiftlc  Dedicatory. 


*/*  Soul  of  Beatitude  j  04  to  the  trifling  affairs  oft 
fwarm  of  Mortals y  here  below,  and  that  all  fylatw 
to  tfo  Vtftble  and  perifrahle  WM^  an  loft  m  utter  c  ■ 
livion,  at  the  vnftant  of  for  Tranfitioji  to  tfo  inYifib ) 
intellecTnal)  anivmmteri.i:  IcaMnotbntfmieatv 
Dehifion  of  this  Ambition,  ofhivntgottr  Memori: 
furvive  our  Afhes  ,  and  lifting  our  Names  in  t 
Legend  of  Fame  ,  by  the  ingraVemcnts  of  memoran 
and  ivor  thy  Anions  y  asfeemmg  to  be  no  more •   -tfoy 
provident  Fraud  of  impaired  Nature,  vrfxreby  mn 
is  fondfomly  deluded  into  the  attempting  Atlions  off*\> 
difficulty  or  danger }  as  if  preftnted  without  thej}c 
ows  difguife  of  Honor ,    mufl  appear  abfolutdyi- 
/hutliVe,at  leaft  to  the  Tranquillity  andjober  Frm  • 
on  of  owfelves,  if  not  alfo  to  our  Conformity  unto  tit 
CatMique  Maxime ,  deeply  imp/ejfed  upon  the  radii 
Principles  of  our  Ejfence,  Philautie  or  Self-confcn  •  | 
tion.  For  what  individual  KjWfrledg  can  we  haVi  j 
CxQlx  ?  Or  what  intelligence  can  fo  hold  with  tfof 
tits  of  thofey  whofacrifla  tfo  moft  of  Feneration  to  * 
Mcmo>y  ?  Or  did  the  inctnft  of  humane  Honor  afcu 
fo  Ugh,  4&  to  approach  tfo  Manfion  of  tfo  Souls  of  l-\ 
roes,  deVefted  of  Mortality  •  which  can  no  more  beg,  a  • 
eJtfon  thatamanon  ourHemifpbae1jfo>tild  befenfik 
of  tfo  wagging  of  a  ft  raw  tn  the  Antipodes :  yet  w  i 
could  tfo  A«xfi  of  that  Nothing  contribute  tot: 


The  Epiftlc  Dedicatory, 


fate  of  Bleffednef }  wlwfe  mcafarc  is immenfity, 

therein  to  imagine  either  Dcfeft,  Satiety,or  Mutati- 

-on,  would  be  a  Conceit  favoring  too  much  of  Senfualtty, 

,and  of  bloody  advantage  totbeabfurd  Metaphyfickjs  of 

ydx  Alcoran  *   And  bow  much  more  noble  a  plea,  to  the 

<ammarcefcible  Laurel  pall  that  modeft  head  obtain  , 

fyhicb,  in  all  Anxieties  and  Difficulties  ofVktuc,drew 

* encouragement  onelyfom  thefimple  and  naked  lovelinef 

of  Virtue  j  then  that  fond  ambitious  one,  wbofefuffer- 

ings  were  caufed  by  no  better  a  Flame,   then  the  Ignis 

\Fatuus  o/Applaufc,  anddefires  knew  no  other  at- 

-*}attive,  but  V  ain  glory. 

This  Meditation ;  my  dear  Lord,  as  it  could  never 

Jlifle  the  irradiations  of  my  Genius,  or  render  me  leji 

fenfible  of  the  incitements  of  Virtue,  to  enterprifefome* 

thing,  that  might  be  grateful  in  the  noji/ils  of  Vofterity, 

y>)xnmyT)uJlJhaIlbeoffenfive:  fohath  it  wrought  my 

refolutions  to  that  Stoical  temper,  that  Mobile  I  fix  one 

f  eye  o/Reafbn  on  that  domeftick  Security, and  internal 

*  Serenity ,   which  nece/farily  redounds  from  thefeVere 

'  prafilice  ofGoodnefi,  in  this  life ;  and  the  other  of  Faith 

on  that  infinite  Compilation  i   ordained  to  reward 

our  pious  endevours,  in  the  next :  I  can  comfortably  ac~ 

epdefee  inthefecret  difcharge  of  my  duty  to  God  and 

the  World ,  at  leafl  in  thefincerity  of  intention :    and 

?  though  I Jhould  arrive  at fuch  unexpe tied  Felicity,  as 

1 to 


The  Epiftlc  Dedicatory. 


to  be  an  in/hument,  or  acceffory,  either  in  the  difewy 
fome  Magnale  in  fyioiVlcdg,  or  in  the  Contribution 
fame  Benefit,  conduclive  to  the  repair  of  the  Comm 
breaches  oj  Humanity  •  yet  I  dare  confidently  hope.  I 
fhould  have  no  ear  open  to  the  invafion  of  PopuU 
EugeSj  nor  admit  any  dream  of  happinef \  intheefi 
mation  offucceeding  Ages. 

lS[ow,  though  the  too  acute  Severity  of  fome,  ma 
herebefurntfbed  with  latitude  enough,  either  to  char g 
this  my  Theory  of  Averfation  fromPraife,  on  m 
king  confeious  of fuch  Fragility,  Lapfes  and  Imper 
te&ions  of  my  1* en,  at  ?night  conclude ,  that  the  bej 
part  of  my  Judgment  lies  in  the  politick  Conceal 
ment  of  my  Name  5   or  deny  me  qualified  ivith  akli\ 
ties.of  reducing  it  into 'Tratlice :  yet  lhaVe  thisQom- 
fort  left  to  take  SanSiuary  in ,  that  I  may  (without 
ingaging  your  Lordflnp  ,  into  the  Tatronage  of  afalf 
hood)  appeal  unto  your  judicious  integrity,  for  deter- 
mination, whether  my  Scepticicy,  even  in  fuch  7>{oti' 
mis,  04  my  felf  bath,  to  the  mofl  precife,.  anatomical 
-■  n9UfiPU  fabdhijkntf  each  fubjeU,  and  abflrafted perpenfion 
vmnum,  de    of  each  minute  particle  thereof  {not  much  below  the 
genii'*         accurate  Method ,  invented  by  the  Stoicks  *,  and  late- 
*Jffi*M*  b  revived  into  ufe  by  the  mofl  ingenious  Mons.    Des 
tbodo  vermis  (Partes  *)  examined  and  tranfmitted  to  the  World, 
veftigand*,  p.  forjndubitate .  and  irrefragable  Truths ;  be  not  evidence* 

fhm 


n 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


jf,  ong  enough  to  make  good y  that  I  prefer  the  mmu 
fjlattm  of  any  one  fengle  Verity ,  to  all  other  finifler 
interejls,  in  this  Vale  of  Error,  and  therefore  jhould 
embrace  and  jftmiiite  the  decifive  Contraction  of 
tiper  heads ,  with  joy  tquall  to  that  of  benighted  Ma* 
•  jriners  ,  at  the  eruption  of  their  faithful!  <Pilot  y  the 
'/North  ftarre,  as  the  SoVeraign  Remedy  to  my  former 
Wandrings.  To  the  other  branch  of  the  prdfuppofed 
Scandall ,  may  juftly  be  oppofed  your  Lordfhips  pri- 
Vacie ,  to  my  obflinate  relutlancy ,  againfl  the  Ad- 
Vifoes  of  my  Honoured  Friends ,  urging  mee  to  a  pub- 
'.*lick  Appropriation  and  Avowance  of  jome  papers,  not 
long  fence ,  differfed  through  Europe,  without  the  pro- 
tell ion  either  of  Author ,  or  Dedication:  as  alfo  my 
denyallcf  Light  yto  fome  Philofophicall  Enquiries, 
Tvbofe  Conception ,  Formation  t  and  Maturity 
( though  of  inconfederable  Value,  in  the  account  of  more 
perfect  Learning )  coft  mee  the  profufion  of  fo  much 
TtmeandOyle,  as  iffummed  up  by  the  Algebra  of 
Candor  y  might  well  have  purchafed  the  Qharitable 
Forgivenefle ,  if  not  the  friendly  Approbation  of 
the  Reader. 

And  in  theferene  darknejfe  of  this  Latency,  I  had 
ftill  remained  inVtflble  to  the  ejfafcinating  Opticks  of 
Envy  j  and  celebrated  a  conflant  Jubilee  of  immunity 
from  the  virulent  blajls  of  Detraction  ,•  had  I  not 

SB  been 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


been  intempeflively  drawn  upon  the  Stage,  by  tbefupe- 
r'tor  Violence  of  two  invincible  Magnets :  wbofc potent 
Miciency  I  could  provide  againfl  by  the  oppofttion  of  no 
fhfennh.  but  Inch  as  either  a  dangerous  R  udenefs  cr 
indijcm  t  Moroilcy  mujl  have  afforded.  Thejirfl,  the 
inexorable  Commands  of  your  Lordjhip  and  other 
<P  erf  ins  j  of  Jo  much  Honor,  as  T^obdity  in  'Birth, 
.c\nowledg,a?i. I  Fortune  cancontribute -which  led  me  from 
the  more  direft  Tath  of  other  Qmtemplatiom  more  per- 
pendicular to  my  Trofefwn,  into  this  Canton  digrefion, 
and  upon  the  penalty  of  the  deprivation  of  that,  which 
I  have good  reafon  to  Value  much  above  my  life,  the  place 
Iheld  in  your  and  their  favourable  Regard,  charged  me 
witbtke  managery  of  this  fm.ill Province,  for  the fpace 
of  two  imneths  oneiy .  Jnd  had  I  withdrawn  my  Obe- 
ditnee  from  fuel?  a'ojolute  SoVeraignty ,  as,  1  muft  ac- 
knowledge yonr  Lord/hips  and  their  more  lamed  Spirks 
deferVedJy  bold  over  nunc :  'Doubtlcf  I  hadinevhably 
fain  t;pon  that  fo  much  to  be  abhorred  rock,  nfraBaiy 
Incivility  ,  and  run  nyftlf  H  an  eternal  loft  of  tho!c 
Stars,  u>hof  confrVhi^  influence  ,and  vigorous  wamth, 
are  fo  neceffary  to  the  Vitality  and  Gro'ilthofmyStti  ■ 
IV I -ocas  now,  intixsclccfron^  I  baVe  adven- 
tured cnely  to  bear  up  agahft  theimpctimit,  torrent  of 
i fn m  The 'Other  ArtraliiVey  the  too  early  Dif- 
f,hon  of  ti 'tie  jhie'L  and  the  immature  admittance 

<f 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


of  a  multitude  to  the  acquaintance  of  them ,  and  the 
"weak  hand  that  Copied  them .  infomuch,  that  the  con- 
cealment of  the  Tranflator,  carried  the  face  of  an  im- 
pofsibility,  without  thejoynt  concealment  of  the  Tranj- 
lition  '.  It  being  (by  an  error  of  T^ecej^ity,  the  Confor- 
mity to  the  unrtfiflibk  importunity  of  thofe  Orbes, 
to  ivhofe  motion,  mine  is,  and  mufi  be>  fubordinate) 
transmitted  to  a  Community,  beyond  the  power  of  Re- 
vocation. 

Tl?us  much  1  was  concerned  to  /peak  ,  as  to  the 
Precaution  of  Scandal,  deduclive  out  of  my  Apo- 
fiafie,  from  my  Solution  of  Self-  conceal ment? 
and  the  publick  ayowance  of  my  f elf  for  tl?e  Father  : 
It  remains  onely,  ■  th,it  I  cnde'Vour  a  spallation  of  this 
boldhpfeof  my  judgment,  infloopingyour  Lordjlnpto 
jo  low  aPatrpmge,  <tffofoGo  J- father,  to  this  a- 
dopted  Childe. 

I  ever  looked  upzn  Dedications ,  with  the  fame 
afyeclof negletl,  and prejumption  of  inutility,  that  I 
beheld  Prologues  in  the  Front  of  Comedies  .  having 
upon  the  unhappy  Experience  of  moft  Poets  creeled  this 
unrefutable  Maxime ,  That  a  good  Pixy  may  commend 
a  bad  Prologue -,  but  the  heft  Prologue  mVer  exp'ute 
the  Errors,  or peeceup  the  defetlsof  abadPUy-  and 
upon  a  mature  Audit -of  all  the  benefits,  7»foch  the  moft 
Elegant ,  and  'judicious  Pens  have  acquired  by  this 

'B    i  imaginary 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


imaginary  fyfuge,  in  the  Santfuary  of  great  Names, 
or  great  Judgements,  found  that  the  total!  refult 
amounts  to  no  more,  but  a  delufive  hope  of  (ecurity 
from  the  Contagious  emifiions  of  that  Uni- 
verfall  Bafilisk  Detraction  5  TfhofeVenome,  in  a 
proud  confidence  of  Vttlory }  laughs  at  the  mofl  Vigo- 
rons  cmrgie  of  any  the  mofl  facred  Antidote ,  and  from 
the  infi  clion  whereof^  he  onely  can  bee  JaVed,  that  dares 
encounter  it  with  Contempt. 

Again  y  my  faith  hath  long  fwam  fmoothly  downe 
the  current  of  the  Topular  opinion ,  that  Tranflati- 
ons  pr&fent  the  life  of  their  Text  ■  at  as  great  difad- 
yantage  of  Diflimilitude,  as  the  backjide  of  Hang- 
in  gs  exhibit  the  flory  interwoven  :  and  are  at  beft, 
butflender  Adumbrations,  or  pale  Counterfeits  of 
thofe  more  lively  Images ,  drawne  with  more  jlrength 
of  Art ,  in  the  (primitive  Thanfy  of  their  Protoplaft. 
ls[pr  could  ley er  be  alienated  by  the  Tbwifie  of  ]>{ar- 
cijjus,  intofuch  a  fond  dotage  of  Partiality  ,  as  to  ex- 
fcSi  a  better  Fortune  J)?ould  belong  to  the  lines ,  copied 
by  my  untquaUTencil ,  then  what  I  have  obferVed  to 
have  accrewed  to  others  upon  more  laudable  Tranfcrip- 
tions.  This  I  would  not  have  rafhly  extended  by  anyy 
to  an  imputation  of  occult  'Bhjphemy,  againfl  theVe- 
nerable i  Majefiy  of  our  Mother  Tongue,-  out  of 
which  ^l  am  ready  to  affert, may  be  [fun  as  fine  and 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


fit  a  garment ,  for the  moft  fpruce  Conceptions  of 
the  MincWo  appeare  in  publick  in,  as  out  of  any 
other  in  the  World:  efpecially ,  fmcethe  Carmina- 
tion  or  refnemeyit  of  ity  by  the  skill  and  fweat  of  thofe 
two  Heroicall  Wits ,  the  LordSt.Alban,andthe  now 
flouriJ}?ingDr.  Browne  5  out  of  whofe  incomparable 
Writings  may  befelected  a  Volume  of  fuch  full  and 
fignificant  Exprefsions.,  as  if  uprightly  fathomed  by 
theutmoji  Extent  ofthefublimeji  Thought,  may 
well  ferVe  to  ftagger  that  Tartiall  Axiome  of  fome 
Schoolmen,  that  the  Latin  is  the  moft  lympho- 
niacall  and  Concordant  Language  of  the  Rati- 
onal! Soul  e. 

Thefe  Diminutions  as  well  of  the  Epidcmick  cufiome 
of  Dedications  ,  as  of  Tranflations  in  generally  and 
of  my  owne  in  particular ',  I  have  pr<zmifed  Vtth  defigney 
to  manifeft  my  owne  exceeding  Audacity,  in  confe- 
cratingfo  contemptible  an  oblationy  as  this  tranfcriptive. 
Landskip  of  Magnetifme,  to  the  Altar  of  fo  much 
fiber  Learning «  as  whoever  hath  the  happy  honour  of 
admificn  to  your  clofet  letlures  {the  onely  priVtled^e  I 
can  be  proud  of  and  be  forgiven)  or  but  with  a  difcreet 
earetotafie your  publick  Difcourfes  in  earnejiy  mujl 
allow  your  Lordjbip  to  be  Majier  of 

Having  thm  deVefted  myfelfofall  other  pretences , 
I  direct  my  addrejfe  to  the  Tlea  ofthofe  two  Cardinall 

B  3  Motives 


The  Epiftle  Dedicatory. 


Motives,  upon  thefvindg  or  raptof  whofe  Violence, 
this  my  bold  Error  mayjeem  naturally  to  depend.     The 
firft,  (a*d  in  troth  ,  the  Trime)  is  your  Lor dfnp  known 
Candor  and  humility  •  which  acquired  by  aLngand 
h.ibitual  Exercife  oj  Virtue  ,  endows  you  with  anin- 
tviublepropcnjityj  to  forgive  the  Poverty  of  his  offer- 
/'?;*,  whole  Wealth  is  oncly  Zeal.    The  other,  your 
Animadverfion  and  careful  influence  beflowedupon 
eachfbtet  of  this  Work,  Juccefively,  hejore  the  Ink 
could  he  fully  dry:  Infomuchy  thatthcjufliceof fome 
might  ffely  efcape  the  imputation  of'l(igor,f?ouldit 
determine  the  Book  to  be  properly  your  Lordjbips  by  a 
merer  right,  then  that  of  Dedication.  This  duly  con- 
fute)'ed,  1  dare  put  myfelfupon  the  tryal  of  /Equani- 
mity •    whether  an  Alienation  of  what  is  rightly 
yours,  to  more  then  a  mcity  •  or  an  equitable  Resig- 
nation of  the  fame,  toyour  peculiar  uje,  can  befl  (land 
with  the  Jujlice  of  his  Duty,  who  endeVours^  by  all 
pofible  objeryances,  tom.ikcgood  the  title  of 

Your  Lordfhips  moR  humble 
and  faithful  Servant, 

W.  Charleton. 


t%ol  ego  Merest. 

To  the  Candid  and  Ingenuous 
READER. 


The  Summary. 

t.  '"TpRuth  and  the  Rational  Soul  are  Twins.  2.  The  Soul; 
A  Beatitude  confilteth  in  her  re-union  to  Truth.  3  .Three 
Guides  conducting  Man  to  Truth.  4.  Their  feveral  wayes  of 
direction,  f.  The  Final  Caufe  of  their  Manudu&ion.  6.  The 
Cognition  of  natural  objecls,  diiHcult  to  the  exa&efl  Reafon. 
7.  The  Application  of  all  this,  by  way  of  apology.  8.  The 
Hoti  of  Magnetical  Remedies  examined.  9.  An  example,  de 
facto..  10.  Afecond  infhnce,  confiderable.  11.  The  Capi- 
tal objection  a-gainft:  Magnetifm  Vulnerary,  that  the  cure  is 
wrought  by  the  lble  power  of  nature,  and  not  by  any  concur- 
rent faculty  of  the  remote  Remedy,  anfwered.  1 2 .  The  firiT 
branch  of  the  Solution.  13.  Upon  every  Solution  of  Conti- 
nuity, there  is  imprefTed  an  exotitk  Miafm,  or  putrefactive 
acidity.  14. „T-his  alien  impreilion,  the  lole  remora  to  redin- 
tegration.. 15.  The  extinction  of  the  fame,  the  onely  mean'j 
to  affiff  Nature.  16.  All  Acidity  fubjeel:  to  the  power  of  an 
Alchaml.  iy.The  ground  of  Traumatical  Potion?.  1 8.  Vitriol 
referred  to  Alchahal  Salts,  and  Vulnerary.  19.  The  Pedep-eo 
of  Helmonfs-Drif.  20.  Vitriol  fanative  at  diftance.  21.  An 
Aftral  quality  genial  tofome  fublunaries.    22.    Vitriol  to  be 

allowed 


PROLEGOMENA 


•  allowed  the  like  Prerogative.  23.  The  fecond  branch  of  the 
Solution.  24.  The  cried  of  Hoplochrifme  not  univocall;  but 
variable,according  to  the  fuperiour  virtue  of  any  third  nature 
aflbci  ated.  25.  A  fecond  Objection,  Jguhd  Agens  Natttrale, 
ut  agat,  debet  effe  applicatum  C"  approximate  ad  Patiens,  re- 
futed. 26.  A  Consideration  cf  the  infinite  extent  of  Divifibi- 
lity. 27. Every  Uncluous  body  emitteth  confimilar  effluviums. 
28.  Sympathy,  longimanus.  29-  An  example  of  the  vail  ex- 
tent of  Sympathy. 30. A  fecond  3  i.A  third.  32  The  refult  of 
all,  in  a  Comparative  fpeculation  of  the  extenfive  power  of 
Magneticall  Remedies.  33.  The  -manner  of  the  Armary  Un- 
guents operation,  upon  a  wound  at  indeterminate  diftance, 
explained  inbriefe.$4.Acidity,thefirfl:  degree  of  Corruption. 
35.  Tartar  made  in  Wine,  by  the  fixative  power  of  a  Saline 
Spirit,refident  in  the  Lees.  36.  Vineger  caufed  by  an  exhaufti- 
omnotby  a  Congelation  of  the  fpirits  of  Wine.  37.  Helmonts 
Paradox,  that  reafon  is  notefTentiall  to  the  Humane  Soule, 
maintained  by  eight  Arguments. 


Ell  did  the  Primitive  Grecian  give  the 
name  'AAw^eia  unto  truth  :  whofe 
Tbebraubof  |ffl!l  C°nfanguinny  nay  Confidentiality 
God,byancafy  wSSJfe  or  Lflence  with  the  Humane  Soule  whin 
Muaph.       ^  9WWl  t|lc  Dlvmc  Philofophy  of  Mofes  *  hath 

defined  to  be  the  Breath  of  God,  doth  exactly  make 
out  that  Etymology.  For  fo  unceflant  a  Magnetifme, 
or  congenerous  Love  doth  the  Soule  hold  unto  Truth^ 
that  (he  can  know  no  reall  or  permanent  fatisfa&ion, 
in  the  fruition  of  any  other  object  •,  but,  like  the 
A  guifh  magnetised  Needle,  reels  to  and  fro,  in  a 
Phrenfie  of  inquietude,  dihra&ed  twixt  various  Ap- 
paritions ,    untill  ihee  lye  parallel  unto  the  Center, 

or 


*  Gen.  a.  ver.7 
I. 


(PROLEGOMENA 


or  Vnitj  thereof:  and  having  once  fixed  in  that  happy 
pofition,  foe  is,  by  an  eternal  union,  identified  or  affi- 
milated  unco  that  twin  of  her  felf  ^  and  in  thatmyfteri- 
ous  penetration  of  homogcneal  Forms,  meets  her  Bea- 
titude, which  can  never  know  any  Defecl,  of  Safiety, 
Alterity  of  De fires,  or  Remifiion  of  Intenfuy.    Now, 
though  the  opacity  of  Original  Sin  hathfo  benighted 
the  primitive  Clarity  of  the  Intelle'd,  that  it  deplorably 
wanders  in  the  infinite  fed uctions  of  Error ;  and  cannot 
recover  that  direct  path,  which  leads  to  the  Heaven  of 
Verity,  without  the  manudu&ion  of  Divine  Light,  in 
this  Wildernefs  of  Sorrow  -,  and  though  the  Opticks 
of  Fleiri  and  Blood  are  too  dim  to  endure  to  gaze  upon 
the  naked  and  entire  Glories  of  Truth  •  yet  hath  the  ex- 
ceeding Mercy  of  the  Fountain  of  Light,  furnifhcd  us 
with  three  faithful  Guides,  whofe  Conduct  if  wepre- 
cifely  follow,  we  may  be  reduced  to  that  advantage  of 
Knowledg,  as  will  afford  us  a  Pifgah  Sight,  orcrepuf- 
culous  profpect  of  her  reflexive  Beauties,  now,  and  an 
alTurance  of  being  blefledly  engulphed  in  the  Abyfs  of 
her  Pleafures,  in  the  future.     Thofe  three  Lines,  per- 
petually deradiating  from  the  Center  of  Truth  (the  eter- 
nal Principle  of  all  E(Tences,and  Soul  of  all  Caufalities) 
are  Religion,  Reafon,  and  Senfe  :  all  terminated  in  our 
Nature.   The  firft  leadeth  us  by  the  invifible  Clue  of 
Faith,  on  towards  the  implicit  and  certain  Apprehcn- 
fion  of  objects  above  the  reach  of  the  other  two.   The 
fccond  bringcth  us  about,  through  the  Circumambages 
and  complex  Labyrinth  of  Difcourfe  5  and  from  the 
remote  dependencies  of  Effects  upon  their  particular 
Caufes,  ufhereth  us  along  by  a  fubalternate  Series,  or 
Gradation  unto  the  Science  of  their  ultimate  Approxi- 
mation and  Individuality.  The  lait  by  a  fhorter  Cut,or 

C  blunter 


(PROLEGOMENA. 


6. 


blunter  method  of  preception^  direfteth  to  the  imme- 
diate and  actual  Knowledg  of  the  Exijlence  and  exteri- 
or or  manifeft  Qualities  of  Entities  •  but  leaveth  the 
fecond  to  a  laborious  exploration  of  their  abftrufcr 
Forms,  or  eflential  Quiddities :  the  repeated  Ads  of 
which  apprehenfive  Power,informed  by  fenfatk>n,make 
up  that  body  of  Knowledg,  called  Experience.  All 
which  Pilots  mutually  confpire  to  ftcer  our  Mindes,pcr- 
pendicularly  toward  our  fatisfacfion  of  the  main  end  of 
our  Creation:  the  reverential  and  fiduciary  Contem- 
plation of  the  MercyJVifdem,  and  Bounty  of  the  Supream 
Effence.  But  fo  deeply  immcrfed  in  Senfuality,  are  all 
the  wretched  Sons  of  Ad Atn  ,  that  few  can  afcend  fo 
many  degrees  toward  the  height  of  their  primitive  Ca- 
pacity, as  with  equal  and  conftant  paces  to  purfue  the 
guidance  of  thefe  genial  Impreftons.  For  if  fome  may 
ufurp  the  licenfe  of  Conccflion,  that  the  habit  of  Cog- 
nition by  Faith  doth  fmoothly  refult  from  the  Idea's  of 
religious  Notions,  either  infenfibly  inftilled  into  our  in- 
fancy, and  natufallized  by  cuftom .,  or  cnthufiaftically 
acquired,  that  is  by  the  infufion  of  Light  Supernatural, 
without  much  labor  and  difficulty  precedent :  yet  none' 
that  ever  felt  the  weight  of  Ignorance,,  and  endevoured 
to  toggle  from  the  oppreflionof  it,  through  the  An- 
xieties of  ftudy,  will  adventure  on  an  aflertion  of  fuch- 
tementy,  as  that  the  fatisfe&ory  and  certain  Compre- 
henfion  of  moft  Natural  objetfs,  is  eafieand  familiar  to 
our  Reafon.  Since  the  fubtrleft  fpeculation  will  evift, 
that  every  the  fmalleft  piece  of  the  Hexameron  Fabrick,- 
carricth  in  the  narrow  round  of  its  fingle  Ens,  Abftrufi- 
ty  fufficient  to  empuzle  the  fcrutiny  of  the  moft  daring 
and  Eagle-eyed  Philofophy. 

And  if  Truth  be  the  moft  defiderablc  Good,  and  yet 

the- 


(p^OLEGOMEl^J. 


the  moft  difficult  to  obtain  •,  as  on  the  one  fide,  I  have 
reafon  to  applaud  my  vow ,  of  unravelling  my  (horc 
thread  of  life,  in  the  conftant  and  eager  fearch  of  this  in- 
estimable treafure ;  fo  have  I  alfo  opportunity  to  hope, 
from  all  heads  of  Candor  and  Difcretion,  to  receive  a 
Charitable  Confideration  and  Forgivenefs  of  my  frail 
miftakes  and  deviations,  on  the  other  •,  efpecially  in  my 
attempts  of  exploring  the  Caufes,  and  manner  of  fome 
operations  of  Nature,  vvhofe  occult  Efficiencies  feem 
rather  propofed  to  exercife,  and  perplex,  then  fatisfic 
our  defires  of  Comprehension,  Among  which  knotty 
pieces  every  intelligent  man  will  readily  account  the 
Theory  of  Magnetifm,  or  more  plainly,  the  fecret  power 
of  Natural  Actives,  working  on  analogous  and  determi- 
nate Paffives,by  invifible  Emanations,  or  an  Influential 
E*trg1  jtranfmwxve  to  remote  diftance  •,  and  more  par* 
ticularly,  the  Argument  of  Helmont,  in  this  difcourfe. 
Concerning  which  fubject,  I  ihall,  in  fome  part,  recede 
from  my  firft  intentions  of  Neutrality,  to  conform  to 
the  incitements ,  and  pacifie  the  importunity  of  fome 
Friends,  in  the  concife  and  extemporary  delivery  of  my 
own  Conceptions:  though  I  ftand  fully  convinced, as 
well  of  the  vaft  difparity  'twixt  the  nerves  of  my  Wir, 
and  the  confiderable  gravity  of  this  Theme  5  as  of  the 
impendent  danger  of  various  an fures ,  arifing  from  the 
irreconcileable  difcord  of  opinion  in  fome,  and  the  ran- 
cor or  livid  Prevarication  of  others,  to  both  which  Hy- 
draes,  I  muft  become  expofed.  £ 

Having  premifed  this  preparatory  Apology  :  I  ihall 
henceforward  chain  my  extravagant  Pen,  to  thefole 
indagationof  this  admirable  (though  fecret,  and  there- 
fore vulgarly  defpifed)  Verity  -,  and  allow  it  no  wider 
range  then  what  the  modeft  rules  of  a  Preface  will  ad- 

b  r  «%  mit. 


PROLEGOMENA 

mit.  Wherefore  I  come  diredly  to  the  examination  of 
the  Hoti,  or  matter  of  Fatt. 

That  Wounds  have  been  frequently  cured  with  more 
expedition,  and  lefs  torment,  then  ufually  follow  upon 
the  ufe  and  daily  renovation  of  Topical  ^itineraries  -by 
the  Confermentation  of  the  Mumj^  the  blood  efflux 
ed,  and  M  retaining  to  Vitality,  with  the  B*lUmicd 
Faculty  of  the  Magnetical  remedies':  I  mutt  firmly  be- 
lecve,  until  my  Scepticity  may  be  allowed  to  be  fo  up 
folcnt,  as  to  affront  the  evidence  of  my  own  fenfe  and 
quefhon  the  verity  of  fome  Relations,  whofe  Authors 
are  perfons  of  fuch  confefTed  integrity,  that  their  finolc 
Attentions  oblige  my  faith,  equal  with  the  ftron°eft 
demonftration.  Among  many  other  Experiments  mnAo 
by  myfelf,  I  (hall  fekl  and  relate  oncly ^on< ^  anff 
moft  ample  and  pertinent. 

Upon  an  ardent  difpute,  with  aDodtor  ofThrn 
logy,  reverend  for  his  Piety  and  Learning,  concerning 
the  Legmmitt  ufe  of  the  Sympathetic  Powder ,  thl 
I  might  at  one  ftab  deftroy  his  inveterate  ?refump,ic„ 
that  the  Capital  Energy  of  that  Maonetical  Remedy' 
adored  for  the  fanation  of  wounds  at dirtance,  did  pro- 
ceed rather  from  the  Sophiftical  Activity  of  that  Im- 
poftor  who  gave  the  flirt  incurable  wound  unto  huma- 
nity, derived  by  the  mediation  of  an  imtticit  CompTli 
then  from  any  native  and  genuine  endowment  of  the 
rnr,ol.  I  prcvatled  with  him,  to  enterprizean  Exneri 
ment  of  the  efficacy  thereof  after  this  manner?  §ri£ 
furniilied  him,   both  with  the  Powder     and^wf 
Matned  with  the  blood  of  a  GentlemScf]  iy  wotd 

iSSS  CSKStt^rj*! ;  ps 


PROLEGOMENA. 


difavow  all  Confederacy,  immediate  or  fecondary,  with 
Satan,  all  expectance  of  his  concurrence,  and  coefH- 
ciency,  and  all  confidence  in  the  cooperation  of  intenfe 
Imagination :  as  alfo,  that  he  adventured  on  this  tryal, 
onely  for  information  of  his  judgment,  whether  it  lie 
in  the  deftiny  of  Natural  Agents  ,  to  tranfmit  their 
Virtue  unto,  and  execute  the  CommhTion  of  their  fpe- 
cifical  Proprieties  upon  obje&s  at  diftance.  However, 
within  few  hours,  the  Patient  (wholly  ignorant  of  the 
means  ufed)  found  his  blood  retired  to  its  wonted  rivu- 
lets, and  the  lips  of  his  large  wound  perfectly  Confo- 
lidated.  Upon  which  admirable  fuccefs,  the  Divine, 
having  alfo  haply  met  with  a  cure  for  the  nicety  of  his 
Conference,  from  a  prevaricate  Advcrf.iry,  became  a 
fervent  Profelyte,  to  our  Doctrine  of  Magnetifm :  foon 
after  writing  his  Palinodia,  in  thefe  words  •  Indubitanter 
credo,  Caufas  Naturales,  qttanquam  nobis  ignot  as,  opcrari. 
in  prafata  fympatheticafanatione. 

This  juftification  was  extorted  from  a  profefled  Ene-  10. 
ntf  :  a  fecond  remarkable  Example ,  I  have  received 
from  the  mouth  of  a  profefled  Friend,  to  the  fpecula- 
tion  of  vulnerary  Magnetifm  •  which  is  right  worthy  of 
recital,  as  well  in  regard  of  the  Experimentator,  as  of 
the  rare  effect  enfuing.  Sir  K.  Digby  (a  noble  Perfon, 
who  hath  built  up  his  Reafon  to  fotranfeendent  a  height 
of  Knowledg,  as  may  fecm  not  much  beneath  the  ftate 
of  man  in  innocence)  immediately  before  his  late  exile, 
was  pleafed  to  tell  me  •,  that  not  many  yeers  paft,  Mr. 
ZpAmes  Bowel  (who  planted  the  Vocal  Forefl)  interceding 
betwixt  two  Brothers  of-  the  (word,  received  a  dange- 
rous wound  through  the  Arm :  By  the  violent  paia 
whereof,  and  other  grievous  Accidents  concomitant, 
he.  was  fuddenly  dejected  into  extream  Debility  and 

C.  3  Dancrer.. 


PROLEGOMENA. 


Danger.  That  in  this  forlorn  plight^defpairing  to  findc 
eafe  or  benefit,  by  the  fruitlefs  continuance  of  Chirur- 
gery,  and  fearing  the  fpcedy  invafion  of  a  Grangram  ; 
he  confulced  Sir  K.  D.  who  having  procured  a  Garrer 
cruentate  ,  wherewith  the  hurt  was  firft  bound  up,  in- 
fperfed  thereon,  without  the  privacy  of  Matter  Horvet, 
a  convenient  quantity  of  Roman  Vitriol.      That  the 
Powder  no  fooner  touched  upon  the  blood, in  the  Gar- 
ter, then  the  Patient  cryed  out,  that  he  felt  an  intolera- 
ble mooting,  and  penetrative  torment,  in  his  Arm  \ 
which  foon  vaniihed,upon  the  remove  of  all  Emplafters 
and  other  Topical  Applications  ,cnjoyned  by  Sir  K.  D. 
That  thenceforward,  for  three  days,  all  former  fymp- 
tomes  departed  ,  the  part  recovered  its  priftine  lively 
Colour,  and  manifeft  Incarnation  and  Consolidation  en- 
fued  :  but  then  Sir  K.  D.  to  compleat  his  Experiment, 
dipt  the  Garter  in  a  fawcerof  Vineger,  and  placed  it 
upon  glowing  coals  5  foon  whereupon  the  Patient  re- 
lapfecf  into  an  extrcam  Agony ,  and  all  former  evils 
inftantly  recurred.    And  finally,  that  having  obtained 
this  plenary  fatisfa&ion ,  of  the  fympathy  maintained 
betwixt  the  blood  extravenated ,   and  that  yet  con- 
ferved  in  the  veins  •,  as  alfo  of  the  Soveraign  Balfamick 
Faculty  of  the  Vttriol :    he  took  again  the  Garter  out 
from  the  Vineger,  gently  dryedir,  and  frcfhly  drefied 
it  with  the  Powder  $  whereupon  the  Sanation  proceed- 
ed with  fuch  admirable  fuccefs,  that  within  few  days, 
there  remained  onely  a  handfom  Cicatrice^  to  witnefs 
there  was  once  a  wound. 

Other  Cures,fo  neer  allied  to  Miracle5as  the  former, 
and  no  lefs  conspicuous,  have  been  wrought,  with  the 
fameMagneticalBalfam,  by  Sir  Gilbert  Talbot^  upon 
upon  many  wounded  in  the  Kings  Army  5  chiefly  in  the 

\A7>fl-Prn 


i 


<P <$J) LEG  OMEN A. 


Weftern  Expedition :  of  which  few  Gent.  Attendant 
on  His  Majefty,  in  that  march,  can  be  ignorant. 

So  fubftantial  and  authentick  are  thefe  Relations, 
and  fo  frequently  others  alfo  of  the  fame  kindc  are  ob- 
trudedupon  vulgar  obfervation «,  that  I  (hall  think re- 
quifite,  to  fuperfede  the  enrolment  of  any  other  evi- 
dence conductive  to  the  illuftration  of  the  oti,  when-I 
mall  havefel'd  that  Goliah,  which  I  efpie  coming  from 
the  Army  of  the  Philiftins  ,  to  the  opinion  of  the  In-  1 1. 
flaential  operation  of  Magnrtical  Remedies,  to  bid  defi- 
ance to  my  felf,  or  any  other  Champion  thereof  :  that 
is,  the  mighty  objef/ion  ,  that  the  Confolidation  of 
Wounds,  is  the  fole  and  entire  Work  of  Nature,  per- 
formed by  the  proper  Balfam  of  the  blood,  flowing  to 
the  part  wounded  •,  and  that  therefore  we  may  feem 
grofly  deluded  in  our  election  of  the  Crf«/?,erroneoufly 
adferibing  the  whole  Arm  of  the  Energy,  to  that  un- 
concerned Principle,  which  indeed  hath  not  fo  much 
as  a  fingerin  the  bufinefs.  Againft  this  Gyant,  I  mail 
fend  onely  two  fmooth  (tones :  and  thofe  taken  out  of 
the  fcrip,  or  iingle  ftock  of  my  own  Reafon. 

The  fir  ft  feems  to  be  of  weight :  and  fo  requires  the  12. 
Care  of  more  then  one  minute,  to  fit  it  in  the  fling  of 
myDifcourfe.  I  conceive  (withfubmiflion  to  the  re- 
prehenfion  of  riper  Philofophy)  that  immediately  upon 
the  Solution  of  unity,  in  any  part,  the  ambient  Aer,  of  13. 
itsownprimigeniousconftitution,  intenfely  Cold,  and 
by  Accident  alfo  replcted  with  the  various  Evaporati- 
ons, or  Aporrhoea's  of  mixt  bodies,  efpccially  fuch  as 
are  then  furfering  the  Ad  of  Putrefaction,  violently 
invadeth  the  part  5  and  thereupon  imprefleth  an  exotick 
miafm,  or  noxious  Biathefis  :  which  difpofing  the 
blood,  fucceffively  arriving  at  the  wound,  to  puwfafii- 

9»% 


PROLEGOMENA. 


on,  by  the  intervention  of  Ferment ation,  caufed  by  fome 
gradual  Acidity  (for  proved  it  may  be,  that  the  nfwW 
ftxTiw  of  Corruption,  muft  be  Acidum  Extraneum, 
fucceeding  upon  a  defertion  of  vital  Heat)  introduced, 
makcth  the  fame  wholly  unfit  for  the  Nutrition,  and 
dcftru&ive  to  the  Incarnation,  or  reunion  of  the  fides 
of  the  orifice.  Againft  this  Hofiile  Acidum,  Nature 
inft  antly  ariieth  in  Arms,  fends  a  large  fupply  of  Arte- 
rial  Blood  (Vital  Jpirits  I  underftand  none  atleaftina 
disjunctive  acception)  and  doubleth  both  the  ftrcngth 
and  number  of  her  Pulfes  •  infomuch  that  mod  times, 
the  overcharged  part  fuffereth  an  increafe  of  pain  and 
Intumefcence,  from  the  dirtenfion  of  its  vefTels,  mem- 
branes and  intermufculary  Capacities :  but  finding  her 
felf  too  weak  to  expel  fo  fubtle  and  potent  an  enemy, 
encamped  within  her  borders,  though  (lie  cannot  pre- 
ferve  the  blood  from  fubmiffion  to  the  tyranny  of  this 
Putrefaclive  Acidity,  in  fome  degree,  and  fo  not  tranf- 
muteit  into  a  laudable  Cement,  to  fodcr  up  thedif- 
union  3  yet  flie  fo  far  hindreth  ( efpccially  in  green 
wounds)  the  dilatation  of  Corruption,  that  flie  fubdues 
the  revolted  blood  into  the  form  of  a  white  Purulent 
Effluxion,  which  is  therefore  to  be  accounted  an  in- 
fallible fignal,  that  Nature  is  not  yet  evirate,  but  holds 
out  bravely,  and  if  relieved  in  time,  will  be  an  happy 
Conquerefs.  This  Exotick  Acidity,  by  the  forementi- 
oned  means  impreffed  upon  the  fides  of  the  Wound,  I 
apprehend  to  be  the  fole  Impediment,  that  defeateth  the 
defign  of  Nature,  in  the  Redintegration  of  the  Onity 
1$-  of  any  part,  infringed  by  external  violence:  and  that 
by  the  rule  of  Con(equence,the  onely  way  of  Afliftance 
to  Naturein  this  exigence,  is  the  deftruclion,  ox  Ex- 
tinction of  that  Alien  Imprepon  3  the  FAtfor  of  Putre- 

fatlion, 


M 


<P^OLEGOMEliJ. 


facliot^  by  the  fpccifical  Counterviolence  of  fomc  Su- 
perior Antagomfl,    Now  Pyrotcchnical  Philofophy,        16. 
and  the  Mcchanick  Experiments  of  Chymiftry,  have 
Sufficiently  inftructed  us :  that  every  Actdum  is,  at  firft 
encounter,  fubdued  by  any  Alchabal^  or  Lixivtal  Salt . 
as  is  autoptically  demonftrable,  in  the  fudden  Trans- 
formation of  the  Spirit  of  Vitriol  into  Alumen,  by  the 
infperfionof  Mercury  dulcified.    The  fame  effect  may 
be  alfo  exemplified  in  the  Acid  Spirit  of  Sulphur,  which 
for  ever  lofeth  its  native  Acidity  and  in  a  moment  de- 
generateth  into  an  aluminous  fweetnefs ,  at  the  Con- 
junction of  the  Salt  of  Tartar^  refolved  into  an  oyl  by 
Deliquium.    For  which  reafon  alfo  (as  Helmont  hath  * In  tramiaf, 
profoundly  obferved  *)  our  Traumatick  or  vulnerary  ^^L 
Pottons,\vhkh  as  well  in  regard  or  the  Balfamical  plants^        1 7. 
as  of  the  ftony  Concretion  found  in  the  ftomacks  of  "Lege  Guidon. 
Crerfjh,  entering  their  Compofltion,  acquire  upon.de-  £%£%** 
coclion,  a  Lixivtal  Tinfture,  or  Alcbabal;   are  moft  An.b  of.  ia*- 
laudable,becaufe  in  truth  moft  fmartly  operative,  Medi-  **  l'j^',  cf.K 
caments,  in  all  wide  Perforations  or  Incifions  of  tffecriaejevuim. 
body:  as  hath  been  found  true,  bythe  unqixftionable^^-1-'-^-;- 
tcftimony  of  Experience  *,  and  ibunds  confonant  to^f^'*^' 
Reafon.  Since  by  reafon  of  their  Lixivid  Salt,  which  Fabric  ab  a- 
doubtlefs  paiTeth  the  feveral  Concoctions,^//*^/*/  haudi"*?™'1™1-1-1' 
multum  c/ftratis,  they  ftand  c  diametro^  oppofed  to  the  f.-,/pm.\.Jta. 
putrefactive  Acidity fhc  Capital  Remorathatimpedcth  i-cap.9- 
the  Consolidation  of  all  Wounds  and  Ulcers.    xAnd  ^      *8. 
whether  Roman  vitriol  may  not  be  juftly  referred  to  the  coumjib^'d] 
Claflis  of  Saline  juices  Concreted,  or  Atc'babal  Salts^  Natura  FoffiL- 
fince  it  rauft  beaparemy  here  to  difputc  it,  I  (hall  "™j,p[llJi 
with  lndultry  leave,  as  well  to  the  experiment  or  its  deAquuMe- 
eafie  E  liquation  upon  the  accefs  of  any  Humidity^    ^sd:'Cat-c:,Ps- 
to  the  decifion  of  the  moft  knowing  Miner  alcgt\h  *.  fj!^"  '  "*' 

D  Who 


(PROLEGOMENA. 


Who  alfo  have  unanimously  cftcemed  it,  as  the  Sacra 
Anchor  a,  or  Panchrcfton,  for  the  cure  of  Chcironian 
Ulcers,  and  inveterate  Wounds  i  though  the  Cardinal 
efficacy,  and  manner  of  its  operation,  may  well  be 
thought  to  have  continued  indarknefs,  until  of  late  the 
light  of  Hdmonti  Furnace  had  the  honor  of  its  reveal- 
ip-        ment.  And  I  am  bold  to  conjecture,  that  upon  this 
fingle  hint,  of  the  incomparable  Baljamical  or  Mumial 
Virtue  of  Fitriol,  Helmom  firft  founded  the  invention 
of  his  admired  Drif,  or  univerfal  Medicine  5    whofe 
mafter  Ingredients  are  Sal  Marinm^  Vitriolwn  Vencrvs, 
and  Vfnea  *  :  by  the  omnipotent  Odor^or  radial  activity 
whereof,  herafhly  imagined,  that  all  irregularities,  ex- 
orbitances, and  excandefcence  of  the  humane  Archcmy 
or  Vital  Spirit,  may  be  rectified, reclaimed,and  calmed, 
and  that  in  a  moment. 

Having  thus  brought  within  the  reach  of  Verifimili- 
ty,  that,  in  many  wounds,  all  the  vigor  of  Nature  can- 
not fuffice  to  the  ejection  of  that  forein  Acory  that  hath 
once  made  an  encroachment  upon  her  tender  confines  5 
and  that  upon  the  firft  charge,  the  ufurper  muft  fur- 
render,  at  the  accefs  of  a  Lixivial  Traumatick  Salt :  It 
remaineth  onely  that  we  bring  it  quite  home  to  our  in- 
20.  tended  fcope,  and  make  a  fhort  enquiry  5  Whether  the 
Sanative  Faculty  of  fitriol,  may  not  be  conceded  fo 
longimanous  and  extenfive,  as  to  produce  the  fame 
effect,  at  diftance.  And  this  we  muft  do  with  exceeding 
brevity  :  in  this  refpect3  that  this  fpeculation  doth  more 
properly  belong  to  our  difquifition  of  the  tM  £n,  or 
Caufalitics  of  Hoplochrifm.  I  am  bound  to  believe,that 
in  the  infinite  Magazine  of  Nature  areto  be  found  vari- 
ous Agents,  not  obliged  to  the  dull  conditions  of  an 
immediate  Corporeal  Contaft  5  but  richly  endowed  with 


21. 


(PROLEGOMENA. 


an  Influential  or  Radial  aftivity  (fo  have  I  taken  the 
liberty  to  Chriftenit,  in  reference  to  the  Cognation  and 
neer  Analogy,  betwixt  the  manner  of  the  Stars  tranf- 
mitting  their  Influence,  by  invifible  Dcradiations  5  and 
the  imperceptible  Emhfions  ft  reaming,  in  a  femi-imma- 
terial  thread  of  A  tomes  *  ,  from  fublunary  bodies  ,  ^jXu- 
qualified  with  this  kinde  of  Aflral  Fac ulty  h  which  ar-  r*un;»erfx,«fc- 
riving  at  a  determinate  obje<5t,though  fituate  at  indcter-  g^*£ 
minable  diftance,  nimbly  operate  upon  it,  to  thetmptlt^froptern. 
fatisfaction  of  the  particular  end,  preordained  in  the  rumradios ;  m- 
primitive  Intellect  of  the  Creator.)    I  conceive  alfo,^^. 
that  Vitriol  hath  a  very  juft  title  to  the  prerogative  ot  serines, (m 
bein°-  lifted  in  the  Inventory  of  thefe  Afkrd  Natures  I  tw«i  * quot* 
and  "that  when  the  powder  thereof  is  applied  to  the  .JJJJJEJ*1 
blood   effufed  out  of  a  wound,  the  Balfamical  Faculty  radiofafm  •• 
of  it  is  not  confined  to  a  meer  Topical  operation  %  but  J^^J! 
bein<*  conducted  by  the  Mumial  Efflux,  or  Aporrhcea's  fiftifmm  >  nee 
of  the  blood,  which  undoubtedly,  by  a  Congener  out  mnminwm 
Magnetifm,    holdeth  a  certain  fympathy   with  UOX  yatme ad£. 
Fountain  from  whence  it  was  derived,  (as  is  to  fatiety  fan.  Qukquid 
of  fatisfatfion  demonftrated  by  Helmont)  in  a  ftream  of  5£jg£ 
fubtilhtcd    Atomes,    extendeth  to    the   iqAwiuai radios emnm 
Wound,  and  there  operateth  to  the  Delate®  or  extir-  ''&* &* Wtf> 
pationof  the  Acid  ImprefTion,  againft  which  it  carrieth  de%pi^  ^ 
z  Seminal  Antipathy.  If  this  be  thus  :  I  may  be  fooncr  rumjah  6. 
deftitute  of  leafure,  then  fubftantial  xArguments,  to  en- 
force, that  it  was  either  Ignorance,  or   <  rev  ar;  cat  ion, 
thatfirft  contrived  this  detractive  objection,  to  the 
dignity  of  Hoplochrifticai  Remedies  :    as  alfo,  that 
Nature  (though,  according  to  the  great  Aphorifmof 
Hermes  Trifmegiftus,  Natura  funt  Medicatrices,  I  allow 
her  to  be  the  prime  and  proxime  Caufatrix  of  all  Sa- 
nation •,  and  all  Medicaments  no  more  but  Auxiliatory> 

r>  *  or 


22. 


PROLEGOMENA. 


2.1., 


or  Adjuvant,  by  the  modification  of  exceflive  preter- 
natural Qualitics,and  remove  oflmpcdiments)  is  not  al- 
ways able  to  play  the  Chiron  to  her  felf,but  in  this  Cafe, 
owes  much  of  the  honor  of  her  fafety  and  conqueft,  to 
the  aififtant  power,  and  amicable  coemciency  of  the  T/- 
trioL  The  fame  alfo  I  defire  fhould  be  underftood,of  the 
Magnetical  manner  of  operation  proper  to  the  Armary 
Unguent-,  though  I  apprehend  the  Ingredients  of  that 
Magnale^  to  work  rather  by  a  Confermentation  of  Anafc- 
gous  Mumies  united.   If  I  have  not  thrown  this  Peble 
home ,   nor  directly  to  the  mark :  'twas  becaufe  I  had 
neither  time  to  take  full  aym,  nor  elbow  room  to  ex- 
tend their  finews  of  Reafon  fo  far,  as  my  felf  defircd. 

The  other,  I  am  confident,  will  hit  our  Enemy  in  the 
forehead.  If  the  Effect  of  Hoplochrifm  be  not  conftant 
and  umvocal,  but  doth  ordinarily  confefs  an  Altcrity 
or  Variation  from  Good  to  Evil, conform  to  the  friend- 
{hip  or  enmity  of  any  Third  Natural  Agent  affbeiated; 
at  the  Arbitrary  Election  of  the  Experiment  ator,  that 
is,  if  from  the  Counter-activity  of  intemperate  Heat, 
Actual  or  Potential,  of  any  vencnate  or  deleterious 
Quality ,   corrofive  and  feptical  Medicament,  putre- 
factive Acidity,^.  confubftentially  applied  unto,  and 
confermentate  with  the  Mumy  of  the  blood,  and  mag- 
netically- fympathetick  Remedy,  there  immediately  arife 
a  Reincrudefcence  of  the  Wound,  and  a  Rccidivation  or 
return  of  all  oppreflive  fymptomes  dependent :  then  is 
it  eftablifhed ,   beyond  the  queftion  of  any  the  moft 
Pyrrhonian  Incredulity,  that  the  Sanation  of  Wounds* 
at  diftance  ,  is  not  rightly  adferiptive  to  the  (ingle 
power  of  Nature  ,    converting  the  blood  fucceflively 
diftilling  from  its  interfered  Conduits,  into  a  genial 
Balfam*  but  more  properly  attributary  to  the  confede- 


PROLEGOMENA. 


rate  virtue  of  the  Vnguent  or  Powder,  idiofyncratical- 
lyoppofed  to  rhe  eiTenrial  hoftility  of  that  Acid  Vul- 
ture, which- ravenoufly  devours  the  Cambium^  or  ro- 
rid  deftillament  ordained  for  the  Vegetation  and  Rendi- 
tion of  the  wounded  parr.  But  the  Hypothefis  is  uncon- 
troulable  upon  rhe  evidence  of  Sir  A".  D.  his  Experi- 
ment, in  tofsing  the  life  of  Matter  Homely  from  hazard 
tofafety,  from  fafety  to  hazard,  and  back  to  durable 
fafety  again,  at  pleafure  :  therefore  is  rhe  Inference 
alfo  found  and  juftifiable.  For  the  propenfe  fubmifsion 
of  Nature,  to  the  fury  of  a  deleterious  influence,  rranf- 
mitted  from  a  remore  Enemy ,  by  the  mediation  or  con- 
voy of  the  Mumial  Effluviums,  mot  from  rheexrra- 
venared  blood  back  toirs  vital  fountain  5  doth  implicire- 
ly  manifeft  her  emolument  and  relief  received,  by  rhe 
fame  invifible  rranfvection,  from  rhe  grareful  and  con- 
generous deradiarions,  or  individuated  Magnetifm  of  a 
remore  Friend,  Since  Comrades  ever  imply  the  necef- 
fary  exiftence  each  of  other* 

Another  Block  rhere  is,  ar  which  not  onely  rhe  herd  25; 
of  Fools,  bur  even  rhe  greateft  Clerks  ufe  to  ftumble, 
in  their  queft  of  this  Secret.  Requifite  it  is  (fay  they.) 
that  every  Natural  Agent  be  immediately  applied  to 
its  determinate  Patient  •,  otherwife,  its  fpecincal  Acti- 
vity, though  neerfo  potent  and  expedite,  muftbeloft 
in  a  fruirlefs  expence,  and  unfarisfaction  of  irs  particular 
end  •,  but  rhe  Sympathetic^  Remedy  is  not  topically  ap- 
proximated to  the  Wound  •,  therefore  muft  it  be,  either 
no  Natural  Remedy,  or  a  vain  and  inefficacious  one, 
at  beft.  But  this  Argument,  though  at  firft  appearance 
plaufible,  weigheth  not  one  grain  in  the  ballancc  of 
more  exact  Rcafon ,  againft  our  theory,  and  may  be 
cafily  blown  out  of  the  way,by.this  diftin&ive  Anfwer. 

D   2  If 


PROLEGOMENA. 


If  it  be  underftood,  that  every  Natural  Agent  ought 
immediately,  immediatione  fnppofiti^  to  touch  the  Pati- 
ent,upon  which  its  virtue  is  proximely  to  be  difcharged; 
but  remotely,  by  the  mediation  of  other  bodies  interja- 
cent, by  which  the  Power  of  the  Active  is  communi- 
cated to  the  diftant  Pafsiverwe  willingly  grant  the  truth 
of  the  Major  ^  tobefolid  and  undeniable,  in  regard,  it 
fufficeth  to  the  fupport  of  our  Magnetifm  ,  that  the 
Active  touch  upon  the  Pafsiveor  Object  proper  and  re- 
mote,  immediationevirtutis.  And  therefore  we  cannot 
but  fmile  at  the  weaknefs  and  incongruity  of  the  Minor  - 
becaufe  the  Sympathetick  Remedy  ought  immediately, 
immediatione  (uppo (iff ,to  touch  that  fubject,  upon  which 
its  virtue  is  firft  received  :  but  not  the  part  affected,  on 
which  the  virtue  is  fecondarily  and  ultimately  received 
and  terminated,  by  the  interposition  of  accommodate 
inftruraents,  whether  bodies  fituate  at  convenient  inter- 
vals, or  continuate  by  fuccefsion  of  parts.  For  thus,  by 
the  fame  extenfion  of  a  medium^  do  we  warm  our  hands 
at  the  fire  :  and  the  Sun  tranfmits  his  vigorous  influence 
and  heat,  to  our  opace  Globe.    And  in  this  degree  of 
affinity,  are  Sympathetica!  Medicaments  allied  unto  Ce- 
leflial  Influences :  infomuch,that  not  onely  the  Aer,but 
vaft  Rocks  of  Adamant,  Walls,  and  any  the  mod:  com- 
pacted and  opace  bodies  are  fubjects  qualified  to  admit 
and  convoy  this  Magnetical  Virtue,  to  its  peculiar  ob- 
ject, no  lefs  then  any  the  mod  potent  AftralTranf- 
mifsion.    Vpon  which  ground,  if  any  ftick  at  the  vaft 
and  unlimitted  extenfion  of  that  Sphear  of  Ailivtij^ 
afsigned  by  the  immenfe  Bounty  of  Nature,  unto  Sym- 
pathetica! Remedies  •  and  yet  can  eafily  concede  an  in- 
finite Orb  of  fewer  unto  Celejiial  Influxes :  he  hath  very 
great  caufe,  either  to  lament  his  Ignorance  of  thofe,  or 

rcnenr 


(Pq^OLEGOMENJ. 


repent  his  Credulity  of  thefe.  And  I  profefs,  that  if  my 
rude  ear  may  have  the  liberty  to  judg,  Frincipium  Acti- 
ons Sympathetica^  eft  Facultas  influentiis  affais^  agens 
per  irradtationem  inobjeclum  fibi  appropriatum  ;  founds 
as  like  an  Axiom  of  conftant  truth,  as  Idem  Accidens 
7ion  rn.gr  at  de  fubjecJo  in  fubjecJum. 

Hitherto  hath  my  imployment  been  to  clear  the  Pro- 
fpecl:,  by  the  neceftary  remove  of  fuch  Doubts,  as  {eem- 
ed  very  much  to  obfeure  the  refplendent  luftre  of  Mag- 
netifm^  and  render  the  Excellencies  of  Sympathetical 
Remedies  imperceptible  \  efpecially  to  thofe  purblinde 
Moles,  whofe  imperfect  opticks  could  never  endure  to 
pry  into  the  myfteries  of  the  Intellectual  and  Spiritual 
World,  but  think  the  debt  of  their  Creation  fully  dif- 
charged,  in  a  flight  and  fuperficial  fpeculation  of  the 
Material,  and  never  were  admitted  to  a  neerer  privacy 
with  Nature,  then  to  have  touched  the  hem  of  her  up- 
per garment.  And  my  now  task  mould  be,to  endevour 
an  ample  prefentment  of  the  £i  cm,  or  Caufes  of  Ho- 
plochriftical  Sanation.  But  of  this  I  can  here  hold  forth 
no  more,  then  a  thin,  blew  Landskip,  or  Abridgment : 
chiefly  in  refpect  the  more  learned  pencils  of  Bapt,  Por- 
ta, Severing,  H or tnt annus ,  Ktrcherus,  Cabeut,  Rob.  de 
Fluttibm,  (that  Torrent  of  Sympathetical  Knowledg) 
and  the  choifeft  flower  in  our  Garden  Sir  K.  Digbyy 
have  already  enriched  the  World  ,  with  ample  and  ele- 
gant defcriptions  of  the  manner,  how  Sympathetically 
Magnetick  Agents  tranfmit  their  Spiritual  Energy,unto 
determinate  Patients,  at  vart  and  indeterminate 
diftancc  -,  and  fecondarily,  becaufe  in  my  precedent  De- 
clarement  of  the  Magnetical  operation  of  vitriol,  I 
unavoidably  fell  upon  a  plain  (though  narrow)  delinea- 
tion of  the  fame  fubject. 

I1 r\n(i  A  /»»► 


PROLEGOMENA. 


26.  Confidcr  we,  firft  the  interminable,  and  almoft  in- 

finite Extent  of  Divtfibility  :  that  is,  with  the  razor  of 
moft  acute  thought ,  rcdivide  the  fubdivifions  of  an 
Atome,  and  diftinctly  perpend,  how  large  a  round  of 
fpiritual  Aporrhx&ts^  or  Evaporations  may  be  made  and 
maintained  by  a  very  fmall  Body,  actually  fnbtiliatcd, 
and  emitting  a  continued  fteam  of  moftfubtle  effluvi- 
.27.       urns.    Let  us  remember  alfo,  that  by  a  general  confent 
of  all  the  Secretaries  of  Nature ,    and  the  undeniable 
teftimony  of  trivial  Experience,  every  mixt  Body,  of 
an  unctuous  Compofition,  doth  unceflantly  vent,  or 
expire  a  circumferential  fteam  of  invifiblc  A  tomes  , 
homogeneous  and  confimilar,  that  is  of  the  fame  iden- 
tical nature  with  it  felf ;  and  for  that  rcafon;efficacioufly 
operative  to  the  fame  Finality  :  which  minute/#£//7/4- 
ttons,  wafted  on  the  wings  of  a  convenient  medium^ 
interpofed  betwixt  the  accommodate  objett  and  the 
body  exbala»t,  and  fo  arriving  at  an  analogous  Patient, 
do  immediately  difcharge  their  Activity  thereupon , 
28.        and  by  degrees  of  mutation  fubduc  the  fame  to  a  Con- 
*  Koh  r*0,    formity  or  Qualification  requifite  to  the  Caufation  of 
faafifympatbla  tnat  particular  effec^originally  enjoyned  to  the  Seminal 
l^r^itu  Entity  of  the  Agent.    Then  let  us  ftretch  our  Intcl- 
eodcmtemfm   lectuals,  to  fathome,  how  immenfly  long  the  arm  of 
'itTvZL   flm?ath  muft  bc  conceded,  by  all  that  mail  obferve, 
nonnuilal imii- how  the  Contagion  of  the  Small  Pox  and  Plague* is 
lias longi fm.c  i  frequently  darted  from  one  Brother  or  Sifter  toan- 
f^aTJ&ti-  otner5  at  tne  diftance  of  many  hundred  leagues ,  by 
-unfa  lock  ha-  invifible  cmiflions3  or  Pefiilential  Atemes  5  without  all 

bitantd)  codem 

fee  tempore,  cxitialifs'mis  bujits  tyanni  (piculls  gravuer  affiiftat,  &  fere  dektas  fuiffc  Dic- 
merbrocck  de  Pefie.  cap.4.  Ita  etiam  Evagrius,  Hi'ftor.  Ecclef.  lib.4.  ap.i^.  refert,  in  Pcfie 
Antiochcm,  ccrias  famlias  prmfus  intewffe,  falvis  manentibm  interim  reliquu  Vrbu  incolis. 
Canfa  ve,  b  dependet  ab  arcana  qnahm  difjnfitionii  (imili[tidi?ie3  quam  inte;  fe  babtnt,  qua  apt  a  c/2 
*flpc(lem  ucipiendm. 


(PROLEGOMENA. 


excufeof  intelligence  or  mutual  Commerce  by  inter- 
venient  mefTengers  :   as  alio  of  Fear  and  Imagination. 
How  a  Taghacotian  Nofc,  enfeoffed  with  a  Commu-        30, 
nity  of  Vitality  and  Vegetation,  by  right  of  Tranfplan- 
tation,  upon  the  face  of  a  Gentleman  at  Bruxels,  hath 
grown  cadaverous,  and  dropc  off,  at  the  inftant  of  that 
Porters  death,  in  Bononiay  out  of  whofe  arm  it  was 
firft  exefted.    And  finally  (that  we  may  fuperfede  the        31. 
rehearfal  of  other  Naturally  magical  examples  )  how 
carefully  good  Hufwives  avoid  the  boyling  over  of 
their  Milk  3  left  the  Atomes  thereof  fubtiliated  by  the 
intenfe  heat  of  Fire,  and  roving  abroad  hand  in  hand 
with  the  igneous  Atomes ,    mould  be  attracted  by  the 
Cows  Udder  (for  the  (tune  or  Fountain  of  every  erTii- 
fion,  acteth  a  magnetical  part,  and  drawethtoit  felf 
the  fubdivifions  of  that  fame  effufion,  fituate  within 
the  Orb  of  its  Alliciency)  and  fo  an  Inflammation  be 
caufed,  by  the  appofition  of  the  Atomes  of  Fire  con- 
comitant,  £nd  when  we  mall  have  thus  caft  about,        32, 
fummed  up  our  reflections,  and  difcreetly  accommo- 
dated the  like  effects,  daily  occurring  to  the  Compara- 
tive perpenfion  of  Magnetical  Vulneraries  :  we  (hall 
naturally  fall  upon,  and  fet  up  our  reft  in  this  Conclufi- 
on :  That  the  (anation  of  Wounds,  by  remote  means  appli- 
ed to  the  Weapon  ,  or  cloth  imbued  with  theblecd^  is  no 
Diabolical^  nor  prejligiou*,  but  a  meer  ordinary  cjfttt  of 
Natural  Cau(es,  operating  by  Magneti(m.   For  very  Fa- 
miliar muft  it  be  made  unto  us,  that  the^AWemifed 
from  a  wound,  doth  conftantly  (until  the  laft  a&of 
putrefaciion)  hold  an  influential  commerce  with  and  af-        33. 
finity  unto  its  proper  Fountain ,  yet  enjoying  a  more 
perfect  ftate  of  Vitality,  in  its  native  Confervatory,  the 
Veins  3   and  in  that  relation,  doth  continually  fend 

E  forth 


(f%OLEGOMBT^A. 


forth  fubtle  ft  reams,  orinvifible  Emijfaries  of  Mumial 
Atomes,  toward  that  Fountain,  or  grand  Source,  as 
Ambafiadors,  to  intimate  the  faithful  Correfpcndence 
and  Amity  yet  maintained  :     that  thefe  Magneticai 
N untii,  being  joyncd  incommiflion  and  confermentate 
with  the  Balfamical  Emanations  of  the  Sympathetick 
Vngucnt  or  Powder  Ao  carry  them  home  to  the  wound  : 
And  laftly,  that  the  Exotick  and  deftruelive  Acidity, 
imprcflfed  upon  the  fides  of  the  Wound,  and  defeating 
the  attempts  of  Nature  towards  the  redintegration 
and  accretion  of  the  Continuity  infringed ,   may  be 
fubducd  and  eradicated  by  the  Medici m I  Faculty  of  the 
Atomes,  deradiated  from  the  Vngucnt^  and  conducted 
along  to  the  wound  in  the  arms  of  the  Mumial  Atomes* 
Since  we  arc  of  opinion,  that  no  man,  who  hath  but 
Philofophy  enough  to  examine  the  Natural  endow- 
ments of  each  fingle  Ingredient  of  the  Compoiition,  as 
alfo  of  the  third  Quality  refulting  from  their  Com- 
mixture of  Confcrmentation :  will  deny,  that  the  Ar- 
mary  Vngutnt>  is  impregnated  with  zfanative  Faculty  * 
but  fuch  as  may  be  too  violent  andimenfc5if  the  Vnguerit 
were  applied  in  body ,   without  the  requifue  allay  and 
refraction  of  previous  Attenuation. 

Thus  (judicious  Reader)  have  you  feen  me,  in  very- 
few  minutes,run  over  my  main  courfe  of  the  Rcafons  of 
Hoplochrifm  •  wherein,  iince  I  may  not  come  fo  neer  to 
the  guilt  of  Arrogancy,  as  confidently  to  fay,  I  have 
won  5  I  freely  fubmit  to  your  equitable  Arbitration  for 
cenfure,whether  I  have  not  contended  fairly,at  leaft ,for 
the  Garland  of  Truth,   and  far  outftript  thofe  my  two 
hotfpurred  AdvcYfrncs^gnorance  and    refumption.  But 
yet  muft  I  become  a  further  exercife  of  your  Patience, 
by  holding  you  to  the  trouble  of  going  along  with  me 


3 

over 


PROLEGOMENA. 


over  two  other  very  fhort  Stages  :  which  I  am  obliged 
to  meafure,  in  order  to  my  plenary  difcharge  of  a  ram 
promife ,   which  the  clamorous  importunity  of  fomc 
friends  prevail'd  upon  my  too  flexile  geniui  to  enter  into. 
Thefuftis,  to  fcanover  the  fecond  Paradox,  con 
cerning  the  Nativity  of  Tartar  in  Wine.  Here,  I  profefs, 
I  highly  admire  the  fagacity  of  Hdmonts  wit,  in  fo  ex- 
actly tracing  this  obfeure  Entity,  back  to  its  firft  fingle 
conftitutive  Principles,  hunting  through  all  thofe  gra- 
dual mutations,  which  he  diftinctly  fcented,  as  well  in 
the  Conglaciation  of  Wines,  in  cold  Climats,  as  their 
Fermentatisn ,  in  hot,  immediately  upon  their  being 
brought  home  from  the  Prcfs.   Nor  can  it  be  gainfaid^ 
by  any,  that  the  Spirit  of  Wine,  in  avoidance  of  its  ir- 
reconcilable Antagonift,  Gtid;  retreating  to  the  Center 
of  its  liquor,  doth  leave  the  Cortex,  oroutward  round, 
open  to  the  invafion  of  Acidity  5  which  being  the  firft       34, 
degree  of  Corruption  (for  if  we  boyl  any  Flefli,  that 
hath  been  but  newly  feized  on  by  Pmrefaclion^   the 
broth  thereof  will  have  a  manifeft  fowrenefs)  and  want- 
ing an  object, whereon  to  fate  its  Appetite  of  Corrofion 
and  Diflolution,  doth  inftantly  dive  to  the  bottom, 
and  there  operate  upon  the  dregs,  or  refldence  of  Ter- 
renityy  fubfiding  upon  a  precedent  Diacrtftsy  or  feque- 
ftration  of  Heterogeneities  :  and  fo  doth,  by  a  fecond 
ebullition,  caufe  them  to  reafcend  to  the  Convexities 
of  the  Liquor.    But  whether,  the  Acid  Sprit ,  being 
coagulated  in  the  very  ad  of  Diffolution,  according  to 
that  Chymick  Axiome,    Omnis  Spiritu*  diffolvens , 
tadtm  aclione,  qua  corpora  dijjelvit,  coaguUtur^  be  the 
immediate  Caufe  of  the  Concretion  or  Coagmentati- 
on  of  the  dtifolved  and  fluctuating  Faeces  :  I  confefs,  I 
^m  yet  unfatisfkd.   The  ground  of  my  hsefitancy,  in 


(PROLEGOMENA. 


this  particular,  is  that  upon  a  ftrict  and  laborious  explo- 
ration of  the  Caufes  of  Coagulation  ,    conductive  to 
Lapidefcence  or  Petri  fiction  \    in  my  Diflertation  De 
Lith;afi,o£  {tones  in  the  Microcofm,  I  found  ^  that  the 
onely  Gorgon^  or  Lapidifa&ory  Principle,  to  which  all 
.  Concreted  fubftances  ow  their  Coagulation,  and  upon 
the  deftruction  of  which,  they  return  to  their  primitive 
Incontinuityand  Volatility^  is  a  Satin t  Fixative  Spuir^ 
as  I  have  in  that  difcourfe  fufficiently  proved  :    and 
therefore  I  mould  rather  derive  the  pedigree  of  Tartar 
.35.        after  this  manner.    When  the  Acid  Spirit,  immcrfed 
in  an  exceffive  quantity  of  Terrenity,  becomes  evirate, 
languid,  and  infufficient  to  the  volatilization  of  the 
more  grofs,  ponderous,  and  flxt  parts  of  the  Faeces  -y 
it  is  wholly  overcome  by  the  predominant  power  of  the 
Saline  Gorgon ,   ambufcadoed  in  the  terreftrial  Refi- 
dence :  and  fo  immediately  upon  this  conqueft,  all  the 
Terreftrial  Atomes  are  fixed,  coagmentated,  and  ferru- 
minated  into  a  folid  Concretion  j  which  is  the  Tartar  ad- 
hering to  the  (ides  of  Wine  Casks. 
16.  Here  alfo  doth  my  conftant  Fidelity  to  Truth,  make 

me  to  obferve  5  that  \tvineger  be  made  of  Wwe^whok 
fpirits  are  all  Exbaufted^  by  the  deftruftive  embraces 
of  Heat,  furrounding  the  veffel,  and  fo  infenfibly  ex- 
trading  all  radical  vigor  and  eflcntial  vitality  from  the 
mafs  of  liquor,  propttr  cfj&iumvy  to  be  united  to  aeon- 
fimilar  fubft  . ncc  5  as  fecmeth  moft  confonant  to  Ex- 
perience ^  then  doubtlefs,  that  great  Privy  Counfellor 
*iniibro  de  to  Nature,  Senmrtu*  *,  hath  deferved  the  refuge  of 
Sio,buio}caf.t.  that  Proverb,  Bernhaydut  nonvidet  omnia ^  in  his  mis- 
take, That  Vineger  mould  be  made  of  Wine,  wherein 
the  fpirits  are  fixed  or  congelattdy  by  reafon  of  an  op- 
premve  quantity  of  Fixative  Salt,  arifing  from  the  im- 


PROLEGOMENA. 


maturity,  aufterity  and  defective  Fermentation  of  the 
Muft,  and  not  out  of  Wine,  whofe  fpirits  are  feparated 
by  Exh&tiftien-,  and  by  confequence,  muft  have  mif- 
carried  in  his  defign  of  drawing  Spirit  of  Wine  out  of 
Vineger,  which  project  he  mentioned  both  in  his  Chy- 
mical  opirations,  and  in  his  incomparable  Tract,  De 
Cwfenfu  Chymicorum  cum  Gdcnicu. 

My  laft  unwilling  task5is  the  delivery  of  ray  fuffrage, 
upon  that infcrutable  Paradox,  aliened  by  Helmont'm 
his  Difcourfe  of  I  he  Image  of  God  in  Man,  as  the  main 
point  he  drives  at  in  all  that  Meditation  3  namely,  that 
Reafon  is  no  radical,  primitive,efjential  part  of the  Hum  An 
foul,  but  a  caduce,  furious  Faculty,  accidentally  Adveni- 
ent  upon  the  Degradation  of  our  Nature  ,  by  eating  the 
foyfonous  Fruit  of  the  forbidden  Tree  ;  and  by  confe- 
quence, ftp  Arable  from  the  foul,  at  the  inflant  of  her  e~ 
mancipation  from  her  prifon  of  Clay,  and  wholly  ufeUfto 
her  in  her  (late  of  restitution  to  the  Clarity  of  AbflraLted 
and  Intuitive  Intellection. 

To  this  opinion  (I  blufti  not  to  profefs)  I  have  for- 
merly leaned,  as  well  by  reafon  of  a  propenfity  there- 
unto kindled  in  me  by  a  ihort  paffage  in  S.  Auguftine  *,  *  Pr*ftantiqve 
as  by  finding,  in  my  folitary  fpeculations,  a  readinefs  T^icmVaiiT 
in  my  beleif  tofubmit  to  the  conviction  of  thefeenfu-  mm^tauqmm 
ing  Arguments.    (1.)  The  Soul  layeth  hold  on  her  SlS'^ 
hopes  of  future  Beatitude,with  her  right  hand  o£Faithy  soiilq. 
which  is  a  firm  and  unalterable  Apprehenfion  of  ob-        1. 
jects,  to  which  her  left  hand  of  Reafon  can  never  be  ex- 
tended :  yea,  fo  far  ihort  doth  our  moft  advanced  and 
illuminated  Reafon  come  of  the  true  Cognition  of .  the 
effence  of  Omnipotence,  Infinity,  Etermh,  &c.     that, 
in  every  ftep  of  our  journey  towards  the  true  EitzAumy 
we  muft  quit  the  dark  Lanthorn  of  Reafon,  and  wholly 

E  ?  throw 


PROLEGOMENA. 


2. 


throw  our  {elves  upon  the  implicit  conduct  of  Faith. 
For  a  deplorable  truth  it  is,  that  the  unconftant,  vari- 
able, and  reductive  impofture  of  Reafon,  hath  been 
the  oncly  unhappy  caufe,  to  which  Religion  doth  ow 
all  thole' wide,  irreconcilcable  and  numerous  rents  and 
fchifms,  in  the  feamlefs  and  indivifible  Coat  of  Faith, 
made  by  men  of  the  greateft  Logick,  and  even  fuch, 
whofe  int^nfer  flames  of  Devotion  had  rendred  their 
mindes  the  whiteft  and  moft  purified  from  the  lees  of 
Temporal  interejl :   every  Faction  alleadging  a  rational 
induction,  or  ground  for  its  peculiar  Deflection,  from 
the  unity  of  Truth  •  Reafon  having,  in  their  judgments, 
erected  the  rotten  and  fragil  reed  of  meer  Futation,  in 
the  room  of  the  found  and  inflexible  Pillar  of  certain 
and  fiduciary  Cognition.  (2.)  TheMinde  of  man,fqua- 
red  by  the  rule  of  Faith,  (lands  afcertained,  that  the 
form  or  effence  of  Verity^  is  unical,  finglc,  and  devoid 
of  all  Alter ity  •,  and  that  the  Intellect,  in  its  abftracted 
fimplicity ,   apprchendeth  onely  the  unity  of  verity : 
but  Reajon  is  unavoidably  obnoxious  to  the  delufion  of 
Multiplicity,  and  diffraction  of  Alterity,  and  there- 
fore unfit  to  fteer  the  Will^  in  the  act  of  Election.  £>uippt 
quje(ns  Helmont^  moft  fignificantly)  facile per  linguas , 
nunc  adunumy  nunc  vtro  ad  alterum  extremorum^  nuta- 
bundafletferetur^  rationefque  ubique  inveniret^  fingeret} 
fubBerneretjuxtAflacitadefideriorum.  (3.)  TheMinde, 
having  once  fathomed  the  extent  of  her  wings,  in  Me- 
taphyseal fpeculations ,   becomes  afliired,  that  after 
her  delivery  from  the  Dungeon  of  Flcfh  and  Blood,  (he 
fhall  have  all  her  knowledg  full,  entire,  abftracted,  in 
one  fingle  act  5  not  fuccefnve,  not-extorted  by  the  ob- 
lique violence  of  premifes,  not  erroneous ,  controver- 
tible, or  dubious :  that  fhe  (hall  no  longer  groan  under 

the. 


PROLEGOMENA 


the  perplexity  of  framing  Vemonflrations,  by  wrefting, 
deducing,  inferring,  concluding  one  proportion  from 
another  $  whether  in  order  to  her  act  of  Concept  ion  or 
Notification.  (4.)  Where  precedeth  no  Difcourfe,  no 
Composition,  nor  Connexion  of  Prcmifes  5  there, 
doubtlefS;  can  fucceed  no  Conclusion,  Confecution, 
or  Reafon  :  but  the  Science  of  the  Premifcs ,  is  always 
more  certain ,  then  the  Science  of  the  Conclufion 
(Since  the  certitude  of  the  Inference,  is  extracted  out 
of,  and  doth  neceffarily  depend  upon  the  Certitude  of 
the  propofition  conceded)  and  that  Science  is  radically 
feated  in  the  Intellect ,  without  the  conenrrence  of 
Rejfon,  becaufe  we  finde  it  elder  then  the  Demonflra- 
tion.  And  queStionlefs,  this  were  a  fur  ground  for  any 
able  pen  to  contend  upon  •,  that  Reafon  doth  not  gene- 
rate, in  the  Undemanding,  any  more,  then  a  Caligi- 
nous  or  Spurious  Cognition,  which  we  may  call  a  fpe- 
cious  Putation :  as  alfo,  that  the  indubitate  Science  of 
the  Verity  of  Effences  ,  of  the  Simplicity  of  tilings 
abstracted,  and  of  firft  Propositions,  or  leading  noti- 
ons in  Syllogifms ,  doth  not  flow  from  the  polluted 
and  tempeftuous  Stream  of  Reafon  5  but,  indeed,  from 
a  more  divine,  ferene,  luminous  Fountain,  the  Intellect \ 
which  I  may,  with  Solomon,  adventure  thus  todefcribe  : 
It  is  The  breath  of  the  power  of  God,  and  a  pure  influence 
flowing  from  the  Glory  of  the  Almighty  the  bright  neft  of 
the  everlafling  Light,  the  unfpotted  Mirror  of  the  Power 
of  God,  and  the  Image  of  his  Goodnefi,  and  being  but  one, 
f\)e  can  do  all  things,  and  remaining  in  her  [elf fhe  mtket  h 
all  things  new,  &c.  (5.)  Let  any  Probleme  in  Philo- 
fophy  be  propounded  to  ten,  or  twenty  (the  number 
is  of  no  concernment)  themoftfage  Oedipufe's  in  the 
World,  and  a  reafon  demanded  from  each  apart ;  and 

I  dare 


PROLEGOMENA. 


I  dare  promifc,  you  {hall  obferve,  the  variety  of  opi- 
nions will  ftand  in  aequilibrio  with  the  number  of  Per- 
fons  5  every  finglc  head  being  deluded  by  the  im- 
pofture  of  fpecious  Reafon,  and  fo  contumacioufly  ad- 
hering to  its  particular  Apprehenfion ,  that  the  mod 
modeft  of  them  all  will  be  ready  to  (wear,  that  his 
Solution  hath  touched  the  white  and  Centre  of  Truth  -, 
when,  peradventure,  not  one  among  them  hath  ever 
(hot  neer  it.    Such  a  Chameleon  is  our  Reafon  •,  and  fo 

£•  varioufly  delufive.  (6.)  Truth  is  imprefled  onely  up- 
on the  Intdietty  in  regard,  the  verity  underftood,  is 
nothing  elfe  but  the  adequation  of  the  Intellect  to  the 
object  \  or  more  plainly,  the  Intellects  putting  on  the 
Form  of  the  thing  comprehended  (for  the  Intellect 
knoweth  objects  in  the  reality  of  their  dirtinct  EfTencc, 
and  is  therefore  interchangeably  certified  of  the  Nature 
of  things,  by  the  things,  themfelves  :  Since  the  Fffe 
of  things  is,  of  it  (elf ,  ever  true,  and  their  EfTence  and 
the  Efience  of  Truth,  are  homogeneal  and  identical) 
and  therefore  the  Intellect,  which  is  in  a  manner  carried 
forth  to  a  Conjunction  with  the  abftract  Forms  of  ob- 
jects, is  always  directly  true.  Now  fince  the  Imagina- 
tion, or  its  laborious  Faculty,  Reafon,  is  a  certain  ob- 
lique and  circulatory  way  of  intelligence,  wyerdrawn 
through  the  devious  meanders,  and  complex  paths  of 
Dijcetirfe^  but  not  by  the  immediate  MetamorphofTs 
of  adequation,  or  Protean  fhifting  of  its  own  Form, 
into  the  Form  of  the  thing  apprehended  :  therefore  is 
the  way  of  Cognition  by  Reafon,  Fallacious  and  Non- 

7.  fcientifical.  (7.)  Whatever  found eth  but  analogous  or 
affine,  that  doth  Reafon  pofitively  judg,  conlbnant  and 
homogeneous  to  Verity :  when  yet  Reafon  and  Truth 
are  infinitely  D/(j>arate:a.s  to  the  roots  of  their  EfTences. 

For 


(p^OLRGOMEl^J. 


For  Verity  is,  Em  reale,  verum :  But  Reafon  is,  Ens 
mentale,  probkmaticum^  and  oncly  plaufible,  or  appa- 
rent •,  and  hence  do  our  Metaphysicians  account  of  Ens 
rauonis,  no  more  then  Non-ens,  as  deriving  its  geni- 
tare  from  no  more  fubftantial  a  Father,  jhen  Imagina- 
tion, and  its  production,  from  the  wanton  and  incon- 
ftant  womb  of  Putation.   (8.)  Many  wife  men,  great      g. 
Scholars,  and  extreamly  tender,  in  the  point  of  their 
Allegeance  to  the  Church,  have  thought  it  no  difhonor 
to  their  Creation  ,  nor  Diminution  of  the  <%pw>  or 
tranfeendent  dignity  of  Humane  Nature,  to  opinion, 
that  the  Faculty  of  Difcourfe,  though  in  a  greater  de- 
gree of  obfeurity,  may  be  attributed  to  brute  Animals, 
I  prefume,  this  hard  faying  will,  by  the  unifone  vote 
of  the  multitude,  be  foon  condemned  to  relim  more  of 
the  Fhihfophery  then  the  Chriftian^  and  fo  be  exploded 
for  Contagious  and  Ethnical.  But  that  indifferent  Ear,  *  ^fi'mnua 
that  lliall  have  fo  much  patience,  as  to  hear  St.  fcrome  f£.a?jS2t- 
relatc  his  ftory  of  the  *  Faunejx  femi-  humane  Monfter,  man  defcripto, 
that  having  vocally  acknowledged  the  true  God,  em-  ^lu»  A«p- 
braced  the  Chriftian  belief,  received  the  fymbols  Q£paMnli*D£ 
the  fame,  and  earneftly  defired  the  mediatory  Prayers  vo'um  mmc~ 
of  Anthony,   the  Anachoret,  converted  a  long  time™Xw 
with  him,  in  the  Wildernefs :  (hall  obferve  the  Arith-  >datu,  Famus 
mctick  of  Bees  * ,  in  computing  their  Hives  morn  and  [cgltur  A™mal 
even,  having  no  other  method  of  directing  themfelves  2u^imlmum\ 
each  to  his  proper  home,  but  the  number  of  their  par-  NahtY*  &~ 
ticular  Common- wealth,  which  when  they  mils,  upon  ^tfwls  co- 
a  tranfpofition  of  them,  they  ftray  and  are  loft  in  their  k  &'fwk- 
miftake  of  entering  another  Hive  i  And  finally  (hall  to  f^A"t<Mlio»» 

D  *  ut  piofeatque 

fuii  Deum  oraret.    Conjiat  inprimis,  hunc  F annum  non  fuiffe  bom'inem  rx  monftrofa  figura  s 
neque  Cacedamonemiqnod  b.cadco  fupcb'&t,  ut  nc qiidem,  fi fc'tret fe falvad pojfc  price,  vrt- 
let  rogare,  Ht  diqu'u  pro  fe  oraret,  neque  fe  profterwet  pro  impeiravda  vema,      *    Mujfctus 
it  Inftclis}&Vljff\  Aldrovandus affi-want. 


PROLEGOMENA. 


thcfc  evidences,  annex  the  ferious  Lecture  of  that  elo- 
quent Lcgat  Hieren.  Rormus,  in  his  two  Books,  £*?<& 
ammalia  Bruta  ratione  utantur  melius  famine,  and  other 
Writers  on  the  fame  Argument  ;  will,  I  doubt  not, 
arife  fully  fajisfied,  that  a  well  tempered  Enquiry , 
Whether  the  Pcrver  of  Ratiocination,  be  not  in  common  to 
fome  Beafls,  as  well  as  to  man,  though  ImperfecJiori  modo, 
cannot  misbecome,  though  not  the  Pulpit, y ct  the  Study 
of  the  moft  rigid  Divine. 

Thefe,  I  fay,  were  the  Temptations  that  firft  drew 
me  intoabeliefjthat  the  Power  of  Ratiocination  feemed 
too  low  and  trivial  an  Endowment,  to  make  out  the 
Imperial  Prerogative ,  of  mans  being  created  in  the 
Image  of  God;  though  at  the  fame  time,  I  could  not 
but  make  a  ftrong  reflexion  upon  my  own  Frailties, 
and  there  inform  my  felf,  that  I  wanted  not  caufe  to 
defpair,  of  ever  being fo  happy,  in  this  life,  as  to  be- 
come enabled,  by  ftudy,  to  husband  my  (hare  of  Rea- 
fon,  to  the  beft  ufc,  and  utmoft  improvement  of  its 
capacity.  But  my  fecond  thoughts  arc  more  wary, 
and  hold  it  a  part  of  Prudence,  to  fufpend  my  posi- 
tive aflent  unto  this  nice  Particular  5  as  well  in  re- 
fpe<5t,  this  difpute  would  better  befeem  the  Metaphy- 
sical Speculations  of  the  School  Divine,  then  the  grofs 
and  corporeal  difquifition  of  a  young  Phyfician :  as 
alfo,  that  I  have  obferved  Sculls  of  the  largeft capa- 
city, mod  fubjeel  to  Scepticity  -7  efpecial.lv,  in  Noti- 
ons relating  to  the  Condition  of  the  Soul,  when  ftrug- 
led  from  the  eclipfe  of  Flefh.  To  which  may  be  added, 
that  abfolutely  to  determine  pro  or  con,  on  this  debate  5 
though  it  may  manifeft  thefinenefs  andfubtilty  of  his 
wit,  who  can  handfomly  fet  Reafon  againft  her  ielf,  and 
wound  her  at  heart  with  arrows  ftoln  out  of  her  own 

Quiver : 


<P<$J0LEG0MENJ. 


quiver;  yetmuft  it  be,  a  bold  ufurpation  of  the  privi- 
ledg  of  Death i  to  whofe  decifion  properly  doubts  of 
this  kinde  ijclong  ;  that  being  the  univerfal  Moderator, 
that  will  fate  our  Curio ftties,  and  in  a  moment,  deter- 
mine all  our  Controverfics. 

BfoTiop  $icttaifii/9v&i  n  ov  %foy&yi  &£o»sy  Arid. 

W.  Charibton, 

London,  the  2^  of 

November. 

1*49. 


F  2  In 


In  Elegantiflimam  Trhdtm 

Traftatuum  Philofophicorum  Do&if. 

Van-Helmont  de  Magmtifmo, 
Tartar o,  &  Anima  5 

AD.    Gualtero    Char  let  on 

Clariffimo  Chimiatro  Londin.  Anglico 
Idiomate  cum  notis  donatorum : 

Hoc,  in  amicitia*  tcfferam,  apud  Belgas  difceflurus, 
Epigramma  Operi  fuo  prarngendum  reliquit : 
P.  dc  Cardonael. 


D 


0<5ta  Trias  /  Magnum  SophU  qu&  condU  elixir^ 
Jhtodputo  Tcrmagnum  vtl  latuiffe  Senem  .* 


Eia  avibus  prodi  Utis  -  Tefamafecundet 

Trefpera^fuffragiis  intemerata  fu'u. 
Digm  Trias  Cedro  $  phabi  Lauroque  percnniy 

Digna  vel  invitos  cenciliare  Scphos : 
Aonidum  munts*  facrumy  defl&qut  Minerva?, 

Cui  nilpoffe  addi  Tamaputabat  iners  : 
Adders  Suada  Novos^  0  Charlctone,  Lepores 
An  fa  tamen  Calami  eft  Dexteritafque  tuu 
*  ABufjidUtr.  A'teT  die  his  merit  0  nunc  omnibus  *  Hermes  5 
metcm Trifmeg.      Et  tut  jam fummis  proxima Laurus  erit : 
fZ'ttt'    22**1ue  Theopliraftum  evexit  Germania  lander 
■ Be'zU.  Hclmonti  in  *  Batavis gloria  quanta  fuit  1 

Tkm  deb  ere  Tibi  Brirones  fejurefatentur, 
ft  Hi  or  a  Hits  qui  Monument  a  para*. 


V.Kal.  VIIbRIS.  iER£  Christ. 
MDCXLIX. 


- I  'ii        .         j|i....mi 


ajflexandri  %ojfcei  Epigramma 

In  Politam  hanc  Tranflationem  Anglican! 
Trium  D.  Helmontii  Traftatuum, 

A  Domino  Gualt.  Ckirletono}  M.  D. 
Clariflimo  emifTam. 

QV&  nlque  Phillyrides,  nee  noverat  ipfe  Melampus, 
Iafidefve  fenex : 
Nee  qui  Paeoniis  caftumrevoeavit  ad  auras 

Artibus'Hippolytum : 
Nee  qui  inter  Danaos  Declor  Podalirius  olim 

Artis  Apollinese 
Noverat  5  hue  nobis  Sermone  Hclmontius  Heres 

Tradidit  Aufonio. 
guamvis  ilii  o>nnespotucre  expeUere  morb'os 

Arte  Machaonia : 
Non  tamen  hirerum  eau[as  novere  latent*  s  J 

guts  deeetifte  Liber ',     . 
Quern  pur o  Sermone  &  voeibtu  edidit  Anglis 

Charleton  latricuf. 
Hercukas.  rerum  vires,  animamque  reclufit 

Splendid;  ore  face: 
Et  velut  Alcides,  refiravit  Tartara nobis  - 

Ndn  Acheronta  tamen. 
Hie  Phoebo  eft  e  bar  us  Jed  long}  chariot  effet 

Si  Peripatetics.. 

Alex*  Kosse, 

F  n  To*- 


II    II  I*  I  II  III  | 


To  ^^Wtf^^te^^Wfe^J  on 

his  elegant  Tranflation  of  forfie  moft  fcle<5t 
pieces  of  Helmont  5   accompanied  with  his 

excejl^nt  Notes,  candid  uinimadverfions^ 
and  opportune  Enlargement.  ■ 

HElmontj  though  dead,  is  now  reviv'd.  Your  Pen, 
Like  </£fons  Bath,  inftill's  frefhjiw^agen, 
Into  his  pale  and  elemental  Clay.  His  Tomb, 
By  your  fair  Midwifery }  becom's  a  Wemb ': 
From  whofe  now  re- impregnate  jj^rw.  He 
Buds  forth  into  a  fecond  Infancy. 
Your  Sheets  new  ftvath  him  (Sir)  where  he  appears 
More  vigorous  in  this y out b,  then  in  his  years. 
We're  now  convine'd,  that  Sympathies  combine 
Atdiftance  5  that  difperfed  Mumies  twine  : 
That  Nature,  on  one  ftring,  like  coupled  Beads, 
Her  Rofary  of  twifted  Caufes  threads. 
Since  what  of  thofe  he  firft  aflerted  true, 
Gathers  new  flrengthjnd  Argument  from  you.  (thence 
Thofe  active  Flames ,  which  thaw'd  your  Brain,  do 
Efpoufe  his  widowed  Earthy  with  Heat  and  Senfe. 
Thofe  Spirits,  which  that  publike  Mint  o'th'  Blood, 
The  Liver,  back  retails  to  th'purple  F  W, 
Still  through  their  azure  Limbecks *and  eritruft 
New  Sap3  and  Verdure  to  his  wither'd  Drift. 
Sure,  when  the  SouloE  Helmont  fhook  away 
The  Frippery,  and  Luggage  of  her  Clay, 
She  feem'd  xp  fteal  into  your  Bre ft  5  and  there 
To  fix  herfelf,  as  in  her  fecond  Sphere. 
Yet  left  two  inmate  Souls,  both  fo  immenfe, 
Tljey  cannot  be  unactive,  chain'd  in  Senfe, 


Or  clofe  immur'd  in  walls  of  Flejh,  fhould  rent 

Uncircumfcrib'd,  the  brittle  Tenement : 

They  virtually  diffufe  themfelves,  and  come 

Into  this  Book,  by  an  Effluvium. 

Within  whofe  Pages,  theyl  joynt  Tenants  dwell, 

As  in  fome  nere  to  be  demolifht  Cell. 

And  when  the  Wardrobe  of  your  Duft  fhall  be 

Difpers'd  themfelves  into  more  Duft  then  ye  5 

This  to  your  Names  (from  Tims  imprefiions  fafe) 

Shall  ftand  at  once,  both  y pand  Sfitafh. 

I  0 

Thorn.  <Pbilipot. 


- 
_ — — ; ; — 


OF 


OF  THE 

MAGNETICK 

CURE 

O  F 

W  DUND  S. 

The  sttmmary, 

i.THAfcination,  Sympathy,  and  Magnetifme  differ.  2.  The  Sym- 
J^ pathetick  Unguent  one,  the  MagRetick  another.  3.  Mumie 
what.  4.  Pnilofophy  immediately  fubjedt  to  the  rcprehen- 
fionof  rcafon  onely.  5.  rhe  difference  of  Law  and  Fhilofophy. 
6.From  an  ignorance  of  the  Caufe,  Magnetifm  afcribed  to  the  Dcviil. 
7.  Who  the  interpreters  of  Narurc.8.Why  Chymicks  only  fit  tounri- 
dle  the  myfterious  oracles  of  Nature.o.  He  is  tacitely  guilcy  of  pride, 
w  ho  from  an  ignorance  of  the  caufe,  bclecves  a  Naturall  tffedl  to  be 
Diabolical!.  10.  Who  are  the  Devils  Hatterers.  11.  Magnetifme  no 
new  invention.  12.  The  Armary. Unguent,  r  3.  The  intention,  fcopc, 
ingredients,  and  manner  of  the  application  of  the  Unguent,  good. 
1 4.  The  Unguent,  why  not  unlawful!.  1  5.  Nor  fuperftitiou?.  16. 
Superltition,  what.  17.  Why  the  manner  of  the  Unguents  o- 
peration,  unknown  to  the  Cenfor,  concludes  nothing  againft  it. 
18.  Magnetifme  what.  19.  Some  effects  of  the  Loadftone.  2o.The 
Magneticall  cure  offotherwifej  incurable difcafes,  perfect.  21. Milk 
burned,  dryes  up  the  breafts.  22.  Vitrioll  deftroyed  by  Magnetifm. 
2 3 .  Mumie  operates  from  Iraly ,  as  far  as  Bruxels,  24.  The  Carline 
Thiftle,  in  the  fliadow,  attra&eth  wonderfully.  2^.  l  he  fame  nu- 
mericall  difeafe  may  change  fubje&s.  26.  From  Magnetifm  flowers 
follow  the  Sun.  2  7.  Mumiall  Philtres,  how  they  may  be  magneti- 
call. 28,Thefecret  myftery  of  the  blood  is  the  Chymift's  Load- 
ftone.  20.  Herbs,  how,  and  why  magneticall.  30.  Afarabacca 
and  Elder,  magneticall.  31.  An  implicit  compaft,  the  refuge  of  the 
ignorant.  32.  Sympathy  prarfuppofeth fenfe,  33.  The  Mumie  of 
a  dead  brother,  long  fince  imprefled  upon  a  chaire,  yet  magneticall. 
34.  A  Saphire,  in  magnetifme,  rivals  the  Unguent.  35.  A  Saphire, 
by  the  touch  of  one  Carbuncle,  cures  m3ny  others.  36.  Why  the 
grand  Prelates  of  the  Church  wear  cxrule  rings.  37.  Man  hath  a 
nugnetick  virtue.  3  8.  A  Zenexton,  or  Amulet,  againft  the  Plague. 
3  9.  NecefTary  it  is,  that  one  and  the  fame  Accident  pafle  from  fub- 
je&  to  fubjeft.  40.  Magnetifmea  coeliftiall quality.  41.  A  thiefe  or 
murderer,  and  an  honeft  man,  or  woman,  yeeld  the  fame  mofTe. 
42.  Whence,  and  what  the  feed  of  the  mofTe.  43.  The  fruit  of  the 
aer.  44.  Themoffe,  a  production  of  fire.  45.  In  the  mofTe  alfo 
is  the  back  of  the  Magnet,  thefcope  being  changed.  46.  God,  in 
miracles,  follows  the  courfe  of  Nature.  47.  God,  by  reliques,  ap- 
proves the  Magnetifme  of  theUnguenr.  48.  Supernatural!  Magne- 
tifme warranteth  naturall.  49.  A  lock  of  the  mofTe,  worn  in  the 
foreheadjis  defence  againft  a  fword :  but  of  the  ftole  of  Saint  Hubert, 
againft  the  biting  of  a  mad  dog.  50.  A  lock  neatly  infertcd  into  the 
forehead,  is  a  prsefcrvative,  during  life,  from  the  biting  of  a  mad  dog. 

G  <;i.PeD- 


The  Summary. 

5  3.  Pepper  degeneratcch  into  Ivy.  52.  How  we  are  to  judge  of  per- 
sons. 5  3.  Paracelfus  the  Monarch  of  Secrets.  54.  Every  thing  hath 
its  peculiar  heaven.  56.  Whence  every  naturall  inclination,  57, 
Whence  difcafes  are  altrall  in  man ,  and  portend  foule  weather. 
5 1 .  Whence  difeafed  men  have  a  foreknowledge  of  tempeils.  e/9. 
Whatcaufeth  the  flux  and  refluxof  the  Sea.  60.  Whence  the  winds 
are  (Hired  up.  61.  The  heavens  doe  not  caufe,  butonely  denounce 
future  events.  6  2.  Every  fcminall  Entity,  hath  its  own  peculiar  fir- 
mament, and  the  virtue  of  its  influence.  63.  The  Vine,  not  the 
liars,  rroubleth  the  Wine.  64.  Antimony  obferves  an  influence, 
■df.  The  Loadftone  directethit  felfe,  but  is  not  attracted,  to  the 
pole.  66.  GlafTe,magneticall.  67.  Rofin.magneticall.  68.  The 
power  of  GarlickovcraLoadftone:  and  why  the  fame  ovcrMercu' 
ry.  69.  The  power  operative  on  a  dirtant  object,  is  naturall  even 
in  fublunaries:  and  magncticall.  70.  Every  Creature  lives,  Jho 
wodo  :   by  the  peculiar  information  of  his  own  effentiall  forme, 

71.  Whatthe  Unguent  can  attract  from  the  wound,    at  diftance. 

72,  Every  Satanicall  effect  is  imperfect,  73.  Why  Satan  cannot  co- 
operate with  our  Unguent.  74.  What  may  be  called,  the  will,  and 
phanfie  of  the  flefh,  and  of  the  outward  man.  75.  A  twofold  EclU- 
fy.  76.  The  ccftatique  virtue  of  the  blood.  77.  Corruption  edu- 
ceth  that  dormant  virtue  into  action.  7$.  Theeflences  of  things  not 
fubject  to  Corruption.  79.  The  defigneof  Spagyricall  putrefaction. 
80.  The  Caufe  of  Ma^netifme  in  the  Unguent.  81.  The  heart  at- 
tracted by  treafure,  magnetically.  82.  The  originall  of  Necromancy. 
83.  What  man  is,  in  the  notion  of  Animal:  and  what  in  the  notion 
of  the  Image  of  God.  84  How  an  Eagle  is  invited  by  the  magnetifm 
of  a  Carcafe.  8  5.  How  the  blood,  in  the  Unguent,  is  allectcd  to  its 
treafure:  and  why  Eagles  flock  together  to  a  Carcafe,  magnetically. 
86.  Senfation  Animal,  and  Senfation  Naturall,  different.  87.  The 
effect)  of  Witches,  impious.  8  8 .  The  power  of  the  Witch,  is  Natu  - 
rail :  and  what  that  power  is.  8  9.  Where  in  Man,  the  magicall  pow- 
er is  featod.  90,  Whether  man  hath  a  dominion  paramount,  overall 
or  her  Creatures  91.  Why  a  man  is  indowed  with  a  power  of  acting, 
pernmnm.  92.  The  mag  call  faculty  of  man,  what.  93.  This  magi- 
call activity  lyes  ambufcadoed  in  man,  fevcrall  wayes.  94.  The  in- 
wat  d  man,  the  fame  with  the  outward.fundamentally:  but  materially 
diverfe.  95.  What  is  the  Virall  fpirit :  its  fcience  and  endowment 
1)6.  In  a  Carcafe,  extinct  by  a  voluntary  death,  there  is  no  inharrent 
fpirit.  97.  The  divifion  Of  fpirits  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Phy- 
fjcians.  98.  The  Soule  operates  in  the  body,  onely  per  nutum,  ma- 
gically. 99.  In  the  body,  the  Soule  operateth  onely  by  a  drowfie, 
fomnolent  beck,  or  reftrained  intuition:  but  out  of  the  body,  by  a 
aimblc,and  vehement.  The  knowledge  of  the  Apple,  eclipfeth  the 

know- 


The  Summary* 

knowledge  magical!,  ioo.  The  beginning  of  the  Cabal,  drawn  from 
dreams,  divinely  infufed.    101.  The  defect  of  underitanding  in  the 
outward  man,  1 02.  How  far  the  power  of  ->atan  extends  in  Witches. 
1  o  3 .  What  are  the  true  and  proper  works  of  Satan.  1 04 .  Sin  rook 
away  the  endowments  of  Grace,  and  obfeured  thofe  of  Nature.  105. 
The  end  of  the  pious  exercifes  of  Catholikes.  1 06.  The  grand  effect 
of  the  Cabal.     107.  Two  fubjects  of  all  things.     108.  Man  hach  a 
power  of  acting,  as  well  by  fpirit,  as  body.    109.  W  hat  kind  of  ray, 
or  effluvium, is  tranfmitted  from  a  witch,  to  a  bruite.     no.  How  a 
Witch  may  be  difcovered*     1 11,  How  the  fpirit  of  a  Witch  may  be 
captived,  and  bound  fart  in  the  heart  of  a  horfe.  n  2. The  intention 
depraves  a  good  work.  1 1  3 .  The  Virtue  fcmioall,  is  Naturally  Ma- 
gicall.     114.  The  caufe  of  the  Cruentation  of  aimurdered  Carcafe, 
in  the  praefence  of  the  homicide.     115.   Why  the  Plague  a  frequent 
concomitant  of  feidges.  116.  Works  of  mercy,  to  be  done  upon  the 
diftrefled,  though  only  in  order  to  the  avoydance  of  the  Plague.  1 1 7. 
Plaguesarifingfromrevenge,andexfecrationsof  men  dyingunder  op- 
preffion,molt  fatall,  1 18. Why  the  carcafes  of  malefactors  were  to  be 
removed  from  the  gibbet,  119.  Why  excrements  can  be  no  authors 
of  a  Plague.  i2o.Whythebloodofa  bull  is  venemous.  121. Why  the 
fat  of  a  bulis  made  an  ingredient  into  the  Sympathetick  unguent;name- 
ly,  that  it  may  be  made  an  Armary  Unguent*  1 22.  Why  Satan  cannot 
concur  to  the  Unguent.  123.  The  bafis  of  Magick.  124.  When  vani- 
ties and  impoftures  are  reputed  for  magick,  125.  A  good  magick  in 
holy  Writ,  1 26.  What  may  be  called  true  magick.  1 27. The  caufe  of 
theidolatry  of  Witches.  12  8.Thc  Excitators  of  magick.-  i2<?,Satan 
excites  it  im perfectly. t  gc.Whence  beaits  are  alfo  magical! .  1  31.!  he 
dominion  of  Spirits  foftereth  contention  and  love.  132.  Man,  why  a 
microcofm.  133.  I  he  mind generateth  rcall  Entities,  x34.Th.at  real! 
Entity  of  an  ambiguous,  or  midle  nature,betwixc  a  body  and  a  fpirit. 
1 3  5.  The  defcenfion  of  the  Soul,cauferh  a  conformative  Will.  1 36. 
The  caufe  of  the  fertility  of  feeds.  137.  Why  lull  doth  in  a  manner, 
alienate  us  from  our  mind.i38.A  Fatherly  the  fpirit  of  his  feed^doth 
generate  extra  fe  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  body,in  a  fubject  fud- 
dainly  removed  to  diftance.i  3  9. What  fpirit  that  is,  which  is  the  Pa- 
tron of  Magnetifm.  1 40.  The  will  doth  tranfmit  a  fpirit  to  the  object. 
Unleffe  the  will  did  produce  fome  reality,  the  Devill  could  have  no 
knowledge  of  it. -and  unlefle  it  fent  this  produced  reality  forth  from  it 
felf.toward  the  object,the  devil  being  abfent,could  never  be  provok'd 
thereby.  Where  therefore  the  treafureis,  thither  doth  the  heart  of 
man  tend .  141 .  Wagnetifme  done  by  fenfation.  142,  There  is  a  plu- 
rality of  fenfations  in  one  fingle  fubject.     143.  From  the  fuperiour 
phanfy  commanding  it,  144,  Why  glaiTc-makers  ufe  the  powder  of 

G   2  Load- 


The  Summary. 

Loaditone.  14 5.  The  Phanfy  of  Attrahents  changed.  146.  Inanimate 
creatures,endowed  with  rhanfy.147.Why  fome  things  eaten,  intro- 
duce madnc fs.  148.  Why  a  mad  dog  biting  a  man,caufeth  madnefle. 
149.  The  fting  ot  the  Tarantula  caufeth  an  alienation  of  the  mind 
from  reafon.  150.  Whybeafts  defend  not  themfelvcs  againft  the 
biting  of  a  mad  dog.  1 5  '  .The  fympathy  betwixt  objects  removed  at 
diftance  each  from  other,  is  done  by  the  mediation  of  an  Univerfall 
Spirit,  which  governing  the  Sun  .andothn  cocleftiall  orbs,is  endued 
with  exquifite  ienfe.  152.  The  imagination,  in  Creatures  enriched 
with  an  Elective  Faculty,  is  various,  arbitrary, and  unconfined  :  but 
in  others,  of  the  fame  determinate  identity  alwayes.  1 5  3  . T  he  Grit 
degree  of  power  magicall,  dwelleth  in  the  formes  of  the  three 
grand  Principles,  viz.*  Sal,  Sulphur,  and  Mercury.  154.  The  fe- 
cond  is  by  the  Phanfies  or  the  Forms  of  the  Mixtum,  or  integrall 
Compoficion  :  which  being  deftroyed,  the  Principles  yet  remaine. 
155. 1  he  third  arifcth  from  the  Phanfy  of  the  Soule.  « 5  6.  What 
beafts  are  endowed  with  magicall  power,  and  can  a&  beyond  the 
circumference  of  themfelves,  per  nutum  onely .  157.  The  fourth 
degree  of  power  magicall,is  from  the  excited  intellect  of  man,  158. 
The  word  Magick,is  analogous,  and  appliable  to  many  things,  in  a 
third  relation.  1 59.  Every  magicall  power,  ftands  in  need  of,  and  is 
improved  by  Excitation.  160.  What  may  befaida  fubjeft  capable 
of  Magnetifra.  161 .  How  M3gnetifm  differs  from  other  Formall  Pro- 
prieties. 16  2.  The  fuperfluous  humours  &  Excrements  of  the  body, 
havealfo  their  Phanfy.  16 3, Why  Holy  Writ  doth  give  the  attribute 
of  life,rather  to  the  blood  then  to  any  other  humor  in  the  body.i 64, 
The  feed  inhaeriteth  the  Phanfy  of  the  Father,  by  traduction:  Whence 
Nobility  hath  its  original!.  165.  The  skins  of  the  Wolfe  and  fherp 
retain  aPhannftique  enmity, of  their  former  life.  \66.  What  the 
Phanfy  of  the  blood,  freflily  added  to  the  Unguent,  can  doe.  The 
manner  of  the  Magnetifme  in  the  Unguent.  167  .  The  difference  be- 
twixt a  magneticall  cure  done  by  the  Unguent,  and  that  done  by  a 
rotten  egg.  168,  Thegrand  myfteryof  humane  Imagination,  the 
foundation  of  Naturall  Magick,  169.  The  Intellect  imprefieth  the 
Entity,  it  felfe  created,  upon  the  extei  nail  obi'ecl  :  and  there  it  reallv 
perfeveres,  170.  How  to  make  powerful!  pcntacles  or  m.igicaJl 
Characters.  171.  The  Phanfy,  by  a  naile,  as  by  a  medium,  holds 
captive  the  fpirit  of  the  Witch.  172.  If  Satan  can  move  a  body, 
without  any  corporeall  extremity  :  why  cannot  the  inward  man  doe 
the  fame  ?  and  why  not  rather  the  fpirit  of  the  Witch  ?  J73»  Tne 
virtue  of  the  Unguent,  not  from  the  imagination  of  its  Compounder: 
but  fromdiverfefimples  married  into  one  Compofition,  174.  The 
Author  makes  profelTion  of  his  Faith. 

OF 


OF  THE 

Magne tick  Cure  of  Wounds. 

N  the  eighth  year  of  this  age,  there  came  to  my 
hands  an  Oration  declamatory,  made  at  Mar- 
purge  of  the  Catti,  wherein  Rodu/phus  Gocle- 
nitu  (to  whom  the  publick  profeflion  of  Phi- 
lofophy  was  lately  committed)  paying  his  firft 
fruits  to  the  Univerfity ,  endevours  to  make 
good,  that  the  cure  of  wounds,  by  the  Sympathetic^,  and 
Arfnarie  Vnguent,  firft  invented  by  Paracelfmy  is  meerly 
natural.  Which  Oration  I  wholly  read,  and  fighed,  that  the 
hiftory  of  natural  things  had  fain  under  the  protection  of  fo 
weak  a  Patron.  The  Author,  neverthelefs,highly  pleafed  him- 
felf  with  that  argument  of  writing ,  and  with  a  continued 
barrennefs  of  probation,  in  the  year  1613.  publifhed  the  fame 
work,  with  fome  enlargement.  Not  long  (ince,  I  alio  met  with 
afuccincl  anatome  of  the  fore-mentioned  Book,  compiled  by 
a  certain  Divine^  favoring  more  of  a  fine-witted  CV#/W,  then 
a  folid  Difputation.  Whereupon  rrry  judgment,  what  ever  it 
were,  was  much  defired  j  at  leaft,  in  that  relation,  that  the 
thing  invented  by  Paracelfns,  neerly  concerned  him,  and  my 
felf,his  difciple.  I  (hall  therefore  declare,  what  I  conceive  of 
the  Phyfician  Geclenim,  and  what  of  the  Divine^  the  Cenfor. 
The  Phyfician  in  the  firft  place,  propofes,  and  with  oftentation 
promifes  to  prove,  the  magnetical  cure  of  wounds  to  be  pure- 
ly natural;  Dut  I  found  the  undertaker  inefficient,  to  per- 
form fo  weighty  a  task ;  in  regard  he  no  where,  or  at  beft  but 

G  2  very 


Of  the  MAgnetick 


very  (tenderly,  makes  good  the  title,  or  his  own  large  pro- 
mifes.  Collecting,  hence  and  thence  from  divers  Authors, 
many  rhapfodies  or  gleanings,  by  which  he  conceives  he  hath, 
to  ample  fatisfaftion,  proved,  that  in  the  inventory  of  created 
natures,  there  are  certain  formal  or  effential  vermes,  which 
men  term  Sympathy  and  Antipathy  •  and  alfo  that  from  the 
conceflion of  thefe,  the  Magnetical  Cure  is  meerly  natural. 
Many  things,  I  fay,  borrowed  from  the  Egyptian.^  Chaldeans, 
Perfians,  Conjurers,  and  Impoftors,  he  hath  amaiTed  together 
into  this  one  difcDurfe,  that  thereby  he  might  evidence  and 
confirm  that  A-Ltgncttfm,  which  notwithstanding,  himfelf  was 
wholly  ignorant  of.  With  defign,  partly,  that  by  a  delightful 
entertainment  of  thofe  mindes  that  are  eager  in  the  que/1  of 
novelties,  he  mightfeduce  them  from  a  direct  progreffion  to 
the  mark  ;  and  partly  to  raife  them  to  an  admiration  of  the 
Author,  who  feemed  to  have  read,  and  ranfacked  not  onely 
-vulgar,  but  alfo  all  other  more  rare  and  antique  writers. 

For  which  confideration,  the  Phyfician  does  very  abfurdly 
confound  Sympathy  (which  erroneoufly,  and  under  various 
notions  he  very  often  introduces)  with  Magnetifm;  and  from 
that  concludes  this  to  be  natural  :  For  I  have  obferved  this 
Vulnerary  Vnguent  to  cure,  not  onely  men,  but  horfes  alfo ; 
with  which  our  Nature  holds  not  fo  rteer  an  affinity  (unlefs 
we  grant  our  felves  to  be  AlTes)  that  from  thence  the  Sympa- 
thetici^Vnguent  (hould  deferve  to  be  accounted  common  to 
horfes,  as  well  as  to  us. 

With  the  fame  abfurd  indiftinclion,  he  alfo  confounds  Sym- 
pathy With  Fafcination  and  Ligation,  and  both  with  Magne- 
/i/w;namely,with  great  anxiety  and  travel  of  minde,he  crouds 
together  upon  the  Stage,in  one  Scene,  without  any  diftinction, 
all  fecret,  and  more  abjlrufe  effetls  what  ever ;  that  being  de- 
ftitute  of  reafons,  he  might  thereby  fupport  his  own  Afagne- 
tifm.  I  will  by  an  example  difference  Fafcination  from  Sym- 
pathy, and  both  from  Magnetifm.  A  Dog  holds  an  Antipathy 
(for  Sympathy  and  Antipathy  are  both  daughters  of  the  fame 
Mother)  with  a  Hen ;  for  he  preys  upon  her,  and  fhe  flies  from 
him ;  but  when  fhe  hath  newly  hatched  her  Chickens,  and 
excluded  them  from  the  protection  of  their  (hells,  (be  boldly 

aflaults. 


Cure  of  Wound*. 

aflfaults,  and  puts  to  flight  a  dog  ;  though  of  hfmfelf  very 
courageous  ;  to  wit,  the  foul  of  the  Hen,  by  faftination, 
chaining  up  the  foul  of  the  dog;  the  former  Antipathy,  dif- 
parity  of  weapons  for  guard,  and  great  ods  of  ftrength  afford- 
ing no  hinderance  to  the  action  :  But  in  this,  Magnetifm  is  no 
where  to  be  found. 

Moreover,  what  other  inftances  the  Phyfician  inlerts,  con- 
cerning Imprejfes,  Characters ,  Gamaheu,  or  A/agical  Images , 
Ceremonies ,  and  fuch  like,  for  the  moft  part,  vain  obfervances, 
are  but  random  fhots,wholly  impertinent  to  the  prefent  fcope, 
and  rather  ftagger  the  doctrine  of  Magnetifm,  by  rendring  it 
fufpecled,  then  fupport  or  advance  it.  But  of  thefe  pofitively 
to  determine  any  thing,  is  a  task  not  futable  to  my  wit. 
•    Goclenius  furthermore  wanders  from  truth,  and  indeed  with 
no  lefs  temerity  then  ignorance ;  fondly  dreaming  from  the  pre* 
fcript  of  Paracelfw,  that  the  weapon,  wherewith  the  wound 
was  inflicted,  if  rolled  up  in  the  weapon  fa lve,  did  work  the 
cure  on  the  wound .  For  in  vain  is  the  weapon,  or  point  of  the 
fword  anointed  with  the  Armary  Unguent,  prefcribed  by  him, 
unlefs  it  be  diitained  with  blood,  and  that  blood  be  firft  dried 
upon  the  fword.  For  to  Paracelfns ,  the  SympathctkkfO  nguent 
is  one  thing,  in  refpect  of  the  blood  effluxed  out  of  the 
wound ;  and  that  V  nguent  >  wherewith  arms,  which  have  re- 
ceived no  tincture  of  blood,  are  to  be  emplaftrated,  clearly  an- 
other ;  and  for  this  reafon,  he  Chriftens  the  former,  the  Mag- 
netic}^ and  Sympathetic!^  the  latter,  the  Armary  Magnetic^ 
Vngnent :    Which  therefore  (and  to  good  purpofe)  receives 
into  its  confection,  befides  the  ingredients  efiential  to  the  for- 
mer, Honey,  and  Bulls  fat. 

In  fine,  Goclenius,  to  humor  his  own  genius,  hath  altered 
the  prefcriptionof  Paracelfus «  affirming,  that  the  Vfnea,  or 
mofs,  is  to  be  felected  onely  from  the  skulls  of  fuch,  as  have 
been  hanged.  Of  which  his  own,  and  grofly  erroneous  inven- 
tion enquiring  a  reafon,  he  Mufhes  not  foolifhly  to  imagine,, 
that  in  ftrangulation  the  Vital  jpirits  violently  retreat  into  the 
skull,  and  there  conftantly  (hroud  themfelves  for  fome  time, 
until  the  mofe  (hall,  under  the  open  canopy  of  the  Air,  grow 
up, and  periwigth?  Cranium,  Varacelfm  hath  exprefiy  taught 

the: 


Of  the  M&gmtkk 

the  contrary,  and  by  multiplied  experience  we  are  confirmed, 
that  Vfnea  gathered  from  the  skulls  of  fuch,  who  have  been 
broken  on  the  wheel,  is  in  virtue  no  whit  inferior  to  that  of 
men  ftrangled  with  a  halter.  For  truly  from  Animals  there  is 
not  drawn  the  Quint  E (fence  ( in  regard  the  principal,  and  pa- 
ramont  eflente  periftieth  together  with  the  influent  jpirit,  and 
life)  but  onely  the  virtue  pnmfidl,  that  is,  the  originary ,  im- 
plantate,  and  confermcntatefpirit,  fafely  remaining,  and  in  an 
obfcure  vitality  furviving,  in  bodies  extinct  by  violence. 

What  other  things  Gsclenius  hath  delivered,  of  remedies 
to  repair  a  ruinous  memory,  rs  we  cannot  but  declare  them, 
in  no  relation,  congruent  to  the  fcope  intended  ;  fo  alfo  we 
nothing  doubt  to  prove  them  meer  pageants  and  impertinent 
flourifhes. 

Betwixt  our  Divine  zn&PhyJician,  there  is  at  all  no  difpute 
dcfatto,  about  the  verity  of  the/^;  for  both  unanimoufly 
concede  the  cure  to  be  wrought  upon  the  wounded  perfon  : 
The  contention  lies  onely  in  this,  that  the  Pbyfician  afTerts  this 
Magnetical  Cure  to  be  purely  Natural*  but  the  Divine  will 
needs  have  it  Satanical,  and  that  from  a  compact  of  the  firfl 
inventor.  Of  which  cenfure,  in  his  Anatomeof  our  Phyjicians 
difcourfe,  he  alledges  no  pofitive  reafon ;  conceiving  it  fuffi- 
ciently  fatisfactory ,  if  he,  on  the  fcore  of  his  own  folitary 
judgment,  abolifh  it,  though  he  fubjoyn  no  grounds  for  the 
abolition;  that  is,  acquiefcing  onely  in  this,  that  he  hath  re- 
moved the  feeble  and  invalid  arguments  of  the  AJfertor ; 
which,  in  fober  truth,  is  a  matter  of  no  diligence,  no  learning, 
and  of  no  authority  to  erect  or  eftabliili  beleif.  For  what  a- 
vails  it,  to  the  procurement  of  faith,  from  no  fhonger  evi- 
dence, then  the  futility  of  fpecious  reafons,  urged  by  fome 
ignorant  head,  to  give  a  definite  judgment  on  the  thing  it  felf? 
and  to  declare  it  impious,  if  himfelf  hath  not  fo  much  as  in  a 
dream  thought  upon  any  one  petty  reafon,  for  the  fupport  of 
his  fentence  ?  What  if  I,  being  a  Laick,fhould  with  courfe  and 
untrimmed  arguments,  commend  Presbytery,  and  another  re- 
ject my  reafons  as  unworthy  and  infurhcient,  will  the  order  of 
Prieithood  it  felf  be  therefore  rejected  ?  Of  what  concern- 
ment, I  pray,  is  the  ignorance,  or  temerity  of  any  one  to 

realities 


Cure  of  Wounds, 

>— — — — ■i^'^^^*^*^^*1  '  '    "'  *   '    ™       '™*         "  "  '      —  ■■■■'■■  ■■■■■!     ■  aai 

realities  themfelvcs  ?  In  the  Court  of  Truth,  Philafophy  fub~ 
mits  not  it  ft  If  to  naked,  and  fingle  cenfures,  unlefs  there  alfo 
concur  a  conjider able  gravity  of  the  Cenfors,  fortified  with  firm 
and  convincible  reafons. 

Wherefore  I,  who  have  undertaken,  in  oppofitton  to  out 
Divine,  to  make  good,  that  the  Magnetick  Cure  of  wounds, 
is  the  fingle,  and  ordinary  effect  of  Nature  ;  in  the  firfl:  place, 
think  Goclenius  worthy  to  be  excufed,  if  without  fuccefs  he 
hath  fweat  in  the  indagation  of  the  grand  and  approximate 
Caufe  of  this  rare  effect.    What  wonder,  when  our  Divine 
makes  publick  confeflion,  that  himielf  is  utterly  ignorant  of 
that  caufe,  and  onely  for  that  reafon  refers  it  to  Satan,  as  to 
the  Author  and  matter-wheel  in  this  abftrufe  motion :   For 
fuch  is  the  infirmity  of  our  delapfed  nature,  that  we  are  defiitute 
of  the  knowledg  of  the  moft,  and  moji  excellent  things.  And  there- 
fore, to  palliate  this  defect  of  ourunderftanding,  we,  though 
not  without  fome  tacite  reluctaacy  within,    obliquely  wrefi: 
many  effects,  whofe  efficients  are  beyond  the  ken  of  our  blear- 
eyed  reafon,  to  the  fanEluary  of  ignorance,  and  refer  them  to 
the  Catalogue  of  Occult  Qualities.  For  who,among  Divines^ 
ever  had  a  plenary  and  demonstrative  knowledg  of  the  true 
and  proper  caufe  of  Rifibility,  or  any  other  Formal  propriety  : 
For  example,  of  the  heat  of  fire.  Dolt  not  thou  fall  upon  that 
Fallacy,  Petitio  Principii,  an  abfurd  begging  of  the  queftion,  if 
thou  anfwer,  that  extreme  heat  belongs  to  fire,  becaufe  it  is  of 
the  eflence  of  fire  ?  In  truth,  the  Ejfences  of  Forms,  in  regard 
they  are  unknown  to  us,  a  priori ,from  their  Caufalities  ;  there- 
fore alfo  is  the  original,  or  pedigree  Of  Formal  proprieties , 
wholly  abftrufe,  jejune, and  undifcovered ;  and  where  we  per- 
ceive any  Formal paffton  fubjoyned,  the  minde,as  if  tired  with 
vain  fcrutiny,  foon  ceafeth  from  the  difquifition  of  it,  and  re- 
pofeth  it  felf,  fitting  down  contented  with  the  empty  notion, 
and  bare  name  of  Occult  proprieties.     Go  to,  I  befeech  thee, 
does  the  Anatomift ,our  Cenfor>  happily  know  the  reafon  why 
a  Dog  fwings  his  tayl  when  he  re  Joyces,  bur  a  Lyon  when  he  is 
angry  ;  and  a  Cat,  when  pleafed,  advances  hers  in  an  erect 
pofture  ?  What  therefore,  when  himfelf  cannot  give  a  reafon 
for  the  motion  of  a  tayl,  will  he  fo  much  wonder,  that  Gocle~ 

H  nim 


6  Of  the  Mdgmtick 

niw  hath  given  an  improper  and  infolid  reafon  of  Aiagnetifm  ? 
and  from  the  refutation  of  that,  prefume  that  he  hath  more 
then  fufficiently  demonftrated  thatfanation  of  wounds  to  be 
Satanical,  which  is  the  genuine  effect  of  Afagnetifm  ?  Far 
from  us  be  fo  great  temerity  of  cenfure'. 
5«  Come  on  then;  why  dofl  thou  call  that  cure  Diabolical} 

Infooth,  thou  oughteft  to  have  annexed  the  reafon  of  thy  cen- 
fure, unlefs  thou  expected  it  fhould  be  denied  by  others,  with 
the  fame  facility,  wherewith  thou  arfirmeft  it  tD  be  diabolical. 
Lawyers  require  onely  the  affirmative  confirmed ;  but  Philofc- 
phers  both  parts,,  that  the  ignorance  or  protervity  of  the  AV- 
gant  party ,may  not  appear  greater  then  that  of  the  Affirmant. 
Do  ft  thou  happily  maintain  the  Cure  to  be  Diabolical.becaufe 
it  cannot  be  clearly  underftood  (by  thee)  that  there  is  any 
natural  reafon  fork?  I  will  not  beleeve,  that  from  thy  own 
infirmity,  thou  mayft  deliver  fo  idle  and  ftupid  a  fenterxe  of 
the  vertue  of  it.  For  thou  well  knowcft,  that  the  imbecillity  of 
our  under  ft  anding,  in  mt  comprehending  the  more  abftrnfe  and 
retired  caufes  of  things,  is  not  to  be  afcribed  to  any  defect  in  their 
nature,  but  in  our  6tpn  hdodrvin'kt  intellectual*. 

Proceed  therefore ;  whence  hall:  thou  aflurance,  that  God, 
in  his  primitive  intention,  hath  not  directed  this  vertue  Mag' 
netical  to  the  benefit  of  the  wounded  ?  Shew  us  your  Com- 
miilion  ;  hath  God  elected  you  the  Secretary  of  his  Councel  ? 
£#  Certainly,  however  you  may  waver  in  your  belief,  you  (hall  in 
eondufion  finde,  that  amongit  you  Divines,  the  Magnetick 
cure  can  be  accounted  Diabolical  for  no  other  reafon  then  that 
the  fhallownefs  of  your  judgment  cannot  comprehend,  nor 
*  your  Function  admit  it  to  be  natural.   What  wonder,  that  no 

Divine  hath  ever  fcented  ihtkfubtilities  ?   for  after  the  Prieft 
and  the  Levite  had  both  paiTed  on  to  Jericho,  there  fucceeded 
a  Samaritan,  a  Lay  man,  who  deprived  the  Pricfts  of  all  right 
g  of  difquifition  into  the  fecret  caufes  of  things    Whereupon 

Nature  from  thenceforth  fummoned  not  Divines  to  be  the  In- 
terpreters of  her  nicer  operations,but  adopted  Phyficians  onely 
to  be  her  darlings,  and  none  but  fuch,  who  inftructed  by  Py- 
rctcchny,  examine  the propvi'etitftti  things,  by  fequeftringthe 
impediment?  or  <  log":  of  venues  ambulcadoed  in  their  grofler 

materials. 


Care  of  Wounds, 

materials,  fuch  arc  their  crudity,  venewfities,  and  impurities; 
that  is  thole  bryars  and  them's  every  where,  from  the  firft 
Malediction,  inoculated  into  the  creatures  in  their  fpring  or 
virgin  eftate.  For  fince  Dame  Nature  (the  Proto-Chymifty 
her  felf  doth  every  day  fublime,  calcine,  ferment,  diffolve, 
coagulate,  fix,  ore.  Certainly  we  alfo,  the  onely  faithful  inter- 
preters of  Natures  Oracles,  do  by  the  fame  helps  and  advan- 
tages draw  forth  the  EJfential  qualities  of  things  from  the  dark 
pi  ifon  of  their  materials,and  bring  them  to  the  Meridian  light 
of  reafon. 

But  the  Divine,  that  he  may  be  able  to  difcern  what  is  prt- 
fiigious,  from  what  is  natural ;  it  is  requifite,  that  he  firft  bor- 
row the  definition  from  us,  left  the  Cobler  lhamefully  adven- 
ture beyond  his  Laft :  Let  the  Divine  enquire  ©nely  concern- 
ing God,  but  the  Naturalift  concerning  Nature. 

AiTuredly  the  goodnefs  of  the  Creator  was  largely  diffufed 
on  all  the  works  of  his  hands,  who  created  all  things  for  the 
ufe  and  benefit  of  ingrateful  man:  neither  admitted  any  of 
our  Divines  as  an  Afleflbr  in  his  Councel,  how  many,  and 
how  excellent  vertues  hefhould  endow  his  Creatures  withal. 
In  the  interim,  I  am  wholly  unfatisfied  how  he  can  be  excufed 
from  the  fin  of  Pride,  who  becaufe  he  comprehends  not  the 
natural  caufe,  as  meafuring  all  the  immenfe  works  of  God  by 
the  narrow  extent  of  his  own  head,does  therefore  audacioufly 
deny,  that  God  hath  beftowed  any  fuchvertue  on  the  Crea- 
ture; as  if  man,  a  vile  worm,  had  fathom'd  the  power  of 
God,  and  were  privy  to  the  defignes  of  his  Councel.  He  efti- 
mates  the  mindes  of  all  men  by  his  own,  who  thinks  that  can- 
not be  done  which  he  cannot  underftand. 

To  me,  ferioufly,it  appears  a  wonder  in  no  refpeclthat  God 
hath,  befides  a  body  perfectly  refembling  the  Load(lme,  be- 
ftowed upon  his  Creatures  a  nobh  verttte  alfo,  which  our  rea- 
fon can  explicate  by  no  other  term  then  that  of  Magnetifw. 
Ougfit  it  not  to  fuffice,  to  the  indubitate  conceflion  of  Mxg> 
nctifm,  that  onely  one  (ingle  example  (I  (hall  hereafter  bring 
in  others,numerous  a,nd  appofite)  be  introduced,of  the  natural 
efficiency  of  that  ftone,  according  to  the  model  or  pattern 
whereof,  even  other  endowments,  varioufly  diftributed 

H  2  amoneft 


Of  the  Magnetic k 


amongft  the  creatures,  may  be  clearly  underftood  ?  What, 
becaufe  the  thing  is  new,  paradoxical,  and  above  the  reach  of 
your  undcritanding,muft  it  therefore  hzSatanicalztto  >  Far 
be  it  from  us  to  conceive  fo  unworthily  of  the  Divine  Majefty 

xo.  of  the  Creator ,  nor  indeed  ought  we  thus  to  court  or  gratifie 
the  Devil,  by  transferring  this  honor  upon  him ;  for  what  can 
ever  affect  him  with  a  more  full  delight,  then  that  the  glory 
of  good  works  be  afcribed  to  him,  as  if  he  had  been  the  grana 
Author  of  them  ? 

,j  That  material  nature  does  uncefTantly  by  its  fecret  Magne- 

tifm,  fuck  down  forms  from  the  brefts  of  the  fupcrior  Orbs, 
and  greedily  third  after  the  favor  and  benign  influence  of  the 
celeftial  Luminaries,  you  willingly  concede  ;  and  moreover, 
that  the  ftars  in  exchange  attract  fome  tribute  from  inferior 
bodies,  fo  that  there  is  a  free  commerce,  and  reciprocal  return 
from  each  to  other,  and  one  harmonious  concord,  and  confpi- 
racy  of  all  parts  with  the  whole  univerfe :  'And  thus  Magne- 
tifm,  in  regard  it  is  vigorous  and  pregnant  in  every  thing,  hath 
nothing  new  in  it  but  the  name,  nor  is  it  paradoxical,  but  to 
thofe  who  deride  all  things,  and  refer  to  the  dominion  of 
Satan,  whatfoever  falls  not  within  the  narrow  circle  of  their 
own  undemanding.  In  good  truth,  thiskindeof  wifdom  is 
never  to  be  found  by  him  that  feeks  it  with  derifion. 

12  But  I  befeech  you,  what  of  Superfiifion  hath  the  Armary 

Unguent  ?  whether  becaufe  it  is  compounded  of  the  mofs, 
toood9nt*mj9znd'fat  of  man  ?  Alas !  the  Phyjicia*  ufes  thefe 
inoffenfively,  and  to  this  purpofe  the  Apothecary  is  licenfedto 
fell  them.  Or  perchance,  becaufe  the  manner  of  ufingand 
applying  the  Medicine  is  new  to  you,  -unaccuftomed  to  the 
v\ilgar,  but  admirable  to  both;  muft  the  effect  therefore  be 
Satanical  ?  Subdue  your  paflion,  and  calm  your  rage,  ere  long 
you  fhall  be  more  fully  fatisfied. 

j.  For  the  manner  of  its  application,  contains  in  it  nothing  of 

evil.  Firfl,  the  intention  is  good  and  pious,  and  directed  one- 
ly  to  a  good  and  charitable  end  ,•  namely,  the  healing  of  our 
fick,  la nguiihing  neighbor,  without  pain,  without  danger,  and 
without  the  confumption  of  his  purfe:  And  do  you  call  this 
diabolical  I  In  fcie.the re mtdies  themfelvcs  arc  dMitiset  natural 

means, 


Cure  of  Wounds.  $ 

means,  to  which  we  (hall  in  the  progrefs  of  our  difpute,  by 
convincing  arguments  demonftrate,  that  this  generous  faculty 
was  peculiarly  given  by  God  himfelf.  Our  wifhes  are  that 
your  felf  had,  by  fo  firm  evidence,  ratified  your  negative  por- 
tion, viz.  that  Godythe  fupreme  Good,did  not,in  the  Creation, 
confer  upon  the  ingredients  of  the  Vnguent,  any  fuch  natural 
venue,  and  mumial  Magnetifm. 

This  Magnetkal  remedy  can,  on  no  fide,be  laid  open  to  the  1 4. 
encroachment  of  fufpect;  fince,  both  in  the  cenfetlion  and 
uje,  it  hath  no  fuperftitious  rites  performed,  it  requires  no 
myfterious  words,  no  characters,  or  imprefTes,  no  preftigious 
ceremonies,  or  vain  obfervances  conjoyned  :  It  prefuppofes 
no  planetary  hours,  or  punctilioes  of  conftellations,  it  pro- 
phanes  not  (acred  things ;  and  what  is  more,  it  foreftals  not  x5* 
the  imagination,  requires  not  a  confidence,  or  implicit  faith, 
nay  not  fo  much  as  bare  leave  or  confent  from  the  wounded 
party ;  all  which  are  ever  annexed  to  fuperftitious  cures. 

For  we  account  that  properly  to  be  Superftition,  when  men         j69 
relie  upon  the  fingle  power  of  an  implicit  faith,  or  imaginati- 
on, or  both  concurring,  above  any  particular  vertue,  which  of 
it  felf  is  not  fufificient,  or  by  the  primitive  intention  of  the 
Creator,  not  deftined  to  the  production  of  that  particular 
effect.  By  which  it  is  clearly  manifeft,  that  our  Magnetic!^ 
cure  hath  none  the  fmalleft  tincture  of  Superfiition.    Do  thou 
therefore,  O  Divine  !  great  with  a  farcafm,  with  defign  at 
leaft  to  detect  and  deride  the  Devil,  make  an  experiment  of 
the  Vnguent,  that  fo  thou  mayeft  deftroy  and  totally  abolifh 
that  implicit  compaU  with  him  ;  neverthelefs  thou  (halt,  vc- 
lent  or  nolent,  without  either  direction  from,  or  obedience  to 
thy  will,  finde  the  fame  effect  remit  from  thy  application  of  it, 
that  ufually  does  upon  ours ;  which  does  not  at  all  (ucceed 
upon  the  conjunction  of  fuperftitious  caufes.. 

Whoever  reputes  the  Magnetkal  Sanation  of  Wounds  to  17- 
be  Diabolical,  not  becaufe  it  is  performed  by  unlawful  means, 
or  directed  to  an  unwarrantable  end;  but  becaufe  in  the 
manner  of  its  operation,  it  progreiTes  in  a  path,  which  his 
reafon  cannot  trace :  He  alfo  convicted  by  the  fame  argument, 
(hall  either  give  the  quidditative  and  peculiarly  expeefceaufes 

H  1  of 


to  Of  the  Migntttck 


19. 


of  all  thofc  admirable  effects  of  the  Loadftone,  which  in  the 
fequel  of  my  difcourfe  I  am  to  mention ;  or  confcfs,  that  thole 
rare  operations  of  the  Loadftone,  aretheimpoftures  and  the 
legerdemain  of  Satan  j  or  (hall  compulfively  concede  with 
us,  (which  indeed  will  be  the  fafer  way)  that  in  nature  there 
is  a  Magnetifm,  that  is,  a  certain  hidden  property,  by  this  ap- 
pellation, in  reference  to  the  confpicuous  and  confeft  prero- 
gative of  that  ftone,  diftinguifht  from  all  other  abftrufe,  and 
to  common  heads  unknown,  qualities. 

A  Loadftone  placed  upon  a  thin  fmall  Trencher  of  wood, 
floating  on  water,  does  inftantly  in  one  determinate  point  au- 
ftralUe,  and  in  the  other  feptentriotate.  That  extreme,  which 
by  its  verticity  regards  the  Southern  Pole ,  when  by  touch  it 
hath  impregnated  a  piece  of  fteel  or  iron,  will  immediately 
fleer  it  to  the  North;  and  the  other  extreme  which  looks  up- 
on the  Northern  Pole, having  invigorated  a  needle  of  fteel,will 
incline  it  to  the  South.  By  its  Septentrional  point,  which  is  its 
bellj,  it  attracts  iron  orfteel  to  it;  and  by  its  Auftrale  endt 
which  is  its  back^,  it  thrufts  iron  or  fteel  from  it.  The  Aqui- 
lonary  fide,  by  friction  of  the  point  of  a  Compafs  needle,  pofi- 
tionally  from  the  right  hand  to  the  left,  endows  it  with  a  ver- 
tical or  polary  faculty,  whereby  it  is  directed  to  the  South : 
But  if  the  friction  be  ordered  in  a  quite  contrary  pofition, 
from  the  left  hand  to  the  right,  the  direction  of  the  point  of 
the  needle  will  alfo  be  contrary,  and  neer  to  the  North.  Thus 
alfo  the  Auftrale  fide  of  the  Loadftone*  according  to  the  variety 
of  locality,  or  pofition  in  fridion,  varies  the  polarity.  Nay, 
what  carrieth  a  neerer  face  of  miracle,  if  a  Loadftone  by  its 
affriction  hath  invigorated  and  excited  a  piece  of  iron,  with  a 
magnetical  activity,  that  is,  a  power  to  attract  another  piece  of 
iron ;  the  fame  new  made  Magnetical  iron,  if  inverted  upfide 
down,  and  in  that  Antipodean  pofition,  a  fecond  time,  rub'd 
upon  the  Loadftone,  will,  in  the  lame  moment,  be  devefted  of 
its  magnetical  infufion,  and  clean  forget  its  lately  acquired 
power  of  attraction.  All  which  various  and  admirable  effects 
of  the  Loadftone,  thou  mayeft,  if  thy  judgment  relifh  them, 
finde  made  good  by  multiplied obfervations,  by  tvilliamGuil- 
bert,  not  many  yecrs  paft,  a  Phyfician  in  London,  in  liis  Book 

De 


Care  tf  Wwnsls*  i 1 

I)e  MAgntte :  Of  which  fub/eft  no  man  ever  writ  more;**#- 
eioftflj  or  experimentally  ;  and  by  whofe  induftry,  the  variati- 
on of  the  Compafs  may  be  reftored.  The  needle,  which  now 
points  directly  upon  the  North,  coming  under  the  Equinoctial 
Line,  ftaggers  to  and  fro,  hovers  from  Pole  to  Pole,  and  in  a 
trembling  unconftancy  fixes  on  neither:  But  once  brought 
over  the  Meridian,  nimbly  wheels  about,  and  fixedly  applies  it 
felf  to  the  South.  I  (hall  annex  this  Medical  Vertue  of  it :  the 
hack^of  the  Load/lone,  as  it  repulfethiron,  fo  alfo  it  retrudeth 
the  gut,  by  reafon  of  too  wide  an  expanfion  of  the  procefs  of 
the  ?er\tonenm\  prolapfed  into  the  ScrottimpxttxXx  the  Entero- 
cele  or  intefrine  rupture,  and  likewife  all  Catarrhes  or  deftil* 
ments,  that  have  a  private  artinity,  or  analogy  with  the  nature 
of  iron.  The  iron-attracting  faculty,  if  in  a  compofition,. 
married  to  the  mumy  of  a  woman,  then  the  back  of  theLoad- 
ftone  applied  to  her  thigh,  on  the  infide,  and  the  belly  of  an- 
other impofed  upon  her  loyns,  about  theloweft  fpondil  of  the' 
back,  will  lafely  prevent  an  abortion  threatned  ;  but  on  the 
contrary,  the  belly  of  one  Loadftone  applied  to  her  thigh,and 
the  back  of  another  to  her  back,  will  both  wonderfully  facili- 
tate her  travail,  and  expedite  her  delivery.  All  which  various 
operations  of  the  Loadfione,  our  Anatomifl  is  obliged  to  il- 
luftrate,  by  reafons,  drawn  i  priori,  from  the  fountain  of  their 
diftinct  and  determinate  efficiencies,  and  expound  to  us  the 
i'ubtilc  manner  of  the  progrefs  of  each  caufe,  in  the  producti- 
on of  each  feveral  effect  :  otherwife,  Khali  byaparile  argu- 
ment of  ignorance,  conclude,  that  thefe  in  like  manner,,  are 
a^fo  meer  Mujions  of  Satan,  and  no  e feels  of  Nature. 

I  fhall  now  infer  fome  certain  examples  of  another  Magne- 
tifm,  coufin-germanto  the  former  j  that  fo  with  our  judgment 
better  informed  we  may  at  length  come  to  the  pofitive  reafon, 
and  clear  refutation  of  all  the  objections  of  ouradverfaries. 
What  can  I  do  more  ?  I  my  felf  will  contrive  reafons  for  you,, 
which  you  have  not  at  all  urged.  You  may  argue  thus  j  Every 
effect  either  immediately  proceeds  from  God,  the  fcle  Opera- 
tor, and  fo  is  a  miracle  •  or  from  Sjtan,  and  fo  is  prodigious  ; 
or  from  natural  and  ordinary7  can; is,  and  fois  meeriy  natural ;, 
but  Magnttifm  is  neither,  a  miracle,  noi  a  natural  effect  j  and 

therefore 


I  z  Of  the  Magnttick 

m  ■  \  ' 

therefore  Satanical.  I  anfwer ;  Though  I  might,  with  great 
facility,  declare  this  enumeration  delivered,  to  be  invalid,  in 
regard  the  inm-ardman  hath  a  power  of  activity,  by  none  of 
the  forementioned  ways,  (which,  in  the  purfuitof  our  debate, 
we  (hall  largely,  and  to  ample  fatisfa&ion,  treat  of)  yet  how- 
ever we  now.  with  a  dry  foot,  pafs  by  the  ajfumption,  making  it 
our  chief  task  to  deny  and  fubvert  the  *'»/*rf»«,)namely  in  that 
part,  whereby  it  isaiferted,  that  the  effect  is  not  natural.  For, 
by  the  rules  of  orderly  and  artificial  difputation,  that  was 
firft  to  be  made  good,  that  we  might  not  fall  foul  upon  that 
elench^  Petitioprincipii^  a  precarious  conceflion  of  that  Thejis% 
which  is  yet  queftionable  and  undetermined ;  but  in  this  point, 
our  Ccnfor  hath  yet  been,  and  ever  will  be  defective,  to  affirm 
the  effect  not  to  be  natural ;  unlefs  he  thought,  that  a  bare 
affirmation  is  equivalent  to  a  confirm at i«»,and  that  to  have  fub- 
ftituted  his  fingle  authority  in  the  room  of  reafon,  was  evi- 
dence flrong  enough  to  (ilence  doubt,  and  procure  credence. 
For  there  are  many  effects  natural,which  yet  do  not  ordinarily 
happen  ;  namely,  fuch  as  are  rarely  incident.  Wherefore  to 
gratifie  our  Jnatomift,  I  fhall  all  along  the  trad  of  this  exer- 
cife,  not  onely  maintain  the  affirmative  part,  but  alfo  perfpf- 
cuoufly  commonftrate  it  by  reafons,  and  ratifie  it  by  examples. 
For  fo  the  mighty  argument,  even  now  urged,  will  fall  by  its 
own  weight. 
20.  There  is  a  Book,  imprinted  at  Vranekera^  in  the  year  \6i  1. 

by  Vldericm  Dominions  £alc\,  of  the  Lamp  of  life.  In  which 
you  (hall  finde,  out  of  Paracelfus,  the  true  Magnctical  cure  of 
rnoft  difeafes,  as  of  the  Dropjie,  Gout,  faundies,  &c  by  inclu- 
ding the  warm  blood  of  the  Patient  in  the  fhell  and  white  of 
an  Egg,  which  expofed  to  a  gentle  heat,  and  mixt  with  a  bait 
of  flefh,  you  (hall  give,  together  with  the  blood,  to  a  hungry 
dog,  or  fwine,  and  the  difeafe  (hall  inftantly  pafs  from  you  in- 
to the  dog,  and  utterly  leave  you  ;  no  otherwife  then  the 
Leproiie  of  Naaman  did,  by  the  exfecration  of  the  Prophet, 
tranfmigrate  into  Gchazi.  What,  do  you  account  this  alfo 
Diabolical,  thus  to  have  reftored  our  languiftung  neighborly 
the  Magnetifm  onely  of  the  mumial  blood  ?  however,  he  is 
perfectly  and  undoubtedly  recovered,  f 

A 


Cure  of  Wounds.  I  ^ 

A  woman  weaning  her  childe,to  the  end  her  brefts  may  the         21. 
fooner  dry  up,  ftrokes  her  milk  into  a  fire  of  glowing  coals, 
and  thereupon  her  paps  fuddenly  grow  flaccid,  and  the  foun- 
tain of  her  milk,  is  flopped.   What,  doth  the  devil  fuck  and 
drain  them  ? 

Hath  any  one  with  his  excrements  defiled  the  threshold  of 
thy  door,  and  thou  intendeft  to  prohibit  that  naftinefs  for 
the  future,  do  but  lay  a  red-hot  iron  upon  the  excrement, 
and  the  immodefl:  floven  (ball,  in  a  very  fhort  fpace,  grow 
fcabby  on  his  buttocks  j  the  fire  torrifying  the  excrement,and 
by  dorfal  Magnetifm  driving  the  acrimony  of  the  burning, 
into  his  impudent  anus.  Perchance,  you  will  object,  that 
this  action  is  Satanical,  in  regard  the  end  of  it  is  revenge,  and 
the  lxfion  of  the  party,  which  offended  us ;  but  afluredly, 
the  abufe  of  fiich  powers  depends  on  the  liberty  of  mans  will, 
and  yet  the  ufe  is  no  whit  the  lefs  natural. 

Make  a  fmall  table  of  Bifmuthum* ',  and  on  the  one  ex-         22. 
treme,  place  a  piece  of  Amber,  on  the  other,  a  piece  of  green  *  Confute  jhp. 
Vitriol ;  the  Vitriol  will  in  a  moment  lofe  both  its  colour  and  Plemcatntu 
acidity.   Both  which  are  familiarly  obfervable  in  the  prepara-  l'^ra' 
tion  of  Amber. 

This  one  experiment,  of  all  others,  cannot  but  be  free  from  23. 
all  fufpecl  of  impofture,  and  illuilon  of  the  Devil.  A  certain 
inhabitant  of  Bruxels,  in  a  combat  had  his  nofe  mowed  off, 
addreffed  himfelf  to  Tagliaco^us  * ,  a  famous  Chirurgeon,  *  Aljlfcrjbmt 
living  at  Bononia,  that  he  might  procure  a  new  one ;  and  Talwotius. 
when  he  feared  the  incifion  of  his  own  arm,  he  hired  a  Porter 
to  admit  it,  out  of  whofe  arm,  having  firft  given  the  reward 
agreed  upon,  at  length  he  dig'd  a  new  nofe.  About  thirteen 
moneths  after  his  return  to  his  own  Countrey,  on  a  fudden 
the  ingrafted  nofe  grew  cold,  putrified,  and  within  few  days, 
dropt  off.  To  thofe  of  his  friends,  that  were  curious  in  the 
exploration  of  the  caufe  of  this  unexpected  misfortune,  it 
was  difcovered,  that  the  Porter  expired,  neer  about  the  fame 
punctilio  of  time,  wherein  the  nofe  grew  frigid  and  cadave- 
rous. There  are  at  Brnxels  yet  furviving,  fome  of  good  re- 
pute, that  were  eye-witneffes  of  thefe  occurrences.  Is  not 
this  Magnetifm  of  manifeft  affinity  with  murriy,  whereby  tt# 

I  nofe, 


14  Of  the  Mdgnetick 


nofe,  enjoying,  by  title  and  right  of  inoculation,  acommu" 
nity  of  life,  fenfe  and  vegetation,  for  fo  many  moneths,  on  a 
fudden  mortified  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Alpes  ?  I  pray, 
what  is  there  in  this  of  Superftition  ?  what  of  attent  and  ex- 
alted Imagination  > 

2-f .  The  root  of  the  Car  line  Thifile  (which  is  the  White  Cha- 

meleon of  Diofcorides)  pluckt  up  when  full  of  juice  and  vigor, 
and  contemporate  with  Humane  Aiumy,  does,  as  it  were  by 
an  operative  ferment^  exhauft  all  the  natural  ftrength  and 
courage  of  a  man,  on  whofe  fhadow  thou  treadeft,  and  in- 
fufe  it  into  thee.  But  you  may  account  this  praftigious,  be- 
caufe  Paradoxical  *  as  if  the  fame  identical  Leprofie  were  not 
traduced  from  Naaman  to  Gehaz,i ;    and-the  fame  numerical 

aj«  Jaundies  tranfplanted  from  the  patient  to  a  dog.  For  a  difeafe 
is  not  under  the  Predicament  of  Quality-  but  all  the  Pre- 
dicaments are  found  in  every  particular  difeafe.  Since  indeed, 
it  may  be  lawful  to  accommodate  names  to  things ,  but  not  things 
to  names. 

16.  The  Heliotropian  or  Solifecjuous  Flowers  are  wheeled  about 

after  the  Sun,  by  a  certain  Magnetilm ;  not  for  his  heat, 
whofe  comfort  they  may  long  after;  for  in  a  cloudy  and 
cold  day  they  imitate  the  rhythme  of  the  Sun;  nor  for  his 
Jight,  are  they  the  Lacqueis  of  the  Sun  ;  for  in  the  dark 
night,  when  they  have  deferted  him,  they  face  about  from 
the  Weft,  to  the  Eaft.  You  will  not  account  this  Diabolical, 
in  regard  you  have  another  fubterfuge  at  hand  ;  namely  the 
harmony  of  fuperior  bodies,  with  inferior,  ami  a  faculty  at- 
tractive, purely  celeftial,  and  no  way  communicable  to  fub- 
lunaries.  As  though  the  Micrccofm,  unworthy  this  heavenly 
prerogative,  could  in  his  blood  and  mofs  oblerve,  and  cor- 
refpond  to  no  revolution  of  the  Planets. 

I  might  here,  with  pertinence,  difcourfe  of  Philters,  or 
amorous  Medicines,  which  require  a  Mumial  Confermentati- 
dn,  that  the  affection  and  defire  of  the  minde  may  be  forcibly 
drawn,  and  rapt  on  to  one  determinate  objecl.But  on  a  fober 
corvfultwith  thought,  it  feems  moreadvifed,  to  iuperfede 
that  theme,  when  I  (hall  firft  have  mentioned  this  one  obfe:  - 
^tion  ;  I  know  an  Herb,  commonly  obvious,  which  if  it  be 

rubbed, 


Cure  of  Wounds.  1 5 

rubbed,  and  cherifhed  in  thy  hand,  until  it  wax  warm,  you 
may  hold  fail  the  hand  of  another  perfon,  until  that  alfo 
grow  warm,  and  he  (hall  continually  burn  with  an  ardent 
love,  and  fi\t  dileftion  of  thy  perfon,  for  many  days  toge- 
ther.' I  held  in  my  hand,firft  bathed  in  the  fteam  of  this  love- 
procuring  plant  the  foot  of  a  Dog,  forfome  few  minutes : 
The  Dog,  wholly  renouncing  his  old  Miftrefc,  inftantly  fol- 
lowed me,  and  courted  me  fo  hotly,  that  in  the  night  he  la- 
mentably howled  at  my  Chamber  door,  that  I  fhould  open 
and  admit  him.  There  are  fome  now  living  in  Bruxels^  who 
are  witnelTes  to  me,  and  can  attefl  the  truth  of  this  facl.  For 
the  heat  of  a  mans  hand  warming  and  refolving  the  plant,  I 
fay  not  a  bare,  fimple  and  folitary  heat,  but  excited  and  im- 
pregnate with  a  certain  effluvium^  or  emanation  of  fpirits 
natural,  doth  peculiarly  determine  and  individuate  the  ver- 
tue  of  the  plant  to  himfelf ;  and  by  this  ferment  communi- 
cated to  a  fecond  perfon,  doth  by  Magnetifm  allecl:  the  fpirit 
of  that  perfon,  and  fubdue  him  to  love. 

I  omit  the  cures  of  many  difeafes,which  the  Arcanum,  the  2$« 
myftery  of  humane  blood,  doth  Magnetically  perform  :  For 
unlefs  the-  blood,  yea  the  very  fanies  or  purulent  effluxions 
from  Wounds  and  Ulcers,  the  Urine,  and  that  fubtle  effluvi- 
um, which  by  infenfible  tranfpiration  evaporates  through 
the  pores  of  the  skin,  did  continually  exhauft,  and  carry  with 
them  fome  part  of  the  vital  fpirit ;  and  unlefs  thefe  had  alfo 
fome  participation  of  vitality,  and  confpiracy  with  the  whole 
body,  after  their  remove  from  the  whole  concretum :  Un- 
doubtedly the  life  of  man  could  not  be  fo  fhort.  For  indeed 
this  is  the  caufe  of  our  inteftine  calamity,  and  that  principle 
of  death  we  carry  about  us,  am'bufcadoed  in  the  very  princi- 
ples of  life. 

The  Herbs  Arfemart  or  Water  Pepper,  Cumfry,  Chirur-  2q. 
geons  Sophia  or  Flixweed,  Adders  tongue,  and  many  other 
of  the  Vulnerary  tribe,  have  this  peculiar  endowment ;  that 
if,  when  cold  they  are  fteept  in  water  (for  an  Oke  felled, 
when  the  North  wind  blows,  will  grow  verminous  and  rot- 
ten, if  not  inftantly  funk  under  water)  and  then  applied  to  a 
Wound  or  Ulcer,until  they  grow  warm,  and  after  buried  in  a 

I  2  muddy 


1 6  Of  the  Magntiick 

muddy  uliginous  Earth  ;  when  they  begin  to  putrifie,  they 
then  operate  upon,  and  draw  from  the  Patient,  whatever  is 
evil,  fuperfluous,  and  hurtful  to  him.  And  this  the  Herbs  per- 
form, not  while  they  grow  in  the  earth,  nor  fo  long  as  they 
remain  in  their  primitive  and  prijlineform  (forneceffary  it  is 
that  the  grain  be  mortified,  that  it  may  bring  forth  fruit)  but 
in  the  putrefaction  of  their  Corporeities,  for  the  Ejfential  vir- 
tues being  then  as  it  were  releafed  from  the  prifon  and  impedi- 
ments of  the  corporeal  matter,  do  put  forth  and  freely  execute 
that  Magnetifm ,  which  otherwise  had  lain  dormant  and  en- 
chained, and  according  to  the  contagion  and  imprefilon  re- 
ceived from  the  wounded  or  ulcerated  part,  powerfully  fuck 
put  much  of  the  remaining  evil,  though  feated  deeply  and  at 
great  diflance  in  the  body. 
30.  If  anyone  in  gathering  the  leaves  of  Afarabecca  ,   (hall 

pluck  them  upward,  they  will  perform  their  operation  re- 
spectively, and  purge  any  third  perfon,  that  is  wholly  ignorant 
of  that  positional  traction,  by  vomit  onely ;  but  if  in  gathering 
they  be  wrefted  downward,t\\ty  then  will  purge  onely  by  ftool. 
Here  at  lead  can  be  no  fuipect  of  fuperfiition ;  for  what  need 
I  here  to  mention  any  thing  of  Imagination ;  when  your  felves 
concede,  that  by  the  power  of  imagination  nothing  can  be 
acted  upon  a  third  object,  efpecially  where  that  third  object  is 
utterly  ignorant  of  the  pofition,  which  the  decerpent  ufed  > 
3  *•         Will  you  again  take  hold  of  the  facred  anchor  of  ignorance, 
and  accufe  this  fecret  of  an  implicite  Compacl  with  Satan  ? 
But  herein  lurks  no  vain  obfervance;  chiefly  when  the  de- 
cerptorfhallhave,  the  afTument  being  wholly  infcious  of  the 
pofition,  plucktoff  the  leaves,  either  upward  or  downward. 
Doubtlefs,  befides  Afarum  and  the  extremities  orcluftersof 
Elder ,  no  other  Cathartic^  Medicines  are  enriched  with  this 
propriety;  for  they,  in  what  pofition  foe  ver  collected  from 
the  plant,  do  ever  operate  univocally  :  that  is,  either  constant- 
ly upwards,  or  conftantly  downwards,  according  to  the  defti- 
iiation  of  their  gifts.    But  in  Afarum,  in  the  integral  plant, 
there  fenfibly  appears  a  Magnetical  propriety  ;  and  fo  it  doth 
\  juioufly  endow  its  leaves,  according  to  the  fenfe  of  their  dc- 
3  *•         cerption.    That  not  onely  plants,  but  alfo  almofl  all  created 

Entities, 


Cure  of  Wounds,  17 

Entities,  have  a  certain  adumbration  of  fenfe,  or  obfcure  fen- 
fibility,  they  largely  declare  as  well  by  Sympathy,  as  Antipa- 
thy (which  prefuppofe ,  and  cannot  confifl:  without  fenfe) 
maintained  amongft  themfelves ;  which  fatisfactorily  to  mani- 
feft,  (hall  be  the  fubject  of  fome  fucceeding  lines. 

A  (econd  Tit  of  the  Gout  furprized  a  Noble  Matron,  of  my  33. 
acquaintance,  after  the  firfc.  paroxyfm  had  gone  off,  and  left 
her;  and  thenceforward  the  Gout,  by  an  unwonted  recidi- 
vation,  and  periodical  recourfe,  infefted  her  without  remifli- 
on,  for  many  moneths  together.  But  (he  not  apprehending 
whence  fo  violent  and  unexpected  a  return  of  the  difeafe  had 
happened  to  her ;  at  length  (he  tiling  from  her  bed,  as  often 
as  the  fury  of  the  fit,  by  intervals,  fomewhat  remitted,  re- 
pofed  her  felf  in  a  Chair,  wherein  a  brother  of  hers,  many 
years  pair,  and  in  another  City,  cruelly  tortured  with  the 
Gout,  was  wont  to  fit,  fhe  inflantly  found  that  from  thence 
the  difeafe  did  awake,  and  afrefh  invade  her.  This  effect  like- 
wife  is,  on  no  pretence  whatever,  to  be  afcribed  to  Imagina- 
tion or  doubt ;  (ince  both  thefe.  were  much  yonger  then  the 
effect.  But  if  it  hapned  that  any  third  perfon  fubject  to  the 
Gout  fate  in  the  fame  Chair,  to  him  there  fucceeded  not  any 
reincrudation  of  the  difeafe.  For  which  reafon,  the  mumy  of 
her  dead  brother  defervedly  rendred  the  Chair  fufpected  of 
contagion ;  which  penetrating  through  all  her  cloaths,  did  to 
the  filter  onely,  and  not  to  any  other  podagrical  perfon,excite 
thofe  frequent  refluxes  and  paroxyfms,  which  otherwife  had 
flept,and  not  invaded  her.  The  caufe  truly  was  the  Magnetifm 
of  the  brothers  mumy,  infected  with  a  prodagrical miafm  or 
tincture  ,  erHuxed  from  him,  and  imprefled  upon  the  Chair, 
ileteiminately  operating  on  the  uterine  mumy  of  the  filter  ; 
and  that  a  long  tract  of  time  after  his  funeral.  I  befeech  you, 
what  can  you  difcover  in  this  of  any  implicite  Compatl,  with 
our  grand  adverfary  Satan  ? 

A  Saphire  enobled  with  a  deep  coerule  tincture,  if  it  be  ap-         ,4 
plied  to,  and  a  fmall  time  rub'd  upon  a  Carbuncle,  whereby 
the  Plague  pathognonVnically  difcovers  it  felf,   and  after  a 
while  be  removed,  the  abfent  Jewel  then  ceafeth  not  Magne- 
tically to  allect  and  extract  all  the  pefcilential  virulency,  and 

I  5  contagious 


1 8  Of tbe  Mdgmtick 


contagious  [Jtfyfon  From  the  infected  party ;  provided  that 
this  be  done,  before  the  Patient  hath  differed  too  great  a 
profternation  of  fpitits,  and  decay  of  ftrength.  Phyficians 
therefore  ufe  (which  to  us  much  advances  the  reputation  of 
MagnetifmygtoxXy  and  Hourly  to  draw  a  circle  with  a  SaphWe, 
round  about  ipejfrikntijtl  tumor  :  To  this end,lefttbe  venome 
exhaling^  ftiould  in  that  part,  where  it  infenfibly  evaporates, 
exfpatiate  and  dilate  it  felf  to  a  wider  range,  and  fo  in  that 
circumferential  expandon  infect  fome  noble  part  adjacent, 
for  in  that  place  where  the  virulency  exhales,  magnetically 
attracted  from  the  infected  body  as  it  were  through  a  trunck, 
orcondiut-pipe,  all  the  round  or  circle  inftantly  grows  black, 
and  at  length  torrified  into  ah  Efchar  falls  of:  the  heart,  in 
the  interim,  being  preferred  from  the  fatal  contagion.  Nor 
is  there  any  poftem  -door  left  open  to  evAfton,  by  objecting, 
that  we  are  to  conceive  the  poy'fon  attracted  to  the  Carbkncle, 
in  the  fame  moment,  when  the  round  was  drawn  about  the 
place,  or  at  leaft  then  critically  conquered  by  the  internal 
champion  of  life,  the  heart ;  and  not  to  attribute  it  to  any 
Magnetifmof  the  Sapbire  removed  atdiftance.  But  however, 
the  Jick^ will  give  in  their  teltimony,  that  they  did  not  perceive 
arty  relief  in  the  inftant  of  the  Saphires  touch  ;  but  a  good 
while  after :  The  poyfon  indeed,gradually,by  little  and  little, 
departing  from  the  body,  by  the  Magnetical  attraction.  Yea, 
the  place  it  felf  will  afford  a  more  certain  and  fatisfactory  e- 
vidence  on  the  behalf  of  Magnetifm ;  for  it  grows  not  black 
and  torrid  in  the  minute  of,  or  by  the  affliction  of  the  Sam- 
phire ;  but  many  minutes  after,  being  immediately  combuft 
by  the  peftiferous,  that  is  Arfcnical,  vapor,  in  that  one  path, 
and  no  other,  expiring  from  the  Centrals.  For  wbere  the  ve- 
nome  doescontinually  exhale,  the  venemous  radii  being  con- 
gregated and  bound  up  into  one  Cone  or  pyramidal  point, 
there  it  is  of  neceflity  that  the  part  fuffer  extreme  violence, 
grow  black,  and  be  torrihed  ;  which  effects,  as  they  are  per- 
formed in  fucceflive  motions  of  time,  fo  alfo  they  inform  us, 
that  the  virulency  does  fucceflively  breathe  forth,in  obedience 
to  the  Magnetical  alliciency  of  the  abfent  Gem. 

Your  reply  perchance  will  be,that  every  Agent  doth  require 

a  cer- 


Cure  of  Wmnds.  19 

a  certain,  arid  limited  duration  of  its  impreffion :  that  the 
Saphire  did  not  benefit  the  Patient  in  the  prefent,  but  left  be- 
hinde  it  an  imprej/ion,  which  was  by  degrees  to  fubdue  the 
remainder  of  the  Plague ;  but  not  that  the  Saphire  did  attract 
any  thing  at  all,  after  its  remove  from  the  Carbuncle.  Here 
you  {hall  obferve,  that  every  Agent  of  Nature  does  act  in  an 
inftant  in  the  firft  moment  of  congreffion,  unlefs  there  be 
fome  obfhcle  or  remora  of  difobedience  in  the  Patient ;  but 
in  the  body  infected  there  can  be  no  impediment  from  re- 
luctancy,  or  flop  of  reaction,  fince  it  longs  for  a  relief  with 
all  expedition,  and  in  expectation  of  it,  unceffantly  pants  and 
labors  in  all  veins  of  the  body. 

It  would  be  clear  another  thing,  if  the  Saphire  were  firfr  to 
fuffer  preparation,  concoction,  or  alteration,  that  fo  from  the 
concretion  there  might  be  educed  the  imprifoned  Agmt, 
which  fhould  afterwards  diffufe  and  fpread  it  felf  through  all 
parts  of  the  body.  But  when  the  Saphire  eonferves  its  native 
integrity,  and  continues  unMjf&lved  and  incorrupt,  it  requires 
onely  a  certain  determinate  time  for  this,  that  it  may,  by  the 
touch  and  mediation  of  the  mumy,  affociate  and  unite  its  own- 
fnfiuffui.il  ftty  to  the  peftilential  vapor,  and  io  captive  k,_  that 
afterwards  being  withdrawn,it  may  forcibly  command  it  from 
the  heart.  To  this  afTbeiation  and  marriage,  I  fay,  that  there 
be  a  convenient  alligation  of  the  virtue  Saphiricalto,  and  as 
jt  were  a  Conglomeration  with  the  venome,  there  is  required 
a  determinate  meafu re  of  time  (grant  the  eighth  part  of  an 
hour)  wherein  the  Compafs  line  may  be  drawn  about  the 
peflilential  Br-bo.  For  if  there  were  onely  fome  bare,  fingle 
impreflion  of  the  Saphire ,  which  conftantly  adhering  to  the- 
place  after  the  touch,  fhould  by  little  and  little  conquer  and 
eradicate  the  ve  name,  within  the  precincts  of  the  body-  and 
no  Aiagnetical  alliciency  of  the  a'bfent  flone :  There  could  no 
reafon  be  found  out,  why  that  particular  place  of  the  circle, 
fhould  bebenegroed  and  torriried,  nor  why  the  virulent  ex- 
halation fhould  not  range  in  a  larger  circumference  then  .the 
cicumdate  line.  What  is-more,  if  many  Carbuncles  fieiliiy  3  % 
(hew  themfelves  in  divers  places  at  once  ;  yet  that  onejy  ffai  - 
bitnde^  which  was  circumfcribed  with  the  Saphire,  undergoes 

combuflion. 


20  Of  the  Magmtick 


combuftionand  denigration,  all  the  other  finking  down  again, 
and  vanifhing infenfibly.  And  therefore,  I  befeech yon,  what 
impreflion  attractive  can  the  Saphire  leave  behinde  it,  after 
its  remove,  if  not  a  Magnetic*!  one  ?  Principally,  when  the 
Attratlum  doth  imply  an  infeparable  relation  to  the  Aitra- 
font ;  and  fo  tranfpofitively. 

Yea,  if  the  Saphire  (hould  from  its  felf  tranfmit  any  virtue 
into  the  fick  body,  after  twice  or  thrice  ufmg,  it  would  inevita- 
bly be  fubject  to  diminution  and  decay  of  power,  (for  fo  the 
hoof  of  the  Ell^,  by  often  ufe  of  it,  to  fufpend  and  rellft  the 
invafion  of  Epileptickjparoxyfms,  by  degrees  becomes  evirate 
anddefpoiled  of  all  activity)  that  faculty,  which  is  impreft 
upon  the  Carbuncle,  being  exhauft  andipent;  which  mani- 
feftly  in  the  Saphire  falls  not  out  alike ;  for  fo  much  the  more 
excellent  and  eiiicacious  a  Saphire  is  efteemed,   by  how  much 
the  more  frequently  it  has  fuckt  out  the  venome  of  the  pefti- 
lence.    It  may  be  you'l  anfwer,  that  the  Saphire  does  generate 
a  new  third  quality  in  the  Patient,  by  reafon  whereof  it  begins 
to  attract  and  drain  the  poyfon,  that  way  onely  ;  and  that  al- 
though the  Saphire  be  then  removed,  yet  that  nature  never- 
theless, once  encouraged  and  invited  into  action,  ccafes  not  to 
perfevere  intheexpulfion,  and  maintains  that  Crilis,  through 
that  paiTage  onely,where  the  poyfon  firft  began  to  be  expel  I'd. 
Firft,  we  f^^/Vf,  whether  the  Saphire  does  attract  by  a  firft, 
manifeft  quality  (imagine  heat)  or  by  a  formal '  magnctical pro- 
priety ?   But  this  Magnetical  eflential  faculty  requires  not  any 
previous  generation,  or  refult,  of  a  new  quality,  within  the 
body;   but  onely  the  conjunction  of  its  virtue  attractive,  to 
the  peftilential  aer,  fo  that  it  may  perform  its  office  of  at- 
traction.   From  whence  the  inference  is ;  that  the  attraction  is 
performed  by  the  abfent  Saphire*    This  affumption  holds  clearly 
good,  becaufe  every  natural  Attrahent  does  attract  adfe,  to  it 
felf ;  for  to  this  end  onely  does  it  attract.  For  which  reafon,  a 
new  third  quality,  generated  in  the  body,  would  rather  attract 
the  virulent  exhalation  concentrically  and  inwards,  and  could 
by  no  means  be  invited  outwards,  by  an  exccntrical  attraction. 
Our  fecond  enquiry  is ;  whether  the  Saphire  may  not  have 
generated,  and  emitted  a  virtue  from  it  felf,  and  impreft  that 

virtue 


Cure  of  Wounds,  a  x 

virtue  on  the  skin  onely  ?  For  neither  can  this  (land  ;  fince 
then,  it  would  not  be  neceffary,  that  a  circle  (hould  be  drawn 
about  the  Carbuncle ,  with  the  Saphire ;  but  it  would  be  fuffi- 
cient,that  any  other  more  remote  and  commodious  part  of  the 
skin  be  toucht ;  which,  by  the  fuffrage  of  experience,  is  ab- 
folutely  falfe.    Our  third  query  is,  whether  the  Saphire  haply 
can  unlock  and  expand  the  pores  of  the  skin  ?  and  whether 
Nature,  on  the  Angle  (lock  of  its  power,  could  not  have  made 
ufe  of  its  own  expulfive  faculty,  without  the  attraction  of  the 
Saphire  ?  ]f  we  fay,  not ;  then  the  Saphire  cannot  be  allowed 
to  attract,  but  onely  to  have  aflifted  and  corroborated  the 
expulfive  faculty.    But  this  opinion  is  foon  fubverted  by  the 
effect ;  in  that  no  place  fuffers  combuftion,  either  without  or 
beyond  the  round ;  and  alfo  becaufe  the  other  Carbuncles^  be- 
ginning to  bud  forth,do  at  the  fame  time  fink  away  and  vanifli, 
though  never  toucht  by  the  Saphire.    Since  indeed,  if  onely 
the  expulfive  faculty  were  corroborated,  that  would  expel  the 
venemous  fumes  every  way  round,and  could  not  be  retrained 
to  any  one  certain  and  eleel  place. 

Fourthly,  Nature  had  already,  before  the  admotion  and 
affriclion  of  the  Saphire,  giving  fufficient  teftimony  of  its 
own  valor  and  ability,  in  expelling  the  Carbuncle  fingly  and 
of  its  own  accord.  Whence  alfo  it  appears  a  grofs  falfity,  that 
Nature  once  excited  and  rouzed  up  to  expulfion,  by  the  faphi- 
rical  infufion,  does  afterward  perfevere  in,  and  ftoutly  main- 
tain that  critical  motion ;  fince  obfervation  aflures  us,  that 
frequently  the  Saphira  is  but  (lowly  applied,  and  comes  too 
late,  to  aflift  the  beginning  of  the  expulfion.  For  which  con- 
(Iderations,  notwithftanding  any  thing  you  (hall  be  able  to 
oppofe,  it  is  of  abfolute  necefiity,  that  the  pefiilential  venoms 
is  magnetically  attracted  by  the  abfent  Saphire. 

Will  you  therefore,  that  the  natural  magnetifm  of  the  Ar~ 
mary  Unguent  be  more  plainly  and  amply  difcovered  unto 
you  ?  or  will  you  difparage  and  calumniate  the  noble  allici- 
ency  of  the  Saphire  j  and  alfo  write  to  the  Calumniator  ?  you 
will  (I  fuppofe)  judg  it  to  have  much  more  of  reafon  and  folid 
truth  to  comply  with  our  faith  j  that  as  death,  wounds, 
difeafes ,  (laughters  crept  in ,  and  made  encroachments  on 

K  humane 


Of  the  Mdgnetick 


humane  nature,  by  means  of  the  Devil,  from  whom  nothing 
proceeds  but  mifchief  :  So  alfo  that  every  good  gift  comes 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights.  It  being  a  pofition  univerfally 
afTented  unto  by  all  men  :  That  that  mufi  be  good,  which  nei- 
ther the  fab  jell,  nor  the  objetl,  nor  the  means ,  nsr  the  endpropofed, 
can  accufe  and  conviEh  of  evil. 
36\  Hence  was  it,  that  the  antient  Prelates  of  the  Church  were 

wont  heretofore  to  wear  rings  enricht  with  a  Saphire ;  the  ufe 
and  excellent  virtue  of  that  precious  ftone  being,for  the  major 
part,  hardly  underftood  among  them.  For  to  whomfoever  the 
charge  of  fouls  is  committed,  to  them  alfo  of  equity,and  duty, 
it  belongs  to  vifit  and  be  afliftant  to  the  infecled.  with  the 
plague  ;  the  dark  mift  of  ignorance,  in  our  days,  obnubilating 
and  eclipfing  the  knowledg  of  the  mofc  excellent  pieces  of 
Nature ;  in  whofe  room  have  fucceeded,  an  afFecled  fpruce- 
nefs  of  language,  a  vain-glorious  trimnefs  of  the  windy  and 
dead  letter,  and  a  confident,  prefument  garrulity.  Which  may 
be  the  fubjecl  of  our  fevious  forrow,  but  more  of  our  wonder ; 
that  all  mechanique  Arts  do  daily  receive  advancement,  and. 
afccnd  by  the  degrees  of  new  difcoveries,  neerer  towards  their 
perfection ;  but  the  ftudy  of  Philofophy  onely  ftands  ever  pcr- 
plext  and  dikouraged  with  unjufi  cenfures,  and  now  is  in  its 
Apo<r<to,  or  retrogradation.  I  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  this 
fubjecl,  the  Saphire,  in  refpecl  it  contains  a  cafe,  in  all  points 
alike,  and  wholly  quadrant  to  that  of  the  Armary  Vnguent. 
>7#  In  this  particular,  therefore,  Man  alfo  hath  his  magnes,  or 

domeftick  power  of  alliciency ;  whereby,in  time  of  the  plague, 
he  draws  in,  through  the  invifible  pores  of  the  skin,  the pefti- 
lential  Atomes  exhaling  from  the  infecled.  For  Nature,  which 
at  all  other  times  is  wont  to  admit  nothing,but  wholfome  and 
alimentary  juice,  and  with  great  diligence  and  exaclnefs  to 
fequefter  that  juice,  from  the  inalimentary  and  excrementiti- 
ous  parts  of  it;  at  this  time,  yeelding  and  wholly  fubmitting 
to  its  magnes,  greedily  fucks  in  the  peftiferous  aer,  and  invites 
death  into  the  inmoft  clofet  of  life.  Ediametro  contrary  to 
this  inteftine  magnes.  Providence  has  furnifht  us  with  another 
peculiar,  antagoniftical  magnes  (this  we  infert,  that  our  dif- 
p-ute  may  not  become  barren  and  fruklefs,  in  any  one  part  of 

K 


Cure  of  Wounds,  2$ 

it,  namely  the  Saphire,  or  a  tranflucid  piece  of  Amber ;  which 
rubbed  to  calefaction  upon  the  [even  planetary  pulfes,  (thofe 
on  the  jugular  Arteries,  on  the  handwriirs,  neertheinftep, 
and  on  the  throne  of  the  heart)  and  hung  about  the  neck  in- 
ftead  of  a  Periapt  or  Amulet,  are  too  hard  for  the  humane 
magnes,  conquer  and  deitroy  his  attraction,  and  by  that  fupe- 
riority  of  attraction,  become  the  mofl  certain  Amulets  and 
Counterpojfons  to  the  fatal  contagion  of  this  plague  :  Other- 
wife,  if  there  precede  not  a  requihte  confridion  of  the  Pulfes, 
they  are  altogether  invalid,and  of  no  efficacy.For  thofe  things, 
which  in  their  primitive  constitution  were  a  Saphire  and  Am- 
ber, having  from  the  arTriction  changed  their  family,  firft  lofe  ^  g . 
their  originary  appellations,  and  are  afterwards  called  aZf- 
w.vfotf.orprefervatory  Amulet  again ft  the  pefttlence. 

Will  any  man,  think  you,  account  thefe  effects  Diabolical ; 
and  attribute  them  to  a  covenant  made  with  Satan  ? 

It  is  fuffirient,  that  we  have  introduced  a  few,  but  felecl, 
fatisfactory,  and  pertinent  examples,  whofe  cafe  holds  a  per- 
fect analogy,  and  even  proportion  with  that  of  the  Armary 
Vnguent ;  we  fhall  now  feafonably  turn  our  felves  to  your 
Arguments. 

You  argue  Goclenius  of  ignorance  of  the  doctrine  of  A- 
riftotle,  in  that  heinfinuates  that  the  fame  numerical  Accident 
can  pafs  from  one  fubject  to  another  (my  wifh  is,  you  had 
been  as  able  at  probation,  as  you  are  at  refutation)  namely, 
that  this  alfo  is  an  aiTertion  of  huge  pertinacity,  to  conceive, 
that  a  Cicatrice  or  fear  in  a  dead  body  is  not  identically  the 
fame,  it  was  in  the  man  yefterday  living.  For  in  vain  do  we  20> 
honor,  and  pay  an  humble  and  fiducial  veneration  unto  the 
reliques  of  Saints ;  if  nothing  but  that  fimple ,  impoflible 
matter ,  which  the  difciples  of  Ariflotle  dream  of,  can  remain, 
and  not  fome  accidents  conftantly  continue  in  the  corrupted 
body,  which  were  heretofore  in  the  living.  Behold  !  whither 
a  paganical  error  may  precipitate  thofe,  who  improvidently 
carp  at  others.  I  fay,  to  imagine  that  to  be  absolutely  im- 
poflible, which  is  abfolutely  necefTary,  is  the  part  of  the  mod 
abfurd  and  grolTeft  ignorance :  For  example,  that  Ugh ,f rom 
the  body  of  .the  Sun  even  down  to  the  earth,  in  a  more  fwift 

K  2  motion 


24  Of  the  Magnetic k 


motion  then  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  through  all  the  (mailed: 
Atomes  of  the  air,  does  produce  new  /pedes,  and  thofe  Jpecies 
produce  another  ftock  and  fupply  of  [pecks  of  light.  This 
properly  is  to  be  blinde  in  Sunfhine;  for  if  we  had  not  diffufed 
upon  us  the  identical  light  and  vigorous  influence  of  the  Sun, 
butonely  the  thoufand,  of  thoufandsof  millions,  [pedes  of 
light  and  virtue [olary  ;  no[ublunary  could  have  growth  or 
vegetation,  nor  could  ever  any  fire  be  kindled  by  the  refraction 
and  union  of  its  beams.  For  the  [pedes  of  Jpecies  of  light, 
Jlnce  in  reality  of  eflence  they  are  no  more  light,  then  the '[pe- 
des of  colours  are  really  colours,  they  can  never  be  of  activity 
ftrong  enough  to  produce  fire.tor  my  part,  ferioufly  I  eherifh 
and  applaud  my  felf  for  that  ignorance  of  Arifiotles  doctrine, 
of  which  Goclenius  is  accufed  as  rude  and  illiterate.  Doth  not 
the  needle  of  the  Mariners  compa[s  ,  through  a  firm  glafe, 
clofely  fealed  up  with  melted  foder  (in  which  there  can  be  no 
pore  or  crany  difcovered)  fleer  it  felf  to  the  Artickjpole  f  and 
is  it  not  attracted  to  a  piece  of  iron  placed  within  the  orb  of 
attraction,  the  pole  during  that  feduction,  wholly  neglected  ? 
Wherefore  the  fame  numerical  Accident, ([reaming  in  one  con- 
tinued radim  from  the  Loadfione  into  the  aer,  pafles  through 
the  glafs,  and  perhaps  goes  as  far,  as  to  touch  the  pole  it  felf. 
40.  And  Magnet i[m  likewife  is  a  Celefiial  quality,  of  neer  affinity 
to  the  [tdere a  I  influences',  neither  is  it  confin'd  to  any  deter- 
minate diftance  of  place ;  as  neither  is  the  Magnetical  Vn~ 
guent,  of  which  our  difpute. 
^i.  You  fmile,  becaufe  Goclenius  choofes  for  an  ingredient  into 

the  Vnguem,  that  mo[s  onely,  which  is  gathered  off  the  fcull 
Fur.  of  a  man  of  three  letters  *. 

Nor  in  this  truly  is  there  any  ground  for  your  conjecture, 
that  in  the  herb  there  lies  a  fnake  in  ambufh,  any  vain  touch 
of  UJ perdition  couch't.  For  if  a  fe[uite,  put  to  death  by 
ftrangulation,  or  any  other  kinde  of  martyrdom,  be  left  [ub 
diojn  an  obedient  pofition  to  receive  the  influence  of  the  ftars* 
yet  his  head  will  yeeld  the  fame  crop  of  Mo[s,  equivalent  in 
ufe,  and  equally  ripe,  with  the  head  of  a  Thief:  fince  the  Se- 
iwinality  of  the  mefs  drops  down  from  Heaven  upon  Mount 
Calvary,  For  fometimes  there  diftils  a  frothy  dew,  which  is 

called 


Cure  of  Wounds.  25 

called  Aurora ;  and  after  that,  a  more  tenacious  Vifcid  Muci- 
lage defcends,  which  is  called  Spermafiderttm,  the  feminal  e- 
rniflion  of  the  fhrs ;  fometimes  the  Heavens  have  (hower'd 
down  clouds  of  Frogs,  Spiders,  Locufts,  and  other  fuch  in-  *  2# 
feels,  which  in  their  defcent  became  folid,  tangible,  and  vital 
fubftances  :  in  other  mountainous  places  the  prodigious 
clouds  have  rained  mil&ndalfo  blood;  frequently  alfo  there 
is  found  lying  upon  ftones  and  bones  a  white  bit uminom  mat' 
tcr,  fweat  from  the  celeftial  orbs,  which  turns  into  weft.  This  ^ 
candid  fubflance,  in  fome  places,  where  it  petrifies  and  is 
changed  into  ftone,  induces  acruftaceousfurface,,  or  parget 
upon  ftones  •  in  other  places  it  degenerates  into  a  mofs. 

To  this  Clajfis  of  Meteors  we  are  alfo  to  refer,  the  Dew,        44, 
Manna,  Throni,  Thereniabin,  NofiochyNebnigea,  Laudanum  *,  *  Quid  vtht 
and  other  fuch  aereal  produdions.Though  thefe  partake  more  ^^thorper  h*c 

largely  of  the  fubflance  of  aer :  while,  in  the  interim,  the  ori-  "ova  & '"" 

.  °    J     .     .   .         ~    ,  r   '  .  /-11  f     ta  momma.,  ex 

ginary  principles  of  the  mofs,  growing  upon  lculls,  are  of  z  Cabali(iico-Para- 

higher  and  more  noble  pedigree,  the  feminary  excretions  of  cclfi  vocabulma 
the  ftars;  and  are  called  by  Hermetical  Philofo:hers  the  flowers  f»iuuataa  cxpli- 
or  fruits  of  the  Cehftial  Orbs.  By  thefe  the  prudent  have  at-  •5^2" 
tempted  and  atchieved  many  notable  defines ;  and  indeed;,  SjJ^^l'0 
they  being  enriched  with  the  favor  and  continual  influence  of 
the  Heavens,  want  not  the  ground  and  foundation  of  excellent 
and  generous  faculties*  The  mofs  therefore  of  a  fcull,  fince  it 
hath  received  its  feminality  from  the  celeftial  orbs,  but  its  Ma- 
trix, conception,  and  increment  from  themumial  and  medul- 
lary fubflance  of  the  fcull  of  man;  it  is  no  miracle,  that  it 
hath  obtained  excellent  Aftral,  and  Magnetical  virtues,  far        45*. 
tranfcending  the  common  lot  of  Vegetables  ;  although  herbs 
alfo,  in  the  capacity  of  herbs,  have  their  peculiar  Magnetifms  : 
I  will  infert  an  obfervation  of  my  own ;  A  certain  Soulctier  of 
a  noble  extraction,  wore  a  little  lock  of  the  mofs  of  a  mans 
fcull,  finely  enclofed  betwixt  the  skin  andflefhof  his  head; 
who  in  friendlhip  interceding  betwixt  two  brothers,  that  were 
fighting  a  mortal  duel,  unfortunately  received  fo  violent  a 
blow  with  a  fword  on  his  head,  that  he  immediately  fell  to  the 
earth-.  With  which  blow  his  hat,  and  hair  were  cut  through, 
aj  with  an  incifion  knife,  even  to  the  skin;  but  heefcaped 

iK  2  without 


26  Of  the  Magnet  I  ck 


without  the  fmalleft  wound,  or  penetration  of  the  skin.    I 

need  not  anticipate,  your  felves  may  without  much  difficulty 

guefs,  to  whatcaufe  the  guard  of  the  skin  may  be  juftly  afcri- 

bed.     It  hath  not  been  the  cuftomc  of  my  genius,  to  perplex 

and  rack  my  rninde,  with  uncertain  conjectures  ;    fince  indeed 

lightning,  of  far  greater  violence  then  a  fword,  if  it  ever  touch 

a  Bay  tree,  does  yet  never  difcharge  it  felf  upon  a  Sea  Calf,  or 

Horfe,  whofe  fnafle  is  anointed  with  the  fat  of  a  Sea  Calf,  nor 

ever  falls  upon  that  ftable,  whofe  dorepofts  are  emplaftered 

with  the  fame  fat.    The  experience  is  trivial  and  frequent.  But 

I  pafs  lightly  over  this  fcene,  and  refigne  it  to  others ;  fo  foon 

as  I  fhall  have  mentioned  one  other  example,  like  the  former. 

*  Ell  (tola  S.    jn  jirclHenna  *  Saint  Hubert  is  worfhiped  with  folemn  and 

(ex diverts" da-  Publick  veneration,  whither  all  people  bitten  by  any  mad  dog 

-vibtts  obferata,  fpeedily  addrefs  themfelves  (as  elfewhere  others  flock  to  the 

a  diverfisquo     (hrines  of  Saint  Domirus  and  Bellini^ :)  there  the  Flymen  or 

qitcdavigms    j>rieft  buries  afmall  lock  of  wool,  from  theftole  or  upper 

wjiodua. <«<>  garment  of  the  Saint,  which  is  artificially  inclofed  within  the 

praftind'unt      skin  °*  tne  forehead  or  the  patient,  bitten  by  a  mad  dog; 

(iola  Wins  par-  and  from  thenceforth  forever  he  can  be  no  more  wounded 

ttm,nma7wite   or  fmitten,  rby  any  mad,  or  wilde  beafts  whatever ;  for  the  fa- 

tntcrim  Jlold^    crecj  magick  of  the  lock  is  thefhield,  that  fecures  from  the 

abotthizauis'  vi°^nce'°f  enraged  teeth,  and  renders  the  wearer  invulnera- 

jam&  amplius  ble.     *  Your  anfwer  will  be,  that  this  extraordinary  effeclis 

amis.  Ncc  c(i   done  by  an  immediate  miracle  of  God,  cooperating  with  facred 

impojlurx  locus,  reliques.  Well,  grant  it  be  a  miracle  ;  yet  that  God  in  the  pro- 

Vodi  anfoU   dudion  of  miracles,  does,  for  the  molt  part,  walk  hand  in 

fiicx'bjffollana,  ^iand  Wlt^  Nature,  and  in  a  manner  oblige  himfelf  to  an  ob- 

imo,  vel  bom-   fervance  of,  and  conformity  with  her  cuftoms  and  rules,  thefe 

bace,  adeoqite    Patients  of  Saint  Hubert  do  plainly  evidence  by  their  lock  of 

nee  poffet  quo-  Wooll.  For  that  uncircumfcribed  Omnipotence,  whofe  power  is 
tannnnovuluB'  '  • 

(litui.  Prafcindimt  autcm  de  (tola  partem,  ut  filament  urn  fogulis  demrrfts  a  rab'ido,  intra  cut'm 
frmtitincament.  Inde  enim  aiiud  miraculum.  £>uod  qui  femel  fufeepto  filamtnto  e  (tola,  per  thus 
fuos  convaluit,  poteft  a/teri  demorfo  diferetermimm,  &  fopircrabkm  adventantcm,  per  quadra- 
genarias,  idque  in  annos  aliquot,  dum  tandm  fuo  commodo  adirc  qucat  S.  Hubert  urn.  Ea  tamen 
fub  conduienc,  uttaniiUum  fi  quisfupra  40  dies  expedet,  nee  prorogationem  termini  ante  impctra- 
verit,  cenfeftim  in  rabiem  incidat  dcplaratam.  Hxc  Myflagogus  omnibus,  quolquot  devot'tonts  crgS 
percgre  Junt  profefti,  bofpitibns-,  clato  fuferalit,  pradicat.  Sedvhti  emimCliOiibns potim  olent 
fraudem^  qmm  veritaicm  Chajiimfmo  dignam.       *  46, 

limited 


Cure  of  Wounds.  27 

limited  by  no  law  but  that  of  his  will,  who  can  do  all  things 
by  the  fingle  efficiency  of  a  Fiat,  does  fometimes  make  ufe 
alfo  of  natural  means. 

Thus  let  the  fweat  in  the  Sudary,  or  Stove  of  Saint  Paul,  be 
alfo  a  Magnetic al  Vnguent ;  but  the  fweat  of  the  fick  perfons, 
or  the  infenfible  effluvium  exhaling  from  them,  be  the  blood 
of  the  wounded,  fprinkled  upon  a  piece  of  wood,  and  put  into 
the  box  of  Vnguent ;  immediately  all  harm  and  evil  depend- 
ing on  the  wound,  is  from  all  parts  of  the  body  attracted 
magnetically.  And  this  effect  is  by  fo  much  the  more  power-  47» 
fully  wrought,  by  how  much  more  efficacy  the  fupematural 
magnes  is  endowed  withal.  For  in  both,  truly,  there  is  the 
fame  reafon,  and  the  fame  manner  of  the  caufes  operation  ; 
the  difference  lies  onely  in  this,  that  in  the  material  world,  the 
effect  fucceeds  upon  a  requisite  conjunction  and  co-efficiency 
of  corporal  means,  the  blood  and  the  Vnguent',  but  in  the 
fupematural,  by  a  holy  magnetifm,  arifing  from  the  facred  re- 
licjuesoi  the  Friends  of  God,  which  in  this  relation,  undoubt- 
edly deferve  our  venerable  efteem.  That  thefe  miracle-pro-  4$, 
ducingreliques  might  in  the  manner  of  their  operations,  by 
a  neerer  fimilitude  approach  to  the  nature  of  the  Magnetical 
Vnguent,  God,  the  foul  of  mercy,  moved  with  compaction  to- 
wards our  frail  and  calamitous  eftate,  hath  infomeof  them 
called  up  a  fountain  of  oyl,  perpetually  pouring  forth  dreams 
of  Balfam :  To  this  end,  that  every  where  relieved  and  fup- 
ported  by  magnetical  remedies,  we  might  for  certain  beaffured, 
that  the  Magnetical  cure  of  wounds  is  received  from  God,  and 
both  in  the  fupematural  and  natural  world  doth  proceed  in 
an  equal  order  of  caufes,  in  an  equal  pace  and  manner  of 
operations,and  by  the  conduct  of  the  fame  Diretlor  and  Guide. 
Hence  is  it,  that  frefh  and  new  reliques  work  more,  and  more 
noble  miracles  when  they  are  carried  about,  or  applied  to  the 
Patient  by  the  touch  ;  becaufe  it  is  of  unexcufable  neceffity, 
that  the  magnes  be  firftrub'd,  touch't,  and  ftir'd,  if  we  will 
have  it  to  attract. 

I  return  to  thee,0  Vfnta  !  the  noble  ifTue  of  celeftial  feed  :         49* 
for  whofo  hath  enjoyed  a  convalefcence  from  the  Hydrophobia^ 
by  the  lock  of  wooll,  and  other  pious  rites  obferved,  is  not 

onely 


28 


Of  the  Mdgmtick 


50. 


*  In  exCmplm 
3Ll\evmano 
iegitur,  inftar 
Joiut :  fed  ex 
incuria  typogta- 
pbl  litci-am  I  pro 
'Xjtiutatam  effe 
conjeei  j  eoqubi 
tnetapbora  Jo- 
«<*,  civitatcm 
Niniven  ctr~ 
cumamb'miU, 
enimislongm- 
<guo  effel  pc- 
ttfida. 


onely  himfelf  for  ever  after  protected  from  a  rabid  dog  •  bur, 
what  is  far  more  noble,  he  can  grant  to  any  other  perfon  bit- 
ten by  a  mad  dog,  nfttperfedea*  to  prorogue  the  time  of  the 
Venoms  energy,  for  many  moneths,  until  the  Patient  can, 
with  convenience,  take  a  journey  to  the  ftirine  of  St.  Hubert ; 
the  poyfon  in  the  mean  time  charmed  into  an  inactivity,  and 
xhe  fermentation  of  the  humors  fufpended.  Nature  hath  alfo 
granted  another  magnetical  magnale,  cozen  german  to  the 
former.  The  Zin^illa  (which  is  an  excrement  of  the  Z)w- 
phragma  or  Midriff,  degenerating  into  an  inflammation  and 
Apoftem)  when  once  it  hath  like  a  Zone  *,  environed  the  cheft 
of  the  Patient,  becomes  fatally  deftructive  •  but  it  is  fafely 
and  with  great  celerity  cured,  if  the  place  be  outwardly, 
though  but  flenderly,  anointed  with  the  blood  of  another, 
who  has  once  recovered  from  the  fame  difeaie.  For  he  who 
hath  once  recovered  from  that  difeafe,  hath  not  onely  ob- 
tained a  pure,  balfamical  blood,  whereby,  for  the  future,  he  is 
rendered  fecure  and  free  from  any  recidivation  of  the  fame 
evil  j  but  alfo  infallibly  cures  the  fame  affection  in  his  neigh- 
bor, and  by  the  cutany  external  contact  of  his  own  blood, 
by  the  myfterious  power  of  Magnetifm,  tranfplants  that  bal- 
fam,  and  conferring  quality  into  the  blood  of  another. 

You  may  object ;  if  the  Magnetifm,  or  grand  magnetical 
arcanum,lie  onely  in  the  Vfnea  j  then  all  other  ingredients  of 
the  composition  are  fruitlefs,  vain,  and  unneceflfary.  Phyjici- 
ans  foon  falve  this  doubt,  by  replying ;  that  fome  of  the  in- 
gredients are  efficients  paramont,  and  principal;  others  of 
inferior  virtue  and  fubordinate  j  fome  are  conjoyned  as  impe- 
diments, to  obtund  and  refract  the  violence  of  contrary  in- 
tenfe  qualities  j  others  as  fpurs,  to  excite  the  dormant  •  and 
others  to  advance  and  promote  the  weaker  and  lcls  active 
Magnetifm,  to  a  higher  and  more  noble  entelecby.  And  that 
thefe  reafons  fupport  the  neceflity  of  a  multiplicity  of  fimples, 
in  the  confection  of  the  unguent.  On  this  consideration,  as  it 
was  a  flat  impertinency  to  argue,  that  if  the  ufnea,  chiefly  com- 
prehend the  magnetiun,  then  is  man,  to  no  purpofe,  exentera- 
ted  tofurnifti  the  Unguent  with  fome  other  ingredients;  fo 
alfo  would  it  be  a  direct  abfurdity  to  plead,  that  if  the  ufnea, 

00 


Ctfrtf  of  Wounds.  29 

■1  '  "         —  ■■'   ■■■■'■  '  ■"■  -'  ■ '■-■---     '   t  '  1  — 

onthefingle  flock  of  its  own  endowment,  be  not  enriched 
with  Tumcient  magnetifm;  nor  the  fat,  nor  -the  blood,  &c. 
therefore  will  not  that  magmtifm,  which  we  attribute  to  the 
un<rttent,i\io  be  found  in  the  whole  composition ;  iince  (ingle 
ingredients  cannot  impart  that  virtue  to  a  compon*tion,which 
they  formerly  did  not  contain  in  their  primitive  conftitutions 
and  fimple  natures.  Imuftevernow  and  then  be  compelled 
to  ad  your  part,  and  contrive  arguments  and  cavillations  for 
you,  againft:  my  felf.  But  however,  it  had  been  your  duty, 
formerly  to  have  been  intruded  from  vulgar  and  ruftick  ex- 
periments, that  in  a  compound  medicine  there  doth  frequently 
*  r  ,  1  ■    1  ,■  11  i  r        •     Mo,es  ctiant 

emerge  and  rejtdt  a  new  third  quality ,  which  was  never  before, iti  m,maimm  pra 

the  leaft  meafure,  conchedvvthe  finglc  ejfcncts  of  the  ingredient  p.- jocorum  quali- 
For  example,  it  would  become  you  to  have  obferved,  that"  t.i^d'(fcrre,ve- 
neither  Vitriol  nor  Galls  are  fejundively  black;  but  married  nenaqueferfen- 
in  the  compofition  of  Ink,  they  immediately  beget  a  perfed  Mm^'frmtio- 
deep  black.  _  effici,  aferit 

You  may  again  object;    if  the  Vfnea  hath  acquired  its  stagyrita3dc 
magnctifm  from  the  mumial  virtue  of  the  bones,  and  the  k-b-ji.  Animal. 
minal  influence  of  celeftial  orbs :  then,  of  confequence,may  M.S.cap.zg. 
the  fame  be  gathered,  not  onely  from  fculls,  but  from  all         51. 
other  bones  of  the  fceleton.    But  this  illation  is  alfo  ridicu- 
lous ;  for  Nature  her  felf  confefleth  a  fubjedion  and  con- 
formity to  the  condition  of  the  foyl ;    and  for  that  reafon, 
Pepper  new  gathered  tranfplanted  into  Italian  ground,  dege- 
nerates into  Ivy  :  Hellebore  fet  in  the  Tridentine  *  fields,quite  *  "^hc  ^hy 
loofeth  its  purging  faculty ;  and  Poppies  with  us  are  wholly  v^fd^^ 
devoid  of  any  deleterious  or  deadly  quality,    however  our /M/y 
Countrey  be  ten  times  colder  then  Thebes  *  it  felf.  Therefore  *  The  Metro- 
the  ufnea  varies  in  its  etficacy,  according  to  the  various  foyl,  polis  of  Bceotia, 
or  matrix  of  bones,  wherein  it  is  conceived  and  nourifhed.  in  otir  age  caU 
For  if  lightning  melt  money,  the  purfe  remaining  untouched,  ^yS(ibCr  °l'c 
and  of  ten  companions  fitting  clofe  together,  choofe  one  out  in  longitude 
of  the  middle,  and  ftrikehim  into  allies;  and  this  happen  50.  in  latitude 
notcafually,  or  by  chance,  but  by  the  permiflionof  that  S8« 
Providence,  which  will  not  have  fo  much  as  one  leaf  drop 
uncommanded  from  the  tree  ;    and  by  whofe  onely  power, 
all  virtues  are  founded  and  eftablifhed  j    it  can  feem  no 

L  wonder 


30  Of  the  Magnet hk 

wonder  alfo,  that  one  diftind  magnetical  feminality  of  ufnea 
be,  from  the  celeftial  fphears,  diftilled  upon  the  [cull ;  and  a 
fecondfeminality,  of  another  peculiar  clajjis,  upon  the  other 
bones  of  the  Scdeton.  Onely  the  bone  of  the  head  is  of  ex- 
cellent ufe  againfl  the  Epilepfie  •  but  fo  are  not  any  of  the 
other  bone?.  Then,  to  conclude,  all  the  brain  is  confumed 
and  difTolved  in  the  fcull,  by  the  continual  irroration  and  im- 
bibing of  which  precious  liquor  (I  mean  that  of  the  brain) 
the  fcull  acquires  fuch  virtues,  which  we  have  difcovered  to 
be  wanting  to  the  other  bones 

I  have  fufficiently  known  the  cuftomes  of '  contradicents.  For 
when  they  have  nothing  more  of  moment  to  alleage  againfl 
the  thing  difputed  of,  they  become  the  more  contumelious, 
break  forth  into  reproaches,  and  fall  foul  upon  the  perfonof 
him,  that  is  their  adverfary  in  opinion.  Wherefore  it  may  be, 
fome  or  other  will  exclaim,  that  Magnetifm  is  fome  new  fan- 
gle,  invented  onely  by  Paracelfw  -3  but  that  he  was  a  lewd, 
diflolute,  and  igncrjnt  fellow.  And  again,  if  there  had  been 
any  fuch  excellent  virtue  in  nature,  it  could  not  have  remain- 
ed in  darknefs,  and  undifcovered  to  fo  many  ages,  and  its 
revealment  have  been  fufpended  till  the  advent  of  Para- 
celfm. 

As  concerning  the  reproaches,and  fcurrilous  fubfannations 
of  many,  fhower'd  down  upon  the  head  of  a  man,  that  was 
the  Ornament  of  Germany  :  I  anfvver,  that  they  are  empty, 
vain,  and  below  a  fober  thought,  and  do  no  more,  then  ren- 
der the  aflertor  of  them  more  indign  and  contemptible  then 
before ;  as  one  that  earneftly  endevours  to  condemn,  not 
onely  the  livings  but  the  dead  alfo.  For  there  is  no  reafon  why 
I,  an  unequal  Orator,  who  have  undertaken  the  Encomium 
of  no  man,  fhould  fall  upon  the  praife  of  him  forthofe 
things,  which  his  own  monuments  hold  forth  to  the  world, 
concerning  his  learning,wil'dom,and  divinely  infuied  endow- 
ments; but  I  come  di redly  to  ballance  the  invetlize  arguments 
themfelves.  This  Ob;eclion  therefore  is  barren  of  any  thing  but 
pride,  fince  it  infolently  dares  to  afTume  the  condemnation, 
not  onely  of  the  living  and  dead,  but  even  of  God  himfelf ; 
namely,  that  he  oughc  not  to  have  infufed  theknowledgof 

fo 


Cure  of  Wounds.  3 1 

fo  divine  a  fecret  into  Paracelftafrut  fome  other  perfon  (fome 
fefuite  perhaps ;)  nor  to  have  manifefted  fo  great  a  confonan- 
cy  and  harmony  of  Nature,  in  the  days, of  Paracelftu,  but 
much  earlier,  in-the  infancy  of  the  world.  But  I  befeech 
you,  why  came  Ignatius  Loyola  fo  late,  and  in  the  evening  of 
the  world,  to  be'the  founder  and  efhblifher  of  a  Society,  fo 
uleful  and  profitable  to  the  whole  world  ?  Why  did  he  not 
fp ring  up,  and  appear  many  agesfooner?  Alas  1  wretched 
man,  whither  doell:  thou  hurry  thy  felf  by  prefumption  ?  Is 
not  God  the  free  and  unconftrained  giver  of  his  own  benefit  > 
and  doth  not  he  delight  himfelf  in  an  undeferved  donation 
of  it  ?  Himfelf  has  vouchfafed  to  bequeath  us  a  touch-ftone,  jj. 
by  which  we  may  give  infallible  judgment  of  the  perfons  or* 
men;  namely,  that  we  fliall  know  them  by  their  works.  But 
what  the  works  of  Paracelfta  were,  and  how  much  greater 
then  all  expectation  of*  Nature,  and  the  mordacity  of  male- 
volent tongues,  his  own  Epitaph,  by  the  moft  illuftrious,  and 
moil:  reverend  Prelate,  the  Biftiop  *  of  Salt^burg,  appenfed  *-panclpe  Sa. 
to  that  well  deferved  Monument  of  his,  doth  in  defpite  of  lUburgmfi. 
envy,  fufficientiy  declare. 


L    z  The 


3* 


Of  the  Magnetick 


THE 


Epitaph  olTATs^ACeLSVS: 

Engraven  in  ftone,  at  Saltzburg,  in  the  Hofpital 

of  Saint  Sebaflian,  on  the  crcd  Wall 

of  the  Temple. 


*  Aim  Philip- 
pus  Aureolus 
Paracclfus,  ut 
idem  Hclsnont. 
intraCt.  dcli- 
tlriafi. 


*  Atiieroga'dU, 
vel  wdinavit : 
ut   A  damns 
Melchlor,  in  vi 
tis  mdicorum 
German, 


COnditur  hie  Philip  pus 
Theophraftw  *j  in  fig- 
nis  Medicine  Doettr ,  qui 
dira  ilia  vulnera,  Lepramy 
Poddgram^  Ffjdropifim , 
aliaque  infanabilia  cor- 
poris Contagia^  mirifica 
arte.fuftutit ;  ac  bonafua 
in  pauperes  diftribuenda  3 
collocandaqm  honor avit  *. 
Anno  1541.  die  24  Sep- 
tembrisyvitam  cum  morte 
mutAvit. 


TLJErc  entombed  is  Phil- 
■*•  *lipu*  Theophrafius  _  ,  a 
famous  Doctor  of  Phyfick, 
who  by  his  wonder-working 
Art  took  away  thofe  mortal 
wounds,the  Leprofie,  Gout, 
Hydropfie,  and  other  in- 
curable contagions  of  the 
body-,and  ordained  his  goods 
to  be  distributed  and  given  to 
the  poor.  In  the  yeer  1 541. 
on  the  24  day  of  September^ 
he  made  an  exchange  of  life 
for  death. 


Paracelfus,  therefore,  is  fo  far  from  having  deferved  ill,  in 
that  he  hath  revealed  Magnctifm,  unknown  to  Antiquity ; 
and  in  the  room  of  that  fludy  of  Natural  rrifdom,  which  with 
*reat  barrennefs  is  taught  abroad  in  publick  Schools,  intro- 
duced another  more  folid  and  real  one,  which  by  the  Analyjis 
and  Syntbcfis,  the  diacritical  refolution  of  heterogeneal,  and 
fyncritical  conjunction  of  homogeneal  bodies,  is  made  pro- 
bable, and  brought  home  to  a  familiarity  with  our  fenfe,  and 
yeelds  a  more  wealthy  harveft  of  knowledg  •  that  thence  he 
hath  rather,  by  a  juft  title,  won  the  denomination  of  the 
Monarch  of  [cents,  from  all  his  predecelTors  •    unlefs  with 

thofe 


Cure  of  Wounds.  33 

thofe  that  malign  him,  we,  as  ignorant  Judges,  difcommend 
all  his  good  actions,  and  difparage  thofe  benefits,  he  accumu- 
lated upon  pious  ufes.  I  am  thus  a  man,  (i.  c.)  this  is  the  | 
rogative  of  my  humanity  ;  all  things  appear  cheap  and  light 
in  the  ballance  of  my  reafon,  that  pretend  to  a  dominion 
over  my  belief,by  no  ftronger  title,then  that  of  Cufiom  onely. 
Since  there  is  nothing,  that  enfhroivds  our  mindes  in  a  greater 
mifi  of  error  and  fedutl  ion, then  that  we  are  conformed  to  Cufiom, 
out  of  an  eajie  and  ungenerous  credulity,  fubmitting  our  ajfent 
to  rumor,  and  the  dreams  of  the  multitude.  We  are  therefore 
gallantly  to  attempt  the  emancipation  of  our  faith  from  the 
tyranny  and  pedantifm  of  popular  tradition,  to  purfue  the 
liberty  of  our  intelle&uals,  and  to  enjoy,  not  enflave  the  lia- 
bilities of  our  judgment. 

You  may  again  plead,  that  in  Sublunaries  there  is  no  influ- 
ential virtue,  that  can  be  paralleld  to  the  impreflions  of  Su- 
perlunaries  ;  but  if  you  (hall  ftumble  at  this  ftone,  you  will 
at  the  fame  inftant  fall  upon  the  reprehenfion  of  all  thofe 
learned  men,  who  have  taken  the  direct  path-  to  Pl.ulofbphy  ; 
fincethey  have  rightly  obferved  to  us,  that  in  inf  nor  bodies 
there  is  an  inference  or  tribute  delivered  down  from  fuperior, 
and  reciprocally  an  analogy  or  refemblance  of  inferior  in 
celefiial  bodies.  Do  not  Herbs,  Animals,  and  difeafed  men 
foreknow  and  prefage  the  future  mutations  of  times  and 
feafons  ?  Are  we  not  to  expecl  fo  much  the  harder  Winter, 
by  how  much  fhe  deeper  cave  or  lodging  the  Frog  hathfera- 
ped  in  the  earth,  to  harbor  himfelf  in  the  fucceeding  Winter  > 
For  from  this  ground  proceed  the  Aletcorical  Auguries ;  not 
indeed,  that  thofe  prophefies  of  weather  arife  from  the  too 
early  and  yet  future  motion  of  the  ftars ;  in  regard,  it  would 
then  follow,  that  that  motion  muft  caufe  this  prefagous  fenfa- 
tion,  long  before  its  own  contingency. 

Far  be  it  from  a  fober  head  to  dream  fo  palpable  an  abfur- 
dity,  For  the  firmament  does  onely  denounce  future  events  ;  b;<t 
hoi  no  hand  in  their  Caufation.  But  indeed,every  fingle  created  fqt. 
nature  contains  its  peculiar  heaven  within  the  fphearof  its 
own  dimenfions,  and  holds  within  it  felf  the  rotation  or  re- 
volution of  thztheaven,  dependent  onhsfeminal  Entity,  in 

L  2  whofe- 


34 


jtf. 

57- 
58. 

59- 

60. 

*  ^tt/ri  region* 
la.  pmt  cnim 
YioiveL  rii/su- 
ju*7*,  Venli 
communes,  & 
thy^tiety  par- 
tkitUoes  fm 
Vcrnaculij  ut 
Hippocrat.  lib. 
de  A  ere  &  lo- 
th. 

b  Depending 
upon  aforain 
motor,  for  a 
regularity   of 
motion. 


Of  the  MAgnetick 

whofc  jpirit  (which  comprehends  the  Cdature  or  Idea  of  the 
whole,  in  landslip)  there  is  comprifed  its  own  peculiar  heaven, 
and  moreover  its  own  afcendents.  Nor  is  there,  why  you 
fhould  conceive,that  we  by  this  doctrine,ftagger  and  demolifh 
the  Fabrick  of  Aftrology  ;  but  rather  that  we  elucidate,  and 
render  it  more  bright  to  the  profpect  of  our  underfhnding ; 
fince  truly  every  fingle  feminal  ens  contains  its  own  heaven,  and 
by  that  relation  holds  a  Syzygia,  or  conjunctive  intereft  of 
the  other  Jidt  real  heavens.  But  the  motion  of  the  univerfal 
heavens,  in  regard  it  is  the  moil  known  and  moft  common, 
does  govern,  and  according  to  the  rule  of  it  felf  direct  the 
particular  heavens  (fuffer  me  to  borrow  that  name,  fince  I 
want  another  more  proper  and  convenient)  of  fingle  inferior 
Creatures.  This  properly  is  the  caufe  of  every  natural  incli- 
nation ;  and  when  the  fingle  creature,  by  the  perfwafion  and 
feducT:ion  of  its  own  domeftick  heaven,  becomes  exorbitant 
from  the  motion  of  the  univerfal  heaven,as  the  moft  common 
rule,  immediately  there  fucceed  irregularity,  acrafie,  confufi- 
on  and  defects.  For  a  fheep  without  a  guide,  loofes  himfelf 
in  the  devious  paths  of  error.  And  from  this  confpiracy  and 
conjugation  of  the  motion  of  the  univerfal,  with  that  of  eve- 
ry particular  heaven,  is  it,  that  difeafed  men  carry  an  iUma- 
nack  in  their  bones,  prefage  foul  weather,  and  the  future  mu- 
tations of  feafons ;  but  not  thofe  that  are  found.  For  if  the 
Sea  did  flow  and  re-flow  by  the  direction  of  the  Celeftial, 
•  that  is  the  pyromantical,  or  fiery  Moon  onely,  and  not  of  its 
own  hydromantical,  or  watry  Moon  ;  and  if  the  windes  were 
ftirredup  by  the  command  of  the  Celeftial  Mercury  onely, 
and  not  of  their  own  Chaomantical ftar  ;  truly  there  could 
be  no  Provincial a  winds  in  any  quarter  of  the  earth,  but 
(fince  there  is  but  one  fingle  Mercury,  and  one  fingle  Moon 
in  the  whole  Arch  of  heaven)  the  fame  wind  would  confhnt- 
ly  blow  alike  through  all  the  world  ;  and  the  Sea  would  in 
all  places  flow,  if  not  at  the  fame  time,  yet  in  the  fame 
rhy  thme,  or  interval  of  tides,  which  our  modern  Navigation 
disproves.  It  is  enough  therefore,  that  we  have  here,  by  way 
of  digreflion,  made  it  appear,  that  in  every  Cmglefcminal  en- 
tity there  is  comprehended  a  virtue  celeftial  Jk  enormantical b, 

which 


Cure  of  Wounds.  3  5 

which  doth  yet  excite  it  felf,  and  is  regulated  by  the  orderly 
motion  of  the  celeftial  orbs,  diflilling  an  imprerfion  upon  it  • 
fo  long  as  it  will  not  be  accounted  refractory  and  exorbitant. 
And  that  the  Firmament  alfo  doth  not  caufe  future  accidents,  •-. 
unlefs  by  a  remote  intereft,  and  that  too  but  by  firit  qualities 
onely,  as  it  were  acting  the  part  of  zCool^;  but  otherwife 
dothfignihe  and  loudly  proclaim  the  handy  works  of  God. 
But  that  every  particular  Creature  doth  in  its feminal  Entity,  62. 
poffefsa  partkuhr  firmament ;  by  the  mediation  of  which, 
fnperior  bodies  fymboliz,n,  and  hold  a  reciprocal  correfpon- 
dence  with  inferior,  obliged  thereto  by  the  law  of  friendfhip 
and  philauty  or  defire  of  felf-confervation.  From  all  which 
we  may  now  at  lealt  colled,  that  there  is  a  Magnetifm,  and 
powers  influential,  every  where  implantate  in,  and  proper  to 
natural  bodies ;  which  powers  who  fo  excludes  from  the  fcene 
of  Sublunarics,  does  feek  to  (helter  himfelf  in  a  rotten  San- 
ctuary. 

You  will  further  urge,that  we  are  to  come  yet  neerer  to  the 
main  point,  norisityet  placed' above  doubt,  that  in  Sttblu- 
r.ariei  there  is  a  quality  that  holds  a  parity  to  the  impreflion 
of  Superlunaries,  and  tilth  a  one  truly,  which  can  tranfmit  it 
felf  to  an  object  removed  at  large  diftance ;  which  notwith- 
ftanding  is  prefuppofed  in  the  A  rmary  Unguent ;  and  fo  that 
Adagnetifm  is  indeed  a  virtue  celeftial,  but  yet  in  no  degree  of 
emulation,  to  be  afcribed  to  Sublunaries,,  much  lefs  to  the 
counterfeit  weapon-falve.  But  what  elfe,  in  the  main,  is  this 
(Ibefeechyou)  then  to  deny  Magnetifm,  without  or  befides 
Magnetifm  ?  For  if,  in  an  univerfal  notion,  we  call  every  in- 
fluence of  fublunaries  reciprocally  tranfmitted  from  each  to 
other,  a  Magnetifm;  and  if  in  defed  of  a  more  proper  and 
distinctive  Etymon,  or  adequate  denominative,  we  chriften 
that  occult  coaptation  and  requifite  connexion  of  Active  and 
Paflive,  whereby  an  abfent  Agent  does  operate  upon  an  ab~ 
lent  Patient,  by  influence,  by  an  invifible  emanation  and  enter- 
courfe  of  virtues,  whether  it  be  done  by  attraction  or  impul- 
fion,  a  Magnetifm  :  Serioufly,  whoever  denies  the  influential, 
power  of  Sublunaries  mutually  tranfmitted  and  entertained 
each  by  other,  to  be  performed  by  Magnetifm;  and  requires. 

an< 


2  £  of  the  Magnaick 

an  iriftanct  to  be  given  him  to  the  contrary  ;  in  fober  truth  he 
requires  a  flat  abfurdity,  a  Magnetifm  (forfooth)  without 
Magnetifm,  and  knows  not  well,  what  he  would  deny,  or 
what  demand. 

Since  in  earneft  I  have  held  forth  examples  of  the  Fad,  in 
Sublmaries,  and  brought  upon  the  ftage  very  many  and  very 
appofite  wftances&s  that  of  the  infititious  or  engrafted  Nofc, 
of  the  Saphire,  of  Arfmarte,  Afankn,  and  moll:  ether  Herbs. 
But  you  deny  (I  fuificiently  know,  becaufe  you  know  it  not) 
either  that  thofe  effeds,   mentioned  in  the  lift  of  examples, 
do  not  at  all  fucceed  upon  the  coaptation  and  marriage  of 
fuch  and  inch  caufes ;    or  elfe  you  will  affirm  thole  effects  to 
be  caufed  by  the  fole  power  of  the  Devil.     And  that  it  is  not 
agreeable  to  the  cuftom  of  Naturalifts,  to  argue  from  bare 
Authorities ;  but  that  it  becomes  us  Defendants,to  come  up, 
with  thofe  that  ftrive  againft  us  to  handy-blows,  namely  to 
experience.  Do  you  make  tryal  therefore,  and  call  any  of  the 
recited  examples  to  the  touchftone  of  experiment,  that  fo  you 
prove  us  guilty  of  fallhood  ;    if  you  cannot,  then  at  leaft 
come  overto  our  fide  and  believe  them.   For  it  is  an  action  of 
infolent  petulancy  for  any,  therefore  to  deny  the  continence 
of  that/rfff,  which  is  every  where  fo  trivial  and  frequent, 
that  it  can  hardly  efcape  the  obfervation  of  any,    becaufe 
(forfooth)  himfeif  never  found,  ncr  indeed  ever  endevoured 
to  finde  it  good  upon  experiment ;    and  of  a  far  more  unpar- 
donable infolence,  to  aicribe  that  effect  to  the  Devil,  which 
in  moft  pieces  of  the  Creation  is  purely  confonant  to  Nature, 
as  fhall  hereafter  be  made  good  ;  and  that  too,  for  one  (ingle 
fault,  becaufe  (in  faith)  the  fecret  manner  of  its  production 
from  the  confederacy  and  co-eltkiency  of  natural  caufes, 
can  by  no  means  fink  into  the  head  of  our  Cenfor.  A  Cenfor, 
who  preiumes,  that  by  the  fubtilty  of  his  own  vaft  intellectu- 
als, and  the  ftudy  of  Ariftotles  Phyficks,  he  hath  exactly  fur- 
veyed  the  great  round  of  Nature,   fathomed  the  Moon,  and 
to  a  hair  taken  the  juft  dimensions  of  all  pieces  of  the  Uni- 
verfe.    A  Cenfor,  I  fay,  who  though  upon  a  fevere  fcrutiny 
he  can  difcover  nothing  of  fuperftition,  and  nothing  of  un- 
conformity to  any  divine  or  humane  laws  in  the  Vnguent  • 

the 


Cure  of  Wounds,  37 

doth  yet,  onely  becaufe  the  manner  of  its  application  to  the 
weapon  feems  paradoxical  to  him,  highly  cry  it  down  as  un-' 
lawful,  condemn  and  deteft  it  as  impious, and  accufe  it  to  con- 
tain fome  flrange  and  horrid  intereft  of  the  Devil.    But  what 
in  the  manner  of  its  application  (I  befeech  you)  do  you  (tum- 
ble at?  Verily  becaufe  the  fword,  orfplinter  of  the  weapon 
difhined  with  the  blood,  is  emplaftered  over  with  the  mumi- 
al  and  Magnetic  al  unguent ;  becaufe  the  blood  once  extra- 
venated,  or  cffluxed  out  of  its  proper  confervatory,  the  veins, 
loofeth  its  intereft  of  vitality,and  can  obferve  no  concordance 
with  that  blood,  which  is  yet  conferved  and  cherifhed  in  the 
veins ;  and  becaufe  he  doth  not  believe,  that  the  action  of  the 
unguent  can  be  extended  to  an  object  at  large  diftance  re- 
moved.   But  return  to  your  felf,  good  Sir,  for  ere  long  you 
ftiall  both  understand,  and  firmly  believe  it,  unlefs  your  per- 
tinacity render  you  uncapable  of  inftruction.   For  we  will 
make  it  our  bufinefsnow,  for  your  information,  to  call  the 
action  of  Magnetifin  to  the  bar,  and  by  the  evidence  of  Me- 
ridian truths,  convince  the  ignorance  and  (lupidity  of  itsad- 
verfaries. 

For  I  will  now  (hew,  that  there  is,  without  that  CUJps  of 
t kings  and  he rbsy  which  you  have  undefervedly  fufpected,  a 
mutual  influence  and  commerce  of  fome  certain  pieces  of 
Nature,  by  effluvium  or  emanation  of  fpirits;  and  that  this 
concordance  is  obferved  between  objects  at  very  great  diftance 
removed  each  from  other.  The  Vine,  when  it  is  in  the  flower,  6$. 
perturbs  and  caufes  a  kinde  of  ficknefs  (for  fo  Vintners  term 
it)  in  the  Wine.  You  will  excufe  that  this  conturbation  is  not 
caufed  by  any  violence  or  impreflion  of  the  Stars ;  when  we 
folidly  prove  the  contrary.  For  if  the  Stars  did  immediately 
occafion  the  germination  and  efflorefcence  of  the  Vine,  and 
alfo  the  turbulency  and  fickly  fermentation  of  Wines  in  their 
Veffels  •  it  would  of  neceflity  be,  that  both  thofe  effects 
fliould  happen  every  yeer,  in  one  determinate,  appointed,  and 
definite  moment ;  which  obfervation  concludes  tobefalfe. 
For  fometimes  the  Vine  emits  her  flowers,  and  the  Wine  is 
troubled  before  the  folftice,  and  in  the  fame  Country,  not  un- 
til another  yeer,.  long  after ;   but  the  Sun  and  all  the  Chonis 

M  of 


38  Of the  Mdgmtiek 

of  fixed  Stars  conftantly,onely  fome  few  minutes  of  difference 
allowed,  return  to  the  fame  point  of  heaven,  once  every  year ; 
therefore  would  the  Vine  flower,  and  Wines  fuffer  a  contur- 
bation  always  at  one  and  the  fame  fet  time.  But  if  you  feek  an 
evafion,  and  (hall  rejoyn,  that  other  Planets,  befide  the  Sun, 
which  pofTefs  not  annually,  about  the  folilice,  oneconfhnt 
and  equal  pofition  or  fituation  in  heaven,  are  the  cauiers  of 
this  languor  in  Wines ;  onely  in  this  relation,  that  che  motion 
of  she  fuperior  Orbs  is  rnoft  common,  as  to  which  alllubor- 
dinate  and  particular  heavens  are  to  conform,all  Vines  would 
for  the  plurality  of  them  flower  in  the  fame  yeer,  in  all  places 
at  once ;  which  is  falfe  upon  the  teftimony  of  experience. 
For  as  there  is  a  Nature  Aftral  conferred  upon,  and  implan- 
tate  in  the  ground ;  fo  alfo  the  fame  particular  Nature  is  in- 
ferted  into  the  Vine ;  which  particular  Nature  doth  per  /?, 
by  its  own  domeftick  power  (no  otherwife  then  the  Earth 
hith,  from  the  fructifying  benedi&ion  of  the  Creator,  re- 
ceived a  power  of  germinating  per  fe)  produce  the  flower, 
fruit,  and  feed,  and  conform  and  difpofe  it  felf  to  the  rhythme 
of  the  moft  genera  1  motion  of  the  Celeftial  Orbs.  Men  pofl- 
ttvely  affirm  further,  that  Wines  are  never  perturbed  in  thofe 
Regions,  in  which  no  Vines  grow ;   wherefore  the  flower  of 
the  Vine,  and  not  the  motion  of  the  Celeftial  Spheres,  doth 
perturb   Wines ,   and  that  many  hundreds  of  miles  from 
thence;   but  truly,  fo  much  the  more  powerfully,  by  how 
much  the  neerer  the  Wines  are  to  the  Vine,  that  produced 
them- 
64.  I  gratefully  applaud  thofe  fludies,  that  contribute  towards 

the  advancement  of  the  Common-wealth  of  learning;  and 
highly  hf  nor  him,  who  difcovered,  that  vulgar  Antimony , 
in  its  preparation,  doth,  though  in  an  obfeure  manner,  con- 
form it  feif  to  an  influence. 

I  exped  no  mote,  but  to  have  the  fame  measure  returned 
to  me,  which  I  deliver  to  others  -3  when  I  (hall  to  plenary  fa- 
tisfaclion  make  good,  that  there  is  a  certain  influential  power 
ordinary  and  familiar  to  fvbiunaries,  which  knows  no  con- 
finement or  reftraint  to  any  local  diftance  ;  and  in  order  to 
6$,        the  more  vigorous   jt.nd  fubftantial  flippoit  of  Magnetifm 

declare. 


Cure  df  Wounds.  39 

declare,   that  the  Loadfione  doth  of  its  own  accord,  by  the 
fwinge  of  a  native  inherent  verticity  or  polary  directive  fa- 
culty, fleer  it  felf  to  the  Pole,   but  is  by  no  means  attracted 
by  the  Pole.    For  one  Loadfione  in  a  lateral  variation  deflects 
to  three,  another  to  fix,  feven,  and  eleven  degrees  from  the 
Pole;  but  none  (for  what  I  could  ever  difcover)  doth  in  a 
direct  line  lie  parallel  to  the  Axis  of  heaven,  and  punctually 
point  upon  the  Pole.   Therefore  if  the  Loadfione  were  at- 
tracted by  the  Pole,  it  mull  receive  that  convultive  influence, 
either  from  the  Pole  it  felf,  or  from  fome  other  Star  ad jacenc 
to  the  Pole;  but  not  from  the  Pole  it  felf,  in  refpect  every 
Attrahent  does  attract  towards  it  felf  by  a  direct,  and  not  by 
an  oblique  line  :   wherefore  if  the  Loadfione  were  attracted 
by  the  Pole,  it  would  in  a  juft  level  point  upon  the  Pole  ; 
and  fo  the  refult  is,  that  Loadjiones  (at  lea  ft  according  to 
what  folid  and  multiplied   obfervations  have  taught  me  ) 
fuffer  no  attractive  force,   or  vertical  invitement  from  the 
Nonk-fiar,  nor  from  any  other  neighboring  Star.  For  fince 
the  whole  After ifin  of  Charts  his  Wain  knows  no  Sabbath,but 
is  ever  wheel'd  about  by  a  perpetual  circumrotation ;  if  it 
did  at  all  attract,  it  would  occafion  a  perpetual  inquietude, 
and  uncefTant  revolution  of  the  Loadfione,  by  reducing  it  one 
while  many  degrees  towards  the  Eaft,  and  another  while  as 
many  degrees  towards  the  Weft,and  every  twenty  four  hours 
fometimes  elevate  it  towards  the  Zenith,  and  anon  deprefs  it 
towards  the  Nadir ;  which  experience  pofitively  contradicts : 
Wherefore  the  Loadfione  ows  its  polarity  to  a  natural  inherent 
faculty,  flowing  from  its  own  Jeminal  Entity ,   and  not  to  any 
forain  alliciency,    or   attractive    influx  transmitted  from  the 
North-fiar.    But  that  otherwife  the  Loadfione  may,  by  its 
own  inftinct,  be  elevated  towards  the  Zenith,  we  have  upon 
ocular  demonftration  found  it  true,  by  a  certain  Infirumcnt 
invented  by  Guilielme  Guilbert  (the  glory  of  which  excellent  Diagramma 
invention  Lodovicm  Fonfeca  hath  lately  endevoured  ro  ravifh  l;ui'(S  v$''u- 
and  arrogate  to  himfelf,  in  the  prefence  of  his  Catholicjue  ™?lil  extac »« 
Majefiy)  which,  by  the  fpontaneous  elevation  of  the  Load-  ^  *• de  Ma&~ 
ftone  in  a  brafs  Ring  fufpended  by  a  thred  or  fmall  wier,fhews 
not  onely  the  latitude,  but  alfo  the  altitude  of  the  Pole,,  in 

all  nlarpc  r»f  rl>p"ParrK.  \A  -»  T  An».« 


40  of  the  Magnetick 

— 

Laboring  your  reafon  to  finde  out  a  way  of  evafion  you 
will  thus  contend  for  the  prerogative  of  the  Pole ;  that  the 
Pole  doth  indeed  attract  the  I^oadfione7  but  according  to  the 
various  and  certain  material  difpofition  of  feveral  Loadfione.^ 
it  doth  ailed  them  not  in  a  right  line  towards  it  felf  (for  fiich 
is  the  condition  and  will  of  the  Attrahent)  but  to  fome  other 
place  fituate  in  vicinity.  The  fubftance  of  which  is ;  the 
Pole  truly  invites  the  loadfione  to  it  felf  in  a  direct  line,  but 
the  Loadfione  becomes  refractary,  and  comes  not  in  a  direct: 
line,  by  reafon  of  fome  unknown  impediment,  (which  you 
term  a  certain  peculiar  difpofition  of  it)  exiftent  in  the  Load- 
fione, which  is  fuperior  in  power  to,and  vigoroufly  refifts  that 
traction  of  the  Pole ;  although  the  influential  alliciency  of 
the  Star,  at  the  diftance  of  fo  many  thoufand  miles,  arrive" 
at  the  body  of  the  Loadfione  entire,  and  without  the  leaft  de- 
cay or  diminution  of  vigor.  You  perceive,  how  much  truth 
you  have  granted  to  your  fubterfuge  ?  and  how,  though  by 
compulfion,  you  affirm  that  in  the  Loadfione  there  dwells  a 
certain  (you  call  it  certain  yv/hich  indeed  to  you  is  purely  ima- 
ginary ^  and  to  all  men  elfe  wholly  uncertain)  motive  difpofi- 
/•*'o#,befide$,and  fuperior  to  the  attraction  of  the  Pole ;  which 
yet  at  the  fame  time,  you  peremptorily  deny  the  Loadfione  to 
poifefs  ?  which  in  the  ballance  of  reafon  carries  this  weight : 
the  Loadfione  is  endued  with  a  domefiick^  Pilot ,  a  directive 
faculty ,  which  guides  it  to  fome  determinate  place,  but  is 
not  at  all  attracted  by  the  Pole. 

Driven  from  this  ftarting  hole,  you  flic  for  refuge  to  fome 
other  Celeftial  Attrahent ;  feated  in  vicinity  to  the  Pole ;  by 
replying,  that  the  Loadfione  is  attracted  ,  and  doth  not  direct 
it  felf,  by  any  internal  polary  virtue ;  attracted  not  by  any 
one  particular  and  determinate  Star,  or  point  of  Heaven,  but 
by  a  certain  Circle  or  Zone,  at  a  neer  diftance,  environing 
the  Pole.  I  anfwer,  That  this  evafion  is  far  fetched  >  for  this 
imaginary  Circle  mult  be  extended  to  the  latitude  of  eight 
degrees  at  leaft ;  namely,  from  three  to  eleven  degrees ;  for 
I  have  obferved  fome  Loadfiones  to  fufill  that  large  variation. 
Wherefore  if  there  were  a  power  of  attraction  equally  in- 
herent in  all  pares  of  this  Circle,  one  and  the  fame  Loadfione 


won 


1,5 


Cure  of  Wounds.  41 

would  continually  vary,  and  in  the  fame  hour  deflect,  now 
to  three,  and  anon  to  eight  or  eleven  degrees  from  the  Pole 
or  Central  Star ;  which  is  a  falfhood  manifefted  upon  frequent 
experiment.  Therefore,  to  help  out  this  Chimera,  there  muft 
be  conceived  many  leflfer  Orbites  or  rounds  one  within  an- 
other, in  a  Circle  of  fo  great  latitude  -,  every  one  of  which 
fubalternate  Zones  muftfelect  and  attract  its  particular  Load- 
ftone. Which  being  conceded,  you  inevitably  fall  again  into 
the  fame  ^fV/a/j  namely,  that  the Loadftone  contains  within 
it  felf  a  certain  difpofition  or  eletlive  power,  whereby  it  fhould 
conform  to  the  traction  of  one  round,  rather  then  of  an- 
other; and  by  confequence,  when  you  have  ftretched  your 
abfurd  conceptions  to  the  higheft  pin  of  phanfie,  there  will  be 
neverthelels  a  motive  virtue,  or  native  verticit)  in  the  Load- 
ftone. 

Yet  we  have  not  a  clear  profpect  into  the  nature  of  this 
abftrafity.  If  the  Pole  did  attract  the  Loadftone,  the  attracti- 
on muft  depend  either  upon  the  elemental  and  material  tem- 
per,or  upon  the  fpecifical  form  of  the  Loadftone ;  but  a  Gl  /r,  &&• 
wherein  the  Magiftery  of  Loadftone  hath  been  prepared , 
though  never  fo  much  wafhed,  and  cleanfed  by  often  rubbing, 
doth  acquire  a  polarity,  and  for  ever  after  conform  it  felf 
pofitionally  to  the  two  Cardinal  points  of  Heaven ;  by  realbn 
of  an  impreflion,  by  inviiible  aporrhceas  or  emiflion  of  mag- 
netical  atomes,  without  any  corporeal  remains,  communica- 
ted to  the  Glafs.  Steel alfo  once  excited  and  invigorated  by 
the  contact  of  the  Loadftone,  how  often  foever  rinfed  and 
poliftied,  doth  yet  inherit  the  Magnetical  infufion,  and  point 
out  the  Pole.  Which  two  diftinct  bodies,  fince  they  neither 
have  a  parity  of  temper  ,  or  homogeneity  of  forms  betwixt 
themfelves  j  nor  hold  any  proportionate  analogy  of  temper, ox. 
identity  of  form,  with  the  Loadftone :  carry  with  them  evi- 
dence clear  enough  to  fatisfie  a  rational  belief^  that  the  Pole 
can  attract  the  Loadftone  for  neither  of  thofe  two  ends  j 
namely,  affinity  of  temperament,  or  cognation  of  ejfence.  You 
may  rejoyn,  that  immediately  upon  a  {friction,  there  fucceeds 
a  participation  of  the  fubftance  of  the  Loadftone  in  the poro- 
fities,  or  atomic •  aline  ontiguitics  of  the  (heel, or  fpondils of  the 

M  3  glafs* 


41  Of  the  MAgmt'uk 


6j*  gUfs.  A  miferable  excufe  !  for  zherofw  of  the  Fir  tree,  is  of 
it  (elf,  by  an  internal  Gorgon,  coagulated  into  the  hardnefs  and 
folidity  of  a  ftone,  which  having  undergone  tins  petrification 
or  lapidefcence,  doth  allecl:  iron  to  it  feif,  no  otherwife  then 
the  Loadftone.  Here  your  dream  of  the  corporeal  participati- 
on of  the  Load  ftone  vanifheth. 
6*8.  The  Loadftone  onely  by  the  arTriction  of  Garlicky  amits  it; 

tt*t  dt  Allctli-  yerticity,  and  neglects  the  Pole,  conferving  to  it  felf,  in  the 
v*  vinutu  meantime,  its  peculiar  form,  material  conftitutton,  and  all 
aUw*i%tflo>  other  dependent  proprieties.  The  reafon,  becaufeG'jr//V^is 
confep'uionc,  a-  the  Loadftones  proper  Opttm%  and  by  it  that  fmrittal  fetifi- 
tiorum  poms  ex  tion\t\  ihe  Magnet  isconfopited  and  laid  afleep ;  which  fen- 
;c!atwuey  quam  fatjon  we  have  in  our  precedent  difcourfe,  mamfefted  to  be 
(cLZTnmlto  thc  fole  and  cardinal  caufe  of  the  all  of  all  formal proprieties, 
cenfcatur  Hel-  Verily,  that  alliciency  of  the  Pole  muft  be  extreme  weak  and 
months,  sie-  of  inconfiderable  energy,  which  palling  through  fo  many  and 
mm  experienii-  fo  immenfeorbs  of  heaven,  and  (hiking  through  great  and 
7"  TfcHc  *c  -  ^rm  buildings, an<*  tmc^  W^K  cannot  yet  be  of  power  fnffi- 
/Zjfety  "prima  c'ent  t0  pierce  the  thin  juice  of  Garlicky  or  the  fume  of  A/er- 
indubitanter  re-  cnry  \  the  material  radix,  or  temperamental  foundation,  and 
feriffct  afreftu,  a|fo  the  fpecifical  form  of  the  ftone,  remaining  unimpaired 
f8d  mdm     and  inviolate. 

v'ZiiSm, ,  A  M*&"\  fwimming  freely  upon  a  calm  water,  in  a  fmall 
&  moxfuuo  boat  of  cork,  hoileth  iail,  and  gives  one  broad  fide  to  the 
tMiiextinSluiH,  North,  and  the  other  to  the  South.  Therefore  if  this  pofitio- 
hiud  obfatram  naj  converfion  were  occafioned  immediately  by  the  folicitati- 
*thatmSVcx~  onof  thePole>  onely  the  Northern  fide  of  the  Stone  would 
u'^ZcatCuat)  be  conftantly  courted  and  drawn  by  the  North  Pole ;  which 
euftralemanc  '  is  apparently  falfe  upon  the  teft  of  experiment.  For  if  a 
ycrforii.magncte  Magnet  hath  impregnated  and  magnetiried  a  gad  of  iron  with 
mvigorat^ex-  its  North  fide,  it  doth  not,  according  to  the  law  of  its  own 
naTfafmsln  ProPriety,  dilpofe  and  incline  that  iron  to  the  North,  but  to 
amplcxusrapere  the  South,  although  the  atomical  powder  or  duft  of  the 
foftt:  afletiam,  ftone  adhere  to  the  iron ;  but  on  the  contrary,  if  it  hath  ex- 
moA  dens  nag-  Clte([  aiKj  fpirjted  iron  with  its  South  fide,  then  it  converts  that 
"'TimbutHs11  *^* t0  thc Nortn-  Again, tlie  Magnet  with  that  part,  where- 
i^reos  acus,  codcm  fncct}  ufque  dum  SYcifliorcm  rubigmm  contraxaint,  mbaAtos,  pempte  fc 
vct/hs  aUicerc  valeat. 

by 


Cure  of  Wtiunds.  43 


•••""J— P— «■« 


by  it  formerly  applied  it  felf  to  the  North ,  on  t'ther 
fide  the  Equinoctial  line  tackes  about,  and  faceth  the 
South. 

Yet  further  let  us  purfue  this  Argument.  A  Magnet  float- 
ing in  a  skif  or  fhallop  of  Cork,  on  a  quiet  pond,  if  the  Bo- 
real quarter  of  it  be  violently  ravifhed  from  its  own  beloved! 
pofition,  and  turned  about  to  the  South ;  immediately,,  as  if 
wheeld  about  by  fome  counter-violence,  it  readdrefieth  to  its 
old  miftrefs  the  North.  For  which  reafonr  if  the  Magnet 
were  by  an  influential  line  from  the  Pole,  drawn  back  again 
to  the  Pole,and  this  return  did  not  proceed  immediately  from 
the  fpontaneous  direttion  of  the  ftone  ;  of  neceflity,  by  that 
convulfionof  the  Pole,  the  whole  skif  would  be  towed  and 
haled  to  the  North  bank  of  the  Pond,  which  never  happens ; 
for  both  the  Magnet,  and  its  Shallop,  by  the  acquifite  directi- 
on of  the  ScptrentrionalCidc,  (land  frill  upon  the  water  and. 
remain  unmoved.  There  is  therefore  inherent  in  the  Magnet 
an  influential  virtue,  which  being  not  obliged  to  the  propin- 
qi'ity  or  contiguous  admotion  of  its  object,  is,  after  the 
nobler  manner  of  celeftial  influences,  freely  and  without  in- 
terruption or  languor  tranfmitted  fo  far  as  to  the  Pole  it  felf; 
(ince  there  is  a  fpontaneous  eradiation,  or  emiffionof  atomicaL 
radii  from  the  body  of  the  Magnet  to  the  Pole.  And  thus, 
when  there  hath  been  found  and  prefented  to  the  view  of 
reafon,  onely  one  influential  virtue  in  fuk <lunaries  (conced  it  ^g* 
mtheLoadftone)  diradiating,  and  in  one  continued  thread  of 
atomes  arriving  at  an  object  feated  at  remote  diftance,  which 
cannot  upon  any  pretence  be  afcribed  to  Satan ;  it  will  alfo 
be  fumciently  demonflrated,  that  there  may  be  many  other 
influential  proprieties  equivalent  to  this  of  the  Magner,. 
wholly  and  purely  natural,  as  inthe  forecited  examples,  and 
the  Armary  Unguent. 

Now  fince  the  Magne t  or  Iron  excited  by  the  Magnet,  do 
by  inftinct  of  their  own  pilot,  and  the  fpontaneous  direction 
of  them  fe  Ives  convert  to  the  Pole;  there  muft  of  neceffity 
be  conceded  fome  certain  Sgrfky  eradiated  and  extended 
from  the  body  of  the  Magnet  tothe-Pole ;  which,  in  regard 
we  alfuredly  know  it  to  be  done  without  any  Corporealeffiu" 


44  Of  the  Magnet kk 


vIhm,  we  denominate  a  fpiritual  quality  ;  in  this  particular 
duTenting  from  our  Divine,  who  places  a  Spirit  in  irrecon- 
cilable difference  to  all  corporeal  nature,  as  an ejfence  wholly 
preternatural.  But  Phyjicians  oppofe  a  .fyi™>  againfl:  the  more 
rro/}  compare,  or  more  material  and  lefs  ratified  fubftance  of 
a  ^o^.  Ana*  in  this  diftinctive  notion  we  fay,  that  the  light  of 
the  Sun,  the  influx  of  celeflial  bodies,  the  narcotical  ejaculation 
cf  the  Torpedo,  the  fatal  optic  kjmijfi  on  of  the  Bafilish^,  &c.  are 
qualities  purely  and  wholly  fpiritual ;  why;'becaufe  they  are 
darted  at  and  ftrike  upon  an  object  at  great  difhnce,  not  by 
the  communion  or  affociation  of  fubfiantial  evaporation ; 
but  are,  as  by  a  medium  of  imperceptible  light,  deradiated 
and  (hot  from  their  Subject  to  a  fit  and  determinate 
object. 

Thefe  things  thus  conceded  and  made  indubitate  by  argu- 
ments of  reafon  and  experiment,  it  is  fuificiently  manife/r, 
that  our  Divine,  when  yet  he  underftood  not  Goclenius,  hath 
neverthelefs  carped  at  him,  and  indeed  many  times  when  he 
deferyed  it  not.  (i )  Becaufe  Goclenius  placed  a.  fpiritual  qua- 
lity in  fo  courfe  a  lodging,  as  a  corporeal  unguent.  (2)  That 
he  affirmed  the  influential  alliciency  of  a  magnetick  body  to 
be  derived  to  its  appropriate  object,  through  a  medium  or 
vehicle,  as  light  is  deradiated  from  the  globe  of  the  Sun. 
(3)  That  (uch  fpiritual  qualities  are ,  by  the  mediation  of  a 
€crt2i\n  fenfation  of  the  univerfal  or  mundane  fpir it  (the  grand 
and  fole  caufant  of  zWfympathy)  tranfmitted  to  a  remote  and 
determinate  object.  This  Archem  or  univerfal  Spirit  our  Di- 
vine interprets  to  be  fome  Cacodtmon,  fome  curfed genius,  but 
by  no  law,  that  I  underftand,  except  that  of  his  own  licenti- 
ous judgment ;  fince  in  real  verity,  it  is  a  more  pure  and  vital 
breath  of  Heaven,  a  Spirit  which  comprehends  and  cherifhes 
within  it  felf  the  Sun,  and  all  the  herd  of  lefler  Stars,a  minde 
or  intelligence  which  dirTufed  through  all  the  limbs  or  parts 
of  this  great  Animal,  the  World,  doth  inform  and  regulate 
the  whole ;  and  fo  by  a  certain  commerce,  communion,  and 
confpiracy  of  otherwife-difcordant  parts,  and  an  harmonious 
marriage  of  the  diftinct  virtues  of  fingle  effences,  doth  order 
and  govern  the  vaft  engine  of  the  Univerfe,  according  to  the 

unanimous 


Cure  of  Wounds.  ^ 

unanimous  confent  of  all,  who  have  read  and  commented 

on  the  true  Hiftory  of  Nature.   To  example,  the  Solijfequout        70. 

flowers  fenfibly  obferve  the  travel  of  the  Sun :    and  the  Sea 

conforms  to  either  Luneftice,  and  fwells  her  obfequious  tides 

high  in  the  full,  but  (hrinks  them  low  again  in  the  Wane  of 

the  Moon.    In  fum  ;  all  Creatures  by  their  life,  (let  us,  the 

maiter-piece ,    and  abridgment  of  all ,   do  homage  to  the 

Majefty  of  that  King,  to  whom  all  things  live)  efTence, 

exigence  andfenfation  vifibly  atteft  the  majefty ,  liberality , 

and  prefence  of  the  great  Creator.     For  which  consideration, 

our  Divine  is  defervedly  to  be  checked,  in  that  he  hath,  with 

infurferable  audacity ,    thrown  rebukes  at  our  Phyfician  \ 

whom  yet  heunderitood  not,writing  in  a  philofophical  ltile. 

For  fuch  a  piece  of  difficulty  was  it  to  obferve  a  mean  in  all 

things. 

You  enquire  of  us  what  can  be  attracted  from  the  body 
of  the  wounded  party  ?  and  how  any  attraction  can  be  per- 
formed by  the  abfent  Vnvuent  ?   But  in  troth  I  might,  with- 
out injury  to  themodeit  rules  of  difputation,  return,  that 
when  your  felf  (hall  fully  refolveus,  for  what  reafon  the 
Loadftone  doth  attract  iron,  and  convert  it  felf  to  the  Pole ; 
then  (hall  I  alfo  fatisfie  you,  how  and  by  what  means  Mumy 
can,  by  the  mediate  efficiency  of  Mumy,  work  a  cure  upon 
another  Mumy,  which  it  hath  touched  upon :  but  in  regard 
we  have  fubftituted  our  felves  to  relieve  the  infufficiency  of 
Goclenint  in  this  particular  ab(trufity,we  (hall,in  the  fequence 
of  our  difcourfe,    by  a  didactical  or  fcientifical  Analogifm 
*  demonltrate  unto  you,  by  what  means  the  Magnetical  at-  *  Ratio  qua  ah 
traction  of  the  Vngttent  is  performed ,  if  at  leaft  I  (hall  to  «"*&»«  ni  ob- 
fatisfaction  inform  you,  what  can  be  by  the  Vngttent  attracted  feHr*j*8ttt'»- 
from  the  Wound.   We  are  to  obferve  therefore,  that  in  z^tioarMt'iofit' 
Wound,  there  fucceeds  not  onely  a  bare  rotation  of  continuity,  comparat'wie  & 
or  Mfunion  of  the  part  •   but  alio  that  there  is  an  exotickor  praceptbTie  cau- 
forain  quality ',  whereby  the  lips  of  the  Wound  being  enraged  *trttm  cfficl€ntim 
and  provoked  to  a  certain  excandefcence,  by  and  by  grow  tu-  dZe^taGden' 
mid  and  apoftemate,  yea,  the  whole  body  from  thence  be-  in  lib.  ad  rfaa- 
comes  afflicted  with  Fevers,  and  a  grievous  fyndrome  or  con-  fjbulum. 
cu.rfe  of  dangerous  Jymvtmcs ;  for  thus  an  £r.  whole  (hell        7 1. 

N  "  is 


4$  of  the  Magnetic k 

is  but  flenderly  crackt,  foon  putrefies  and  turns  adle  ,  when 
otherwife  it  might  have  been  a  long  time  conferved.  Now 
this  extrant om  and  peregrine  quality  the  Armary  Vnguent  im- 
mediately fucks  out  of  the  Wound,  whereupon  chelipsof 
the  Wound,  being  at  length  opprefTed  and  impeded  by  no 
Accident,  are  delivered  from  all  pain  and  fickly  situation  of 
fpirits,  andfuddenly  haften  to  accretion,incarnation,and  con- 
folidation.  Nature  her  felf  is  the  fole  Chiron,  that  by  the 
Sovereign  balfam  of  the  vital  blood  doth  reunite  the  fevered 
parts,  and  foder  up  the  incontiguity :  the  Phyjician  is  onely 
her  fervant  to  be  aflifhnt  to  her  in  the  remove  of  thofe  im- 
pediments, which  otherwife  might  oppofe  and  infringe  the 
power  of  her  action  :  nor  does  the  Medicine  deferve  the  at- 
tribute of  Sarcotical,  or  by  its  own  virtue  regenerate  flefh  in 
a  Wound,  but  then  to  full  fatisfaction  of  our  hopes  executes 
the  commiflion  of  its  faculty,  when  it  hath  removed  thofe 
accidental  remoraes  that  did  retard  and  hinder  the  operation 
of  Nature  :  all  which  impediments  the  Armary  Vnguent,  up- 
on its  own  fingle  flock  of  power,  doth  fecurely  and  effectual- 
ly take  off  and  banifh. 

Your  rejoynder  will  be,  that  the  Armary  Unguent,  in  pro- 
bability of  reafon,  ought  not  to  exhauft  the  forementioned 
quality  ,  rather  then  the  natural  vigor  of  the  body,  and 
ftrength  of  the  veins :  and  that  the  blood,  fince  it  continues 
uncoriupt  in  the  Unguent,  ought  to  procure  health,  and  not 
any  indifpofition,  to  the  wounded  party  :  according  to  the 
•example  of  the  Car  line  Thiftlc  above  mentioned.  I  refpond, 
-that  there  is  a  plurality  and  variety  of  Mignetifms :  for 
fomc  attract  Iron,  fome  Straws,  fomeLcad,  others  Flefh,  the 
jpurulent  effluxion  of  Wounds,  &c.  and  the  Magnetick  en- 
dowment of  fome  confifls  onely  in  this,  that  they  can  onely 
extract  the  peftilential  Atomes  from  the  centrals  of  an  in- 
fected body,  &c.  Yea,  if  you  fhall  annex  the  /anation  in  our 
Unguent  to  your  own  Argument,  your  own  weapon  will 
wound  you. 

Por  from  thence,  that  the  genuine  effect  of  the  Unguent  is 
to  cure  perfectly,  fpeedily  without  pain,  without  colt,  dan- 
ger, and  decay  of  ftrength  :  Hence,  I  fay,  it  reiults  a  manifeft 

truth? 


Citrtrf  Wwnds.  4? 

truth,  that  the  Magnetkal  virtue  of  the  Unguent  is  (imply 
natural,  and  proceeds  from  God,  and  not  from  Satan.  The 
reafon  thus ;  if  Satan  did  cooperate  to  thtsCure  (according 
to  your  affertion)  the  cure  would  of  neCeflity  beimperfec\ 
attended  with  great  amiflion  of  ftrength,an  univerfai  languor 
and  enervation  of  tlie  body,  manifeft  hazard  of  life,  a  diffi-  7 s. 
ctl,  and  at  beft  a  tedious  convalefcence,  an  alienation  of  the 
minde,  abefion  of  fome  more  noble  faculty,  andfuccefsof 
fome  notable  misfortune.  All  which  events  3s  they  are  ever 
annexed  to  Diabolical  cures :  fo  are  they  never  obferved  to 
follow  upon  a  cure  wrought  by  our  Unguent.  Our  appeal 
lies  to  Experience,  for  fo  many  as  ever  received  a  cure  by  the 
Unguent  will  freely  give  in  their  teftimony  on  our  fide.  Now 
Satan  is  no  Oracle  tha4T  delivers  truths,  no  Counfellor  to 
good,unlefs  with  defign  to  inllnuate  hisdelufions  the  fmooth- 
er,  and  cannot  but  betray  himfelf  by  this,  that  he  never 
long  continues  in  the  truth,  he  fo  fpecioufly  pretended  :  for 
always,  when  he  has  been  an  inftrument  of  any  good,  con- 
fhnt  to  the  hoftility  of  his  nature,  he  in  the  clofe  tempers 
his  favor  with  a  larger  allay  of  evil.  And  introth  the  fame 
method  would  he  according  tothecuftom  of  his  malicious 
friendftiip,  have  obferved  in  the  Unguent,  had  he  been  in- 
terefTed  as  an  Author  or  Fautor  ,  either  as  Principall  or  Ac 
ceftory  :  at  leaft  this  remedy  .would  then  have  failed  and  be-  73. 
come  evirate,  when  the  wounded  patient  is  refcued  from  the 
jaws  of  death,  and  reprieved  from  the  Gates  of  Hell,  who 
otherwife,  tainted  with  the  mortal  contagion  of  fin,  would 
by  reafon  of  his  dangerous  wound  have  poured  forth  his 
foul  together  with  his  blood ;  unlefs  perchance  you  feek  to 
evade  by  faying,  that  Satan  in  that  Crijis,  that  puntlilio  of 
danger,  furfered  a  change  of  his  cruelty  into  compafsion,  de- 
vefted  himfelf  of  his  ellential  and  inveterate  enmity,  and  put 
on  the  good  Samaritan,  nay,  fell  not  onely  to  commiferate 
but  even  drefs  the  wounds  of  humanity  ;  and  that  he  hath  ac- 
quired fome  intereft,  fome  jurifdiclion  over  the  wounded 
patient,  himfelf  leaves  doubtful  and  open  to  difpute,  in  that 
he  preferves  him  by  the  Magnetical  Unguent,  whom  he  had 
rather  fhould  perifh,     It  may  be  that  Satan  is  in  your  efteem 

N  2  now 


48  Of  the  Magnetick 

now  held  a  Arid  and  pun&ual  obferver  of  his  word  and 
bargain,  and  no  longer  a  turncoate,  fraudulent  diflembler 
and  perjured  impoftor.  Befides,  we  pofitively  deny,  that  your 
fftppofition  can  carry  weight  in  the  ballance  of  truth,  that  the 
blood  once  extravenated  continues  uncorrupt,  and  conferves 
its  intereft  of  vitality ;  but  rather  that  it  is  deprived  of  all 
community ,  and  participation  of  life ,  and  immediately 
undergoes  fome  degree  of  corruption  ;  but  that  it  obtains 
onely  a  Mumial  vitality.  To  this  purpofe  conduces  the  cor- 
rupted, and  yet  magnetical  blood  in  an  Eg.  Wherefore  I  pafs 
by  the  abfurdity  of  your  ob]tBion,  fince  it  hath  been  fo  bold 
as  to  wreft  the  Magnet  of  the  Unguent  to  another  intention, 
then  that  which  the  wife  bounty  of  Godt  in  the  primitive 
decree  of  his  counfel,  ordained  it  unto. 


The 


Cure  of  Wounds,  4£ 

The  To/ithe  ^eafons  of  Magnetifm  more  neerly 
brought  home  to  our  knowkdg}  by  Metaphyseal  and 
Magical  principles. 

Opportunity  now  invites  us  to  difcover  the  grand  and  ap- 
proximate caufe  of  Magnetifm  in  the  Vnguent :  Firft,  by 
the  confent  of  myftical  Divines ,  we  divide  man  into  the  e x~ 
sternal,  and  internal  man,  affigning  to  each  diftinft  part  the 
powers  of  a  certain  minde,  or  informative  principle  •  for  in 
this  disjunctive  acception,  there  is  a  will  competent  to  fiejb  74. 
and  blood,  which  properly  is  neither  the  will  of  man,  nor  the 
•will  oi  God -r  and  our  heavenly  Father  reveals  fome  things  to 
the  inward  man,  and  fome  things  are  revealed  by  fiejh  and 
(flood,  that  is,  the  outward  man,  in  the  fingle  and  abftraded 
relation  of  Animal.  For  how  can  the  adoration  of  idols^ 
envy,  and  other  fuch  branches  arifingfrom  the  root  of  Cok- 
cupifcence,  be  juftly  lifted  amongfr  the  works  of  the  flefli 
(fince  they  confift  onely  in  the  imagination)  if  to  the  flefh  alfo 
there  did  not  peculiarly  belong  an  Imaginative  faculty,  and 
an  elecTive  will  ? 

Again,  that  there  are  miraculous  Ecflaftes  competent  to 
the  inward  man,  is  a  tenet  true  beyond  the  difpute  or  hxfita- 
tion  of  a  Sceptick.  And  that  there  are  alfo  Ecft-aftes  in  the 
outward  man,  is  unqueftionable  by  the  moll  impudent  infide- 
lity :  Yea  Martin  Delrio,  an  Elder  of  the  Society  of  fefu,  in 
his  Magical  Difcjuijitions  brings  in  a  certain  youth,in  theCity 
Infulis,  rapt  with  fo  intenfe  and  violent  cogitation,and  ardent  7  i£ 
defire  to  fee  his  mother,  that  as  if  tranfported  by  an  high 
Ecflafie,  he  faw  her  many  leagues  diftant,  and  returning  again 
to  himfelf  perfectly  remembred  all  things  his  fancy  met  with 
in  this  more-then-i>j[/£<*/?  Vifien,  and  reported  many  fignes  to 
atteft  his  real  and  prefential  vifit  of  his  mother. 

Many  fuch  examples  occur  to  our  quotidian  obfervance,. 
which  in  conformity  to  our  purpofe  of  brevity  we  with  in- 
duftry  omit.   But  that  this  defire  did  arife  from  the  outward. 

N  3  maD? 


_— . 


50  Oftbt  Magnet  ick 

man,  namely,  from  flefh  and  blood,  is  mod  certain ;  for 
otherwife  the  foul  once  difliged  and  enfranchifed  from  the 
body,  can  never,  unlefs,  by  miracle,  be  again  reunited  toir. 

76.  Therefore  in  the  blood  there  dwells  a, certain  Ecflatkal power , 
which,  if  at  any  time  it  (ball  be  excited  by  an  earned  and 
ardent  de(ire,is  able  to  tranfport  and  on  the  immaterial  wings 
of  fancy  waft  the  fpirit  of  the  outward  man  to  fome  deter- 
minate object  though  at  vafr  difhnce  removed  •  but  this  Ec- 
ftatical  faculty  lies  dormant  in  the  outward  man,as  inpotentia, 
hi  hability ;  nor  is  it  deduced  into  act,  unlefs  firft  rouzed  and 
excited  by  the  imagination  accenfed  and  exalted  by  fervent  dc- 
fire,  or  fome  other  art  equivalent  to  affection. 

77.  Moreover,  when  the  blood  has  undergone  fome  gradual 
corruption,  then  and  not  till  then  are  all  the  powers  of  ir, 
which  before  lay  lock'c  up  inpotentia,  aniflept  in  an  unadive 
hability,  awakened  and  called  forth  to  action,  without  any 
previous  excitation  of  the  imagination :  For  by  corruption 
of  the  grain,  the  feminal  virtue,  otherwife  drowfie,  torpent 

7%.  and  fieri  1,  fprings  forth  into  the  act  of  fertility.  Forfincethe 
effences  of  things,  and  their  principles  of  vitality  know  no 
obedience  to  the  tyranny  of  corruption,  by  the  diflfolution  of 
the  inferior  harmony,  the  feparation  of  their  corporal  Hete- 
rogeneities, they  awake  into  a  vigorous  activity,  and  freely 

79.  execute  the  commiflion  of  their  faculties.  And  from  hence  is 
k,  that  every  occult  propriety,  the  compage  of  rheir  bodies  be- 
ing,by  certain  previous  digejiions  (which  we  call  putrefactions) 
once  dilTolved,  as  it  were  emancipated  from  the  bondage  of 
corporeity,  comes  forth  free,  expedite,  and  ready  for  action. 
Wherefore  when  the  Wound,  by  the  ingreflion  of  the  offen- 

80.  iiveaer,  hath  admitted  an  adverfe  and  extraneous  quality , 
from  whence  the  Wood  immediately  actuates  and  ferments  in 
the  lips  of  the  Wound,  and  otherwife  is  converted  into  a 
purulent  matter;  it  happens  that  the  blood  in  the  Wound 
freflbly  made,  doth,  by  reafon  of  this  exoticl^  quality,  fuffer 
fome  degree  of  putrefaction  (which  blood  then  received  upon 
the  weapon,  is  empiaftered  with- the  Magnetick  Unguent)  by 
the  mediation  of  which  gradual  putrefaction,  the  Ecfiatick^ 
power  of  the  blood,  formerly  latent  in  potential  is  drawn  into 


Cure  of  Wounds.  5 1 

aft,  which  bccaufe  it  holds  a  commerce  and  fecret  friendfhip 
with  that  body,  from  whence  it  was  effluxed,  by  relation  of 
its  hidden  ecftafie  •  hence  is  it  that  this  blood  conftantly  carries 
•an  individual  refpecl  and  determinate  amity  to  the  other 
Mood  yet  running  in  the  veins  of  the  fame  body.  For  then  is 
it,  I  fay,  that  the  Magnet  fets  it  felf  a  work  in  the  Unguent; 
and  by  the  concurrence  and  mediation  of  the  Ecftatick  power 
(for  fo  I  chriften  this  quality,  in  defed  of  a  m-ore  convenient 
Epithite)  fucks  out  the  noxious  tintlure  frorn  the  lips  of  the 
Wound,  and  at  length  by  the  mumial,  balfamical  and  at- 
tractive virtue  acquired  in  the  Unguent,  the  Magnetifm  is 
confummate,  and  the  Cure  perfected. 

Lo  now  you  have  the  true  and  pofitive  reafon  of  the  Natu-  8-r 
ral  Magnetifm  in  theUnguent5deduced  from  Natural  Magick  • 
to  which  the  Sonl  of  Reafon ,  and  Light  of  Truth  is  pleafed  to 
a  (Tent,  in  that  fentence,  Where  the  treafure  />,  there  the  heart  is 
alfo  :  For  if  the  treafure  be  in  Heaven,then  the  heart,  that  is, 
the  fpirit  of  the  internal  man  is  fixed  upon  God,  who  is  the 
true  Paradife,  who  onely  is  the  life  of  eternal  life.  But  if  the. 
treafure  be  laid  lip  in  tranfitory  and  fading  things  s  then  alfo 
is  the  heart  and  fpirit  of  the  outward  man  chained  to  things 
that  mu ft  perifh  and  confefs  their  duft.  Nor  is  tnere  caufe 
why  you  fhould  infer  any  mjfiical  fignif  cation,  or  fecond  in- 
tention by  underftanding  not  the  Jpirit,  but  the  cogitation  and  §2,. 
naked  ehfire,  for  the  heart :  for  that  would  found  frivolous 
and  abfurd,  that  where-ever  a  man  fhould  place  his  treafure, 
in  his  cogitation,  there  alfo  would  his  cogitation  be  placed  : 
and  Truth  it  felf  interprets  this  prefent  Text  literally  ^  acd 
Without  enfolding  any  myfrery  or  deuterofcopy  ;  and  by  an 
example  annexed  manifeftly  (hews  the  real  and  local  prefence 
of  the  Eagles  with  the  Carcafe.  And  inthis  fignification 
alfo  the  fpirit  of  the  internal  man  is  faid  to  be  locally  in  the 
Kingdom  of  God  (which  is  very  God  himfelf)  within  us: 
tind  the  heart  or  fpirit  of  the  external  man  locally  dwells 
about  its  treafure.  What  wonder,  that  the  aftral fpirits  8fc. 
of  flefhly  minded  men  fhould,  long  after  their  funerals , 
appear  wandring  about  fuch  places,  as  their  treafures  are 
hidden  in?  by  which  apparitions  the  whole  NeBroms.ncy 


52  of  the  MAgnttick 

*  Ncftrmmtia*  of  the  Antients  emancipated  itfelf.  I  fay  therefore,  that  the 
tfjpeocsqiu.  externai  man  is  fingly  an  Animal  governed  by  the  reafon  and 

gmd^Smm  wil1  of  the  blood  :  blU  in  the  interim>  not  barely  an  Animal^ 
manes,  vclpoti-  but  alfo  the  image  of  God.  Let  Logicians  therefore  hence  ob- 
us  damnes  fub  ferve ,  how  defectively  and  improperly  they  ufe  to  define  man 
wum .(peck Ur- fr0m  his  power  of  ratiocination.  But  of  this  fubject  more 
ZnSr'm'  largely elfewhere*. 

cxcitatTad*rc-  ^or  wmcn  confideration,  I  (hall  in  this  place  opportunely 
velanda  avcana  infert  the  Magnetifm  of  Eagles  to  Carcafes  newly  flain  :  for 
ex  ono  cvocan-  Fowls  of  the  aer  are  not  endowed  with  fo  much  acutenefs  of 
tur:  ut  tan;  ore 't\itfcnfeof  fme/ling,  that  by  the  noftril  they  can  receive  an 
tiVonmiilTd  mvn:ation  m  Itab>  to  come  and  ^ea^  on  ^ead  bodies  in  Afri- 
Lucanum.        ca'   F°r  neither  can  an  Odor  be  dirTufed  to  fo  vaft  a  circum- 

*  in  tradatu  ferential  diftance,  fince  both  the  great  latitude  of  the  Sea 
ejmde  Vcnaii-  interpofed  muft  of  neceflity  hinder,  and  the  elemental  pro- 
•enc  Scicntiarum.  priety  of  the  Odor,  fubjeft  to  diminution  and  impairment  in 

fo  long  a  trad  of  aer,  forbid  fo  huge  an  expanfion  of  the 
Atomes  ftreaming  from  the  odorible  Body  ;  nor  is  there  any 
ground  whereon  to  build  your  conception,  that  birds  can  by 
their  fight  difcover  carcafes  at  fo  large  diftance,  efpecially 
when  they  lie  Southward,  behindefome  high  Mountain.  But 
what  need  is  there  for  us,  by  the  tedious  force  of  words,  to 
inculcate  the  Magnetifm  of  Fowl ;  fince  God  himfelf,  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  ofPhilofophy,  hath  in  exprefs  terms  decreed 
the  procefs  of  intercourfe  or  commerce  betwixt  the  heart  and 
its  treafure,  to  be  the  fame  with  that  betwixt  Eagles  and  their 
prey  of  dead  bodies :  and  fo  on  the  contrary,  interchange- 
ably ?  For  if  Eagles  were  carried  on  to  their  prey  the  Car- 
?4.  cafes,  by  the  fame  incitement  of  appetite,  whereby  all  Qua- 
druped Animals  are  goaded  on  to  their  paftures,  afluredly  he 
would  have  faid  in  a  word,  that  Animals  are  directed  and 
congregated  to  their  food  by  the  fame  motive,  that  the  heart 
of  a  man  fallies  forth  and  invades  its  treafure.  Which  would 
contain  a  molt  grofs  falfity  :  for  the  heart  of  man  progrefTeth 
not  to  its  treafure,  with  defign  to  devour  it,  and  fate  it  felf 
therewith,  as  Animals  are  by  the  fwinge  of  appetite  rapt  ©n 
to  their  food.  And  therefore  the  comparifon  betwixt  the 
heart  of  man  and  the  Eagle  holds  not  good  in  the  final  caufe 

or 


Cure  of  Wounds.  1 3 


©rattractive,for  which  they  tend  to  defire  of  fruition  :  but  in 
the  manner  and  proceffe  of  tendency,  namely  that  they  are  e- 
qually  invited,allected,  &  carried  on  by  Magnetifm  really  and 
locally  to  their  determinate  objects.  Wherfore  the  fpirit  and  85. 
willofthebJoud  erTufedout  of  the  wound  adhering  to  the 
weapon,  and  together  with  it  embalmed  in  the  Vnguent ,  in- 
ftantly  tend  and  egiefle  towards  their  peculiar  treafure ,  the 
refidue  of  bloud  yet  running  in  its  proper  confervatory,  the 
veines,  and  enjoying  a  community  of  life  with  the  inward 
man.  Bnt  the  Pen  of  Divinity  in  a  peculiar  Elogy  writes  that 
the  Eagle  is  allured  to  the  Carcafes  of  thefiaine  :  becaufe  he 
receives  his  fummons  and  invitation  from  the  originary ,  im- 
planted, and  mumiall  fpirit  of  the  carcafe ;  but  not  from  a- 
ny  odour  exhaling  from  the  body  under  the  arreft  of  putrefa- 
ction. For  this  Amm.1I ,  in  ailimilation  ,  appropriates  to  him- 
felfe  onely  this  mumiall  Spirit  :  and  hence  is  it  in  Sacred 
Writ  faid  of  the  Eagle  ,  My  youth  Jhall  be  renewed  like  an  Ea- 
gle. In  regard  the  renovation  of  its  youth  proceeds  not  from 
the  bare  eating  thtflejh  of  a  carcafe ,  but  from  an  Elixir 
orefTentiall  extract  of  the  fpiritbalfamicall  ^xqu\(\te\y  depu- 
rated and  refined  by  a  certaine  lingular  digeftion  ,  or  corre- 
ctive faculty  proper  only  to  this  Fowle :  for  otherwife  Dogs, 
Ravens  and  Pies,  would  alfo  receive  an  equall  benefit  of  reju- 
venefcence ;  which  experience  afiures  us  to  be  falfe. 

You  will  fay,  we  have  travelled  far  indeed  to  fetch  home  a 
reafon  tofupportandilluftrate  our  Alagnetifme.  But  what 
will  you  infer  hereupon  ?  if  you  confefle  that  what  feems 
far  remote  from  the  capacity  of  your  intelligence,  mult  alfo 
to  you  feem  far  fetched ;  truly  the  book  of  Genefis  teacheth 
us,  that  the  Soule  of  every  living  creature  dwels  in  the  bloud  of 
it,  as  in  its  proper  manfion.  For  in  the  bloud  there  inhabite 
certaine  noble  and  vital  powers ,  which,  as  if  they  were  en~ 
dowed  with  animation,  cry  loud  to  heaven  for  revenge ,  yea 
from  the  hands  of  Judges  here  below,  demand  vindictive  ju- 
ftice  to  be  done  upon.the  homicide:  which  fince  they  cannot  be 
denyed  to  be  naturall  Citizens  of  the  blood ,  I  fee  no  reafon, 
why  any  man  fliould  reject  the  magnetifm  of  the  bloud  ,  and 
unjuftly  reckon  its  rare  &  admirable  effects  among  the  ridicu^ 

O  Ions 


5>4  Of  the  Mdgnttick 

lous  acts  offatanj  wil  fay  this  further,that  men  which  walk  in 
their  flecp,do  by  the  conduct  of  no  other  A<fotor  or  guide,then 
■  that  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Bloud,  that  is  of  the  outward  man ^ 
walk  up  and  downe,  clime  wals  and  precipices,  and  performe 
many  other  actions  difficult  and  impollible  to  men  awake :  I 
fay,  by  a  magical/  virtue  naturall  to  the  outward  matt.  That 
Saint  Ambrofe  was  vifiblj  prefent  at  the  exfequies  of  Saint 
ik£*m"»,though  corf  orally  at  home  in  his  owne  Chamber  ma- 
ny Leagues  diftant.  Yet  he  was  vifibly  prefent  at  the  celebra- 
tion of  his  holy  brothers  funerall ,  in  the  viftble  fpirit  of  the 
cxteriour  manendi  no  otherwife  :  for  when  many  holy  Fathers 
of  the  Church  have  feenthe  tranfaction  of  many  fecret  and 
diftant  things,  this  hath  been  performed  without  the  circum- 
fcription  of  time  and  place,in  that  ecftaf)  which  is  only  of,  the 
internal/ man,  by  the  fuperiour  powers  of  the  foule ,  collected 
and  twifted  into  unity,  and  by  an  intelletluall  vifion ,  but  not 
by  a  vifible  pre  fence.  For  otherwife  the  foule  is  never  divorced 
from  the  body,unlefs  in  earned  once  and  ever,and  then  is  not 
capable  of  a  reunion  until  the  refurrection:  which  reconnexi- 
on  notwithstanding  is  otherwife  familiar  and  naturall  to  the 
fpirit  of  the  outward  ;»*  »,divorced  pro  tempore  in  fome  ecflafy. 
%6.  In  fo  great  a  Paradox  it  can  hardly  fuffice  to  erect  a  firme 

building  of  belief  upon  one  (ingle  pillar  of  reafon  :  wherefore 
we  conceive  it  our  duty,  to  frame  a  fecond  bafis  for  the  more 
fubftantiall  fupportment  of  our  doctrine  of  Afagnetifme,  and 
to  advance  to  the  explanation  of  that  myfterious  caufe,  by 
which  this  Magneticall  alliciency  is  performed  alfo  betwixt 
bodies  devoid  of  animation ,  not  by  any  Animall,  butacer- 
taine  Naturall  fenfafion.  Which  that  we  may  more  ferioufly 
enterprife,  and  folidly  performe ,  we  are  obliged  by  way  of 
preparation  to  premife  an  enquiry ,  what  Satan  can  of  his 
own  power  contribute  to,  and  by  what  meanes  he  can  coope- 
perate  in  the  meerly  nefarious  and  impious  actions  oi  witches 
and  Concur  at  or  s  \  for  from  hence  will  it  clearly  appear,  to 
what  particular  and  juft  caufe,  whether  Naturall  or  Diabo- 
lically every  effect  arifing  from  abftrufe  originals,  ought  pro- 
perly to  be  afcribed.  And  finally,  what  kinde  of  Jpirituall 
power  that  is,  which  tends  to  and  arrives  at  an  object  remo- 
ved 


Cure  of  Wounds,  55 

ved  at  large  diftance :  or  what  is  the  action,  paffion,  and 
velitation  or  reactive  encounter  betwixt  Natnrall  Spirits:  or 
wherein  confifts  the  fuperiority  and  prerogative  of  man,  above 
other  inferiour  Creatures :  and  by  confequence ,  why  our 
XJnguent  compounded  of  human  Mumies,  {hould  alfo  cure 
the  wounds  of  horfes.  I  (hall  explain  the  matter  by  an  ex- 
ample. 

Let  us  therefore  grant  a  -witch,  who  can  vigoroufly  torment  87; 
an  abfent  man  by  an  image  of  wax,  by  imprecation,  incantati- 
on, or  onely  by  fome  previous  touch  (  for  in  this  place  we 
have  nothing  to  doe  with  Feneficious  Witches,  properly  called 
Sorcerers,  in  regard  they  execute  their  malice,  and  deftroy 
onely  by  poyfon,  which  eve/y  common  Seplafiarie  and  petty 
Apothecary  can  imitate  )  that  this  action  is  Diabolicall,  no 
man  will  doubt.  However  it  pleafeth  us  to  distinguish,  how 
much  Satin,  and  how  much  the  mtchcAU  contribute  to  this 
mifchiefc. 

Thefirfi  Suppofxtion. 
Firft,  you  fliall  take  notice  that  Satan  is  the  fworne  and 
irreconcileable  enemy  of  mankinde,  and  fo  accounted  by  all, 
unleflfe  any  pleafe  to  efteem  him  a  friend  :  and  therefore  that 
he  doth  molt  readily,  without  any  the  leaft  hxfitancy  or  neg- 
ligence, attempt  and  procure  what  mifchief  foever  lies  within 
the  reach  of  his  malice  or  power  againft  us. 

The  fecondfttppojltion. 
Next  you  {hall  obferve,  that  although  he  be  a  mortall  ad-- 
verfary  to  Witches  alfo,  in  fo  much  as  'tis  cfTentiall  to  him  to 
maintain  a  mod  definitive  hoftility  againft  all  the  Sons  of 
^idam  :  yet  in  refpect  they  are  his  confeft  flaves  ,  and  fworn 
Subjects  of  his  own  black  Kingdome,  he  never,unleffe  againft 
his  will,  and  by  compulsion  ,  detects  them,  never  betrays 
them  into  the  hands  of  the  Mugiftrate,nor  expofes  them  to  the 
fcorne  and  reproches  of  other  pcrfons ;  and  that  for  three 
reafons.  (1)  Since  he  is  the  Grand-father  of  pride,  he  very 
well  knowes,  that  by  the  detection  of  his  favorites  there  is 
much  detracted  from  his  reputation,  authority  and  dominion. 
(2)Sincehei?aninfatiateAT/w/W,  an  implacable  perfccutror 

O2.  of. 


56*  Of  the  Magnetick 

— ■ —  —  - 

of  foules,  he  is  not  ignorant,  that  by  the  puniftiment.and 
flames,  which  juftice  inflicts  upon  his  Zanies,many  other  men, 
elfe  willing  and  prompt  to  lift  themfelves  in  his  regiment, 
and  fall  under  his  jurifdidion ,  are  difcouraged,  deterred, 
and  -quite  averted.  (3)  Becaufe  he  often  oblerves  many  a 
Witch,  whom  with  an  obtorfion  or  wrefting  round  of  her 
neck,  and  fecret  (topping  of  her  breath  he  could  heartjly  wifli 
to  deftroy,  converted  by  her  punifhment,  to  become  an  Apo- 
ftate  from  him,  and  repenting  at  fight  of  the  flames,  and  by 
this  meanes  fnatched  out  of  his  clutches. 

From  the  former  of  our  propofitions  I  conclude.that  Satan, 
if  he  were  able  fingly  by  his  own  power  to  deftroy  man , 
whom  the  guilt  of  mortallfinne  hath  made  obnoxious  to  the 
tyranny  of  death,  would  upon  no  motive  whatever  be  induced 
to  fufpend  and  procraftinate  the  execution  or  his  deftruclive 
malice  :  but  he  doth  not,  therefore  he  cannot  deftroy  him. 
But  yet  the  witch  doth  very  frequently  murder  man;  and 
hence  alfo  it  is  clear,  that  the  witch  hath  a  power  to  deftroy 
him,  no  otherwife  then  an  aflajfine  hath  a  power,at  the  liberty 
of  his  own  will,  to  cut  the  throat  of  him  that  is  fallen  into 
his  hands :  and  therefore  in  this  deteftable  adk>n  there  is  a 
certain  power  peculiarly  belonging  to  the  Witch,  which  de- 
pends not  upon  Satan  j  and  by  eonfequence  Satan  is  not  the 
principal!  efficient  and  grand  executor  of  the  homicide;  for 
otherwife,  if  he  were  the  prime  executor,  he  could  in  no  re- 
fpecl  ftand  in  need  of  the  Witch  for  a  Coadjutrix  and  AJfiftanf, 
but  would  ere  this  time,  by  his  own  (ingle  power,  have  cut 
off  and  fwept  into  the  grave  the  greateft  part  of  mankinde. 
Moft  miferable  and  deplorable  indeed  were  the  condition  of 
the  pofterity  of  Adam,  which  fhould  lie  in  fubjeclion  to  fo 
horrid  a  tyranny,  and  ftand  obnoxious  to  the  fate  of  his  ar- 
bitrary cruelty  :  but  we  have  the  Almighty  Preferver  of  men, 
more  faithfull  in  his  mercies  towards  us  then  to  fubjed  the 
workes  of  his  own  hands  to  the  arbitrary  dominion  of  Satan* 
%°-  Therefore  in  this  impious  act  there  is  a  certaine  power  clearly 
peculiar,  and  naturall  to  the  Witch,  which  proceeds  not  from 
Satan. 

Moreover,what  the  nature,extent,  and  quality  of  this  Mt- 

qicall 


Cure  of  Wounds.  57 

gicall  (yet  naturali)  power  of  the  witch  may  be,  we  muft  ex- 
actly explore  and  gravely  confider.   It  ismanifeft  in  the  firft 
place,  that  it  is  not  any  Corporeal!  ftrength  of  the  mafculine 
iex ;   for  there  concurres  not  any  forcible  attraction  of  the 
members  of  the  body,  and  witches  are  for  the  moft  part  old, 
feeble  and  impotent  women .  Wherefore  of  necefltty  to  the 
production  of  this  notable  mifchiefe  there  mud  concurre  fome 
other  power,  of  farre  more  vigour  and  activity   then  the 
ftrength  of  the  body,  and  yet  purely  naturali  to  man.   This 
power  therefore  mu ft  be  ambufcadoed  in  that  part,  whereia         ^p. 
we  moft  nearly  refemble  the  Image  of  God.  And  although  all 
pieces  of  the  hexameron  Creation  doe  in  fome  relation  or 
other  reprxfent  that  moft  facred  and  venerable  image  of  the 
Creator-,  yet  in  regard  man  doth  moft  elegantly ,moft  properly 
and  moft  exactly  reflect  that  fhadow  of  Divinity,  therefore 
doth  the  image  of  God  fhine  more  tranfeendent  in  man,  and 
as  Lord  Paramount  beare  rule  and  exercife  dominion  over  the        Oo, 
reprafentative  Divinity  of  all  other  Creatures.  For  haply  by 
this  prerogative  all  created  Sublunaries  are  made  fubordinate 
to  his  royaltie,  and  proftituted  at  the  feet  of  his  Soveraign 
will.  Wherefore  if  God  execute  his  will,  and  produce  real!       nX 
effects  per  nutum,  intuitively,  and  by  the  fingle  efficacy  of  his 
word  :  then  man  alfo  to  make  good  his  title  of  being  the  true 
mirrour  or  repraefentative  of  the  Deity,  ought  to  enjoy  a 
power  of  doing  fome  actions  per  nutum.  For  neither  is  that 
new,  paradoxicall  or  troublefome  to  our  faith,  nor  peculiar 
onely  to  God  himfelf :  fince  Satan,  the  moft  vile  and  abject  of 
all  Creatures,  can  alfo  move  folid  and  ponderous  bodies  from 
place  to  place  at  pleafure,  onely  per  nutum  :  for  he  hath  no 
corporeall  organs,  no  extremities,  wherewith  to  touch,locally 
move,  or  aflume  any  new  body  to  himfelf.    No  lefte  there-        92. 
fore  ought  this  priviledge  to  belong  to  the  inward  man,  in  his 
(pirituall  capacity;  if  we  allow  him  to  beare  the  image  of  God, 
and  that  no  idle  and  unactiveone    If  we  name  this  faculty 
magical!,  and  this  appellation  found  harfti,  and  terrible  in  the 
eares  of  your  ignorance,  I  (hall  not  quarrel  with  you,  if  you 
pleafe  to  denominate  it  a  Jpirituall  vigour  or  energie  of  the 
inward  mamfor  wee  are  not  at  all  follicitous  about  names,but 

O  z  ever 


.1       I —  ■  --  '  ' 

-g  of  the  MAgmtick 


ever  with  as  direct  an  eye  of  reafon  as  I  can,  I  look  upon  the 
9j.        reality  of  the  thing  it  felf.  This  magic  all  power  therefore  na- 
turally refides  in  the  inward  man :  whether  by  this  title  you 
underftand  the  foule  or  vitall  fpirit  of  man,  is  now  indifferent 
to  us.-  fince  the  inward  man  doth  hold  a  certain  correfpon- 
dence  with  the  o/mrar^  in  all  things,  which  commerciall  in- 
flux, thriving  and  as  it  were  glowing  with  a  fervour  of  afti- 
vity'in  a  peculiar  manner,  is  an  appropriate  difpofition  and 
proportionate  propriety.   On  which  ground  it  is  neceffary, 
that  this  active  faculty  be  diffeminated  and  diffufed  through 
the  whole  compojitttm  of  man:  but  indeed  in  the  _/Wf,  more 
intenfe  and  vigorous,  and  in  flejh  and  bloody  far  more  remifle 
and  languidc 
e  c .  The  Vitall  Spirit  in  the  throne  of  flcjb  and  £/W,that  is  the 

outward  man,  fits  Viceroy  to  the  Settle,  and  acts  by  her  com- 
mifiion  :  and  is  the  fame  plaftick^Jpirit^which  in  the  feed  com- 
prehends, contrives,  and  models  the  whole  figure  of  man, 
that  Magnificent  ftructure,  limms  out  all  the  lineaments  and 
accurate  adumbration  of  the  parts,  and  underfhnds  the  pra> 
06.        deftinateendsofallits  delignes  and  undertakings:  which  as 
Prafident  and  guardian  accompanies  the  infant  from  the  firfl 
moment  of  its  conception,  to  the  lafTof  its  diflblution  :  and 
which  although  together  with  the  life  it  bid  adieu  to  the  body, 
yet  fome  little  remaines,  as  if  ftrongly  united  unto  and  con- 
fermentated  with  the  corporeall  mafTe,  for  a  while  fojourn  in 
a  Carcafe  extinct  by  violence.    But  out  of  a  dead  body,  whofe 
lamp  of  life  languished  and  went  out  of  its  owne  accord,  both 
the  implantate  and  influent  fpirit  depart  hand  in  hand  together. 
97.         For  which  reafon   Phyficians  diftinguifh  this  fpirit  into  the 
eripinarj^  implantare  and  inherent ,  or  Adnmi  ill^  and  the  in- 
finer,  t  or  acqnifite  vanishing  together  with  the  former  life: 
and  afcerwards  they  againe  dichotomize  or  fubdivide  the  in- 
flnxive  fpirit  into  the  natnrall,  vitall  and  animall'.  but  we 
in  this  notion  bind  them  all  up  together  in  this  one  tcrme,  the 
q  vitall  fpirit,  ox  inward  man.    Tht  Sotile  therefore,  by  eflence 

wholly  fpiritttatl,  could  by  no  meanes,  move,  inform,  and 
actuate  the  vitall Jpirit  (which  truely  carries  fomething  of 
corporeity  and  bulk)  much  lefTe excite  and  give  locomotion  to 

fieJk 


Cure  of  Wounds.  jp 


flefli  and  bloud;  unleflfe  fome  naturall,  yet  magic  all  and  fpiri- 
tttatt,  power  inherent  in  theyWf,  did  ftreame  down  from  the 
foute,  as  from  the  firfl:  motor,  upon  the fpirit ,  and  fo  defcend 
to  the  body.  I  befeech  you  by  what  way  could  the  corporeall 
Spirit  obey  and  execute  the  command  of  the  Soul ,  unlefife  it 
firft  receive  commiflion  and  ability  from  her  to  move  the  Spi- 
rit, and  afterwards  the  body  >  But  againit  this  Magicall  Ma- 
trix you  will  inftantly  object ,  that  indeed  there  is  fuch  a  na- 
turall  power,  but  her  wings  are  dipt ,  (he  is  retrained  and 
confined  within  the  walls  of  her  owne  tabernacle  ,  the  bodyy 
fo  that  (he  cannot  extend  her  authority  and  influence  beyond 
the  circumference  of  it;  and  therefore  although  we  give  her 
the  proud  name  of  Magic all,  yet  we  cannot  etcape  the  guilt 
ofwreftingand  abufively  applying  that  Epithite ,  fince  the 
true,  genuine,  and  fuperftitious  Magicall  power  defumes  not 
her  bafts  from  the  Soule ;  in  regard  the  Soul:  her  felf  is  devoyd 
of  all  ability  to  move  ,  alter ,  or  excite  any  the  lead  thing 
at  all,  without  her  own  orbe  of  activity  ,  the  body.  I  anfwer, 
that  this  Vigour  and  naturall  Magic  k^of  the  <SWf, which  acts 
extra  fe,  beyond  the  dimenfions  of  her  felfe ,  by  virtue  of  the 
image  of  God,  doth  now  lye  raked  up  and  obfeured  in  man.and 
being  impoveriftied  in  its  force  of  excitation ,  is  grown  un- 
active ,  fomnolent  and  ftupid,  ever  fince  the  prevarication  of 
Adam  (all  which  particulars  we  (hall  hereafter ,  in  conveni- 
ent place  and  order  common(trate)which  power ,  however  it 
be  charmed  into  a  lethargick  inactivity  by  the  opium  of  ori- 
ginall  fin,  and  drunk  with  the  narcoticall  fumes  of  concupi- 
scence, within  us :  yet  it  retaines  force  fufficient  to  performe 
all  its  requifite  offices  in  the  body.  This fcience  therefore  and 
Magicall  potver  in  man  ,  acting  only  per  tmtum  ,  intuitively,  *' 

grew  dormant  and  evirate ,  from  that  minute  the  Science  (or 
rather  nefcience  )  of  the  Aple  was  drunk  in :  and  while  this 
malignant  Counter-fcience  of  the  forbidden  fruit  ( that  is,  of 
fle(h  and  bloud  ,  of  the  outward  man ,  and  darkneffe)  growes 
up  and  flourifhes,  the  more  noble  Magical  power  -withers,  is 
ploughed  up  and  buryed  in  the  rubbifti  of  fenfuality.  But  in 
regard  ever  now  and  then  the  fcience  of  the  aple  is  fufpended 
and  chained  up  in  the  leaden  fetters  of  deep  :  hence  it  is  alfo, 

that 


60  Of  the  Magnetick 

that  fometimes  our  dreams  are  propheticall ,  and  that  often 
Godhimfelf  vouchfafethtomakea  neerer  approach  and  fa- 
miliar vifit  to  the  fons  of  men  ,  in  dreams  or  abftracled  vifions 
of  the  night  •  for  when  the  interior  magic  ^pf  the  Stale  ftands 
enmolefted  and  free  from  any  difturbance  of  the  Science  of 
the  interdicted fr nit ,  then  and  onely  then  doth  the  intelligence 
keep  holy-day,  enjoy  an  halcyon  Calme,  and  freely  diffufe  its 
felfe  through  all  its  royaltie  :  for  thus  doth  it,  when  it  de- 
mergethitfehf  into  the  inferiour  and  fubordinate  faculties, 
fafely  condud  and  lead  along  thofe  that  vralhjn  their  (leep^  o  • 
ver  fuch  horrid  precipices ,  where  the  ftrongeft  brained  man 
awake  duift  not  adventure  to  clime. 
Whereupon  the  fenior  RaHncsof  the  ^fw\raftirme,.that 
ioo.       the  Cabal  *  was  originally  conceived  in  fletp  :  namely  when 
*c*baUvtlCa-  the  fcience  tf  the  Aple  was  wholly  confopited.    The  intel- 
balia>ldimatc  leftuall  acl of  the  Soale  is  ever  clear,  enjoys  a  «onftant  Ju- 
Cl!f**?'!T (     bile  of  calme  ferenity ,  and  continues  in  fome  fort  perpe- 
eni'ia,  quxdivi-  Wall ;    but   fo    long   as   the    principal!    Agent    hath  not 
mtmunacum    tranfmitted  its  power  fo  farre  as  the  limits  of  Senfe ,  this 
kgeUoylitrtr  kinde  of  action  is   not  dirTufed  through   the  whole  man. 
4Mf*nurri >»on  For  we  who  are  wholly  imployed  and  taken  up  with  the  ex- 

Z!?!Hl  L.V  ercife  of  our  fen  fit  he  Facalt  ie  together  with  our  Camall  in- 
^a  voce,  &■  pa-      ,,.  J    J  M      -    . ,  v  •-  t_  i.  r 

tabus auncuia, i-  telligence ,  are  perpetually  (oh  mifery  worthy  a  deluge  of 

Hnraduttaafte-  tearesl  difrraftcd  and  impetuoufly  hurryed  away  from  the  ufe 
Ycnubm  mam  2xi&  benefit  of  our  more  ccelcftial  &  Magical  fcience ,and  held 
KMws  He-  captivc8  rather  in  the  crepufculous  and  owle-ligh  o^congniti- 
P*f J  driven-  **j tncn  &  the  Meridian  of  trath.  Nor  do  we  the  inhabitants 
tifsimi  tuttores  of  ^Egyptian  darknefle  understand  our  own  intelleclion,untill 
tuque  yrjtftfl'orcs  there  fucceed  a  certamc  mutuall  traduction  of  the  feverall  fa- 
<xtnt>i]m'  Gr*  cuWbi,  a  fucceflive  deliver)'  of  the  image  of  the  object  from 
^yuutwMK  •  tlc^  to  otner>  anc*  untill  as  it  were  certain  angles  of  actions, 
tha/Mi* '        propagated  by  divers  agents,  concurre  and  become  complica- 

101.  ted  about  the  Mediam. 

102.  Now  Satan  excites  this  Magicall  porre r  (  otherwife  dor- 
mant, and  impeded  by  the  Science  of  the  outward  man)  in  his 
vaffals  :  and  the  fame  awaked  into  activity  ferves  them  in  ftead 
of  afword,  orinflxument  of  revenge  in  the  hand  of  a  potent 
^dverfary,  that  is  the  Witch.  Nor  doth  Satan  adfer  any  thing 

at 


Cure  of  Wounds.  61 

at  all  co  the  perpetration  of  the  murder,  more  then  the  bare 
excitation  of  the  fomnolent  pomw,  and  a  confent  of  the  Will, 
which  in  Witches  is  for  the  moft  part  fubjed  to  his  compulft- 
on  :  for  which  two  contributions,  the  damned  mifcreant,  as 
if  the  whole  energy  of  the  ad  were  foly  attributary  to  him- 
felfe  requires  by  compact,  a  conftant  homage,  a  firme  and 
irrevocable  oppignoration,  and  devout  adoration  at  lea(t,and 
frequently  a  Surrender  of  the  veryfoule  into  his  poffeflion. 
When  intruth  this  power  was  freely  conferred  upon  us  by 
God,  our  Architect,  and  is  no  more  then  purely  natural t  to       IO>* 
man.  For  thofe  prtfligious  ads  and  impoftures,  the  effafci- 
nation  by  the  optick  emiflion  of  the  eyes,  the  falfe  difguifes 
of  Watches  in  borrowed  fhapes,  and  other  delufions  of  this 
kind,  are  onely  derived  from  the  legerdemain  of  Satan,  and 
his  proper  atls.    And  for  this  reafon  all  the  operations  of  this 
Montinbamo,  this  Hocm-pocus,  are  meerly  ridiculous  pageant 
delufionsand  counterfeit  apparitions,  by  the  presentment  of 
formes  that  delude  the  fenfe  ;  becaufe  the  God  of  mercies  permits 
him  not  to  enjoy  any  greater  range  of  power,  but  holds  this 
mifchievous  Leviathan  by  a  hook  in  his  noftrils  :  but  on  the 
other  fide,  the  Witch  doth  by  the  magick  of  her  own  naturall  .     IQ4. 
faculty  perform  -reall  and  impious  ejfctls.  Since  that  by  Jin, 
not  the  endowments  of  Nature,  but  of  Grace,  were  oblitera- 
ted in  Adam,  no  man  difputes  :  and  that  thefe  gifts  of  Nature, 
although  they  were  not  totally  cancelled  and  loft,  yet  re- 
mained eclipfed  and  as  it  were  envelloped  in  the  obfeurity  of 
a  midnight  deep.  For  as  man  from  that  unhappy  moment, 
wherein  he  forfeited  his  primitive  Soveraignty,  became  inevi- 
tably obnoxious  to  the  fame  fate  of  mortality  together  with 
bis  fellow  creatures :  fo  alfo  were  all  his  heroick  and  imperial 
faculties  withdrawn  behind  a  cloud,  and  fo  opprefled  with  the 
opacity  of fejhly  lufis,  that  ever  fince  they  ftand  in  need  of 
excitement  and  eduction  from  that  Cimmerian  umbrage.  And 
to  the  procuring  and  advance  of  this  excitation,  abflracled        10>* 
Contemplations,  fervent  and  uncefiant  Prayers,  tedious  vigils, 
macerating  Fafis  and  other  ads  of  mortification,  are  ftrong 
and  prevalent  conducements ;  that  by  thefe  fpirituall  anti- 
dotes the  Lethargic  of  flelh  and  blood  being  fubducd,  men 

P  may 


6i  of the  Mdgnetick 

— — — i^ — — «» «»— i^^— »^—  -^— — » «— — — — ^— « 

may  obtain  this  faculty  renewed  into  its  primitive  agility, 
and  in  a  calme  requiem  of  fpirit  offer  up  their  addrefles  to 
thatpure  Ejfencc,  which  requires  to  be  worshiped  no  other 
way,  then  in  purity  ofjpirit,  that  is,  in  the  zealous  abyfle  of 
the  Souk,  the  profundity  of  the  inward  man. 

j  0£  To  this  purpofe  alfo  mainely  conduceth  the  practice  of  the 

Cabal,  which  may  reftore  to  the  Soule  this  her  naturall  and 
magicall  prerogative,  and  rowze  it  up  from  theflumber  and 
inchantment  of  Carnality. 

I  will  explain  my  felf  yet  farther,  like  a  Mathematician,  by 
Examples,  and  aflume  the  very  operations  of  Witches  :  which 
although  of  themfelves  they  are  full  of  impiety  and  horrid 
mifchiefe  j  yet  they  grow  upon  the  fame  root  indifferently 
difpofed  to  the  production  of  good  or  evill  fruite,  namely  up- 
on this  Magicall  facultie.  For  it  proclaimes  not  the  majefty 
of  Free-will,  or  the  tractate  of  it,  if  we  from  thence  collect 
argument  concerning  a  thiefe,  an  affafline,  a  whoremonger, 
an  apoftate,  or  Witch.  Grant  therefore  that  a  Witch  kill  a 
horfe,  in  a  (table  removed  at  good  diftance :  there  is  fome 
certain  naturall  power  derived  from  the  fpirit  of  the  Witch, 
an^  not  from  Satan,  which  can  oppreffe,  ftrangle,  and  perifti 

107.  the  vitall  fpirit  of  the  horfe.  Grant  that  there  be  two  fubjetts 
of  difeafes  and  death,  and  that  one  of  thefeis  the  body  where- 
in every  difeafe  takes  up  its  quarters :  and  becaufe  all  Entities 
difcharge  their  activities  on  this,  as  the  molt  paflive  and 
flexible,  men  have  conjectured,  that  the  other  fpirituall  do- 
minion was  derived  immediately  from  Satan  :  but  the  other 
is  the  impalpable  and  invifible  Spirit,  which  is  conftituted  in 
a  capacity  of  fuffering  every  difeafe,  perfe ,  in  its  own  folitary 
nature.  The  Spirit  once  invaded  by  any  forreign  hostility, 
and  fubdued  to  the  obedience  ofpajfion,  the  body  alfo  cannot 
but  fubmit  to  compaffion  and  deuteropathy;  finceevery  action 
is  terminated  in  the  body(for  the  mind  after  once  it  is  adliged 
to  the  body,  alwaies  flowes  downward,  as  when  the  Palate  is 
mifaffected  with  paine,  the  tongue  alwaies  tends  thither,  on 
the  defigne  of  relieving  it)  but  on  the  contrary,  the  body  may 
often  be  aflaulted  and  entered  by  the  force  of  a  difeafe,  and 
yet  the  jp ir it  remain  exempted  from  fympatby.  For  there  is  a 

claflis 


Cure  of  Wounds,  6$ 

claflis  of  difeafes  onely  material!,  which  arife  fingly  from  a 
materUll  tinelure.  So  various  and  numerous  are  the  occafi- 
ons  of  death,  that,  when  we  have  taken  the  jufr.  dimenfions 
of  our  frailties,  we  (hall  finde  no  ground  left  us,  to  ered  any 
ftrudureof  pride  upon.  The  ad  therefore  of  the  previous 
touch  of  the  Witch  is  purely  naturall :  although  the  excita- 
tion of  this  magicall  virtue  depend  upon  the  auxiliary  con- 
currence of  Satan,  in  as  near  an  intereft,  as  if  the  Witch  had 
cut  the  throat  of  the  horfe  with  a  fword,  which  Satan  had 
put  into  her  hands.  This  ad  of  the  Witch  is  naturall  and  l°8» 
corporeall :  as  the  other  precedent  ad  is  naturall  mdjprituall. 
For  indeed  man  doth  naturally  confift  no  leffe  of  zjpirit,then 
a  body  :  nor  is  there  rcafon,  why  one  ad  (hould  be  accounted 
more  naturall  then  the  other ;  or  why  the  body,  the  courfer 
part  of  man,  (hould  be  allowed  a  power  of  adion,  but  the 
fpirit,  the  more  noble  and  cceleftiall  part ,  (in  its  relation  of 
being  the  Image  of  God)  accounted  idle,  unoperative,  and 
altogether  devoid  of  any  adivity  peculiar  to  it  felf :  yea  the 
Vitall  fpirit  s,  in  mod  exad  propriety  of  language,  are  the  im- 
mediate adors  of  fenfation,  motion,  memory,  &c.  but  the  body, 
and  dead  carkafTe  cannot,in  any  refped  whatever,  owne  thofe 
faculties:  wherefore  every  action  (lands  more  relatively  and 
properly  regardant  to  its  Agent ,  then  to  the  body,  which 
at  beft  is  no  more  then  the  tranfitory  lodging  of  the  Agent. 

And  thus  it  is  evidenced,  that  there  paffeth  a  fpirituall  ra-  ioo. 
^WjOrgleame  of  magicall  virtue,  from  the  Witch,  to  the 
man  or  horfe  appointed  for  de(truction,according  to  that  Axi- 
ome  :  That  no  atlion  can  be  done,  without  a  due  approximation 
of  the  Agent  to  the  Patient \and  a  reciprocal  unition  or  marriage 
of  the  virtues  of  each,  whether  the  admotion  or  approximation  be 
corporeall  or  fpirituall :  which  by  an  example  ready  provided 
to  our  hand  we  can  both  prove  and  illuftrate. 

For  if  the  heart  (which  is  the  prefence-chambenof  the  vi- 
tall fpirit)  of  a  horfe  flain  by  a  witch,  taken  out  of  the_yec 
warme  and  reaking  carcafe,  oe  empaled  upon  an  arrow,  and  II0 
roafted  upon  a  broach,  or  carbonadoed,  immediately  the 
vitall  fpirit  of  the  witch,  without  the  intervention  of  any 
other  medium,  and  anon  the  whole  witch  (fince  not  the  body, 

P    -y.  hilt 


6$  Of  the  Magnttick 

' —  nil  -  -■   -  ■       ii 

but  onely  the  jpir it  is  capable  of  fenfatian)  becomes  tormen- 
ted with  the  unfufferable  pains  and  cruelty  of  the  lire ;  which 
truly  could  by  no  meanes  happen,  unlefle  there  preceded  a 
conjunction  or  reciprocall  intercourfe  of  the  Jpirit  of  the- 
Witch,  with  the  jpirit  of  the  horfe.     For  the  horfe  after 
ftrangulation  retaines  a  certain  mmniall  virtue  (To  I  call  it, 
whenever  the  virtue  of  the  vitall  nectar,  or  blood,  is  con- 
fermentate  with  the  flefli )  which  is  the  originary,  implantate 
fpirit,  fuchas  is  never  found  refident  in  bodies,  that  are  ex- 
tinct by  voluntary  deaths  in  any  chronique  dileafe,  or  other 
ataxy,  irregularity,  or  difruption  of  the  inferiour  harmony, 
that  is  the  temperament  of  the  body  :  to  which  the  jpirit  of 
the  Witch  is  affociated,  as  joynt  commifiioner.     In  the  reak- 
ing  and  yet  panting  heart  therefore,  the  jpirit  of  the  Witch, 
before  itihall,by  the  diffolution  of  the  precedent  confpiracie, 
or  divorce  of  the  united  fpirits  by  putrefaction,  have  returned 
backe  into  her  bofome,  is  imprifoned  and  held  captive,  and 
the  retreat  of  it  prevented  by  the  arrow  transfixed,  and  by 

in.       the  torrefaction  of  both  fpirits  together  :   and  hence  comes  it 
to  paffe,  that  the  witch  is  afflicted  and  throwne  into  a  horrid 

112.  agony  in  her  fenfative  jpirit*  This  effect  adinits  a  change,  or 
double  conftrutlion,  from  the  intention  of  the  experiment; 
For  if  revenge  be  the  motive  or  incitement  to  the  experimen- 
tator,  then  is  the  effect  unwarrantable  and  inconfiftent  with 
the  charitable  rules  of  Chriftianity  '•  but  if  an  honeft  and 
confeientious  defigne,  to  compell  the  Witch  to  detect  her 
felf,  to  betray  her  to  the  jufticeof  the  Magifhate,  to  procure 
fecurity  to  our  neighbour  and  our  felves  by  the  remove  of  fo 
impious,  blafphemous,  and  nocuous  a  vaflall  of  Satan,  that 
the  greater  glory  to  God,  and  peace  and  benevolence  to  men, 
may  redound  from  the  difcovery ;  then  undoubtedly  the 
effect  cannot  be  difallowed  or  condemned  by  the  moir  rigid, 
preuie,  or  puritanicall  judgement.  We  are  not  to  conceive, 
that  all  theTpirit  of  the  Witch  fallyed  forth ,  and  tranfmigra- 
ted  into  the  heart  of  the  Horfe  (for  fo  the  Witch  her  felfe 
hadperiflhed,  falne  into  an  eternall  fwoune)  but  that  there  is 
a  certaine  univocall  participation,  or  idcnticall  traduction  of 
the  jpirit  and  vitall  light  of  the  Witch .-  in  an  equal!  analogie 

to 


Cure  of  Wounds.  e>5 

to  the  Plaftique  fpirit,  or  fole  delineator  and  architect  of  the 
mod  curious  and  magnificent  fabrickof  man,  which  in  every 
diftinct  emiflion  of  the  geniture  or  feed  is  covertly  ambufca- 
doed  and  propagated,  furrkient  to  the  procreation  of  a  nume- 
rous iffue,  the  originary  fpirit  of  the  father  yet  remaining 
unimpaired,  and  conferving  its  individuall  integrity.  For 
in  footh  that  participation  and  inheritance  of  the  vitall  light  r 

is  magical ,  and  a  rich  and  fruitfull  communication  of  the 
fpecifccall  efifence,  by  the  fertill  virtue  of  that  benediction, 
delivered  by  the  Protoplafi  of  all feminall  formes,  Let  all  Ani- 
malls  and  Vegetalls  bring  forth  feed,  and  hence  is  it  that  one 
individuall  feed  produceth  ten  myriads  of  other  feeds  Equi- 
valent, and  as  many  feminall  fpirits  comprehending  the  whole 
fpecificall  effence,  by  the  fame  myfterious  way  of  traduction, 
whereby  one  Tapor  is  lighted  by  the  flame  of  another.  But 
what  the  proper  nature  of  this  Magneticall  fpirit,  and  what 
the  Magical!  entity  begotten  in  the  wombe  of  phanlie  may  be, 
I  fhall  more  largely  declare  in  the  proceiTe  of  our  drfcourfc  : 
For  it  becomes  me  to  retreat  from  my  digrelTton,  and  now  to 
progrefle  in  that  path,  which  directly  leads  to  pur  intended 
fcope. 

Nor  is  there  any  pretence  of  reafon  ,  why  any.fhbuld  con- 
jecture, that  this  reailion,  or  rebound  oimagic.ill  power  upon 
the  heart  of  the  Witch  ,  is  only  imaginary  and  a  chimera  of 
licentious  phanfte ,  or  a  plainly  firperftitious  and  damnable 
impofture  and  delufion  of  Satan ;  fince  by  this  token  the 
witch  is  infallibly  detected,  and  volent  nolent  compelled  to  ap- 
pear in  pubtick,  which  in  one  of  our  precedent  fuppofitions  we 
have  furficiently  demonftrated  to  be  e  diametro,vppofed  to  the 
intention  of  Satan:  for  the  effeel  holds  conftantly  good,  and 
never  failes  to  fucceed  upon  experiment ,  as  having  its  fu'nda- 
rnentall  caufalities  laid  in  reafon  and  the  fpirituall  nature  of 
the  inward  man,  but  not  at  all  built  upon  fuperfhtious  (up- 
porters.  Hath  not  many  a  murdered  carcafe ,  by  the  operati- 
on of  the  fame  magneticall  fpirit,  fuffered  afrefh  cruentatiora 
upon  the  Coroners  inquefl,  in  the  prefence  of  the  Homicide, 
and  very  often  directed  the  Magiftrate  to  a  juft  and  infallible 
judgement  of  the  crime,  although  the  blood,  before  that  mi- 

P  7.  nute. 


66  of  the  Mdgnetick 

nute,  flood  congealed  and  frozen  in  its  cold  rivulets  >  The 

114.  realbnof  this  life  in  death ,  this  plea  of  the  grave  and  loud 
language  of  filent  corruption .  which  hath  empuzled  the 
anxious  difquifitions  of  many  fubttle  heads,  we  conceive  to1>e 
thus  :  in  a  man  dying  of  a  wound,  the  infer  iour  virtues ,  which 
are  mumiatl,  (for  thefe  are  not  fubject  to  the  reftraint  of  our 
will,  and  operate  not  in  conformity  to  the  dictates  of  rea- 
fon)  have  deeply  imprefled  upon  themfelves  a  certaine  Chara- 
cter of  revenge :  and  hence  is  it ,  that  at  the  approach  of  the 
a{iafiine,the  bloud  whofe  fountaine  death  had  fealed  up ,  be- 
gins btumultuation  and  ebullition  in  the  veines ,  and  violently 
gulheth  forth,  being ,  as  in  a  furious  fit  of  anger,  enraged 
and  agitated  by  the  image  or  imprelTe  of  revenge  con- 
ceived againft:  the  murderer,    at  the  initant  of  the  foules 

115.  immature,  and  compulfive  exile  from  the  body.  For  indeed 
the  bloud  after  death  retaines  a  peculiar/^  of  the  murderer 
being  prefent,  and  enjoyes  a  certaine,though  obfcure,  kind  of 
revenge :  becaufe  it  hath  its  peculiar phanfte :  and  for  this  rea- 
fon,  not  Abel  himfelfe,  but  his  innocent  bloud  cries  loud  in 
the  eares  of  divine  juftice  for  revenge. 

This  alfo  is  the  caufe,  why  the  Plague  is  fo  frequent  a  con- 
comitant to  feidges,  and  why  the  beleaguered  fee  the  revenge 
of  their  dead  acted  upon  their  enemies  by  the  furviving  Ma  - 
gick  of  their  friends  bloud :  for  the  magic  all  fpirit  of  the  in- 
ward man,  in  the  heat  of  the  encounters  &  fallyes,hath  con- 
ceived a  character  and  impreflion  of  revenge ,  and  fometimes 
the  defendants ,  efpecially  th  common  Souldier ,  being  by 
want  and  other  extreame  miferies  reduced  to  defperation,and 
man  and  wife,  conjoyned  as  well  in  death  as  life ,  falling  into 
the  cold  armes  of  the  grave,  bequeath  heavie  imprecations 
and  maledictions  to  the  furviving  Officers,who  engaged  them 
in  the  calamity,  and  might,  had  their  charity  been  but  halfe 

1 16.  fo  weighty  as  their  wealth,  have  relieved  their  famine  :  by 
which  earneft  curfe,  there  are  more  ftrong  and  durable  im- 
prefsions  engraven  on  the  ftdereall  fpirit  of  the  dying  man 
(chiefly  of  a  great  bellyed  woman)which  furvive  the  funeral  1 
of  the  body.  This  poftbume  fpirit  (call  it  Ghofl  ifyoupleafe) 
immediately  after  death  taking  a  vagabond  progrefle  in  the 

lower 


\  Cure  of  Wounds.  6j 

lower  region  of  the  ayre,  applies  it  felfe  to  the  contrivement 
of  fuch  fpirituall  means  of  revenge  and  mine,  as  lye  within 
the  fphearofits  activity,  and  having  oncedefigned  the  way, 
moft  readily  advances  to  execution-  And  Plagues  of  this  o-  1I7 
riginall  are  moft  fatall,  afwell  in  the  univerfality  of  contagion, 
as  <k/?r##/0»,fparing  no  fex,  age,  or  conftitution,  but  impar- 
tially blafting  all,  as  if  immediately  fliot  from  the  quiver  of 
incenfed  Divinity.  But  our  pen  is  tender ,  and  feares  to  di- 
vulge the  myfterious  caufe,  why  fuchfpiritttall  plagues fcorne 
to  obey  the  empty  and  fruftaneous  help  of  corporeal  remedies: 
for  to  reveale  the  reciprocall  connexion  of  mumiesy&c' the  con- 
cordance of  their  interchangeable  and  cooperating  faculties^ 
might  prove  unfafe  and  offenfive  to  vulgar  heads ,  in  regard 
of  the  whole  Netlromancy  of  the  Antients  was  originally 
founded  on  this  bads.  For  the  fame  reafon  alfo  God  in  the  Le-  i  iS. 
vitical  Law  feverely  prohibited  the  fufpenfion  of  the  bodies 
of  Malefactors  upon  the  Gibbet,  exprefly  commanding  their 
remove  before  the  Sun  went  downe  upon  them.  You  will 
anfwer,  that  Camp-plagues  are  generated  from  the  odious  and  119, 
unwholfome  naftinefle  of  the  Souldier ,  and  from  the  unbu- 
ried  excrements  of  men ,  and  entrails  of  beads,  polluting  the 
ayre  with  putrid  and  malignant  vapours :  but  to  this  errone- 
ous opinion  we  oppofe  the  example  of  Coriars  ,  Tanners,  and 
fuch  who  imploy  their  induflry  in  the  fordid  manufacture  of 
glew,  made  of  skins  diffolved  by  putrefaction,  for  all  thefe 
are  obferved  for  the  moil  part  (fo  farre  are  they  from  being 
obnoxious  to  the  infection  of  the  Hague)  to  enjoy  the  blef- 
fings  of  health  and  longevity ;  fo  confpicuous  and  admirable 
is  the  finger  of  Divinity  in  the  fpiritof  the  Microcofme. 

Doe  you  defire  to  be  informed,  why  the  blood  of  a  Bull  120 
is  toxical  I  and  poyfonous,  but  that  of  an  Oxe,  though  brother 
to  the  Bull,  fafe  and  harmeleffe  ?  the  reafon  thus,the  Bull  at 
the  time  of  (laughter  is  full  of  fecret  reluctancy  and  vindi- 
ctive murmurs,  and  firmly  imprefleth  upon  his  owne  blood  a 
character  and  potent  fignature  of  revenge.  But  if  it  chance, 
thatanfl^f  brought  to  the  flaughter,  fall  not  at  one  ftroke 
of  the  Axe,  but  grow  enraged  and  furious,  and  continue  long 
in  that  violent  madnefle  :  then  he  leaves  a  depraved  and  an-. 

wholfome 


122. 


68  Of  the  Mdgnttick 

\(ome  tiu&ure  on  his  fleih,  unlefle  be  be  firft  reea!med 
pacified  by  darknefle  and  famine.     A  Bull  therefore  eyes 
with  a  higher  -fiame  i  ge  about  him,  then  any  other 

T  2  j .       Animall  whatever  :  and  for  that  tranlcendent  escajidekence, 
his  fat  o  meanes  his  hUcd,  led  the  humane  blood  in 

the  ftntuerr  be  fubdued  and  overawed  by  th'.s  exctujv: 
Hurt  of  the  Bulls  blood)  is  an  ingredient  wholly  necelTary  to 
the  composition  of  the  Arm.iry  unguent,  where  the  weapons, 
which  made  the  wound,  are  not  befprinkled  with  the  blood 
of  the  Patient. 

R>r  if  we  expect  a  perfect  cure  from  the  drefllng  of  the 
.pon,truely  the  z^o^  and  other  it?  fellow  ingredients  will 
pre  e  a  cure,  when  the  weapon  is 

^ined  with  blood  erfuled  fiom  :i  :  Since  there  is 

recruited  a  more  violent  a  cious,  namely,  a  taurine, 

n ,  and  an  acreall  communication  of  florid  honey. 
And  thus  have  wee,  to  the  fatisfachon  of  the  moil  incredulous 
and  prejudicate,  made  it  out,  that  the  admirable  efficaq 
the  Vr.guent  ought  to  be  imputed,  not  to  any  auxiliary  i 
currence  of  S.itun    who  could  performe  the  cure  without 
the  ufe  of  honey  and  Bulls  blood)  but  to  the  communion  of 
X.-.Txrall  qualities,  by  the  energy  of  the  pofthume  Char 
cf  Rez tnge,  remaining  firmly  imprefTed  upon  the  blood  and 
concreted  fat. 

Our  Ad\  erfaries  will  whifpei ,  and  fecretly  exuit,  that  the 
power  of  our  Afagnetical  V r.guert  could  have  hardly  been 
fupported,  but  by  Anmlogcml  Arguments  drawn  from 
abftrufe operations  of  Witches,  from  the  impoftures  of  Satar., 
and  the  jpiritttal magicl^of  the  ir.  orld,  which  is  a 

faience  onely  imaginary ,  of  no  folid  concernment  or  weight 
in  the  ballance  of  reafon,  and  a  dangerous,,  if  not  damnable, 
error.  Neverthelefs,  not  any  finiller  obliquity  orper\eriion 
of  truth,  nor  any  indirect  defign  in  us,  by  fpecious  fimilitudes 
to  impofe  upon  the  weaker  credulities  of  the  illiterate  :  but 
the  grofs  ignorance  of  others,  and  the  deplorable  condition 
of  humane  fragility,  which  by  the  propensity  of  our  vitiated 
nature  more  readily  inclines  to  evil,  more  nimbly  apprehends 
evil,  and  is  more  familiarly  inilrucled  by  evil,  then  good, 

hath 


Cure  of  Wounds.  69 

hath  compulfively  directed  our  pen  to  obferve  this  method 
in  the  explanation  and  probation  of  our  thcfls.  However, 
what  we  have  reprefented  in  this  fcene  concerning  S.uan,  and 
his  familiar  Zany  the  witch  ,  affords  no  encouragement  or 
ground  for  others  to  hope  a  perfect  conformity  or  resem- 
blance of  the  power  of  our  Vnguent  with  that  of  Witches ; 
for  neither  the  ffiritual  faculty  of  the  Vnguent,  nor  the  ecfta- 
tinue  pbaufie  of  the  blood,  are  excited  by  the  manuduction 
or  impuliion  of  Satan.  The  mark  we  fhot  at  was,  that  there 
is  inhabitant  in  the  Soul  a  certain  Alagical  Virtue,  infufed  by 
the  primitive  bounty  of  her  Creator,  naturally  proper  and  of 
right  belonging  to  her  by  that  juft  title,  that  Ms.n  ts  the 
imA&e  and  r.ohle  effigies  of  the  Deity  ;  and  that  this  virtue  is 
qualified  with  a  celeftial  activity,  and  femidivine  prerogative 
of  operation,  that  is,  a  power  of  acting  per.  nut  urn,  intuitive- 
ly, fpiritually,  and  at  vaft  diflance,  and  that  too  with  much 
more  vigor  and  erHcacy,  then  by  any  corporeal  helps  and 
ailiflance.  The  reafon  briefly  and  plainly  thus ;  the  foul  is  the 
diviner  particle,  and  more  noble  moity  of  man,  far  over- 
weighing  the  body  both  in  dignity  of  eflence  and  extraction  : 
chereforealfo  is  the  activity  competent  to  it  fpiritual, Magical, 
and  of  fuperlative  validity.  That  the  Soul  by  the  dictates  of 
this  Virtue,  which  hath  fuffered  a  confopition  and  abate- 
ment of  its  primitive  agility  by  the  counter-magick  of  the 
forbidden  Apple  in  Paradife,  doth  regulate,  manage,  and 
move  onely  her  own  peculiar  body ;  but  the  fame  being  ex- 
fufcitated  and  awakened  again  into  action,  fhe  extends  her 
dominion  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  her  earthly  cloyfler  co 
an  object  at  diflance ,  and  becomes  lb  longimanous  as  to 
operate  onely  per  nutum  ,  by  intuition  conveyed  through 
convenient  mediums :  for  upon  this  point  is  founded  the 
whole  balls  of  Natural  Magick_,  but  in  no  refpect  upon  the  123. 
brittle  and  fandy  foundation  of  Benedictions ,  Ceremonies, 
and  vain  fuperflitions ;  for  thefe  vain  and  impious  obfer-  124. 
vances  were  all  introduced  by  him  ,  who  hath  ever  made  it 
his  ftudy,  to  confpurcate  and  defile  the  befl  things  with  the 
fophiftication  of  his  tares.  And  in  this  fenfe  we  have  not  125: 
trembled  at  the  name  of  Maaicl^,   but  with  the  Scripture 

Q_  underflood 


7°  Of  the  Mdgnttick 

underftood  it  in  the  beft  interpretation  :   and  yet  we  have  al- 
lowed it,  to  be  indifferently  imployed  to  a  good  or  evil  end, 
u6.       namely  by  the  lawful  ufe  orabufeof  this  power.     And  fo 
under  this  term  we  comprehend  the  highefr  ingenitecogni  ti- 
on  of  natural   things ,   and   the  mofi;  vigorous  power  of 
action,  equally  natural  to  us  with  Adam,  not  wholly  extin- 
guifhed  nor  obliterated  by  original  fin  ,  but  onely  obfeured 
and  as  it  were  confopited,  and  therefore  wanting  experge- 
faction  and  excitement.    And  therefore  we  declare ,  that 
1 27-        Magnetifm  is  not  exercifed  by  Satan :  but  by  that  which  hath 
no  dependance  upon  Satan :    and  confequently   that  this 
power,  which  is  peculiarly  connatural  to  us,  hath  been  a- 
bufively  fathered  upon  Satan,  as  if  he  were  the  fole  patron 
and  promoter  of  it :  that  this  Magical  Faculty  lieth  dormant 
in  us,  charmed  into  a  fomnolent  inactivity  by  the  opiate  of 
328.        the  primitive  fin,  and  therefore  fhnds  in  need  of  znExci- 
tutor  to  promote  it  into  action  :  Whether  this  Excitator  be 
I2Q.       {^e  ^°ty  fy*™*  by  illumination,  as  the  Church  commemo- 
*  Coma  vigil     rate$  t0  nave  happened  in  the  Eaftern  Magi,  and  frequently 
by  others  7>    happens  in  many  devout  perfons  even  in  our  days :  or  Satan , 
plumanm  &fo»  for  fome  previous  oppignoration  and  compact  with  Witches  ; 
por  dfliransy  is  in  whom  this  excitation  is  wrought  as  by  a  Coma  *  vigil,  or 
!lcyravarion°of  Clttoc^e  *»  am* 1S  therefore  imperfect  in  regard  of  the  manner, 
the  internal     evil  in  regard  of  the  end,   obfeure  in  regard  of  the  means, 
fenfes,  where-  and  nefarious  in  regard  of  the  Author :  nor  doth  the  verfi- 
in  the  fick  arc    pellous  or  Protean  impoftor  endure  that  the  Witch  fhould 
oppreded  with  |cnow  tms  power  to  be  her  own  natural  endowment,  on  pur- 
b?eF?opPer|nty"  Pofe  to  hold  her  the  more  fo^ty  obliged  to  himfelf,  and 
to  fleco,  and  yet  cannot,  by  reafbn  of  various  images  and  phantafms  crowding  into  the  ima- 
gination, and  perturbing  their  {lumbers.  Vtd.  Semcrt.  in  Inlfuut.     *  Catocbe,  or  Catalep{ht  is 
a  violent  fymptome  of  the  Animal  Faculty,  whertwith  who  is  furprixed,  remains  deprived  of 
all  fenfc  and  arbitrary  motion,  and  rigidly  congealed  like  a  fbtue  in  the  fame  polture,  where- 
in he  was  fit  ft  invaded,  Confide  Jul.  C afar.  Scaligcr.  Exerc.$  11.   H  oc  admhandum  far,c  fymp- 
toma,  ex  eo  omi  vida/tr,  quod  fmfonum  commune,  five  Conadon,  &•  interdum  etiam  partes  ei 
vicin*,  mulcts  occHpentur  bummktti,  dum  rclieuum  cerebrum  ab  its.  rmnus  eft  affc&um.  Hinc  emm 
nnUu6  objcftotHmmotm  ab  omnia  mhec  off  eft  u  pertipi  potcft :    &  fymtut  in  ccubro  fais  copiose 
fjiihdem  geniti,  fed  dcttrmmaiioncm  in  ahai  partes  nan  accipwites,  i»  cofdm  mufculos,  in  quos 
anna  er ant  deter mwaii,  perpituk  flaunt,  corpjtfquein  eodemflatu  ret  went.    Nullo  autem  modo  a. 
Congelations  (p'uii\s\im,qu*d  viilgut  Mcdcnium  docct.fieripetc(l  .*  Ilia  tnim  cerebri  fubfidentiam, 
-.■Krvoiumquc  comprrjfi&zm,  &  hute  Apoplexiam  pai'w  iiduetvet, 

left 


—     •  II. --  - 

Curt  of Wounds.  71 

left  the  exercife  of  fo  noble  a  faculty,  once  excited,  fhould 
be  employed  to  any  other  atchieveme,  but  what  is  impious 
and  deftructive  to  mankinde  ;  and  fo  he  keeps  the  reins  in  hi* 
own  hand,  nor  can  the  Witch  know  how  at  her  own  pleafure 
to  excite  this  dormant  Magick^,  who  hath  wholly  proftituted 
the  freedom  of  her  Spirit  to  the  will  of  another  tyrant.  That 
man  of  himfelf,  without  the  auxiliary  concurrence  of  any 
forrein  Caufality,  can  where  and  when  he  pleafe,  by  the 
praclife  of  the  Cabatiftique  Art% awaken  and  excite  this  grand 
Virtue  into  action  :  and  fuch  who  have  attained  to  this  reno- 
vation of  their  impaired  nature,  are  honored  with  the  title 
of  Adepti,  Obtainers,  or  Acquirers,  the  felect  veflels  of  God, 
whofe  wills  ftand  in  humble  and  full  conformity  to  the 
dictates  and  advifoes  of  the  Holy  Ghfi. 

That  this  Magical  Virtue  is  alio  naturally  inherent  in  150. 

the  outward  man,  namely  in  flefh  and  blood  j  but  yet  in  a  far 
lefs  meafure,  and  of  a  more  feeble  energy  :  yea,  not  onely  in 
the  outward  man,  but  even  in  Brutes,  in  fome  proportion  and 
of  inferior  vigor  (for  fo  the  Book  of  Mofes  hath  pofitiveh 
obferved  unto  us ,  that  the  foul  cf  every  beaft  is  lodged  in  itf 
blood,  and  therefore  he  deiervedly  forbids  it  to  be  lifted  ia 
the  bill  of  humane  fare)  and  perchance  in  all  other  created 
natures ;  fince  every  fingle  entity  contains,  within  the  nar- 
row tablet  of  its  own  nature,  an  adumbration  or  landskip  of 
the  whole  Univerfe ;  and  on  this  hint  the  Antients  have  left 
it  on  record  unto  us,  that  there  is  a  God,  that  is  an  univerfal 
Entity,  in  all  things.  That  this  Alagick^  of  the  outward  man% 
no  lels  then  that  of  the  inward  man,  doth  want  excitation: 
nor  doth  Satan  excite  any  other  Afagickjn  his  bafe  mifcreant 
vaflals,  then  that  of  the  outward  man;  for  in  the  interior 
clofet  of  the  Soul  is  feated  the  Kingdom  of  God,  to  which  no 
Creature  hath  accefs.  We  have  further  demonftrated,  that 
there  is  a  mutual  connexion  between  fpiritual  Agents,  and 
that  fpirits  as  they  combat,  which  we  have  (hewn  in  the  ex- 
ample of  the  Witch,  fo  alio  they  hold  a  friendly  and  amica- 
ble correfpondence  each  with  other,  which  We  prove  by  the 
teftimony  of  Magnetical  experiments,  and  proper  arguments, 
for  the  fafcination  and  ligation  of  fouls,  as  m  the  amours  of 

Q^  a  David 


72  Of  the  Magntiick 

■  ■        ■  i  i      ■  • 

David  and  Jonathan,  &c.  Finally ,  we  have  ftretched  the 
(mews  of  our  reafon  to  manifeft,  that  man  enjoyes  a  dominion 
paramount  over  all  other  corporeal  Creatures,  and  that  by  his 
own  natural  Magick  he  can  countermand  the  Magical  vir- 
tues of  all  other  fublunaries :  which  royal  prerogative  and 
predomination  fome  others  have  erroneoufly  and  abufively 
transferred  u po n  the  power  of  charms  and  incantations.  By 
which  Hierarchy  we  have  to  fatiety  of  fatisfa&ion,  made  it 
manifeft ,  that  all  thofe  admirable  and  abftrufe  effects  are 
wrought,  which  the  ruftical  and  too  corporeal  Philofophy 
of  others  hath  afcribed  to  the  dominion  of  Satan. 

That  thofe  who  are  ignorant  of  moil  things  we  have  de- 
livered, (hould  yet  remain  dubious  and  unfttisfied  in  many 
things,  is  neceflarily  certain  :  wherefore  we  have  determined 
to  make  a  fummary  rehearfal  of  all :   chiefly  that  fo  what  we 
have  fpoken  in  the  former  part  of  ourdifpute,  concerning 
the  duello  or  conflict  of  fpirits,  and  the  reciprocal  amity  or 
mutual  confpiration  of  their  united  virtues,  may  receive  the 
clearer  explanation.   It  is  a  task  worthy  our  fweat  and  oyl, 
todifcover  and  handfomely  define  the  arms,  militia,  and  en- 
counters of  fpirits,and  their  Commonwealth:  in  order  where- 
unto  we  are  with  great  fobriety  of  judgment ,   and  acute- 
nefs  of  reafon,  to  perpend  the  example  of  a  pregnant  or  great 
bellied  rpoman,  who  when  (he  hath  intently  and  with  vio- 
lence of  defire  fixed  her  minde  upon  a  Cherry,  immediately 
there  is  imprefled  upon  the  fruit  of  her  womb  the  mode!,  or 
pourtracl  of  the  Cherry,  in  that  part,  whereon  the  ingravi- 
dated  woman  laid  her  hand.    Nor  doth  there  remain  onely 
a  bare  and  idle  figure  of  a  Cherry,  and  afpot  ormaculatior. 
of  the  skin:    but  a  certain  real  produclion ,     which  buds, 
bloflbmes,  and  ripens  in  its  due  feafon,  at  the  fame  rime  with 
other  trees,  the  fignatures  of  colour  and  figure  palling  gradu- 
al changes  till  it  come  to  maturity.     High  and  facredjn  good 
troth,  is  the  power  of  the  microcofmical  Jpirit,  which  with- 
out any  arboreal  trunck  produceth  a  true  Cherry:  that  is 
flefh,  by  the  fole  feminality  and  conception  of  Phanfle,  qua- 
lified with  all  the  proprieties  and  virtue  of  a  real  Cherry. 
Hence  we  underiland  two  neceifary  conferences.   The  firfi, 

that 


Cure  of  Wounds*  73 

that  thcfeminaljpirits,  and  in  fome  latitude  of  aeception  the         13  a. 
verv  ejfence s  of  all  creatures  do  lie  ambufcadoed  in  our  na- 
ture :   and  are  onely  educed  and  hatched  into  realities  by  the 
microcqfmicratical  Phanjie. 

The  other ,  that  the  Soul  in  the  conception  of  thought        i??. 
doth  generate  a  certain  idea  of  the  thing  conceived  in  the 
minde :  which  as  it  before  lay  concealed  and  raked  up,  as 
fire  in  flint ;  foby  the  concitation  of  Phanjie  it  doth  produce 
a  certain  nezlidea  or  exact  pourtraict,  andaneflential  deter- 
mination, in  every  part  refponding  to  the  quiddity  of  the 
Cherry,  which  cannot  be  a  meer  quality,  but  fomething  J  ike  a         *34« 
fubflance,  of  an  ambiguous  eflence  between  the  body  and  the 
jpirit,  that  is  the  Soul.    This  production  isfofar  Jpiritual, 
that  it  is  not  wholiy  exempted  from  a  corporeal  condition,- 
fince  the  actions  of  the  foul  are  terminated  in  the  body,  and 
the  other  inferior  faculties  fubfervient  to  her :  nor  yet  fo 
far  corporeal,  that  it  may  be  circumfcribed  by  dimenfions, 
which  is  onely  proper  to  a  feminai 'Entity,   as  we  have  for- 
merly related.     This  ideal  Entity  therefore  when  it  falls  from 
the  invifible  and  intellectual  world  of  the  microcofm,  it  then 
puts  on  corporeity,  and  then  firfi:  becomes  fubject  to  be  cir- 
cumfcribed  by  the  determinate  dimenfions  of  Locality  and 
Numeration-     The  proper  obje El  of  the  imclutl  is  an  abilxact- 
ed,  naked  and  pure  ejfence,  lubfifting  of  itfelf;  and  not  an 
Accident,  by  the  confent  of  Practical,  that  is  Myftical  Di- 
vines.  This  Prothw,  the  intellect,  doth  thus  as  it  were  cloath- 
and  apparel  this  conceived  ejfence  with  Corporeity.    But  in  re- 
gard every  operation  of  the  foul,  whether  external  or  inter- 
nal, hath  its  fieri  in  its  own  proper  image :  therefore  can 
not  the  intt Heel  difcern  and  know,  the  Will  like  and  felect, 
and  the  Memory  recollect  and  recogitate,  unlefs  by  images  : 
and  this  fame  image  of  the  object  the  inte lie if  doth  cloath  in 
corporeity  :    and  becaufe  the  Soul  is  the  fmple  Form  of  the 
body,  which  readily  converts  and  applies  her  felf  to  every 
member,  therefore  cannot  the  intellect  entertain  and  harbor 
two  images  at  one  and  the  fame  time,  but  fucceffively  firft 
one  and  then  another.    And  thus  the  Soul  wholly  defcends 
epon-  the  intellect  y  and  the  yet-tender  and  embryon  image        *3»5/* 

Q  2  newiv 


74  Of  tbt  Magnetick 


newly  conceived  ami  impre/Tcd ,  and  afterwards  forms  the 
cognition  of  the  peculiar  efTence  into  a  perfiftent  and  durable 
image,  ok  ideal  Entity.  The  minde  being  once  polluted  by 
the  leprous  miafrn,  or  contagious  tincture  of  fin,  foon  be- 
came obnoxious  to  the  wrath  of  God ;  and  becaufe  this  was  at 
once  deturpated  and  depraved,  being  develted  of  the  Nobi- 
lity of  its  primitive  condition  ;  therefore  Death  found  an  en- 
trance upon  our  nature,  not  by  the  original  decree  of  the 
Creator,  but  by  the  degeneration  of  man  dehpfed  into  filthi- 
nefs  and  impurity,  and  ungeneroufly  degrading  himfelf, 
by  reafonof  this  ideal  entity  now  arrayed  with  comparative 
corporeity ;  which  corruption  and  turpitude,with  deplorable 
fertility  fpringing  up  in  every  the  moil:  venial  peccadillo,  we 
muff  extenuate  andmortifie  byfliowersof  poenitential  tears 
in  this  world,  or  too  late  bewail  in  the  next.  This  entity  there- 
fore, while  it  remains  in  the  forge  of  the  intellect,  is  but 
lightly  and  {lenderly  characterized,  nor  doth  anywhere,  but 
in  a  pregnant  woman,  receive  a  more  firm  confidence,  which 
in  the  mafculine  fexit  never  obtains  but  by  the  will-,  more 
familiarly  thus ,  the  Agent  Intelletl  always  procreateth  an 
ideal  Entity,  or  femi-ftthfiantial  ponrtraitt  of  the  efTence  of 
an  object  j  but  doaths  it  not  with  corporeity,  unlefs  by  the 
immediate  action  of  the  will,  great-bellied  women  onely 
excepted.  Sin  therefore,  whether  we  allow  it  to  be  a  reality, 
or  non-reality ',  at  lead  a  confent  and  propenfity  to  evil,  can 
never  be  committed  without  the  real  production  of  this  kinde 

136.  of  Entity,  and  the  affumption  and  indution  of  it.  And  this 
truly  hath  ever  been  the  Caufe  of  the  facundity  cf  feeds :  for 
the  Pbanfe,  excited  by  the  orgafmus  or  heat  of  /#/?,produceth 
a  (lender  reality  or  ideal  entity,  which  when  the  foul  hath 
clothed  with  corporeity  (for  the  action  of  the  minde,  while  it 
remains  immured  in  wills  of  Cefh,  always  tends  downward 
and  outward)  it  inftant!ydiiTufe:h  this  new  ideal  entity  into 
the  liquor  of  the  feed,  which  witbott:  tT  :  impregnation 
had  ftill  continued  barren  and   devoid   of  any  Plaftitjuc 

137.  fower:  which  action  is  performed  as  it  were  by  an  aliena- 
tion of  the  minde,  the  vnH  being  ravifhed,  by  the  trueMagick 
of  the  outward  man,  into  a  kinde  of  (bore  ecfiafie,  in  which 


Cure  of  Wmnds*  7j 

there  happens  a  communication  or  bequeit  of  a  certaine 
Mentall  tight  to  the  entity  defcending  into  the  body  or  ma/Te 
of  feed. 

Whenfoever  therefore  the  Cogitation  draws  the  fimft  and 
•will  into  confent  -y  fo  often  is  there  hatched  and  incorporated 
a  filthy,  fyunous  ideall  entity  :  by  which  production  the  will 
is  faid  to  be  confirmed:  and  this  idcall entity  with  all  expedition 
rangeth  through  the  body,  whitherfoever  it  is-  fent  on  an  er- 
rant by  the  will :  and  by  this  meanes  the  will  now  moves  the 
arme,  now  the  foote ,  anon  the  tongue ,  and  fo  all  other 
parts. 

Againe  when  this  entity  is  diflfeminated  upon  the  Vitall 
Spirit ,  on  a  defigne  of  love,  reliefe,  or  harme  to  any  objec\ 
then  it  wants  no  more  then  a  flight  and  eafie  excitement  from 
the  auxiliary  hand  of  God,  of  the  Cabaliftique  Art,  or  of 
Satan ;  that  fo  the  portion  of  the  fpirit,  which  is  impregna- 
ted with  the  ideall  entity,  mayfally  abroad  and  atcheivethe 
enterprife  en  joined  it  by  the  will.   Thus  every  male  projects        i$%* 
his  feed  at  diftance  from  the  dimensions  of  his  body:  which 
feminall  emiflion  carries  along  with  it  that  fcecundity,  which 
it  drew  from  the  infufed  entity,  and  executes  its  procreative 
commiflion  beyond  the  trunck  of  the  individual!  protoplaft. 
Undoubtedly  bodies  fcarce  makeup  a  moity  of  the  world: 
but  Spirits  poiTcfle  a  full  mediety,  and  indeed  the  major  part 
of  the  world.    And  therefore  in  this  whole  Context,  I  call 
Spirits  the  Patrons  of  Magnet i/nJe:  ~rtot  thofethat  are  fent 
downe from  heaven  doe  we  mean,  much  lefTe  thofethat  a- 
fcend  from  the  horrid  AbyfTe  below;butfuch  only  which  have 
their  originall,  and  exigence  in  man  himfelfe  •.  ft^r  as  fire  is,  by 
excuflion,  kindled  from  flint,  fo  alfo  from  the  Witof man,  by 
a  kindeof  fecretfcintilktion,  fomething  of  the  vitaftinftuent 
fpirit  is  defumed,  and  that  fomething  afmmes  an  ideall  entity, 
as  its  ultimate  forme  and  complement.   Which  perfection  once       j^o 
obtained  the  Spirit,  which  before  was  purer  and  more  refined 
then  the  asherealt  aer,  becomes  fubtihtated  like  light ,  and 
affumes an  ambiguous  or  midle  nature  between  Corporeall 
ftibftances  and  incorporeall.  But  it  is  fent  ambaf&dor  whither- 
foever the  trill  directs  it,  or  thither  at  leaft,whither  the  innat< 

wfaltifrfc 


y5  Of  the  Magnetick 


infallible f deuce  of fpirits  doth  command  it,  according  to  the 
intentions  and  fcopes  of  the  taskes  to  be  performed  :  the  ideall 
entity  therefore,  being  now  ready  prepared  for  its  journey  ,be- 
comes  a /<>/?r  (underftand  it  in  Tome  latitude  of  lenfe  )  and 
fluffing  off  corporeity,  confefTeth  no  reftrair.t  or  circumscri- 
ptive laws  of  places,  times?or  dimenfions.  And  this  refined  and 
exalted  ftmifubfiance  is  neither  the  Devil! ,  nor  any  effeft,  nor 
a-ny  confpiration  of  his  :  but  a  certain  jptritttall action  of  the  tn- 
■tvardman,  plainly  and  purely  naturall  and  hereditary  to  us. 
This  myfterious  wifdome  who  ever  entertaineth  with  that  fo- 
lemnity  of  judgement  and  preparation  of  nature  and  unpra- 
judicatc  thought,which  becomes  the  gravity  of  a  mind  greedy 
of  marnalities,  (hall  eafily  underftand,  that  the  material! 
ivor  Id  is  on  all  fides  governed,  regulated^  and  coerced  by  the  im- 
material! and  inviftble :  and  that  all  corporeal  created  natures 
are  placed  at  the  footfhole  of  man,  oa  being  fubordinate  t&  the  rc- 
crality  of  his  Trill.  And  this  very  thing  truely  is  the  Caufe,  why 
"even  the  mumie,  the  fat,,  the  moflc,  and  the  humane  blood, 
namely  the  Phanfy  naturally  exifting  in  them,in  the  Vnguent, 
fhould  domineer  over  the  blood  of  a  Dogge,  of  a  Horfe,  &o 
(lied  upon  a  piece  of  wood,  and  buried  in  a  pot  of  the  Vn- 
gttent* 

141.  '  Yet  we  have  not  faid  enough  concerning  the  Magnttifme 
of  the  Vnguent :  We  ftiall  therefore  now  purfue  a  hint,  which 
we  darted  in  our  precedent  lines.  That  the  Alagnetifme  of  the 
Loadftone  and  other  inanimate  Creatures  is  performed  by  a 
certain  Naturall  fenfation,  the  immediate  Authrix  of  all  fym- 

142.  p*M7,  is  a  truth  unquestionable.  For  if  the  Loadfone  dired 
it  felfe  to  the  Pole,  it  muft  have  a  certain  knowledge ,left  it  be- 
come Subject  to  deviation  and  error  in  its  direction  :  and  how, 
Ibefeechyou,  can  it  have  that  requifite  knowledge,  if  it  be 
not  fenfibhoi  its  owne  locall  pofition  ?  In  like  manner  if  it 
convert  to  iron  placed  at  great  diftance,  and  neglect  the  Pole, 
of  neceflity  it  muft  firil  know  the  (ituation  of  the  iron.  Wher- 
fore  the  Single  Magnet  is  endowed  with  various  [mfes,  and 
alfo  with  imagination :  nor  will  it  be  enough,  that  it  be  provi- 
ded of fenfation,  unleflewealfo  adde  the  provokement  and 
goads  of  occult  fritndjbip  and  Philauty  or  felfe-love ;  and  fo 

that 


Cure  of  Wounds.  «y 

that  the  Loadftone  is  endowed   with  a   certaine   Naturall 
phanfy  ,  by  the  power  of  whofe  impreflion  all  Magnetifmet 
in  the  whole  Catalogue  of  Creatures  are  performed.     For        14?. 
by  one  phanfy  it  is  directed  to  iron,  and  by  another  to  the 
Pole ;   for  then  is  its  virtue  dirfufed  onely  through  a  fmall 
fpace  of  the  aer  to  the  object  near  at  hand :  but  that  Phanfy 
is  changed,  when  it  prevents  an  abortion,  reftraines  the  im- 
petuous flux  of  Catarrhes,  or  hinders  the  falling  downe  of 
the  inteftine  in  a  rupture:  and  by  a  third  phanfy,  different 
from  both  the  former ,  doth  the  Loadfione  attract  any  thing 
ofglaiTe  melted  by  fire:  for  any  the  fmalleft  fragment  of  a 
Loadjhne  injected  into  a  good  quantity  of  glafle,  while  it  is 
in  decoction ,  of  green  or  yellow  turns  it  into  perfect  white. 
For  albeit  the  Loadfione  it  felfe  be  of  a  deep  (  though  fome-        *44* 
thing  fhadowcd  )  fanguine  tincture,  and  be  wholly  deftroied 
and  confumed  by  the  fire  that  dilTolves  the  glafTe :  yet  not- 
withftanding  while  it  retaines  any  relict  of  its  vital  ejfence, 
it  exhauftetn  the  tintled  liquor  even  from  the  candent  glafle, 
anddevoureth  the  tintture  of  it:  and  thus  we  difcerne,  that 
the  attraction  of  the  Loadftone  is  not  determined  onely  to 
*>•»;  but  alfo  extends  to  that  aerial  pan,  which  otherwife 
could  not ,  without  great  difficulty  ,  be  divorced  from  the 
body  of  the  giafTe  :  and  to  this  purpofe  is  it  commonly  ufed 
by  GlaiTe-makers.     The  phanfy  of  Amber  delights  to  allect 
ftrawes,  chaflfe,  and  other  feftucous  bodies ,  by  an  attracti- 
on ,  we  confeiTe,  obfcure  and  weake  enough,  yet  furficiently 
manifeft  and  ftrong  to  attefl:  an  Eletlricity ,  or  attractive 
fignature :  for  married  to  the  mumie  of  our  bodies,  it  appears 
fuperiour  to  the  humane  Magnet,  draws  counter  to  it,  and 
by  that  intereft  entitleth  it  felfe  to  the  dignity  of  a  Zenexton% 
or  prefervatory  Amulet  againfr  contagion.  But  Amber  mixed 
with  Gummes,  its  imagination  being  then  tranfplanted,  attract- 
ed the  T'enome  and  bullets  out  of  wounds :  for  the  pleafure 
anddefireof  attraction  is  varied  on  either  fide,  that  is  accor- 
ding to  the  various  contemperation  and  allay  of  the  humane 
mumie,  and  of  the  Gummes.  But  alas  1  What  wonder  can  it  be        1a^ 
( unlefle  amongft  thofe,  who  being  ignorant  of  all  things, 

R  foolifnly 


7  S  Of  the  Mdgnetick 

•~m~~m       i  i  -  I  ■   ■  ■         ' 

foohftily  admire  all  things  ( that  inanimate  creatures  fhould 
be  inriched  with  an  imaginative  faculty  ?  when  that  infinite 
EiTence,whoisall  life,  and  the  very  Soule  of  Vitality,  hath 
created  all  things  in  perfection,  and  fo  prevented  all  expectati- 
on of  deficiency  and  inutility  in  the  leait  peice  of  his  handy- 
worke  :  nor  can  the  fubtileft  Cui  iofity  finde  out  any  one  peice 
in  the  innumerable  lift  of  Creatures,  wherein  the  reflex  of  his 
Divinity  is  not  confpicuous  :  for  the  Jpirit  of  the  Lord  fill's 
the  whole  earth  ;  yea  this  expreflion,  that  he  comprehends  all 
things, carries  the  emphaticall  and  flgnificant  force  of  the  word. 
Doe  we  not  beleive  that  there  was  a  large  ftock  of  malignant 
fcience  ambufcadoed  into  the  forbidden  fruit}  and  that  our  un- 
happy Protoplafts,  together  with  the  aple,  fwallowed  downe 
that  fcience,  and  received  it  into  the  very  entrails  and  profun- 
dity of  their  nature?  and  doth  not  this  fcience  praefuppofea 
phanfy  peculiar  to  it  ?  For  thus  fome fimples  induce  an  Amen- 
ty  or  ftiort  alienation  of  the  reafon,  others  caufe  a  conftant 
madnefTe,  or  Maniacal  fury :  not  by  a  diffraction  of  the 
brain,  or  a  diflipation  of  the  Animall  fpirits  (for  then  the 
ftrength  and  vigour  of  the  maniacall  perfons  would  ofnecefli- 
ty  fuffer  impairment  and  decay  ,  which  never  happens,  but 
rather  on  the  contrary  they  become  much  ftronger  and  almoft 

147.  invincible  )  but  indeed ,  by  the  exotick  and  diftractive 
phanfy  of  thofe  peculiar  fimples  introduced ,  which  over- 
ma  Iters  our /^/y,  and  fubducs  it  to  full  obedience,  fome- 
times  only  pro  te mpore  ,  as  in  periodicall  deliriums,  phrenftes 
&o  and  fometimes  for  ever,  as  in  Lunaticks  and  Maniack*  or 
Bedlams. 

$4$.  Doth  not  the  rabies  or  madneffe  of  Dogges  by  this  meancs 

tranfmigrate  into  men?  the  Maniacall  phanfy  of  the  Fury 
beeing  tranfplanted  into  the  flaver  or  falivous  froth  o'f 
the  doggs  tongue ,  which  foone  conquers  and  triumphs 
over  the  blood  of  any  Animal,  into  which  it  hath  infinu- 
ated  it  felfe,  through  any  the  molt  flender  puncture  of 
of  the  skin?  for  then  the  primitive  and  genuine  Phanfy 
of  all  the  blood  in  the  wounded  body  furrenders  up 
its-  inferiour  power ,  becomes  fubordinate ,   and  compul- 

fively 


Cure  of  Wounds. 


19 


*  A  derivative  from  Hydrophobic  a  fear  of 
wrter,  which  is  a  fymptome  of  the  Animal  Fa- 
culty, or  alienation  of  reafon  introduced  from 
the  peculiar  propriety  of  the  venornc  of  a  mad 
dog.  The  reafon  of  this  ftrange  accident  Phy- 
ficians  refer  either  to  the  occult  quality  of  the 
venornc,  by  fecret  and  fpecifical  fermentation 
of  the  blood  fubduing  the  inr.gination  to  this 
abfurdity;  like  as  the  ftingor  the  Tarantula, 
opcra:ing  chiefly  on  the  feat  of  reafon,  the  brain, 
alienates  the  Phanfie ,  3nd  fo  infacuatcs  the 
minde,  that  the  patient  dances  to  deat'i,  if  noc 
cured  by  harmonious  mufick ;  or  to  the  imagina- 
tion ofthe  patient,  from  the  remembrance  of 
the  occafion  of  bis  harm  ,  a  dog,  perpetually 
fixt  upon  and  troubled  with  the  image  of  a  dog, 
fo  that  he  conceives  the  apparition  of  a  dog  in 
the  W3ter,  or  liquor  prefented  to  him,  and  there- 
fore abhors  to  drink  it.  Examples  of  this  are 


149- 


fively  afTumes  the  *  Hydrophobic*! 
phanjie  of  the  Exotick^  Tincture  : 
from  whence,  in  excefs  of  time, 
comes  a  Binjical  Death,  ( i.  e.  ) 
from  the  fole  difeafe  and  ex- 
orbitancy of  the  minde  ,  the 
Magical  virtue  of  the  Dog  being 
excited  and  exalted  above  the  non- 
excited,  but  fomnolent  Vhanfte  of 
the  Animal.  By  the  fame  myfte- 
rious  traduction,  in  all  refpects,  is 
the  Phanjie  of  the  Tarantula  im- 
prefTed  upon  man ,  by  a  (lender 
thrufl:  of  his  fting,and  the  wound- 
ed fuffering  an  immediate  alienati- 
on of  their  reafon,  fall  into  a  vio- 
lent fit  of  dancing,  and  capering  recorded  by  Au'w,  Tetrab.z.  cap.z*. 
high  levoltoes:  onely  the  poyfon 

of  the  Tarantula  differs  from  that  of  the  mad  dog  in  this  par- 
ticular, that  this  operateth  by  a  magical  power  excited,  and 
fo  by  magickjcruly,  and  without  the  favor  of  a  metaphor,  fo 
called;  but  that  acleth  by  a  magical  power  non-excited  and 
fomnolent,  as  the  fame  difference  is  undeniably  manifeft  in 
Monkshood,  Aconite, &c.  deleterious  plants,  which  are  fpeedy 
and  inevitably  deftrudive,  in  very  fmall  quantity  :  in  regard, 
no  Animal  endevours  tofecureor  defend  it  felf  againfl:  the 
biting  of  a  wad  dog,  fince  the  magical  power  of  his  excited 
phanfie  being  diflfufed,  is  binding  and  obligatory,  againft  which 
neither  the  teeth,  nor  horns  of  any  beaft  can  make  the  lead 
prevalent  refiftance ;  which  cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  Venome 
of  the  Tarantula. 

In  the  outward  man  therefore,  as  alfo  in  all  his  fellow  Ani- 
mals, the  Magical  power  is  latitanti  and  as  it  were  confopited ; 
nor  is  it  capable  of  excitation  onely  in  man,  (though  we  con- 
fefs,  with  greater  facility,  an  i  to  higher  atchievements)  but 
even  in  many  other  Animals,conforced  with  man  at  the  Crea- 
tion. Again,  it  fufficeth  not,  that  the  Spirit  of  one  individu- 
al maintain  and  obferve  this  law  of  concord,  and  mommachy 

R2  or 


150. 


ijt. 


8o  Of  the  Magnetick 


or  dueUo  with  the  Spirit  of  another  individual :  but  more- 
over there  dwells  a  certain  nniverfal  or  mundan  flirit  in  the 
whole  world,  (/.  e.)  in  all  things  within  Trifmegiftu,  Circle 
which  we  Chriften  the  Magnum  magnate,  which  exfifteth  the 
umverfal  Pander  of  all  fympathy  and  dyfpathy  ,  the  invisible 
Mercury  or  common  Intelligencer,  and  the  Pronator  of  all 
natural  adions ;  and  by  whofe  mediation  or  convoy  the  Mac- 
nctifmis,  as  by  the  mort  convenient  vehicle,  tranfported  and 
wafted  to  anobjed  atvafldiflance.  This  is  made  good  by 
an  autoptical  demonftration ;  for  if  upon  the  minikinq  of  a 
tuned  lute  you  place  a  (lender  ftraw,  hanging  with  a 
doubtful  extremity  (/.  r.)  equilibrated  in  the  aer3  and  at  con- 
venient diftance  in  the  fame  room  ftrike  the  minikin  of  an- 
other Lute,  when  there  fucceeds  a  confonance  in  the  eighth 
note,  you  (hall  fee  theflraw  to  tremble;  but  when  the  notes 
concord  in  an  #»//^,then  the  minikin  of  the  untouched  Lute 
impatient  of  delay,  will  quaver,  caper  for  joy,  echo  the  fame 
aer ,  and  by  a  nimble  fubfultation  throw  off  the  ofFenHve 
ftraw.  What,  will  you  impute  this  effed  to  Safan,  *nd  make 
him  the  Fidler  ?  Now  you  fhall  never  obferve  the  ftraw  to  re- 
bound from  the  firing,  though  all  the  firings  of  the  other 
Lute  be  linanimoufly,  ftrongly,  and  neer  at  hand  plaid  up- 
on ;  for  it  is  not  the  bare  and  fimple  tone  that  compels  the 
untouched  firing  to  quaver  •  for  then  every  tone  would 
caufe  the  fameeffeft;  but  it  is  onely  the  nniverfal  fbirit 
the  Common  Mercury ,    inhabiting  in  the  middle  of  the 

•(V  univerfe,  and  being  the  faithful  executor  and  adjutor  of 
all  natural  adions,  tranfports,  promotes  and  caufes  the 
Sympathy. 

!  52#  But  why  tremble  we  at  the  name  of  Magick  •'  fince  the 

whole  adion  is  Magical  ;  nor  hath  any  natural  ulgcnt  a 
power  of  activity,  which  is  not  emergent  from  the phanfie  of 
its  peculiar/*™*,  and  that  magically  too.  But  in  regard  this 
phanfie  in  bodies  devoid  of  voluntary  eletlion  is  onely  of  a  de- 
terminate and  limited  identity  :  therefore  have  fornevulfar 
heads  erroneoufly  and  dully  imputed  the  effect  of  fuch  re- 
(trained  bodies,  not  to  the  phanfie  of  them,  but  a  Natural 
yropmty  ;  out  of  an  ignorance  of  Caufes  fubflitucihg  the 


tfFefl 


Curt  of  Wounds*  gj 

r  feci  in  the  room  of  the  Caufe.    When  indeed  every  Age »t 
doth  operate  on  its  proper  object,  by  z  prcefenfation  or  diitin- 
dive  foreknowledg  of  it,    whereby  it  is  directed  not  to  dif- 
charge  its  activity  rafhly  and  at  random,  but  onely  on  its  own 
peculiar  object.     For  the  diffufion  or  emiflion  of  activity 
neceifarily  fucceeds  the  fenfationof  the  object  y  and  the  effect 
refults  from  an  excitement  of  the  pbanfie,  by  tranimittingof 
the  ideal  entity,  and  conjoyning  it  with  the  radius  ot  gleam 
of  the  pajpve  entity.    And  this,  in  our  diatectjhach  ever  been 
the  Magical  action  of  natural  bodies ;    yet  in  mo(r  accom- 
modate language  and  juft  propriety  of  denomination,  this 
Magical  and  pbantajriqzc  aftivitj  belongs  principally  (if 
notfolefy)  to  Creatures  ennobled  with  a  power  o£  election. 
I  (hall  mufter  up  the  Creatures,   and  guide  our  difquifition        I^*i 
through  every  Claifis  of  them.    All  formal  proprieties  flowing 
from  the  forms  of  the  three  nniverfal  principles,  Sal,  Sul- 
pbury  and  Afcrcnrj%  or  the  fait.  Unctuous  fat,  and  liquor,, 
whereof  every  body  is  compofed,  and  into  which  it  is,  by 
corruption  of  the  corporeal  harmony,  again  refolved  •   and 
the  Mercury  or  liquor  is  fo  often  diverfe  and  differently  qua- 
lified^ there  are  different  fpecies  of  compound  bodies^  which 
fame  variety  of  impregnation  we  are  to  conceive  alfo  of  the 
other  two,  Sat  and  Sulphur :    All  fpecifkal  proprieties,!  fay,, 
are  derivator)'  from  the  pbanjies  of  thefe  farms%  which  in 
regard  they  are  very  corporeal,  and  deeply  immerfed  in  the 
bofomeof  Elements,  therefore  are  they  called  Formal  and 
occult  proprieties  ,    out  of  a  grofs  ignorance  of  the  formsy        • .  • 
which  in  another  (and  introth  more  Phi lofophicatj  accepta- 
tion are  Magical  e feels  produced  by  the  pbanfie  of  the  faid 
forms  :  but  (we  confefs)  lefs  noble,  and  more  corporeal,  yet 
abundantly  Satisfactory  ro  thofe  ends,  which,  by  the  pri- 
mitive deftiny  of  their  Creation,  they  regard.    To  this  feries         *?<§> 
belongs  the  fubductive  virtue  of  Cathartick  or  Purgative,  the 
lomniferous  faculty  of  Hypnotkk^Q* dormitive medicaments, 
t~c. 

Befides  thefe  there  are  other  nobler  Proprieties,  taking  their 
original  from  the  pbanfie  of  the  forms  of  the  whole  Compofi- 
tnm :  and  thefe  are  diffufed  through  and  inherent  in-  the 

R  3, whole- 


8j  Of tht  Magtutick 


whole  Compoftum,  by  rcafon  of  the  Form  of  it  j  fbchare 
the  Magnetifm  of  the  Loadfione,  the  virtue  of  Tinctures , 
and  allfpecifical  and  appropriate  Medicaments  -y  which  are 
occasioned  by  reafon  either  of  the  whole  homogeneous  mixture, 
or  the  particular  form  of  fome  integral  part,  but  not  of  any 
Jingle  or  divided  principle',  fuch  as  thefe  are  naturally  inhe- 
rent in  the  trunck,  leaves,  root,  and  fruit  of  plants,  and  not 
in  any  one  of  the  three  principles  diacritical ly  feparated  from 
the  compage  or  conjuncture.  Thus  alfo  Antimony,  while  it 
remains  in  its  primitive  form,  and  native  integrity,  is  en- 
riched with  noble  and  excellent  qualities,  which  it  could  ne- 
ver afpire  unto  in  its  folitary  and  divided  principles.  But 
thefe  are  alfo  clofely  enfhrowded  in  Corporeity  ;  and  there- 
fore the  natural  magicf^  lies  covertly  ambufcadoed  and  ob- 
fcure  in  them,  and  hath  been  thought  wholly  attributary  to 
Nature,  by  an  unjuft  and  unadvifed  diftinction  of  Nature 
from  Magicl^,  oppofing  the  former  e  diametro  to  the  latter, 
when  in  fober  verity  they  are  both  one  and  fame,  though 
commonly  received  under  diftincT:  appellations.  Thus  the 
leaf  of  arc/?  hath  a  diftinct  virtue,  which  the  flem,  or  yellow 
tuft  in  the  middle  of  the  rofe  hath  not :  and  that  virtue  arifeth 
not  to  the  leaf  from  the  three  Grand  principles  united,  or 
any  one  of  them  paramont  in  the  conjuncture;but  immediate- 
ly refulteth  from  its  Vital  Form,  which,  when  it  isdeftroyed, 
amitteth  its  primitive,  and  acquireth  other  fee  ondary  virtues  ■ 
as  in  example,  a  grain  of  Corn  in  its  primitive  vitality  nourijh- 

j  ^  e  eth,but  when  degraded  from  that  firft  life,  it  fructifies.  Third- 
ly, there  is  another  Magical  power  proceeding  from  the  phan- 
fte  of  the  life  of  the  integral  compo fit  urn  :  and  this  is  implanted 
in  bruites  and  the  exterior  man  ,  which  being  fpiritual,  is 
more  abfolute  in  foveraignty  then  the  former,  but  yet  not  ad- 
vanced to  the  zenith  or  higheft  pitch  of  energy,  though  fome- 
times  by  much  excitation,  and  a  ftrong  phanfie  introduced  by 
a  real  entity,  it  afcend  to  a  very  great  height  of  activity,  and 
by  a  neer  emulation  rival  the  true  Magick_  of  the  inward 

156'.  man.  Again,  the  Soul  of  every  Bruite  enjoyeth  a  power  of 
creating  a  real  entity,  and  of  tranfmitting  the  fame,  by  the 
mandate  of  the  Will,  to  an  object  at  very  large  diftance :   of 

this 


CureofWmnds.  83 

this  fort  of  magical  bruites,  are  the  Bafilisk^,  a  dog,  many 
fifties  defcribed  by  Olam  Magnus,  csrc.  fuch  alfo  is  the  virtue 
inhabitant  in  the  blood  of  many  Animals:  and  hence  doth 
Holy  TVrrt  deliver  exprefly  ,  that  the  Soul  fojourns  in  the 
blood  though  extravenated,  though  decoded  on  the  fire, 
yea,  arid  (for  ought  can  be  alleaged  to  the  contrary)  though 
totally  altered  by  corruption.  Finally,  there  is  alfo  a  Mag.c  I  l1T* 
virtue  as  it  were  abfiratled  from  the  body,  which  is  wrought 
by  the  excitement  of  the  interior  power  of  the  foul:  and  from 
this  arife  moft  potent  procreations,  moft  noble  imprefiions, 
and  effects  of  fupreme  vigor  and  efficacy.  For  (introth)  Na-  1 58'. 
ture  in  moft  of  her  operations  playes  the  Magician,  and  acts 
by  the  energy  of  her  own  phanfie ;  and  fince  this  activity  is  by 
fo  much  the  more  potent,  by  how  much  the  more  fpiritual  ; 
therefore  is  the  term  or  appellative  of  Magick  exactly  analo- 
gous and  concordant, 

Of  all  which  gradually  different  Jpecies  of  magical  virtue,  I S9X 
there  is  hardly  any  one  that  ftands  not  in  need  of  excitation. 
For  that  of  the  lowed  Claflls  requires  excitement  and  educti- 
on, by  fome  previous  warmth  ,  or  gently  fomenting  heat, 
by  which  there  is  educed  a  certain  vapor ,  or  (piritual  effluvi- 
um, by  reafon  whereof  the  phanfie  reftra'med  in  a  profound 
fleep,  and  drowfie  inactivity,  is  awakened  into  adiony  and 
then  begins  a  mediatory  encounter  between  the  corporeal 
jpirits,  which  is  of  JWagnet'ifm,  excited  by  a  precedent  touch. 
But  that  of  the  higheft  Claflls,  fuch  as  belongs  to  bruits  and 
men,  receives  excitement  from  an  intellectual  conception  -,  and 
that  of  the  inward  man  is  not  at  all  excited,  unlefs  by  the 
Holy  Jpirit,  and  by  his  excellent  gift,  the  Cabal  •  but  that  of 
the  outward  man,  by  ftrong  imagination,  by  afliduousand  in- 
tenfe  fpeculation,  yea,  and  in  Witches  by  Satan.  But  the  ma- 
gick_of  the  extravenated  blood  (  wherein  the  foul  hath  taken 
up  her  quarters)  which  lies  lurking  onely  in  potent ia,  is  excited 
and  invited  into  act,  either  by  a  more  ftrong  imagination  ex- 
alted, conceive  it  of  the  magician  making  uie  of  the  blood  as 
a  medium,  and  fixing  his  newly  accenfed  entity  thereon  •  or 
conceive  it  by  the  afcendent  phanfie  of  the  Armary  unguent ,, 
the  excitatrix  of  the  proprieties  latent  in  the  blood  ;  or  by  a 

previous 


y*  Of  the  M&gmtuk 

previous  defti  nation  of  the  blood  to  corruption  whereby  the 
Elements  are  dilpofed  to  reparation,  and  the  EfTences  (which 
know  no  corruption  )  and  the  Eflential  phanfies,  which  lay 
obfeured  in  the  potentia  of  the  proprieties,  fully  forth  into 

action. 

160.  The  phanjie  therefore  of  any  fubjecl  whatever  hath  ob- 

tained a  ftrong  and  vigorous  appetite  to  the  fpirit  of  its  pecu- 
liar object,  in  order  to  the  locomotion,  attraction,  expulfion, 
or  repulfion  of  it :  now  in  this,  and  no  where  elfe,  we  ac- 
knowlcdg  Magnetifm,  as  the  natural  magical  endowment  of 
that  fubjeft,  conferred  upon,  and  firmly  implanted  in  it,  by 
the  wife  bounty  of  God. 

t6i.  There  is  therefore  a  certain  formal  propriety  fegregated 

and  manifeftly  diftincl  from  the  Sympathetic  and  abfirufe, 
qualities,  in  this  particular  relation  :  that  the  phattjie,  which 
is  the  motrix  of  thofe  qualities ,  doth  not  diredly  tend  to 
the  Locomotion,  but  onely  the  Alteration  of  the  object. 
And  thus,  though  we  giant,  that  every  Magnetifm  be  either 
Sympathetica^  or  Antipathetical ;  yet  notwithftanding  the 
inverlion  will  fail,  that  every  fympathy  rnuft  be  Magne- 
tical. 

But  we  retire  from  our  digreflion  to  the  grand  mark  our 
intentions  level  at.  By  this  time  (I  conceive)  it  is  clearly  un- 
derftood,  that  there  refideth  a  phanjie  and  magical  appetite, 
not  onely  in  the  blood,  but  even  in  the  fuperfluous  humors, 
meats ,  and  excrements  ;  fince  the  various  and  numerous 
progeny  of  difeafes  affordeth  conviftive  manifeftoes  of  it. 
162.  ^or  pregnant  women  labor  with  an  abfurd  and  ridiculous 
appetite  to  ftrange  and  unufual  meats,  and  Cache&ical  Vir- 
gins, by  a  natural  ceftrum  or  libidinous  fury  of  the  exorbi- 
tant womb,  do  with  extraordinary  celerity  (though  not  with- 
out great  inamcenity  and  palenefs)  digeft  what  ever  they  long 
for  :  but  indeed ,  not  from  reafon  of  fimilitude  of  fub- 
ftance ,  nor  from  any  confanguinity  of  humane  nature 
requiring  that  particular  meat ,  their  irregular  appetite  fo 
ravenoufly  covets  j  but  feduced  by  the  exotic] ue  phanfie  of 
the  virions  humors^  accumulated  in  the  veiTels  of  the  womb, 
and  reftagnated  or  belched  up  into  the  ftomach,    which 

over- 


Cure  of  Wounds,  85 

over-maftering  the  true  and  natural  appetite,  goadeth  them 
to  this  abfurdity  >}  by  the  expulfion  of  which  noxious  im- 
purities ,  we  have  frequently  cured  fuch  perverfions  and 
abfurd  appetites ;  or  elfewehave  mitigated  and  compofed 
them,  by  permitting  the  irregular  and  frantick  phanfie  of  fuch 
humors  to  fate  it  felf  by  fruition.    In  the  blood  therefore  there  • 

inhabiteth  a  peculiar  phanfie^  which  in  regard  it  is  of  more  **> 

vigorous  energy  therein,  then  in  other  things,  therefore  doth 
Divine  Hiftory,  in  a  lingular  and  emphatique  Elogy,  call  the 
blood  (though  ftrongly  decoded,  and  ready  cooked  for  the 
table)  the  Manjion  of  the  foul.  And  in  regard  this  phanfie  of  164. 
the  blood  is  capable  of  traduction,  and  may  be  devolved  to 
pofterity  •  for  this  reafon  is  it,  that  the  manners,  geftures, 
conditions,  and  genius  of  the  Grandfather  are  revived  and  be- 
come refplendent  in  his  iflue,  long  after  the  refolution  of  him 
into  duft.  Nobility  took  its  firft  rife  from  well-deferving 
Virtue .  hence  mo(t  nobility  be  without  juft  merit,  fufpeded 
to  be  encreafed  by  the  continued  and  fucceflive  propagation 
of  the  family  s  unlefs  the  heroick  inclinations  and  virtues  of 
gallant  anceflors,  obfcured  by  mortality,  might,  with  proba- 
bility of  hope,  beexpeded  tofinde  arefurre&ion,  andfhine 
again  in  their  late  pofterity.  Again,  doth  not  the  enmity  itfc. 
conceived  betwixt  the  Woolf  znd/bcep  remain  firmly  impreffed 
upon  their  pelts?  Wherefore  the  phanfie  of  an  Animal,  per- 
vicacioufly  furviving  death,  is  impreffed  not  onely  upon  the 
blood  :  but  alfo  whoever  deeps  under  the  coverture  of  a 
blanket  made  of  the  skin  of  a  Gulo  or  Glutten  (a  beaft:  of  in- 
credible,becau(e  infatiate,voracity,very  common  inSwedland) 
is  forced  continually  to  dream  of  feafting,  hunger,  voracity 
and  the  enfnaring  of  wilde  beads,  according  to  the  natural 
condition  of  that  animal,  while  it  was  living  :  and  ttius,onely 
by  an  external  coverlet,  the  phanfie  of  the  beafl, which  during 
life  ibjourned  in  the  skin,  is  devolved  and  traduced  unto  a 
man,  that  fleeps  beneath  it.  And  thus  alfo,  by  the  miniftery  of 
the  Phanfie  of  the  blood  comes  it  to  pafs,  that  the  blood  extra- 
venated,  being  received  upon  the  fword  or  weapon,  is  intro- 
duced into  the  Magneticl^JU  nguent.  For  then  the  phanfie  of  \66. 
the  blood,  before  unaclive  and  fomnolent,  being  by  the  vir- 

S  tuc 


86  .     Of  tbt  Magnetic  k 

tue  of  the  magr.etical  unguent  excited,  and  there  finding  the 
balfamical  and  medical  virtue  of  the  unguent,  earneftly  covets 
the  newly-induced  quality  to  be  communicated   to  it  felf 
throughout,  and  from  thence ,   by  fpiritual  magnetifm,  to 
exhault  and  drain  out  all  the  forein  quality,  that  had  invaded 
the  wound  \  which  when  it  cannot  furficiently  perform  upon 
thefingle  fWk  of  its  own  ftrength,  it  implores  the  aid  of  the 
moll  of  the  blood,  fat,  and  mumy,  which  by  coalition  dege- 
nerate into  fuch  balfam,  that  by  no  other  means,  but  its  own 
pbanjie,  becomes  medica/,wagnttictil,  and  &Ko  attraftive  of  all 
the  forein  quality  out  of  the  body,  whole  frelh  blood,  a- 
boundingwithfpirits,  is  applied  unto  it,   whether  it  be  the 
blood  of  a  man,  or  any  other  Animated  Creature.The  phanfie 
therefore  is  reducible  and  ecftatical  from  part  of  the  blood 
frelhly  and  immediately  after  the  erTufion  brought  unto  the 
unguent  :   but  the  magnetic  al  attraction,  begun  in  the  b!ood,is 
perfected  by  the  medical  virtue  of  the  unguent,    Butthe^^- 
guent  doth  not  attract  ttie  evil  and  depraved  tincture  or  in- 
quinament  of  the  wound,  unto  it  felf,  and  fo  put  on  as  much 
contagion,as  was  enclofed  in  Pandoraes  box  :  but  onely  works 
a  falutiferous  alteration  on  the  fpirit  of  the  newly  effufed  and 
frefhly  applied  blood,    makes  it  medical,  balfamical,  and 
rouzeth  up  its  dormant  virtue  :  whence  there  reiults  to  it  a 
certain  medical  and  magnetical  virtue,  which  makes  a  fpeedy 
return  to  the  body,  from  which  the  blood  iiTued  forth,  with 
full  commiflion  and  power  to  cure  itscoufin  german,  the  fpi- 
rit of  the  blood  yet  flowing  in  its  proper  conduits,throughout 
the  whole  man.    For  it  fucks  out  of  the  wounded  party,  the 
exotick  and  dolorous  imprefllon,  diminiiTieth  it  by  a  medical 
power,  exileth  it;  which  medical  virtue,  being  the  puiiTan: 
conqucrefsof  the  evil,  is  partly  excited  in  tneblood,and  partly 
in  generated  in  the  fame  by  the  ungmnt,  that  is  by  the  fpirit  of 
the  v.ngr.cr,t,  upon  the  mtgicl^of  its  phanfie  (/.  e  )  its  created 
endowment,  thus  exercifmg  imperial  power,  and  elticacious 
ioveraignty,  over  the  fpirit  of  the  blood.  In  another  cafe,  ihc 
blood  enciofed  in  an  egge  (hell,  putrefying  with  ail  its  eigw 
about  it,  and  fo  as  it  were  redeemed  from  the  bondage  of  cor- 
*6j.      poreity,  and  the  fpirit  delivemi  from  all  impediments,  by 

previous 


'    ■ 


Curt  of  Wounds.  ,87 

previous  putrefaction,  becomes  attractive,  by  the  mediation 
of  the  muniyof  a  dog,  and  really  transfers  that  dileafe, 
which  was  hefrore  feated  in  the  plianlie  and  afti'ality  of  the  ex- 
cremeatitious  impurities  in  the  patient ,  into  the  dog  that 
devours  it  j  for  no  other  reafon,  but  this,  that  the  magnetifm 
cannot  be  advanced  to  perfection  of  operation  ,  without 
the  intercellion  of  the  balfam  of  the  unguent.  We  have  ob- 
fcrved,  if  it  happen  that  the  wounded  party  hath  received 
many  wounds  at  once ,  that  it  furhceth  to  have  the  blood 
efFuted  out  of  any  one  of  the  wounds  j  and  that  by  the  fingle 
application  of  that  blood,  all  the  other  wounds  are  cured 
together :  becaufe  that  blood  obferves  a  correfpono'ence  and 
fympathetical  concordance  with  the  fpirit  of  the  whole  man, 
and  from  the  fame  educeth  the offenilve  extraneous  quality, 
communicated  not  onely  to  the  lips  of  the  wound,  but  alfo 
to  the  whole  body  j  for  from  one  wound  thete  ordinarily  is 
kindled  an  universal  fever  throughout  the  whole  body  of 
man. 

Hitherto  have  I  fufpended  the  revealment  of  a  grand  my-  x<58. 
ftery ;  namely,  to  bring  it  home  to  the  hand  of  reafon,  that 
in  man  there  fits  enthroned  a  mble  energy ,  whereby  he  is  en- 
dowed with  a  capacity  to  zt\  extra  fa  without  and  beyond 
the  narrow  territories  of  himfelf,  onely  per  nmtert*  by  his 
fingle  beck,  and  by  the  natural  n^-gick  of  Iwpkw/ie,  and  to 
rranfmit  a  lubtil  and  mvitiblevirtve,  a  certain  influence,  that 
doth  afterward  fubiifland  perfevere  per  fa  and  operate  upon 
an  objefl  removed  at  very  large  diftance  :  by  the  difcovery 
of  which  fole  my  fiery,  all  that  we  have  hitherto  treated,  con- 
cerning the  ideal  entity,  conveyed  in  the  arms  of  a  fplritual 
emanation,  and  Tallying  abroad  to  execute  the  mandates  of 
the  ?>v'^,  concerning  the  wagxetifmofzli  Creatures,  proceed- 
ing as  well  from  humane  pbanfu -,  as  from  the  native  and  pe- 
culiar phanfie  of  every  thing,  and  alfo  concerning  the  magical 
f::vcriority  of  man  over  all  other  fublunary  bodies, will  receive 
illustration,  and  fhine  bright  in  the  eye  of  our  underftanding. 
Tis  a  meridian  truth,  too  clear  to  be  echpied  by  contr-overfie,  r^9t 
that  of  fteel  there  may  be  made  a  needle,  which  invigorated 
by  the  confriclion  of  a  load  (tone,  doth  point  out  the  pole  to 

S  2.  Seamen; 


88  Of  the  Magnaick 


Seamen :  but  in  vain  is  the  fteel  hammered  into  a  needle,  and 
placed  at  free  range  in  the  navigatory  Compafs,  to  level  at 
the  north  Star,  unlefs  there  hath  preceded  a  fit  and  requisite 
affriction  of  the  loadftone.Which  afTertions  fince  they  found 
k>ud  enough  to  pierce  the  ears  of  the  deafcft  incredulity,  it 
remains  convenient,  that  we  frame  and  qualifie  a  Mariners 
needle,  folo  nmu,  onely  by  the  magnetifm  of  our  pbanjie,  and 
magick  of  intuition.  On  the  anvil  therefore,  whereon  the 
fteel  is  hammered  into  a  figure  of  a  needle,  let  the  north 
point  be  chalked  out,  and  that  in  a  ftrait  line  :  then  ftand 
you,  when  you  play  the  Vulcan,  with  your  back  to  the  north, 
that  fo  when  the  fteel  is  beating  under  the  hammer,  you  may 
draw  it  out  into  a  needle  towards  your  felf  and  the  north : 
I  fay  therefore,  that  fuch  a  needle,  thus  pofitionalty  and  intu- 
itively framed,  will  acquire  a  vigorous  po/aritj, una  punctually 
obferve  the  north  Star,  without  any  forein  impregnation  or 
magnetical  infufion,  and  indeed  without  any  variation,  to 
which  the  ordinary  needles  invigorated  by  the  loadftone  are 
fubject,  which  carries  with  it  a  very  great  myftcry.  Moreover 
that  needle,  which  is  made  upon  the  forefaid  line,  by  chancey 
and  without  the  knowledg  or  intention  of  the  Fabricator,  con- 
tinues bare  fteel,  devoid  of  all  verticity,  and  directs  not  to  the 
pole.  Hence  is  it  a  natural  Confequence,  tRat  the  imagination 
of  the  Fabricator,  in  the  very  moment  of  the  needles  nativity, 
when  the  glowing  heat  of  the  fire  is  fomewhat  abated, and  the 
fteel  but  obfcurely  red,  doth  imprefs  this  magnetical  faculty 
into  the  fteel  needle,  as  a  convenient  and  appropriate  fubject. 
Not  that  the  celeftial  orbs  do,  in  that  punctilio  of  time,  in- 
fufe  the  verticity ;  for  then  it  would  delcend  and  be  imprcffed 
upon  the  fteel,  without  the  intention,  confent  or  obferrance 
of  the  fmith  ;  which  cannot  fatisfie  experience :  for  if  the 
Stars  did  tranfmit  their  influence  at  fome  certain  hour,  and  in 
fome  determinate  poiition,  then  might  the  Charatlerifticat 
and  figillarj  fcience  of  the  celeftial  orbs  be  allowed  to  put  on 
triumphant  wreaths,  which  we  pafs  by. 
*7.s*  But  that  ConftelUtion  which  defcends  upon  the  fteel  (and 

it  may  be  upon  every  magical  image  and  feal)  is  derived 
from  the  Micrtcofaical  Heaven ,    that  is ,  from  our  own 

Olympic. 


Cure  of  Wounds.  %9 

Oljmpus  :   vain  and  unfuccefsful  therefore  have  beenthofe 
Magical feals  andpentacles,  which  were  not  framed  and  con-* 
figurated  by  the  magician  in  an  high  ecfiafie  and  exaltation  of 
his  phanfie ;  for  all  inferior  Entities  and  Phanfies  are  com- 
pelled to  do  homage  to  the  tranfeendent  magick  of  ours,  by 
which  prerogative  Sapiens  dominabitur  afirus,  a  wifeman  fhalJ 
regulate  and  countermand  the  influence  of  the  Stars,  to  the 
dominion  of  whofe  fceptre  the  Parent  of  Nature  hath  fub  jett- 
ed whatever  is  contained  in  the  vaft  Amphitheatre  of  Heaven. 
What  we  have  here  alleaged  concerning  the  phanfie  impref- 
fing  a  verticity  upon  the  fteel ,    as  we  have  learned  from  the 
authentick  teltimony  of  many  judicious  pens,  and  from  our 
own  frequent  experience  :  fo  may  it  be  confirmed  ten  thou- 
fand  times  to  the  obfervation  of  any  whofe  curiofity  fhall  en- 
cline  him  to  the  eafie  trouble  of  the  experiment.    Thus  the 
leaves  of  Afarum,  and  the  tops  of  Elder,  fubmit  and  conform 
unto  the  phanfie  of  the  decerptor,  who  impreffeth  upon  the 
plant,  and  the  plant  upon  the  leaves  a  magnetic al  virtue, 
which  in  operation  fliall  juftly  refpond  to  the  pofition  of  the 
hand  that  gathered  them:    when  otherwife,  the  leaf  being 
decoded  (as  the  needle  heat  again  in  the  fire)  and  given  in  a 
potion,  the  virtue  of  the  phanfie  imprefTed  upon  it  would  of 
necefiity  perifti,  if  the  Magnetifm  were  not  cheriihed  and 
maintained  from  the  integral  plant.    That  the  blood  of  any 
Animal  decoded  and  ready  cooked  for  the  trencher,doth  yet 
contain  theyWof  that  Animal,  is  true :  but  that  virtue  doth 
not  depend  upon  the  impreflion  of  humane  andforein  phanfie, 
but  arifeth  immediately  from  the  proper  endowment  of  its 
own  phanfie.    By  the  fame  reafon  alfo  doth  a  dart  thruft        1-^To 
through  the  heart  of  a  horfe,  killed  by  the  execrable  magick 
of  a  witch,  binde  up  and  hold  captive  the  vital  (pirit  of  that 
witch,  and  twifteth  it  together  with  the  muwialjfiirit  of  the 
horfe,  that  fo  both  may  be  torrified  together,  and  by  that  tor- 
ment, as  by  a  (harp  goad,  the  witch  may  be  driven  to  betray 
her  felf .-  and  that  at  length,  by  the  juftice  of  the  magistrate,, 
the  bafe  mifcreant,  detectable  toGW,  and  pernicious  to  man, 
may  be  eternally  exiled  from  the  converfation  of  mortals,and 
cut  off,  according  to  the  Law  of  God.  For  if  the  operation  be 

S  7,  determined; 


0O  Of the  MAgMbck 


determined  to  any  external  ob')t&,  the  magical  foul  doth  never 
attempt  it  without  a  convenient  medium .-  and  for  this  reafon 
(he  makes  u&   of  the  dart  or  nail  transfixed  through  the 

heart. 

Now  this  poittion,  that  man  is  endowed  with  a  power  of 
acting,  fer  nutum,  or  moving  any  object  at  remote  diftance, 
bein<3  proved  by  convictive  evidence:  k  is  alfo  fufhtiently  con- 
firmed, by  the  fame  natural  example,  that  this  tranfcendent 
energy  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the  wife  indulgence  of  his 
Creator ;  and  therefore,  by  the  Charter  of  hisNatuve,  doth 
X72.        jwftly  belong  unto  him.    Their  conjecture  hath  ever  had  a 
firong  hautgouft  of  abfurdity,  who  have  hitherto  conceived, 
that  Satan  hath  moved,  altered,  and  tranfported  any  thing, 
ami  really  applied  AtHztsto  Ptijfives  in  locomotion,onely  jkv 
*mnm',  while  tbey  have  taken  for  granted,' that tbe Devil 
was  the  fiirft  and  grand  Motor  intheforementioned  motions, 
that  by  thofe  corporeal  extremities  requisite  to  contaction,  he 
could  violently  fnatch  away,  tranfmit,  or  any  way  move,  at 
leaft  an  aereal  body  (which  they  fondly  imagine)  though 
deftkute  of  a  foul.  Abfurd,  I  fay,,  is  it  to  believe,  that  Satan 
fince  his  exile  from  the  prefence  ( I   mean  ,   the  merciful 
influence)  of  Divinity,  and  fall  from  the  glory  of  his  own 
eflence,  cloth  frill  retain  a  magical  dignity,   whereby  he  can 
really  act  upon  any  natural  fubject,  and  produce  what  effect 
foever  he  pleaie,  onely  by  intuition,  becaufe  in  the  primitive 
excellence  of  his  once  Angelical  nature,  he  received  fuch  an 
endowment:  but  that  the  fame  prerogative  was  taken  from, 
and  ever  iince  denied  unto  man,  and  given  to  the  Devil,  the 
moftvile  and  defpicable  of  Creatures:  and  that  if  there  be 
any  fuch  real  effects  performed  by  man,thcy  are  to  be  afcribed 
toafervilc  combat!  with  the  devil.     Open  the  eyes  of  your 
reafon  :  for  Satan  hath  hitherto  proudly  triumphed  in  your 
fo  great  and  fo  dangerous  ignorance,  with  fo  high  content,  as 
if  you  had  made  his  altars  fmoke  with  the  grateful  incenfe  of 
glory  and  dignity,  and  devefted  your  fclf  of  your  own  native 
prerogative,  pulled  out  your  own  eyes,  and  offered  them  in 
facrificetohim. 

Wc  have  laid,  that  every  magical  virtue  doth  lie  dormant, 

and 


jmt 


Curtvf Wounds.  9l 

and  want  excitation t    which  holds  perpetually  true,  if  the 
object,  upon  which  the  energy  is  difcharged,  beno'tneerly 
difpofed  and  qualified  to  admit  it,if  the  phanfie  of  it  doth  not 
promptly  conform  unto  the  impreflion  of  the  Agent,  or  alfo 
if  the  Patientbe  equal  in  ftrength,  or  fuperior  to  the  Agent. 
But  on  the  contrary, where  the  object  isconveniently,proxim- 
ly,  and  obediently  qualified  to  entertain  the  magical  influx, 
as  fteel  is  to  receive  the  magnetical  infufton  of  a  ioadfloue  & 
or  plainly  weak,  and  confeious  to  it  felf  (as  are  the  homicide 
adulterer,  theif,  and  witch)  there  the  patient,  without  much 
excitation,  the  (oh  phanfie  of  the  cxtrsard  man  being  deduced 
into  aclion  and  adliged  to  any  convenient  medium,2,t  the  rirft 
affaukfurrenders  its  felf,  and  obeys  theMagnetifm.     I  fay, 
the  magician  ever  makes  uie  of  a  medium  :  for  thus,  unlefs 
a  pregnant  woman  hath  extended  her  hand  to  her  own  thigh, 
forehead,  or  buttocks,  the  infant  in  her  womb  (hall  never 
be  ftigmatized  in  his  thigh,  forehead,  or  buttocks.     Thus  do 
the  words  or  forms  of  Sacraments  ever  operate  :  becaufe  £x 
opere  operato,  from  the  work  performed.    But  why  exorcifms 
do  not  aiway  fucceed  in  their  operations ;  the  defecHs  ijotin 
God,  but  onely  becaufe  the  nnexaltcd  and  dully  -excited  minde 
of  the  Exorcifi  doth  blunt  the  edg  of  the  Charm,  and  render 
the  words  invalid  and  ineffectual.     For  which  reafon,  no 
man  can  be  a  happy  and  perfect  Exorcifi,  but  he,  who  hath 
learned  the  art  to  excite  the  JlSzgick^of  his  oxm.phue/te  5 
or  by  pradife  can  do  it  ecfatically ,    without  that  know~ 
Icdg. 

It  may  be  youi  fay,  that  our  Armary  unguent  acquires  no 
other  magnerical  virtue,  then  that  which  redounds  to  it  from- 
the  phanfie  of  him  that  compounds  it :  you  are  raifiaken,How- 
ever,  (hou'ld  we  allow  you  that  error  for  truth,  your  caiife 
could  receive  no  fupport  or  advantage  thereby ;fmce  then  you 
would  tmpHcitely  confels  the  effect  not  to  be  afcrioed  to 
Satan.  So  the  Vv.gttent  would  not  be  magnetical  from  any 
innate  and  natural  phanfie  peculiar  to  it  ielf,  butfrofri  ao 
external  adventitious  infpiration,  nantdythe  phanfie  of  the 
Compounder^  imprefTed  upon  it :  fince  there.  cani>e  oonecret 
medium  of  the  forefaid  Magactifm,  then  bamanejMood  mih 

humane: 


pt  Of  the  Magnetic k 

humane  blood  ;  truly,  the  blood  alone,  as  the  moft  propor- 
tionate and  predifpofed  fubjeft,  would  fuffice  to  thecompofi- 
tion  of  the  Vnguent,  and  ail  the  other  fimples  ingredient  into 
the  confection,  would  be  fruftraneous  and  unneceflary,  efpe- 
cially  the  blood  of  a  Butt  and  bony,  where  the  cure  is  to  be  per- 
formed by  applying  the  falve  to  weapons  not  diftained  with 
the  blood  of  the  Patient,  which  is  manifeftly  falfe  by  experi- 

179  ment.  Finally,  the  Magnetifm  of  the  "Unguent  would  then  be 

general ;  in  refpecl  the  Confcclioner  may,  by  thewildeand 
univerfal  range  of  his  Fhanfie,  intend  to  make  the  irnpreflion, 
uncertain,  undeterminate,  and  extenfive  to  the  wounds,  not 
onely  of  man,  but  of  all  beafis  whatever.  What  if  the  Corn- 
founders  pbanjieviere  not  fixed  upon  a  dog ;  muft  the  Vnguent 
therefore  have  no  virtue  to  cure  the  wound  of  a  dog  r  Away, 
with  fuch  idiotifm ,  fuch  ridiculous  dotage.  What  hath 
Bole  Armeniake,  what  Linefeed  oyl,  what  Honjt,  and  in  fine 
what  hath  the  blood  of  a  Bull,  of  peculiar  difpofition,  or  de- 
terminate refpecl  to  the  wound  of  a  horfe,  or  man ;  that  up- 
on them  onely,  as  upon  the  moft  proper  mediumyand  not  upon 
any  other  things,  the  Phanfie  of  the  Confeftioner  fliould  be 
imprefled  >  and  yet  if  thefe  werefecluded  the  Compofition, 
the  Unguent  would  be  barren  and  devoid  of  all  power  and 
vulnerary  efficacy.  The  Natural  phanjie  therefore  of  the  Vn- 
guent is  the  f oh  and  grand  caufe  of  the  Magnetifm ,  and  the  im- 
mediate and  prefer  caufe  ofttoe  Cure  :  but  not  the  imagination  of 
the  Component' 

Behold  1  you  have  our  (underftand  true,  Chrifiian)  Philo- 
fophy ;  not  the  frantick  fophifms ,  or  idle  dreams  of  Eth- 
nicks.  Be  cautious,  I  befeech  you,  that  you  bring  not  me 
into  cenfure,  who  have  been  your  felf  more  forward  and  rafh 

174.  incenfuring  others.  I  am  yours,  and  a  Roman  Catholick  : 
who  have  cordially  and  firmly  determined  in  my  felf,  to 
meditate  or  write  nothing,  that  may  be  contrary  to  the  Word 
of  God,  or  the  fundamental  Articles  of  the  Church.  I  well 
underftand  the  conftellation  of  my  own  genius ,  and  know 
my  felf  born,  not  to  allow  or  foment  contentious  debates, 
not  to  write  Comments  on,  or  defensive  Apologies  for  the 
pens  of  other  men  ;  wherefore,  what  I  knew,  I  defired,  with 

a  free- 


Curt  of  Wounds,  g$ 


a  freedom  becoming  a  Philofopher,  to  communicate  to  the 
world. 

I  (hall  annex  onely  this  one  daufe  :  Whoever  attributed 
to  the  Devil  an  erTecl:  arifing  from  Natural  Caufes,  fo  created 
by  God,  and  fo  conferred  upon  the  Creatures :  he  doth  alie- 
nate the  honor  due  to  the  Creator,  and  ignominioufly  (others 
might  fay  blafphemoufly)  apply  it  unto  Satan  :  which  (un- 
der your  favor)  if  you  (hall  ftriclly  call  under  the  teftof 
your  Anatome,  you  will  finde  to  be  exprefs  idolatry.  My 
earned  prayer  to  the  fountain  of  all  Clemency,  our  God  and 
Father  of  Mercies,  is  now,  and  ever  (hall  be,  that  he  would 
be  pleafed  to  look,  with  the  eye  of  compaffion  and  forgivenefs, 
upon  thofe  errors  and  lapfes  of  our  under  ft  anding*  which  from 
our  native,  not  ftubborn,  ignorance,  and  humane  fragility  we 
have  contracted.  Amen. 


Thtxe 


9\ 


TFJcre  are  three  that  bear  record  in  Heaven,  the 
Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and 
thefe  three  are  one :  (And  4?m  Jpeiking  of  the  Hum  a- 
nity  of  Chrift )  there  are  three  which  bear  record  in 
Earth,  tfa  Bloody  the  Spirit,  and  the  Water,  and  thefe 
three  are  one.  Tons  therefore,  wh  haye  the  like  hu- 
manity, it  is  no  wonder,  thai  we  contain  'Blood  and  4 
Spirit  of  the  like  witty :  and  that  the  aclion  of  the  'Blood 
is  meerly  Spiritual.  Yea  for  this  reafon,  in  Genefis  it 
is  not  called  by  the  name  of  Blood :  but  digitized  with 
the  appellation  of  a  xT{ed  Spirit. 

Withdraw  tlxrefore ,  whoever  thou  art,  from  thy 
incredulous  pertitiacy,  and  ingenuoufly  acknowledg  an- 
other Spirit  in  the  blood ,  be  (ides  the  Devil :  unlefs  thou 
wilt  dare  tooppofe  thy  mis-infomed  Faith  to  the  Bwk 
of  Truth. 


The 


P5 


The  Tranjlators  Supplement. 


NEmo  hue  Getmetrit  expert  ingrediatur,  was  the  Motto 
which  the  femi-chriftiart  Philofopher,  Plato,aufed  to 
be  engraven  on  the  pofch  of  his  Academy  *  :  im-  *  Mwfil.  'Fid 
plying  not  onely  the  exact  meafure  of  lines,  but  alfo  nm>  mvka 
the  Geometry  of  a  mans  felf,  the  dimenfions  and  juft  extent  platon- 
of  the  paflions  and  affections  of  the  minde,  to  be  the  previ- 
ous qualification  neceflfary  to  any^that  (hould  hope  to  benefit 
by  his  Lectures.  And  Nemo  hue  PhilofopbU  expers  ingrediatur, 
(hall  be  our  infeription  in  the  front  of  this  Tranjlation ;  un- 
derfhnding  by  Philofophy,  the  ample  knowledg  not  onely  of 
the  Elemental  and  viiibl*  World,  but  alfo  of  the  Intellectual 
and  Spiritual ;  not  onely  of  the  more  plain  and  obvious 
tracts ,  wherein  Nature  progrefleth  to  the  production  of 
ordinary  effect's  •  but  even  thofe  obfeure  and  unfrequented 
paths  (he  walks  in,  when  (he  advanceth  to  Abftrufities  and 
more  myftef ious  Alaghalities ;  together  with  that  acquired 
Candor  of  judgment ,  and  habitual  Equanimity,  which  as 
well  emancipateth  the  underftanding  from  the  pedantick 
tyranny  of  fubfeription  to  all  that's  read,  if  but  difguifed  in 
the  fpecious  drefs  of  probability,  and  ufhered  in  by  Antique 
Authority  ;  as  it  irtclineth  the  reafort  to  a  fober  aflent,  and 
modeft  conformity  to  fuch  AJfertions,  which  carry  the  face 
of  judicious  Enquiries ,  and  ferious  majefty  of  Truth , 
though  they  be  prefe.nted  at  difadvantage,  under  a  cloud  of 
Novelties,  or  Paradoxes.  Nor  can  we  fear  that  this  our  device, 
or  imprefs,  will  be  fufpected  of  impertinency  i  by  any  that 
(hall  do  fo  much  right  to  their  own  judgments,  as  to  conced, 
thataifo*^r  thus  qualified,  muft  be  the  onely  he,  that  can 
furvey,  underftand,  eenfure,  and  enrich  his  head  With  the 
fubtler  fpeculations,  and  profound  Dihoties  of  our  more  then 
ingenious  Helmont ;  while  it  is  of  confeffed  neceflity,  that 
the  grofs  ignordnct  Of  fome  mud  obfeure,  and  the  prevarica- 
tion of  others  pervert  the  profpeel  of  thefe  fplendid  (though 

T   1  Hpt/>ra. 


$>6  The  TranfiMors  Supplement. 


Heterodox  seal)  Notions,  and  Natural  ( though  fpiritual,  or 
magical )  Caufalities,  which  his  finer  pen  hath  drawn,  in 
landskip,  upon  this  tablet,  The  AJagnctically- Natural  cure  of 
Wounds* 

Now  though  the  penfive  Confideration  of  the  incapacity 
(fome  would  have  faid,  Barbarity)  of  the  numerous  multi- 
tude, on  one  fide,  and  of  the  deplorable  inflexibility  of  the 
leading  part  of  learning,  more  then  a  moity  of  Schollers  be- 
ing fwallowed  up  in  a  deluge  of  Preemption  and  Prejudice, 
on  the  other,  might  in  fome  meafure  excufe  our  defpair  of 
finding  many  heads  of  this  foveraign  temper,  wherein  fuffi- 
ciency  in  knoirledg  ought  to  have  received  the  juft  allay  of 
Candor,  and  non-adherence  to  Antiquity  ;  yet  may  we  not  in- 
cur the  odious  premunire  of  fingularity  fo  far,  as  not 
confidently  to  hope,  that  our  worthy  Author  will  fall  into  the 
bands  of  fome,  whofc  unbyaffed  intellectuals  will  fmoothly 
run  him  over,  and  gather  fo  full  fatisfa£t.ion  from  many  of 
his  Experiments,  that  Gratitude  her  felf  will  prompt  them 
to  confefs  the  facrifice  of  Honor  defervedly  due  unto  his 
memory. 

And  upon  this  evidence  of  Hope,  we  are  bold  to  promife 
our  felf  fupportment  for  our  refolutions  of  not  attempting 
either  any  Comment  on  ,  or  Defence  of  thofe  Metaphyseal 
(underftand  onely  Ideal  and  abstracted  )  conceptions ,  and 
novel  Hints,  rich  afperfed  upon  thefe  fheets  5  fuch  as  that 
of  a  Phanfie,  or  Natural  fen  fat  ion,  by  the  Charter  of  their 
Creation,  properly  pertinent  unto,  and  infeparably  inherent 
in  all  mixt  bodies,  though  devoid  of  Animation,  and  power 
of  voluntary  eletlion ;  and  this  not  onely  fingle  and  of  deter- 
minate identity,  but  multiplex  and  various  according  to  the 
diverfe  predifpofition  and  capacity  of  the  object,  whereon 
they  difcharge  their  activity  ;  that  of  the  magical  preroga- 
tive of  man,  or  that  tranfeendent  endowment,  whereby  he 
is  empowered  to  ad  per  nutum,  by  the  fole  virtue  of  Thought 
or  Spiritual  intuition, upon  an  object  removed  at  vail  diflance, 
by  means  of  an  ideal  entity,  formed  in  the  womb  of  more 
attentive  Imagination,  and  tranfmitted  by  the  will',  that  of  the 
htdXConfopitionof  this  Hierarchy,  or  iemi-divine  Faculty  of 

the 


The  Tran floors Supplement.  97 

the  foul,  by  the  Opiate  or  Counter-magick  of  the  Forbidden 
Fruit  ;   and  the  refufcitation  or  excitement  or  the  fame,  by 
theenfranchifement  of  the  inward  man  from  theedipie  and 
oppreilion  of  Corporeity,  in  Enthufiafms,  Raptures ,  and/r- 
flatical  Contemplations,  ef-c.   Since  the  known  poverty  of  our 
Reafon  could  not  but  throw  infinite  difp^ragement  on  the 
wealthy  harveft  of  his ;  nor  the  accefs  of  our  plenary  ajfent, 
or  vindication,  confer  any  thing  at  all  of  eftimation  to  fulfil 
the  Authority  of  his  Name,  or  determine  the  eftabiifnment 
of  his  Portions  for  folid  and  unrefutable  Truths.   Wherefore 
in  conformity  to  the  advifoes  of  fome  riper  heads,  to  whofe 
friendly  decifion  we  humbly  fabmitted  our  hefitancy  in  this 
point,  together  with  the  concurrent  vote  of  our  own  thir- 
teenth thought,  we  have  flood  refolved,  neither  to  dim  the 
luftre  of  our  Authors  fenfe,  by  the  interposition  of  our  Boe- 
otian* interpretation, or  melancholick  enlargement ;  nor  make  *  ^ceoti  erim' 
our  pen  guilty  of  fo  uncivil  encroachments  on  the  liberties  apudcmiqms, 
of  the  comprehensive  Reader,  as  to  preoccupy  his  head,  with  fiolidituu  & 
the  abortive  remits  of  our  Shallower  fcrutinies ,   or  prevent  ftupiditatis no- 
bis more  ocular  difquifitions  and  maturer animadverfions  ;  but  t^nema'cau~ 
fo  far  to  affift  younger  capacities,  as  to  endevour  the  ex-  Horat.'mEp^ 
planation  of  fome  unfrequent  idiomes,    and  uncouth  terms,  Baetimincafa 
which  the  Author  feems  to  have  borrowed  from  the  Caba-  jurares  ae>c 
liftique  Vocabulary  of  Paracelfiu  ;    annexing  onely,  for  fatis-  ****** 
faftron  of  the  more  illiterate,    the  more  felecl ,   and  lefs 
fuperftitious  Forms,  or  Prefcripts  of  the  Magnetic^  Armary 
Vnguent. 

In  the  mean  time,  in  order  to  our  avoidance  of  fcandal,  as 
we  cannot  fmother  our  wifhes,  that  the  ardor  of  debate  with 
his  opponents,  Father  Roberts,  the  fefnite,  and  Goclenius,  the 
Phyfician,  and  the  eager  queft  of  reafons  to  make  good  his 
theory  of  Magnetifm  againfl:  future  Affailants,  had  not  fedu- 
ced  his  gravity  to  flumble  upon  fome  few  Examples,  whofe 
eonftant  verity  Experiment  may  have  juft  caufe  to  queftion 
orfober  Philofophy,  at  flrft  fight,  fmilingly  refer  tofuper- 
flition  :  fo  we  cannot  but  figh  at  the  apprehenfion  of  our 
own  want  of  abilities  to  fuftain  fo  considerable  and  weighty  a 
task  as  the  due  perpenilon  and  mature  difquifition  of  fome 

T    2  ahftrnf* 


98  Tbt  Trtnjiatm  Supplement. 


abflrufe  riotions,  which  the  concifer  pen  of  oaf  Author  hath 
onely  hinted,  per  tranfennam,  and  fo  propofefd  to  the  more 
deliberate  difcovery  of  fome  worthy  EnUrgtr.  For  (to  omit 
others  of  lefs  value)  upon  that  one  cardinal  pin  of  Magnetifm, 
or  the  Magical  virtue  of  Naturals,  it  feemeth  to  us,  that  the 
whole  fpeculation  of  thofc  three  grand  Arcandes,  whofe  ob- 
fcure  and  yet  infcrutable  Caufalities  have"  captived  the  great- 
eft  Wits,  in  all  ages,  in  a  labyrinth  of  perplexed  and  uncer- 
tain Enquiries.  (  I  )  The  Original  and  edgnation  of  Forms  ; 
(  l  )  The  caufes  of  Sympathy  andDyfpathy,  or  of  idiofyricfi- 
tical  Friendfhip and  Enmity  or  averfation  j  ( 3  )  And  the  fo 
Uhiverfally  magnified  Tower  of  Imagination  ,  rieceffarily  de- 
pend. To  the  clear  and  fatisfactory  folutionof  which  Pro- 
%levms  whoever  19  ordained,  by  the  exceeding  bdnignity  of  his 
Conftellation,  will  perform  a*  work  of  higheft  benefit,  and 
unparalleled  merit  to  the  Commons-wealth  of  Learning,  Will 
advance  his  memory  to  fo  high  a  pitch  of  Honory  that 'twill 
be  accounted  humility  in  him  to  look  fo  low  as  Cafar,  and 
(hall  have  our  free  Vote,  that  his  ftatue  cannot  be  uncivil,  or 
ambitious,  if  it  take  the  right  hand  of  Ariftotles  in  the  Vati* 
can.  But  alas  1  this  muft  be  a  work  of  Time,  Pyrotechny,  and 
many  heads  cooperating.  And  therefore  the  wide  and  almoft 
irreparable  encroachments,  which  the  late  deluge  of  Bar' 
barifm  hath  made  upon  the  ftudies  of  our  own  ingenious 
Nation^  and  ominoufly  threatned  to  moft  Seminaries  of  Art's 
and  Sciences  in  Europe :  together  with  the  general  contempt 
of  fevere  Philolbphy,  amongft  thofe,  whofe  wealthy  For- 
tunes might  fuftain  the  charge  of  Experiments  and  forein 
Explorations  requifite  to  the  laudable  achievement  of  fo 
magisterial  a  piece  of  knowledg ,  may  probably  encourage 
our  fears,  that  it  may  be  late  ere  pofterity  be  blefTedwith 
its  revealment,  nay,  perhaps  not  until  the  whole  material 
World  be  ready  to  confefs  the  Chymiftry  of  the  laft 
day. 

Having  hitherto  feduced  the  minde  of  our  Reader,  into  a 
fliort  profped  of  thofe  few  pieces ,  which  our  devout  Zeal 
to  the  advancement  of  the  knowledg  of  Natures  choifefi: 
Magnalities  hath  inflamed  us  to  defire  in  a  larger  draught  j 

and 


The  Tranflators  Supplement.  99 


and  prefented  him  the  (lender  fummary  of  what  our  Supple- 
ment intendeth :  a  longer  digreffion  cannot  but  tacitely  fcan- 
dal  the  weight  of  our  Theajm,and  rudely  difoblige  attention. 
Wherefore,  we  return  to  the  direel  difeharge  of  our  under- 
takings :  the  interpretation  of  fome  Fanatique  words,  which 
in  the  opinion  of  Grammar  know  no  figmficarjon,  becaufe  no 
Etymology,  nor  can  the  greateft  Philologer  deduce  from  any 
original  higher  then  the  Babe  I  of  P trace Ifa ;  and  the  fupplj 
of  the  Antiquity,  and  Firms  of  the  Magnetical  Vn~ 
guent. 

Bifmuthum,  in  the  dialect  of  Hermetic  aI  Afineralogifis,         1. 
admits  of  a  double  fignification.    For  fome  accept  it  for  %  Bifmuthum* 
fimple,  and  lift  it  in  the  inventory  of  Marchafites  or  Fire 
ftones,  taking  it  to  be  no  other,  then  that  which  the  Noble 
Geber  called  Magnefia,  and  the  fliops  Black  Lead :  *  others  *yidc  ca/Jpin, 
intend  by  it  a  compound  made  by  the  hand  of  Art,  and  that  Itb.z.  dc  mctalL 
of  two  forts  :   The  firft,  when  upon  melted  Tin,  the  Chymift  caP-  J4* 
affufeth  Mercury,  and  makes  thereof  a  fragil  fubfhncea.nd 
fnow-white  mafs  •  *  the  other  a  mixture  of  Silver  and  M?r-  *  nomxm  in 
eury,  which  fubmitteth  to  the  firft  aHauk  of  hie,  as  eafijy  as  diBionar.  Voter 
wax,  and  is  of  exceeding  whitenefs,  which  we  conceive  to  be  e  lf' 
the  true  Magwfia,  Pbilofofbarum.     But  we  had  rather  incline 
to  the  autoptical  teftimony  of  thje  judicious  Dodor  fa-dan  ^ 
*  who  renders  Bifmuthum  to  be  in  Englifh,  TmgUfsx  or  the  * In  his  Book 
fteril  Marchafite  of  Lead.  Now  Marchafites  are  the  immature  «?     jM. 
materials  of  metals,  and  vary  according  to  each  feveral  and  nmfvviers.1" 
diftincl  fpecies  of  metals  :  *  and  hence  donbtie{s  Paracelfus  *  Libmm  w 
took  occafion,in  the  feparation  of  Elements  from  Marchafites,  /j^g^r.  Ar- 
iz compare  the  golden  Marchaiite  to  Gold,  the  filver  one  to  can-  chymic. 
filver,  Talck  to  Tin,  Bifmuthum  to  Lead,Zincum  to  Copper,  lib--CflP-l^-:n 

^  j  T         c    1  •  X4  _>      !~     r  ,    r,'         ir     *  comment xt.  ad 

Cadmia  to  Iron,Stifeium  to  Mercury, &c.  Confme  Paraceljum  rncm 
intcrtio  Archidox* 

Throni,  or  Trenos  and  Trojioffa,   in  the  wild  Language,  Of         ,2, 
rather  Canting,  of  Paracelftu^  implies  a  rorid  Aftteqr <9  or  ,G>  Thm;:- 
teftU/deWy.  being  a  (pedes  of  Minna,  infweetne&  density, 
tenacity,  and  whitenefs,  far  cranfeending  all  other :   genera- 
ted by  the  Mercury  of  the  midle  region,  infuiing  its  aftraj 
fcminality  into  the  fertil  matrix,  of  the  Aer  -y  Afi  j  wholly 

feparated 


ioo 


The  Tr  an  (later  s  Supplement. 


I- 


a    4- 
Noliocb. 


In  digionaia 
Patau!/?. 

Ncbhlgea- 


6. 

Laudanum. 


feparated  and  refined  from  all  Sulphur  and  Sale.  This  delicate 
extract  of  the  Scars  is  in  good  plenty  found,  if  we  regard  the 
time  of  its  diitillation,  in  the  lpring  and  entrance  of  harveft, 
when  the  Sun  begins  to  leave  the  torrid  Negro,  and  make  his 
more  temperate  courtfhip  to  the  (tarty  Virgin  :  if  the  place, 
in  molt  Eaftern  Countries,  upon  the  leaves  of  Trees  and 
Herbs. 

Tberemaben,  or  Terenialnx,  meaneth  the  fame,  which  the 
more  regular  and  orthographical  penof  Ariftotle  hath  pro- 
perly named  drgjui\t,  mel4treumyve/nfeid*r»;  an  oleaginous 
kinde  of  mldhenj,  not  confected  by  the  Chymiftry  of  Bees, 
but  diltilling  from  the  Retort  of  the  inferior  Aer,  upon  Mea- 
dows, Campaniaes,  Trees,  and  Herbs.  This  delicate  collation 
the  civility  of  the  Planets  entertaineth  us  with,in  the  moneths 
of  fttrte,  p#/y,and  Aug*,  ft,  as  if  they  intended  the  refrefh- 
ment  of  the  laborious  fwain,exhauited  by  the  heat  of  Summer 
and  fweat  of  Harveft.  The  Antients  called  it  Tbrer,  if  we  may 
credit  the  traduction  of  Dorn&tu,  in  his  comment  upon  the 
diflra&ed  meteorology  of  Paracelfat. 

Nofioch  underftandeth  the  nocturnal  Pollution  of  fome 
plethorical  and  wanton  Star,  or  rather  excrement  blown  from 
the  noftxils  of  fome  rheumatick  planet,  falling  upon  fpacious 
plains,  fields  and  fheep  paftures,  of  an  obfeure  red  or  brown 
tawny,  in  confidence  like  a  gelly,  and  fo  trembling  if  touch- 
ed :  which  the  philofophy  of  the  clouted  fhooe  affirms  to  be 
the  ruinesof  a  Star  fallen.  Some  there  are,  faith  Doymhs, 
who  by  Nefiocb  intend  Wax  :  but  by  the  favor  of  a  meta- 
phor. 

Nebulcea  we  Englifh  a  Salt,  or  Nitrons  exudation  and  de- 
ftillament  from  the  clouds,  by  the  deliquium  of  the  colder 
aer  refolved  into  an  unctuous  liquor,  and  defcending  upon 
folid  and  ftony  bodies ;  which  fuffering  induration,  by  the 
exhalement  of  its  aqueous  parts,  alTumes  folidity,  and  by  the 
intereft  of  exact  fimilitude  and  cognation,  doth  more  then 
pretend  unto  the  dignity  of  celeftial  Nitre. 

Laudanum,  if  the  fame  that  all  the  Druggifts  of  Europe 
call  Ladanum,  is  the  Woodfeer,  or  liquid  fpumous  exudation 
of  the  (hrub  Cifiw,  or  Ledony  growing  in  great  plenty  in 

the 


The  Trdnjlatcrs  Supplement.  i  o  I 

thelfland  Cyprus,  which  the  Natives,  (unlefs thefyth  of 
time  hath  lighted  upon  thatcufrom,  fince  the  days  of  Dio- 
fcorides)  *  ufe  every  Spring  to  gather  from  off  the  long  *  litfa.  i. 
fhaggy  hairs  of  the  thighs  and  beards  of  Goats,  feeding  fttfuio. 
among  and  bruftiing  themfelves  againft  the  ftalks  and  leaves 
of  the  plant ,  and  after  due  clarification  and  percolation 
thereof,  to  conferve  in  convenient  pots :  But  if,  in  the  ac- 
count of  Helmont,  a  kinde  of  aereal  meteor,  or  production 
arifing  from  the  coition  and  confpiracy  of  fome  feminary 
celeftial  influx  with  fit  and  proportionate  matter ,  the  fat 
evaporations  of  Plants ;  we  confefs  that  after  a  tedious  fearch 
of  Paracelfw,  Severinm,  Dorneus ,  and  others  his  inter- 
preters ,  we  cannot  receive  pofitive  fatisfaftion  concerning 
its  name,  nature,  manner  of  generation,  or  fpecifical  dif- 
ference, but  muft  acquiefce  in  a  contented  ignorance  of  what 
it  is. 

We  dare  not  countenance  error,  or  ftifle  our  own  habilities 
6f  difquifition ,  fo  far,  as  not  to  take  notice  of  the  incogi- 
tancy,  or  partiality  of  our  Helmont,  in  afcribing  the  honor  of 
the  invention  of  Hoplocrifm ,  or  the  Cure  of  Wounds  by 
unction  of  the  weapora,  to  his  Matter  Varacelfns  :    When  we  *  Produ  Porta, 
(land  confirmed,  upon  evidence  of  fubfhntial  and  conviclive  fiM».  Mag. 
Arguments,  that  this  fecret  is  much  younger  then  Paracelfm,  n*tUYal-  cap. 
as  bearing  no  date  of  its  revealment  beyond  thofe  yeers ,  ^a/«o»  pTo- 
wherein  he  had  long  confefTed  his  dufl ,  and  experimentally  cut  ab'eppido 
confuted  his  own  arrogant  Treatife  of  the  art  of  fpinning  Ateftino,  repe;- 
out  the  thread  of  Mam  life  to  a  length  equal  with  the  clue  t*m(uif}'eumm 
of  Time  ,    and  making  our  vital  Oyl  of  the  fame  durable   f^Tlhc  a 
and  invincible  temper,    with  that  which  maintaineth  ^-t  umula&hira 
flames  of  Eternal  Lamps  *.      For  firfl ,   upon  ftricT:  (  and  cam  luccnula 
introth  tedious)  lecture  of  all  the  leaves  of  the  extant  Works  aibuc  ardms, 
ofParacelfajjit  cannot  meet  with  any  the  leaf!  mention  of  it:  $*/*  rufticUfnar, 
nor  indeed  the  grave  Libavins  before  us,  as  he  foiemnly  pro-  ™rZo$£l&~ 
fefTeth,  in  Apocalypfeos  Hermetic*,  parte  priore,  &  cap.  ultim.  rupta  mox  eva- 
And  to  thofe,  who  have  appealed  to  pofthume  Manufcripts,  taut  fiamma. 
and  gloried  in  their  inheritance  of  fome  Papers  bequeathed  v^mamc^- 
to  the  fecret  cuftody  of  Opporinus^  his  Amanuenfis ;  we  muft  f*m  de™aera- 
withfiniles  rejoyn,  that  a  fober  and  well  ordered  belief  can  se'^'zo' 

V  as 


102  Tht  Traitjlaters  Supplement. 

as  foon  fwallow  down  the  monftroUs  figment  of  the  Book^ 
*  confide  Ma-  0f  Adam,  *  which  the  impious  credulity  of  Alagicians  doth 
VuwVh,hf  con^entty  deliver  to  be  given,  by  the  Archangel  Mattel, 
tb'uenova 'an  unt0  mm>  irnmediately  upon  his  exile  from  Paradife,  and 
msgia  Pa'acel-  contrition  for  his  fin,  and  from  Adam  devolved  to  Seth,  from 
ficapoflit  po-  him  to  Enochs  from  him  to  Noah,  thence  to  Sent,  afterwards 
b.vi}&c.  c.6.  to  Abraham,  Ifaac, Jacob,  Levi,  Caath >j  Amram,Mofes$ofhua, 
^'  J*  and  fo  down  to  the  Prophets  and  holy  Seers  fucceflively ; 

whereby  they  were  in  a  moment  illuminated,  the  veil  of  fin 
withdrawn  from  the  eye  of  their  reafon,  and  all  thofe  moun- 
tains of  flefhly  luft,  which  hindered  the  profpect  of  the  in- 
tellect, levelled,  fo  that  they  beheld  Nature  face  to  face,  and 
freely  gazed  upon  all  her  beautiful  parts,  in  thenakednefc 
of  their  Effaces,  and  Porw^  devefted  of  all  corporeity.  A- 
gain,  though  an  Argument  drawn  from  the  printed  fheets  of 
Paracelfus  be  of  no  confiderable  validity,  in  regard  he  is  fo 
ridiculoufly  fubject  to  felf-contradidion ,  through  all  his 
works,  that  a  witty  Ad verfary  might  eafily  beat  him  out  of 
the  Schools  with  his  own  weapons;  yet  it  may  be  lawful 
for  us,from  the  mafterpeice  of  his  pen,  his  tract  of  Chirurgery, 
to  colled  fome  proof,  that  he  was  wholly  a  ftranger  to  the 
doctrine  or  praclife  of  HopPochrifm.  For  in  tbatdifcourfe, 
reducing  all  the  feveral  kindes  of  Vulnerary  remedies  to  a 
conftant  method,  he  is  pofitive,  that  there  is  no  other  Cura-ti- 
on  of  a  wound,  but  what  is  performed,  either  by  means  of  the 
Natural  Balfam,  or  by  the  appofitionof  Brajfidclla  upon  the 
green  wound,  or  by  Aiagorreo  ;  the  firft  of  which  is  Natural 
and  the  fame  that  all  rational  Phyficians  allow,  the  fecond 
LraJfiAellkal,  fo  denominated  from  the  Herb  Adder  (tongue, 
or  Ophioglojfum, which  he  was  pleafed  to  nickname  Brtjfidella, 
the  third  Magical,  for  Afagorrco,  in  the  interpretation  of 
Dorntprs,  is  Aiedicamentum  Adagicum:  and  who  can  finde 
amongfr  thefe  differences  any  room  for  the  intrufion  of  the 
Sympathetica!  Armary  Unguent  ?  Laftly,  if  the  exceeding 
Candor  of  any,  willing  to  palliate  this  lapfeof  our  Helwont, 
recur  to  Authority,  and  transfer  the  guilt  upon  Baptifia 
Porta  (from  whom,  in  probability,  this  erroneous  tradition 
was  derived  downto  our  Century)  who  fathers  the  invention 

upon 


The  Tranjlmrs  Sufflcmnt.  103 


upon  Paracelftu,  in  thefe  words  :  Vngmntum  Armarium , 
GrtcU  QTfr!oyp.<ryA  diftumy  olim  a  Paraceljo  Maximi lia.no  C&- 
fari  datum  y  &  ah  eodem  expertum,  maxime'que  carum  ab  eo  hc- 
bitum,  quamdiu  vixit,  cujus  aula  nobilts  mihi  communicavit : 
We  (full  modeftly  return,  thatfo  incredulous  and  indepen- 
dent a  pen,  as  was  Helmonts,  (whofe  genius  (cwnt&fapereex 
aliem  commentario,  and  feems  conftellated  rather  to  confute, 
then  fubferibe)  could  hardly  be  fo  incircumfped,  as  not  to 
difcover  the  grofs  mifhke  of  Porta,  in  the  point  of  Chrono- 
logy. For  what  he  affirms  of  Paracelfus  his  communicating 
the  prefcript  and  ufe  of  the  Unguent,  to  Maximilian,  Em- 
peror of  the  Romans,  is  eafily  confuted  as  well  from  the  An- 
nals of  Salteburg,  as  the  Hiftory  of  Paracelfus  life,  written 
by  the  learned  and  faithful  hand  of  Melchior  Adamut*  ,  *  inUbr.dc 
from  both  which  pofterity  may  receive  ample  fatisfaclion,  vg-  M^°' 
that  Paracelfm  was  faft  luted  in  his  grave,  and  refolved  in  ' 
terram  damnatam,  in  the  reign  of  Charts  the  fifth,  about  the 
year  of  Chrifts  Incarnation,  1^41.  Now  Maximilian  was 
made  Cafar,  after  the  death  of  Ferdinand  his  brother,  in  the 
yeer,  156$.  Wherefore  to  reconcile  Porta's  ftory  to  his 
computation  of  time ,  we  muft  eonced  a  pojTibility  of  re- 
rrejsion  ab  inferis,  and  allow  Paracelfns,  as  in  his  life  time  to 
nave  defcended  to  the  Abyfs  below,  out  of  curiofity  to  dif- 
pute  with  Avicejtna,  and  returned  victor  over  the  pale  Philo- 
sopher ;  fo  Ilfo  after  his  deach,  fujl  twenty  four  yeers,  to 
have  afcended  to  the  Court  of  Ma>:imilian,  and  preferred 
him  the  form  of  the  Sympathetica!  Unguent.  Nor  can  the 
aflertion  of  Crollius  (  who  drank  as  deep  of  the  fpitle  of 
Paracelfus,  as  his  predecelTor  Porta)  that  this  fecret  wa.s  firft 
imparted  to  the  King  of  Bohemia,  be  made  good :  Since  * 
Maximilian  obtained  not  the  Scepter  of  that  Kingdom,  un- 
til the  yeer,  1 56*2.  as  we  are  inftruded  by  the  almofl:  omni- 
fcient  Libavitts,  whofe  pen  hath  been  large  upon  thisfubjed, 
in  Apocalyps.  Hermetic*  part,  prior,  cap.  uhim. 

But  whoever  was  the  true  Father  of  this  modern  produdi- 
io& ,  fhould  he  obtain  a  parol  from  the  grave,  and  return 
.again  to  converfe  with  men,  we  may  with  rea/on  doubt  that 
he  would  hardly  now  know  the  Minerva  of  his  own  brain; 

V  z  but 


1 04  The  Tranjlttors  Supplement. 

but  would  borrow  that  exclamation  of  Hercules  returned 
from  his  Avernal  expedition,  Vnde  rs.m  foedo  cbfti  p*dere  nati  ? 
qua  clades  domum gravat  ?  fo  much  hath  the  fqualid  difeafe 
of  Reformation  disfigured  it,  and  varied  that  originary  come^ 
!inefs,which  was  retrained  to  a  determinate  number  of  felect 
ingredients,  into  as  many  uncouth  drefles,  as  the  licentious 
Phanfie  of  every  Commentator  thought  fit  to  prefentit  in, 
every  fecond  hand  adding,  abstracting,  or  altering  what  fim- 
ples  it  pleafed.  For  in  Libaviw  his  conteft  with  Ctolliuf  and 
Severinut,  about  the  Dihoti  of  Hoplochrifm ,  we  finde  no 
fewer  then  thirteen  feveral  and  different  Forms  of  the  Mag- 
netick  Unguent  enumerated  ;  and  in  the  private  ftudies  of 
many  Noblemen  (who  have  thought  their  Cabinets  infinitely 
enriched  with  this  Jewel ,  and  valued  it  equal  with  that  pre- 
cious trifle,  the  Countefs  of  Kent s  Powder)  we  havefeen  many 
other  diflenting  from  the  original  in  all,  but  the  title.  So  that 
while  fome  have  ufurped  the  liberty  to  multiply  the  (Imples, 
and  run  through  the  whole  feries  of  Vulnerary  remedies  : 
others  have  contracted  the  whole  Magnetical  Energy  into  one 
fingle  mineral ;  as  may  be  exampled  in  the  fo  much  magnified 
Sjmpathetickjporrder,  that  wears  the  name  of  Sir  Gilbert  Tal- 
bot,which  we  afTuredly  know  to  be  nothing  but  Roman  Vitriol 
%  .      calcined  with  Promethean  *  Fire.     In  this  we  are  tender  not 

domofubLa-  t0  nave  tnc  ""ncerity  °f  our  thoughts  expofed  to  the  danger 
um,  wot  boy.  of  mifapprehenfion.  Wherefore  to  provide  ag'ainft  miftake, 
lib.x.  Carmm.  we  profefs  in  the  ears  of  the  world,  that  we  have  not,  in  this 
od- 1'  our  diflike  of  innovating  the  receipt,  tacitely  been  injurious 

to  the  juft  freedom  of  any  judicious  pen,  in  making  fober 
enquiries,  profitable  enlargements,  and  modeft  corrections 
of  any  piece  delivered  down  from  the  hand  of  more  antient 
Learning ;  for  the  happy  induftry  of  our  Forefathers  hath 
not  precluded,  but  opened  the  door  of  Exploration ,  and 
our  fight  muft  needs  be  confeffed  weaker,  if  franding  upon 
their  fhoulders  we  fee  not  farther :  nor  confined  the  Magne- 
tical Virtue  to  that  juft  number  and  quantity  of  Simples, 
found  in  the  primitive  compofition  of  the  Unguent ;  for  we 
cannot  be  destitute  of  valid  reafons  to  allure  us,  that  the 
fame  admirable  effect  might  arife from  many  other  Vulnerary 

medicaments, 


The  Trarfftators  Supp  lenient.  105 


medicaments,  as  well  in  the  operation  of  their  fingle  Effen- 
tial  Forms,  as  of  the  neutral  Quality  rehiring  from  their 
conjunction  into  one  compound  Salve  :  but  onely  infinuated 
our  wifhes,  that  every  fick  Phanfie  might  not  be  tolerated  to 
exercife  an  arbitrary  power  of  innovation  over  fuch  well 
compofed  Medicines,  which  by  the  conftancy  of  their  effects 
fufftciently  affert  the  maturity  of  their  firfr.  contrivers  know- 
ledg,  and  manifeft  their  own  perfection ;  as  alfo  that  the 
Adverfaries  to  the  Doctrine  of  Magnetifm  had  wanted  that 
advantage  and  encouragement  of  contradiction,  which  the 
unneceffary  variety  of  prefcripts  of.  the  Armary  Unguent 
hath  unadvifedly  given  them.  But  our  proper  bufmefs  is  to 
furnifti  the  Reader  iefs  acquainted  with  the  Books  of  Phyfi- 
cians,  with  the  faithful  Copies  of  the  mod  ancient,  authen- 
tick,  'and  rational  defcriptions  of  the  Sympathetick  Unguent  •. 
withinduftry  omitting  thofe,  which  feem  to  offend  the  no- 
ftrils  of  more  precife  Philofophy  with  the  ingtateful  fmell  of 
Superftition. 

The  Prototype  or  Original  of  the  Unguent    vulgarly  im- 
puted to  Paracelfus  •  but  in  probability  contrived  long  after  *  m  hoc 
his  death,  by  the  hand  of  Barthol.  Corrichterm  \  Phyfician  cov(iaf}  qi0'd 
to  Maximilian  the  fecond,  in  whofe  Court  it  was  rlrft  divulg-  deh&bwumk- 

ed  and  pratfifed,  is  thus  drawn.  fimmulta 

jHperltujofacom' 

'«»•',*■'■/•  1  ,    „  t>,         mentiti  fit :  it- 

Of  the  Mofs  grown  on  a  humane  skull  two  ounces:  Mimy  fan,  ut  Cwdum 

half  an  ounce :  Humane  fat  depurated  two  ounces  :  Oyl  of  Live  bcaedift&s  car- 

■feed  twelve  drachmes  :  Qy I  of  Rofes,  and  Bole  Armeniack^  ana  tarrboiJijl*t,fo~ 

one  ounce.    Mix  them,  and  by  frequent  agitation  incorporate  «^««* ?"  M~ 

them  into  an  Vnguent.    Into  which  a  (flinter  of  wood ',  or  the  ^^  po^'{olk 

•  weapon  ft ained  with  the  patients  blood,  is  to  be  immerfed :  the  cccafiim  rct,o- 

wound,  during  the  time  of  its  fanation,  being  defended  from  the  cedendo  '.  & 

.  injury  of  aer,  bound  clofely  up  with  clean  fwathes^  andmundi-  tifflCjOitafjead 

fed  with  the  urine  of  the  patient.  But  to  the  efficacious  confection  ^/^ff/^ 

cf  the  Armary  Vnguent,  to  cure  a  wound  by  untTion  of  the  inftru-  auoquc  Vnguen- 

ment  of  the  harm,  though  not  dift  ained  with  the  blood,  we  are  to  tumtitidaFara- 

admix  to  the  former,  of  Virgin'Honey  (we  Jbould  rather  cboofe  C^A 

the-  be  ft  Mel  Atticum,  or Homey  of  Athens,  for  its  excellence 

worthily  efteemed  by  the  Antients)  two  ounces  i  the  fat  of  a.  Bull 

V  3  ont 


emm 


io6 


The  TfAnfldtm  Supflemem. 


2. 


*  Civ'di  vi% 
ttmfwa,  qnn- 
■tum  ma  ejl  li- 
b,-Mum  circtier 
fefqultrium  aut 
trium :  ai'Ai 
fexlarius  e(l 
unciarum  oiic- 
decm,&  refpon 
dec  carubao 
Rotembnrgo  til 
harino. 


one  drachme*  And  this  we  conceive  to  be  the  fame,  which  our 
Helmont  intended :  as  the  obfervation  of  every  diligent  Reader 
cannot  but  cou'etl. 

Baptijla  Porta,  in  Magia  Natural.  /.8.  r.ia.  compoundeth 
it ,  of  the  Mofs  of  an  unburicd  Cranium  :  the  fat  of  man, 
each  two  ounces :  Mumy,  Humane  blood,each  half  an  ounce ; 
Cyl  of  Line  feed,  and  Turpentine,  each  one  ounce  :  Bole 
Armen,  as  much.  Incorporate  all  thefe,  in  a  clean  Marble 
Morter,  into  an  Unguent :  whofe  ufe  and  effect  exactly  cor- 
refpond  to  the  former. 

The  moll:  magnified  (becaufe,  indeed,  mod  diificult  and  ce- 
remonious) method  of  compounding  the  Unguent,  defcribed 
by  Ofwaldus  Crollius,  in  Bajilica  Chymica  ,  together  with  a 
Panegyrick  of  its  excellencies,  runs  thus : 

tyi  Of  the  Fat  of  a  -wild  Boar,  and  a  Bear  (the  elder  the  Beafts, 
the  more  efficacious  their  fat)  ana  four  ounces.  When  thefe  Fats 
have  been,  for  the  Jp ace  of  half  an  hour,decocled  in  good  red  wine, 
they  are  to  be  effufed  into  pure,  clean,  cold  water,  and  the  floating 
untlmus  fubfiance  to  be  skimmed  off  rvith  a  convenient  infiru- 
ment,  but  the  ponderous  refidence  in  the  bottom  to  be  ejected,  as 
excrementitiotu  and  ufe  left.  This  done ,  R  of  thefaireft  Earth- 
worms, frequently  purified  in  white  Wine,  two  fext arte s  *  :  Let 
them  be  tor  ri fed  in  a  well  vernijhsd  earthen  pipkin,  in  an  Oven 
clofe  luted,  provided  they  burn  not,  and  then  be  finely  pulverated : 
Of  this  powder  Ifc  one  ounce  :  t  he-brain  of  a  wilde  Boar  exjiecated: 
red  odoriferous  Sanders :  Mumy  :  the  Bloodftone  •  ana  one 
ounce*  Finally,  ty.  of  the  moffy  periwig  of  the  skull  of  a  man,  de- 
firoyedby  violent  death,  /beared  off  in  the  increafe  of  the  Moon, 
and  her  exigence  in  a  propitious  houfe  of  Heaven,  of  Venus,  if 
:poffible  ,  but  on  no  condition  of  thofe  two  malevolent  Planets, 
Mars  and  Saturn,  the  quantity  of  two  Nutmegs*  To  aH  thefe 
decently  pulverized  and fe arced  conjoyn  the  for ef aid  Fat,  and 
confufe  them,  according  to  the  art  of  the  Apothecary,  into  an  in- 
comparable Vngueni ,  to  be  conferved  with  extraordinary  dili- 
gence in  a  Glafs  or  Gallipot,  c/ofely  fealed  up,  and.if  it>grow 
dry,  with  long  keeping,   to  be  remollied  and  humectated  with 

Virrin 


The  Tr an  [tutors  Supplement*  1 07 

Virgin  Honey*  All  this  is  to  be  performed  while  the  Sun  is  quar- 
ter ei-in  libra.    ■  1 

Somewhat  different  from  all  thefe  is  the  Compofition  of 
Ofwaldtts  Gabelchoverns  ,  recorded  in  Pratlica  Germanica : 
which  contains  of  the  "Fat  .of  a  Septennial  Boar,  and  Bear, 
each,  one  pound  :  .afterwards  melted  in-boyHng  fed  Wine, 
andaffufed  into  cold  water,  for  the  better  depuration  and 
collection  of  them  :  of  the  powder  of  aBIoodftone,  half  an 
ounce  :  of  red  aromatical  Sanders,  fix  drachmes :  of  Earth- 
worms prepared  with  wine,  two  drachmes ;  of  Ufnea,  a  gre# 
quantity  :  Married  all  together  into  an  Unguent,  by  an  artifi- 
cial hand.   The  ufe  is  the  fame  with  the  former  of  Crollim. 

No  lefe  variation,  as  weJl  in  the  number,  as  quantity  of  the 
ingredients,  may  we  obferve  in  that  famous  defcription,which 
Pancratitu  Gallus,  chief  Phyfician  to  the  Duke  of  Saxony,  in 
great  privacy,  communicated  to  Libav'ms :  it  being  confe&ed 
of  the  Fat  of  a  Male  Bear,  and  wilde  Boar,  in  the  quantity  of 
two  ounces  apiece  j  boy  led  aad  clarified  in  red  Wine  :  of  red 
Saunders.  Bloodftone  prepated,each  two  drachmes :  of  Earth- 
worms cleanfed  in  Wine,  one  ounce  :  of  Ufnea  two  drachmes : 
of  the  dried  and  powdered  roots  of  the  greater  Confound, 
or  major  Cumfry,  and  Colcothar,  each  half  an  ounce  :  Com- 
mix them  exadly,  with  a  filver  fpatule,  into  an  Unguent. 


Jhc 


io8 


The  Tranfla tor's  Landskip , 

Or  Abftraa  of 

H  S  L  M  0  N^T  S 

Theory  of  Magnetifm. 

I'M  fatisfi'd,  chat  Sympathies  combine 
At  diftance :  that  diiperfed  Mumies  twrne. 
That  our  Souls  z£tper  nutum ;  when  awake 
From  that  Enchantment,  the  firfl/w  did  make : 
And  that  this  native  Magick  of  the  mind, 
Is  the  fole  Devil  and  Witch  ♦  if  once  refin'd 
By  Ecftajie.  That  ^eafons  but  the  Brat 
Of  Senfuality ;    and  is  loft  with  that. 
That  none  can  chain  up  Aflral  Energy, 
Orcircumfcribe  Radial  Aclivity : 
And  Magnetifm  extends  its  arm  as  far, 
And  potent,  as  the  mod  triumphant  Star. 
That  Earth  hath  Heaven  in't.  That  Atoms  may, 
At  vaft  remove,  their  Virtual  Forms  dilplay. 
Thj  Heat  and  (old  are  languid  Agents,  when 
Seminal  TinBures  (though  oblcure  to  men) 
Are  brought  in  play  -   for  thcfe,  like  Angels,  cure 
Onely  by  th'  touch  invijible,  procure 
Natural  Miracles,  and  eas'ly  in  an  hower, 
Cicatrize  Wounds,  that  (corn  Chirurgeons  power. 


nrL~, 


I  op 

Thac  nice  DiVines,  who  fcruple  at  this  Arty 
Commit  implicite  Stcriledg  j   and  impart 
Gods  honor  unto  Satan :  while  wife  Zzal 
Call's  it  lafe  Tfytural  Magick  thus  to  heal. 
All  this  I  now  aflent  to ;  but  invite 
Each  wifcr  head,  to  makeme's  Profelyte. 
My  Mercury  is  not  fixt :  my  Virgin  Faith 
Scorns  to  fubmit  to  what  an  Author  faith, 
Barely  becaufe  he  faid  it.  To  enquire, 
To  doubt,  is  to  advance  our  Judgment  higher. 
For  I've  been  told,  That  Kjiowkdg  moft  doth  lie 
Enfhrin'd  in  Sceptical  lS[eutralitie. 

W.  C 


X  The 


Ill 


Nativity  of  T  a  r  t  a  r  in  W  i  n  e. 


■ 


The  Summary. 

i.  K  Fifhing  for  Whales.  2.  The  fpirit  of  W'ne>  depretfed  by 
XTLcold,  retires  to  the  center  of  its  veflel.  3 .  How  Vineger  dif- 
fers from  Wine.  4.  Wine  in  the  fuperficies  of  aveffel,why  lefsgene- 
rons.  5.  The  Concretion  of  Tartar  in  Hogsheads.  6.  How  it  affixes 
it  felf  to  the  fides  of  a  veflel.  7.  It  U  coagulated  in  fixing.  8 .  The 
premifes  are  made  good.  9.  The  error  of  a  Chymick  Axiome. 
10.  Thereafonor  Wine  coagulated  in  Tartar,  holds  no  analogy  to 
that  of  Excrements  coagulated  in  the  Microcofrn.  1 1 .  The  difference 
betwixt  Tartar,  and  the  Stone  concreted  in  the  body  of  Man.i  2. Tar. 
par  not  altogether,  or  truly,  the  excrements  of  Wine.  1 3 .  A  grand 
error  of  ParacelfHs.  14.  Tartar  of  Wine  totally  differs  from  any 
coagulated  recrement  in  difcafes.  1  5.  A  fecond lapfe  of  Paracelfm. 
1 6.  Why  Tartar  is  riot  incruftated  on  the  Lees,  in  the  bottom  of  a 
vefTel.  17.  Wines  diftinguifht  by  their  Tartar.  18.  Tartar  nejthtr 
Wine,  nor  the  dregs  of  Wine.  1 9.  Why  an  Alcale,  ©r  Lixival  Salt, 
extracted  from  Wine,  or  Tartar,  doesdiftolve  Tartar.  20.  The  dregs 
of  Wine,  in  fome  part  the  material  of  Tartar.  21.  How  ill  the  re- 
femblance  holds 'twixt  Tartar,  and  coagulations  in  the  Microcofra. 
21.  Tartar  to  be  referred  to  coagulated  Salts,  not  to  Stones,  or 
excrements, 

lEfore  I  attempt  the  explofion  of  that  neceflity, 
1  which  Taracclfus  vainly  imagined  r,o  himfelf,  of 
the  conftitution  of  Tartar  in  all  aliment,  for 
the  difcovery  of  the  caufes  of  moft  chronicle 
difeafes ;  and  that  the  folly  of  that  fiction  may 
be  more  clearly  demonftrated  ,  I  have  thought  good ,  to- 
premife  an  Enquiry  into  the  original  of  Tartar  in  wine  :  Since 
from  thence  (according  to  the  new  belief  of  vulgarity)  moft 
difeafes  derive  their  Chafes,  and  borrow  their  Appellations. 

X2  The 


1 1 2  The  Nativity  of 

i.  The  Cantabi  (now  Bifcons)  natives  of  a  Province  in  Spain,. 

before  their  converfation  with  the  Hollander,  in  a  voyage  for 
•the  fifhing  of  Whales ,    being  on  the  coafts  of  Groenland 
(which  Modern  Travellers  conceive  loft)  among  the  vaft 
Quickfands,  called  Atalaya,  furprifed  by  intenfecold,  had 
their  decoded  Wines,  of  themfelves  generous  and  excellent, 
frozen  to  Ice.  Inftrucled  by  this  exigent,  they  beat  off  their 
hoops  from  their  vefTels,  and  expofed,  to  the  open  aer,  the 
naked  conglaciated  Wines  ;  with  defign,  that  the  refidue  of 
Liquor  might  be  totally  frozen  :   This  accordingly  fucceed- 
rng,  they  boared  the  Ice,  and  at  the  Centre  of  it  found  a 
clear,  tranfparent  Liquor,  of  the  colour  of  an  Amethyft,  be- 
ing the  pure  fpirit  of  Wine,  a  fiery  and  vital  ellence ,  un- 
capable  of  conglaciation.  This  difcovery  taught  them  under- 
ftanding  -y  for  they  drank  the  Ice,  melted  at  the  fire,  reftoring 
to  it  a  fmall  quantity  of  this  efTential  vital  Ne&ar.    The  (lory 
is  introduced  for  this  end ,   that  hence  it  may  be  obferved, 
That  the  fpirit  of  Wine,  bj  a  natural  tendency,  flies  from  cold, 
as  from  his  proper  enemy  •   and  gently  withdraws  itfclf,  from  its 
former  manfion,  into  the  Centre  of  the  Wine.    But  on  the  con- 
trary ,  Wines  are  therefore  expofed  to  the  heat  of  the  Sun, 
that  they  may  grow  Acide,  and  the  fpirit  exhaling,  leaves  be- 
hinde  it  a  flat,  cadaverous  fubftance,  devoid  of  fpirit  and  life, 
which  is  Vineger.     But  fince  it  is  far  more  noble  andufeful, 
that  the  fpirit  of  Wine  fhou Id  retreat  into  the  Centre,  then 
periih  by  exhalation ,   therefore  hath  neceffity,  forthecon- 
fervation  of  Wines ,    hinted  the  invention  of  cold  ,  deep 
Ccllers.     The  Auftrian  Wines   ftill  operating  on  themfelves 
by  an  uncelTant,  tumultuous  heat  of  Ferment at urn ,■  are,  .for 
the  mofi  part,  grofs  andvifcid.  For  which.reafon,  theCellers 
at  Vienna  are  ordinarily  digged  to  no  lefs  then  a  hundred 
foot  in  depth.     The  Spanijh  Wines  alfo,  would  furTerthe 
fame  reftlefs  ebullition,  and  conflict  betwixt  their Hetero- 
geneities ,  were  they  not  prevented  by  the  admixture  of  a 
Lime,  which  the  Spaniard  calls  Hiefco,  at  the  very  inftant  of 
g;        their  flowing  from  the  Wine  Prefs.    Whence  refults  it  a  clear 
and  unqueftionable  truth,  that  the  fpirit  of  Wine,  in  cold 
Cellers,  retreating  from  its  adverfary,  cold,  returns  to  the 

heart 


T Attar  in  Wine.  113 


heart  of  the  Liquor,  astoafaferefuge,  and  there  conceals  it 
felf.  Wine,  therefore,  in  the  cortex,  or  outward  circum- 
ference of  it  felf,  is  tel's  generous,  as  having  fewer  fpirits, 
then  in  the  middle,  or  inmofl:  retiring  room.  Hence  it  is  a  3. 
necefTary  confequent,  that  as,  by  reafon  of  the  exhalation  of 
fpirits,  Wines  fet  in  the  Sun,  grow  acide,  and  phlegmatick; 
fo  alfo,  proportionably,  the  exterior  Cortex  of  Wine  in  a 
coldCeller,  muft  be  more  acide,  then  the  Centrals.     And  . 

thus,  when  the  mufts  of  Wines  are  frefhly  brought  in  from 
thePrefs,  lodged  in  Store-houfes,  and  have  fuffered  Fermen- 
tatisn,  the  fpirit  by  and  by  flying  from  cold,  concentres  it 
felf;  and  therefore  the  fuperficies  of  Wine,  having  already 
entred  fome  degree  of  Acidity  ,  immediately  begins  to  ope- 
rate on  the  dregs,  floating  on  the  yet  troubled  and  unclarified 
mate  of  Liquor.  For  an  abfolute  impoflibility  it  is,  that  there 
can  be  any  the  lead  Acidity  ;  which  having  once  met  with  a 
proportionate  object,  does  not  immediately  begin  to  operate 
©n  it.  This  really  is  the  Law,  and  unavoidable  neceffity  of  Na' 
turals.  By  example.  Vineger,  how  flat  and  weak  foever, 
having  once  touched  upon  the  ftone  concreted  in  the  head  of 
a  Creafifh,  vulgarly  (but  erroneoufly)  called  Crabs  eye,  can 
by  no  means  contain  it  felf,  but  mufl:  immediately  act,  to 
the  dtflblution  of  it,  and  refolve  it  into  a  clear,  diaphanous 
Liquor.  The  Acidity  of  Wine,  having  once  fated  it  felf  on 
the  dregs,  and  fpentmuch  of  its  activity,  by  degrees,  inclines 
it  felf  to  coagulation.  But  coagulate  it  cannot,  without  a 
confpiracy  with,  and  aflifhnce  from  the  Fracid  Odor  of  the 
veflel,  impregnate  with  a  fpirit,  or  power  of  Fermentation  ; 
whereby  it  may,  in  fome  meafure,  admit  of  putrefaction. 
And  for  this  onely  reafon,  is  the  Coagulation  made  at  the 
fides  of  the  vefTel,  to  which  it  affixes  it  felf;  according  to 
that  familiar  Chymick^  Axhme  :  Omnis  (piritus  dijfohens , 
eadem  atlione  (jua  corpora  dijfolvit,  coagulatur  :  Every  di(fol- 
ven't  Jpirit  is  it  felf  coagulated,  in  the  fame  action  »  wherein  it 
dijfolves  other  concreted  bodies.    The  more  acide  Wine,  there—  ^ 

fore,  in  the  extremities  of  it  felf,  diiTolves  the  dregs ;  and 
at  the  fame  inftant,  the  acide  diftolvent  fpirit  is  coagulated, 
together  with  the  newly  diffolved  fxces,  and  foon  applies  it 

X  7  felf 


I  j^  The  Nativity  of 

felf  to  the  neereft  fide,  or  concave  of  the  veflel.  And  this, 
left  both  (thediflblvent  and  diflblved)  might  not  be  hindred 
from  coagulating;    but  on  one  fide,  at  lead,  they  might  not 

-  be  invironed  by  Liquor  :    And  thus,  by  this  progrefs  and 

fucceflion  of  natural  motions,  there  is  affixed  anew  pro- 
duction of  Coagulation,  T^-r^r.  Obferve  alfo,  'that  before 
thecompleat  act  of  Coagulation,  there  is  no  exiftent  Coagu- 
l at um  ;  and  therefore  the  acide  fpirit  in  the  verge  of  the  mafs 
of  Wine,  having  newly  difiblved  the  dregs,  in  a  moment, 
before  the  ad  of  coagulation  finiiht,  feazes  on  the  veiTcl,  and 
by  a  Cement,  or  glue,  native  and  proper  to  it  felf,  there  fixes, 
and  cenftantly  adheres.  Otherwife  depreiTed  by  gravity,  ic 
would  immediately  fink  to  the  bottom.  And  this  new  Entity \ 
thus  coagulated  ,  is  the  Tartar  of  Wine  ;  of  which  our 
Difcourfe. 

8.  That  thefe  are  fober,  folid  truths,we  have  dear  and  demon- 

ftrable  evidence  from  Vineger  it  felf.  For  Wine  infolated  to 
a  calefaclion  of  the  veflel,  may  produce  Tartar  •  but  Vineger 
never.  And  yet  Wine  and  Vineger  are  one  and  the  fame 
matter,  differing  onely  in  thofe  qualifications,  heat  and  cold ; 
in  the  former ,  indeed,  with  Tartar ,  in  the  latter  with- 
out it. 

gt  From  the  premifles,there  breaks  forth  a  considerable  truth; 

that  ourforementioned  Axiome,  by  Chymicki  concluded  of 
eternal  verity,  grofly  fails  in  that  it  makes  the  diflblution  of 
any  concreted  body,  to  be  done  in  the  inftant  of  time,  and 
numerical  adion,  with  the  coagulation  of  the  fpirit  diiToI- 
vent.  For  if  there  intervened  not,  in  fome  fhort  interval  of 
time,  a  diverfity,  and  fucceflion  of  motions,  the  Coagulation 
could  not  foder  it  felf  to  the  circumambient  planks  of  the 
veflel,  as  is  there  arTufed  by  liquefaction ;  but  would  of  ne- 
ceflity,  if  it  were  coagulated  at  the  inftant  of  diflblution,  fink 
down  to  the  loweft  region,  in  the  form  of  a  fimple  coagula- 
tion, and  not  cement  it  felf  to  the  walls  of  the  hogfhead.  But 
on  the  other  fide,  in  the  bottom,  the  peculiar  region  of  the 

jo.  Lees,  there  is  never  found  any  Tartar.  Here  alfo  accurs  to 
our  ferious  confideration,  a  fecond  and  more  weighty  verity  : 
that  the  Analogy,  or  refemblance,  which  the  vulgarity  of 

Phyficians 


Tartar  inWtne.  115 

Phyficians  conceives,  betwixt  the  Tartar  in  Wine,  and  thofe 
preter-natural  Coagulations  in  the  body  of  man,  is  erroneous, 
vain,  and  altogether  impertinent;  and  therefore  the  name, 
hiftory,  manner  and  end  of  Coagulation  of  Tartar  in  Wine, 
are  fooljfhly  and  unfitly  accommodated  to  the  caufes  of 
difeafes.  All  which  I  (hall  demonftrate  to  ample  fatisfaction, 
when  I  come  to  difcover  that  grand  and  popular  delufion  of 
the  Exiftencc  of  Tartar  in  our  meat  and  drink.  Allowing  to 
Wine  onely  a  fertility  of  Tartar.  For  that  we  acknowledg  to 
be  no  Alien,  no  fon  of  an  exotick  mother,  from  the  concur- 
rence of  forein  principles,  intruded  into  Wine,  having  its 
production  contrary  to,  or  befides  the  ordinary  and  fimple 
nature  of  Wines  :  neither  owing  its  original  to  the  adjuncts 
of  the  primitive  MaleditHon  delivered  in  Paradife,  by  divine 
providence,  for  the  expiation  of  thofe  Crimes  committed  by 
man,  in  the  heat  and  diffraction  of  Wine.  Again,  neither  is 
the  Tartar  of  Wine  ever  coagulated  by  any  originary  activity, 
or  power  of  coagulation ,  proper  to  its  own  nature  (though 
Varacefftis  dreamt  fo :)  but  then  undergoes  Coagmentation, 
when  the  circumferential  Acidity  of  the  Wine,  hath  newly 
exhausted  much  of  its  Energy,  and  wafted  it  felf,  by  a  pro- 
fufc  operation  on  the  dregs.  That  is,  the  AElive  being  fwal-  11- 
lowed  up  in  the  embraces  of  the  Paffive :  the  Acide  fpirit  im- 
bibed, and  fubdued  to  obedience,  by  thefrefhly  difTolved 
Fjccs  ;  then,  and  not  till  then,  contrives  and  fets  about  the 
ad  of  Coagulation,  not  with  defign  or  power  to  make  a  real, 
true  flone,  but  a  counterfeit,  fuch  as  afterwards  may  be  again 
difTolved  in  hot  water,  as  an  Acide  fait  in  liquor,  which  for 
thatreafon,  the  vulgar  call  Cremor  Tartari.  All  which  do 
very  ill  correfpond  with  thofe  preter-natural  Coagulations  in 
the  bodies  of  men :  and  yet  they  are,  in  a  drunken  fiction  of 
Paracelfus,  by  an  imaginary  analogy  of  efTence  and  identity 
whhTartar,  in  all  meat  and  drink,  grofly  obtruded  on  the 
faith  of  vulgar  Phyficians,wholly  over-run  by  thatepidemick, 
lazy,  evil,  fubfeription.  Here  alfo  we  are  fallen  on  a  third 
Magnate  or  Violentnm.  That  Tartar  is  not  an  excrement  of  12, 
Wine,  unlefs  on  one  part,  which  is  the  dregs  difTolved  :  which 
truly   Paracelfus  was   not   ignorant   of,    who  does  very 

frequently 


Ii6  The  Nativity  of 

frequently  extol  the  Medicinal  faculties  of  Tartar,  far  above 
thole  of  Wine  it  felf,  as  inheriting  many  more  and  nobler  en- 

i  j.  dowments.     Wherefore  he  very  abfurdly  refers  Tartar  of 

Wine,  by  an  identity  of  eflence,  and  formation,  to  the  fame 
Claflisof  Entities,  with  thofe  folid  Concretions  indifeafed. 
bodies ;  which  yet,  in  many  other  places,  himfelf  concludes 
to  be  a  meer  excrement,  yea,  the  forrowful  fruit  of  that  curfe 
of  the  Larth,  pronounced  by  God,  in  Paradife,  Brjers  and 
ti:orns  jhult  thou  bring  forth,  and  calls,  Ens  Cacedonium,  in 
pvrofaphyrico  cnte  rerun.  The  Tartar  of  Wine  therefore,  and 
that  which  is  erected  in  the  Schools,  for  the  material  caufe, 
and  foundation  of  moft  Chronick  difeafes,  if  any  fuch  were 
in  realky  of  Entity,  can  keep  no  concord  in  their  Original 
Forms,  even  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Parace/fus  himfelf, 
if  we  accept  the  former,  as  a  preternatural  production,  di- 
rected, by  the  deftiny  of  its  being,  to  the  generating  difeafes, 
as  to  its  proper  end.  And  thus  alfo,  hath  he  mod  impertinent- 
ly,  and  at  belt,  but  by  the  favor  of  a  Metaphor,  reduced  the 
caufes  of  difeafes  to  Tartar :  Since  they  no  way  agree,  either 
in  their  matter,  efficient,  manner,  or  caufe  of  Coagulation,  in 
the  term  of  the  Coagulatum,  Object,  or  Originals.  For  nei- 
ther gravel,  nor  the  ftone  is  capable  of  diflblution  in  boiling 
water  ;  as  the  Tartar  of  Wine  is.  This  ufurpation  therefore, 
of  name  and  propriety,  is  wholly  metaphorical,  rafli,  and  fri- 

ij.  volous$  and  an  aiTertion  tacitely  injurious  to  divine  wifdom 
and  providence,  by  polluting  the  purity  of  all  fublunary  crea- 
tures, with  the  bold  imputation  of  a  Curfe,  as  if  in  the  to- 
tality of  their  natures,  they  were  nothing  but  Compoiitions, 
amafled  out  of  the  feeds  of  Tartar.  And  to  fo  high  a  pitch  of 
impudence  hath  this  error  flown,  that  men  dare  imagine 
Tartar  in  the  very  marrow  of  Animals  ;  which  yet  they  allow 
incoagulable,  nor  did  ever  Parac e /fits  finde  any  where,  but  in 
his  own  wilde  imagination.  And  fo  the  refult  of  all  is,  that 
he  falls  upon  a  manifeit  contradiction,  makingTartar  to  be 
no  Tartar,  that  is  uncapable  of  Coagulation:  fo  that, 
not  onely  every  coagulable  and  folid  body,  but  alfo  every 
liquid  fubitance,  that  is  every  created  nature,  fubject  to  the 
influence  of  the  lower  orU,  would  be  nothing  but  Tartar,  by 

divine 


Tartar  inline,  uj 


divine  Vengeance,  deftined  to  thepunifhment  of  the  firirfin. 
No  (boner  hath  the  Mm  ft  fuflfered  Fermentation,  parted  with 
its  former  fweetnefs.  and  aflumed  the  perfection  and  digni- 
ties of  Wine,  but  the  whole  Mafs  of  Terrenity,  the  Lees,  falls 
to  the  bottom  of  the  veflel  j  and  then  begins  the  new  made 
Acidity  of  the  Wine,  in  the  circumference,  to  execute  its 
power  diffolutive ,  on  the  earthly  refidence  in  the  bot- 
tome. 

For  the  more  effential  portion  of  the  Wine ,  the  fpiritual 
Nectar,  by  a  gentle  and  gradual  concentration,  crowding  in- 
to the  middle,  forfakes  the  protection  of  the  Superficial  round 
of  the  Liquor:  This  done,  and  the  extremity  of  the  Wine 
thus  deftitute  of  Vitality  and  radical  heat,  foon  grows  acide, 
and  not  meeting  with  any  fit  object  neer  it,  whereon  to  dis- 
charge its  activity,  but  onely  the  dregs  in  the  lowed  region 
of  the  Wine,  immediately  aiTaults  them,  and  by  degrees 
difiblves  them  :  And  thus  the  Acidity  is  both  confirmed  and 
inlarged. 

Butfince  every  Acidum,  by  reafon  of  its  corroding  Energy, 
doth  operate  in  a  perpetual  Ebullition  :  hence  is  it,  that  that 
Acidity,  which  had  dived  to  the  bottom,  when  it  hath  opera- 
ted on  the  Lees,  doth  reafcend  from  thence,  and  fix  it  felf  in  a 
higher  manfion,  the  circumftance  of  the  veifel.  And  for  this  i& 
caufe,  is  the  generation  of  Tartar  done,  by  (ucceffive,  gradM*ly 
and  flow  motions.  For  the  fame  reafon  alfo  cannot  Tartar  be 
concreted  and  affixed  to  the  bottom  ;  hindered  by  that  in- 
quietude, and  tumultuation  of  perpetual  Ebullition.  Hence  I7; 
is  it,  that  rich  and  generous  Wines,  being  not  eafily  fubject  to 
this  deftitution  of  fpirits,  unlefs  on  an  aiTault  of  intenfe  cold, 
do  not  foon  grow  acide,  nor  yeeld  any  considerable  quantity 
of  Tartar. 

But  old  Rhenifh  Wines  eafily  pall,  grow  fick,  and  loofe 
their  grateful  and  vigorous  tafte  j  in  regard  their  activity  of 
eagernefs  is,  for  the  molt  part,  devoured  by  their  Lees ;  and 
yet  they  continue  wholfom  and  friendly  to  the  ltomach,  in 
that  their  fpirits  are  not  exhaulted  to  an  equal  proportion  of 
their  dregs  and  acidity.  But  red  French  Wines,unlels  nourifht 
by  their  Lees ,    ( which  for  this  effect,  Vintners  call,  the 

Y  Mother, 


n  8  The  Nativity  of 

A/other,  or  Nurfe  of  Claret}  dilTolve  their  own  Tincture, 
continually  preying  on  it  by  their  fubtilty  and  eagernefs.  And 
this  is  the  caufe,  why  Claret  Wines,  if  not  very  rich,  and  ex- 
cellently vigorous,  at  the  age  of  two  yeers  grow  pale  and  dif- 
coloured.  For  the  Tincture  of  Wines,  is  a  fubftance  fami- 
liarly fubjectto  reparation.  But  ftrong,  generous,  and  fpiri- 
tual  red  Wines,  in  that  they  more  (lowly  growacide,  hold 
good  to  the  age  of  many  yeers.  On  the  contrary,  fmall 
White  Wines,  if  not  fequeltred  from  their  Lees,  in  fhort  time, 
grow  flat  and  cadaverous.  For  their  Lees  drawn  off,  theif 
Acidity  wanting  a  proportionate  matter,  to  imploy  its  corro- 
five  faculty  upon,  the  Wine  continues  good,  fprightful,h~rm, 

18.  and  in  its  primitive  integrity.  From  thefe  experiments,  we 
naturally  collect,  That  Tartar,  in  the  acception  of  its  entire 
nature,  is  no  longer  either  Wine,  or  the  dregs  of  Wine;  bp;t  a 
Neutral,  &r  third  Nature,  refultingfrom  the  conjunction,  and 
co'efficiencj  of  both.  That  this  is  thus,  is  demonftrable  from 
the  Mechanick  experiment,  that  a  greater  quantity  of  Tartar 
may  bediiTolved  in  ten  ounces  of  Rain  water,  then  in  two 
hundred  of  Wine,  though  never  fomuch  itirred  in  boyling. 
The  reafon  belongs  to  the  Acidity  of  Wine  to  which  the  Tar- 
tar ows  its  Coagulation. 

zp,  To  conclude  ;    fix  ounces  of  the  fait  of  Tartar,  will  dif- 

folve  feven  ounces  of  crude  Tartar  ;  becaufe  the  Lixivium,  or 
Lee  of  that  Salt  imbibes  and  fucks  up  the  Acidity  of  Tartar. 

ith  That  Tartar  confiits  of  the  Lees  of  Wine,  and  not  Wine  one- 
\y,  we  need  no  other  evidion,but  that  experiment  of  Printers, 
who  indifferently  ufe  Tartar  or  the  Lees  of  Wine,  for  the 
Matter  ingredient  in  their  Composition  of  Ink:  the  fame  effect 
arifing  from  either,  on  good  reafon,  preventing  the  election 
of  cither ,  and  confefling  a  plain  confanguinity  ,  if  not  an 
identity  of  the  Caufes.  Again,  in  diftillation,  they  both 
belch  up  one  and  the  fame  Acide  Odor,  and  yeeld  one  and 
the  fame  OyK  Onely  Tartar  is  not  diiTolved  in  cold  water : 
becaufe  the  feculent  and  earthy  fubftance  of  the  dregs.does  fo 
clofely  environ  and  fhroud  the  Salt,  that  the  cold  water  is  not 
of  force  futticient,  to  transfix  that  counterfcarfe,or  penetrate 
theatomical  parts  of  the  Concretion,  and  by  confeqnence,not 
todiflblveik  Now 


Tartar  in  Wine,  up 


Now fincc  Tartar  hath  its  originary  principles  and nativi-  as 
ty,  no  where  but  in  Wines,  grown  lightly  Acide,  by  a  de- 
iertion  of  fpirits,  flying  from  circumftant  cold,to  the  Centrals 
of  the  Liquor :  Hence  let  the  fo  much  illuminated  (that  is 
infatuated^  Difciples  of  Paracelfiis  be  intruded,  how  ill  the 
fpeculation  of  Tartar  does  quadrate,  even  with  thofe  difeafes, 
for  whofe  fake  chiefly  it  was  firfl  invented  and  embraced. 
For  plain  it  is,  the  frone  concreted  in  the  body  of  man,  can 
never  be  difTolved  in  boyling  water  •  as  Tartar  commonly  is. 
For  which  consideration,  Tartar  is  more  juftly  to  be  lifted  in  *3; 
the  number  of  Salts,  or  Juices  coagulated  by  Salt,  thea  of 
Stones :   t  diametro,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Paracelftts. 


Y  i  Trie 


121 


The  Image  of  G  O  D  • 


O  R, 


Helmonfs  Vifibn  of  the  Soul, 

EngliQied. 


The  Summary, 

i.  *"Tr»  He  fear  of  God,  the  beginning  :  and  Charity,the  end  of  Wif- 
X  dom.  2.  Man  made  in  the  Image  of  God.  3.  Threefortsof 
Atheifts.  4.  A  with  of  the  Author.  5.  The  intellection  of  the  minde, 
intellectual.  6.  The  intimate  integrity  of  the  minde  fuffereth  from 
caduce  faculties,  without  the  pafllon  of  extinction.  7.  The  action  of 
the  minde  fcarce  perceptible  in  us.  8.  Atheifts  of  the  firft  Claflis  de- 
ride the  image  of  God,  in  man.  9.  Atheifts  of  the  fecond  Clanls, 
have  lately  fprung  up.  1  o.  The  Atheiflical  ignorance  of  fuch  is 
manifefted,  11.  A  variety  of  vital  Lights.  1  2.  How  the  minde  dif- 
fers from  Angels.  13.  An  intellectual  vifion  of  thc'Authors.  14.  All 
optation  vain,  without  God.  1 5.  The  mifery  of  the  Author.i  6.  A 
vifion  of  the  foul,  feparate  from  the  body.  1 7.  That  the  minde  hath 
a  figure.  18.  The  minde  an  immortal  fubftance,  reprefenting  the 
figure  of  God.  10.  A  vulgar  error,  concerning  the  Image  of  God. 
20.  The  error  of  fuch,  who  conceive  thelmageof  God  to  be  fcated 
in  the  ternary  of  faculties,  21.  The  doctrine  of  Taulerus  oppofed. 
22.  The  Image  of  God  never  yet  difcovered,  nor  pofitivcly  defcri- 
bed,  becaufe  incomprehenflble.  2  3 .  The  minde  fubject  to  damna- 
tion, onely  by  accident.  24.  After  death,  is  no  more  Memory,  or 
Reminifcence.  2  5.  The  will  was  fuperadded  to  the  minde,  acci- 
dentally, after  its  Creation.  2(5.  In  Heaven,  the  Will  is  ufelefs 
and  fruftraneous.  27.  In  Heaven  the  Will  appears  no  power,  or 
Faculty :  but  a  fubftantial  and  intellectual  effence.  28.  If  the  Minde 
be  the  Image  of  God.  this  was  anciently  known  to  Plato.  29.  The 
definition  of  the  Minde.  30.  Reafon  not  the  Image  of  God.  3 1.  The 
Authors  opinion.  32.  Thefe  two  Quiddities  lie  obfcuredin  the 
foul,  by  reafon  of  the  corruption  of  our  nature.  33.  The  love  of  the 
foul  is  excited  onely  by  an  Ecftafie  5  nor  otherwife  in  thefeTalami- 
tiesof  Nature.  34.  A  precifionof  the  Intellect.  3  5.  AiiObjcction 
fblved.    36.  That  triplicity,  or  ternary  of  diverfe  Faculties  in  the 

Y  3  Minde,. 


I22  The  Image rf  God  h 


Minde,  is  exprefTed  alfo  in  every  fyfteme ,  orcompofition  of  the 
world,  3  7.  A  more  noble  and  exa&  fimilicude,  then  that  of  a  Tri- 
nity of  Faculties,  rcquifite  to  make  out  the  Image  of  God  in  man. 
38,  The  defcription  of  the  Minde,  rehearfed,  39.  How  the  Minde 
may  furvey  it  felf.  40.  The  original  of  the  Imagination,  conlritu- 
tive.  41.  The  Minde  underftandeth  far  otherwile,  42.  The  prero- 
gative of  the  Minde.  43,  An  explication  of  living  love.  4.4.  The 
difcrepancies  of  intellections  in  Mortals.  45.  Why  that  amorous 
defire,  or  divine  Love,  cannot  ceafe  in  Heaven.  46.  The  defcription 
of  thatdefire.  47,  How  fin  may  be  harbored  in  thedefireof  the 
Minde.  48.  The  love  of  the  Minde  is  a  fubftance,  even  in  men,  that 
have  not  yet  confefled  their  duft.  49.  How  great  a  cloud  of  dark- 
nefs  is  drawn  over  the  primitive  fplendor  of  the  Intellect,  from 
the  corruption  of  Nature,  by  the  original  (in,  50,  The  Image  of 
God,  defaced  and  demoliflied  in  the  fons  of  perdition. 


Ifdom  begins  at  the  Fear  of  God ;  and  the  Fear  of 
God  begins  at  the  meditation  of  death,  and  eternal 

i«  $$$$  hfe-  But  the  end  of  Wifdom  many  conceive,  with 

the  Stoicks  ,  to  be  the  knowledg  of  a  mans  felf; 
but  I  account  the  ultimate  end  of  wifdom,  and  the  Crown  of 
the  whole  courfe  of  our  life ,  Charity ,  which  alone  will 
faithfully  accompany  us,  when  all  other  things  (hall  have  de- 
ferted  us.  And  although  felf-cognition,  in  our  opinion,  be 
onely  a  medium  to  the  fear  of  God ;  yet  from  that,  muft  our 
Tractate  concerning  long  life,  alTume  its  beginning;  in  this 
relation,  that  the  cognition  of  life  prefuppofeth  the  cognition 
of  the  Soul,  fince  the  life  and  foul  (which  we  have  more  then 

2#  once  intimated)  are  Synonymaes.  Tis  of  Faith,  that  man 
was  created,  of  nothing,  after  the  Image  of  God ,  into  a 
living  Creature ;  and  that  his  minde  (hall  never  perifh;  while, 
in  the  mean  time,  the  Souls  of  Bruits  fuffer  annihilation,  fo 
foon  as  they  ceafe  to  live.  The  weighty  reafons  of  which 
difference  I  have  declared,  in  my  dilcourfe  of  the  Original  of 
Forms.  But  hitherto  is  it  not  manifefted,  beyond  difpute, 
wherein  that  fimilitude  of  Man  with  God,  our  Archtype,  or 
prime  exemplar,  dothconfift.  For  in  the  Soul  alone,  many 
determine  this  majeftick  Pourtraiclure.  I  (hall  deliver  what  I 
conceive ;  yet  under  an  humble  protefhtion  and  fubjedion 

to 


Or  ,  Helmonu  vifion  of  the  Sen/.  1 2  ? 


to  the  cenfure  of  the  Church.  Thus  it  is.  The  Original  of 
Forms  being ,  in  fome  degree  of  comprehenfion  ,  already 
known  ;  it  is  juft  we  make  a  grand  enquiry  concerning  the 
Minde  of  At  an.  But,  ferioufly,  no  cognition  is  more  weighty 
then  that,  whereby  the  foul  comprehends  her  felf :  Yea, 
and  hardly  is  any  more  profitable  ;  in  this  intereft,  that  Faith 
doth  efhblifh  her  foundation  upon  the  unperifhable,  and  in- 
delible fubftance  of  the  Soul.  I  have  found,  indeed,  many 
demonftrations,  concerning  this  verity,  divulged  in  Books: 
but  none  at  all  propter  quid,  touching  the  Cardinal  jQuiddity, 
in  relation  to  Atheifis,  denying  one  fingle,  and  from  all  Eter- 
nity conftant,  Deity.  Plato,  infooth,  hath  decreed  three  or- 
ders of  Atheifts.  (1 .)  Afirfl,  which  beleeveth  no  gods  at  all. 
(2.)  Afecoxd)  which  indeed  doth  admit  of  gods  •  but  fuch  as 
are  incurious  of  our  condition  here  below,  and  idle  contemn- 
ers of  the  trifling  affairs  of  Mortals.  (3.)  A  third,  which 
although  it  beleeve,  that  there  are  gods,  and  fuch  as  are  both 
knowing  and  obfervant  of  the  fmalleft  occurences  in  the 
World;  yet  imagineth  them  fo  exceeding  merciful,that  they 
are  flexile,  by  the  ringer  of  the  weakeft  prayer.  And  this  kinde 
is  moit  frequent  among  Chriflians,  and  even  fuch,  who  pro- 
fefs  themfelves  the  moft  perfect  in  our  days:  and  on  this 
prefumption,  they  dare  any  thing,  and  beleeve  Religion  to  be 
no  more  but  an  engine  of  mature  policy,  to  coerce  the  peo- 
ple, with  the  terror  of  Lares,  the  obligation  of  Faith,  and 
the  penalty  of  Hell.  For  thefe  impofe  heavy  burthens  on  the 
{boulders  of  others,  which  themfelves  touch  not  with  one  of 
their  fingers  ;  drain  the  purfes  of  their  difciples,  proftitute 
Heaven  for  money  to  dying  men,  and  continually  intrude 
themfelves  into  fecular  affairs,  in  regard  they  opinion,  that 
Religion  cannot  fubfift  without  State-policy-  My  highefl  wifli 
fhosld  be,  that  they  had  once,  though  but  in  a  moment, 
tailed  what  it  is  to  underftand  intellctluallj-jthat  fo  they  might 
perceive  fenfibly,  as  it  were  by  the  touch,  the  immortality  of 
theMinde.  Iconfefs,  1  have  not  invented  rules,  or  a  method, 
whereby  I  might  be  able  to  illuftrate  the  intellect  of  anothet 
man.  I  proteft  therefore  juftly,  that  fuch  who  ever  ftudy, 
making  difquifitions  concerning  truth,  but  can  never  attain 

the. 


124  ^^  lma&*  °f  Go&  5 

theknowledgof  it,  in  refpect,  being  puffed  up  with  Learn- 
ing, they  have  no  Chanty,  do  fofter  fecret  Atheifm.     But 

j.  this  one  myftery  I  have  learned  ,  That  the  minde  doth  not  at 

all  underftand  by  the  mediation  of  the  Pbanjie^  nor  by  figures 
and  images;  unlefs  the  miferable,  and  afflicting  difcourfe of 
Reafon  be  annexed ;  but  when  the  Soul  comprehends  her 
own  nature,  Reafon  falls  off  from  her ,  and  the  image  of  her 
felf  fails  her,  by  which  (he  might  reprefent  her  felf  to  her 
felf:  therefore  the  Soul  can,  by  no  means,  apprehend  her 
felf  by  the  difcourfe  of  Reafon,  nor  by  Images.  For  after  that 
I  had  known,  that  the  verity  of  an  E  fence ,  and  the  verity  of 
the  Intellect  were  one  and  the  fame  :  I  certainly  knew  that 
the  intellect  was  a  certain  immortal  Entity,  far  removed  from 
all  frail  and  periftiable  things.  The  Soul,  indeed,  is  not  per- 
ceived ;  yet  we  firmly  beleeve  her  to  dwell  within  us,  not  to 
be  idle,  not  to  be  weary,  nor  affiicled  with  difeafes.  Therefore 

6.  Jleep,  madnefs,  and  ehriety^  are  not  fymptomes  of  the  immortal 
foul  fuffering  exorbitancy ;  but  the  attendants  of  life  and 
onely  paflions  of  the  fenfitive  Faculty  ;  fince  bruits  alfo  fre- 
quently endure  the  fame  paflions.  For  juft  it  is  that  the/'w- 
mortal  Being  owe  thefe  difturbances  to  her  adligement  to  ca- 
duce  and  mortal  things.  For  as  the  minde  inhabiteth  within 
us,  and  yet  is  not  perceived  by  us :  So  neither  are  her  con- 
tinual and  uninterrupted  operations  fubjed  to  fenfation  ; 
becaufe  if  they  were  fenfiblc,  verily  they  could  not  have  been 
fpiritual  and  meerly  abftracted.  And  although  it  appear  to 
us,  that  we  underftand  nothing  by  the  total  fequeftration  and 
abftraction  of  difcourfes  from  all  things  corporeal,  which  can 
fall  under  the  comprehenfion  of  our  fenfe,  minde,  and  intel- 
lect ;  and  that  in  the  very  beginnings  of  our  Contemplations : 
yet  really,  the  <SWdoth,  all  that  while,  act  by  her  own  in- 
fenfible  way,  and  by  an  efficacy  wholly  fyiritudl :  which  I 
thus  underftood.    The  penitentiary  very  often  doth  not  fenfi- 

7»  bly  perceive  the  effects  of  his  contrition,  and  with  groans  de- 
ploreth  that  his  infenfility  :  yet  being  asked  whether  he 
would  willingly  commit  a  fin,  would  perchance  anfwer,  that 
he  had  much  rather  die.  Infenfible  therefore  is  the  operation 
of  the  foul  in  penitence  and  confeflion,  being  the  fupernatural 

effect 


Or,  Hclmont'x  vifion  of  the  Soul.  T  2  c 


effect  of  Faith :  bccaufe  the  intellectual  actions  are  derived 
from  a  higher  principle,  and  are  clients  of  a  more  noble  and 
indefinent  Magiftracy.  And  on  this  ground  Myfiical  Divines 
lay  their  Doctrine,  That  the  foul  doth  more  effectually  ope- 
rate, and  in  her  operations  more  benefit  her  felf,  in  faith 
alone,  without  difcourfe  and  cogitation  ;  then  he  who  pray- 
eth  in  a  multitude  of  words ,  and  by  tedious  difcourfes  ex- 
citeth  compunction  in  himfelf.  But  happy  he,  who  hath  ob- 
tained that  excellent  endowment,  to  perceive  thefe  infenfile 
operations  of  the  foul,and  by  fecret  emanation  to  reflect  them 
upon  the  operations  and  powers  of  the  fenfttive  SohI  ;  fince 
fuch  frequently  leave  their  imprefles  upon  the  whole  after 
life,  and  excite  the  memory  in  faith  operating  together  with 
grac e ,  for  the  future. 

The  Libertines  of  Chriftianity  ,    and  Atheifls  of  the  firfl:  8, 

Claffis  deride  this  Article  of  our  Creed,as  if  the  Image  of  God, 
in  us  were  onely  imaginary,  and  it  a  meer  traditional  fiction 
that  man  was  fafhioned  after  the  (imilitude  of  the  Deity.  Bu  c 
other  Atheiftsof  the  fecond  and  third  fort  beleeve,  not  onely 
that  we  are  created  in  the  Image  of  God  ;  but  feign  alfo  that         o 
in  our  nature  there  is  an  identity  with  the  effencc  of  the  im- 
menfe,  uncreated  Divinity;  and  that  man  doth  differ  from 
God  in  fubftance  no  otherwife,  then  a  pan  doth  from  the 
whole,  or  that  which  had  beginning  from  that  which  is  non- 
principiatej  but  not  at  all  in  point  of  Effence,  or  internal 
propriety.    Which  befides  the  Blafphemy,  doth  comprehend 
very  many  and  grofs  abfurdities.  Since  whatever  once  began  is 
in  that  very  notion  a  Creature ;  and  it  doth  tacitcly  involve 
an  imperfection  in  God,  to  be  able  to  create  extra  fe,  without 
the  limits  of  his  own  nature,  any  thing  in  fubftance  equal  to 
himfelf:  Since  truly  from  Philofophy  it  is  evident  beyond 
doubt,  that  all  the  parts  of  an  infinite  are  infinite,  of  neceflity. 
The  Creature  therefore  cannot  be  in  fubftance  more  infinite, 
then  it  hath  been  in  duration  equal  to  its  eternal  principle:  and 
much  lefs  is  the  Soul  of  man  a  part  of  the  Divine  fubftance, 
or  efTentially  like  unto  it  j  which  in  power,  magnitude,  dura- 
tion, glory,  wifdom,  &c.  in  her  felf,  and  of  her  felf,  is  a 
meer  nothing.    If  therefore  ftie  was  not  made  out  of  God, 

Z  much 


19. 


1 2  6  The  Image  of  God  • 


much  lefs  out  of  her  felf;  but  out  of  nothing.  Infinitely 
therefore  do  they  wander  from  truth,  who  beleeve  a  quiddity 
of  the  Divine  Image  implanted  in  the  Soul,  by  an  identity  of 
fubftance  :  when  they  are  diftinguifhed  each  from  other  by 
infinite  difparity  j  yea,  the  foul  would  at  length,  of  her  own 
accord,  be  again  refolved  into  that  nothing,  from  whence  (he 
began,  unleTs  (he  were  confhntly  conferved  in  being,  by  the 
Divine  goodnefs.  Serioufly,  the  damned  fouls  might  wifti  to 
be  refolved  into  their  primitive  nothing,  which  the  I>ivine 
Juftice  doth  conferve  in  Being.  The  Soul,  indeed,  from  the 
minute  of  her  creation  forwards  to  the  future,  hath  an  eternal 
permanence ;  not  from  her  own  effence,  but  from  her  native 
eternity,  freely  conferred  upon  her  by  the  bounty,  and  con- 
ftantly  conferved  by  the  providence  of  her  Maker. 

M..  Suffice  it  therefore,  that  the  Soul  bt^fpiritual  and  vital 

fubftance ;  and  a  luminous  Creature.  And  fince  there  are  many 
kindes  and  fpeeies  of  vital  lights,  this  light  of  the  minde  dif- 
fers from  all  other  vital  lights,  in  this,  that  it  is  a  (piritual 
and  immortal  fubftance  ;  but  all  other  vital  lights  are  not fub- 
ftances  Formal,  though  they  be  Forms  fubftantial ;  and  there- 
fore, by  the  Chymiffry  of  Death,  they  are  reduced  into  their 
ancient  nothing  ,   no  otherwife  then  is  the  flame  of  a  Tapor 

j£a  extinct.  But  the  Minde  differs  from  Angels  •  in  refpect  it  is 
framed  in  the  fimilitude  and  reprefentative  figure  of  the  eter- 
nal God,  for  the  foul  hath  that  light  and  luminous  fubftance 
from  the  gift  of  her  Creation,  fince  (he  her  felf  is  that  vital 
light :  but  an  Angel  is  not  that  fubftantial  light,  nor  hath  he 
any  light  genial  and  inherent  to  his  effence,  but  is  onely  a 
mirror  of  the  increated  light  j  and  fo  in  this  particular  falls 
ftiort  of  the  excellence  and  perfection  of  the  Divine  Image, 
Otherwife  an  Angel,  fince  he  is  an  incorporeal  fpirit,  were  he 
luminous  from  the  right  of  his  own  effence,  would  exprefs 
the  Image  of  God  more  perfectly  then  man.  Moreover,what- 
cverGod  doth  beftow  more  love  upon,  that  is  more  noble; 
but  he  hath  loved  man,  much  more  then  the  Angels ;  for  not 
to  the  redemption  of  the  Angelical  nature  did  heaffume  the 
figure  of  z-Cacadxmon,  as  the  thrice  glorious  Lamb  of  God, 
ihe  Saviour  q£  the  world,  affumed  the  nature  of  a  Servant. 

Nor 


Or,  Helmont'/  vifton  of  the  Soul,  1 27 


Nor  can  this  Doctrine  be  daggered  by  the  opposition  of  that, 
The  meaneft  in  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  u  greater  then  John  the 
Baptifi :  For  the  Son  of  Man  is  not  inferior,  in  dignity  of 
effence,  to  the  Angels,  though  he  was  pleafed  to  become  a 
little  lower  then  the  Angels  j  for  in  the  calamitous  condition 
of  his  life,  he  was  made  a  little  lower  then  the  Angels^  as  alfo 
was  fohn  the  Baptift.  And  for  this  reafon,  an  Angel  is  con- 
stantly called  a  minifiring  Spirit .  but  is  no  where  read  a 
friend  of  God,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  the  delight  of  the  Son 
of  Man,  or  the  Temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  wherein  the  thrice 
glorious  Trinity  takes  up  his  Manfion.  For  that  is  themaje- 
ftick  prerogative  of  the  Divine  Image,  which  the  Light  Eter- 
nal doth  imprefs  upon  every  man  that  comes  into  this 
world. 

In  the  year  1 6 1  o.  after  a  long  wearinefs  of  contemplation,  1 3 , 
that  I  might  acquire  fome  gradual  knowledg  of  my  own 
minde,  fince  I  was  then  of  opinion,  \h2Xfe  If- cognition  was  the 
complement  of  rvifdom,  fain  by  chance  into  a  calm  fleep,  and 
rapt  beyond  the  limits  of  reafon,  I  feemed  to  be  in  a  Hall 
furficiently  obfcure.  On  my  left  hand  was  a  table,  and  on  it  a 
fair  large  Vial,  wherein  was  a  fmall  quantity  of  Liquor :  and 
a  voice  from  that  Liquor  fpake  unto  me :  Wilt  thou  Honor 
and  Riches  ?  At  this  unwonted  voice,  I  became  furprized  with 
extream  amazement.  I  walked  up  and  down,  ferioufly  con- 
fidering  with  my  felf,  what  this  fhould  defign.  By  and  by, 
on  mv  right  hand ,  appeared  a.  chink  in  the  wall,  through 
whien  a  light  invaded  my  eyes  with  unwonted  fplendor : 
which  made  me  wholly  forgetful  of  the  Liquor ,  voice,  and 
former  counfel.  Then  penfively  returning  to  the  Vial,  I  took 
it  away  with  me ;  and  attempted  to  tafle  the  Liquor,  but  with 
tedious  labor  I  opened  the  Vial,  and  aiTaulted  with  extream 
horror  I  awakened.  But  my  ancient  intenfe  defire  of  knowing 
the  nature  of  my  foul ,  in  which  I  had  panted  uncefTantly 
tor  thirteen  whole  yeers  together,  constantly  remained  with 
me.  At  length,  amidft  the  anxious  afflictions  of  various  for- 
tunes, when  yet  I  hoped  a  Sabbath  of  tranquillity  from  the  fe- 
curity  of  an  innocent  life  tranfacled,  in  a  vision  I  had  the  fight 
,  of  my  foul.    It  was  a  tranfeendent  light,  in  the  figure  of  a  man, 

Z  2  ivhofe 


x  2  g  The  Image  if  God  • 


ivhofe  whole  was  homogeneous,  actively  difcerning,  afubfiance' 

But 


spiritual,  Cryftalline,  and  lucent  by  its  own  native  fplendor. 
enftirined  it  was  in  a  fecond  nubilouspart,  as  the  husk  or  ex- 
terior cortex  of  it  felf,  which  whether  it  did  emit  any  fplen- 
dor  from  it  felf,  I  could  hardly  diftinguiftr,  by  reafon  of  the 
fuperlativefulgorof  the  Cryftalline Jpirit  irrfhrowded  within 
it.    Yet  this  I  could  eafily  difcern,  that  there  was  no  fexual 
imprefs ,.hvx  onely  in  the  cortex  orftirine.   But  the  mark  of 
theCryftal  wis  light  ineffable,  fo  reflexed,  that  theCryftal 
Image  it  felf  became  incomprehenfible  :  and  that  not  by  nega- 
tion or  privation  (fince  thefe  are  terms  onely  accommodate  to 
our  imbecillity)  otherwife  then  this,  that  it  prefented  a  ma- 
jeftick  Ens,  which  cannotoe.exprefTed  by  words ;  yet  fo  fine- 
ly, that  you  could  not  have  comprehended  the  quiddity  of 
the  thing  beheld.  And  then  was  it  revealed  unto  me,  that  this 
light  was  the  fame,  which  I  had  a  glimpfe  of  twenty  three 
yecrs  before.    And  thefe  things  I  faw  by  an  intellectual  vifion, 
in  my  minde ;  for  had  the  eye  of  my  body  once  beheld  this 
refplendent  exceflive  ob  jecfyt  would  for  ever  after  have  ceafed 
from  vifion,   and  conftantly  have  celebrated  a  blinde  mans 
holy  day.   And  thus  my  dream  difcovered  unto  me,  that  the 
beauty  of  the  humane  Soul  doth  far  tranfeend  all  conception 
of  thought.  At  that  inftant  I  comprehended  thus  much,  that 
my  long  defire  of.  feeing  my  foul  was  vain  and  fruitlefs  j  and 
iAt  thereupon  I  did  acquieice.  For  however  beautiful  the  Cry- 

fialline  Jpirit  did  appear;  yet  my  foul  retained  nothing  of 
perfection  from  that  vifion,  as  at  other  times  flhe  was  wont  to 
do  after  anintelleclual  vifion.  And  fo  1  came  to  be  inftrutfed,' 
that  my  minde,  in,  this  fomnial  vifion,  had  as  it  were  acted 
the  part  of  a  third  perfon ;  nor  was  the  difcovery  fufficiently 
fatisfadory  to  compenfate  fo  earned  and  infatiate  a  defire  of 
exploration- 
^,  But  as  to  the  Image  of  God  imprejfed  uptn  the  Sou/ ;  accord- 

ing to  my  (lender  capacity,  I  confefs,  I  could  never  conceive 
any  thing,  whether  a  body,  or  jpirit,  whether  in  my  phanjie,  or 
the  moft  pure,  and  abftracted  fpeculation  of  my  intellect, 
which  in  the  fame  ad  of  meditation,  did  notreprefent  fome 
certain  f gun  f  under  which  it  flood  objected  to  my  concep- 
tions. 


Or,  Helmont'/  vifton  of  the  Soul,  1 2  p 


tionf.  For  whether  I  apprehended  it  by  imagining  an  Ide* 
probably  correfpondent  to  its  effence,  or  whether  by  concei- 
ving that  the  intcllctl  did  tranfmute  it  felf  into  the  objett  un- 
derftood  j  ftill  it  occurred  unto  my  thought  inverted  in  fome 
figure.  For  although  I  could  familiarly  underftand  the  minde 
.  under  the  notion  of  an  incorporeal  and  immortal  fubftance : 
yet  could  I  not,  while  I  meditated  upon  the  individual  exi- 
gence of  it,  confider  the  fame  devoid  of  all  figure;  yea,  nor 
fo,  truly,  but  it  would  refpond  to  the  figure  of  a  man.  Since  iC, 
when  ever  the  foul  being  fequeftred  doth  fee  another  Soult 
Angel,  orCacodtmon,  requisite  it  mu*ft  be,  that  (he  perfectly 
know,  that  thefe  are  presented  to  her,  to  the  end  (he  may 
diftinguifh  it  Soul  from  an  Angel,  and  the  Soul  of  Peter  from 
the  Soul  of  fud.u.  Which  diftindion  cannot  be  made  by  the 
fenfe  of  rafting,  fmelling,  hearing,  touching }  but  onely  by 
the  proper  vifton  of  the  Sou/;  which  vifion  neceffarily  impli- 
eth  an  alterity  or  difference  of  figure.  Since  an  Angel  \s(o 
far  reftrained  to  locality,  that  at  once  he  cannot  ponefs  two 
different  places :  in  that  alfo  there  is  included  as  well  zfigu- 
ral,  as  a  local  circumfcription.  Thence  I  confidered  the  minde 
of  man  figurated  after  this  manner. 

The  body  of  man,  accepted  under  that  diftincl  notion,  17," 
cannot  give  to  itfelf  the  figure  of  a  man ;  and  therefore  hath 
need  of  am  external  Sculptor  or  Delineator,  which  (hould  be 
fecretly  ambufcadoed  in  the  material  mafs  of  the  feed,  and 
defcend  upon  it  from  above.  Yet  this,  in  fo  much  as  it  is  of 
a  material  condition,  and  far  below  the  finenefs  of  a  fpiritual 
nature,  cannot  derive  theplaftick  or  conformative  virtue  no 
more  from  it  felf,  then  from  the  grofs  mafs  of  the  body : 
necefTary  it  is  therefore,  that  there  be  fome  precedent  or  elder 
principle,  which  muft  be  wholly  and  purely  immaterial,  yet 
real,. and  operative,  to  which  may  be  juftly  attributed  the 
power  of  figuration  or  delineation,  by  a  figiilary  impreflion 
upon  the  Archem,  or  Regent  Spirit  of  the  Seed.  The  Soul 
of  the  Genitor^  therefore,  when  it  defcends  to  vifit  and  relieve 
the  inferior  faculties,and  makes  a  progrefs  to  furvey  the  Seed, 
in  a  paroxyfm  of  carnality,  doth  upon  the  mafs  of  feed,  en-> 
grave  and  adumbrate  the  imprefs  and  figure  of  itfelf  (which/ 

Z  3  in  1 


x  3  0  the  image  of  Cod . 


in  fober  truth,  is  the  onely  caufe  of  the  fecundity  of  feeds) 
and  thence  is  that  comely  and  magnificent  ftruclure  of  the 
Infant.  Otherwife  if  the  Soul  were  not  figurated,  but  the 
figure  of  the  body  did  arife  fpontaneoufly  :  a  father  maimed 
in  any  one  member  could  not  beget  a  fon  but  maimed  in  the 
fame  member ;  in  regard  the  body  of  the  Gcnerant  hath  loft 
its  primitive  integrity,  and  is  become  imperfect,  at  leaft  in  the 
imp  I  ant  ate  jpir  it  of  that  member.  If  therefore  the  figure  be 
imprefled  upon  the  feed ;  undoubtedly  it  muft  receive  that 
image  or  model  from  fome  other  more  vital  and  elder  principle , 
alien  to  it  fclf.  But  if  the  foul  imprefs  that  figure  upon  the 
feed,  fhe  will  not  counterfeit  an  exotick,  or  ftrange  image; 
but  accurately  pourtray  the  fimilitude  of  her  felf.  For  by 
this  means  alfo  Beafts,  by  the  fouls  modelling  of  her  own 
picture,  conftantly  maintain  their  fpecies.  And  although 
the  minde  of  man,  if  we  relate  to  its  original,  far  tranfcend  the 
Laws  of  Nature ;  yet  by  the  fame  method  or  way,  whereby 
it  firftentred  the  portal  of  Nature,  was  incorporated  and  af- 
fociatcd  to  her,  it  is  conftrained  to  progrefs  in  traduction,  and 
is  conftantly  adliged  to  the  obfervanceof  her  rules  and  pre- 
fcriptions ;  in  this  refpedt,  That  the  progrefs  and  end  of  vital 
eventrations  is  always  nnivocal. 

Nor  otherwife  could  it  want  many  and  grofs  abfurdities, 
that  fo  excellent  an  operation,  as  is  the  generation  of  man, 
fhould  be  performed  without  the  confent  and  cooperation  of 
the  Soul.  Which  if  it  be  thus,  it  is  alfo  of  inevitable  necefli- 
ty,  that  the  fecundity  be  given  to  the  feed  by  the  Soul,  by 
the  communication  of  its  figure,  and  other  vital  determina- 
tions requisite  to  fpeciflcation.  Which  verily  doth  not  come 
to  pafs  otherwife,  then  by  the  figillation  or  engravement  of 
the  Soul  upon  the  feed,  whereby  the  matter  of  the  feed  doth 
obtain  a  requifite  maturity  and  adumbrated  figure :  that  at 
length  it  may  acquire  from  the  Creator  the  formal  light  of  life, 
or  foul  of  its  fpecies ,  whofe  fimilitude  is  exprefted  in  the 
figure. 
18.  Moreover,  we  apprehend  it  as  matter  of  Faith,  that  our 

foul  is  a  fpiritual  fubftance,  that  fhall  never  know  annihilati- 
on :  the  fabrication  of  which  fubftance  out  of  nothing  be- 

longeth 


Or ,  Helmonu  vifim  of  tb(  Seal.  \  3 1 

longeth  to  the  Almighty  God  alone.  Who  fincehehath 
vouchsafed  to  adopt  onely  the  foul  of  man  tothelmageof 
himfelf:  it  appears  alfo  a  genuine  confequence,  that  the /'w- 
menfe  and  ineffable  G od  is  alfo  of  humane  figure  ^  and  that  by 
an  argument  drawn  a  pofleriori,  if  arguments  be  of  any  vali- 
dity in  this  incomprehenfible  fubjeet.  Since  the  body  is  like 
wax,  whereupon  the  imprellion  of  the  image  of  the  Soul  is 
imprinted:  but  the  Soul  hath  her  image  and eflential per- 
fection from  him,  whofe  (lamp  or  fimilitude  fhe  wears.  But  *  ip, 
on  confideration  that  the  body  of  man  doth  frequently  be- 
come fubject  to  mutilation  and  monftrofity ;  hence  have  moil 
Divines  conceived  that  the  glorious  Image  of  the  Deity  is 
wholly  confident  in  the  Rational  Faculty  :  not  at  all  confider- 
ing,  that  the  reprefentative  Divinity  of  man  doth  in  a  more 
perfect  and  proxime  relation  confift  in  the  Soul,  and  fo  in  the 
Body  formed  after  the  exemplary  character  of  the  Soul ;  not 
perpending,  that  the  Rational  Faculty  is  but  Handmaid  and 
fubfervient  to  the  Intelletl,  no  part  at  all  of  its  eflence,  nor 
adliged  to  it  by  the  infeparability  of  union,  or  identity  t 
which  we  have  to  fatisfadion  demonftrated  in  our  Treatife,  of 
the  Venation  of  Sciences.  Now  if  any  error  be  in  the  confirma- 
tion of  the  body,  in  the  womb  of  the  Conceptrix  i  that  error 
is  not  adferiptive  to  any  imperfection  of  the  Image  of  God  t 
but  to  the  incapacity  of  the  material  principles,  and  other  ex- 
ternal caufes,  invading  the  PUftick^  virtue  of  the  feed,  and 
perverting  its  exact  delineation  of  the  parts.  But  the  more 
Learned  number  of  Chriftians  doth  hold  it  of  Faith,  that  the 
Soul  doth  proximly  exprefs  the  Image  of  the  Trin-une  God, 
in  the  univocaljimplicity  of  her  fub fane  e  ,  and  the  Trinity  of 
her  Faculties,  namely,  the  Intellecl,  *r*7/,and  Memory.  Which  iot 
analogy  ever  founded,  in  the  ears  of  my  reafon,  fo  ridiculous 
and  empty  as  an  old  wives  dream ;  and  improper  to  make 
good  the  proxime,  (irtgular,  and  excellent  reflex  of  the  God- 
head in  the  Soul :  fince  the  term,  Image,  doth  include  a  fimi- 
litudeof  E fence  and  Figure,  and  nOtonely  a  bare  parity  of 
numbers.  Again,  if  the  Soul,  inher  fub  fa  nee,  reprefent  the 
thrice  facred  Deity  ;  but  the  Inte/letl,  Will,  and  Memory  re- 
flect the  Trinity  of  Perfons ;  neceffary  it  is  that  thefe  three 

faculties  > 


1 2  2  The  Image  of  Ged  • 

faculties  are  not  proprieties,  or  accidents  of  the  Soul ;  but  the 
very  umvocal  fubftance  of  the  minde ;  or  elfe,  that  the  pour- 
tradure  doth  ill  quadrate  and  refpond  to  the  Prototype,  or 
prime  exemplar,  whofe  image  it  is  beleeved  to  be.  I  confidcr- 
ed  moreover,  that  not  onely  the  minde  of  man,  but  even  the 
whole  man  was  framed  after  the  Image  of  God  ;  and  that  it 
was  a  bloody  abfurdity  to  compare  the  perfons  of  the  Trinity 
to  the  Memory,  or  fVill:  fince  no  perfon  of  the  mod  Holy 
'  Godhead,  can  in  any  latitude  of  refemblance,  reprefent  the 
Will,  nor  the  Will  the  Perfon,  none  the  Memory,  or  the  Me- 
mory none ;  as  alfo  that  no  one,feparated  from  the  other  two, 
can  hold  any  analogy  to  the  Intettccl.  And  then,  that  the 
three  faculties  of  the  Soul  are  ever  accepted  under  the  notion 
of  Accidents  :  but,  infooth,  Accidents  fall  (hort  of  expref- 
fingthe  Image,inany  neercr  relation,then  the  naked  Ternary 
°f  J2f*Hfications,  heaped  together  upon  the  fubfhnce  of  the 
Soul.  In  which  fenfe,  the  Soul  doth  exprefs  the  Im<w  of  God 
far  lefs,  then  any  the  fmalleft  piece  of  wood :  which  oy  retro- 
grade Analyfis  or  refolution  of  it  felf  into  its  primitive  En- 
tities, holdeth  forth,  Sa/t  Sulphure,  and  Afercury  :  and  not 
onely  (as  the  Minde  in  the  forementioned  fimilitude,  credited 
by  the  vulgar)  three  diverfe  proprieties,  or  a  naked  Ternary 
of  accidents.  For  every  Wood  hath  three  feveral  fubftances, 
comprifed  under  the  unity  of  the  concretion,  diftinct  in  the 
fuppofed  ElTences  of  their  principles;  but  concurring  in  the 
compofition  of  the  whole,  they  make  onely  the  fingle  fub- 
ftance of  Wood, 
a  I.  Taulerus  hath  divided  the  Soul,not  into  three  faculties,  but 

two  diftinft  parts,  viz,,  the  inferior  or  outward,  which  by 
peculiarity  of  appellation  he  denominates  the  Soul  ;  and 
the  Superior  or  inward ,  which  he  entitleth  the  profundity 
of  the  Soul,  or  Spirit;  in  which  he  affirmeth  the  Image  of 
God  to  be  comprehended,  fince  therein  is  feated  the  King- 
dom of  Heaven ,  and  therefore  the  Devil  can  obtain  no  ac- 
cefs  unto  it.  And  to  each  of  thefe  parts  he  hath  afligned 
feveral  alls  and  proprieties  mutually  diftind  each  from  other. 
But  alas  !  this  holy  man  expungeth  that  ftmple  homogeneity 
©f  the  Soul ,  wherein  (he  ought  principally  to  exprefs  the 

fimilitude 


Or,  Hclmont  s  vifion  of  the  Soul.  jj. 


fimilicudeoftheZ)«>7  :  or  at  leaft  hath  hitherto  denied  the 
Image  of  God  to  be  propagated  and  diffufed  through,  not 
onely  the  whole  man ,  but  even  through  the  whole  Soul. 
Verily,the  ears  of  my  Faith  are  not  eafily  open  to  this  Doctrine 
of  the  Duality  of  the  immortal   Sou! ;    nor  the  alterityof 
thofetwo  parts :  efpecially  when  in  here(fence,the  Soul  ought 
to  refemble  the  Image  of  the  mod  fimple  Divine  Nature.  I 
fhould  much  rather  aflent,  that  the  minde  of  man  doth  carry 
the  refcmblance  of  the  moft  immenfe  Godhead,  in  the  moft 
fimple  unity,  and  indivifible  Homogeneity  of (pirit,  under  tU 
fymbol  of  immortality ,  of  indiffolution,  and  identity,  beyond  all 
connexion  or  alterity.  Wherefore  my  affertion  is,that  the  glo-         zi. 
rious  Image  of  God  is  neither  feparate,  norfeparabie  from  the 
Soul ;  but  the  very  j»iW<?isthe  very  Ima$eof  God,  fully  fo 
intimate  to  the  Soul,  as  the  Soul  is  to  her  felf,that  is,the  Image 
of  God  is  the  Soul  of  the  Souls  ejfence  :  and  for  that  reafon,  that 
nofoberhead  can  conceive  orexprefs  any  the  leaft  analogy 
eflential  betwixt  the  fupream  increated  Ens,  and  the  foul  of 
man  ;  fince  the  nature  of  Divinity  is  wholly  incomprehen- 
sible, and  the  moft:  fubtile  thought  can  never  rinde  any  cha- 
racter of  identity  and  unity  with  God,  imprefled  upon  the 
minde,  whereon  the  fimilitude  (hould  be  founded.  Sufficient 
it  is,  that  the  minde  is  a  fpirit,  dearly  beloved  of  God,  homo- 
geneous, fimple,  immortal,  created  after  the  Image  of  the 
immenfe  Deity,  a  (ingle  Ens,  to  which  death  can  adde,  and 
from  which  Death  can  detract  nothing  that  is  proper  and  ge- 
nial unto  it  in  the  efTence  of  its  fimplicity.  And  in  regard  the       23, 
Soul,  in  the  primitive  conftitution  and  deftination  of  its  ef- 
fence,  is  participant  of  beatitude  :  therefore  is  damnation  fu- 
pervenient  to  it  by  accident,  befides  the  originary  decree  of 
Creation,  by  reafon  of  a  fucceeding  defection. 

This  Semideity,the  Soul,  thus  nobly  enriched  with  fcience,  24. 
when  once  enfranchized  from  her  prifon,  the  body,  doth  then 
for  ever  fufpend  all  ufe  of  memory,  and  no  longer  makes  ufe 
of  the  tedious  induction  of  Reminifcence,  intuition  of  place, 
or  duration  ;  but  being  (ingle,  in  that  homogeneal  fimplicky 
comprehendeth  all  things.  For  which  reafon,  fhould  any 
Memory  remain  to  the  Soul,  after  her  flight  from  Earth,  it 

A  a  would 


1 34  The  lmsge  of  God  - 


would  of  neceiTity  be  not  onely  fruftraneous  and  ufelefs,  but 
burdenlbm  :  when  it  mult  edipfe  her  tranfcendent  adual  in- 
tellection. And  from  Rcminifcence  muft  arife  the  fame  incon- 
venience ;  fince  that  can  never  be  invited  into  aCt,  but  by  the 
circumambages  and  complex  difcourfe  of  Reafon  ;  and  there- 
fore it  poflTefTeth  no  room  in  Eternity  j  where  in  the  full  pro- 
ved of  verity,  without  being  fubjed  to  declination,  defati- 
gation  or  defed,  the  foul  flandeth  exalted  far  above  the  necef- 
fityof  Recognition.  The  inference  i6,  that  the  Soul  muftbe 
conftituted  in  beatitude  (underftand,in  her  primitive  deftina- 
tion)  without  the  conjunction  of  the  forementioned  Ternary 
of  Faculties  ;  and  fo  in  that  analogy  cannot  refemble  the 
image  of  theincomprehenfiblel^/Vj',  for  thefole  reprefenta- 
tion  whereof  (he  was  created.  Yea>  upon  a  more  intimate 
fcrutiny,  I  do  not  finde  the  Memory  to  be  any  fingular  and 
diftind  power  of  the  Soul :  but  onely  the  bare  manner  of 
recognition.  For  fuch,  who  have  (hallow  memories,  to  relieve 
this  infirmity  do,  by  the  help  of  the  imagination  (Vicegerent 
to  the  intellect)  contrive  for  themfelves  an  artificial  memory, 
and  that  far  more  retentive  then  otherwife  their  natural  me- 
mory could  have  been. 

Moreover,  the  Will  alfo  taketh  an  eternal  farewel  of  the 
Soul  in  death  :  why,  becaufe  it  is  not  ejfentiaJ,  but  acci- 
dentally advenient  to  the  Soul  Since  GW,  fo  foon  as  he  had 
•flnifhea  his  Creation  of  man,  confrituted  him  in  the  abfolute 
power  of  his  own  Free  Will ;  which  in  fober  truth,  accord- 
ing to  my  apprehenfion,  doth  plainly  import,  that  the  Will 
is  not,  by  any  peculiar  manner,  ejfential  to  the  Soul,  from  the 
firft  of  her  Creation :  but  onely  annexed  to  her,  by  way  of 
concejfion,  or  trufi,  as  a  talent  to  the  hand  of  a  fer.vant ;  to 
this  end,  that  man  might  have  free  power  to  choofe  what  path 
beft  liked  him,  to  unravel  his  life  in.  Otherwife  I  deny  not, 
but  in  the  whole  fcene  of  things,  there  can  be  no- one  more 
pernicious  then  a  free  and  unregulated  wjll^  as  being  that 
onely,  which  introduceth  all  variance  and  difcord  betwixt 
God  and  man.  This  faculty,  therefore,  rrrafifbe  for  ever  exiled 
from  the  beatitude  of  Eternity  .  for  the  liberty  of  willing 
being  taken  away,  the  will  it  telf  doth  alfo  of  neceflity  periih  t 

and 


or,  HelmontV  vifion  of  the  Soul.  135 


and  of  what  ufe  can  the  power  of  Volition  be,  when  there  is 
no  longer  remaining  any  occafion  to  will  ?  And  on  this  bafis 
the  Schoolmen  found  their  dodtfine,  that  in  Heaven  the  will  is 
confirmed^  or  rather  wholly  evacuated  by  death  :  that  is,  the 
beatified  Souls  in  Paradife,  have  no  power  to  will,  nor  will  to 
will,  but  what  is  conform  to  the  will  of  the  higbe/l ;  and  thofe 
who  are  compleat  in  Charity  and  G lory ,  retain  no  power  of 
willing  any  thing  which  is  not  of  Charity.  The  Will  there- 
fore expires,  when  the  liberty  of  Volition  is  diflblved ;  and 
•by  fequel,  the  Will  can  be  no  ejfential,  but  temporary  and 
caduce  power  of  the  Soul ;  fince  it  cannot  be  of  ufe  or  ad- 
vantage to  that  Soul,  which  in  the  confummation  of  beati- 
tude and  higheft  fruition,  hath  fufTered  an  utter  evacuation 
of  defire  and  hope  :  when  it  can  no  more  be  deduced  into  aft, 
but  mud  be  a  bare  optation,  which  cannot  be  admitted  in  the  26. 
ftate  of  blifs,  where  is  a  full  fatiety  and  abundant  pofTefllon 
of  all  defiderable  good.  Sufficient  let  it  be  for  us  -t  by  the 
power  of  Volition  in  this  life,  to  thefaurize,  or  make  provifion 
for  the  life  to  come. 

Now  after  this  tranfitory  power  of  Volition  is  aboliftied,  27. 
in  the  next  life  there  fpringeth  up,  and  rnanifefteth  itfelf,  a 
fnbftantial  fVill,  in  no  refpecl:  an  alien  to  the  intellect  and 
cfTence  of  the  minde ;  and  therefore  having  a  being  abfolute- 
ly  diftincT:  from  the  accidental  and  variable /f  *'//.  For  as  the 
Imagination  is  aliened  in  Phrenfies,  diftracled  in  perturbations 
of  the  Animal  Faculty  ,and  eternally  fufpended  at  thedifunion 
of  the  Soul  and  body :  even  fo  is  the  power  of  Tree  Will  for 
ever  abrogated  by  death.  Andthuslcametobeleeve,  that 
the  Image  of  God  in  man  isfeated  inthefpiritualfubftance 
of  the  Soul;  and  not  in  the  ternary  of  its  Faculties.  In  a 
word,  the  Analogy  (lands  thus.  God  is  an  Ens  incre ate,  jingle, 
incomprehenfible,  eternal,  infinite,  omnipotent,  good,  a  fnper fub- 
ftantial Light  and  Spirit.  But  the  Soul  is  a  Creature,  Jingle, 
indivifible,  dependent,  immortal \Jimple,  and  from  the  date  of  her 
creation  eternal,  a  fubftance  foiritual and  lucid.  Finally,  in  God  %%. 
there  can  be  no  accidents  :  but  all  and  every  one  of  his  Attri- 
butes are  the  very  indiftinft  and  mofl  fimple  eflence  of  the 
Divine  Spirit :  which  Plato  his  Parmenides  in  fome  meafure 

A  a  2  understood. 


X  2  5  The  Image  of  God  • 


underftood.  And  fo  the  Soul,  fincefhe  is  the  reprefentative 
of  God,  doth  alfo  admit  no  accident  in  her  nature  :  but  her 
whole  fubftance  mud  be  a  fimple  light,  and  the  very  intellect. 
For  as  fmoak  afcending  from  flame,  is  in  figure  and  matter  the 
fame  thing  with  flame  ;  even  fo  the  Soul  is  the  naked,  pure,  and 
fimple  intellect  r  And  the  luminous  Jhadow  of  the  increated  light. 
tp.  So  that  as  the  eye  doth  behold  nothing  more  truly,  and  more 

neerly  then  the  Sun,  and  all  other  ob jecls  by  the  Sun ••.  even 
fo  the  beatified  Soul  underftandeth  nothing  more  neerly  then 
that  light,  by  whofe  eradiation  (he  is  illuminated,  and  upon 
which  (be  doth  totally  and  immediately  depend.  And  as  the 
eye  of  our  body  cannot  endure  to  gaze  upon  the  exceflive 
lufrreof  the  Sun:  fo  cannot  the  Soul  by  intelleclion  com- 
prehend the  glorious  EJfence  of  God,  much  lefs  while,  in  this 
vale  of  ignorance,  fhe  ftands  obliged  to  the  obfcure  mediati- 
on of  her  tranfitory  Faculties.  Otherwife  the  intellect,  eman- 
cipated from  the  thraldom  of  flefh,  doth  by  the  acl  of  intel- 
lection acquire  the  figure  of  the  object  underftood ;  in  fo 
much  as  it  transformeth  it  felf,  by  commigration,  to  that  unity 
tf  Light,  which  penetrateth,  and  by  penetrating  invigorateth 
it  with  beatitude.  And  thus,  the  Soul  doth  principally  and 
primarily  contemplate  the  immenfe  Nature  of  God,  in  the 
acl  of  intellection ;  and  for  this  end  was  (he  created  the  true 
and  real- reprefentative  of  the  Divine  E fence. 
ao,  They  who  opinion  the  Image  of  God  to  be  feated  in  the 

rational  faculty  of  man,  depend  upon  this  Argument.  The 
Law  is  the  Image  of  God ;  but  this  Law  is  engraven  upon  our 
Souls,  by  Reafon  :  therefore,  is  the  Soul  the  Image  of  God,  as 
(he  is  onely  rational.  But  fuch  confider  not,  that  according  to 
the  intent  of  this  Sophifm,  the  Soul,  indeed,  would  contain 
the  Image  of  God  j  but  yet  the  Soul  her  felf  would  be  the 
Law  it  felf  elTentially.  Which  abfurdity  is  too  palpable  to 
efcape  the  obfervation  of  any,  who  (hall  but  perpend,  how 
much  the  Law  and  the  Soul  differ  in  the  fuppofitionality  of 
Eflence  :  and  that  the  conflitution  and  engravement  of  the 
Law  fucceeded  the  Creation  of  the  Soul.  Verily,  I  abhor  me- 
taphorical locutions  in  ferious  and  abftrufe  fubjecls*  As  if 
diefe  words,    God  created  man  in  his  own  likenefs ,    would 

naturally 


Or,  Helmont U  vifion  of  the  Soul.  137 

naturally  bear  this  onely  interpretation,  that  God  gave  man 
the  ufe  of  reafon  :  and  that  fuch  who  enter  this  fcene  of  mor« 
tality,  with  native  idiotifm,  or  a  durable  infatuation  of  rea- 
fon, about  them,  have  forfeited  their  plea  to  this  grand  prero- 
gative of  mankinde,  the  Intake  of  the  immenfe  Deity.  Again, 
to  impute  the  Image  of  Goo*  to  Reafon,  istopropbane  and 
blafpheme  the  Sacred  Majefty  of  God,  as  I  have  amply  de- 
clared in  my  difcourfe  of  the  Venatimof  Sciences :.  When 
there  is  no  adequation  of  reafon  to  God,  no  comparifon  be- 
twixt a  tranfitory  and  uncertain  faculty,  and  an  eternal  omni- 
fcient  fubftance.  But  omitting  the  opinions  of  other  men,  I 
(hall  prefume  the  liberty  to  declare  my  own. 

The  Intellect  hath  a  Will  coequal,  and  fubftantially  united  3  ■* 
to  it  felf ;  not  fuch  as  may  be  accounted  a  power  or  accident ; 
but  thievery  light  intellectual,  a  fubftance  (piritual,  an  ejfence 
jpiritqal  and  indivifible,  onely  diftinguifhed  from  the  intellect 
&y  fuppojitianality ,  not  reality  of  ejfence.  Befide  thefe,  I  finde 
alfo  in  the  Soul  a  third  native  propriety,  which  in  defect  of  a 
more  proper  appellation,  I  name  Love,or  conftant  Dejire  •  not 
of  acquiiition,  poffelTion,  or  fruition;  but  of  Complacency  : 
which  is  equally  effential  to  the  Soul  with  the  other  two,  the 
Intellect,  and  the  intellectual  fViH,  and  equally  fimple  in  unity 
of  fubftance.  Which  Ternary  of  proprieties  meet  in  the  fina- 
gle and  indivifible  fubftance  of  the  Soul,  and  make  one  perfect 
unity.  But  this  Love  is  no  #ffof  the  rvill  fingly;  but  pro-  • 
ceedeth  from  the  intellect  andfubftantial  will  together,  as-  a 
diftinct  and  glorious  act :  for  even  in  this  life,  we  may  love 
thole  things,  which  our  understanding  concludeth  not  to  be 
amiable,  and  which  our  will  advifeth  us  not  to  love :  and  fre- 
quently we  love  objects,  that  tranfeend  the  comprehension  of 
the  underftanding,and  wilt,  as  in  anEcftafie  both  the  intellect, 
and  will  are  fufpended,  and  confopited,  during  the  abstraction 
of  the  minde,  for  fo  long  have  they  refigned  their  fcepter  to 
Love.  Nor  is  this  Love  a  pajjion:  but  an  Ejfence  dominant, 
and  an  Act  glorifkant.  The  Will  therefore,  and  Lovey  of  this  3  *. 
place,  hold  no  community  at  all  with  the  fenfual  and  tranfi- 
tory will  of  man,  or  of  flefh  and  blood  :  in  regard  they  are 
eflentiaL  tides,  by  which  (in  our  great  poverty  of  words)  we 

A  a  3  endevour 


13$  Thclmgeef X3od^ 

endevour  to  demonftrate ,  wherein  the  minde  of  man  doth 
reprefent  the  Image  of  God  :  forafmuch  as  the  intellect  en- 
franchifed  from  the  body  doth  intuitively  mderftknd,  intend, 
and  from  the  abyfs  of  the  minde,  love  God,  in  one  entire  and 
never-difcontinued  ad:  of  love,  or  defire  of  complacency,  ac- 
cording to  the  fimplicity  of  her  fubftance.  But  fo  long  as  we 
-fojourn  in  walls  of  flelh,  we  come  not  fo  neer  beatitude,  as 
once  to  ufe  our  fubftantial  and  purely  intellectual  intellect ; 
butmoft  of  our  obfcure  cognition  of  any  Entity  is  derived 
from  the  information  of  Phanfie,  which,as  Viceroy,  ufurpeth 
the  throne  of  the  intellect.  For  (as  before)  in  an  ecftatical 
rapture,  the  intellect,  will,  and  memory  keep  holiday,  and  are 
as  it  were  loft  in  a  fomnolent  inactivity ;  the  ardent  act  of 
Love  onely  remaining  vigorous  and  operative  :  yet  fo  diftincl 
from  the  three  former,  that  it  cannot  fubfift  without  the  in- 
tellect ^  and  fubfiantial  will;  fince,  when  the  Soul  is  totally 
homogeneous  in  her  fubftance,  fhe  would  plainly  lofe  that 
her  abfolute  fimplicity,  if  any  one  of  the  three  could  fubfift 
without  eflential  dependence  on  the  other.  Love  therefore, 
while  the  other  two  proprieties  continue  bound  up  inanEo- 
ftatical  (lumber,  doth  as  it  were  afcend  to  the  fuperficies :  or 
rather,  in  terms  of  neerer  fimilitude,  the  other  two  are  as  it 
were  imbibed  and  overwhelmed  in  Love.  While  we  fojourn 
in  the  Tents  ofKedar,  in  this  vale  of  mifery, Love  is  elder  then 
Defire ;  becaufe  it  is  a  pallion  of  the  Amatory  Facu  lty, which 
proceedeth  from  that  fuppofitionaiity  of  the  Soul  (which  is 
true  love  indeed)  and  reprefenteth  the  idea  or  refemblance  of 
the  corporeal  Faculty :  and  hence  is  it,  that  all  the  affeclions 
arc,  by  invincible  propensity,  rapt  on  to  irregularity  and  con- 
fufion.  But  in  the  Citizens  of  New  ferufalem ,  this  Love 
knows  no  priority,  or  distinction  from  Defire :  neither  is  it 
a  Faculty,  nor  Habit,  nor  Act  of  willing,  nor  fubfifteth  with- 
out the  Intellect. 
34.  And  thus  the  Intellect  U  a  formal  Light ;  and  the  very  fub- 

ftance of  the  Soul,  whofe  Cognition  is  perfectly  intuition,  rrirh- 
cut  the  help  of  eyes,  which  dijcernetht  willeth,  and  defireth,  in  the 
unity  of  itfelf,  whatever  -it  comprehendeth  within  it  [elf,  and 
judgeth  by  volition.  Nor  doth  it  then  any  longer  remember  by 

are- 


Or ,  Hdmont'x  vifi on  of  the  SouL  139 

a  repetition  of  the  fpecies,or  image  of  the  object  once  known ; 
nor  is  it  any  more  induced  to  the  cognition  of  an  EfTence,  by 
circumftances  i  but  then  becometh  the  onely  and  exact  cog- 
nition of  all  intelligible  objects,  and  the  intuitive  afpect, with- 
in it  felf.  Yet  fo,  that  it  knows  one  object  more  prefentially 
then  another,  while  the  Intellect  refledeth  it  felf  upon  the 
objects  underftood,  in  the  diftinct  Unity  of  Verity  :  even  as 
it  frequently  happens  in  the  artifical  Memory,  where  that  re- 
cordative  memory  is  no  diftinct  ad  from  the  inductive  judg- 
ment of  the  intellect.  And  will  this  not  be  more  genial  and 
proper  to  the  minde,  when  once  delivered  from  the  tedious, 
turbulent,  and  complex  way  of  underflanding  by  the  imagi- 
nation ?  Nor  can  the  (lability  of  thefe  our  aflertions  be  ?^, 
(haken  by  this  objection,  that  frequently  in  exorbitances  of 
the  Brain,the  Memory  doth  perifh,  and  yet  the  fudgment  con- 
tinue firm  and  found  ;  and  on  the  contrary ,the  Judgment  doth 
fufFer  impairment  and  defolation,  and  yet  the  Memory  con- 
ferve  its  integrity  and  tenor,  as  many  Drunkards  perfectly 
remember  all  pafTages  as  well  before,  as  in  and  after  their 
Wine  :  in  regard  thefe  are  Heterogeneal  Facft/ties  of  the 
fenfriive  Soul,  feated  in  diftinct  provinces  of  the  body,  and. 
fubject  to  intenfion  and  remiflion  according  to  the  exact  and 
irregular  temperament  of  the  Organs.  And  to  inanimate  ?$, 
Creatures  alfo,  according  to  our  obfervation,  there  undenia- 
bly belongeth  a  kinde  of  imperfect  and  obfeure cognition  of 
their  particular  objects  :  as  alfo  a  blindefenfe  and  dull  affecti- 
on of  the  mod  convenient  and  adequate  ;  which  Creatures 
have,  for  this  determinate  election  of  their  determinate  ob- 
jects, lately  acquired  the  name  of  Sympathetica^ :  and  this 
dark  perception  of  the  moft  accommodate  objects,  ferveth 
them  in  ftead  of  the  fenfe  of  Vifion,  and  faculty  of  reafon. 
Befides  this,  there  is  alfo  implanted  in  thefe  inanimate >fympa- 
thetical  Creatures  a  certain  Virtue,  or  Vital  endowment,  of 
infallible- valor,  and  energy  \  as  to  thofe  ends  ordained  by  the 
Creator.  There  is  alfo  a  third  power  conferred  upon  Crea- 
tures of  this  qualification,  refu king  from  theconfpiracy,  and 
coefficiency  of  the  two  former  :  which  fitteth  as  a  filent 
Gounfellor,  and  dtfpenfeth  commands  w  them,  either  to  ad- 
vance 


njo  The  Image  of  God; 

vance  towards  the  amiable  and  beneficial,  or  retreat  from  the 
offensive  and  harmful  object.  In  which  the  moft  blear-ey'd 
reafon  cannot  but  behold  a  certain  natural  fen fation,^  affecti- 
on of  determinate  objects:  yea,  and  what  is  more,  zdipke 
andaverfation.  Which  Climax,  or  threefold  degree  of  mn- 
intelleflual  cognition,  is  more mani felt  in  the  moftftupid  forts 
of  JnfeSls,  as  alfo  in  Fools  and  Mad  men;  who  are  no  fub- 
jecls  to  the  prudent  fcepter  of  the  Intellect,  but  fubordinatc 
to  the  duller  advifoes  of  fenfe,  and  conform  to  the  provoca- 
tions of  onely  vifual  light.  And  yet  in  thefe  there  is  moreover 
a  fecond  power,  or  aft  of  their  virtues  fpecifical  and  functions 
.  vital :  for  the  onely  exercife  whereof  they  were  ordained. 
And  thirdly,  there  is  comprehended  in  them  afarmorecon- 
fpicuous  act  of  Addrefs  or  Application,  and  Avcrfation  or 
Avoidance  :  which  arifeth  from  the  inftinct  of  their  Forms. 
All  which  natural  proprieties  do  yet  more  powerfully  declare 
themfelves  in  fenfitive  Creatures  :  for  to  thefe  belongeth  a 
certain  fenfitive  Imagination,  with  a  gradual  difcourfe  of  ob- 
fcure  reafon,  which  fupplieth  their  defeft  of  an  Intellect,  and 
is  more  or  lefs  refplendent  and  confpicuous  in  every  fingle 
fpecies :  fo  that  fagacity,  voluntary  election,  and  memory  in 
fuch  fall  under  the  apprehenfion  of  a  comparative  intellect : 
their  objects  being  yet  changed,  according  to  the  variety  of 
matter,  propenfe  to  variations,  distinctions,  and  Angularities. 
Moreover,  in  fuch  there  is  anemanative  oreffluxive  power 
collaterally  annexed  to  their  virtues ;  whereby  their  Souls  are 
more  or  lefs  propenfe  to  the  exercifes  of  their  element,  be- 
nign, and  wholfom,  or  wilde  and  destructive  endowments,  or 
qualities  efTential.  And  finally,they  are  enriched  with  a  native 
defire  of  complacency,  of  abhorrence  or  diflike,  and  of  concttpi- 
fcence,  immediately  enfuing  upon  their  consideration  of  the 
good  or  evil  of  the  object :  which  power  or  propenfity  is  fo 
firmly  counited  to  the fenfitive  foul,  that  it  feems  almoft  im- 
poflible  to  obfervation,  that  any  man  ftiould  at  once  fee  two 
ftrange  perfons  together,  and  not  inftantly  become  more 
affected  to  one  then  the  other.  And  thefe  things,  which  are 
fufficiently  operative  even  in  meerly  Corporeal  and  inanimate 
natures,  of  confefled  efficacy  in  fenfitive,  and  in  b©th  admit 

of 


Or,  HelmontV  vifton  of  the  Soul.  141 


of  more  or  lefs  acutenefs,  according  to  the  obedient  or  re- 
fractary  predifpofition  of  the  recipient :  cannot  but  be,  for  the 
fame  reafon,  of  more  clarified  and  fublime  energy  in  man. 

Finally,  it  is-not  the  fenfe  of  our  thoughts,  that  the  Image  37. 

of  God  in  man  fhotold  fall  under  fuch  grofs  difparagement,  as 
to  be  confidered  as  dependent  on  any  Ternary  of  Faculties  ; 
which  naturally  belongeth  alfo  to  other  inferior  natures  in 
this  fcene  of  the  world.  Becaufe  the  dignity  of  the  Image  of 
the  mod  glorious  fehovab  is  not,  in  any  the  largefl  latitude  of 
Analogy,  participated  by  any  other  Creature  whatever :  fince 
the  Divine  Image  is  peculiarly  radicated  in  the  humane  Soul, 
and  equally  proper  to  it  with  its  very  efTence :  but  all  other 
proprieties  of  the  Soul  are  not  of  the  efTence  of  theMinde; 
but  productions  and  fubfequent  acts.  Nor  can  it  (land  with 
the  Majefty  of  the  Divine  Image,  to  be  defumed  from  fo  poor 
an  original  as  qualities ;  for  the  proprieties  and  excellencies 
of  all  other  created  forms  concur,  and  are  as  it  were  colli- 
quated  or  melted  together  into  theelTence  of  the  Soul,  by 
virtue  of  the  Divine  Image.  But  if  thefe  be  accounted  as  at- 
tributes and  productions :  that  mu(l  be  charged  upon  the  mife- 
rable  manner,  and  cuftomary  abufe  of  underftanding,  ac- 
cording to  the  capacity  of  the  Vulgar.  For  in  equitable  truth,  38*. 
the  minde  is  one  (ingle  act,  purejiimple/ormaljhomogeneous, 
and  indivifible  j  in  which  the  Image  of  God  doth  fuhfift 
proximely  and  eflentially.  So  that  in  this  Image,  all  faculties 
do  not  onely  lay  afide  the  nature  of  Attributes :  but  alfo  col- 
lect and  binde  up  their  fuppofitionalities  into  an  unity  in- 
diftinct.  Why,  becaufe  the  Soul  is  a  certain  fubftantial  light 
within  her  (elf  j  or  a  fubftance  fo  lucid,  that  in  fuppofitiona- 
lity  of  e(Tence,it  cannot  be  diftinguiftied  from  the  very  light : 
and  her  intellect  isfo  the  light  of  the  Minde,  that  the  very 
Minde  is  the  meer  lucid  intellect.  And  in  this  felf-light  the  ?£• 
Minde,  once  uncaptived  from  the  opacity  of  flefli  and  blood, 
doth  wholly  and  intimately  furvey  it  felf,  and  underftand  its 
own  nature:  and  therefore  hath  no  need  either  of  brain  or 
heart ;  in  which  material  Organs,  the  fubftance  of  the  Minde 
doth  feem  to  (loop  unto  the  aflumption  of  the  progeny  or 
(lock  of  proprieties  j  that  is,  the  Soul  is  diffufed  or  emiflively 

Bb  expanfcd 


*42  t  TbelmAgt$f  Cod^ 

expanfed  into  fcveral  tra.nfitory  Faculties.  To  fpeak  more  plain- 
ly ;  in  the  body,  when  the  Intellect  isabftracled  infpeculati- 
on,  it  makes  ufe  of  corporeal  Organs,  to  which  it  is  obliged  : 
and  aftumes  a  certain  /  'irtus  qualitative,  called  Imagination ; 
.0t  which  from  the  conjunction  or  fociety  of  the  power  phanta- 
fiicaL  and  concurrent  fplendorof  the  intellect,  fuflfering  fome 
degradation  in  the  Organs,  fpringeth  up,  by  a  certain  com- 
bination, into  the  forementioned  qualitative  Faculty.  And 
hence  comes  it  to  pafs,  that  this  Faculty  groweth  weary  by 
long  and  intenfe  Imagination,  feemeth  wholly  vanquifhed  by 
difficult,  knotty,  andabftrufe  meditation,and  frequently  fub- 
mits  to  dementation  or  madnefs :  nay,  as  the  obfervarion  of 
Phyficians  telleth  us,  with  one  nights  penfive  fhidy,  and  anxi- 
ety of  thought,  the  hair  of  young  heads  hath  put  on  the 
filver  Livery  of  old  age.  But  theminde,  once  emancipated 
from  the  pedantifm  of  flefh  and  blood,  is  never  weary  with 
continued  intellection.  Moreover,  the  Imagination  in  this  life 
is.not  onely  fubjeel  to  lafTation  :  but  from  the  magazine  of 
it  fejf  hath  not  any  intellective  (pedes ;  which  it  hath  not 
drawn  in  from  fenfible  objects.  And  therefore  the  Intellective 
Faculty,  which  concurreth  and  cooperateth  with  the  phan- 
tafiical  function  of  the  Senjltive  Soul,  followeth  theconfri- 
tution  or  temperamental  difpofition  of  the  Organ,  and  arbi- 
trary dictates  of  the  Scnfitive  Life :  no  otherwife  then  in 
Naturals  the  effect  followeth  the  weaker  part  of  their  Caufes. 

41:#  But  the  Soul,  whatfoever  is  requifite  for  Cognition,  Com- 
memoration, or  Volition,  either  for  one  fingle  act,  or  many, 
hath  wholly  from  it  felf,  and  borroweth  it  from  no  other 
forein  Caufality  concurrent.  For  the  good  fubfhntial  Will 
of  a  Soul  advanced  to  beatitude,  arifeth  not  from  the  object 
underftood  :  but  from  the  radical  goodnefs  of  her  own  For- 
mal love,  which  is,  indeed,  no  proper  pa#Ion  of  the  foul,  no 
habit,  no  propenfion,  nor  any  quality  ;  but  a  fubfhntial  act 
of  goodnefs,  by  which  the  blelTed  Soul  xsfukfiantiaUy-,  uni- 

*2]  vocally,  and  homogeneally, not  qualitatively  good.  And  this 
prerogative  it  enjoyetb,  becaufe  it  is  the  Typical  Image  of  Di- 
vinity. But  bodies,  of  their  own  accord,  perpetually  fall  into 
the  attributes  of  forms,  heterogeneity,  viciijitudev  and  at 

length 


or,  HelmontV  vifion  of  the  SottL  *43 


length  into  diflblution.  Therefore  Love  or  Defire  of  the  43. 
Minde,  is  no  function  of  the  Appetitive  faculty  :  but  is  a  part 
of  the  fubfhntial  Minde,  or  rather  the  very  Minde  it  felf, 
flowing  from  the  Intellect  and  Will.  Which  three  are,  by  the 
hand  of  the  Creator,married  indhTolubiy  into  an  eternal  unity, 
in  the  pureft  and  moft  abfolute  identity  and  fimplicity  of 
fubftance.  Yet  in  Mortals  they  are  ieparate  and  drftincl:,  as 
well  inrefpecl  of  the  necefllty  of  Organs,  and  difparity  of 
functions  ;  as  the  collateral  fociety  and  conjunctive  operation 
of  the  Senfitive  Soul :  Since  now  we  frequently  defire  thofe  a  a 
things,  which  the  Intelletl  judgeth  not  defiderable,  and  the 
W*7/wouldwi(h  never  to  enjoy.  ButnecefTary  itisthatfuch 
things,whofe  operations  are  diflferent,fhouId  be  alfo  different 
in  the  root  of  their  Beings,  by  a  manner  of  diftin<ftion,where- 
by  each  fingle  nature  is  feparated  from  others :  in  the  Minde 
truly  by  a  Suppofitionality  relative  :  in  the  Senfitive  Soul,  ac- 
cording to  the  corporeal-  and  qualitative  nature.  And  there-  a<. 
fore  that  amorous  defire  of  the  Minde,  is  the  radical  elTence 
of  the  Soul,  confubftantial  and  coarvous  to  it.  So  though  in 
Heaven  be  a  fatiety  and  perpetual  fruition  of  all  defiderable 
good:  yet  doth  not  this  defire  of  the  Soul  therefore  ceafe, 
which  is  a  conftant  ftudy  of  Complacency  :  nor  doth  it  more 
infer  a  pafllon  into  the  Minde,then  Charity  it  felf ;  fince  Love 
and  Charity  are  in  the  Soul  radically  one  and  the  fame  thing. 
Otherwife  (hould  this  defire  ceafe,  and  the  ardor  of  Love 
fuffer  extinction,either  a  fatiety  or  infenfility  of  fruition  would 
inftantly  fpring  up ;  which  cannot  confift  with  a  ftate  of  full 
beatitude,  and  would  infer  difcord  upon  the  calm  and  con- 
ftant  harmony  of  a  Soul  once  admitted  into  the  Chorus  of 
Saints  triumphant.  And  thus  this  Defire  is  the  incendiary  that  .$ 
doth  both  kindle  and  maintain  the  flames  of  interminable  de- 
lectation,  and  joyes  infatiate  and  inextinguifhible  •  in  which 
confederation  the  Soul  wears  the  refemblance  of  the  Holy 
Ghoftthe  Comforter.  Now  manifeft  it  is,  that  in  the  Minde, 
the  Intellect,  will,  and  Love  are  fubflantially  counited :  but 
in  thefenfitive  Soul,  their  operations  arediftinguiflied,  ac- 
cording to  the  determinate  alterity  of  Faculties  and  their 
Organs  ;  when  we  undemanding  many  objects,  we  do  not 

Bb  2  defire, 


144  The  Image  $f  Gedh 

defire,  and  defire  many  we  hardly  underfhnd,  and  fuch  in- 
deed as  our  will,  if  let  to  the  fwinge  of  its  own  native  pro- 
47.  penfity,  would  decline  the  enjoyment  of;   as  in  example,  we 

will  what  we  defire  not,  when  we  willingly  fubmit  to  the 
ftroke of  the  Executioner:  and  defire  what  our  will  abhors, 
when  we  call  for  the  difmembringfaweof  the  Chirurgeon,and 
gladly  embrace  the  horror  of  amputation.  Whence  it  comes 
to  pais,  that  fomctimes  the  Will  giveth  laws  to  the  defire  • 
and  on  the  contrary,frequently  the  defire  ufurpeth  the  fcepter 
and  commands  the  Will :  So  that  thefe  two  Lords  mutually 
vanquifh  and  fucceed  each  the  other,  by  viciiTitudes.  Which 
Civil  War  muft  fo  long  continue  in  thefe  our  walls  of  flefh, 
as  the  fenfitive  Soul  draweth  and  engageth  the  Intellect,  and 
the  body  draweth  and  engageth  the  fenfitive  Soul,  into  a 
multiplex  and  various  ataxy  or  irregularity  of  divifion.  And 
from  this  inteftine  Duello  arife  thole  abfurd  defires  of  objects 
impoiTible  to  be  obtained,  and  wifhes  of  things  in  the  prefent 
tenfe,  which  the  unalterable  Grammar  of  Time  hath  made  in 
the  pmerperfett,  and  excepted  from  ever  being  declined  in 
the future. 

But  this  Dr/m^enftirined  in  the  fubftanceof  the  Soul,  mull 
be  of  the  eflence  of  theMinde:  Otherwife  he  could  not 
commit  a  fin,  who  looked  upon  a  woman  to  luit  after  her, 
before  the  plenary  confent  of  the  Will.  Our  defires  therefore 
are  elemented  and  coyned  in  the  mint  of  mortal  and  caduce 
faculties  j  which  feated  in  the  Sensitive  Souly, rival  the  opera* 
tions  of  the  immortal  and  rational :  whofe  objects  are  many 
times  rejected  by  the  Will  as  inconvenient  and  ungrateful. 
As  to  the  manner  alio,  the  defirer'm  this  life,  operateth  one 
way,and  the  Will  another :  and  in  the  narrow  circle  of  a  day, 
fometimes  the  defire  precedeth  the  Will,  and  anon  again  the 
Will  getteth  the  ftart  of  the  Defire,  and  one  fubdueth  the 
other  fucceOively,  that  the  victor  may  reftrain  and  coerce 
fomething  diftinct  from  it  felf :  and  this  wholly  in  the  tranfi- 
tory  faculties ;  becanfe  each  arifeth  from  the  concupifcence  of 
48.  the  Senfitive  Soul.  But  in  the  glorious  denizens  of  Paradife, 
this  excellent  Love,  or  amorous  Defire,  feeleth  a  refurrection 
and  brighter  afcenfion,  as  being  the  lumiHOus.fubflance  of 

the 


Or ,  Hclmont'  s  vifion  of  tht  Soul.  145 

the  Soul :  for  there  is  nothing  defired,  which  is  not  alfo  the 
full  object  of  the  Will :  and  that  is  collected  into  an  unity,  " 
as  well  in  regard  of  the  aft,  as  of  the  fubfiance  :  although 
Volition  and  Oration  feem  two  diverfe  branches  expanfed  from 
one  root ;  which  far  tranfcendeth  the  manner  and  method  of 
intellection  in  thofe,  who  have  not  yet  confefled  their  duft. 

Laftly,  in  man  is  fituate  the  Kingdom  of  God)  that  is  the 
very  Deity  it  felf,  by  whofe  perpetual  fplendor  all  things  are 
collected  into  the  unity  of  verity.  The  Image  of  God  therefore 
is  primarily  in  the  minde  of  man,  whofe  very  eflenceisno 
other  then  the  very  Image  of  God,  Which  Image  falleth  not 
under  thecomprehenfion  of  the  moft  fubtilethought.nor  can 
be  exprefled  by  any  the  moil  fignificant  words,  in  this  vale  of 
ignorance :  in  regard  it  is  the  mirror  of  the  incomprehenfible 
Divinity ;  and  hence  alfo  is  it,  that  the  foul  while  immured  in 
this  cloyfter  ofj flefh,  cannot  reach  the  knowledg  of  her  own  ~ 
nature,  bttc  mult  remain  a  (hanger  to  it  felf. 

But  in  the  Cortex  or  (brine  of  the  Minde,  the  fenptive  and  dp, 
vital  Form^  this  Image  of  Divinity  is  vifible  by  reflexion,  as 
being  relucent  in  the  Faculties  :  yet  fuffering  a  great  allay  of 
fplendor  from  the  opacity  of  the  body ;  becaufe  obumbrated 
by  the  cloud  of  brutal  generation,  and  infected  with  morta- 
lity and  pollution  by  the  inquination  of  our  nature  fain  from 
its  primitive  purity  :  by  reafon  whereof  the  body  hath  not 
received  the  Image,  but  atfecond  hand  borrowed  onely  the 
Figure  of  the  Deity.  But  alas !  the  miferable  Minde,  de-  jo» 
volved  into  outward  darknefs,  as  it  hath  divorced  it  felf  from 
an  unity  with  the  Light  uncreate,  and  infringed  the  originary 
energy  of  this  Image  of  Divinity  :  fo  alto  hath  it  loft  the 
primitive  light  of  that  Image,  by  the  bold  appropriation  of  it 
as  juftly  proper  to  it  felf  by  the  title  of  merit ;  {o  that  ever 
fince  the  fall  it  can  underftand,  wilt,  or  love  no  object  befides 
it  felf,  and  in  order  to  it  felf.  For  the  damned  (hall  arife  from 
the  dead  unchanged :  becaufe  their  bodies,  in  the  refurrecli- 
on,  (hall  receive  their  determinations  from  their  fouls,  which 
fince  they  appear  with  all  their  depraved  affections,  reflected 
onely  on  themfelves,  after  a  corporeal  manner ;  they  (hall 
not,  in  the  refurrection,  reprefent  the  Image  of  God y  being 

Bb  3  as 


!  a  $  The  Image  of  God  5 


as  it  were  fuffocated  within  them  ,  unlefsin  that  corporeal., 
fimilitude  derived  from  Adam^  the  Protoplaft,  by  the  means 
of  generation ;  that  is,  they  (hall  have  no  more  of  the  Image 
of  Gcd,  then  what  is  weakly  and  darkly  reflected  in  the  figure 
of  the  body.  Laftly,  the  Soul  (underfhnd  onely  fuch,  as  is 
excluded  the  New  ferufalem)  being  once  fain,  by  the  horrid 
Cataract  of  death,  upon  the.  privation  of  thofe  afliftant  Fa- 
culties, the  Imagination,  Memory,  and  Will;  doth  forever 
after  underfhnd,  will,  and  love  all  objects,  byablindeap- 
prehenfion^  addicted  onely  to  it  felf.  Font  knoweth  its  own 
immortality,  becometh  fenfible  of  its  damnation,  and  with 
fecret  murmurs  complaineth  of  it,  as  an  act  of  high  injultice 
done  upon  it.  Becaufe  all  the  bent  and  fcope  of  its  love  is  one- 
ly to  defend  its  excufes  for  fins,  fecretly  to  recriminate  upon 
the  hand  of  Juftice,  by  palliating  the  guilt  of  Crimes,  as  if 
committed  in  the  days  of  ignorance  and  innocence,  with 
great  fragility  of  nature,  many  crafty  wiles  and  treacherous 
invitements  of  our  three  Adverfaries,  the  World,  Flefh,  and 
Devil,  and  the  defect  of  Grace  furncient  to  encounter  fuch 
forcible  temptations  :  and  that  an  eternal  punifhment  (as  far 
beyond  all  patience  to  endure,  as  all  flux  of  time  to  end)  can- 
not according  to  the  laws  of  Juftice,  be  due  for  a  momentany 
tranfgreflion.  And  at  this  it  burneth  with  blafphemous  rage 
and  furious  hatred  againft  God :  chiefly  becaufe  it  is  too 
well  afcertained,  that  the  judgment  can  never  be  reverfed  by 
any  replea  of  error,  nor  the  arreft  taken  off  by  any  reprieve, 
till  the  impoffible  period  of  eternity  ;  all  hopes  of  evading 
the  uncefTant  fcourge  of  Gods  wrath  being  for  ever  cut  off  in 
defpair.  Thus  the  impoflibility  either  of  evafion  or  ceffation 
being  as  long  lived  as  Eternity,  the  Caitiff  foul,  plunged  in 
a  deluge  of  defperation  that  fhall  never  know  an  ebbe,  from 
the  firfr.  minute  of  her  difunion  from  the  body,  palTeth  into 
an  abyfs  of  horror ;  where  fhall  be  no  piety,  no  companion, 
no  confolation,  no  relaxation,  and  no  redemption  or  revoca- 
tion. To  which  fad  truth  we  may  adde,  that  fince  the  imellctb 
doth  naturally  transform  it  felf  into  the  idea  of  the  object 
underftood  {  which  the  ancient  Ethnick^  Philosophers  well 
knew,  and  elegantly  blended  under  the  parabolical  fiction  of 

Proteus) 


0r ,  Helmonu  vifion  of  the  Soul,  1 47 


Proteus)  that  is,  into  the  full  fimilitude  of  thofe  curfed  Devils 
and  Spirits  created  for  revenge,that  are  ever  objected  unto  it>: 
Hence  is  the  Soul  contiually  pofFeffed  with  an  high  hatred  of 
God,  and  his  blefled  Army  of  Saints  and  Angels ;  together 
withdefperation,  malediction,  damnation,  and  the  vindictive 
tortures  of  thofe  infernal  executioners.  Omay  the  Mercy  of 
Omnipotence^  upon  the  fole  motive  of  his  own  infinite  goodnefs 
and  clemency ,  vouchfafe  to  break  thofe  fnares  laid  in  all  the 
paths  of  our  life,  to  precipitate  us  into  this  mifery,  that  muft 
finde  neither  remedy,  releafe,  nor  end .     Amen, 


FINIS. 


3  ?<,■  3  84
