A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean, and Round the World, Vol. III (George Vancouver, 1798)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1798 first edition, vol. III of three (https://archive.org/details/cihm_41864). The official account of Vancouver's survey of the Pacific Northwest (1791–95) — vol. III of the 1798 first edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

A 
VOYAGE or DISCOVERY 
NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN, 


AND 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


VOL. Ill. 


A 


VOYAGE or DISCOVERY 


TO THE 


NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN, 
ROUND THE WORLD: 


{N WHICH THE COAST OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA HAS BEEN CAREFULLY 
EXAMINED AND ACCURATELY SURVEYED. 


Undertaken by HIS MA FESTY’s Command, 


PRINCIPALLY WITH A VIEW TO ASCERTAIN THE EXISTENCE OF ANY 
NAVIGABLE COMMUNICATICN BETWEEN THE 


North Pacific and North Atlantic Oceans; 


AND PERFORMED IN THE YEARS 


1799, 1791, 1792, 1793, 1794, and 1795, 
IN THE 


DISCOVERY Stoop or War, anp ARMED TenpER CHATHAM, 
UNDER THE COMMAND OF 


CAPTAIN GEORGE VANCOUVER. 


IN THREE VOLUMES. 


——— 


VOL, III. 
EE 


LONDON: 


PRINTED FOR G. G. AND Jj, ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW; 
AND J. EDWARDS, PALL-MALL. 


1798. 


CON TENT S 


THIRD VOLUME, 


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. 


BOOK THE FIFTH. 


TuirD visit TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS—CONCLUDE THE SUR: 
VEY OF THE COAST OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA. 


CHAPTER I. 


Leave the coaft of New Albion——Arvive off the eaft point of Owhyhee—Exa- 
mine Whyeatea bay—Vifited by Tamaahmaah—Procecd to Karakakooa bay 
—Tranfactions there—Departure of the Daedalus for New South Wales. 

Page 1 


CyTAPTER II. 


Sequel of tranfaétions at Karanakooa—Ceffion of the ifland of Owhyhee— 
Aftronomical and nautical obfervations, - - - 21 


CHAPTER JI. 


Quit Karakakooa—Viit Tyahtatooa and Toeaigh bays—Some defcription of 
the anchorage at thofe places—Examine the northern jides of Movwee, 
Woahoo, and Attowai—Obfervations on the anchorage at Attowai and 
Onehow— Leave the Sandwich iflands, - - - 59 


Vou, IIL. A CHAPTER 


CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER IV. 
Quel the Sandwich flands— Part company with the Chatham—Indications of 


land—See Tfcheritow iflind—Pa/s Trinity tfes—Proceed along the 
coaft—Enter and procecd up Cook's river, — - - - 83 


CHAPTER V. 

Dangerous fituation of the fhip in confequence of ice—Examination of the 
upper part of Cook's river—Its final termination proving it to be only an 
extenfive aim of the fea, tt obtains the name of Cook's inlet-— Foined by 
the Chathim-——Mr. Pugel’s narrative during the feparation of the two 
veffels—Vipited by Ruffians—Qual Cook's nlec—Aflronomical and nautical 
obfervations, . - - - - - 110 


CHAP TIER Vi. 


Paffage from Cook's inlet to Prince William's found—Mceet a large flect of 
canoes—Spring the bow/pirt in a gale of wind—Carry away the foreyard 
— lrrive in port Chalmers— Survey of Prince William's found by the boats 
—A violent florm—Vifited by a few Ruffians—Some account of their efta- 


blifhments in the found—Chatham difpatched to continue the furvey of 


the coaft eaftward from cape Hinchinbrook—sAfironomical and nautical 
obfervations, - s a . - - 150 
CHAPTER VIL 
Quit Prince William's found—Geographical and other obfervations re/peci- 
ing the adjacent country and its nhabitants—Procecd in the examination 
of the exterior coaf_—Pafs port Mulgrave—Intellizence received of the 
Survey having been completed to that flation by the Chatham— Arrive in 
Crofs found— Joined by the Chatham there, - - - 189 


CHAPTER VUTI 


Mr. Puget’s narrative of his tranfaclions and furvcy of thé couft, between 
Prince William's and Crofs founds ; during the Chatham's fcparation from 
the Difcovery, - - - - - 216 

A CHAPTER 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER IX. 
Zranfaétions in Crofs found—Proceed to fea— Account vf a boat excurfion— 
Defcription of port Althorp and Crofs found—Aftronomical and nautzcal 
obfervations, - - - - - - 238 


Cr ad lB UX, 
Proceed to the fouthward along the exterror coaft of King George the Lhird's 
archipelaga—Arrive in port Conclufon—Tranfaclions there—Two boat 


excurfions—Complete the furvey of the continental fhores of North-Weft 
America—Aftronomical and nautical obfervations, . 204 


BOOK THE SIXTH. 


PASSAGE TO THE SOUTHWARD ALONG THE WESTERN COAST OF 
AMERICA; DOUBLE CAPE Horn; roucn Ar Sr. HELENA; 
ARRIVE IN ENGLAND. 


CHAPTER I. 


Depart from port Conclufion—Arrive at Nootkha—Tranfaélions there— 
Vifit 1 aquinit’ at Tahfheis—Aftronomical obfervations for correéling the 
furvey between cape Douglas and cape Decifon, - : 297 


CHAPTER IIL 


Depart from Nootka found—Violent florm—darrive at Monterrey—Receive 
on board the deferters from the Chatham and Dedalus—Excurfion into 
the country—Examine a very remarkable mountain—Aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations, Sa - : : 319 


CHAPTER IIL 


Leave Monterrey—Some account of the three Marias t/lands—Proceed to 
the fouthward—Aftronomical and nautical obfervattons, : 339 


CHAPTER 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Vifit the ifland of Cocos—Some defcription of that ifland—Aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations there — Proceed to the fouthward — Pafs between 
Wenman's and Culpepper's iflands—See the Gallipagos iflands, and afcer- 


tain their filuation. - - - - 357 


CHAPTER V. 


Proceed to the fouthward—The Difcovery fprings her main-maf_—Scurvy 
makes its appearance—Pa/s the iflands of Maffafuero and Juan Fernan- 
dez—Arrive at Valparaifo—Vifit St. Fago, the capital of Chih, 389 


CHAPTER VIL 


Quit Valparaifo—Proceed to the fouthward—Pafs to the fouth of cape Horn 
—Ufelefs fearch for la Grande—Part company with the Chatham— 
Arrive at St. Helena—Foin the Chatham there—Capture the Macaffar 
Dutch Eaft India Man—Aftronomical and nautical obfervations— Leave 
St. Helena—Proceed to the northward—Difcover a number of veffels under 
convoy of His Majefty’s fhip Sceptre—Foin the convoy, and proceed with 
it to the Shannon—Difcovery proceeds from thence to the river Thames, 

464 


“7 


Notes and Mifcellaneous Obfervations, . . “ 487 


A 
LIST OF 
THE PLATES 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRD VOLUME. 


witty 


DIRECTIONS 1O THE BINDER, 


Plate 


I. Tue crater on 


To face Page 
the fummit of mount Worroray, 
Owhyhee, with a diftant view of the ifland of Mowee, 


14 

II, Port Dick, with a fleet of Indian canoes, - = 150 
III. Mount St. Elias, bearing n. 5° Ww. and Icy bay, wn. 20 w, 

five miles diftant, —- - r : 204 

IV. A remarkable mountain near the river of Monterrey, 334 

V. The town of Valparaifo on the coaft of Chili, - 403 


with 


VI. The village of Almandrel, in the bay of Valparaifo, 
a diftant view of the Andes, 


. - 412 


A 


VOYAGE 


TO 
THE NORTH PACIVIC OCEAN; 
AND 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


BOOK THE FIFTH. 


THIRD VISIT TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS—CONCLUSION OF 
THE SURVEY OF THE COAST OF NorTH-WEstT AMERICA. 


CHAPTER I. 


Leave the coaft of New Albion—Arrive off the eaft point of Owhyhee—Exa- 
maine Whyeatea bay—Vifited by Tamaahmaah—Proceed to Karakakooa bay 
—Tranfathons there—Departure of the Dedalus for New South Wales. 


Our progrefs from the coaft of New Albion, ftill attended with light Rt Oe 
variable winds, was fo flow, that at noon of the 15th the fhores were fe poeeed 
yet in fight, bearing from N.17£. to s.6g£.; the former, being the SunCRYAES 
neareft, was diftant 7 leagues ; the obferved latitude was 30° 14’, longi- 
tude 243° 572’. 

In the afternoon, the wind blew a moderate gale at w.n.w., which 
brought us by day-light the next morning within fight of the ifland of Mondav 6. 
Guadaloupe. This ifland is compofed of high naked rocky mountains ; 
is about thirteen miles long, nearly in a north and fouth direétion, 
with two rocky iflets; one lying w. s.w., at the diftance of half a league ; 

Vo. Itt. B the 


are ra eh aaa 


1793- 
December. 
a ed 


Sunday 22, 


Wednef, 25. 


Sunday 29. 


Tuefday 31. 


1794: 
January. 


(ney sorted 
Friday 3. 


Monday 6. 


Tuefday 7. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the other lying fouth, two miles from its fouth point, which is fituated 
in latitude 28° 5.4’, longitude 241° 38’. The wind at n. w. continued to 
blow a pleafant gale with fair weather until midnight; but at this time it 
veered round, and fettled in the north-eaft trade. Our diftance was now 
about 75 leagues from the coaft, and it is probable the north-weft winds 
do not extend far beyond that limit, as the wind that fucceeded continued 
without calms, or other interruptions, between the N.£. and E.N.E., 
blowing a ftcady, gentle, and pleafant gale. 

On the ged, in latitude 29° 23’, longitude 234° 37’, the variation of 
the compafs was 7° eaftwardly; here we had thirty hours calm, after 
which we had a gentle breeze from the N.£.; this as we proceeded was 
attended firft by cloudy and gloomy weather, and afterwards with rain, 
and fudden gufts or flurries of wind. On the ‘25th, a tropic bird was 
feen, and a common gull that appeared to be much fatigued, and in- 
clined to alight on board. 

This very unpleafant weather, fimilar to that which we had experi- 
enced in this neighbourhood about the conclufion of laft january, ftill 
continued; and on the goth, in latitude 19°1', longitude 231° 58’, the 
wind, after veering to the s.£., became light, and, like the weather, was 
very unfettled. We were now paffing the {pot affigned to the tos Majos 
ules, at the diftance of a few miles only to the fouthward of our former 
track; but we perceived no one circumftance that indicated the vicinity 
of land. 

On the 31ft, the wind feemed to be fixed in the northern quarter, but 
the atmofphere was ftill very unpleafant, and the gloomy weather was 
now accompanied by much rain. On the gd of january, in latitude 18° 
34, longitude 219° 32’, a very heavy {well rolled from the N.w., and 
the wind in that direétion was light, with alternate calms, attended by 
foggy or dark hazy weather until the 6th, when in latitude 19° 19’, lon- 
gitude 208° 48’, we had a few hours of fair and pleafant weather; this was 
again fucceeded by the fame gloomy atmofphere that we had ~-xperienced 
during the greater part of this paflage, and the wind conti..ued to be 
very variable between the n.w. and s.s.w. In the afternoon of the 
following day the weather was more favorable, and the wind from the 
northward 


Ga eel ie 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


northward fettled in the N.£; to this we fpread all our canvafs in the 
expeétation of {eeing the ifland of Owhvhee at day-light the next morn- 
ing. The wind however flackened during the night, and the weather 
being dark and gloomy, it was not until about nine o’clock in the fore- 
noon that Mowna-kaah was difcovered fhewing his hoary head above the 
clouds, bearing by compafs w. £ s.; but the haze and imift with which 
the diftri€t of Ahcedo was inveloped, prevented our difcerning the fhores. 


The obferved latitude at noon was 19° 52’; at this time the eaft end of 


523 
Owhyhce bore by compals s. 52 w., at the diftance of 10 leagues, by 
which it appeared, that Arnold’s chronometer, No. 14. had erred in lon- 
gitude fince our departure from the coaft of New Albion 27’; his No. 
176, 21’; Kendall’s, 52’; and the dead reckoning 3° 40’; all being to the 
eaftward of the truth. This error has however been corrected. in affign- 
ing the feveral fituations during this paflage. 

We ftood for the land until fun-fet, when being within 2 leagues of 
the fhore, we employed the night in preferving our {lation off that part 
of the coaft, where we expeéted to find the harbour or bay of Whyeatea: 
in queft of which I difpatched Mr. Whidbey in the cutter the next 
morning, attended by a boat from the Chatham, and another from the 
Dedalus, all well armed. The appearance of the fhores did not feem 
much in favor of our finding a more eligible fituation here than at Ka- 
rakakooa, for accomplifhing our feveral purpofes ;° notwithflanding the 
reprefentation that had been made to us of its being very commodious. 

The boats had fearcely departed when fome of the natives came off 
in their canoes, but owing to a very heavy {well from the northward, 
they could bring us but few refrefhments. As foon as they underftood 
who we were, they told us that Tamaahmaah, with feveral of the prin- 
cipal chiefs, were then on fhore waiting in expeétation of our arrival; 
and then immediately made the beft of their way towards the fhore, pro- 
claiming our return to their country with fhouts, apparently of great joy 
and gladnels. 

About ten in the forenoon we were honored with the prefence of 
the king, with his ufual confidence and cheerful difpofition. It was 
impoffible to miftake the happinefs he expreffed on feeing us again, 


B2 which 


2 


1794- 
January. 
e—.,--— 


Wrednel. Qe 


Tue'day a 


1704- 


January. 


eee ain 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


which feemed to be greatly increafed by his meeting us at this, his moft 
favorite part of the ifland; where he hoped we fhould be able to re- 
main fome time, to take the benefits arifing from its fertility ; which, 
from the appearance of the neighbouring fhores, feemed to promife an 
abundant fupply of the various refrefhments thefe countries are known to 
produce. 

Tamaahmaah had noticed the boats in their way to the fhore, and 
trufted they would return with a favorable report; which he, as well as 
ourfelves, anxioufly waited for until five in the evening. Mr. Whidbey 
now informed me, that during the prevalence of the foutherly winds, in 
the more advanced part of the {pring feafon, Whyeatea might probably 
be found a tolerably fecure and convenient place, as the land formed a 
deep bay, which was additionally fheltered by a reef lying off its fouth- 
eaft point, with foundings from 25 to 6 fathoms, clear fandy bottom; at 
leaft as far as his examination had extended. This had not been very 
minute, as the bay was intirely expofed to the northerly winds, which 
then blew very ftrong; and being attended with a heavy fea from that 
quarter, rendered any attempt to land from our boats impraéticable. 
On this report I determined to proceed to Karakakooa, as that bay 
was indifputably at this me the moft fecure and convenient port for 
fhipping of any in the Sandwich iflands. 

My intention was direétly made known to Tamaahmaah, and I requeft- 
ed that he would give us the pleafure of his company thither; well 
knowing that his influence over the inferior chicfs and the people would 
be attended with the moft defirable confequences, in preferving the har- 
mony and good underftanding that already fo happily exifted. He did 
not however feem much-iaclined to accept my invitation, &r to give 
me a pofitive anfwer; but requefted, that the vellels might remain fome 
days in this neighbourhood, to avail ourfelves of the ample fupply of 
refrefhments that might be procured here, before we proceeded to any 
other part of the ifland; adding, that he would remain with us to fee this 


bufinefs properly performed. 


I was by no means difpofed to accede to the wifhes of the king, nor: 


was I fatisfied with the arrangement he had propofed. 
The 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


The veffels having been driven far to leeward on the morning of the 
10th, and the wind then blowing ftrong from the northward, attended 
with a very heavy fea, I pointed out and explained to Tamaahmaah, the 
great improbability of our being able to comply with his defires, and the 
neceffity of our proceeding without delay to fome place of fecure ancho- 
rage, for the purpofe of refitting; renewing at the fame time and in the 
{lrongeft terms, my folicitations for his company. I did not fail to en- 
force how important his prefence would neceffarily be, not only to us 
for whom he had nelly expreffed the greateft refpeét and friend- 
fhip, but alfo to the welfare of his own fubjeéts. He readily acknowledged 
the propriety of my obfervations, and how much he was inclined to 
adopt the meafure I had propofed; but he now avowed that he could 
not accompany us, as the taboo appertaining to the feftival of the new 
year demanded his continuance for a certain period, within the limits 
of the diftriét in which thefe ceremonies had commenced. The time of 
interdi€tion was not yet expired, and it was not poflible he could abfent 
himfelf without the particular fanétion of the priefts. To obtain this 
indulgence, he confidered his prefence to be indifpenfibly neceflary 
on fhore at the morai. Aware of the fuperior influence poffeffed by 
the priefthood, and of the ftrict adherence of all ranks to their fuper- 
ftitions, I fufpeéted that if Tamaahmaah went on fhore they would not 
allow him to return; for this reaion I recommended, that one of the 
chiefs in his fuite fhould repair thither, and make known the king’s 
pleafure. But as this propofal did not feem to meet his ideas, or to be 
confonant to his wifhes, I refolved not to detain him contrary to his 
own free will and inclination, or by any other means than thofe of per- 
fuafion. Yet as I confidered his attendance to be an objeét of too much 
importance to be readily relinquifhed, I had recourfe to a fort of ar- 
tifice, that I had reafon to believe would anfwer my purpofe by its ope- 
ration on his feelings. I defifted from all importunities, and attributed 
his: declining my invitation to a coolnefs and a relaxation in the friend- 
fhip he had formerly fhewn, and pretended to entertain; and I ftated, that 
Lhad no doubt of foon finding amongft the other iflands fome chief, 


2 whofe 


5 


1794+ 


January. 


ES amend 


1794- 


January. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


whofe affiftance, prote€tion, and authority, would on all occafions be 
readily afforded. | 

Tamaahmaah had always been accuftomed to attend our meals, and 
breakfaft in particular he was extremely fond of partaking with us; 
but under the reproach he had juft received, of a want of friendfhip, no 
folicitation could prevail on him to accept of any thing at table; he fat 
ina filent thoughtful mood, his fenfibility was probed to the quick, and 
his generous heart, which continued to entertain the warmeft friendfhip 
and regard, not only for me but for every one in our little community, 
yielded to our wifhes; though at the rifk of incurring the difpleafure of 
the priefts, by an unprecedented breach of their religious rites. At 
length he determined, that his half brother Crymamahoo fhould be fent to 
the priefts, to communicate his intentions of accompanying us. On my 
faying, that this refolution made me very happy, and met my hearty 
concurrence, he replied, that I had treated him unkindly in fufpe@ting 
that his friendfhip was abated, for that it remained unfhaken, as his fu- 
ture conduét would demonftrate; but that he confidered himfelf to be 
the laft perfon in his dominions who ought to violate the eftablifhed 
laws, and the regulations of the country which he governed. 

Our little difference being thus amicably adjufted, he ate a hearty break- 
faft ; and having given his brother the neceffary inftruétions for governing 
this part of the ifland during his abfence, in which bufinefs they were 
occupied an hour, Crymamahoo was difmifled, and direéted to return with 
all convenient {peed to communicate the anfwer of the priefts. 

Thoroughly convinced of the purity of Tamaahmaah’s friendly inten- 
tuions, I had receded from my former determination with refpeét to him, 
or any other of the chiefs, {leeping on board the fhip. Our party now con- 
fifted of feven chiefs, three of whom were accompanied by their favorite 
females ; but Tahow-man-noo, the king’s confort, was not of the number. 
As fhe had never failed in her attendance on him, the caufe of her ab- 
fence became a fubjeét of inquiry, and I had the mortification of under- 
ftanding that a feparation had taken place, in confequence of its having 
been 


S 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


been reported, that too great an intimacy had fubfifted between her and 
Tianna. 

I underftood from the king’s attendants, that the infidelity of the queen 
was by no means certain; and as I well knew the reciprocal affeétion of 
this royal pair, and as fhe was then refiding with her father at, or in the 
neighbourhood of Karakakooa, I thought it a charitable office, to make 
a tender of my endeavours for the purpofe of bringing about a reconci- 
liation. In reply to this obtrufion of my fervices, Tamaahmaah expreffed 
his thanks; and affured me, that he fhould be always happy to re- 
ceive any advice on {tate affairs, or any public matters, efpecially where 
peace or war might be concerned; but that fuch differences as might 
occur in, or refpett, his domeftic happinefs, he confidered to be totally out 
of my province. This rebuff I filently fuftained; cherifhing the hope that 
the period would arrive, when I fhould be able to prevail on him to en- 
tertain a different opinion. _ 

The wind from the northward, attended with a very heavy fea, redu- 
ced us to our clofe-reefed topfails, and as we ftood in fhore in the after- 
noon a very {trong current evidently prefled us to leeward. The appear- 
ance of the weather indicating no favorable or early change, there was 
little probability of our foon feeing Crymamahoo, or any of the inhabi- 
tants of Aheedoo ; this induced the king to call his whole retinue toge- 
ther, both male and female, in order to take their advice as to his pro- 
ceeding, without firft receiving the religious affent he had difpatched 
Crymamahoo to obtain. The refult of their deliberations was, a unani- 
mous opinion that the priefts would, on a certainty, accede to his wifhes. 
This had been undoubtedly the previous fentiment of the king, or he would 
not have inftruéted his brother, in the manner he had done, how to con- 
duét himfelf during his abfence. 

Although I earneftly wifhed to avoid being the caufe of endangering 
his popularity, yet I was fo anxioufly defirous of his company, that J 
did not hefitate a moment in giving my hearty concurrence to this deter- 
mination, in order that we might make the beft of our way to Karaka- 
kooa, 


Our 


17940 


Januarv. 


1994. 


January. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Our courfe was now dire€ted round the eaft point of the ifland, along 


—~— its fouth-eaft fide; we made a tolerably good progrefs; and as we paffed 
Saturday 11+ the diftri@t of Opoona, on the morning of the 11th, the weather being 


very clear and pleafant, we had a moft excellent view of Mowna Roa’s 
fnowy fummit, and the range of lower hills that extend towards the eaft 
end of Owhyhee. From the tops of thefe, about the middle of the de- 
fcending ridge, feveral columns of fmoke were feen to afcend, which 
Tamaahmaah, and the reft of our friends faid, were occafioned by the 
fubterranean fires that frequently broke out in violent eruptions, caufing 
amongft the natives fuch a multiplicity of fuperftitious notions, as to give 
rife to a religious order of perfons, who perform volcanic rites ; confift- 
ing of various facrifices of the different produétions of the country, for 
the purpofe of appeafing the wrath of the enraged demon. 

On approaching the fhores of the diftriét of Kaoo, we were met by 
feveral of the inhabitants, bringing in their canoes fome refrefhments and 
other produétions of the country. Thofe who firft approached us feemed 
to be much furprized, and many of them were not a little alarmed at 
feeing their king on board; inquiring with great earneftnefs, whether 
his being there, and having broken the taboo, was by his own choice, 
or by compulfion. On being affured by all prefent that Tamaahmaah, 
and the reft cf the chiefs, were under no reftraint whatever, but were 
accompanying us by their own free will, they became perfeétly fa- 
tisfied; and appeared to be equally fo on underftanding, that it was 
the king’s pleafure, that the hogs and vegetables they had brought off 
fhould be delivered on board, without their receiving any equivalent in re- 
turn; nor could we, without giving Tamaahmaah {erious offence, have 
infringed this order, which feemed to be very cheerfully complied with 
on the part of his fubjects; and, in the courfe of the forenoon, the 
veffels procured a fufficient fupply for their prefent confumption. Whe- 
ther the king accounted with thefe people afterwards for the value of 
their property thus difpofed of, or not, I could not rightly underftand ; 
but from the great good humour with which they complied with the royal 
order, and from fome converfation with one of the king’s attendants, re- 


{petting 


nee een 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fpeciing the value of the refrefhments fo delivered, I had reafon to be- 
lieve that a compenfation would be allowed to them. . 

Shortly after noon we were oppofite the fouth point of the ifland ; and, 
as a report had been circulated that clofe round, on its weftern fide, 
good anchorage and excellent fhelter had been found, (though it had 
elcaped the nouce of Captain Cook) Mr. Whidbey was difpatched in the 
cutter, in order to afcertain the truth of this affertion, which was foon 
proved to be void of ioundation ; for although a flrong wefterly gale pre- 
vented Mr. Whidbey from making a very minute examination, yethe clear- 
ly difcovered that the fhores were nearly f{traight, and expofed to a moft 
tremendous furf, that broke with fuch fury as to render landing, if not 
impoffible, highly dangerous, even to thofe of the inhabitants who are 
moft expert in the management of their canoes. 

The wind continued to blow very ftrong between weft and n.w. 
until the morning of the 12th; when it became variable, and allowed us 
to make but a very flow progrefs towards Karakakooa. Tamaahinaah 
being very anxious that we fhould gain the place of our deftination, went 
on fhore for the purpofe of placing lights to conduét us in the evening 
to our former anchorage; where, about ten the following might we an- 
chored near an American brig, named the Lady Wafhington, command- 
ed by Mr. John Kendrick. 

As we worked into the bay many of the inhabitants were aflembled on 
the fhores, who announced their congratulations by {houts of joy, as, on 
our diffcrent tacks. we approached the fhores of the neighbouring villages. 
At this late hour many of our former friends, particularly of the fair fex, 
loft no time in teftifying the fincerity of the public fentiment in our fa- 
vour. Young and Davis we had likewife the pleafure of finding in the 
exercie of thole judicious principles they had fo wifely adopted, and by 
their example and advice had fo uniformly been carried into effeét. The 
great propriety with which they had condu€ted themfelves, had tended 
ina high degree to the comfort and happinels of thefe people, to the 
gratification of their own feelings, and to a pre-eminence in the good 
opinion of the king, that had intitled them to his warmeft affeétions. 


The fame fort of efleem and regard, we underftood, was fhewn to 


Vor. HI. G them. 


174. 
Jonuay 


(ny 


Wednel. 15. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


them, if not by all, at leaft by the well-difpofed inhabitants of the 
ifland. 

The Difcovery was fecured nearly in her former ftation on the follow- 
ing morning; and the Chatham and Dedalus were difpofed of in the 
moft convenient manner for carrying into execution the refpeétive fer- 
vices that each had to perform. 

Mr. Kendrick had been here about fix weeks, and it was with infinite 
pleafure we underftood, that during that time he Kad not only been Ii- 
berally fupplied by the inhabitants of the ifland with is feveral pro- 
duétions, but that the fame orderly, and civil behaviour had been ob- 
ferved towards him, which we had experienced on our former vifit; 
and which we had every reafon to expeét would be continued, from the 
affurances we received from the chiefs, and from the acclamations of the 
people, which had refounded from all quarters on our arrival. 

Tamaahmaah underftanding that it would be neceffary that we fhould 
land parts of the cargoes of all the veffels, appointed proper places for their 
reception; and knowing we had no more men than we could conftantly 
employ for the fpeedy accomplifhment of this bufinefs, he undertook 
to be anfwerable for the fafety and fecurity of every thing we might 
have occafion to put on fhore, without our having any guard there for 
its prote€tion. He alfo gave orders that his people fhould fill all our 
water cafks; and as he confidered that bartering’ with the feveral chiefs, 
and other individuals, for the valuable refrefhments of the country, would 
not only be troublefome and unpleafant, but might give rife to difputes 
and mifunderftandings between the parties; he defired we would daily, 
or as often as fhould fuit our convenience, make our demands known to 
him, and he would take care that the three veffels were duly fupplied 
with every neceffary refrefhment. 

This confiderate and very friendly arrangement I was happy to concur 
in, and at day-light on wednefday morning three large canoes, laden 
with forty very fine hogs, and thirty fmall ones, with a proportionate 
quantity of vegetables, were, by the dire€tions of the king. diftributed 
amongit our three veffels. 

On 


ate 
ted 


On 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


On this occafion, it was impoffible to avoid making a comparifon be- 


tween our reception and treatment here, by thefe untaught children of 


nature, and the ceremonious conditional offers of accommodation we 
experienced at St. Francifco and Monterrey, from the educated civilized 
governor of New Albion and California. 

After the large canoes had delivered their acceptable cargoes, they 
received and took to the fhore the live cattle, which I had been more 
fuccefsful in bringing from New Albion than on the former occafion. 
Thefe confifted of a young bull nearly full grown, two fine cows, and 
two very fine bull calves, all in high condition; as likewife five rams, and 
five ewe fheep. ‘Two of each of thefe, with moft of the black cattle, were 
given to the king; and as thofe I had brought laft year had thrived ex- 
ceedingly well; the fheep having bred, and one of the cows having 
brought forth a cow calf; I had little doubt, by this fecond importation, 
of having at length effeéted the very defirable objeét of éflablihing in 
this ifland a breed of thofe valuable animals. 

I learned from Tamaahmaah, that he had iffued the ftricteft orders fo 
to regulate the condué&t and behaviour of his people towards us, as he 
trufted would be the means of infuring a continuance of the harmony 
that had fo happily fubfifted on our former vifits to his dominions; and 
he added, that he had many enemies even amongft the chiefs of Owhy- 
hee, who were not unlikely to ufe their endeavours for the purpofe of 
fruftrating his good intentions, and that it was very important that the 
defigns of fuch ill-difpofed perfons fhould be watchfully guarded againft. 
[thanked Tamaahmaah for his vigilant attention to preferve our tran- 
quility and comfort, and informed him, that I had alfo iffued orders and 
direétions fimilar to thofe given on my former vifit. ‘Thefe having the 
fame tendency, and operating to the fame end, with thofe enjoined by 
himfeif, would, I hoped, be effeétual in affording us the recreation and 
enjoyment of the country, and in fecuring to us a continuation of the 
then fubfifting friendly intercourfe. 

Thefe neceflary precautions being taken on both fides, we imme- 
diately began upon the various fervices that demanded our attention. 
‘Yhofe appertaining to the reception of the provifions and ftores from 

C2 the 


12 


1794+ 


January. 


—— eed 


Thurfday16. 


Tuelday 21, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the Dedalus, were the primary objeéts of our confideration; and by the 
orderly and docile behaviour of all claffes of the inhabitants, this bufinefs 
was carried into exccution with a degree of facility, and confidence in 
our perfect fecurity, equal to the accommodation that could poflibly have 
been obtained in any port of Europe. 

There were not at this time many of the principal chiefs in our neigh 
bourhood. Our former friend Kahowmotoo paid us an early vifit, with 
a prefent of twenty large hogs, and a proportionable quantity of vege- 
tables. He was not, however, in his ufually cheerful good fpirits, but 
was much deprefled, in confequence of a violent indifpofition under 
which his favorite fon Whokaa laboured, from a wound he had received 
in the exercife of throwing the {pear with a man of mean rank. After 
a long contention for fuperiority, their play, it feemed, terminated in 
earneft, and the young chief received his adverfary’s {pear, which was 
barbed, in the throat. Much difficulty had attended its being taken out. 
which had occafioned a wound that had baffled all their art to cure, and 
had reduced him to the laft {tage of his exiftence. His antagonift was 
foon feized, and the next day his eyes were pulled out, and, after re- 
maining in that deplorable ftate two days, he was executed, by being 
{lrangled with a rope. 

As fome of the gentlemen intended to accompany Mr. Menzies on an 
excurfion into the interior part of the country, they were, agreeably to 
our plan of regulations, attended by a chief of the village of Kakooa 
wth feveral of the king’s people, who had direétions to fupply all their 
wants, and to afford them every affiflance and fervice that they might 
require. 

The harmony that had attended the execution of all our employments 
had fo facilitated the equipment of the veflels, that, by the following 
tuefday, the bufinefs in the Difcovery’s hold was in that ftate of forward- 
nefs as to permit our attending to other objeéts. The aftronomical de- 
partment claimed my firft thoughts; and being of fuch material import- 
ance, I was anxious to lofe no time in [fending the tents, obfervatory, 
and inftruments, on fhore, now that a party could be afforded for their 
protection, On this occafion I was furprized to find the king make fome 


objections 


heir 


brits 
ing 
rd- 
de- 
rte 
ry, 
elr 
me 


ons 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


objection; to their being erected in their former fituation, near the moral; 
giving us as a reafon, that he could not fanétion our inhabiting the tabooed 
Jands, without previoufly obtaining the permiffion of an old woman, 
who, we underftand, was the daughter of the venerable Kav0, and wife 
to the treacherous Koah.* Being totally unacquainted before, that 
the women ever pofleffed the leaft authority over their confecrated pla- 
ces, or religious ceremonies, this circumftance much furprized me, 
efpecially as the king feemed to be apprchenfive of receiving a refufal 
from this old lady; and which, after waiting on fhore for fome time, 
proved to be the cafe. Tamaahmaah obferving my difappointment, In- 
treated me to fix upon fome other part of the bay; but as it was eafily 
made obvious to his underftanding that no other {pot would be equally con- 
venient, he inftantly affembled fome of the principal priefts of the morai, 
anc after having a ferious conference with them, he acquainted me, that 
we were at liberty to occupy the confecrated ground as formerly, which 
we accordingly took pofleffion of the next morning. 

Mr. Whidbey, who had charge of the encampment, attended it on 
fhore under a guard of fix marines; thefe were fent, however, more 
for the fake of form than for neceflity; as Tamaahmaah had appointed 
one of his half brothers, Trywhookee, achief of fome confequence, to- 
gether with feveral of the priefts, to proteét, and render the party on 
fhore every fervice their fituation might demand. To this fpot, as on 
our former vifit, none were admitted but thofe of the fociety of priefts, 
the principal chiefs, and fome few of their male attendants ; no women, 
on any pretence whatever, being ever admitted within the facred limits 
of the moral. 

The unfortunate fon of Kahowmotoo had been brought by his father 
from one of his principal places of refidence, about ftx miles north 
of the bay where the unfortunate accident happened, to the village of 
Kowrowa, in order to benefit by fuch medical or other affiftance as we 
might be able to afford, but without effect; for in the afternoon he 
breathed his laft. 

The periodical taboo, that ought to have commenced the following 
evening, was, on this occafion, fufpended, to manifeft that they were 


offended 


746 


b 3 


January. 


(ere mend 


® Vide Cap- 


tain) Kin 
account 
Cook's 
death, 


B's 
of 


Wednef. 22. 


14 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


i! Pid offended with their deity for the death of this young chief; whofe lofs 
feemed to be greatly deplored by all the family, but moft particularly 
Thuriday23- fo by Kahowmotoo ; of whom I took a proper opportunity of inquiring 
i! when the corpfe would be interred, and if there would be any obje¢tion 
i to my attending the funeral folemnities. ‘To this he made anfwer, that 
the burial would take place the day following, and that he would come 
on board at any convenient hour; and accompany me on fhore for that 
{ purpofe. 
‘ I remained perfeétly fatisfied with the promife made by Kahowmotoo ; 

Friday eg, - and was the next morning greatly difappointed on his informing me, that 

' Kavaheero, the chief of the village at which his fon had died, had, in 
the courfe of the night, unknown to him or any of his family, caufed 
the body of the young chief to be interred in one of the fepulchral holes 
of the fteep hill, forming the north fide of the bay. This circumftance 
could not but be received as an additional proof of their averfion to our 
becoming acquainted with their religious rites, and their determination to 
prevent our attendance on any of their facred formalities. 

Svurday 25¢ The party accompanying Mr. Menzies returned with him on faturday, 
after having had a very pleafant excurfion, though it had been fome- 
what fatiguing in confequence of the badnefs of the paths in the inte- 
rior country, where in many places the ground broke in under their feet. 

. Their objeét had been to gain the fummit of Mowna Roa, which they 
had not been able to effeét in the dire¢tion they had attempted it; but 
they had reached the top of another mountain, which though not fo lofty 
as Mowna-rowna, or Mowna-kaah, is yet very confpicuous, and is called 

by the natives Worroray. This mountain rifes from the weftern extre- 

‘ mity of the ifland, and on its fummit was a volcanic crater that readily 
accounted for the formation of that part of the country over which they 
had found it fo dangerous to travel. The good offices of their Indian 
guide and fervants received a liberal reward, to which they were highly 
intitled by their friendly and orderly behaviour. 

The whole of the retinue that had attended Tamaahmaah from Ahec- 
doo, with the addition of fome new vifitors, lived intirely on board the 
fhip, and felt themfelves not only perfectly at home, but very advan- 

tageoully 


\ 
7 
lofs : 
arly : 
ring 
tion 
that 
ome : 
that : 
toe ; : 
that é 
i, in 
ufed : 
noles : 
ance : 
our : 
yn to : 
rday, : 
ome- : 
inte- : 
feet. : 
they : 
t but E 
lofty 
alled ‘ 
Pxtre- . 
badily 
they : 
ndian : 
ighly : 
hee- : 
d the | : 
ivan- : 
poully 


bist 


2») 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tageoufly fituated, in being enabled to purchafe fuch commodities of 
their own produce or manufacture which were brought to us for fale, as 
attra€ted their attention, with the prefents which they received from 
time to time. Notwithftanding this indulgence, which I thought could 
not have failed to keep them honeft, fuch is their irrefillible propenfity 
to thieving, that five of my table knives were miffing. ‘The whole par- 
ty ftoutly denied having any knowledge of the theft; but as it was evident 
the knives were ftolen by fome of them, I ordered them all, except the 
king, inftantly to quit the fhip, and gave pofitive dire€tions that no one 
of them fhould be re-admitted. Befide this, I deemed it expedient to 
make a point with Tamaahmaah that the knives fhould be reftored. He 
faw the propriety of my infifting on this demand, and before noon three 
of the knives were returned. 

The taboo, which had been poftponed in confequence of Whokaa’s 
death, was obferved this evening, though not without holding out a fen- 
timent of refentment to their deity for having fuffered him to die ; for 
inftead of its continuing the ufual time of two nights and one whole day, 
this was only to be in force from fun-fet to the rifing of the fun the fol- 
lowing morning; which the king having obferved, returned to us as foon 
as the ceremonies were finifhed. 

Being very much difpleafed with the ungrateful behaviour of his at- 
tendants, I demanded of Tamaahmaah, in a ferious tone, the two knives 
that had not yet been reflored. I expatiated on the difgrace that at- 
tached to every individual of the whole party, and the confequence of 
the example to all the fubordinate claffes of his people. He appeared 
to be much chagrined, and to fuffer a high degree of mortification at the 
very unhandfome manner in which I had been treated ; this was ftill fur- 
ther increafed, by one of his moft particular favorites having been charged, 
and on juft grounds, as one of the delinquents. 

About noon he went on fhore, in a very fullen humour, and did not 


return until I had fent for him in the evening, which fummons he | 


very readily obeyed ; and foon another knife was returned, which he de- 
clared was the only one he had been able to find, and that if any more 
were yet miffing, they muft have been loft by fome other means. The 

1 truth, 


14 


1794. 
January. 


een peed 


Sunday 26, 


ih! 
a4 
| 
ht 
4 
iB 
ht 
1 3 
Wit 
Bui 1704. 
At January. 
1} ed 
" 
it 
i 
At 
i | 
ii 
Wi 
at) 
i 
if 
i 
i? 
A 
tt 
iI 
Monday 27. 
| vc 
| Luefday 28, 
Thurfday2o. 
\ 
iat 
iit 
{4 
t 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


truth, as we afterwards underftood, was that the knife had been given, 
by the purloiner, to a perfon of much confequence, over whom Tamaah- 
maak did not wifh to enforce his authority. 

Thefe knives had not been ftolen, as might be naturally imagined, for 
their value as iron inftruments, but for the fake of their ivory handles. 
Thefe were intended to have been converted into certain neck ornaments, 
that are confidered as facred and invaluable. ‘The bones of fome fifh are, 
with great labour, appropriated to this purpofe; bui the colour and tex- 
ture of the ivory furpafling, in fo eminent a degree, the viler ordi ary 
material, the temptation was too great to be refifted. 

Under the particular circumftances, which we underftood attended the 
miffing knife, I readily put up with its lofs; becaufe, in fo doing, I was 
relieved of the inconvenience which a number of noify and troublefome 
vifitors had oceafioned. Thefe, however, paid dearly for their dilhonefty, 
in being abridged the great fource of wealth which they had enjoyed on 
board, and which had enabled them to procure many valuable commodities 
of their own country, at the ex pence of afking only for fuch of our Euro- 
pean articles as the feller demanded. 

Our bulinefs in the hold being finifhed, the feamen were employed 
in a thorough cxamination of all the rigging ; and although this was the 
firft time, with re{pect to the lower rigging, that an examination had taken 
place fince the fhip was commiffioned, we had the fatisfaction of finding 
it in much better condition than, from the trials it had endured, we 
could reafonably have expeéted. 

Since the death of Whokaa, Kahowmotoo had not paid the leaft atten- 
tion to the Owhyhean taboos; but as fimilar interdiétions were to take 
place on the 28th, on the ifland of Mowee, thefe he punétually ob- 
ferved: and on the following day Tamaahmaah allo was again thus re- 
ligioufly engaged; but as there were no prayers on this day, the people 
at large feemed to be under little reftriétion, 

On thurfday we were favored with the company of Terree-my-tee, 
Crymamahoo, Tianna, and fome other chiefs, from the diflant parts of the 
ifland. 

Their arrival had been in confequence of a fummons from the king, 
who had called the grand council of the ifland, on the fubjeét of its cef- 


fion 


yen, 
1ah- 


for 
Ales. 
ants, 
are, 
tcX- 
1 ary 


1 the 

was 
fome 
refty, 
ed on 
dities 
“uro- 


loyed 
is the 
taken 
nding 
l, we 


tten- 

» take 
ob- 

is re- 
eople 


uy-lee, 
of the 


king, 
ts cel- 
fion 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fion to the crown of Great Britain, which was unanimoufly defired. 
This important bufinefs, however, for which their attendance had 
been demanded, appeared to be of fecondary confideration to all cf 
them ; and the happinefs they exprefled on our return, together with 
their cordial behaviour, proved, beyond difpute, that our arrival at 
Owhyhce was the obje€&t moft conducive to the pleafure of their jour- 
ney. Even Tianna conduéted himfelf with an unufual degree of good 
humour; but as neither he, nor his brother Nomatahah, from their 
turbulent, treacherous, and ungrateful difpofitions, were favorites 
amongft us, his humility, on this occafion, obtained him only the reputa- 
tion of poffeffing a very fuperior degree of art and duplicity. But as the 
principal objeét I had in view was to preferve the good underftanding 
that had been eftablifhed between us, and, if poffible, to fecure it on a 
permanent bafis, for the benefit of thofe who might fucceed us at thefe 
iflands, I waved all retrofpeétive confiderations, and treated Tzanna with 
every mark of attention, to which his rank, as one of the fix provin- 
cial chiefs, intitled him, and with which, on all occafions, he appeared 
to be highly gratified. 

Thefe chiefs brought intelligence, that a quantity of timber which 
had been fent for at my requeft, was on its way hither; it had been cut 
down under the dire€tions of an Englifhman, whofe name was Boid, for- 
merly the mate of the floop Wafhington, but who had relinquifhed that 
way of life, and had entered into the fervice of Tamaahmaah. He ap- 
peared in the charaéter of a fhipwright, and had undertaken to build, 
with thefe materials, a veffel for the king, after the European fafhion ; 
but not having been regularly brought up to this bufinefs, both himfelf 
and his comrades, Young and Davis, were fearful of encountering too 
many difficulties ; efpecially as they were all much at a lofs in the firft out- 
fet, that of laying down the keel, and properly fetting up the frame ; 
but could they be rightly affifted in thefe primary operations, Boid 
(who had the appearance of being very induftrious and ingenious) feem- 
ed to entertain no doubt of accomplifhing the reft of their underta- 
king. 

Vou. UI. D This 


1} 


1794- 


January. 


18 


179360 
February, 


Saturday 1, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


This afforded me an opportunity of éonferring on Tamaahmaah a fa- 
vor that he valued far beyond every other obligation in my power to 
beftow, by permitting our carpenters to begin the veffel ; from whofe 
example, and the affiftance of thefe three engineers, he was in hopes that 
his people would hereafter be able to build boats and {mall veffels for 
themfelves. 

An ambition fo truly laudable, in one to whofe hofpitality and friend- 
fhip we had been fo highly indebted, and whofe good offices were daily 
adminiftering in fome way or other to our comfort, it was a grateful tafk 
to cherifh and promote; and as our carpenters had finifhed the re-equip- 
ment of the veffels, on the 1ft of february they laid down the keel, and 
began to prepare the frame work of His Owhyhean Majefty’s firft man 
of war. The length of its keel was thirty-fix feet, the extreme breadth 
of the veffel nine feet and a quarter, and the depth of her hold about five 
feet; her name was to be The Britannia, and was intended as a protection 
to the royal perfon of Tamaahmaah ; and I believe few circumftances in 
his life ever afforded him more folid fatisfaétion. 

It was not very likely that our flay would be fo protraéted, as to al- 
low our artificers to finifh the work they had begun, nor did the king 
feem to expeét I fhould defer my departure hence for that purpofe; but 
confided in the affertion of Boid, that, with the affiftance we fhould af- 
ford him, he would be able to complete the velflel. 

In the evening a very ftriét tad00 commenced ; it was called The taboo 
of the Hahcoo, and appertains to the taking of two particular kinds of 
hfh; one of which, amongft thefe iflanders, bears that name ; thefe are 
not lawful to be taken at the fame time, for during thofe months that 
the one is permitted to be caught the other is prohibited. They are 
very punétual in the obfervance of this anniverfary, which is, exclu- 
fively of their days, months, and year, an additional means of dividing 
their time, or, perhaps, properly fpeaking, their feafons. ‘The conti- 
nuance of this interdiction ought to have extended to ten days ; but as 
it is the prerogative of the king to fhorten its duration in any one 
particular diflril, he direéted on our account that ir the diftri€t of 

Akona 


ROUND THE WORLD: 


Akona it fhould ceafe with the men on the morning of the 4th, and with 
the women on the day following. 

Molt of our effential bufinels was nearly brought to a conclufion by 
the 6th, and our remaining here for the accomplifhment of what yet re- 
mained to be done, was no longer an objeét of abfolute neceflity ; yet 
I was induced to prolong our ftay in this comfortable fituation for two 
reafons ; firft, becaufe the plan of operations I intended to purfuc, in the 
profecution of the remaining part of our furvey on the coaft of North- 
Weft America, did not require our repairing immediately to the north- 
ward ; and fecondly, becaufe our former experience amongft the other 
lands had proved, that there was no profpeét of obtaining that abundant 
fupply of refrefhments which Owhyhce afforded, even at the expence of 
arms and amniunition ; articles that humanity and policy had uniformly 
dictated me to with-hold, not only from thefe iflanders, but from every 
tribe of Indians with whom we had any concern. 

The completion of our furvey of thefe iflands required ftill the exami- 
nation of the north fides of Mowee, Woahoo, and Attowai; and re- 
ferving fufficient time for that purpole, I determined to fpend here the 
re{t I had to fpare, before we fhould proceed to the American coaft. 
This afforded an opportunity to Mr. Menzies and Mr. Baker, accom- 
panied by fome others of the gentlemen, to make another excurfion in- 
to the country for the purpofe of afcending Mowna Roa, which now 
appeared to be a tafk that was likely to be accomplifhed ; as we had under- 
ftood from the natives, that the attempt would be lefs difficult: from the 
fouth point of the ifland than from any other direétion. For this pur- 
pole the party, furnifhed by Tamaahmaah with a large double canoe, 
and a fufficient number of people, under the orders of a {teady careful 
chief, fat out, in the confidence of receiving every affiftance and atten- 
tion that could be neceffary to render the expedition interefting and 
agreeable. 

The Daedalus being, in all refpeéts, ready to depart for port Jackfon, 
Lieutenant Hanfon on the 8th received his orders from me for that pur- 
pofe, together with a copy of our furvey of the coaft of New Albion, 
De fouthward 


19 


1794- 
February. 


(ne te 


Thu 


{ 


a 


day 6, 


20 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ree, fouthward from Monterrey; and fuch difpatches for government as I 
‘-—.—— thouglit proper to tranfmit by this conveyance, to the care of the com- 
manding oifcer at that port. 
Some plants of the bread fruit were alfo put on board, in order that 
Mr. Hanfon, in his way to New South Wales, fhould endeavour, in the 
event of his vifiting Norfolk ifland, to introduce there that moft valuable 
produétion of the vegetable kingdom, 


CHAPTER 


s [ 


IM-= 


that 
the 
able 


ER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER II. 


Sequel of tranfactions at Karakakooa—Ceffion of the ifland of Owhyhee— 
Aftronomical and nautical obfervations. 


WHILST the re-equipment of the veffels was going forward in this 
hofpitable port, I had remained chiefly on board ; but having now little 
to attend to there, on funday I took up my abode at the encampment, 
highly to the fatisfa€tion of the king; who, for the purpofe of obtain- 
ing fuch knowledge as might hereafter enable him to follow the example 
of our artificers, had paid the ftri€teft attention to all their proceedings in 
the conftruétion of the Britannia. This had latterly-fo much engaged him, 
that we had been favored with little of his company on board the veffels ; 
yet I had the fatisfaétion of reflecting, that his having been occafionally 
with us, and conftantly in our neighbourhood, had been the means of 
reftraining the ill-difpofed, and of encouraging the very orderly and 
friendly behaviour that we had experienced from the inhabitants with- 
out the leaft interruption whatever. An uniform zeal direéted the con- 
duét of every Indian, in the performance of fuch offices of kindnefs as 
we appeared to ftand in need of, or which they confidered would be ac- 
ceptable ; thefe were executed with fuch promptitude and cheerfulnefs, 
as to indicate that they confidered their labours amply repaid by our ac- 
ceptance of their fervices ; yet I truft they were better rewarded than if 
they had aéted on more interefted principles. 

Our reception and entertainment here by thefe unlettered people, 


who in general have been diftinguifhed by the appellation of favages. was’ 


fuch as, I believe, is feldom equalled by the moft civilized nations of 
Eurvpe, 


1793+ 
February. 


Sunday 9. 


1794! 
February, 


Nemes tod 


Wrednef, 12. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


E:rope, and made me no longer regret the inhofpitality we had met with 
at St. Francifco and Monterrey. ‘the temporary ufe that we wifhed to 
make of a few yards of the American fhore, for our own convenience 
and for the promouon of {cience, was not here, as in New Albion, granted 
with reftrictions that precluded our acceptance of the favor we folicited ; 
on the contrary, immediately on our arrival an ample fpace, protetted 
by the moft facred laws of the country, was appropriated to our fervice ; 
whilft thofe of our fmall community whofe inclinations Ied them into 
the interior parts of the ifland, either for recreation, or to examine its 
natural productions, found their defires met and encouraged by the kind 
alfiftance of Tamaahmaah, and their feveral purfuits rendered highly en- 
tertaining and agreeable, by the friendfhip and hofpitality which was 
fhewn them at every houfe in the courfe of their excurfions. ' 

A conduét fo difintereftedly noble, and uniformly obferved by fo un- 
tutored a race, will not fail to excite a certain degree of regret, that 
the firft focial principles, teaching mutual fupport and univerfal bene- 
volence, {hould fo frequently, amongft civilized people, be facrificed to 
fufpicion, jealoufy, and diftruft, Thefe fentiments had undoubtedly 
very ftrongly operated againft us on a recent occafion; but had the gen- 
tleman, to whole affiftance we appealed, but rightly confidered our pecu: 
liar fituation, he muft have been convinced tiicre could not have exifted a 
neceflity for the unkind treatment he was pleafed to offer to our little 
{quadron; and he would have {pared me at this moment the unwelcome 
talk of making this comparifon, by which the world will perceive what 
I mult have felt upon that occafion. 

A very f{tri€t taboo was on this day to be enforced over all the ifland, 
and required that the refpeétive chiefs fhould retire to their own eftates, 
for the purpofe of rigidly obferving the attendant folemnities; which 
were to continue two nights and one day. In the event of the omen’s 
proving favorable, the chiefs would be permitted to eat of fuch pork as 
they might think proper to confecrate on this occafion; and high oory, 
that 1s, grand prayers would be performed; but fhould the omens be 
otherwife, the rites were inflantly to be fufpended. 


1 I had 


vith 
d to 
nce 
nted 
ted; 
éted 
1Ce 3 
into 
e its 
kind 
ren. 
was 


and, 
tates, 
hich 
en's 
rk as 
oory, 
s be 


[ had 


ROUND THE WORLD 


I had frequently expreffed to Tamaahmaah a defire of bi 
fome of thefe occafions; and he now informed me, that he had obtained 
for me the confent of the priefts, provided I would, during the continu- 
ance of the interdiétion, attend to all the reftriétions which their religion 
demanded. 

Having readily promifed to comply with this condition, I was with 
fome degree of formality vifited by feveral of the principals of their re- 
ligious order, one of whom was diftinguifhed by the appellation of 
Eakooa, no Tamaahmaah; meaning the god of Tamaahmaah. This 
prieft had been one of our frequent attendants, notwithftanding which, 
he was, on this occafion, deteéted in ftealing a knife; for which offence he 
was immediately difmiffed from our party, and excluded from the pre- 
cinéts of our encampment. 

The reftraints impofed confifted chiefly in four particulars ; firft, a total 
feclufion from the company of the women; fecondly, partaking of no 
food but fuch as was previoufly confecrated; thirdly, being confined to 
the land, and not being afloat, or wet with fea water; and fourthly, not 
receiving, or even touching, the moft trivial article from any one, who 
had not attended the ceremonies at the morai. 

Thefe reftri€tions were confidered neceffary to be obferved by the 
whole of our party refident on fhore; and about fun-fet we attended the 
{ummons of the king at the morai, who was there officiating as high prieft, 
attended by fome of the principal refidents of their religious orders, 
chanting an invocation to the fetting fun. This was the commence- 
ment of thefe facred rites; but as I propofe to treat this fubje€& more 
fully on a future occafion, I fhall for the prefent poftpone the detail of 
my obfervations, and briefly ftate, that their prayers feemed to have 
fome regularity and form, and that they did not omit to pray for the 
welfare of His Britannic Majefty, and our fafe and happy return to our 
native country. A certain degree of order was perceptible through- 
out thefe ceremonies, accompanied by many fuperftitious and mytte- 
tious formalities; amongft which, a very principal one was performed 
about the dawn of day. At this time the moft profound filence was 
required of every creature within hearing of this facred place. ‘The 


hing 
hing 


to 
2 


1794. 
February. 


Samed 


24 


1794- 
February. 


Tem amend 


Thurfday13. 


Friday 14. 


Saturday 15. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


king then repeated a prayer in a low tone of voice with the greateft fo- 
lemnity, and in the middle of it he took up a live pig tied by the legs, 
and with one effort dafhed it to death againft the ground; an operation 
which muft be performed without the {malleft interruption or cry from 
the viétim, or without the prevailing filence being broken by any noife 
whatfoever, though of the moft trivial kind. This part of the fervice 1s 
fuppofed to announce their being on terms of friendfhip with the gods, 
on which the further ceremonies were carried into execution. A num- 
ber of hogs, plantains, and cocoa-nuts, were then confecrated for the 
principal chiefs and priefts; the more common produétions, fuch as 
fifh, turtle, fowls, dogs, and the feveral efculent roots, that compofe 
their food during the intervals between thefe more facred tabou's, were 
not now ferved up, but for the firft time fince our arrival, they fared 
fumptuoufly on thofe more delicious articles. The intermediate day 
and the fecond night were paffed in prayer, during which we found no 
difficulty in complying with the prefcribed regulations; and foon after 
the fun arofe on the 14th, we were abfolved from any further attention 
to their facred injunétions. 

Moft of our Indian friends returned to our party the following day; 
and as we all now fed alike on confecrated pork, they were enabled to 
be infinitely more fociable. Our mode of cookery was generally preferred, 
as far as related to the dreffing of fih, flefh, or fowls; but with refpeét to 
roots and the bread fruit, they certainly preferved a {uperiority. 

Tahowmotoo was amongft the moft conftant of our guefts; but his 
daughter, the difgraced queen, feldom vifited our fide of the bay. I 
was however not ignorant of her anxious defire for a reconciliation with 
Tamaahmaah; nor was the fame wifh to be mifunderftood in the con- 
duét and behaviour of the king, in whofe good opinion and confidence 
I had now acquired fuch a predominancy, that I became acquainted 
with his moft fecret inclinations and apprehenfions. 

His unfhaken attachment and unaltered affe@tion for Tahowmannoo, was 
confefled with a fort of internal felf conviétion of her innocence. He 
acknowlecged with great candour, that his own conduét had not been 
exattly fuch as warranted his having infifted upon a feparation from his 

3 queen ; 


- fo- 

legs, 

tion 

from 

noile 
ice 1s 
gods, 
num- 
r the 
th as 
npofe 
were 
fared 
> day 
nd no 
. after 
ntion 


day ; 
led to 
erred, 
ect to 


t his 
ry. I 
with 
con- 
dence 
ainted 


bo, Was 
He 
been 
m his 
ueen ; 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


queen; that although it could not authorize, it in fome meafure pleaded 
in excufe for, her infidelity ; and, for his own, he alledged, that his high 
rank and fupreme authority was a fort of licence for fuch indulgences. 

An accommodation, which I confidered to be mutually wifhed by both 
parties, was urged in the f{trongeft terms by the queen’s relations. To 
effect this defirable purpofe, my interference was frequently folicited by 
them; and, as it concurred with my own inclination, I refolved on em- 
bracing the firft favorable opportunity to ufe my beft endeavours for 
bringing a reconciliation about. For although, on our former vifit, 7a- 
howmannoo had been regarded with the moft favorable impreffions, | et, 
whether from her diftrelfes, or becaufe fhe had really improved in her 
perfonal accomplifhments, I will not take upon me to determine, but 
certain itis, that one, or both of thefe circumftances united, had fo far 
prepoffeffed us all in her favor, and no one more fo tha.. myfelf, that 
it had been long the general wifh to fee her exalted again to her for- 
mer dignities. This defire was probably not a little heightened by the 
regard we entertained for the happinefs and repofe of our noble and 
generous friend Tamaahaah ; who-was likely to be materially affected 
not only in his domeftic comforts, but in his political fituation, by re- 
ceiving again and reinftating his confort in her former rank and confe- 
quence. 

I was convinced, beyond all doubt, that there were two or three 
of the moft confiderable chiefs of the ifland, whofe ambitious views 
were Inimical to the interefts and authority of Tamaahmaah; and it was 
much to be apprehended, that if the earneft folicitations of the queen’s 
father (whofe condition and importance was next in confequence to that 
of the king) fhould continue to be rejeéted, there could be little doubt of 
his adding great {trength and influence to the difcontented and turbulent 
chiefs, which would operate highly to the prejudice, if not totally to the 
deftruétion, of Tamaahmaah’s regal power; efpecially as the adverfe party 
feemed to form a conflant oppofition, confifting of a minority by no 
means to be defpifed by the executive power, and which appeared to be 
a principal conftituent part of the Owhyhean politics. 

Vou. ii, E For 


4 


25 


1794. 
February, 


(presen omens 


06 


1794. 


February. 
See ah aimee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


For thefe fubftantial reafons, whenever he was difpofed to liften to fuch 
dilcourfe, I did not ceafe to urge the importance and neceflity of his adopt- 
ing meafures fo bighly effential to his happinefs as a man, and to his pow- 
er, intereft, and authority as the fupreme chief of the ifland. All this he 
candidly acknowledged ; but his pride threw impediments in the way of a 
reconciliaticn which were hard tobe removed. He would not of himfelf 
become the immediate agent ; and although he confidered 1t important 
that the negociation fhould be conduéted by fome one of the principal 
chiefs in his fulleft confidence, yet, to folicit their good offices after 
having rejefted their former overtures with difdain, was equally hard to 
reconcile to his feelings. I ftood nearly in the fame fituation with his 
favorite friends; but being thoroughly convinced of the fincerity of 
his wifhes, I fpared him the mortification of foliciting the offices he 
had rejected, by again proflering my fervices. To this he inftantly con- 
fented, and obferved that no propofal could have met his mind fo 
completely ; fince, by effeéting a reconciliation through my friendfhip, 
no umbrage could be taken at his having declined the feveral offers 
of his countrymen, by any of the individuals ; whereas, had this obje&t 
been accomplifhed by any one of the chiefs, it would probably have 
occafioned jealoufy and difcontent in the minds of the others. 

All, however, was not yet complete; the apprehenfion that fome 
conceffion might be fuggefted, or expeéted on his part, preponderated 
againft every other confideration; and he would on no account con- 
fent, that it fhould appear that he had been privy to the bufinefs, or 
that it had been by his defire that a negociation had been undertaken 
for this happy purpofe, but that the whole fhould have the appearance 
of being purely the refult of accident. 

To this end it was determined, that I fhould invite the queen, with 
feveral of her relations and friends, on board the Difcovery, for the pur- 
pofe of prefenting them with fome trivial matters, as tokens of my friend- 
fhip and regard; and that, whilft thus employed, our converfation fhould 
be direéted to afcertain, whether an accommodation was {till an objeé 
defired. That on this appearing to be the general wifh, Tamaahmaah 

1 would 


ith 
pur- 
end- 
ould 
yeet 
yaahs 


ould 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


would inftantly repair on board in a hafty manner, as if he had fome- 
thing extraordinary to communicate; that I fhould appear to rejoice at 
this accidental meeting, and by inftantly uniting their hands, bring the 
reconciliation to pafs without the leaft difcuffion or explanation on ei- 
ther fide. But from his extreme folicitude left he fhould in any degree be 
fulpeéted of being concerned in this previous arrangement, a difficulty 
arofe how to make him acquainted with the refult of the propofed con- 
verfation on board, which could not be permitted by a verbal meflage , 
at length after fome thought he took up two pieces of paper, and of his 
own accord made certain marks with a pencil on each of them, and then 
delivered them to me. The difference of: thefe marks he could well re- 
collcét; the one was to indicate, that the refult of my inquiries was agree- 
able to his wifhes, and the other that it was the contrary. In the 
event of my making ufe of the former, he propofed that it fhould not be 
fent on fhore fecretly, but in an open and declared manner, and by way 
of a joke, as a prefent to his Owhyhean majefty. The natural gaiety of 
difpofition which generally prevails amongft thefe iflanders, would render 
this fuppofed difappointment of the king a fubjeét for mirth, would in 
fome degree prepare the company for his vifit, and completely do away 
every idea of its being the effeét of a preconcerted meafure. 

This plan was accordingly carried into execution on the following 
monday. Whilft the queen and her party, totally ignorant of the contri- 
vance, were receiving the compliments I had intended them, their good 
humour and pleafantry were infinitely heightened by the jeft I propofed to 
pafs upon the king, in fending him a piece of paper only, carefully 
wrapped up in fome cloth of their own manufaéture, accompanied by a 
meflage: importing, that as T was then in the aét of diftnibuting favors 
to my Owhyhean friends, Thad not been unmindful of his majefty. 

Tamaahmaa) no fooner received the fummons, than he haftened on 
board, and with his ufual vivacity exclaimed before he made his ap- 
pearance, that he was come to thank me for the prefent I had fent 
him, and for my goodnefs in not having forgotten him on this occa- 
fion. This was heard by every one in the cabin before he entered; and 


E 2 all 


1794. 
February, 


(easy oes 


Monday i, 


28 


1794. 
February. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


all feemed to enjoy the joke except the poor queen, who appeared to be 
much agitated at the idea of being again in his prefence. The inftant 
that he faw her his countenance exprefled great furprize, he became im- 
mediately filent, and attempted to retire; but having pofted myfelf for 
the efpecial purpofe of preventing his departure, I caught his hand, and 


joining it with the queen’s, their reconciliation was inflantly completed. 


This was fully demonftrated, not only by the tears that involuntarily 
{tole down the cheeks of both as they embraced each other, and mutu- 
ally expreffed the fatisfa€tion they experienced; but by the behaviour 
of every individual prefent, whofe feelings on the occafion were not to 
be reprefled; whilft their fenfibility teftified the happinefs which this ap- 
parently fortuitous event had produced. 

A fhort paufe produced by an event fo unexpeéted, was fucceeded 
by the fort of good humour that fuch a happy circumftance would 
naturally infpire; the converfation foon became general, cheerful, and 
lively, in which the artifice imagined to have been impofed upon the 
king bore no {mall fhare. A little refrefhment from a few glafles of wine, 
concluded the fcene of this fuccefsful meeting. 

After the queen had acknowledged in the moft grateful terms the 
weighty obligations fhe felt for my fervices on this occafion, I was fur- 
prized by her faying, juft as we were all preparing to go on fhore, that 
fhe had {till a very great favor to requeft; which was, that I fhould 
obtain from Tamaahmaah a folemn promife, that on her return to his 
habitation he would not beat her. The great cordiality with which the 
reconciliation had taken place, and the happinefs that each of them had 
continued to exprefs in confequence of it, led me at firft to confider 
this intreaty of the queen’s as a matter of jeft only; but in this I was 
miftaken, for notwithf{tanding that Zamaahmaah readily complied with 
my folicitation, and affured me nothing of the kind fhould take place, 
yet Tahowmannoo would not be fatisfied without my accompanying them 
home to the royal refidence, where I had the pleafure of feeing her re- 
ftored to all her former honours, and privileges, highly to the fatisfaction 
of all the king’s friends; but to the utter mortification of thofe, who, by 
their 


be 
ant 
im- 
for 
and 
ted. 
ily 
utu- 
iour 
yt to 


; ap- 


eded 
ould 

and 
the 
wine, 


; the 

s fur- 

that 

ould 
0 his 
1 the 
had 
hfider 
i was 
with 
place, 
them 
r re- 
étion 
, by 


their 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


their fcandalous reports and mifreprefentations, had been the caufe of 
the unfortunate feparation. 

The domeftic affairs of Tamaahmaah having thus taken fo happy a 
turn, his mind was more at liberty for political confiderations ; and the 
ceffion of Owhyhee to His Britannic Majefty became now an object of 
his ferious concern. On my former vifit it had been frequently men- 
tioned, but was at that time difapproved of by fome of the leading 
chiefs ; who contended, that they ought not voluntarily to furrender 
themfelves, or acknowledge their fubjection, to the government of a 
fuperior foreign power, without being completely convinced that fuch 
power would protect them againft the ambitious views of remote or 
neighbouring enemies. During our abfence this fubje€t had been moft 
ferioufly difcuffed by the chiefs in the ifland, and the refult of their de- 
liberations was, an unanimous opinion, that, in order to obtain the pro- 
te€tion required, it was important that Tamaahmaah fhould make the 
furrender in queftion, formally to me, on the part of His Majefty ; that 
he fhould acknowledge himfelf and people as fubjeéts of the Britifh 
crown; and that they fhould fupplicate that power to guard them againft 
any future moleftation. 

To this aét they were greatly ftimulated by the treatment they had 
received from various f{trangers, by whom they had been lately vifited. 
Of fome of thefe I was well perfuaded they had had too juft caufe to 
complain; particularly in the fraudulent and deceitful manner in which 
the traffic with the natives had been conduéted. 

In many inftances, no compenfation whatever had been given by thefe 
civilized vifitors, after having been fully fupplied, on promife of making 
an ample return, with the feveral refrefhments of the very beft quality the 
country afforded. At other times they had impofed upon the inhabi- 
tants, by paying them in commodities of no fervice or value, though 
their defects were indeteétable by the examination of the natives. This was 
more particularly the cafe in thofe articles which they were moft eager 
to obtain, and moft defirous to poffefs, namely, arms and ammunition ; 
which chiefly compofed the merchandize of the North-Weft American 


adventurers. 


°2 


= 


1794. 
February. 


\eeeeseen mene? 


go 


1794. 
February. 


een ord 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


adventurers. Mufkets and piftols were thus exchanged that burft on 
being difcharged the firft time, though with the proper loading. To 
augment the quantity of gunpowder which was fold, it was mixed with 
an equal, if nota larger, proportion of pounded fea or char-coal. Se- 
veral of thefe fire-arms, and fome of the powder, were produced for my 
infpection in this fhameful ftate, and with the hope that I was able to 
aflord them redrefs. 

Many very bad accidents had happened by the burfting of thefe fire- 
arms ; one inftance in particular came within our knowledge a few days 
after our arrival. A very fine active young chief had lately purchafed 
a mufket, and on his trying its effeét, with a common charge of 
powder, it burft; and he not only loft fome of the joints of his fingers 
on the left hand, but his right arm below the elbow, was otherways fo 
dangeroufly wounded, that, had it not been for the timely affiftance 
afforded him by fome of our gentlemen of the faculty, his life would have 
been in imminent danger. 

The putting fire-arms into the hands of uncivilized people, is at 
beft very bad policy ; but when they are given in an imperfeét and in- 
fufficient condition for a valuable confideration, it is not only infamouf- 
ly fraudulent, but barbarous and inhuman. Notwithftanding which, 
fhould thefe inhabitants refort to meafures of revenge for the injuries 
thus fuftained, they would be immediately ftigmatized with the epi- 
thets of favages and barbarians, by the very people who had been the 
original caufe of the violence they might think themfelves juftified in 
comm ‘ting. 

Under a conviétion of the importance of thefe iflands to Great Britain, 
in the event of an extenfion of her commerce over the pacific ocean, and in 
return for the effential fervices we had derived from the excellent pro- 
duétions of the country, and the ready affiftance of its inhabitants, I loft 
no opportunity for encouraging their friendly difpofitions towards us; 
notwithflanding the difappointments they had met from the traders, for 
whofe conduét I could invent no apology ; endeavouring to imprefs them 
with the idea, that, on fubmitting to the authority and proteétion of a 
fuperior 


yerior 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fuperior power, they might reafonably expect they would in future be 
lefs liable to fuch abufes. 

The long continued praétice of all civilized nations, of claiming the 
fovereignty and territorial right of newly difcovered countries, had here- 
tofore been afflumed in confequence only of priority of feeing, or of vi- 


fiting fuch parts of the earth as were unknown before; but in the cafe of 


Nootka a material alteration had taken place, and great ftrefs had been 
laid on the ceffion that Maquinna was ftated to have made of the village 
and friendly cove to Sen™ Martinez. Notwithftanding that on the 
principles of the ufage above ftated, no difpute could have arifen as to 
the priority of claim that England had to the Sandwich iflands; yet I 
confidered, that the voluntary refignation of thefe territories, by the 
formal furrender of the king and the people to the power and authority 
of Great Buitain, might probably be the means of eftablifhing an incon- 
trovertible right, and of preventing any altercation with other ftates 
hereafter. 

Under thefe impreffions, and on a due confideration of all circum- 
ftances, I felt it to be an incumbent duty to accept for the crown of 
Great Britain the proffered ceffion; and I had therefore {tipulated that 
it fhould be made in the moft unequivocal and public manner. 

For this purpofe all the principal chiefs had been fummoned from 
the different parts of the ifland, and moft of them had long fince ar- 
rived in our neighbourhood. They had all become extremely well 
fatisied with the treatment they had received from us; and were high- 
ly fenfible of the advantages they derived from our introducing amongft 
them only fuch things as were in{trumental to their comfort, inftead 
of warlike ftores and implements, which only contributed to f{trength- 
en the animofities that exifted between one ifland and another \nd 
enabled the turbulent and ambitious chiefs to become formidable to 
the ruling power. They feemed in a great meafure to comprehend 
the nature of our employment, and made very proper diftinétions be- 
tween our little fquadron, and the trading veffels by which they had 
been fo frequently vifited; that thefe were engaged in purfu'ts for 
the private emolument of the individuals concerned, whillt thofe un- 
der 


a 


1794s 
February. 


a wom yoreend 


iH] 
hy 


32 


1794. 
Februarv. 


Ten amend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


der my command aéted under the authority of a benevolent monarch, 
whofe chief objeét in fending us amongft them was to render them 
more peaceable in their intercourfe with each other; to furnifh them 
with fuch things as could contribute to make them a happier people; 
and to afford them an opportunity of becoming more refpeétable in the 
eves of foreign vifitors. 

Thefe ideas at the fame time naturally fuggefted to them the belief, that 
it might be in my power to leave the Chatham at Owhyhee for their 
future protettion; but on being informed that no fuch meafure could 
poflibly be adopted on the prefent occafion, they feemed content to wait 
with patience, in the expeétation that fuch attention and regard might 
hereafter be {hewn unto them; and in the full confidence that, according 
to my promife, I would reprefent their fituation and conduét in the 
moft faithful manner, and in the true point of view that every circum- 
{tance had appeared to us. 

Thefe people had already become acquainted wii four commercial 
nations of the civilized world; and had been given to underftand, that 
feveral others fimilar in knowledge and in power exifted in thofe diftant 
regions from whence thefe had come. This information, as may rea- 
fonably be expeéted, fuggefted the apprehenfion, that the period was 
not very remote when they might be compelled to fubmit to the autho- 
rity of fome one of thefe fuperior powers; and under that impreffion, 
they did not hefitate to prefer the Englifh, who had been their firft and 
conftant vifitors. 

The formal furrender of the ifland had been delayed in confequence 
of the abfence of two principal chiefs. Commanow, the chief of Aheedoo, 
was not able to quit the government and proteétion of the northern and 
eaftern parts of the country, though it had been fuppofed he might have 
delegated his authority to fome one of lefs importance than himfelf; but 
after fome meflages had pafled between this chief and. Tamaahmaah, it 
appeared that it had not been poffible to difpenfe with his prefence in 
thofe parts of the ifland. 

The other abfentee was Tamaahmotoo, chief of Koarra, the perfon 
that had captured the Fair American {chooner, and with whom I was 


not 


arch. 
them 
them 
ople ; 
n the 


that 
their 
could 
) wait 
might 
ording 
in the 
rcum- 


nercial 
1, that 
diftant 
y rea- 
od was 


autho- 


effion, 
rft and 


quence 
heedoo, 
rn and 
t have 
f; but 
aah, it 
ence in 


perfon 
» I was 
net 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


not ambitious to have much acquaintance. Since that perfidious me- 
lancholy tranfa€tion, he had never ventured near any veffel that had vi- 
fited thefe fhores ; this had been greatly to the prejudice of his intereft, 
and had occafioned him inconceivable chagrin and mortification. Of 
this he repeatedly complained to Tamaahmaah on our former vifit ; and 
then, as now, folicited the king’s good offices with me to obtain an in- 
terview, and permiffion for his people to refort to the veffels, for the fake 
of fharing in the fuperior advantages which our traffic afforded. But, to 
fhew my utter abhorrence of his treacherous character, and as a punifh- 
ment for his unpardonable cruelty to Mr. Metcalf and his crew, I had hi- 
therto indignantly refufed every application that had been made in his fa- 
vor. When, however, I came ferioufly to refle&t on all the circumftances 
that had attended our reception and treatment at this ifland, on our for- 
mer vifit and on the prefent occafion; when I had reference to the 
fituation and condition of thofe of our countrymen refident amongft 
them; and when I recolleéted that my own counfel and advice had 
always been dire€ted fo to operate on their hafty violent tempers, as to 
induce them to fubdue their animofities, by exhorting them to a forgivenefs 
of paft injuries, and proving to them how much their real happinefs de- 
pended upon a ftri€t adherence to the rules of good fellowfhip towards 
each other, and the laws of hofpitality towards all fuch ftrangers as 
might vifit their fhores, I was thoroughly convinced, that implacable 
refentment, or unrelenting anger, exhibited in my own practice, 
would ill accord with the precepts I had endeavoured to inculcate for 
the regulation of theirs; and that the adoption of conciliatory meafures, 
after having evinced, by a difcrimination of charaéters, my averfion to 
wicked or unworthy perfons, was moft confiftent with my duty as a man, 
and with the ftation I then filled. 

In order therefore to eftablifh more firmly, if poffible, the friendfhip 
that had fo mutually taken place, and fo uninterruptedly fubfifted, 
between us, I devermined, by an aét of oblivion in my own mind, to 
efface all former injuries and offences. To this end, and to fhew 
that my conduét was governed by the principles I profeffed, at the re- 

Vo .. III. k quelt 


——e | 
a 


tee 
== 


rs 


— 


SS 


+ 


34 


1794: 
February. 
Rs eet 


* Vide ad 
Vol. Cook’s 
Voyage, 


Chap, I. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


quelt of Tianna and fome other chiefs I- admitted the man amongft us, 
who was reputed to be the firft perfon who had ftabbed Captain Cook, 
and gave leave alfo to Pareea* to vifit the veffels ; who during the late 
contefts had been reduced from his former rank and fituation, and was 
at this time refident on an eftate belonging to Kahowmotoo on the eaft- 
ern part of the ifland, in a very low and abjeét condition. 

Tamaahmotoo had already fuffered very materially in his intereft, and 
had fenfibly felt the indignity offered to his pride, in being excluded 
from our fociety, debarred the gratification of his curiofity, and the 
high entertainment which his brethren had partaken at our tables, and 
in our company. I gave Tamaahmaah to underftand, that thefe confi- 
derations, in conjunétion with his repeated folicitations, had induced me 
no longer to regard Tamaahmotoo as undeferving forgivenefs, and to al- 
low of his paying us the compliments he had fo repeatedly requefted ;. 
provided that he would engage, in the moft folemn manner, that neither 
himfelf nor his people (for he generally moved with a numerous train 
of attendants) would behave in any manner fo as to difturb the fubfifting 
harmony of our prefent fociety, nor conduét themfelves, in future, but 
with a due regard to honefty, and the principles of hofpitality. 

To thefe conditions I was given to underftand, Tamaahmotoo would 
fubfcribe without a murmur ; and, on their being imparted to him, I 
received in reply a moft humble and fubmiffive anfwer, that he would 
forfeit his own exiftence if any mifdemeanor, either on the part of 
himfelf, or of any of his followers, fhould be committed. The diftriét 
over which his authority regularly extended, was the next diftriét 
immediately to the northward of us; but his apprehenfions left we 
fhould retaliate the injuries he had done to others, had induced him 
to retire to the eaflern parts of Amakooa, as being the moft remote 
from our ftation. His progrefs towards Karakakooa, fince his vifit 
had been permitted, had been very flow; and as he had advanced 
he had frequently fent forward meflengers, to inquire if I {till conti- 
nued the fame friendly difpofition towards him; and to requeft that I 
would return a renewal of my promifes, that he fhould be received in the 

fame 


t US, 
90k, 
late 
was 


eaft- 


and 
uded 
| the 

and 
onfi- 
d me 
to al- 
fted 5. 
either 
train 
ifting 
>, but 


ould 
yim, I 
vould 
hrt of 
hiftriét 
{t we 
hinr 
emote 
 vilit 
ranced 
conti- 
that I 
in the 
fame 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fame friendly manner as I had engaged myfelf he fhould to Tamaahmaah. 
Having no intention whatever to depart from this obligation, [ felt no 
difficulty in repeating thefe affurances as often as they were demanded. 

My promifes, however, were not fufficient to remove his fufpicions, 
or to fix his confidence; but on his way he flopped at every mora), 
there made facrifices, and confulted the priefts as to what was portended 
in his vifit by the omens on thefe occafions. At firlt they had been 
very unfavorable, but as he advanced the prognofticks had become more 
agreeable to his wifhes ; and at length, in the morning of the 19th, he 
appeared in great pomp, attended by a numerous fleet of large canocs 
that could not contain lefs than a thoufand perfons, all paddling with 
fome order into the bay, round its northern point of entrance. 

Tamaahmaah was at this time with me, and gave me to underftand, 
that Tamaahmotoo generally went from place to place in the ftyle and 
manner he now difplayed, and that he was the proudeft man in the whole 
ifland. 

After the fleet had entered the bay, its courfe was flowly direéted to- 
wards the veffels; but on a meflage being fent from me, defiring that 
Tamaahmotoo and his party would take up their refidence at Kowrowa, 
he inftantly retired with his fleet, and foon afterwards, accompanied by 
Tamaahmaah, and feveral of the principal chiefs, he vifited the encamp- 
ment. At this time I happened to be abfent, but on my return I found 
him feated in our marquee, with feveral of our intimate friends, and 
fome ftrangers, who were all in the greateft good humour imaginable, 
and exhibiting a degree of compofure that the favage defigning counte- 
nance of Tamaahmotoo could not even affeét. Not the leaft difficulty 
could arife in diftinguifhing this chief from the reft of the company, as 
his appearance and deportment were a complete contraft to the furround- 
ing group, and confirmed in our opinions the unworthinefs of his cha- 
rater, and every report to his difadvantage that had been circulated by 
his countrymen. 

Our firft falutation being over, he caught the earlieft opportunity to offer 
an apology for the offence that had fo juftly kept us ftrangers to each 
other. He complained of having been very ill treated by the crews of 

F 2 fome 


35 


1794. 
February. 


eyed 


Weduet. 19. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fome veffels that had vifited Toeaigh bay, and particularly of his having 
been beaten by Mr. Metcalf, commanding the Eleonora, at the time when 
his fon, who afterwards had the command of the Fair American, was 
on board the former veffel ; and alledged, that the indigmities he then re- 
ceived had {limulated him to have recourfe to the favage barbarity, before 
recited, towards the younger Mr. Metcalf and his people, by a fentiment 
of refentment and revenge; but that he entertained no fuch wicked 
defigns againft any one elfe; and that his future behaviour, and that of 
his dependants, would confirm the truth of the proteftations he then 
made. After calling upon the feveral chiefs to vouch for the fincerity 
of his intentions, ana making every conceflion that could be expeéted 
of him for his late unpardonable conduét, his apprehenfions feemed to 
fubfide, as his friends appeared to give him credit for his affertions, and 
came forward as fureties for the propriety of his future behaviour. 

This fubjeét having been fully difcuffed, and concluded, I fhook Ta- 
maahmotoo by the hand as a token of my forgivenefs and reconcilia- 
tion; and on confirming this friendly difpofition towards him by pre- 
fenting him with a few ufeful articles, approbation and applaufe were 
evidently marked in the countenance of every one prefent. 

By the time this conciliatory interview was at an end, the dinner was 
announced; and as our confecrated pork was exhaufted, Zamaahmaah 
had taken care to provide fuch a repaft, confifting of dogs, fifh, fowls, 
and vegetables, as was fuitable to the keen appetites of our numerous 
gucfts. The day was devoted to mirth and feftivity; and the king, 
Terrymitee, Tabowmotoo, Tranna, and, indeed, all our old acquaintances, 
took their wine and grog with great cheerfulnefs, and in their jokes did 
not {pare our new vifitor Tamaahmotoo, for his awkwardnefs and ungrace- 
ful manners at table. 

The glafs went freely round after dinner ; and as this ceremony was 
completely within the reach of Tamaahmotoo’s imitation, he was anxious 
to excel in this accomplifhment, by drinking with lefs referve than any 
one at table. I thought it proper to remind him, that as he was not in 
the habit of drinking f{pirituous liquors like Tamaahmaah and the other 

chiefs 


ving 
vhen 
was 
n re- 
efore 
ment 
icked 
at of 
then 
-erity 
eéted 
ed to 
- and 


: Ta- 
icilia- 
; pre- 

were 


r was 
maah 
owls, 
herous 
king, 
ances, 


les did 
yrace- 


y was 
xious 
In any 
ot in 
other 
chiefs 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


chiefs prefent, it was neceffary he fhould be upon his guard, left the 
wine and grog fhould difagree with him ; but as his {pirits became ex- 
hilarated he became le{s attentive to thefe admonitions, until the ope- 
ration of the liquors obliged him to retire. In this ftate it is not 
poffible to imagine a countenance more expreflive of indignation, or 
of favage barbarity and refentment ; his eyes were fixed on me as he 
was carried out of the marquee, whilft his tongue, no longer con- 
fined within his lips, indiftinéily uttered attoou-anni, figmifying that I 
had poifoned him; and fome prefent, even of our old acquaintance, 
feemed to be a little concerned for his fafety. The king, however, 
laughed at their apprehenfion, and explained to them the caufe of Ta- 
maahmotoo’s indifpofition, which, by the affiftance of a little warm water, 
was almoft inftantly removed, and he re-joined our party, to the great 
entertainment and diverfion of his countrymen, who were {ftill very 
pleafantly regaling themfelves, and in the perfect enjoyment of each 
other’s fociety. 2 Gee 
In the front of the marquee, feated on the ground, were two or three 
of Tamaahmotoo’s moft confidential friends and conftant attendants. The 
behaviour of thefe people, on their mafter being taken from table, fud- 
denly changed, from the moft unreferved vivacity to a fufpicious filence ; 
their eyes fparkled, and their countenances were expreflive of diftrutt 
and refentment; one of them in particuiar, who I had not obferved 
before to be armed, had with him a dagger, made out of the broad part 
of an iron fpit, which he handled with great agitation, and feemed to 
be more than half inclined to make ufe of it, to gratify the revenge 
that was ftruggling within his breaft. This man contended, in a fhort 
converfation with Tamaahmaah, that Tamaahmotoo had been given a dif- 
ferent bottle to drink out of from the reft of the company ; but on the 
king and other perfons drinking fome wine from the fame bottle, he be- 
came pacified ; and the recovery of the intoxicated chief completely did 
away his fufpicions of our having entertained towards his mafter any un- 
favorable intentions. 
On this occafion, however, I could not avoid reflecting, how indif- 
penfably neceffary it is, that the greateft circumfpeftion and caution 
py should 


37 


1794. 
February, 


ee aed 


38 
1794+ 


February. 


(econ ese 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fhould be obferved in our intercourfe with fuch ftrangers, unaccu{tomed 
to our manners and way of life; becaufe it may frequently happen, that 
the moft difaftrous and fatal confequences may arife from caufes the 
leaft to be apprehended, and in themfelves of the moft innocent nature. 
Notwithftanding that in the inftance before us nothing uncomfortable 
took place, yet I was firmly perfuaded that we were greatly indebted for 
our tranquillity, on this occafion, to the great refpeét and efteem which 
our conduét towards thefe people had previoufly infured us; but had 
it unfortunately fo happened, that Tamaahmotoo had died under the ef- 
fects of the liquor to which his conftitution was unufed, and of which 
he had drank inordinately, our having poifoned him would have been 
generally received as a fact; whence the natives, naturally concluding that 
we had been guilty of the moft unwarrantable treachery, they would have 
been pardonable in f{ceking revenge; and under fuch impreifions ought 
rather to have been confidered as intitled to our pity for being miffaken ; 
than to our refentment for any aéts of injury which the mifunderftand- 
ing might have occafioned, 

The convocation of the principal chiefs of the ifland by the royal man- 
date, failed not to affemble at the fame time moft of the perfons of confe- 
quence of both fexes, who took up their refidence in our immediate neigh 
bourhood; which became fo populous, that there was fcarcely a place 
where a temporary habitation could be ereéted that remained unoccupied, 
efpecially in the vicinity of the two principal villages of Kakooa and Kow- 
rowa. Their numbers amounted now to feveral thoufands, whofe 
cheerful good humour, eagernefs to oblige, and orderly behaviour, could 
not be furpaffed by the inhabitants of the moft civilized country. The 
days pafled pleafantly to thofe who devoted them to innocent amufe- 
ments, and profitably to others who were engaged in bartering away the 
merchandize they had brought, to exchange for our more valuable com- 
modities; whilft thofe of our fociety who extended. their recreation on 
fhore, beyond the limits of the bay, were received with the greateft hof- 
pitality, and eniertained with the general amufements of the country ; 
which rendered thefe excurfions not lefs interefting than contributory to 
health. 

The evenings were generally clofed with finging and dancing, and the 

nights 


tomed 
, that 
»s_ the 
ature. 
table 
ed for 
which 
ut had 
the ef- 
which 
> been 
ng that 
ld have 
ought 
taken ; 


‘{tand- 


al man- 
confe- 

P neigh 
a place 
cupied, 
Kow- 
whofe 

, could 
The 
amufe- 
vay the 
le com- 
tion on 
eft hof- 
buNtry 5 
tory to 


nd the 


nights 


ROUND THE WORL D. 


nights were as quiet as the moft orderly towns in Europe; though 1t was 
a late hour moft commonly before they retired to reft. The {pace be- 
tween fun-fet and that time was employed by foine parties in focial con- 
verfation, and by others at various games of chance; and I did not ob- 
ferve a fingle inftance in which thele were conducted, even by the lofers, 
but with the greateft temper and good humour. 

Defirous of being conftantly upon the fpot, left any untoward circum- 
ftance fhould arife to interrupt the happinefs we enjoyed, my excurfions 
were confined to a fmall diftance from ourencampment. This however 
did not preclude my attending fome of their evening amufements in our 
neighbourhood. At one of which, in particular, Iwas very well enter- 
tained. 

This was a performance by a fingle young woman of the name of 
Puckoo, whofe perfon and manners were both very agreeable. Her 
drefs, notwithftanding the heat of the weather, confifted of an immenfe 
quantity of thin cloth, which was wound round her waift, and extended 
as low as her knees. This was plaited in fuch a manner as to give a 
pretty effect to the variegated pattern of the cloth; and was otherways 
difpofed with great tafte. Her head and neck were decorated with 
wreaths of black, red, and yellow feathers; but excepting thefe fhe wore 
no drefs from the waift upwards. Her ancles, and nearly half way up 
her legs, were’ decorated with feveral folds of cloth, widening upwards, 
fo that the upper parts extended from the leg at leaft four inches all 
round; this was encompafled by a piece of net work, wrought very 
clofe, from the mefhes of which were hung the {mall teeth’ of dogs, giv- 
ing this part of her drefs the appearance of an ornamented funnel. On 
her wrifls fhe wore bracelets made of the tufks from the largeft hogs. 
Thefe were highly polifhed and fixed clofe together in a ring, the 
concave fides of the tufks being outwards; and their ends reduced toa 
uniform length, curving naturally each way from the center, were by no 
means deftitute of ornamental effect. 

Thus equipped, her appearance on the flage, before fhe utiered a fin- 
gle word, excited confiderable applaufe from the numerous fpeétators, 
who obferved the greateft good order and decorum. In her perform- 
ance, which was in the open air, fhe was accompanied by two men, 


who 


39 


1794. 
Feb: uary, 


ee ete 


t 
y HRS 


49 


1794- 


February. 


aeeen “aunt 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


who were feated on the ground in the -chara&ter of muficians. Their 
inftruments were both alike, and were made of the outfides or fhells of 
large gourds, open at the top; the lower ends ground perfeétly flat, and 
as thin as poffible, without endangering their {plitting. Thefe were 
ftruck on the ground, covered with a fmall quantity of dried grafs, and 
in the interval between each ftroke, they beat with their hands and 
fingers on the fides of thefe inftruments, to accompany their vocal ex- 
ertions, which, with the various motions of their hands and body, and 
the vivacity of their countenances, plainly demonttrated the intereft they 
had, not only in excelling in their own parts, but alfo in the applaufe 
which the lady acquired by her performance, advancing or retreating 
from the niuficians a few fhort fteps in various direftions, as the nature 
of the fubjeét, and the numerous geftures and motions of her perfon 
demanded. Her fpeech, or poem, was firft began in a flow, and fomewhat 
folenin manner, and gradually became energetic, probably as the fubjeé& 
matter became interefting; until at length, like a true aétrefs, the liveli- 
nefs of her imagination produced a vociferous oration, accompanied by 
violent emotions. Thefe were received with fhouts of great applaufe; 
and although we were not fufficiently acquainted with the language to 
comprehend the fubjeét, yet we could not help being pleafed in a 
high degree with the performance. The mufic and finging was by no 
means difcordant or unpleafing; many of the a€tions feemed to be 
well adapted, and the attitudes exhibited both tafte and elegance. The 
fatisfa€tion we derived at this public entertainment, was greatly in- 
creafed by the refpeétful reception we met from all parties, as well per- 
formers as fpeftators, who appeared to be infinitely more delighted by 
our plaudits, than by the liberal donations which we made on the oc- 
cafion. 

Thefe amufements had hitherto been confined to fuch limited 
performances; but this afternoon was to be dedicated to one of a 
more {plendid nature, in which fome ladies of confequence, attendants 
on the court of Tamaahmaah, were to perform the principal parts. 
Great pains had been taken, and they had gone through many private 
rcheartals, in order that the exhibition this evening might be worthy of 

the 


heir 
s of 
and 
ver@ 
and 
and 
| ex- 
and 
they 
laufe 
ating 
ature 
erfon 
what 
ibjekt 
ji veli- 
ed by 
laufe; 
ge to 
in a 
Dy no 
to be 
The 
y in- 
] per- 
ed by 


e oc- 


mited 
of a 

dants 
parts. 
rivate 
hy of 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the public attention; on the conclufion of which I purpofed by a difplay 
of fire-works, to make a return for the entertainment they had afforded 
us. 

About four o’clock, we were informed it was time to attend the royal 
dames ; their theatre, or rather place of exhibition, was about a mile to 
the fouthward of our tents, in a {mall fquare, furrounded by houfes 
and fheltered by trees; a fituation as well chofen for the performance, 
as for the accommodation of the fpeétators ; who, on a moderate com- 
putation, could not be eftimated at lefs than four thoufand, of all ranks 
and defcriptions of perfons. 

A difference in point of drefs had been obferved in the audience at 
the former entertainment, but on this occafion every one fhone forth 
in the beft apparel that could be procured; thofe who had been fuccets- 
ful in their commercial tranfaétions with us, did not fail to appear in 
the beft attire they had procured ; and fuch as were deftitute of Euro- 
pean articles, had exerted their genius to fubftitute the manufa€ture and 
produétions of their own country in the moft fafhionable and advanta- 
geous manner. Feathered ruffs, or gartering tape in wreaths, adorned 
the ladies’ heads, and were alfo worn as necklaces; red cloth, printed 
linen, or that of their own manufaéture, conftituted the lower garment, 
which extended from the waift to the knees. The men likewife had 
put on their beft maros; fo that the whole prefented a very gay and 
lively fpeétacle. 

On our arrival, fome of our friends were pleafed to be a little jocular 
with our appearance at fo unfafhionable an hour, having come much 
too early for the reprefentation; but as we were admitted into the green 
room amongft the performers, our time was not unpleafantly engaged. 
The drefs of the aétreffes was fomething like that worn by Puckoo, 
though made of fuperior materials, and difpofed with more tafte and 
elegance. A very confiderable quantity of their fineft cloth -vas pre- 
pared for the occafion; of this their lower garment was formed, which 
extended from their waift half way down their legs, and was fo plaited 
as to appear very much like a hoop petticoat. This feemed the moft 


difficult part of their drefs to adjuft, for Tamaahmaah, who was confidered 
Vou. III. G 


to 


41 


1994. 
February. 


eed 


42 


1794+ 
February. 


en ate 


* Vide 
Cook’s laft 
Voyage. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


to be a profound critic, was frequently appealed to by the women, and his 
dire€tions were implicitly followed in many little alterations. Inftead of 
the ornaments of cloth and net-work decorated with dogs’ teeth, thefe la- 
dies had each a green wreath made of a kind of bind weed, twifted together 
in different parts like a rope, which was wound round from the ankle, 
nearly to the lower part of the petticoat. On their wrifts they ware no 
bracelets nor other ornaments, but acrofs their necks and fhoulders were 
green fafhes, very nicely made, with the broad leaves of the tee, a plant 
that produces a very lufcious {weet root, the fize of a yam*. This part 
of their drefs was put on the laft by each of the aétrefles; and the party 
being now fully attired, the king and queer, who had been prefent the 
whole time of their dreffing, were obliged to withdraw, greatly to the 
mortification of the latter, who would gladly have taken her part as a 
performer, in which fhe was reputed.to excel very highly. But the royal 
pair were compelled to retire, even from the exhibition, as they are pro- 
hibited by law from attending fuch amufements, excepting on the feftival 
of the new year. Indeed, the performance of this day was contrary to 
the eftablifhed rules of the ifland, but being intended as a compliment to 
us, the innovation was admitted. 

As their majefties withdrew, the ladies of rank, and the principal 
chiefs, began to make their appearance. The reception of the former 
by the multitude was marked by a degree of refpeét that I had not be- 
fore feen amongft any inhabitants of the countries in the pacific ocean. 
The audience affembled at this time were ftanding in rows, from fifteen 
to twenty feet deep, fo clofe as to touch each other; but thefe ladies no 
fooner approached their rear, in any accidental direction, than a paflage 
was inftantly made for them and their attendants to pafs through in the 
moft commodious manner to their refpeétive ftations, where they feated 
themfelves on the ground, which was covered with mats, in the moft advan- 
tageous fituation for feeing and hearing the performers. Moft of thefe la- 
dies were of a corpulent form, which, affifted by their ftately gait, the 
dignity with which they moved, and the number of their pages, who fol- 
lowed with fans to court the refrefhing breeze, or with fly-flaps to dif- 
perfe the offending infeéts, announced their confequence as the wives, 
daughters. 


| his 
1 of 
e la- 
ther 
nkle, 
e no 
were 
plant 
part 
party 
it the 
o the 
as a 
royal 
: pro- 
ftival 
ary to 


ent to 


ncipal 
ormer 
ot be- 
cean. 
fifteen 
les no 
aflage 
in the 
feated 
advan- 
efe la- 
it, the 
ho fol- 
to dif- 
WIVES, 


ghters. 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


daughters, fifters, or other near relations of the principal chiefs, who how- 
ever experienced no fuch marks of refpeét or a.tention themfelves ; being 
obliged to make their way through the fpeétators in the beft manner they 
were able. 

The time devoted to the decoration of the aétrefles extended beyond 
the limits of the quiet patience of the audience, who exclaimed two or 
three times, from all quarters, “ Hoorah, hoorah, poaliealee,” fignifying, 
that it would be dark and black night before the performance would be- 
gin. But the audience here, like fimilar ones in other countries, attend- 
ing with a pre-difpofition to be pleafed, was in good humour, and was 
eafily appeafed, by the addrefs of our faithful and devoted friend Try- 
whookee, who was the conduétor of the ceremonies, and fole manager on 
this occafion. He came forward, and apologized by a {peech that pro- 
duced a general laugh, and caufing the mufic to begin, we heard no fur- 
ther murmurs. 

The band confilted of five men, all ftanding up, each with a highly- 
polifhed wooden fpear in the left, and a {mall piece of the fame ma- 
terial, equally well finifhed, in the right hand; with this they beat on 
the fpear, as an accompaniment to their own voices in fongs, that varied 
both as to time and meafure, efpeciaily the latter; yct their voices, and 
the founds produced from their rude inflruments, which differed accor- 
ding to the place on which the tapering {pear was ftruck, appeared 
to accord very well. Having engaged us a fhort time in this vocal per- 
formance, the court ladies made their appearance, and were received 
with fhouts of the greateft applaufe. ‘The muficians retired a few paces, 
and the a€trefles took their ftatton before them. 

The heroine of the piece, which confifted of four parts or aéts, had 
once fhared the affections and embraces of Tamaahmaah, but was now 
married to an inferior chief, whofe occupation in the houfehold was that 
of the charge of the king’s apparel. This lady was diftinguifhed by a green 
wreath round the crown of the head; next to her was the captive daugh- 
ter of Titeerce; the third a younger fifter to the queen, the wife of Cryma- 
mahoo, who being of the moft exalted rank ftood in the middle. On each 
fide of thefe were two of inferior quality, making in all feven aétreffes. 

G 2 


They 


43 


1794- 
February. 


Saeed 


IRE DO AN 


( 


| 


44 


1794. 
February. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


They drew themfelves up in a line fronting that fide of the {quare that 
was occupied by the Jadies of quality and the chiefs. Thefe were com- 
pletely detached from the populace, not by any partition, but, as it were, 
by the refpeétful confent of the lower orders of the affembly ; not one 
of which trefpaffed or produced the leaft inaccommodation. 

This reprefentation, like that before attempted to be defcribed, was 
a compound of fpeaking and finging ; the fubje€t of which was enforced 
by appropriate geftures and aétions. The piece was in honor of a cap- 
tive princefs, whofe name was Crycowculleneaow ; and on her name being 
pronounced, every one prefent, men as well as women, who wore any or- 
naments above their waift, were obliged to take them off, though the 
captive lady was at leaft fixty miles diftant. This mark of refpe€t was 
unobferved by the aétreffes whilft engaged in the performance ; but the 
inftant any one fat down, or at the clofe of the aét, they were alfo 
obliged to comply with this myfterious ceremony. 

The variety of attitudes into which thefe women threw themfelves, 
with the rapidity of their ation, refembled no amufement im any other 
part of the world within my knowledge, by a comparifon with which I 
might be enabled to convey fome idea of the ftage effe€t thus produced ; 
particularly in the three firft parts, in which there appeared much corre- 
{pondence and harmony between the tone of their voices, and the dif, play 
of their limbs. One or two of the performers being not quite fo perfe& 
as the reft, afforded us an opportunity of exercifing our judgment by 
comparifon ; and it muft be confeffed, that the ladies who moft excelled, 
exhibited a degree of graceful aétion, for the attainment of which it is 
difficult to account, 

In each of thefe firft parts the fongs, attitudes, and actions, appeared 
to me of greater variety than I had before noticed amongft the people of 
the great South Sea nation, on any former occafion, The whole, though 
I am unequal to its defcription, was fupported with a wonderful degree of 
fpirit and vivacity ; fo much indeed that fome of their exertions were made 
with fuch a degree of agitating violence, as feemed to carry the per- 
formers beyond what their {trength was able to fuftain; and had the per- 
formance finifhed with the third aft, we fhould have retired from their 
theatre 


rced 
cap- 
peing 
y Or- 
h the 
t was. 
it the 
e alfo 


elves, 
other 
hich I 
uced ; 
corre- 
hifplay 
perfect 
ent by 
celled, 
h it is 


peared 
pple of 
hough 
gree of 
e made 
e per- 
e per- 
their 
theatre 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


theatre with a much higher idea of the moral tendency of their drama, 


a 


45 


1791+ 
February: 


than was conveyed by the offenfive, libidinous fcene, exhibited by the ladies ——.—~’ 


in the concluding part. The language of the fong, no doubt, corre- 
fponded with the obfcenity of their aétions; which were carried to a de- 
gree of extravagance that were calculated to produce nothing but difgutt, 
even to the molt licentious. 

This hooarah occupied about an hour, and concluded with the de. 
fcending fun, it being contrary to law that fuch reprefentations fhould 
continue after that time of day. The fpe€tators inftantly retired in the 
moft orderly manner, and difperfed in the greateft good humour; appa- 
rently highly delighted with the entertainment they had xeccived. But 
as the gratification I had promifed on this occafion required the abfence of 
light, and could not be exhibited to advantage until a late hour, the mul- 
titude were permitted to re-affemble in our neighbourhood foon afterwards 
for this purpofe. 

Our exhibition commenced about feven in the evening, and as we 
{till poffeffed a confiderable variety of fire-works in a tolerably good 
{tate of prefervation, an ample affortment was provided; and on being 
thrown off, they produced from the expeéting multitude fuch acclama- 
tions of furprize and admiration from all quarters, as may be eafily ima- 
gined to arife from the feelings of perfons totally unacquainted with 
objeéts of fuch an extraordinary nature. Tamaahmaah fired the two firft 
rockets; but there were only one or two of the chiefs who had courage 
fufficient to follow his example; and it was obferved amongft thofe who 
were near us at the time, that in thefe apprehenfion was more predomi- 
nant than pleafure. The whole concluded with fome excellent Bengal- 
lights, which illuminating the neighbourhood to a great diftance, almoft 
equal to the return of day, feemed to produce more general fatisfa€tion 
than the preceding part of the exhibition; and on its being announced, 
that the light was fhewn to conduét them fafely to their refpeétive habita- 
tions, the crowd retired; and in the {pace of half an hour the ufual ftill- 
nefs of the night was fo completely reftored, that it would rather have 
been imagined there had not been a fingle ftranger in our neighbourhood, 

than that thoufands had fo recently departed. 


As 


=. 


a 


46 


17946 
February. 


Neen me 


Thurlday20. 


A VOYAGF OF DISCOVERY 


As the number of thefe ftrangers had'increafed, fo a gradual augmen- 
tation of the king’s nightly guard had taken place; but on this evening 
the guards were at leaft doubled, and in number amounted to about forty, 
armed with pallaloos and iron daggers, and ftationed in different places 
about the royal refidence. 

This having been the twelfth day’s abfence of Mr. Menzies and his 
party, and having far exceeded the limits of time that I expe¢ted their 
propofed excurfion could have required, I began to be anxious left fome 
accident or indifpofition had detained them in the interior country; (be- 
ing perfeétly fatisfied that there was not the leaft danger to be appre- 
hended from the natives,) efpecially as I had received only one note from 
the party, and that on the commencement of their journey from the fouth 
point of the ifland; and although their excurfion had not a+ that time 
been attended with the expedition I could have wifhed, yet I had reafon 
before now to have expeéted their return. 

The period of our departure being faft approaching, in order that 
we might be in readinefs to fail on the arrival of the party, I diretted 
that every thing fhould be prepared the next morning for embarking 
fuch matters as we had on fhore. Moft of the principal chiefs having, as 
ufual, joined our party at breakfaft, the higheft fatisfa€tion and admira- 
tion was expreffed at the exhibition that clofed the entertainments of the 
preceding day; whilft the preparations that were making for our depar- 
ture occafioned a univerfal regret. It was well known that I had already 
exceeded the time of my intended ftay, and that the hour would come 
when a feparation muft inevitably take place, and probably never to 
meet again. Such were the topics of our converfation round the 
breakfaft table, when information was brought that a cartridge box, 
which the centinel had fuffered to lie carelefsly about, had been ftolen 
from on board the Chatham. On this unpleafant circumftance being 
firft reported, Tamaahmaah feemed to be indifferent as to its recovery ; 
alledging that the centinel had been much in fault in not having taken 
proper care of his accoutrements. His reafoning was undoubtedly cor- 
ret, and I would willingly have paffed the tranfgreffion unnoticed, rather 
than have rifked the chance of any interruption to our prefent harmony ; 


had 


men- 
ning 
forty, 
laces 


d his 
their 
fome 

; (be- 

ppre- 

. from 

-fouth 

. time 

reafon 


r that 
ireéted 
arking 
ing, as 
dmira- 
of the 
depar- 
ulready 
i come 
ver to 
nd the 
e box, 
ftolen 
b being 
overy ; 

taken 
ly cor- 
rather 
mony ; 


had 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


had not the uniform negative that I had put upon every folicitation from 
thefe people, for arms or ammunition, and which was only to be fup- 
ported by faying, that all fuch articles belonged to His Majefty King 
George, and that they were ftri€tly tabooed, rendered it abfolutely necef- 
fary that I fhould infift on the reftitution of the thing ftolen. 

The converfation that this unlucky incident produced, drew for a fhort 
time a veil of gloom over the cheerfulnefs which had generally pre- 
vi" d; although this was extremely unpleafant at fo interefting a 
penod, i .s attended with t.~ ,vod effect of ftimulating the king to 
fend Kahowmotoo in queft of the cartridge-box, who, in about half an 
hour, brought it to us. It had been found in the houfe of Cavaheeroo, 
the chief of the diftri@ of Kaoo, and the principal perfon at the village 
Kowrowa ; but of the thief, who was a woman, no tidings could be 
procured; as fhe had either made her efcape, or was protected under 
the peculiar privileges with which that village is endowed, in giving pro- 
tection to offenders of various defcriptions, whilft they remain within its 
precinéts. 

The accoutrement however being reftored, with its contents undimi- 
nifhed and in good order, all parties were inftantly reconciled, and our fo- 
ciety brought back to its former ftandard of harmony and good fpirits ; 
though it was apparent that the latter had received fome little check, in 
confequence of the indications of the near approach of our departure, 
by the removal of our feveral matters from the fhores to the veffels. 

In the afternoon, intelligence was brought that our travellers had reach- 
ed the fummit of Mowna Roa, and that they were on their way back ; but, 
from the native who brought us this information, it appeared, that they 
would yet be fome days before they arrived, as they intended to return 
by land, and the roads they had to pafs were very indifferent. 

Having refumed my refidence on board the fhip, I was on friday compli- 
mented with a formal vifit from all the great perfonages in the neighbour- 
hood, except Cavaheeroo; who, having accepted the ftolen cartridge-box, 
I confidered as an acceffary in the theft, and on that account I would not 
permit him to enter the fhip. This exception was no {mall mortification 
to his pride, nor difappointment to his intereft, as none of his affociates 

returned 


47 


-1794- 
February. 


aed 


Friday as, 


SRS pa 


2 ee a 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


returned to the fhore without a handfome token of my efteem. Tamaah- 


— motoo, and his retinue, though lefs deferving of fuch marks of atten- 


tion, and with little claim to any acknowledgment from me, were not 
omitted, but received fuch prefents as their refpeftive conditions and 
the occafion feemed to demand. with this party had come a daughter 
of Tamaahmaah, about nine years of age. She had not vifited us when 
we were here before, nor had we ever feen her until the arrival of 
Tamaahmotoo, to whofe charge fhe had fome time fince been entrufted for 
the purpofe of being educated and brought up agreeably to the cuftom 
of thefe iflands. She bore a ftriking likenefs to ner father, and though 
far from being handfome, had an expreflive intelligent countenance, and 
was a very cheerful and engaging girl. 

All the chiefs that were expefted being now affembled, I inquired of 
the king when the propofed voluntary ceffion of the ifland was to be 
confirmed. A fhort converfation immediately took place between Ta- 
maahmaak and fome of his counfellors then prefent ; the refult of which 
was, that as a taboo-poory was to commence on the evening of the enfuing 
funday, and would continue - ‘il tuefday morning, they were unani- 
moufiy of opinion, that it wou. . be highly proper to embrace that op- 
portunity of reconfulting the priefts, that each might be fully fatisfied 
with the propriety of the meafure they were about to adopt. Tamaah- 
maah at the fame time requefted, that I would attend him at the grand 
morai during the interdiétion. 

This was a reply that I did not altogether like, nor did I expett it, as 
they were all convinced how anxtous I now was to take my departure. 
A final appeal to the priefts, however, I was given to underftand, could 
not be difpenfed with ; and as there was little probability of the party 
from Mowna Roa returning much before that time, I was induced to pro- 
mife that I would comply with their wifhes. 

There appeared }ittle reafon to believe that the ceffion would not be 
made, although fome previous ceremonies were {till wanting, before they 
would be enabled to make the furrender in form, which at this time 
was fixed for the following tuefday; immediately after which, I in- 
formed them, I fhould fail with the land wind for Tyahtatooa and Toeaigh, 
to 


naah- 
atten- 
e not 
s and 
ighter 
when 
val of 
ed for 
uftom 
hough 
e, and 


red of 
to be 
en Ta- 
which 
nfuing 
unani- 
at op- 
atished 
maah- 

grand 


tit, as 
barture. 
| could 


party 
to pro- 


not be 
re they 
his time 
, I in- 
oeaigh, 

to 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


to the former, for the purpofe of more particularly examining the an- 
chorage, and to the latter for the purpofe of procuring fuch a further 
ftock of refrefnments as we could conveniently take; well knowing that 
we ought to place little dependence on the precarious fupply that Mowee, 
Weahoo, or the reft of the iflands to leeward might afford. ‘The whole 
of the party did me the favor to fay, that they would remain on board 
until we quitted Owhyhee. 

I was very much concerned to find, that my earneft endeavours to 
bring about a reconciliation, and to eftablifh peace amongft thefe 
iflands, had proved unfuccefsful. The mutual diftruft that continued 
to exift amongft the people of the feveral iflands, which I had forefeen 
to be the greateft difficulty there was to combat, and which I had ap- 
prehended would be an infurmountable obftacle, had proved fatal to the 
attainment of this defirable objet. Immediately on my arrival here, I 
inquired if my letter from Mowee had been received, and received an 
anfwer in the negative. But I was given to underftand, that a {mall party 
from that ifland had arrived on the weltern fide of Owhyhee, whofe ob- 
je& was fufpetted to be that of feizing on fome of the inhabitants there, 
for the purpofe of taking them away, and of facrificing them in their re- 
ligious rites at Mowee; and fome reports went fo far as to affert that 
this diabolical obje€t had been effe€ted. On further inquiry, however, 
this fa&t appeared to be by no means eftablifhed ; as it was pofitively in- 
fifted on by fome, and by others as pofitively denied. One circumftance, 
however, both parties agreed in, that of the people from Mowee having 
been under the neceflity of making a hafty retreat. I could not under- 
ftand that any chief was in the neighbourhood of the place where they 
had landed; and Tamaahmaah himfelf, either from a convition that they 
had been unfairly dealt with, or that I fhould difapprove of the fufpici- 
ous narrow policy that had influenced the condué& of his people on 
this occafion, was unwilling to allow that he had been made duly ac- 
quainted with their arrival, and was always defirous of avoiding the 
fubjeét in converfation. 

After many attempts to fix his attention, I at length explained to him 
what was the refult of my negociation with the chiefs at Mowee; and 

Vou. III, H he 


49 


1794. 
February. 


5° 


17946 
February. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


he then feemed to concur in opinion with me, that the party from 
Mowee who had landed on the weftern fide of Owhyhee, could be no 
other than the embafly charged with my letter, and invefted with powers 
to negociate for a general pacification. 

It was fome time before I was able to make myfelf thoroughly mafter 
of thefe circumftances; yet long before I had afcertained with any to- 
lerable precifion what was the ftate of the bufinefs, I was perfeétly con- 
vinced that no overtures of this nature would be attended with fuccefs, 
and that nothing but by my pafling backwards and forwards between the 
feveral iflands in the manner before ftated, would anfwer any good pur- 
pofe; could I have done this, I entertained no doubt of accomplifhing 
this defirable obje&; but neither our circumflances nor our time would, 
admit of my engaging in this tafk, particularly at the prefent feafon of the 
year, when very boifterous weather ufually prevails amongft thefe iflands, 
againft which we fhould occafionally have been obliged to beat to 
windward. Our fails, rigging, and probably our mafts, would neceffarily 
have fuffered in point of wear and tear, even fhould we have been fo for- 
tunate to have avoided any material damage by accident; and as our 
ftock of thofe effential articles, even with the fupply we had received from 
port Jackfon, which was very fhort of what I had requefted, demanded 
the greateft ceconomy and care to make them laft, without fubjeéting us 
to unpleafant and even difaftrous circumftances, during our progrefs in 
the unaccomplifhed part of our voyage; I was under the neceflity of 
declining any fur.her perfonal interference, notwithftanding that I was 
fatisfied the happinefs and tranquillity of many thoufands might have been 
fecured, at-leaft for a time, could I have undertaken this important buft- 
nefs. : 

This conviction did not fail to claim a great fhare of my attention; but 
the execution of the feveral important objeéts of our voyage that yet re- 
mained unfinifhed, and which were of an extenfive nature, compelled me 
to give up all thoughts of fecondary confiderations, ‘The completion of 
our bufinefs that appertained to the north pacific ocean, I had fo far 
hopes of effeéting in the courfe of the enfuing feafon, that I had not de- 
manded the return of the Dedalus with a further fupply of ftores, nor 

indeed 


from 
e no 
ywers 


nafter 
yy to- 
- con- 
ccels, 
‘n the 
| pur- 
ifhing 
would, 
of the 
lands, 
sat ta 
{Tarily 
fo for- 
as our 
1 from 
anded 
ing us 
refs in 
lity of 
I was 
le been 


t bufi- 


; but 
et re- 
ed me 
ion of 
fo far 
ot de- 
bs, nor 
indeed 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


indeed was it certain that fuch a fupply could have been obtained from 


5 


1794+ 


February. 


port Jackfon; we had therefore to rely on the difpenfations of Divine —~-—~ 


Providence, and our own care and frugality, for the accomplifhment of 
the remaining part of our furvey with the ftores we had {till remaining. 

Tamaahmaah having become acquainted with our intended route from 
Karakakooa, and being watchful to embrace every opportunity by which 
he could continue his good offices, either for our prefent comfort, or our 
future welfare, ordered one of his principal domeftics to depart imme- 
diately for Toeaigh; there to provide according to his direétions fuch 
things as we ftood in need of, and to have them in readinefs for em- 
barkation on our arrival. 

After thefe, and other lefs important arrangements had been made re- 
lative to our departure, the king with his companions returned to the 
fhore. About this time the gentlemen made their appearance from Mowna 
Roa, having defcended from the mountains in a {ftraight line to the 
fea fhore, from whence they had returned by water; but had not this 
been their route, their journey hither would have occupied fome few 
days more. At firf: fight of the travellers I regretted the delay I had {fo 
recently confented to; but it was now too late to retract, efpecially as, on 
the moft trivial occafions, I had made it a point to perform all promifes 
made to thefe people with fcrupulous punétuality. Two or three days 
therefore were not of fufficient importance to us, to induce my breaking 
in upon the arrangements I had juft made with Tamaahmaah; who would 
eafily have difcovered, that no new caufe had arifen for any alteration in 
our plan; and I therefore determined to remain contented until tuefday, 
when the reftriétions of the taboo were to ceafe. This afforded an op- 
portunity to fome of the officers, whofe attention to their feveral duties 
had confined them hitherto to the fea fhore, to make a fhort excurfion 
into the adjacent country. 

The building of Tamaahmaah’s veffel was now fo far advanced, that I 
confidered its completion an eafy tafk for his people to perform under 
the direftion of Boid, who moft probably had, by his attention to our 
carpenters, added fome information to his former knowledge in fhip- 
building. Her frame was completely fixed, and all that remained to be 


H 2 done 


52 


1794+ 


February. 
ee eed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


done was fome part of the planking, and fitting up her infide according 
to the tafte and fancy of Tamaahmaah. Having no doubt but all this 


Saturday 22. would be effeéted with little difficulty by themfelves, on faturday our 


Sunday 23. 


carpenters were ordered to repair on board with their tools. Befides the 
affiftance I had afforded in building the hull of the veflel, I had furnifhed 
Tamaahmaah with all the iron work fhe would further require; oakum 
and pitch for caulking, proper mafts, and a fet of fchooner fails, with 
canvafs, needles, and twine to repair them hereafter. With refpeé& to 
cordage, they had a fufficiency of their own manufaéture for her rigging, 
{chooner fafhion, and every other neceflary purpofe. 

Tamaahmaah was exceedingly well pleafed, and thankful for our exer- 
tions; and it was extremely gratifying to my feelings to refleét, that fuch 
valuable opportunities fhould have offered for beftowing this gratifi- 
cation upon the king, and many effential benefits upon his people; all 
of whom were now well convinced, that thefe fuperior advantages were 
only to be obtained by the conftant exercife of the fame honefty and ci- 
vility, by which thefe had been fecured to them on the prefent occafion. 

Very little doubt can be entertained of the exalted pleafure Ta. 
maahmaah would enjoy in the attainment, by honorable means, of fo 
defirable an obje& as his new fchooner; efpecially at thofe times, when 
his mind recurring to the virtuous caufes that had given him fo valu- 
able a poffeflion, he would naturally make a comparifon between them, 
and the criminal meafures purfued by Tamaahmotoo for a fimilar acquifi- 
tion; which he had no fooner poffefled by treachery and barbarity, than 
he was deprived of it with indelible marks of infamy, and the lofs of his 
reputation and charaéter. 

On funday evening, agreeably to my promife, I accompanied 7amaah- 
maak to the morai, and fubmitted to all the forms, regulations, and re- 
ftritions of the taboo. The ceremonies were fimilar to thofe I had before 
obferved, though they were more concife, lefs formal, and attended by 
fewer perfons. 

I was not on this, as on the former occafion, purely an idle fpe€tator; 
but was in fome degree one of the aftors. Whilft in the morning the 
principal ceremonies and prayers were performing, I was called upon to 

give 


rding 
1 this 
y our 
les the 
nifhed 
yakum 
, with 
yet to 


gging, 


- exer- 
it fuch 
gratifi- 
le; all 
5 were 
and ci- 
afion. 
re Ja. 
, of fo 
when 
D valu- 
them, 
ncquift- 
, than 
5 of his 


nmaah- 
hnd re- 
before 


ded by 


€tator; 
ng the 
pon to 


give 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


give my opinion on feveral matters that were agitated at one time by 
the king, and at others by the principal priefts. Amongft thefe, was 
the propriety of their remaining at peace, or making war againft the 
other iflands? The ceffion of the ifland; and if by that voluntary mea- 
fure, they would be confidered as the fubjeéts of Great Britain? Under 
this impreffion, in what manner ought they to conduét themfelves to- 
wards all ftrangers, as well thofe who might vifit them from civilized 
nations, as the inhabitants of the neighbouring iflands? With thefe, and 
fome other queftions of lefs importance, I was very ferioufly interro- 
gated; and I made fuch anfwers to each as was confiftent with my own 
fituation, and, as E confidered, were moft likely to tend in future to 
their happinefs and tranquillity. 

I was not prohibited in my turn from offeiing my fuggeftions, or de- 
manding their attention to my requifitions. Anx:ous leti the objeé I 
had fo long had in view fhould hereafter be defecicd; namely, that of 
eftablifhing a breed of fheep, cattle, and other European animals in thefe 
iflands, which with fo much difficulty, :rcuvle, and concern, I had at 
length fucceeded fo far as to import in geod health and in a thriving con- 
dition; I demanded, that they fhould be tabooed for ten years, wita a 
difcretionary power in the king alone to appropriate a certain number of 
the males of each fpecies, in cafe that fex became predominant, to the ufe 
of his own table; but that in fo doing tie women fhould not be pre- 
cluded partaking of them, as the intention of their being brought to the 
ifland was for the general ufe and benefit of every inhabitant of both 
fexes, as foon as their numbers fhould be fufficiently increafed to allow 
of a general diftribution amongft the people. This was unanimoufly 
approved of, and faithfully j.:mifed to be obferved with one exception 
only; that with refpeét to tic «neat of thefe feveral animals, the women 
were to be put on the fame footing as with their dogs and fowls; they 
were to be allowed to eat of them, but not of the identical animal that 
men had partaken, or of which they were to partake. Much con- 
verfation took place on thefe different fubjeéts, when not otherways 
engaged in funétions of a religious nature; all thefe ceafing at fun- 

rife 


1794+ 
February. 


oer ner <cninn Mf 


ee ees Se re 


a 


u 
ih 


ee 


Ss 


Somgess eS 
SS SS ESS 


eee 


~ 


54 


17946 
February. 


ad 
Tuelday 256 


A VOYAGE Or DISCOVERY 


rife the next morning, I repaired on board, and found every thing in 
readinefs for our departure. 

In the forenoon the king and queen, accompanied by Terreemytee the 
king’s brother, Crymamahow, half brother to the king, and chief of the 
diftrié&t of Amakooa; Kahowmotoo, father to the queen, and chief of the 
diftiiG of Kona; Kavaheeroo, chief of the diftri& of Kaow; Tzanna, chief 
of the diflrict of Poona; Yaizahmotoo, chief of the diftri€t of Koarra; 
Trywhookce, half brother to the king, and our moft faithful proteftor and 
purveyor at the encampment; all aflembled on board the Difcovery, for 
the purpofe of formally ceding and furrendering the ifland of Owhyhee 
to me for His Britannic Majefty, his heirs and fucceffors; there were 
prefent on this occafion befides myfelf, Mr. Puget, and all the officers of 
the Difcovery. 

Tamachmaah opened the bufinefs in a fpeech, which he delivered with 
great moderation and equal firmnefs. He explained the reafons (already 
{tated) that had induced him to offer the ifland to the proteética of Great 
Britain; and recounted the numerous advantages that himfelf, the chiefs, 
and the people, were likely to derive by the furrender they were about io 
make. He enumerated the feveral nations that fince Captain Cook’s dif- 
covery of thefe iflands had occafionally reforted hither, each of which 
was too powerful for them to refifi; and as thefe vifitors had come more 
frequently to their fhores, and their numbers feemed to increafe, he con- 
fidered that the inhabitants would be liable to more ill treatment, and 
{till greater impofitions than they had yet endured, unlefs they could be 
protected againft fuch wrongs by fome one of the civilized powers with 
whofe people they had become acquainted; that at prefent they were 
completely independent, under no fort of engagement whatever, and 
were free to make choice of that ftate which in their opinion was moft 
likely by its attention to their fecurity and interefts, to anfwer the pur- 
pofe for which the propofed furrender was intended. For his own part 
he did not hefitate to declare the preference he entertained for the king of 
Great Britain, to whom he was ready to acknowledge his fubmiffion; 
and demanded to know who had any objeétion to follow his example. 

1 This 


hing in 


wtee the 
f of the 
of of the 
1a, chief 
Koarra ; 
tor and 
ery, for 
ywhyhee 
re were 
ficers of 


red with 
(already 
of Great 
1e chiefs, 
about io 
ok’s dif- 
of which 
e€ more 
he con- 
ent, and 
could be 
vers with 
ey were 
er, and 
as moft 
he pur- 
wn part 
e king of 
pmiffion ; 
Pxample. 


This 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


This produced an harangue from each of the five chiefs, all of whom 
had fome ideas to offer on this important fubject. 

The warlike fpirit and ambitious views of Kahowmotoo had long taught 
him to indulge the flattering hope, that on fome future day he fhould be 
enabled to acquire the fovereignty of Mowee. This prompted him to 
ftate in a fpirited and manly f{peech, that on their becoming conneéted 
and attached to fo powerful a nation, they ought no longer to fuffer the 
indignities which had been offered to their ifland Owhyhee by the peo- 
ple of Mowee; he alfo candidly enumerated the offences that Mowee 
had juftly to complain of in return; but as thefe bore no propor- 
tion to her aggreffions, he contended that fhe ought to be chaftized, and 
that when a force for their prote€tion fhould be obtained from England, 
the firft objet of its employment ought to be the conqueft of Mowee; 
after which the care of its government fhould be intrufted to fome re- 
{pe€table chief, whofe intereft and inclination could be depended upon as 
being friendly towards Owhyhee. 

Kavaheeroo, a chief of a very diiferent difpofition, content with the 
ftation he filled, and the comforts he enjoyed, looked forward with plea- 
{ure to the confequences that were likely to refult from the adoption of 
the meafure propofed; having no doubt of its tending to their future 
fafety and protection, which had now become highly expedient in fome 
way to effect, and of its being the means of producing . eneral pacifi- 
cation with their relations and friends, as he termed them, on the other 
iflands. 

Tianna, after agreeing with Kahowmotoo, that Mowee ought to be 
chaftized; and with Cavaheeroo, in the neceffity of Owhyhee being 
protected; propofed that fome perfons, duly authorized for that pur- 
pole, fhould refide on fhore by way of guards, and ftated that a veffel or 
two would be requifite to defend them by fea. He very judicioufly ob- 
ferved further, that fo great a fimilarity exifted between the people of 
the four nations with whom they were already acquainted, but more par- 
ticularly fo between the Englifh and the Americans, that in the event of 
their prefent furrerder being accepted, and of a veflel being fent out 
for their proteéiion, they fhould be doubtful as to the reality of fuch 
perfons 


1794+ 
February. 


56 


1794: 
February. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


perfons coming from England, unlefs fome of the officers then prefent, 
or fome of thofe on board the veflels with whom they were acquainted, 
and who they were convinced did belong to King George, fhould 
return to Owhyhee witn the fuccours required. This appeared to him 
a meatfure of fo much confequence that it could not be difpenfed with, for 
otherways, any of the diftant nations, knowing they had ceded the ifland 
to the Englifh government, might fend to them fhips and men whom 
they had never before feen, and who, by afferting they had come from 
England and belonged to King George, would deceive them into the 
obedience of a people againft whom they fhould afterwards moft proba- 
bly revolt. 

Thefe were the prominent features in the feveral fpeeches made on the 
occafion ; in every one of which their religion, government, and domef- 
tic ceconomy was noticed; and it was clearly underftood, that no inter- 
ference was to take place in either; that Tamaahmaah, the chiefs and 
priefts, were to continue as ufual to officiate with the fame authority as 
before in their refpeétive f{tations, and that no alteration in thofe parti- 
culars was in any degree thought of or intended. 

Thefe preliminaries being fully difcuffed, and thoroughly underftood 
on both fides, the king repeated his former propofition, which was 
now unanimoufly approved of, and the whole party declared their 
confent by faying, that they were no longer Janata no Owhyhee, (i. e.) , 
the people of Owhyhee; but Janata no Britannee, (i.e.) the people of 
Britain. This was inftantly made known to the furrounding crowd in 
their numerous canoes about the veffels, and the fame expreffions 
were cheerfully repeated throughout the attending multitude. 

Mr. Puget, accompanied by fome of the officers, immediately went on 
fhore; there difplayed the Britifh colours, and took poffeffion of the ifland 
in His Majefty’s name, in conformity to the inclinations and defire of 
Tamaahmach and his fubje&ts. On this ceremony being finifhed, a fa- 
lute was fired from the veflels, after which the following infcription on 
copper was depofited in a very confpicuous place at the royal refidence. 

“ On the 25th of february, 1794, Tamaahmaah, king of Owhyhee, in 
“ council with the principal chiefs of the ifland affembled on board His 
“ Britannic Majefty’s floop Difcovery in Karakakooa bay, and in the 


“ prefence 


prefent, 
tainted, 
fhould 
to him 
ith, for 
e ifland 
1 whom 
ne from 
into the 
t proba- 


e on the 
1 domef- 
10 inter- 
iefs and 
lority as 
fe parti- 


derftood 
hich was 
ed their 
Paty 
beople of 
rowd in 
preffions 


went on 
he ifland 
defire of 
ed, a fa- 
ption on 
idence. 

yhee, in 
oard His 
din the 
prefence 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


“ prefence of George Vancouver, commander of the faid floop; Licu- 
“ tenant Peter Puget, commander of his faid Majefty’s armed tender the 
** Chatham; and the other officers of the Difcovery ; after due confide- 
“ ration, unanimoufly ceded the faid ifland of Owhyhee to His Britannic 
“ Majefty, and acknowledged themfelves to be fubjeéts of Great 
“ Britain.” 

Such a diftribution of ufeful or ornamental articles was now made to 
the principal chiefs, their favorite women, and other attendants, as 
Tamaahmaah and myfelf efteemed to be fuitable to their refpettive ranks 
and {tations on this memorable occafion. 

Thus concluded the ceremonies of ceding the ifland of Owhyhee to 
the Britifh crown; but whether this addition to the empire will ever 
be of any importance to Great Britain, or whether the furrender of the 
ifland will ever be attended with any additional happinefs to its people, 
time alone muft determine. It. was however a matter of great fatisfac- 
tion to me, that this conceffion had not only been voluntary, but gene- 
ral; that it had not been fuggefted by a party, nor been the wifh of a 
few, but the defire of every inhabitant with whom we had any conver- 
fation on the fubje&t ; moft of thefe having attended the external cere- 
monies, without fhewing any other figns than thofe of perfect approba- 
tion; and the whole bufinefs having been conduéted by the king and his 
advifers with great fteadinefs, and in the moft ferious manner, left me no 
doubt of the fincerity of their intentions to abide ftriétly by their en- 
gagement. 

This tranfa&tion muft ever be confidered, under all the attendant cir- 
cumftances, as of a peculiar nature; and will ferve to fhew that man, 
even in this rude uncultivated ftate, will not, except from apprehenfion 
or the moft preffing neceffity, voluntarily deliver up to another his legi- 
timate rights of territorial jurifdi€tion. 

With refpeét to aftronomical obfervations whilft at Karakakooa, our 
attention had been principally direéted to the rates and errors of the 
chronometers; thefe on being landed the 2ift of january, 1794, {hewed 

Vou. II. I the 


57 


1794. 
February, 


ee 


=< — 
ea 
=" Xs = = 


SS eS : 
= 23 = a = =: = ——- 


58 


1794: 
February. 
he eed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the longitude by Kendall’s to be * eg - 205° 8 45” 
Arnold’s No. 14, - : - - 204 26 
Ditto 176, - Ss - - 204 1 


The true longitude of Karakakooa being 204°, fhews 
their refpective errors; by which Kendall’s chronometer 
was at noon on the igth of february, 1794, faft of mean 


time at Greenwich, - - - - 3 30! 17” 59” 
And, by twenty-fix days correfponding altitudes, was 

found to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of 15 16 
Arnold’s No. 14, faft of mean time at Greenwich, as 

above, : : 7 - - 3 25 49 59 

And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of 21 12 
Arnold’s No. 176, faft of mean time at Greenwich, as 

above, - - - - - 7 38 33 59 

And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of 48 28 
Arnold’s No. 82, on board the Chatham, faft of mean 

time at Greenwich, as above, - - - 8 25 53 59 

And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of 35 25 


The latitude, by twenty-one meridional altitudes of the fun, and three 
meridional altitudes of the ftars, varying from 19° 27’ 27” to 19° 28’ 27”, 
and differing 20” from the mean refult of the obfervations made in the 
month of march, 1793, fhewed by the mean refult of both years obfer- 
vations, the latitude to be 19° 28' 2”, 


CHAPTER 


n We 


7 59 


15 16 


49 59 
21 12 


33 59 
48 28 


53 59 
35 25 
d three 
28 27" 
b in the 
rs obfer- 


APTER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER II. 


Outt Karakakooa—Vifit Tyahtatooa and Toeaigh bays—Some defcription of 
the anchorage at thofe places—Examine the northern fides of Mowee, 
Wochoo, and Attowai—Obfervations on the anchorage at Attowar and 
Onehow—Leave the Sandanch iflands. 


N OTHING now remained to detain us in Karakakooa bay, the memora- 
ble fpot where Captain Cook unfortunately fell a facrifice to his undaunted 
and enterprifing fpirit. Notwithftanding it had, in that melancholy in- 
ftance, proved fatal to one of the moft illuftrious navigators that the world 
ever produced, yet to us it had proved an afylum, where the hofpita- 
ble reception, and friendly treatment were fuch as could not have been 
furpaffed by the moft enlightened nation of the earth. The unremitted 
attention in the fuperior claffes, to preferve good order, and infure the 
faithful difcharge of every fervice undertaken by the fubordinate defcrip- 
tion of the people, produced an uniform degree of refpeét in their de- 
portment, a cheerful obedience to the commands they received, and a 
{tri€t obfervance and conformity to fair and honeft dealing in all their 
commercial intercourfe. Excepting in the inftances of the table knives, 
the centinel’s cartridge-box, and a few others of little moment, occafi- 
oned, very probably, by ovr want of difcretion in leaving irrefiftible 
temptations in their way, we had little to complain of ; and fuch circum- 
ftances of this nature as did occur, ought only to be confidered as re- 
fleGtions on the particular individuals concerned, ard not as eee 
charaéteriftic of the whole people. 


I2 All 


1794- 
February. 


60 


1794. 
February. 
Neen omen J 


Wednef. 26. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


All our friends were prepared to attend us ; fome were on board, and’ 
others were in their canoes, ready to follow the fhip as foon as fhe got 
under fail. This was effe€ted about three in the morning of wednefday. 
Accompanied by the Chatham, we dire¢ted our courfe, with a light 
land breeze, clofe along the fhore, toward Tyahtatooa bay ; the morn- 
ing was delightfully pleafant, and the furrounding objeéts, whilft they at- 
tra€ted our attention, excited alfo our admiration. The country which, 
as we pafled, rofe with a gradual afcent from the fea fhore, feemed to 
be in a high ftate of cultivation, and was interfperfed with a great num- 
ber of extenfive villages ; whil{t our numerous companions on the fur- 
face of a ferene tranquil ocean, fanned by a gentle breeze, to which fome 
{pread their fails, and the reft kept up with us by leifurely paddling along, 
added confiderable beauty to the interefting fcene, and exhibited, by this 
numerous population, that wealth which the improved ftate of this part 
of the ifland fo ftrongly inticated. About eight o’clock we anchored 
in Tyahtatooa bay, in 15 fathoms water, fand and rocky bottom. 

According to Mr. Meares’s account of Mr. Douglas’s voyage, this place 
is reprefented as equal, if not fuperior, to Karakakooa, for fecure an- 
chorage; but to us it appeared in a very different point of view, as it is 
formed by a {mall bend only in the general dire€tion of the coatt, fcarce- 
ly deferving the name of a bay. Its northernmoft point from us bore 
by compafs n.69 w.; the village called Ane-oo-rooa, being the neareft 
fhore, N. 30 £., about half a mile diftant; and the point of Kowrooa 
s.22£. ‘The ftation we had taken was as clofe to the land as we could 
with prudence lie, and the bottom, in all direétions where we founded, 
was a mixture of rocks and fand. A confiderable {well rolled in from 
the weftward, and by the beaten appearar. ¢ of the rocks that chiefly com- 
pofed the fhore, this appeared to be in general the cafe; and for that 
reafon not a very eligible refting place for fhipping. It however poflef- 
fes an advantage with refpeét to landing, fuperior to Karakakooa.. This 
convenience is produced by the jutting out of two points ; between thefe 
is a {mall cove, defended by fome rocks lying before it, which break the 
viclence of the furge, and render the communication with the fhere very 
commodious. The landing is on a fandy beach, before a grove of cocoa 


nut, 


|, and’ 
ne got 
efday. 
. light 
morn- 
hey at- 
which, 
med to 
b num- 
he fur- 
h fome 
- along, 
by this 
is part 
anchored 
|. 
is place 
cure an- 
as it is 
{carce- 
us bore 
p neareft 
owrooa 
e could 
founded, 
in from 
fly com- 
for that 
pr poflef- 
a. This 
een thefe 
break the 
hore very 
of cocoa 
nut, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nut, bread fruit, and other trees, in the midft of whic the village is 
fituated. Towards the fouth part of this cove is a fpring, which rofe very 
rapidly from amongft fome rocks that are generally covercd with 
the fea water; but when this is low, which is fometimes the cafe, it is 
found to produce a ftream of excellent frefh water; and there can be no 
doubt, by ufing proper means, that its current might be diverted, and 
made fubfervient to the domeftic ufe of the neighbourhood, and to veffels 
refitting at Karakakooa, without their being under the neceflity of fub- 
mitting to the tardy procefs we were compelled to adopt; efpecially as 
the diftance between the two places is only ten iniles. 

The fouthern bafe of mount Worroray forms thefe fhores. This 
mountain, with Mowna Kaah, and Mowna Roa, form each a large mafs 
of elevated land, of which the ifland chiefly confifts, though mount Wor- 
roray is the fmalleft. 

Accompanied by Tamaahmaah, fome of the officers, and feveral of 
the chiefs, I vifited the royal refidence at this place ; which confifted of 
three of the neateft conftru€ted houfes we had yet feen; but not having 
been conftantly inhabited for fome time paft, they were not in good re- 
pair. This habitation of the king, like that at Karakakooa, was in the 
neighbourhood of a grand morai, clofe to the fea fide. The morai was 
the moft complete ftru€ture of the kind, and kept in the greateft order 
and repair, of any that had fallen under our obfervation. It was deco- 
rated with feveral ftatues, or idols, carved out of the trunks of large 
trees, and meant to imitate the human form; but they were the moft 
gigantic and prepofterous figures that can be imagined. 

Having fatisfied our curiofity, we returned on board to dinner, which 
was purpofely ordered of beef and mutton, to give all the chiefs an idea 
of the value of the animals I had imported, as articles of food ; our party 
was numerous, and they unanimoufly agreed that both were excellent. 
The beef, though falted, feemed to have the preference in their opinion ; 

the mutton was by moft confidered to be very fimilar in its tafte to the 
flefh of their dogs, which they very highly efteem. The general opinion 
was taken by vote on the fuperior excellence of mutton to dog’s fleth, 


and 


61 


1794. 
February. 
ee ammmend 


62 


17946 
February, 


Thurfday27. 


Friday 28, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


and the preference was decided in favor of mutton, only by the cafting 
voice of Tamaahmaah. ; 

I was very anxious to quit this ftation, which is fituated in latitude 
19° 374’, longitude 203° 544, left the rocky bottom fhould damage our 
cables; but light breezes from the fea, fucceeded by calms, prevented 
our moving until midnight, when, with a gentle breeze from the fhore, 
we proceeded flowly along the coaft to the northward. 

In the forenoon of the 27th, we had a light breeze from the weftward ; 
with this we fleered for the anchorage at Toeaigh, but a ftrong current 
fetting to the fouth-weftward, we approached it very flowly ; the wea- 
ther however was fair and pleafant, and the objeéts about us were cheer- 
ful and entertaining, notwithftanding the adjacent fhores were uninte- 
refting, being chiefly compofed of volcanic matter, and producing only 
a few detached groves of cocoa nut trees, with the appearance of little 
cultivation, and very few inhabitants. The deficiency of the population 
on fhore was amply compenfated by the number of our friends that ac- 
companied us afloat in canoes of all defcriptions ; thefe ftill preferving 
the fame orderly behaviour and cheerful good humour, our change of 
fituation was {carcely perceivable, as the fame fociability and friendly in- 
tercourfe continued which had exifted at Karakakooa. 

As this evening was to be devoted to an appointed taboo that would 
continue until the morning of the 1ft of march, the king and the reft of 
our friends went on fhore for the purpofe of attending their religious 
duties. The weather in the evening being fqually, with variable winds 
and alternate calms, gave me reafon to believe it very probable that we 
fhould not reach our deftination before it was dark; on intimating this to 
Tamaahmaah, he promifed to have a light placed in fuch a fituation, as 
would conduét us to it with fafety. 

It was not however until near four the next morning that we gained 
foundings, when we anchored in go fathoms water, fandy bottom. After 
it was day-light we removed to the beft anchorage in this bay, whofe 
north-weft point bore by compals n. 36 w., and the morai, N. 68 £.; 
this is a confpicuous objeé, and a good leading mark to this anchorage ; 
it is fituated on a barren eminence to the fouthward of the village, and 


3 Ws 


cafting 


atitude 
ge our 
-vented 
> fhore, 


{tward ; 

current 

he wea- 

e cheer- 
uninte- 
ing only 
of little 
pulation 
that ac- 
eferving 
ange of 
ndly in- 


at would 
e reft of 
eligious 
le winds 

that we 
g this to 
htion, as 


e gained 
n. After 
vy, whofe 
N. 68 E.3 
horage ; 
age, and 


ws 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


is to be kept in a line with a {mall faddle hill, on the eaftern land de- 
fcending from the higher parts, over the village of Toeaigh, on the north 
fide of this fpacious open bay. Its fouth point defcending gradually from 
Worroray, and forming a low point, bore by compafs s. 31 w.; within 
this point on the rifing land are fome elevated hummocks ; the third of 
thefe, from the point forming a kind of faddle hill na line with a low, 
projecting, black, rocky point, in the middle of the bay, bearing s. 22 w., 
isa further direftion, and a crofs mark for this anchorage; from whence 
the watering place lies s. 79 £., a mile and a half diftant. The fummit 
of Mowna-kaah alfo bore by compafs s. 68 £.; Mowna Roa, s. 33 £.; 
and Worroray, s.5w. In this fituation the depth of water was 25 fa- 
thoms, the bottom a ftiff clay, and good holding ground; incommoded 
by the patch of rocky bottom, ftated on our former vifit to be at the 
depth of 10 fathoms only; but on a more minute fearch, this was now 
difcovered to fhoal fuddenly, and the depth to decreafe to 7, 4, and 3 
fathoms, about the fourth of a mile to the fouth-weftward of the ftation 
we had taken; and confequently to be a very great inconveniency to the 
roadf{tead, which at beft, in my opinion, is but a very indifferent one; be- 
ing intirely expofed to the north-weft winds, and the weftern oceanic 
{fwell, which beats with great violence on the reefs that encompals the 
fhores. Thefe reefs {tretch out a mile or upwards, leaving between them 
and the land a narrow channel, that affords comfortable and commodi- 
ous landing for fmall boats and canoes; but the landing is at too great 
a diftance from the place of anchorage to allow of proteéting any de- 
barkation from the fhip. 

The only circumftances that feem to render this a defirable ftopping 
place, are the run of water, which however does not conftantly flow; 
and the probability of procuring refrefhments, from its contiguity to the 
fertile, and populous weftern part of the diftri€t of Koaarra, and the 
plains of Whymea, lying behind the land that conftitutes this part of 
the fea coatt. j 

The country rifes rather quickly from the fea fide, and, fo far as it 
could be feen on our approach, had no very promifing afpeét; it forms a 
kind of glacis, or inclined plane in front of the mountains, immediately 


behind 


03 
1794+ 


February. 
YC —— 


Ll see ee >. 


Sas ST a ES 


val 


64 


1794- 


February. 


aed 


March, 


SE aie 
Seturday 1. 


Sunday 2. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


behind which the plains of Whymea are ftated to commence, which are 
reputed to be very rich and produétive, occupying a {pace of feveral 
miles in extent, and winding at the foot of thefe three lofty mountains 
far into the country. In this valley is a great tract of luxuriant, natural 
pafture, whither all the cattle and fheep imported by me were to be 
driven, there to roam unreftrained, to “ increafe and multiply” far from 
the fight of ftrangers, and confequently lefs likely to tempt the inhabi- 
tants to violate the facred promife they had made; the obfervance of 
which, for the time ftipulated in their interdiction, cannot fail to render 
the extirpation of thefe animals a tafk not eafily to be accomplifhed. 

This day being devoted to their holy rites, the king, with all the pro- 
vincial chiefs, remained in facred retirement. The fame caufe operated 
to deprive us of the fociety of our other vifitors, particularly the females, 
who are on no account permitted to be afloat on thefe occafions. 

The next morning the king, with all our friends, were again about the 
vellels. In the courfe of the day a further proof of the liberality of 
Tamaahmaah’s difpofition was given, by his prefenting us with near an 
hundred hogs of the largeft fize, and as great a quantity of vegetables as 
both veffels could well difpofe of; with offers of a further fupply if 
thefe were infufficient. 

It was my intention to have failed with the land wind in the evening, 
but Tamaahmaah pointing out that fince thurfday his engagements on 
fhore had totally deprived him of our fociety ; firft by his attendance on 
their religious ceremonies, and afterwards in procuring and fending us 
the fupplies we required; and foliciting, at the fame time, in the moft 
earneft manner, that the laft day fhould be dedicated to the enjoyment 
of each other’s company, I was induced to remain the following day, to 
prove to him that there was no indulgence in my power, compatible 
with my duty, that I would not grant, in return for the friendfhip and 
regard he had on all occafions manifefted towards us, and that in the 
moft princely and unlimited manner. 

The fucceeding day was confequently paffed in receiving farewell vifits, 
and making farewell acknowledgments to our numerous friends; who all 


exprefled 


ch are 
feveral 
intains 
natural 
- to be 
ur from 
inhabi- 
ance of 
render 
ifhed. 
he pro- 
perated 
females, 


yout the 
rality of 
near an 
tables as 


pply if 


vening, 
ents on 
lance on 
ding us 
he moft 
joyment 

day, to 

patible 
fhip and 
t in the 


ell vifits, 
who all 


x prefled 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


exprefled the high fatisfa€tion they had experienced during our refi- 
dence amongft them, and the deep regret they felt at our departure 
from the ifland ; after which they were feen to fteal away gently and 
reluétantly from a fcene that had afforded them fo many valuable ac- 
quirements, and fo much pleafing entertainment. By fun-fet nearly the 
whole group was difperfed in the feveral dire€tions to which their incli- 
nations or neceffities led. The occurrences of this day did not pafs over 
without producing fome impreffions on our fenfibility, from the repeated 
ardent folicitations that we would come back to them again, and from 
the undifguifed fincerity of the wifhes and prayers that were offered up 
for our future happinefs and profperity. 

As our departure was to take place with the firft breeze from the land, 
Tamaahmaah and his queen, unwilling to take leave until the very laft 
moment, remained on board until near midnight, when they departed, 
with hearts too full to exprefs the fenfations which the moment of fepara- 
tion produced in each; with them their honeft and judicious counfellors 
Young and Davis returned to the fhore. The good fenfe, moderation. 
and propriety of conduét in thefe men, daily increafed their own refpec- 
tability, and augmented the efteem and regard, not only of the king 
and all his friends, but even of thofe who were profefledly adverfe to 
the exifting government, and who confequently were at firft inimical to 
their intereft. 

As it was a great uncertainty, whether we fhould or fhould not return 
again to thefe iflands, I had given thefe two worthy characters their 
choice of taking their paflage with me to their native country, or of 
remaining on the ifland in the fame fituation which they had fo long 
filled with credit to themfelves, and with fo much fatisfaGtion to the 
king and the reft of the principal people. After mature confidera- 
tion, they preferred their prefent way of life, and were defirous of con- 
tinuing at Owhyhee; obferving, that being deftitute of refources, on their 
return home, (which, however, they {poke of in a way that did honor to 
their hearts and underftandings) they muft be again expofed to the viciffi- 
tudes of a life of hard labour, for the purpofe of merely acquiring a pre- 
carious fupply of the moft common neceflaries of life ; objeéts which, for 

Vor. HI. K fome 


ee 


Monday 3. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVLRY 


fome years paft, had not occafioned them the leaft concern. Nor was 
it probable that they would be liable hereafter to any fort of inconve- 
nience in thofe refpeéts ; for, befides the high repuiation, and univerfal 
good opinion they had acquired amongft all clafles of the inhabitants, 
they were now confidered in the light of chiefs, and each of them pof- 
feffed a confiderable landed property. Here they lived happily, and in 
the greateft plenty ; and, to their praife be it {poken, the principal ob- 
je&t they feemed to have in view was, to correct by gentle means the 
vices, and encourage by the moft laudable endeavours the virtues, of 
thefe iflanders ; in this meritorious undertaking they had evidently made 
fome progrefs, and there are reafonable grounds to believe, that, by fteadi- 
ly purfuing the fame line of conduét, it will in time have a due influence 
on the general charaéter of thefe people. From us they received every 
attention that could ferve to raife them in the eftimation of the natives ; 
and fuch an affortment of ufeful articles for promoting their comforts, 
as it was in our power to afford. 

Our faithful fhipmate Terehooa, who, to the laft moment, conduéted 
himfelf with the greateft integrity and propriety, was alfo left very ad- 
vantageoufly fituated, under the prote€tion of the king and his old maf- 
ter Kahowmotoo, with a large affortment of ufeful implements, and or- 
namental articles; and being firmly attached to Young and Davis, to: 
whom he could be very ufeful, and who had it in their power to ferve- 
him in return, his future profpeéts in life feemed to have been much im- 
proved by his excurfions in the Difcovery, of which he feemed very 
fenfible, and which he gratefully acknowledged. . 

Thus concluded our tranfaétions at Owhyhee, to which we bad 
adieu about three in the morning of monday the 3d of march, very 
highly indebted for our reception, and the abundant refrefhments we 
had procured. ‘Thefe effential comforts I fhould have entertained: 
no doubt would, in future, have been adminiftered to all vifitors who- 
fhould conduct themfelves with common honefty and proper decorum, 
had we not left behind us a banditti of renegadoes, that had quitted dif- 
ferent trading veffels in confequence of difputes with their refpettive: 
commanders, who had reforted to this ifland fince the preceding year, 
under 


for was 
iconve- 
niverfal 
bitants, 
m pol- 
and in 
pal ob- 
ans the 
tues, of 
y made 
y fteadi- 
fluence 
d every 
natives : 
ym forts, 


ndutted 
very ad- 
old mal{- 
and or- 
avis, to 
to ferve. 
uch im- 
led very 


e bad 
h, very 
ents we 
ertained: 
ors who- 
ecorum,: 
ted dif- 
fpettive: 
be year, 

under 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


under American or Portuguefe colours. Amongft them was one Por- 
tuguefe, one Chinefe, and one Genoele, but all the reft appeared to be 
the fubjeéts of Great Britain, as feemed alfo the major part of the crew 
of the brig Wafhington, although they called themfelves Americans. 
Thefe latter perfons, in the charaéter of failors, amounting to fix or fe- 
ven in number, had taken up their abode with different chicls of fome 
power and confequence, who efleemed thefe people as great acquifitions, 
trom their knowledge of fire-arms ; but as no one of them could produce 
any teftimonials of their former good conduét, or even make out a plau- 
fible charaéter for himfelf or his comrades, it is much to be appre- 
hended they may be the means of creating inteftine commotions, by in- 
citing the jealoufy, and furthering the ambitious views of the haughty 
chiefs, with whom they are refident. ‘Their machinations to the preju- 
dice of the exifting government, however, will prove ineffe@tual, unlefs 
they fhould be able to elude the watchful attention of Young and Davis ; 
who are both well aware of the danger they ought to be prepared to 
meet; and whofe fidelity to Zamaahmaah, I had every reafon to believe, 

was not of a nature to be fhaken by the moft flattering temptations. 
That thefe apprehenfions were well founded I could not entertain the 
leaft doubt; for foon after my arrival et Owhyhee, I received, by Young, 
a letter from Mr. William Brown, commanding the Butterworth of Lon- 
don, complaining heavily of a fimilar fet of vagabonds, refiding at Woa- 
hoo and at Attowai, who had, at the latter place, taken up arms in fupport 
of an inferior chief, again{ft the authority of Zazo and Titeeree, the fove- 
reigns of that ifland; and had fo far forgotten their allegiance, and the 
rules which humanity, juftice. and common honefly prefcribe, as to con- 
cert, with the natives of Attowai, a plan for the capturing of an Ame- 
rican brig; called the Hancock. This was to have been effetted by feut- 
tlng her under water, which would induce the crew to fuppofe fhe 
had fprung a very bad leak; when thefe renegadoes were to advife 
her being hauled on fhore, for the purpofe of faving from her as much 
as poffible ; and when in this fituation, fhe would be completely in the 
power, and at the difpofal, of the natives. But, happily for thofe in the 
veffel, although fhe was near finking, in confequence of a hole cut in 
K 2 her 


67 


1794. 
March. 


(em actrees 


ee SP oy ere 


68 


1704. 
March. 
ew) 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


her counter by fome unknown hand, the reft of the diabolical {cheme 
was deteéted before the contrivers liad time or opportunity to carry it 
into execution, and by the exertions of the crew the vellel was faved. 

Mr. Brown ftated further, that by the bad advice, and far worle:ex- 
ample, of thefe people, the natives of moft of the leeward iflands had. 
arrived at fuch a degree of daring infolence, as rendered any com- 
munication with them from fmall veffels, or even anchoring near the 
fhores, highly dangerous; and that he trufted it might be within the limits 
of my authority to take fram thefe iflands {uch improper and dangerous 
affociates, 

I reprefented in the ftrongeft terms to Tamaahmaah, all the bad con- 
fequences that were likely to refult from thofe people remaining on 
Owhyhee ; but no arguments could prevail upon him, or the chiefs, 
to deliver them up. Their knowledge in the ufe and management of 
fire-arms, made their fervices of fuch importance, that it was. evident 
nothing but compulfion would have any effeét; and to have reforted to 
fuch a meafure, in which I was. by no means certain how far I fhould 
be juftifiable, would neceflarily have produced a breach, and deftroyed 
that harmony which we had taken fo much pains to eftablifh, and care 
to preferve. In addition to which, thefe people were ftated to. poflels 
Janded property in the ifland, and te have conformed to the laws, both 
civil and religious. Nor had any fpecific charge been exhibited againft 
the feven failors living on Owhyhee, like that produced by Mr. Brown 
againft thofe at Attowai and Woahoo, 

With Kavaheeroo alfo refided a perfon by the name of Howell. who 
had come to Owhyhee in the capacity of a clerk on board the Wafhing- 
ton; he appeared to poffefs a good underftanding, with the advantages. 
of an univerfity education, and had been once a clergyman in England, 
but had now fecluded himfelf from European fociety: fo that with 
Young, Davis, and Boid, there were now eleven white men on the ifland ; 
but, excepting from thefe latter, I much fear that our Owhyhean friends 
will have little reafon to. rejoice in any advantages they will receive froma 
their new civilized companions, 


To 


[cheme 
carry It 
ved, 

rie: ex- 
ids had. 
7 come 
sar the 
e limits 
igerous 


ad con- 
ing on 
. chiefs, 
ment. of 
evident 
orted to 
| fhould 
eftroyed 
nd care 
. poffefs 
s, both 
againft 
Brown 


ell. who 
afhing- 
antages. 
ngland, 
at with 
> ifland ; 
friends 
ve from 


10 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


To Young and Davis I delivered fuch teftimonials of their good con- 


duét as I confidered them fully intitled to, for the purpofe of fecuring to Ve y—w 


them the refpeét and confidence of future vifitors, who would be warned 
by them of the {nares and dangers they were liable to, from the evil-dif- 
poled, civilized or favage inhabitants of the country. 

The land wind blew faintly, and our progrefs from Owhyhce was fo 
flow, that an opportunity was afforded to a few {mall canoes from the 
fhores of Koaarra to vifit us as we pafled; but we did not recognize 
any of the chiefs, or our former acquaintances. Towards noon the fea 
breeze reached us, with which we flood to windward, in order to pals 
to the north of the eaft point of Mowee; this engaged our time until 
after noon on the following day, when we bore away along the north 
fide of that ifland. 

In this route we fell in with the fouth-eaft fide of Mowee, near to 
the ftation where our furvey had commenced the preceding year; and 
in beating round the weftern part of the ifland, which does not termi- 
nate in a projecting point, but forms a large rounding promontory, we 
very anxioufly looked out for the harbour mentioned by Captain King, 
as reported by the natives to exift in that neighbourhood; but nothing 
was feen that could warrant fuch a reprefentation, excepting two fmall 
open coves, fituated on each fide of the eaftern extremity of the ifland ; 
thefe, anfwering all the purpofes of the inhabitants with their canoes, 
probably induced them to fuppofe that fuch accommodations were all 
we required. Off this eaftern extremity, which, according to our ob- 
fervations, is fituated in latitude 20° 442’, longitude 203° 58’, and bearing 
by compafs from the north-weft point of Owhyhee n.7 w., at the dif- 
tance of g leagues, lies a fmall iflet, with fome rocks between it and the 
fhore. ‘To the north of this iflet is a remarkably elevated hummock, 
rifing almoft perpendicularly from the fea, but gradually defcending in a 
flope in land; it was covered with a pleafing verdure, and occupied by 
feveral houfes, but deftitute of trees or fhrubs. The adjacent country; 
which was moderately elevated, prefented a fertile appearance, and feemed 
to be thickly inhabited, as far back as the foot of thofe mountains that 
compofe the eaftern part of the ifland, As we patted this rounding pro. 


montory, 


1794- 
M 


arch. 


Tuefday 4, 


69 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


montory, fome detached rocks were noticed lying about half a mile 
from the fhore, along which we failed at a diftance from two to four miles, 
and found it a little indented, and chiefly compofed of: fteep rugged 
cliffs. 

The wind being light, enabled a few of the natives to vifit us during 
the afternoon, but they had little with them to difpofe of; in the evening 
they returned home, and at dark we hauled off the fhore in order to 
preferve our {tation for continuing our furvey. The next morning we 
again ftood in for the land, pafling the deep bay that bounds the north- 
ern fide of the ifthmus, which conneéts the two lofty ranges of moun- 
tains that form the ifland of Mowee. A very heavy furf beat on the low 
fandy fhores of the bay, from whence a few of the natives, as ill appoint- 
ed for barter as the former, paid us a vifit. 

From thefe people we underftood that Titeeree was at Woahoo, and 
that Tato was at Morotoi; but that Namahanna, who in the abfence of 
Liteeree had been left in charge of the government, accompanied by three 
or four other chiefs and fome inferior people, were unfortunately in a 
houfe that contained the major part of the gunpowder Trteeree pollefled, 
when it took fire and blew up. By this accident Nama/:anna, with two 
other chiefs and fome of the people, had been killed, and all the reft 
had been very badly wounded. ‘This houfe appeared, by their account, 
to have been appropriated by Tvteeree as a magazine; that the accident 
had happened only a few days before our arrival, and that fome of the 
perfons who had iyeen hurt had fince died of their wounds. 

A fine breeze from the n.., with clear and pleafant weather, brought 
us by noon up to the north-weft point of Mowee. The obferved lati- 
tude at this time was 21°7’, longitude 203°23'. The point bore by 
compals s. 8 w., diftant four miles ; off this lie an iflet and fome rocks, 
at a {mall diftance from the fhore, which is fteep and cliffy. Having 
thus completed our intended furvey of Mowee, we ftood over, and 
brought to within about half a league of the north-caft point of Moro- 
tol, in the expectation of feeing Tazo ; for whom, as well as for 72teeree, 
I had referved fome fheep, for eftablifhing the breed in each of the 
iflands. Tato, we had underftood, refided fome where hereabonts, and 


fome 


“a mile 
ir miles, 
ru gged 


; during 
evening 
order to 
ning we 
1e north- 
f moun- 
the low 
appoint- 


100, and 
fence of 
by three 
tely in a 
pofleffed, 
vith two 
the reft 
account, 
accident 
e of the 


brought 
ved lati- 
bore by 
e rocks, 

Having 

ver, and 
f Moro- 
Liteeree, 
1 of the 
buts, and 
fome 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fome of the natives who came off to us repeated this incciligence, but 
added that the day being taboo poory, it was impoflible we fhould re- 
ceive a vifit from him. 

We continued nearly ftationary for three hours, in the hope of ob- 
taining fome vegetables, but none were to be procured; at five we made 
fail, and as the Chatham the preceding year had examined the north fide 
of this ifland, our courfe was direéied for the north-eaft fide of Woahoo; 
which at day-light the fucceeding morning bore by compals from w. to 
s.27 w., and Morotoi, from s.92£. to s.45£. We continued our 
furvey from what we had formerly examined on the fouthern part of this 
fide of the ifland, and fhortly after noon we pafled its north point; which, 
according to our obfervations, is in latitude 21° 42%’, longitude 202° 1’; 
the former being three miles further fouth, and the laitcr fourteen miles 
further weft, than the fituation of that point as laid down by Captain 
King; our prefent furvey however, correfponded with our former obfer- 
vations, as to the pofition of the fouth-eaft point of Woahoo; and made 
this fide of the ifland four miles longer than Captain King’s delineation: 
and agreed better with our eftimated diftance between Woahoo and At- 
towai. In every other refpeét our examination confirmed the remarks of 
Captain King; excepting, that in point of cultivation or fertility, the 
country did not appear in fo flourifhing a ftate, nor to be fo numeroufly 
inhabited, as he reprefe nted it to have been at that time, occafioned moft 
probably by the conftant hoftiities that had exiftec © ce that period. 

My intentions were to have i\\:ned near the run of water off which 
the Refolution and Difcevery haa anchored, called by the natives Why- 
mea, and rendered memorable 'y the fatal cataftrophe that had awaited 
the commander and the aftronomer of the Deedalus. Here I was in 
expeétation of procuring ai: interview with Titeeree, who we had been 
informed was then in. this neighbourhood; but learning from a few of 
the inhabitants, who vifited us in a-fmall, fhabby, fingle canoe, that he 
was gone to Whyteete, and there being at this time a very heavy north- 
welt fwell that broke inceffantly, and with great violence, on all the adja- 
cent fhores, to which from their greatly ¢xpofed fituation they feemed. 
very liable; and having alfo firifhed our furvey; we quitted Woahoo, and 

directed 


1794. 


A 
March, 


eee, pte} 


Thurfday 6, 


1794. 
March. 


Friday 7: 


/ 


saturday 8, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


directed our courfe towards the north-eaft part of Attowat, which at 
day-light in the morning bore by compafs from v.84 w. to Ss. 4o w. 
As we approached its fhores, the fame influence was felt from a north- 
erly current, as we had before experienced; but the wind being to the 
fouthward, it did not prevent our paffing to the north of the ifland, 
which, at noon, bore by compafs from s.75 w. to s.25 £.; and the 
aorth-eaft extremity of the ifland, extending from the forked hill men- 
tioned on our laft vifit hither, s.19 £., diftant three miles and ahalf. In 
this fituation the obferved latitude was 22° 15’, longitude 200° 36’. Here 
we rejoined the American brig Wafhington, which had failed with us 


from Karakakooa, but had dire€ted her courfe to the fouthward of the 


ilands, for Whyteete in Woahoo, where fhe had remained five days. 
Amongft other articles that Mr. Kendrick had procured whilft there, 
was eighty pounds weight of very fine bees wax, that had drifted by the 
fea on to the fhores of that ifland, and had very recently been picked up 
by the natives; and I now underftood that fome pieces had alfo been 
procured from the natives of the other iflands by Mr. Kendrick, who in 
a great meafure confirmed the account contained in Mr. Brown’s letter 
to me, of the very improper condu& of the merchant feamen who had 
deferted, or otherways quitted the veffels to which they had belonged, for 
the purpofe of refiding amongft thefe iflanders. In this number were 
fome whom he had formerly left at Attowai, but he now feemed to 
be determined that thev fhould no longer remain on that ifland. 

The wind during the afternoon was light and variable, confequently 
we made little progrefs. In the courfe of the day we procured a fmall 
fupply of hogs, yams, and vegetables. At fun-fet a fmall iflet iying 
near the fhore, and fituated from the north-eaft point of ihe ifland 
N.55 W., fix miles and a half diftant, bure by compafs s. 33 w., about 
two miles from us, and the fhores of the ifland, which are alternately 
cliffs and beaches, bore from s. 50 £. to 8.71 W. 

The night was paffed as ufual in preferving our ftation, and in the 
morning we again ftood i for the land; about eight o’clock we were off 
a {mall deep bay; its eaft point lies from the above iflet welt, diftant four 


niles ; 


ich at 
40 W. 
north- 
to the 
ifland, 
id the 
| men- 
lf In 

Here 
vith us 
of the 
e days. 
. there, 
by the 
ked up 
o been 
who in 
’s letter 
ho had 
ved, for 
er were 

ed to 


quently 
a {mall 
tt lying 
ep ifland 
» about 
prnately 


in the 
vere off 
ant four 
milles ; 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


rniles; this bay is nearly half a league wide, and about the fame depth; 
but being expofed to the violence of the norih-weflerly winds, and the 
oceanic {well, is ineligible for fhipping, and therefore we did not examine 
it further; but continued our route with a fine breeze from the w.r, 
at the diftance of about two miles from the fhore, pafling fome rocks and 
breakers, that extend a fmall diflance from the weft point of the bay ; 
where the coaft of Attowai aflumes a very rugged and romantic appear- 
ance, rifing fuddealy to lofty abrupt cliffs, that jet out into a varicty of 
fleep, rugged, rocky points, apparently deflitute of both foil and ver- 
dure, but terminating nearly in uniform even fummits. on which, as 
well as in the vallies or chafms that were formed between the points, were 
{mall patches of lively green that produced a very fingular eect.  Vhis 
fort of coaft continued to the north-weft point of the ifland. As we ap- 
proached this point, the regular trade wind being intercepted by thefe 
lofty fhores, we were retarded. by light variable breezes. and were fre- 
quently becalmed. At noon the obferved latitude was 22° 12’, longitude 
200° 108’... The ifland of Onehow bore by compats from s. 94 Ww. to 
8.44 wW.; Orechooa, s. 51 w.: and Attowai, from N.78 5. to s.gt.; 
its north-weft point being the neareft fhore, 5.97 z., diftant three miles 

From this point the country aflumed a very different afpeét; it de- 
fcended fuddenly from the mountains, and terminated in a low fandy 
fhore, fomewhat diverfified by eminences, anda few fcattercd habitations, 
but wearing a fteri] and defolate appearance. 

In the afternoon we were favored with 2 gentle northerly breeze, which 
by fun-fet brought us to the weft point of the ifland, fituated, according 
to our obfervations, in latitude 22° 4’, longitude 200° 10’; off which 
extends a reef of rocks, about half a mile from the fhore. 

Having now completed the furvey of Attowai, we met the regular 
trade wind, with which we ftood to windward for Whymea bay, in that 
land; where, at nine the next morning, we anchored in 23 fathoms, 
foft bottom, and moored with a cable each way; the points of the bay 
bore by compafs n.77 w. to s.65 ©: the river s.35 8, diftant half a 
league. Here we again met the Walhington; Mr. Kendrick, having 
beaten round the eaft end of the ifland, had arrived two davs before us. 

Vou. IL. i Our 


aud 


SY 


1794. 
March. 


\ceeseraton penne} 


Sunday g. 


PS 


Lod 


1794. 
March. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Our arrival was foon known, and we were early vifited by many of 


u+—~ our former friends and acquaintances. Amongft the number were the 


two young women I had brought from Nootka and fettled here; dur- 
ing our late abfence they had been treated with great kindnefs and civi- 
lity, yet they were both very apprehenfive that, on our finally quit- 
ting thefe feas, the attentive behaviour they had hitherto experienced 
would be difcontinued. I however embraced the firft opportunity of 
obtaining from all the principal chiefs the moft folemn affurances of the 
contrary. 

We found Enemo, who had now changed his name to Wakea, ftill alive, 
and though in a fomewhat better ftate of health than when we laft left 
him, he was yet ina moft deplorably emaciated condition. 

Since our late departure, Enemo had attempted to acquire the fupreme 
authority in the government of thefe iflands, independent of Tzteeree and 
tao. To effeét this obje& he had been affifted by Mr. Kendrick’s peo- 
ple, and the reft of the Furopean and American renegadoes ; in whofe 
fupport and knowledge in the ule of fire-arms he had placed the great- 
eft reliance, and had been induced to declare and confider his indepen- 
dency as certain. Thefe proceedings foon reached the ear of Titeeree, 
who fent a chief and a party of men to inquire into the caufe of fo fud- 
den an alteration, and to know if it were countenanced by the chiefs 
and people of the ifland, among{t whom the regent had not been confi- 
dered as very popular. But the intentions of thefe unfortunate people 
being fuppofed to be hoftile to the intereft or views of Enemo, they were 
met as they approached the fhore, and, without any previous inquiry 
into the nature of their errand, were oppofed by a fmall party of 
I'nemo’s adherents conduéted by the renegadoes, who, with their muf- 
kets drove them with great flaughter from the ifland, and purfued them 
in their flight unti! they left very few to relate the unfortunate iffue of 
their embafly, to Yzzeeree; and the untimely fate of thofe who had fallen, 
to their inquiring relations and friends. This melancholy event would 
not, moft probably, have happened, had not thefe f{trangers advifed and 
affilted in the perpetration of this diabolical and unprovoked barbarity ; 
in extenuation of which they plead, that they were compelled to aét this 

favage 


any of 
ere the 
>; dur- 
nd civi- 
Yy quit- 
rienced 
nity of 
s of the 


ill alive, 


laft left 


fupreme 
eree and 
*k’s peo- 
in whofe 
1e great- 
indepen- 
| Titeeree, 


ey were 

inquiry 

party of 
heir muf- 

ed them 
le iffue of 
ad fallen, 
nt would 
vifed and 
arbarity ; 
aét this 
favage 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


favage part in order to preferve the good opinion of, and keep themfelves 
in favor with, the chief. 

The Butterworth arriving at Woahoo fhortly after the return of this 
unfortunate expedition, Tvteeree folicited Mr. Brown to take him to At- 
towai for the purpofe of effecting, in an amicable way, an accommoda- 
tion with this rebellious chief. With this Mr. Brown complied, and after 
an explanatory interview on board his fhip, all matters were compro- 
mifed to the mutual fatisfa€tion of both parties; and fince that period 
the ifland has enjoyed tranquillity, though it flill remained under the 
government of Enemo as regent. 

But to return. We received an early vifit from Enemo and Tamooerrve, 
accompanied only by a few chiefs, but by a great number of women, 
who were, for the moft part, of fome confequence, and attendants on his 
court. From the regent and prince I received a prefent of a few in- 


different hogs, though, according to their affertions, they were fome of 


the beft onthe ifland. The ftock of thefe animals, they faid, by the sreat 
demand from the trading veffels for them for fome time paft, had been 
much reduced; and judging from the {mall number that were brought for 
fale, we had no reafon to difcredit their information. A fupply of vege- 
tables was what we had principally depended upon procuring here, and in 
this expe€tation it appeared we were likely to be more fuccefsful ; though 
the vams, by far the beft {pecies for fea ftore, were alfo very fcarce. 

During the afternoon the trade wind blew a very {trong gale; it mo- 
derated for a few hours in the evening, but in the night was attended by 
heavy gufts from the n.N.e. A continuance of titis weather, although it 
did not prevent, much retarded the natives, in their paflage from the fhore 
to the fhips with the fupplies we required, until the afternoon of the 
11th; when it becoming more moderate, I paid my refpeéts to the re- 
gent at his refidence on fhore, in confequence of an invitation to an 
evening amulement, which, from the deicription of it by the natives, was 
very different from thofe I had before attended. 

Having been difappointed in feeing either 72/eeree or Taio, 1 took this 
opportunity of depofiting with Enemo the breeding fheep I had intend- 
ed for thofe chiefs ; giving him to underftand, that in proport’on as they 


L 2 multiplied 


75 
1794. 
March. 
een ated 


TR en 


See a 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


multiplied they were to be diftributed amongft the other iflands ; and the 
produce of them were put under the fame reftrictions as 1] had exacted at 
Owhyhee ; with all which, himfelf, and the chiels then prefent, very 
{erioufly promifed to comply. 

On our arrival at the place of exhibition, we found the performers 
affembled, confifting of a numerous throng, chiefly of women, who were 
drefled in their various coloured clothes, difpofed with a good effe€t. The 
entertainment confifted of three parts, and was performed by three dif- 
ferent parties, confifting of about two hundred women in each, who 
ranged themfelves in five or fix rows, not ftanding up, nor kneeling, 
but rather fitting upon their haunches. One man only advanced a few 
feet before the centre of the front row of the ladies, who feemed to be 
the hero of the piece, and, like a flugal man, gave tone and a¢tion to 
the entertainment. In this fituation and pofture they exhibited a varie- 
ty of geftures, almoft incredible for the human body fo circumftanced to 
perform. The whole of this numerous group was in fuch perfeét unifon 
of voice and action, that it were impoffible, even to the bend of a fin- 
ger, to have difcerned the leaft variation, Their voices were melodious, 
and their a€tions. were as irnumerable as, to me, they are undefcriba- 
ble; they exhibited great eale and much elegance, and the whole was 
executed with a degree of corre€tnefs not eafily to be imagined. This 
was particularly ftriking in one part, where the performance inftantly 
changed from a loud full chorus, and vaft agitation in the countenances 
and geftures of the actors, to the moft profound filence and compo- 
fure ; and inflead of contmuing in then previous ereét attitude, all fell 
down as it were lifelefs, and in their fall buried themfelves under their 
garments; conveying, in fome meafure, the idea of a baifterous ocean 
becoming fuddenly tranquillized by an inftant calm. The great diver- 
fity of their figured drefles on this occafion hada particularly good effect ; 
the feveral other parts were conducted with the fame correétnefs and 
uniformity, but were lefs eafy to deferibe. There appeared to be much 
variety and little repetition, not only in the aéting of the refpective fets, 
but in the whole of the three parts; the performers in which, could not 
amount tolels than {ix hundred perfons, ‘This hoarah was completely free 


from 


and the 
cacted at 
nt, very 


rformers 
vho were 
&. The 
hree dif- 
ich, who 
kneeling, 
‘ed a few 
ied to be 
action to 
1 a varie- 
tanced to 
€t unifon 
of a fin- 
relodious, 
defcriba- 
hole was 
Pd. ‘This 
inftantly 
ntenances 
1 compo- 
e, all fell 
der their 
bus ocean 
eat diver- 
bod effect ; 
nefs and 
be much 
Give fets, 
could not 
letely free 
from 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


from the difgufting obfcenity exhibited in the former entertainments, which 
I have before had occafion to notice. It was conduéted through every 
part with great life and vivacity; and was, without exception, the moft 


yleafing amufement of the kind we bad feen performed in the courfe of 
3 P 


the voyage. 

The {pe@tators, who were as numerous as at Owhyhee, were in their 
beft apparel, and all retired very peaceably after the clofe of the perfor- 
mance, about the fetting of the fun. 

All our friends feemed to be much gratified with the applaufe we had 
beftowed, and the fatisfa€tion we expreffed at the great fkill, dexterity, 
and tafte of the performers. ‘This entertainment was ftated to be in 
compliment to the pregnancy of one of the regent’s wives, and that it 
would frequently be repeated until fhe was brought to bed; which event 
vas expeéted to take place in about three months. 

In return for the amufement we had derived, we entertained the multi- 
tude after it was dark in our way, bya difplay of fire works, which as 
ufual were received with great furprize and admiration. 

The weather being more fettled, on the following day we completed 
our water; and having procured a few hogs, with a tolerable fupply of 
vegetables, our intended departure was made known to the regent prince 
and the reft of the chiefs; who, on receiving fuch prefents as their fervices 
had demanded or the occafion required, all took their leave, (excepting 
one or two who propofed to accompany us to Onehow,) with every ex- 
preflion of the moft friendly-regard and attachment, and with repeated 
folicitations for our fpeedy return. 

For the purpofe of procuring a fea ftock of yams, which we were given 
to underftand by the natives might be readily obtained at Onehow, we 
quitted Attowai in the morning of the 13th, and dire€ted our courfe to 
that ifland. 

By our feveral vifits to Attowai, we had found that the roadftead of 
Why nea was much confined in refpeét of fafe anchorage; for although the 
Difcovery’s cables had not been injured by a foul bottom, yet the Chat- 
ham, in march 1792, when anchored in go fathoms water at only a: 
convenient diftance to the north-weft of the Difcovery, on a bottom of 


foft 


77 


17946 
March. 


Tamed 


Wednef, 123 


‘ye 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


{oft mud, had both her cabies much fretted and damaged by the rocks : 
the bottom; and not far to the eaftward of our eafternmoft anchor was 
found alfo a patch of rocky bottom, in fome piaces not deeper than 4 
fathoms, though furrounded by a depth of froin 30 to 4o fathoms. 

Although a fituation more convenient to the fhore, in a lefs depth of 
water and with a muddy bottom, might have been taken within the 
Difcovery’s ftation, and is to be found by keeping the fteep banks of the 
river not fhut in, but juft a little open; yet, from the lurking patches of 
rocks that have been found near the fame fort of bottom, it is evident 
that great caution fhould be obferved to avoid thofe hidden dangers ; 
which may ferve to account for the cables of former veffels having been 
cut through, without reforting to an operation which appears to me in- 
credible, and I believe impoffible to have been effected. 

It had been pofitively aflerted, and I doubt not as pofitively believed, 
that the natives were capable of diving to the depth of 4o fathoms, 
and there cutting through a twelve or fourteen inch cable; they have 
not only been fufpected and accufed of accomplifhing this tafk, but 
have been fired upon by fome whofe cables have been fuppofed to be 
thus injured; an aét not to be juftified by common humanity, or com- 
mon (enfe. Thefe people are however very expert {wimmers, and al- 
molt as dexterous as fifh in the water, but their efforts are chiefly con- 
fined to the furface; though fome of them dive exceedingly well, yet they 
are noi capable of defcending to fuch a depth, or of remaining under 
water a fufficient time to cut through a cable. 

One of the beft divers of the country in Tamaahmaah’s eftimation, I 
faw endeavour at Karakakooa to recover a caulking iron that had been 
dropped in 12 fathoms water; and in order to induce his utmoft exer- 
tion, a great reward was offered to him if he fucceeded; but after two 
unfuccefsful attempts he was fo tired and exhaufted, that he was unable 
to make a third trial then, though he promifed to renew his exertions the 
next day; the fame reward was then again offered to him, but he could 
not be prevailed upon to make another effort, and the caulking iron 
remained at the bottom. 


About 


rocks ; 
hor was 
than 4 


Jepth of 
thin the 
ks of the 
utches of 

evident 
langers ; 
ing been 
oO me in- 


believed, 
fathoms, 
hey have 
afk, but 
fed to be 
or com- 
, and al- 
efly con- 
yet they 
g under 


ation, I 
had been 
oft exer- 
after two 
as unable 
rtions the 
he could 
king iron 


About 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


About two in the afternoon we anchored off the weft fide of Onehow, 
in 18 fathoms water, foft fandy bottom; the north-weft point of the 
ifland bearing by compafs N.25 F., half a league diftant; the neareft 
fhore £.s.E., about a mile and a quarter; its weft point s.15 5.; Ta- 
hoorowa s. 43 w.; and the outer part of the reef that extends from the 
north-weft point of Onehow, N.8 E. 

In the evening, Mr. Puget, who I had direéted to examine the nort!: 
welt fide of this ifland, in the Chatham joined us, and acquainted me 
that the Chatham was very crank. 

We had now accom, 1 our furvey of the Sandwich iflands ; and 
as our expectations wer pointed in the promifed fupply of yams, in 
the evening of the 14th we took our leave of Onehow. 

In the fituation where we had anchored, our cables had not received 
any damage ; but the Chatham, at anchor near us, hooked a rock under 
water, which engaged them fome time, and was with difficulty cleared; 
after great danger of lofing the anchor, as the cable was nearly chafed 
through by the rocks. It is here neceflary to remark, that although 
this {tation has been the general rendezvous of the feveral veflels that 
have reforted hither, for the yams and other refrefhments that Onchow 
once afforded, it is in all refpeéts greatly inferior to the place of our 
anchorage on our former vifit; the bottom here being at a greater 
depth, and very rocky, and the fituation open, and expofed to all the 
violence of the north and north-weft winds, and the {well of the ocean. 
The other fituation is protected from this inconvenience, with the addi- 
tional advantages of a lefs depth of water, and a clear bottom of good 
holding ground. It is not, however, quite fo central for the inhabi- 
tants to bring the produce of the ifland to market ; but this is of little 
importance, for when they have any to difpofe of the diftance is not 
regarded by them. 

At the anchorage we had juft quitted, we left the Wafhington and 
an American fhip called the Nancy ; the latter had arrived only a fhort 
time before our departure ; and as it was natural to fuppofe that fhe 
muft have recently quitted the civilized world, her approach produced 
no {mall degree of anxiety in the hope of obtaining fome European in- 


telheence, 
oe} 


Friday 14, 


.% 
Ra 
we w ‘ ay 
9 %, 9,0 « 
\Y Xe vw, ; 
WZ bh W WN . <0 
\ 7 \7 Ka kk Pes 
\F NX h* 
\ IMAGE E\‘ALUATION NS 


TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


ye is 
ae Le 


| 
U2 WLS, tus. 


» \ 
xy ob 
, a 
nN 4 "Oo O® 
NY 7 Photographic Cates 
] Sciences sume @ 


(716) 872-4503 


Corporation 


80 


179}- 
March. 
ya 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


telligence. But we were difappointed in thefe hopes, as thofe on board 


of her were as totally ignorant of tranfaétions there as ourfelves, hav- 
ing been abfent from New York twenty-two months; duritg which 
time they had been principally engaged at Falkland’s iflands and Staten 
land, in colleéting feal {kins and oil. Not being fatisficd with their en- 
deavours to the fouthward, they had repaired hither to procure provifions 
and refrefhments, with the intention of proceeding afterwards to the 
coa{t of North Weft America, in order to collect furs, which they un- 
derftood were to be had there; but, according to their own account, they 
neither knew what were the proper commodities, nor were thev pollefled 
of any articles of trafhe for obtaining fuch a cargo from the inhabi- 
tants of the feveral countries. 

On failing from Onehow, I appointed cape Douglas in Cook’s river 
our next place of rendezvous with the Chatham, in cafe of feparation. 
There I purpofed to re-commence our furvey of the coaft of North Weit 
America; and from thence to trace its boundary eaftward to cape Deci- 
fion, the point which is ftated to have terminated the pretended ancient 
Spanifh difcoveries. 

Having afcertained fatisfaétorily that there was not any extenfive na- 
vigation eaftwardly, between the goth and 56th degrees of north latitude. 
on this fide of the American continent, I was led to believe, that if any 
fuch dd exif, it would moft probably be found communicating with 
Cook's river, up which I entertatned no doubt of penetrating to a very 
contiderable diftance; and fhould we not be able to complete our refearches 
in the courfe of the prefent feafon, we fhould at any rate, by this mode, 
reduce the unexplored part of the coaft within very narrow limits. And 
as the examination of Cook’s river appeared to me to be the moft im- 
portant, and I did not doubt would prove the moft laborious, part of our 
tafk in the enfuing campaign, I was willing not to lofe any portion of 
the approaching feafon, but to avail ourfelves of the whole of it, for the 
fake of infuring, as far as was within our powers, a certainty in the ac- 
complifhment of that objeét. For this purpofe I wifhed to be in readi- 
nefs to commence the purfuit the inftant the fpring was fufliciently ad- 
vanced 


on board 
ves, hav- 
i which 
nd Staten 
their en- 
prov ifions 
ds to the 
they un- 
sunt, they 
’ pollefted 


1e inhabi- 


»0k’s river 
feparation. 
orth Wei 
cape Deci- 
led ancient 


tenfive na- 
th latitude. 
hat if any 
ating with 
r to a very 
refearches 
this mode, 
mits. And 
e moft im- 
part of our 
portion of 
f it, for the 
in the ac- 
be in readi- 
iciently ad- 
vanced 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


vanced to render our endeavours practicable, and which was now likely 
to be the cafe by the time we fhould reach that diftance. 

It was not much out of our way to afcertain the fituation of a {mall 
ifland, difcovered in 1788 by the commander of the Prince of Wales, 


and by him called Bird ifland, in confequence of its being the refort of 


vatt flocks of the feathered tribe; and alfo to examine the neighbouring 
parts of the ocean, where Captain Cook in his pailage from Oonalafhka 
to the Sandwich iflands in the year 1778 faw a fhag, and other indica- 
tions of the vicinity of land. For thefe purpofes, our courfe was firtt 
dire€ted N.w. by N. in queft of Bird ifland, under an ealy fail, in order 
to allow the Chatham to come up with us, which fhe did about midnight. 

At day-light on the 15th we made all fail, and {tood more to the weft- 


ward, furrounded by an immenfe number and confiderable variety of 


oceanic birds, confifting of the {mall black and white albatrofles, tropic, 
and men of war birds; with boobies, noddies, and petrels of different 
kinds. In the forenoon the wind at £.N.E, blew a frefh gale, and in 
confequence of fome of the back-ftays giving way, we were obliged to 
reduce our fail; and as we had but little cordage to replace luch rigging, 
thefe defeéts became a confideration of a very unpleafant nature in this 
early part of our fummer’s expedition. 

At noon the latitude obferved was 23° 14’, longitude 198° 42’; the 
former was 14’ further north than was fhewn by our reckoning, and was 
nearly the fame diftance to the north of the latitude afligned to Bird ifland; 
but as we expe¢ted to find it further to the wellward, though by fome 
accounts we had now paffed its meridian, our courfe was directed to the 
fouth-wefl, and by two in the afternoon it was feen bearing by compals 
w.s.W. about 7 leagues diflant. About fix in the evening we reached, 
and pafled along the fouthern fide of, this very remarkable, folitary ifland, 
or more properly fpeaking, tingle rock, rifing out of this immente ocean, 
Its greateft extent. which was in a direétion s.7.4 w., and N, 74h. did 
not exceed one mile; the uncouth form of its northern, eaflern, and 
weflern extremities, againft which the fea broke with ereat violence, 


prefented a moft awlul appearance. rifing perpendicularly from the 
ocean in lofty rugged cliffs, inaccelfible but to its winged inhabitants: 


Vou, III. M Oy 


81 


1794, 
March. 


eae 


Saturday 15+ 


82 


170.4. 
March. 
Teen *aume nd 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


on its fouthern fide the afcent is not fo fteep and abrupt; and near its 
weflern extremity is a fmall fandy beach, where in fine weather, and witha 
f{mooth fea, a landing might probably be effected. At this place there was 
the appearance of a little verdure, though it was deftitute of tree or fhrub; 
every other part was apparently without foil, and confifted only of the 
naked rock. Its whole circumference does not exceed a league, and it is 
fituated in latitude 23° 6’, longitude 198° 8’. When this rock was firft 
difcovered in 1788, there were on board the Prince of Wales fome of the 
natives of Attowal, who expreffed great furprize that there fhould be 
land fo near to their iflands (it lying from Onehow Nn. 51 w. at the dif- 
tance of 39 leagues only,) and of which not only themfelves, but all 
their countrymen were totally ignorant. 

This intelligence was communicated on their return in the autumn of 
that year; and it excited in the a€tive mind of Tazo a {trong defire to pay 
it a vifit, to eftablifh a colony there, and to annex it to his dominions ; 
but on his being made thoroughly acquainted with its extent and fteri- 
lity by the officers of that veffel, his proje€t was abandoned. Thofe people 
however recognize it under the appellation of Modoo Mannoo, that is, 
Bird ifland; and from its great diftance from all other land, and its prox- 
imity to their iflands, it feems to claim fome diftant pretenfions to be 
ranked in the group of the Sandwich iflands, of which we now took 
leave, purfuant to the determination already ftated, 


CHAPTER 


near its 
id witha 


here was 
rr fhrub; 
y of the 
and it is 
was firft 
ne of the 
ould be 
the dif- 
» but all 


itumn of 
re to pay 
minions ; 
ind fteri- 
fe people 
, that is, 
Its prox- 
ns to be 
ow took 


APTER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Quit the Sandwich iflands—Part company with the Chatham—Indications of 


land—See Tfcherikow ifland—Pafs Trinity ifles— Proceed along the 
coaft—Enter ard proceed up Cook's river. 


HAVING bid farewell to the Sandwich iflands, our courfe was directed 
to the northward, with a frefh breeze from the N.£. by £.; but as the 
Chatham was fome diftance a-ftern, the topfails were double reefed, and 
in the courfe of the evening the jib and ftay-fails were taken in, under 
the idea that with fuch reduced fail the Chatham would foon overtake us; 
but as fhe did not make her appearance by ten at night, nor anfwer a falfe 
fire then burnt, the mainfail was hauled up, and we continued under the 
forefail and double-reefed topfails only, in the hope of feeing our confort 
at day-light; but in this we were difappointed, and I was much at a lofs 
to account for the caufe that had produced our feparation. It was a 
matter of extreme uncertainty what courfe would prove moft likely to 
effe€t our meeting again, as it was not improbable that by the low fail 
we had carried during the night, fhe might have paffed us unobferved, 
and was then a-head; this was as likely to have happened, as that fome 
accident had occafioned her fhortening fail, and that fhe was yet a-ftern. 
The latter would probably have been announced by fignal; under this 
impreffion we made the beft of our way towards the coaft of America, 
with the hope of rejoining our confort at the appointed rendezvous. 

The trade wind between N.£., E.N.E., and eaft, blowing a moderate 


gale, with fqually and fometimes rainy weather, attended us until the 
following friday, when towards midnight, having then advanced to the 
M 2 ane 


83 


1794. 
March. 
Ly 
Saturday 145: 


Fricey 245 


8; 


"O46 
Maron. 


Se a 2. 


Monday 24. 


TVueldav 25 


25 


Wednel, io. 


\ VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


35° of latitude, and in longitude 1964’, it veered round by the eaft to 


—— ) the fouth, and on the next day it feemed to be fixed in the weftern quar: 


ter, accompanicd with dark gloomy weather, anda very heavy fea from 
the north and x.w., which had been frequently the cafe fince our leay- 
ing the iflands. 

‘But few of the black and white albatroffes, petrels, or others of the 
feathered tribe had attended us. In the evening the wind fhifted to the 
N.N.E., where it continued with gloomy weather unul monday, when it 
fixed in the s.£., and blew a frefh gale with the fame dark gloomy wea- 
ther. A few intervals of fun-fhine enabled us on the following day to 
alcertain the latitude to be 39° 9°, kongitude 198° 46’; and the variation 
of the compals 19° 42’, eaflwardly. ‘This was an increafe in the varia- 
uion far beyond our expeétations ; but as thefe were the firft obfervations 
we had been enabled to make for this purpofe fince our departure from 
the Sandwich iflands, it is probable the mcreafe had been gradual to this 
ftation. Our climate was alfo greatly changed, the thermometer during 
the laft week having fallen from 76to 50; but the barometer having been 
unfortunately broken, I had no means of afcertaining the other proper- 
ties of the air. ‘The foutherly gale produced a fmooth fea, and as to- 
wards night we approached the parallel where Captain Cook had noticed 
fume indications of the vicinity of land, we ftood to and fro under an 
eafy fail until the morning of the 26th, when witha {trong gale from the 
weftward we paffed about 15 leagues to the north-wefllward of the Refo- 
lution’s track in the year 1778. ‘Throughout the day the weather was 
clear, which enabled us to gain a diftant view in all direétions, but no- 
thing was feen to intercept the horizon, The latitude at noon was 40° 
45/. which was extremely well afcertained by good obfervations, The 
longitude 200° 17’ was deduced from altitudes of the fun, and from the 
chronometers both before and after mid-day, when the variation was 
found to be 15° .43' eaflwardly., Few oceanic birds vifited us in this fitu- 


/ 


ation. Two pieces of drift wood were pafled this day, one piece ap- 
peared to have been a great length of time in the water, as it fwam very 
deep, and was nearly covered with barnacles; the other was much more 
buoyant, and had on it but few of thofe fhell fifh, ‘Thefe were the only 
pieces 


e eaft to 
mM quar: 
fea from 
yur leay- 


rs of the 
-d to the 

when it 
my wea- 
g day to 
Variation 
he varia- 
ervations 
ure from 
al to this 
er during 
ing been 
r proper- 
nd as to- 
1 noticed 
under an 
from the 
he Refo- 
ither was 

but no- 
was 40° 
ns. The 
from the 
tion was 
this fitu- 
piece ap- 
yam very 
ich more 


the only 


Pp 1ECeS 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


pieces of drift wood, and the only indications of the viciniiy of land, feen 
by us between the Sandwich iflands and the American coait. I was. how- 
ever, afterwards informed by Mr. Puget, that in his palling thefe regions 
between the 37th and goth degrees of latitude, about 4 degrees to the 
weftward of our track, he faw, befides petrels and other oceanic birds, 
puffins, and a bird of the diver kind: and that for a few hours, in the la- 
titude of about 39°, the furface of the fea was remarkably fmooth. Mellrs. 
Portlock and Dixon alfo in their voyage, in two fimilar paflages about 
the fame latitude, and in longitude 206°, faw feals, pufhins, and other 
mdications, that induced them to think fome undifcovered land was not 
far remote; but the weather being then, as it was alfo at the time of the 
Chatham's pafling, very foggy, this faét could not be afcertained. As 
fuch indications are by no means common in the north pacific, they fa- 
vor the conjecture that fome land, though pofiibly of no very great ex- 
tent, {lll remains unknown to Europeans in this neighbourhood. 

With a frefh gale moftly from the weftern quarter, we proceeded ra- 


pidly to the north, and by the following funday reached the latitude of 


50° 10’, longitude 205° g; the variation on the preceding afternoon was 
16° 29' ealtwardly. ‘The wind had been attended by a very heavy fwell 
from the fouth-weltward : the intervals of clear weather were of fhort 
duration, and in general it was very gloomy, with fhowers of rain fuc. 
ceeded by a fall of now. ‘The thermometer funk to 35. In the courle 
of the day fome fea weed and fome divers were obferved: about the fhip 
were alfo fome albatroffes and fheer-waters. Our climate now began to 
affume a degree of feverity that was new to us: on the next day the mer- 
cury ftood at the freezing pomt, and for the firft time during the voyage 
the fcuttle cafk on deck was frozen. 

After a few hours calm the wind fettled in the x... attended with 
froft and fnow until the 2d of april, when in latitude 55°49. loneitude 
204° 3, it veered to the x.w., and blew fo flrong a gale that in the 
evening we were reduced to clofe-reefed topfails. ‘The froft, with much 
fnow and fleet, cafed our rigging in ice; the thermometer flood at 26°, 
In the forenoon of the 3d a fhag pafled the thip, flying to the eaflward, 
and about three in the afternoon, high land almofl intirely covered with 


ft lO 


——— 
soe 


Fa oars 
Sad 


ae a 


ae 


ee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


{now was difcerned, bearing by compafs Nn. by £. By feven in the even- 


‘ing this was plainly difcovered to be an ifland, extending by com- 


pafs from N.2 Ww. to N. 32 w., at the diftance of thirteen miles, with 
{ome detached rocks lying off its weftern extremity. In this fituation the 
depth of water was 75 fathoms, fand and fhelly bottom. 

Although I did not confider this ifland as altogether a new difcovery, 
yet as its fituation had not hitherto been well afcertained, and as during 
the laft three days our obfervations had been but indifferent, I thought 
it proper to pafs the night in ftanding backward and forward, in order to 
gain a nearer view of it, and in the hope that the following day would 
be more favorable to our wifhes for this purpofe. 

With the wind at n.w. blowing a moderate breeze, the mercury at 
27, andextremely cold, we made all fail for the land the next morning ; 
but in confequence of our having been fet by a very ftrong current to 
the s.w., we were fo far diftant, that it was near noon before we had pafled 
its fouthern point. We were fortunate in gaining excellent obfervations, 
which at noon determined our fituation to be in latitude 55° 48’, longitude 
205° 16’; this fhewed a confiderable error in our reckoning fince the 
firft day of the month, the latitude being 22’ further north, and the lon- 
gitude 72’ further eaft, than had appeared by the log. The depth of 
water at this time was 23 fathoms, fine black fandy bottom. The north- 
eaft point of the ifland bore by compafs n. 55 w., diftant about 2 leagues; 
its eaftern extremity, which is a low rocky point, and was our neareft 
fhore, s.66.w., two miles; and its fouth point, s. 30 w., about 2 leagues 
diftant. In the point of view in which we faw the fouth-weft, fouthern, 
and eaftern fides of this ifland, it appeared to form a fomewhat irregu- 
lar four-fided figure, about 10 leagues in circuit; having from its weft- 
ern part, which is low and flat, and which had the appearance of being 
infular, a remarkably high, flat, {quare rock, lying in a direétion s. 66 w., 
at the diftance of two miles, between which and the ifland is a ledge of 
fmaller rocks. ‘The center of the ifland appeared by our obfervations 
to be in latitude 55° 49, longitude 205° 4’. 

The feafon of the year greatly contributed to increafe the dreary and 
inhofpitable afpeét of the country; in addition to which it feemed to be 


intirely 


hs 


the even. 
by com- 
les, with 
ation the 


lifcovery, 
as during 

thought 
| order to 
ay would 


ercury at 
morning ; 
urrent to 
ad pafled 
*rvations, 
longitude 
fince the 
| the lon- 
depth of 
he north- 
» leagues ; 
r neareft 
2 leagues 
fouthern, 
At irregu- 
its welt- 
of being 
s. 66 w., 
ledge of 


ervations 


eary and 
ed to be 
intirely 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


intircly deftitute of trees or fhrubs, or they were hidden beneath its win- 


ter garment of {now, which appeared to be very deep about its fouthe | 


eaftern parts, confifting of high fteep cliffs ; but on its weftern fide, which 
was confiderably lower, this appearance was not fo general. About its 
fhores were fome fmall whales, the firft we had noticed during this paf- 
fage to the north. From the relative fituation of this ifland to the con- 
tinent, I was inclined to believe it to be that which Beering called Foggy 
ifland; but as Captain Cook gave that name to another ifland not far 
diftant to the weltward, I have in honor of Beering’s companion 7/che- 
rikow, whofe labors in the arduous tafk of difcovery do not appear to 
have been thus commemorated, called this ifland after him Tscuert- 
Kow’s IsLAND. 

In our route from the Sandwich iflands to this ftation it may be feen, 
that whenever the winds would permit, our courfe was dirc&ted far to the 
weftward of the entrance into .Cook’s river, as delineated by that able 
navigator. My reafon for fo doing, in the event of circumftances per- 
mitting, was to fall in with thofe parts which Captain Cook was pre- 
vented from feeing between Foggy cape and cape Trinity; as I much 
wifhed to afcertain whether that fpace was occupied by land, or whether 
it communicated with Smoky bay, as has been reprefented in fome late 
publications, though in a manner not eafily to be underflood. The 
winds and weather had, however, been adverfe to this defign; and al- 
though the latter prefented now a more favorable profpe&t, yet the 
wind, at N.\w., blew in the very dire ion I wifhed to fteer for that pur- 
pofe. But as it was favorable for cun:nuing along the exterior coaft, 
and as we had already been greatly retarded in our gencral operations, 
by adverfe winds and other untoward circumftances, I was induced to 
forego the obje€t I had in view, left fimilar inconvenience fhould conti- 
nue to attend us, and caufe delays that we could ill afford in the profe- 
cution of our furvey. Thefe confiderations induced me to make all fail, 
fteering with the wind at N.N.w. during the afternoon to the N.£.; and 
having at fix in the evening made our courfe good from noon, N. 65 E., 
40 miles, Trinity ifland was feen bearing by compafs from N. 5 £. to N, 
15.., and ahother ifland from w.£N. to w. bys. The latter I took 

‘ to 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


) 


to be thar which is laid down in Captain Cook’s chart to the fouth-weft of 
Vronty ifland. ‘Phis land, although not noticed in Captain Cook's jour- 
nal, was feen and pafled on its fouthern fide by the Difcovery in that 
voyage, which proves that the Refolution and Difcovery could not have 
gone far to the north of Tfcherikow’s ifland, which was obfcured at that 
tme by thick foggy weather, 

After fun-let, the wind veered more to the weflward, and enabled us 
to ftand nearly for ‘Trinity ifland, under our double-reefed topfails; and 
at midnight, having foundings at the depth of 50 fathoms, foft fandy 
bottom, we plied until day-light under an eafy fail, with foundings from 
70 to 82 fathoms, fine fandy bottom. At day-light we made all fail, 
fLecring towards Trinity ifland, which bore by compafs from x. 6 w. to 
n.w., the main land beyond it f{tretching to the N.N.&. 

Vith a moderate breeze, between n.w. and w.s.w., we drew in with 
the land, and the weather being clear permitted us to notice three or 
four mountains of confiderable height, on the main land, behind thol- 
that bounded the fea-coaft ; all of which at firft appeared to be covered 
with fnow: but as we approached the fhores, the lower parts of the coal 
were found in general to be free from fmow, and confiderably more fo 
than ‘Pfcherikow ifland. The froft which, fince the 31ft of march, had 
been very fevere, now gave way, and the thermometer rofe to 35. At 
noon the eaftern extreme of Trinity ifland bore by compafs s. 36 w., 
diftant 13 miles; its north-weft point s. 42 w.; cape ‘Trinity s.77 w.; 
the land of ‘'wo-headed point from nN. 39 w. to x. 24 W.; and the north- 
ernmoft land in fight x.1g 8. The obferved latitude 56° 40’, longitude 
207°74'. In the courfe of the morning, the variation, by the furveying 
compals, was found to be 23° 30’ caftwardly. 

As we pafled Trinity ifland, it appeared to be divided into two 
lands, with feveral others of inferior fize lying to the north, between 
them and the land about cape Trinity. ‘The caft point of the eaftern- 
moft is, according to our obfervations, fituated in latitude 56° 992’, lon- 
gitude 206° 47’; and Two-headed point, compofing a {mall ifland that 
terminates to the north-eaf! by a low flat rocky point, in latitude 56° 
514. longitude 207° 5’. Captain Cook, in aligning the longitude to 


Trinity 


h-ewelt of 
k's jour- 
y in that 
not have 
dat that 


1abled us 
ails; and 
oft fandy 
ings from 
> all fail, 


.OW, to 


win with 
- three or 
and thole 
e covered 
“the coat 
v more fo 
arch, had 


At 


S.77W.3 
the north- 
longitude 
furveying 


into two 
, between 
ie eaftern- 
394°) lon- 
fland that 
itude 56° 
gitude to 


Trinity 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Trinity alles, which occupy an extent of about fix leagues tu an eafl and 
welt direétion, does not defignate any particular part. but fays they he 


in latitude 56° 36’, longitude 2052. ‘The longitude of the caft point of 


Trinity ifland, agreeably to the obiervations made that voyage on board 
the Difcovery, was 205° 53; neither of which will be found to agree 
with the longitude on this occafion, which was deduced from exceeding- 
Iv good obfervations, both before and after noon, and corrected by fub- 
fequent obfervations. . 

Southwellward from ‘Two-headed ifland the coaft is low, and appears 
to be compact ; but immediately to the northward of it the fhores de- 
fcend abruptly into the fea, appear to be much broken, and form an 
extenfive found, of which the flat rocky point may be confidered as 
its fouth-welt point of entrance; from this its north-eaft point, being 
low projeéting land, les x. 58 &., at the diftance of 3 leagues. ‘The fe- 
veral branches that appeared to flow into the found, leemed to wind to- 
ward the bafe of a connected range of high {nowy mountains, which 
no doubt gave boundaries to their extent. 

As we proceeded gently acrofs the entrance of this found with a light 
foutherly breeze, we were vilited in the afternoon by two of its inhabi- 
tants, a young man and a girl, ina finail {kin canoe, who fhewed that they 
had been acquainted with {ome European nation, by their having adopted 
our mode of falutation in bowing as they approached the fhip, and by 
their coming on board without the leaft hefitation. We entertained no 
doubt of their having been fo inftruéted by the Ruffians; and, if we 
underftood them rightly, there were fix perfons of that nation then re- 
fiding on fhore in the found. The man took his dinner without the 
leaft ceremony, drank brandy, and accepted fuch prefents as were made 
him, but feemed to prefer {nuff and filk handkerchiefs to every thing 
elfe. Whiulft he remained on board, which was about an hour, I endea- 
voured to learn from him the name which the natives give to this part 
of the coaft, but could not gain any fatisfaétory information. He clear- 
ly and diftinctly counted the numerals in the languages of Oonalafhka 
and Prince William's found, though thefe do not bear the leaft aflinity to 
each other. From his general appearance, I was more inclined to be- 


Vou. II. N 


lieve 


iy 
if 
ie 
a 
i 


go 


1794. 
Apul. 
— 


Sunday 6. 


Tuclday 8. 


—— | 
w 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


lieve him to be a Kamt{chatdale than a native of America, or its adjacent 
iflands. After their departure we were vifited by a fingle Indian in a 
canoe, but he was not fo familiar as the others ; he paddled at a dif- 
tance round the fhip, and then returned to the fhore. At feven in the 
evening we were becalmed within about two miles of the north-eaft 
point of the found; when the depth of water was 24 fathoms, fine 
fandy bottom. 

The weather continued fair, with faint variable winds, until midnight ; 
at which time the wind fixed in the north-eaft quarter, and brought with 
it fleet and diflolving {now ; thus the flattering profpeét that had been pre- 
fented, of a favorable paflage to our deftined ftation, was again ob{cured, 
and that we might not lofe ground, we were obliged to ply againft a 
heavy fea and a ftrong n.£. gale, which, on the forenoon of the 6th, 
reduced us to c!ofe-reefed topfails. 

The gale between N.N.E. and eaft, varied a little in force and direc- 
tion, and permitted us to gain fome advantage. On tuefday morning 
we were within about a league of the coaft, which appeared to be much 
broken; cape Barnabas bore by compafs s. 30 w.; the north point of a 
found, of which the land adjoining to cape Barnabas forms its fouthern 
fide, s.57 w.: the north point of another apparent found, s. 69 w.; a 
tract of land much lower than the coaft in its vicinity, free from fnow, 
and feemingly detached from the main land, from s. 80 w. to N. 29 w.; 
its neareft part w.N.w., about a league diftant ; a low projeéting point, 
being the eafternmoft part of that which appeared to be the main land in 
fight, N.168.; and an ifland, from N. 26£, to N.32£. In this neigh- 
bourhood the land was more free from fnow than that further to the 
fouth, occafioned moft probably by the alteration in the temperature of 
the weather, as the mercury now ftood at 404, and gave us hopes that 
the feverity of the winter feafon was at an end; this made me extremely 
anxious to reach our deftined ftation, from whence the labours of the 
fummer were to commence. 

Our obfervations at noon fhewed our fituation to be in latitude 56° 
58, longitude corrected as before ftated by fubfequent obfervations, 208° 


19, 


adjacent 
ian in a 
at a dif- 
n in the 


orth-eaft 


ms, fine 


vidnight ; 
ight with 
been pre- 
obfcured, 
again{t a 


the 6th, 


nd direc- 
- morning 
. be much 
point of a 
s fouthern 
69 W.; a 
om fnow, 
. 29 W.; 
ting point, 
hin land in 
this neigh- 
er to the 
perature of 
hopes that 
extremely 
rs of the 


ntitude 56° 
tions, 208° 
1g), 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


, 


tc/, The ifland then bore by compafs w. 23 w.: and cape Barnabas ap- 


pearing to lie in latitude 57° 10’, longitude 207° 45, N. 81 w. 

‘The two following days being for the moft part calm, though what 
little wind there was continued from the nw. &. with thick mitiy weather, 
prevented our feeing much of the land unul thurfday evening, when we 
tacked about a league from the north-eaft point of the above iland, 
which appeared to be about 2 leagues in circuit, and its center to be 
fiuated in latitude 57° 24’, longitude 208? 20°. This ifland renders this 
part of the coaft very remarkable, being the only diflinguifhable detached 
land of anv magnitude north-eaftward from ‘Urinity ifles. Its north-weft 
part projeéts in a low point towards the main land. from whence alfo a 
low flat point extends towards the ifland, forming a pallage about half a 
learue wide, to all appearence free from interruption, ‘This ifland is 
not nouced in Captain Cook’s chart or his journal, probably owing to 
the very foggy weather which prevailed when the Refolution was in its 
neighbourhood; it was however feen in that vovage from on board the 
Difcovery, and then placed by me 5’ to the fouth of its fituation deduced 
from the refult of our prefent obfervations, which [ have reafon to be- 
heve are not hable to any material error. The wind having fixed in the 
N.W. brought us clear weather, but we were obliged to ftand from the 
coaft, the northernmoft part of which diftinétly feen was cape Greville, 
bearing by compals N. 50 w.; fome rocks extending from the cape Nn. 
42 w., and the above mentioned ifland, s. 20 w. 

With the approach of the following day the wefterly breeze increafed, 
and we pafled rapidly to the north, though too far from the land to af- 
certain any thing with precifion between cape Greville and cape St. 
Ilermogenes; had we been able to have fteered for point Banks, and 
from thence acrofs Smoky bay, fome conclufion might have been drawn 
whether the land we had thus coafted along was compofed of iflands, or 
whether it was as Captain Cook had confidered it, a part of the continent. 
I much regretted that I had it not in my power to become fatisfied in this 
refpcét, as the feafon had now put on a very favorable appearance, which 
rendered it important that not a moment fhould be loft in profecuting 
the examination of this extenfive opening. At noon cape Greville, the 


Ne fouth- 


91 


W794. 
April. 
cen atte 


Thuridayte. 


Friday 11, 


a EP 
a iy 


Se ees 


Ce aque Re 


— 


iy ae 
a 


= 


SEE a PT SS 


De kero oe eee s et 


=e 


Saturday 12. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fouthernmoft part of the coaft in fight, bore by compafs s. 28 w., the 
land of St. Hermogenes, from s. 56 w. to s. 89 w.; the wefternmoft 
mountain feen over cape Douglas, N. 81 w.; and the barren ifles n. 55. 
In this fituation the obferved latitude was 58° 14’, and the longitude 
deduced from very fatisfactory obfervations both before and after noon, 
From this authority cape Greville appeared to be in latitude 
57° 34%, longitude 208° 26’; and the fouth extreme of the ifland St. 
Hermogenes, in latitude 58° 101’, longitude 208° 56’. The variation in 
the afternoon was 21° 37’ eaftwardly. 

Thefe pofitions of longitude vary materially from thofe affigned by 
Captain Cook; but as fimilar d:fferences occurred afterwards in other 
inftances, I fhall for the prefent decline making any comments on this 
fubject. 

With the wind chiefly at weft, by faturday noon we were faft ap- 
proaching the coaft to the eaftward of cape Elizabeth, which then bore 
by compafs n. 84 w.; the barren ifles, s. 55 w. to s. 34 w.; the north- 
ernmott part of the coaft in fight, N. 26 £., and the neareft fhore, x. 6w., 
five or fix miles diftant; here we had foundings in 70 fathoms water, 
fandy bottom, and by an indifferent obfervation the latitude was 59°, 
longitude 209° 20... ‘The top of high water appeared to be at noon, as 
at that time no effect was felt from a tide; but immediately afterwards 
we were driven at a confiderable rate to the caftward, until half paft one, 
when, on a breeze {pringing up from that quarter, we fteered for cape 
Elizabeth, and paffed that promontory, and entered Cook’s river about 
half paft five. The coaft is compofed of high land, before which lie 
three fmall iflands and fome rocks; the cape is itfelf the largeft, and the 
moft weftern of thefe iflands, which appeared to afford a navigable chan- 
nel between them and the main land, nearly in an eaft and welt direétion ; 
though between the cape and the middle ifland fome low lurking rocks 
were difcerned, which had the appearance of-being conneéted with a 
clufter of rocks above the furface of the fea, lying from the cape s. 50 £., 
at the diftance of three or four miles. To the fouth-well of the middle 
land is another clufler of rocks, both above and beneath the furface of 
the water. 

The 


w., the 
ernmoft 


N55 We 
yngitude 
y noon, 
latitude 
land St. 


‘jation in 


igned by 
in other 
; on this 


faft ap- 
hen bore 
1e north- 
,N.OW,, 
ms water, 

was 59°; 

noon, as 

fterwards 

paft one, 

for cape 

‘rer about 

which le 
, and the 
hble chan- 
lirection ; 
ing rocks 
ed with a 
eS. 5OE., 
he middle 
furface of 


‘The 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


The thermometer now varied between 40 and 45; and the fnow, ex- 
cepting in the deep chafins of the rocks, was melted to a confiderable 
height on the fides of the hills, which being wel! wooded, affumed a far 
more cheerful afpeét than the country to the fouthward. Spring feem- 
ed to be making fo rapid a progrefs here, that we had every reafon to 
indulge the hope of being able to carry our refearches into execution, 
without any interruption from the feverity of the feafon. 

As I had determined to commence our furvey on the weflern fide of 
the river, as far up that fide as the wind now at N.N.E. would permit us 
to fetch, we proceeded in queft of fome convenient flation for the fhip, 
from whence two boat parties might be difpatched, the one to examine 
the fhores fouthward to cape Douglas, the cther to precede the fhip in 
our route up the river. 

For the firft time this feafon we noticed fome flocks of wild geefe, and 
could not avoid remarking, that they all flew to the fouthward, contrary 
to what might have been expected from the advanced ftate and mildnels 
of the featon; which however on funday morning fuffered a very mate- 
rial alteration, as the wind came to the N.£. and was attended by a fharp 
froft anda very heavy fall of fnow. On leaving the eaftern fhore the 
depth of water gradually increafed from 25 to 35 fathoms, fine fandy 
bottom in mid-channel, and then decreafed again as we approached the 
weftern fhore, which about fix was inditin¢tly perceived through the 
falling {now ; and being then in go fathoms water, we anchored until the 
weather fhould prove more favorable to our purfuit. In this fituation we 
remained, without being able to difcern the adjacent fhores, until the fol- 
lowing forenoon, when the weflern worizon became clear, and fhewed us 
cape Douglas bearing by compafs s.g E.; mount St. Auguitin, s. g w.; 
the northernmoft land in fight, N.gw.; and a low point, s. 31 W.; 
from whence the fhores to the fouthward fell fo far back to the weltward, 
that we could only diftinguifh the fummits of a range of lofty disjoined 
mountains intirely covered with {now, that feemed principally to occu- 
py the fpace between that low point and cape Douglas, but at the fame 
time gave the country an appearance in this point of view of being 
greatly divided by water. From thence to the northward, excepting 
afimall open bay abreaft of us with two rocks lying before its entrance, 


the 


Sunday 13, 


Monda yuge 


94 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 
i794. the fhores appeared to be compatt, and the furface of the country de- 
Rie ae {cending rather abruptly at firft, admitted near the water-fide a nar- 


row border of low land; this was covered with wood, which continued 
to grow fome diftance up the fides of the mountains, which were very 
lofty and rugged, and above the line where vegetation ceafed were wrap- 
ped in perpetual fnow. 

Whilft we had a clear and diftinét view of every thing in the weftern 
quarter, the oppofite fide of the horizon was totally obfcured from our 
fight by a dark mifty haze. We had, however, by intervals of clearer 
weather, been enabled to form fome idea of our fituation, and of the 
coaft to the fouthweftward, which I now confidered as lying behind us; 
the broken and infular appearance of which gave me reafon to expect the 
examination of it would be a laborious tafk, notwithttanding that the 


range of mountains that bounded. our horizon, in that direction, admit- 
ted of a ftroag prefumption that the whole might be clofely connected 
by land, not fufficiently elevated to be vifible at our remote diftance. 
As I concluded the Chatham could not be far behind, if fhe had not 
already preceded us; and as I had particularly dire&ted that the furvey 
fhould commence at cape Douglas, I had little doubt, on our meeting, 
that any thing would be left unexamined in that quarter: but fhould it 
fo happen, that any further inquiry might be deemed neceffary, and that 
we fhould be obliged to return by the fame route, the fummer feafon in 
that cafe would be more advanced and more favorable to our refearches 
in that region, which is expofed to all the influence of the oceanic winds 
and waves, and in the prefent inclement weather would be a very ha- 
zardous undertaking in our open boats, the only means by which, from 
experience, I was confident this objeét could now be accomplifhed. To 
avoid, therefore, as much as poffible, any delay, or mifapplication of 
time, I determined to proceed up the river, keeping clofe along its 
weftern fhore, and forthwith to purfue our inveftigation to its navi- 


ee ened 


ae 


tet 


——_ 


gable extent. 

Agrecably to this determination, being favored with the flood tide, 
although not a very rapid one, we fteered to the northward until about 
three in the afternoon; when, on meeting the reflux, we anchored 

about 


ntry de- 
> a nar- 
ontinued 
ere very 
re wrap- 


-weftern 
yom our 
f clearer 
d of the 
hind us; 
xpect the 
that the 
1, admit- 
onnetted 
ftance. 
> had not 
1e furvey 
meeting, 
fhould it 
and that 
feafon in 
efearches 
ic winds 
very ha- 
ch, from 
ed. To 
ation of 
along its 
its navi- 


lood tide, 
til about 
anchored 

about 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


about a league from the weftern fhore, in 20 fathoms water, foft fandy 
bottom. The latitude, by double altitudes, was 60°14’. The froft flill 
continued ; the wind was moderate, though variable, attended with a 
very heavy fall of fnow, and an unpleafant fwell from the s.e. Thele 
combined circumftances detained us at anchor until the next day in the 
afternoon, when we took the advantage of the latter part of the flood- 
tide, but advanced only a few miles before the ebb obliged us again to 
anchor in 25 fathoms water, foft bottom. Here the weftern fhore was. 
bounded by lofty rugged mountains, between the bafes of which and the 
water-fide was a margin of low, or moderately elevated, wood-land 
country. ‘Two {mall openings were obferved, the northernmoft, being 
the Jargeft, appeared to be a found, winding towards the foot of the 
volcano, which, from its apparently clofe conneétion with the neigh- 
bouring mountains, probably gave the limits to its extent. Thefe open- 
ings we left for the examination of Mr. Puget, not confidering them 
fufficiently important to retard our progrefs, efpecially as the appear- 
ance of the atmofphere indicated a favorable change in the weather. 
The {now had ceafed to fall, and, excepting fome dark clouds between 
the n.N.E. and n.w., the fky and horizon were perfeétly clear, and 
gave us, for the firft time fince faturday night, a diftant view of the 
fouthern parts of the eaftern fhore; the night, however, was attended 
with the fevereft froft we had yet experienced, the mercurv fell to 29, 
and although the weather was clear aud cheerful the next morning, yet 
the air was fo exceffively keen, that the fun’s rays had no effeét on the 
thermometer. We weighed about ten in the forenoon, with the flood- 
tide, and a light breeze from the n.w., and proceeded up the river ; 
the mercury at noon had rifen to 26°, the obferved latitude 60° 11’, lon- 
gitude 208° 234’, and the variation in the forenoon was obferved to be 
23°46’ eafterly, which I confidered as too little, notwithftanding that the 
obfervations were very carefully made. Our courfe was direéted be- 
tween the weftern fhore and the low ifland near it mentioned by Captain, 
Cook. 

Shortly after noon, we were vifited by three of the natives, each in 
a {mall {kin canoe, who without the leaft hefitation made their canoes 


faft 


95 


1-91. 
April. 
—— 


Tuefday 15 


Wrednef. 16+ 


— 
va 


i 
; 
( 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


faft alongfide, and came on board with evident marks of being acquaint- 
ed with European manners, by their bowing very refpeétfully on coming 
upon deck. They made figns for {nuff and tobacco, which, with fome 
other trivial articles they folicited, they feemed to be highly gratified by 
receiving, and exprefled a degree of modeft concern that they had not 
any thing to offer in return. At dinner they did not make the leaft 
{cruple of partaking of our repaft, with fuch wine and liquors as were 
offered to them ; though of thefe they drank very fparingly, feeming to 
be well aware of their powerful effect. The weather was calm on their 
arrival ; but towards the evening a light breeze fprang up from the 
fouthward, and as they had but flightly fecured their canoes, the proba- 
bility of their breaking adrift was pointed out to them. On this they 
made figns to know if we were going up the river, and on their being 
an{wered by the fame means in the affirmative, they eafily gave us to 
underftand that they-wifhed to accompany us, and that their canoes 
fhould be taken on board, with which I had no objeétion to com- 
ply. 

With a boat a-head, founding the depth of water from 13 to 17 fa- 
thoms, we continued our courfe until fix in the evening, when the in- 
fluence of the returning tide being ftronger than that of the wind, we 
anchored in 15 fathoms water, fandy bottom. In this fituation the 
mountains feen over cape Douglas bore by compals s. 5. £., diftant 35 
leagues ; mount St. Auguftin s.6 w.; the north-eaft point of the moft 
northern opening or found, s. 20 w., diftant 19 miles; the Volcano s. 
28 w.; a remarkably lofty mountain on the weft fhore, s. 85 w.; the 
north extreme of the low ifland, in a line with another high diftant 
mountain, N. 4 E.; its neareft fhore eaft, diftant two miles; its fouth 
point s.75., a league diftant; beyond which the eaftern fhore was 
feen f{tretching to s. 41 £.; and the neareft part of the weftern fhore 
n. 87 w., about four miles diftant: this is a f{teep cliff moderately high; 
the {hore on either fide is a low flat beach, particularly to the north- 
ward, where the margin of low land is of a greater extent than we 
had noticed further to the fouthward, from the bafe of the mountains, 
which, fo far as we were able to difcern, are a conneéted and undivi- 


ded 


>quaint- 

coming 

ith fome 

tified by 

had not 
the leaft 
as were 
‘ming to 
on their 
from the 
ie proba- 
this they 
eir being 
ve us to 
ir canoes 
to com- 


to 17 fa- 
n the in- 
wind, we 
ation the 
diftant 35 
the moft 
olcano s. 
5 w.; the 
ph diftant 
its fouth 
fhore was 
ern fhore 
tely high; 
he north- 
than we 
ountains, 
d undivi- 
ded 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ded barrier along the weftern fide of the river. Our latitude at this 
anchorage was 60° 232’, longitude 208° 33’. The night tide not ferving 
our purpofe, we waited the return of the flood on the following day, 
but as that would not take place until about noon, I employed the morn- 
ing by making an excurfion to the ifland. 

We landed with tolerable eafe on the fouth point of what at high 
water forms a fhallow bay, but at low tide is a flat of fand and mud, on 
which were lying innumerable large fragments of rock not attached to 
the {pot on which they refted, but evidently brought and depofited there 
by the violence of the tide, or by fome other powerful agency. The 
globular form which moft of them had acquired, with the {moothnefs of 
their furface, indicated their having been much fubjeéted to a rolling 
motion. The ifland was in moft parts covered with {mall pine and alder 
trees, but the fnow that was lying very deep on the ground confined our 
walk to the beach, on which were lodged fome {mall drift wood, and 
many large pieces of ice that feemed to have been there left by the tides 
that had flowed much higher than thofe which at that time prevailed; from 
hence we were induced to fuppofe that the froft had broken up, and that 
the feverity of the then weather was a fecond vifitation of winter. In 
the {now we faw the tracks of fome {mall animals, and on the beach we 
found fome pieces of coal refembling the cannel coal. The fhip pro- 
ceeded at flack tide with a light breeze from the north-eaft, ftood to wind- 
ward, and having advanced about 4 miles from her laft ftation in a di- 
rection N.N.E., I repaired on board. 

The depth of water had now (about one o'clock) decreafed to 8 fa- 
thoms; in the expeétation of finding a deeper channel we again ftood 
towards the ifland; the foundings however foon decreafed to 6 fathoms, 
and, immediately after, the fhip grounded in 15 feet water; here fhe 
refted for a fhort time, then fwung round, and again floated with a jerk, 
conveying the idea of her having refted ona round ftone, fimilar to thofe 
found on the beach at the ifland. The depth foon increafed, as we pro- 
ceeded towards the ifland, to 15 fathoms, where we anchored to wait for 
the ebb tide, in order that we might return by the way we had come, as 


little advantage could be derived by perfifting in a route {o intricate 
Vou. UI. O 


and 


97 
1794. 
April. 
ee amd 
Thurfday 17. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


and unpleafant. The fhoal on which the fhip had grounded is of fome 
extent, it ftretches to the northward, lies between fix and feven miles 
from the main land, and is near a league from the weft fide of the ifland ; 
where alfo a flat extends fome diftance into the river. 

The objett I had had in view being now fully accomplifhed, in having 
afcertained that the weftern fhore behind the ifland was compaét, I de- 
termined to procced immediately to the furthceft extent of Captain Cook’s 
refearches, and from thence to carry my examination into execution as 
circumftances fhould direét. For this purpofe, about feven in the even- 
ing, the weather being nearly calm, we weighed, and committed our- 
felves to the influence of the ebb tide, a meafure that in regions fo un- 
known cannot be defended as being the moft prudent; yet in fervices of 
this nature a very confiderable degree of rfk muft frequently be encoun- 
tered, or the accomplifhment of particular objeéts would neceffarily be 
prolonged to a very diftant and indefinite period. The truth of this ob- 
fervation was very foon exhibited. By the time we had paffed about a 
league in a direétion s. 38 w. from the anchorage that we had quitted in 
the forenoon, we again fuddenly found ourfelves in a very fhallow wa- 
ter, and were under apprehenfions of being aground every inftant, 
which, with the falling tide, muft have been attended with very unplea- 
fant, if not fertious, confequences. Whilft in this irkfome ftate, and at 
the moment when our depth had decreafed to 3 fathoms, a light breeze 
of wind providentially fprang up, which rendered the fhip manageable, 
and permitted us to fleer to the eaftward; our depth then foon increafed 
to 7, and afterwards gradually to 30, fathoms. Having kept a fouth- 
wefterly courfe until midnight, and at that time reaching no bottom 
with 40 fathoms of line, I concluded we were far to the fouthward of 
the fhoal laid down in Captain Cook’s chart, as extending from the fouth 
point of the ifland. 

For the purpofe of taking the advantage of the flood tide, to affift our 
progrefs up the river, although we confidered the fhoal to lie far to the 
north of us, yet that we might run no rifk we hauled gradually to the fouth 
and s.s.£., in order to pafs it at fome diflance; this precaution, however, 
availed us little, for we had not advanced far before the depth of water was 

again 


s of fome 
ven miles 


the ifland ; 


in having 
pact, I de- 
‘ain Cook's 
ecution as 
1 the even- 
nitted our- 
ions fo un- 
fervices of 
be encoun- 
ceflarily be 
of this ob- 
ed about a 
1 quitted in 
fhallow wa- 
sry inftant, 
ry unplea- 
ate, and at 
ight breeze 
anageable, 
n increafed 
pt a fouth- 
no bottom 


uthward of 
the fouth 


to affift our 
e far to the 
o the fouth 
, however, 
pf water was 

again 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


again under g fathoms; and inftantly decreafing to 4, the fhip ftruck with 
fome degree of violence, occafioned by a very heavy {well from the ocean, 
that for fome days paft had been attendant on the flood tide. About 
one o'clock, having a fine commanding breeze from the N.z£., we {teered 
to the weftward and s.w., but to no purpofe, the tide having more in- 
fluence on the body of the fhip than the wind on her fails ; in this very 
unpleafant predicament we remained nearly ftationary for about an hour 
and an half, the fhip frequently {triking, and fometimes fo heavily as 
to occafion conftant apprehenfion left the mafts fhould come by the 
board, or fome worfe accident befall us. Every effort to get to the 
weftward of the fhoal proving ineffectual, we had no other alternative 
than to crofs it if poffible, by purfuing an oppofite line of direétion ; 
this attempt however feemed to be full of danger, as its fhalloweft part ap- 
peared by the breakers to be at its eaftern extremity, which had induced 
me to perfevere fo long in my endeavours to get to the weftward. The 
attempt was made, and was happily crowned with a fuccefs far beyond 
my moft fanguine expectations. After having got the fhip’s head to 
the eaftward fhe ftruck but once more, (though that was the moft vio- 
lent and alarming fhock we had fuftained) in crofling the fhoal; the 
water foon after deepened to 10 and 15 fathoms, and we had the further 
fatisfaction of finding that the fhip made no water, nor were we able to 
perceive that fhe had in any other refpeét received the leaft damage. 

We arrived in deep water juft as the dawning of day enabled us to 
procure fome angles, which fhewed that we had paffed the fhoal about 
a league to the fouth-weft of the fouth point of the ifland, and (by the 
appearance of the broken water in our paffage) nearly over its middle, 
as it feemed to extend full a league further in that dircé&tion. From the 
great variety in the foundings in paffing over it, it fhould appear to be 
very uneven, as in feveral inftances, when the fhip ftruck violently, or 
when fhe refted on the ground, the depth by the lead line was frequent- 
lv near 4 fathoms, and the rife and fall of the waves was by no means 
equal to this difference. It is not improbable that this fhoal might have 
arrefted fome fragments of rocks fimilar to thofe before mentioned : and 

O 2 if 


99 


1794. 
Apu. 


ey 


3100 


1794. 
April. 
ee me ad 


Friday 18. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


if fo, it was infinitely more dangerous to contend with than a mere fpit 
of fand, and renders our prefervation a moft providential event. 

We continued to take advantage of the flood tide, and ftood to wind- 
ward until about feven the next morning, when on the ebb making, we 
anchored off the eaftern fide of the ifland, in 14 fathoms water, ftony 
bottom, about a league from its fhore; along which extends a continua- 
tion of the fhoal about two miles from the ifland. 

I fhould be wanting in juftice to our Indian paffengers, were I to omit 
ftating their docility and refpeétful behaviour whilft they were on board ; 
as alfo the anxiety they expreffed for our fafety, left the veffel whilft 
ftriking fhould break to pieces; and the real fatisfaftion and happinefs 
they exhibited on being given to underftand that we were again in per- 
fe&t fecurity. 

The weather now, though extremely cold, (the mercury ftanding at 
25) was very cheerful, and afforded us an excellent view of the fur- 
rounding region, compofed, at a little diftance from the river, of ftu- 
pendous mountains, whofe rugged and romantic forms, clothed in a per- 
petual fheet of ice and fnow, prefented a profpeét, though magnificent- 
ly grand, yet dreary, cold, and inhofpitable. In the midft of thefe ap- 
peared the voléano near the fummit of which, from two diftin@ cra- 
ters on its fouth-eaftern fide, were emitted large columns of whitifh {moke; 
unlefs, as was fuppofed by fome on board, it was vapour arifing from hot 
fprings in that neighbourhood; but how far this conjeture was confif- 
tent with the feverity of the climate at the top of that lofty mean, 
is not within the limits of my judgment to determine. 

About ten in the forenoon, we were furprized by a much earlier re- 
turn of the flood tide than we had expeéted, with which, and a light vari- 
able breeze, we dire€ted our courfe to the northward. In the afternoon 
the wind blew a fteady breeze from the N.N.w., which enabled us to 
reach the narrows by feven inthe evening. On the return of the ebb 
we became again ftationary in 17 fathoms water. Here the fhores of the 
river were comparatively low, or only moderately elevated, jutting out 
into three remarkable fteep cliffy points. Thefe I diftinguifhed by the 
names of the West, NorTH, and East Forezanps; the two former 


are 


nere {pit 


to wind- 
king, we 
er, ftony 
-ontinua- 


I to omit 
m board ; 
fel whilft 
happinefs 
in in per- 


anding at 
f the fur- 
r, of ftu- 
In a per- 
gnificent- 
thefe ap- 
in cra- 
ifh fmoke; 
; from hot 
as confif- 
' ountain, 


earlier re~ 
ight vari- 
afternoon 
bled us to 
f the ebb 
bres of the 
utting out 
ed by the 
o former 

are 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


are on the weftern, and the latter on the eaftern, fhore; which, from the 
{tation we had taken, bore by compafs as follow: the weft Foreland, 
forming the fouth-weft point of the narrows, s.28 w., about four miles 
diftant ; the north Foreland n. 4 £.; and the eaft Foreland, forming the 
north-eaft point of the narrows, N. 76 E. 

Here we were vifited by two of the natives, in a {mall fkin canoe, 
who underftanding what reception their countrymen had met with, 
folicited the fame indulgence; their canoe was accordingly taken in, 
and they were permitted to remain on board. One of thefe, whofe name 
was Sal-tart, pofleffing fome apparent fuperiority over the reft, pre- 
fented me with fome martin fkins, and received in return fome iron, 
beads, a few other trinkets, and a {mall quantity of {nuff and tobacco, 
all of which he feemed to value very highly. Thefe people appeared to 
be acquainted with the Ruffians, of whofe language they feemed to fpeak 
feveral words ; but our very confined knowledge of that, as well as our 
total ignorance of their native tongue, prevented our acquiring the in- 
formation which, from the intelligent appearance of thefe very civil and 
well-behaved ftrangers, we might otherways have been enabled to obtain. 

The ebb tide ran at the rate of five miles per hour ; and at half paft 
one on faturday morning the flood returned with equal rapidity; and 
having by three o'clock inereafed with a velocity that the beft bower ca- 
ble was unequal to refift, it broke, and the buoy finking by the ftrength 
of the current, the anchor and cable were irrecoverably loft. This 
was an accident that gave me very ferious concern, fince our ftock of 
thefe important ftores was already very much reduced. As it was now 
becommg day-light we proceeded up the river, with the flood tide and 
a light variable breeze in the northern quarter, attended with very {e- 
vere weather; the mercury being at 18. We kept near the weftern fhore 
to avoid being entangled with the fhoal on which the Refolution had 
grounded, and by that means loft much of the influence of the flood ; 
fo that on the ebb making about feven o'clock, we had not advanced 
more than 2 leagues. Here we again anchored in 19 fathoms water ; 
the weft Foreland by compafs bearing s.14£., diftant nine miles.; the 
north Foreland n. 35 £.; the eaft Foreland s, 61 £,; and the volcano s. 

1 12 W, 


Saturday 19. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


12 w. The obferved latitude was 60°51', but we were not able to pro- 
cure any obfervations for the variation. 

Our Indian friends, who we had imagined were on their return from 
an excurfion down the river at the time we met with them, now gave 
us to underftand that their habitations were in this neighbourhood, on 
the weftern fhore, and defired to take their leave ; they departed, fhew- 
ing a very high fenfe of gratitude for the kindnefs and attention with 
which they had been treated. Whilft on board they had behaved with a 
degree of modefty and decorum rarely found amongft men in a far 
more civilized ftate ; and notwithftanding they had been conftantly ex- 
pofed to temptations, by articles lying in their way which were of the 
moft valuable nature in their eftimation, not the moft trifling thing was 
milled, nor did their honefty in any refpeét fuffer the leaft impeachment. 
‘They repofed the utmoft confidence in our integrity, and confidered 
themfelves as much at home in our fociety, as if we had long been their 
molt intimate friends. In fhort, if the conduét they exhibited, during 
the time they paffed with us, is to be received as their general national 
charaéter, it indicates them to be a people unattuated by ambition, jea- 
louly, or avarice; the paffions which fo ftrongly operate on the human 
{pecies, to produce a conftant dread and variance with each other, and 
{limulate to aéts of oppreffion, violence, and rapacity, as well on their 
neareft neighbours as the moft diftant f{trangers. 

At iow tide the fhoal we purpofed to avoid was feen from the maft- 
head to the north-eaftward, between which and the weftern fhore, on 
the return of the flood tide, about two o’clock our route was dire@ted, 
with a frefh breeze from the.x.N.w., which obliged us to ply, keeping 
nearer the fhore than the fhoal. The foundings from mid-channel to- 
wards the flioal were 20 fathoms and upwards, but towards the land the 
depth regularly decreafed to 13 and 10 fathoms. ‘The gale reduced us to 
double-reefed topfails and forefail, and was accompanied by fo fevere a 
froft, that the {pray became inftantly frozen, and fell on the decks like 
fleet, or finall particles of fnow, and the water that was brought up with 
the lead-line, although in conflant motion, cafed it intirely with ice. On 
meeting the ebb ude in the evening, we anchored in 15 fathoms water, 


about 


€ to pro- 


urn from 
now gave 
hood, on 
ed, fhew- 
tion with 
ed with a 
ina’ tar 
antly ex- 
re of the 
thing was 
~achment. 
‘onfidered 
been their 
-d, during 
] national 
ition, jea- 
he human 
other, and 
l on their 


the maft- 
fhore, on 
directed, 
, keeping 
annel to- 
e land the 
uced us to 
fevere a 
ecks like 
tup with 
ice. On 
ms water, 
about 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


about two leagues to the north-eaflward of the north Forcland, and about 
a league from the weftern fhore. During the night a quantity of loofe 
ice pafled the fhip, and in the morning of funday the wind blew a gen- 
tle breeze from the n.w., with intenfely cold weather, the mercury ftand- 
ing at 74, Having both wind and tide in our favor, about three o'clock 
we proceeded towards the northern or main branch of the river, but 


were foon alarmed by the appearance of a dry fhoal in the direction of 


our courfe. This appearance was very unexpeéted, as we were then 
nearly purfuing the former track of the Refolution and Difcovery, which 
could fcarcely have paffed fuch a fhoal unnoticed. Many large lumps, 
like rocks of confiderable fize, were lying upon it, which at length in- 
duced me to believe, that what we had taken for a fhoal would be found 
to be only a body of dirty ice. We had however contended fufficiently 
with dangers of this fort, and having underftood that a Spanifh officer 
had found the navigation of this extenfive river intirely clofed by fhoa!s 
and fand banks, extending from fide to fide fome leagues lower down 
than where Captain Cook had anchored, I did not think. it prudent to 
proceed until fome examination fhould have taken place; efpecially as 
fome of the crew were already froft-bitten,. and in: the event of our get- 
ting a-ground, the carrying out anchors, and other duties confequent 
upon fuch an accident, might expofe others to the like inconvenience. 
For thefe reafons we again anchored, and after the fun had fhone about 
three hours, J difpatched Mr. Whidbey in the cutter to afcertain the 
matter in doubt. About ten in the forenoon he returned, having gone 
feveral miles beyond where the fhoal was fuppofed to have been feen, 
without meeting lefs than from 14 to 17 fathoms water. The appear- 
ance that had been miftaken for a fhoal proved to be floating ice, which 
had been carried rapidly. from the fhip with the {trength of the tide, 
and then difappearcd, giving it, in the gray of the morning, the fem- 
blance of a fhoal overflowed by the flood tide; this was manifefted by 
the return of the next ebb, when, about noon, our horizon was cncom- 
pafled in moft direétions with floating ice, of various fhapes, magnitudes, 
and colours. 


The 


193 


170}. 
April. 
Sy 


Sunday zo. 


Oe er ee 


ome ea 


oy Sweets 


sesmmat 


222 

= > a 
ee « a = “hi 
i § _ —s tl 


aS Se er 


iW 
ii 


April. 


Cee eed 


Monday 21. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The weather was calm and ferene, though intenfely cold, and the ebb 
tide obliging us to remain ftationary, afforded a good opportunity for 
making fuch obfervations as were become requifite ; by thefe the lati- 
tude was found to be 61°10, longitude 210°; and the variation in fix 
fets of azimuths, by two compaffes, fhewed the mean refult to be 29° 48’ 
eafterly, differing very materially from our laft obfervations, notwith- 
ftanding that the two ftations were not jo leagues apart; the latter how- 
ever I confidered to Fe the moft correét. In this fituation, the north 
Foreland bore by compafs s. 28 w.; the neareft fhore s. 74 w., about a 
league off; the ifland lying before the river Turnagain, N. 55 £.; the 
entrance of that river, N.70£.; point Pofleffion, v.87 £.; and the vol- 
cano, s.15 W., diftant 32 leagues. Favored with the flood tide and a 
foutherly breeze, about three o’clock we refumed our courfe as before- 
mentioned, and had foundings from 13 to 17 fathoms until feven in the 
evening, when we fuddenly came into 6 and 4 fathoms; but on hauling 
a little to the fouth the water again deepened to 6 fathoms, in which we 
anchored. The weft point of entrance into the northern branch of the 
river, by compafs bore n. 48 £., 5 leagues diftant; its eaft point, N.55£.; 
Turnagain ifland, from Nn. 63 £. to eaft, and point Poffeffion, s. 95 £., 
diftant 10 miles. Four large pieces of ice were aground to the north of 
us; and as we were about 4 miles to the north of Captain Cook’s track, 
and a league to the fouth of the fhoal laid down by him as extending 
from the northern fhore, I confidered the fhoal we had anchored near, 
to have been one that had efcaped his notice. 

The wind blew a ftrong gale in the night from the N.N. w., the wea- 
ther was intenfely cold, attended with a heavy fall of very fmall hard 
frozen {now, that prevented our feeing far about us until monday after- 
noon, when the weather clearing up about the time of low water, our 
fituation was difcovered to be about a quarter of a mile from an exten- 
five dry fhoal, bearing by compafs from s. 74 w. to N. 54 £.; evidently 
conneéted with, and lying along the northern fhore of, the river, which 
was at the diftance of about five miles, and had the appearance, by the 
dire€tion it took, of joining on to the weft point of its northern branch. 
This left no doubt of its being the fame fhoal as that delineated in Captain 

Cook’s 


ROUND THE WORLD. 105 


id the ebb Cook’s chart, although by our obfervations, both the fhioal and its ad- 794 
tunity for joining fhore feem to lie fome miles further, to the fouth than is there Lope 
e the lati- reprefented. 
ion in fix The weather continuing to be fair, and having a commanding breeze 
be 20° 48 from the N.N. w., we proceeded to the north-eatt along the edge of the 
, notwith- fhoal in foundings from 13 to 19 fathoms water, unul about four o'clock, 
atter how- when the depth again decreafed to 64 fathoms. We flood towards 
the north Turnagain ifland, but not finding a deeper channel we anchored, in or- 
,,, about a der to examine the paffage before we fhould proceed further. On this 
55 E.3 the fervice Mr. Whidbey was difpatched at day-light the next morning with Tuclday 22. 
nd the vol- two boats, and he returned about noon, having found in the channel a 
gdeand’s depth of water from 7 to 17 fathoms, the deepeft water being on the 
an belore: ifland fide. 
suen inthe At four in the afternoon we weighed anchor, with the flood and a 
on hauling light wefterly breeze ; but our. fails had not fufficient influence to act 
aehich: we again{t the {trength of the tide, which in f{pite of every endeavour to the 
such oF the contrary prefled us toward the fhoals, forming the northern fide of the 
nt, N55 E35 channel ; here the fhip grounded for a fhort fpace of time, and again 
n, 8.95 Es floated without occafioning us the leaft trouble; the wind from the 
ecaorthiok weftward becoming at this juncture fomewhat more powerful, we hauled 
cols teack: acrofs the channel into 7 fathoms water, where we again anchored, hav- 
| extending ing now advanced as far as the paflage had been examined, 
Laced ear: A favorable change had this day taken place in our climate; the met- 
cury in the thermometer had rifen to 36, the weather was ferene, the air 
comparatively mild, and we again flattered ourfelves that a more tem- 
= a ee perate feafon was at length approaching. 
laa aa « The next morning we difcovered on the furface of the water innu- Wednel. 23. 


merable large pieces of floating ice, which were drifted by the rapidity 
of the tide with great violence againft the fhip’s bows, but fortunately 
they were not of fufficient magnitude to do us any injury. They how- 
ever prevented the boats being hoifted out until eight o'clock, when 
Mr. Whidbey again proceeded in queft of a convenient ftation for the 
nce, by the fhip, within the entrance of the northern branch; this fervice engaged 


h. 1 , 1 
ern branct him until two in the afternoon, when he returned, and reported that 
A in Captain ; Vou. II 


Cook's ‘ P from 


water, our 

an exten- 
; evidently 
iver, which 


‘Thurfday24. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


from the fhip’s anchorage the depth of water had gradually increafed to 
10 and 15 fathoms, until he had reached the points of entrance, between 
which he had found 20 fathoms, and within them from 26 to 10 fathoms, 
but this depth was by no means regular. He had then directed his re- 
fearches fome diftance further up the branch than the boats from the 
Refolution and the Difcovery had penetrated in the year 1778, and 
tound all the fhores round to the northward compofed of compaét low 
land; and unlefs the branch took a very fharp turn to the eaft or s.£., it 
had every appearance of terminating not many miles beyond the extent 
of his examination, in a f{pacious bafon or harbour. 

This account difappointed my expe€tations, as it was not eafily recon- 
cilable with the idea we had formed of the interior diftance to which we 
fhould be led by the waters of this extenfive opening. ‘The prefumption 
that our progrefs would fpeedily be {topped, became by this information 
very ftrong; but as that point remained yet to be proved, I was deter- 
mined to perfevere in my former intention, and weighing with the flood 
about five in the evening, we fteered for the bafon or harbour defcribed 
by Mr. Whidbey; and which, although by his account capable of afford- 
ing us protection and fhelter againft the winds or the fea, did not promife 
any very agreeable communication with the fhore. Our progrefs was 
uninterrupted, and having about nine at night reached the limits of Mr. 
Whidbey’s examination, we anchored near the eaftern fide of the har- 
bour in 7 fathoms water, black {andy bottom. 

The weather was fair the next morning, and at low tide a dry fhoal 
was feen ftretching from a high cliffy point to the northward on the eaft- 
ern fhore, where the river took an eaftwardly dire€tion. This fhoal 
feemed to be conneéted with the cliffy point, and to be fome feet above 
water, forming as it were a ridge that extended towards the north-weft 
or oppofite fhore, and was apparently united to that fide alfo; at any 
rate, it was evident that if a channel did exift it could only be a very nar- 
row one, and our curiofity became greatly excited by the appearances be- 
fore us. For our fatisfa€tion in this particular, and for the purpofe of 
finding a more convenient {tation far the fhip, and a fupply of frefh water, 
I made an excurfion after breakfaft, accompanied by fome of the officers. 

We 


reafed to 
between 
fathoms, 
“d_ his re- 
from the 
778, and 
npact low 
or S.E., it 
he extent 


ily recon- 
which we 
efumption 
formation 
was deter- 
. the flood 
- defcribed 
> of afford- 
ot promife 
pgrefs was 
its of Mr. 


the har- 


» dry fhoal 
the eaft- 
‘his fhoal 
feet above 
orth-welt 
fo; at any 
very nar- 
brances be- 
burpofe of 
‘e{h water, 
1¢ officers. 
We 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


We had not long quitted the fhip, before we found a flream of ex- 


1 


hie 


cellent water on the eaftern fhore, which, with little labour in clearing UY 


away the ice, could be very conveniently obtained. Our attention was 
now principally direéted to a bay or cove, that feemed to be fituated to 
the fouthward of the cliffy point before-mentioned, where I entertained 
hopes of finding a commodious refting place for the fhip, free from the 
inconvenience of the drifting ice, which feemed likely to occafion us 
much annoyance. On reaching the fouth point of this bay, we obferved 
near the edge of the fleep cliffs that form it, fome houfes; thefe we vi- 
fited, but found them f{carcely more than the fkeletons of habitations, 
that had apparently been fome time deferted. The large ones were four 
in number, of a different fhape and conftruction to any of the houfes of 
the North Welt American Indians we had yet feen, One of thefe was 
twenty-four feet long, and about fourteen feet wide, built with upright 
and crofs fpars, had been covered in with the bark of the birch tree, and 
when in good repair muft have been a very tolerably comfortable dwel- 
ling. Their fhape refembled that of a barn, the fides perpendicular 
about nine feet high, and the top of the roof about four feet higher, 
which inclined uniformly from the fides until it met in the middle. Befide 
thefe there were two or three fmaller tenements or hovels half under 
ground, and built more after the prevailing fafhion of the native inhabi- 
tants of thefe regions. ‘This circumftance, in addition to the {pars of 
which the larger houfes were formed, having all been cut down by axes, 
and evidently by perfons accuftomed to fuch tools, induced us to fuppofe 
that this village had been the refidence of a party of Ruffians, or fome 
other European vifitors, not only from the conftru@ion of the larger 
houfes, but from the circumftance of thefe Indians not having yet been 
induced to make the leaft ufe of the axe, but univerfally preferring and 

ufing iron tools in the form of the knife or chifel. 
rom hence we proceeded to the examination of the bay. On found- 
ing from point to point, the deepeft water was not found to exceed from 
4 to 5 fathoms, and this nearly at the top of the flood. And as the 
rife and fall of the tide according to our menfuration was not Jefs than 1 
futhoms, this part of the bay muft neceffarily be nearly dry at low 
Ps water, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


water. After paffing to the north of the high cliffy point to which at 
low tide the fhoal had appeared to be united, we had for the {pace of a 
quarter of a mile g and 10 fathoms water, but on fteering over towards 
the oppofite or north-weft fhore the depth inftantly decreafed to 4 and 
3 fathoms, and by keeping as nearly as we could judge on the fhoal ridge 
feen from the fhip, the depth was found to be from 20 to 14 feet water, 
until within a little diftance of the north-weft fide, when we had a few 
cafts of 74 fathoms. At this time it was the top of high water neap 
tides. 

Being unprovided for a more comprehenfive furvey, we left for future 
examination the width of thefe fmall fpaces of deep water; as likewife 
the afcertaining whether this fhoal conftituted only a bar, and whether 
the extenfive fheet of water to the E.N.E. became again navigable for 
fhipping, and ftretched to any remote diftance in that direétion. The 
general appearance of the country indicated the contrary, as the fhores, 
in every dire€tion in which we had feen them, had uniformly appeared to 
defcend gradually, from the mountains to their termination at the water 
fide, in low flat land, apparently firm and compaét; fhould thefe waters 
therefore penetrate beyond the limits of our view, their courfe muft have 
been between interlocking points at no great diftance from each other. 

Our curiofity fo far fatisfied we returned to the fhip, not very well 
able to reconcile with each other the feveral circumftances that had 
thus fallen under our obfervation; namely, the rapidity and regularity 
of the tide forming equal intervals of flood and ebb, both of equal 
ftrength, and fetting at the rate of 3 miles an hour; with the water, 
even at dead low tide, little, if at all, frefher than that of the ocean, al- 
though at the diftance of near 70 leagues from the fea. Thefe feveral cir- 
cumftances could not be confidered, notwithftanding the appearance of 
the fhores, as indications of an early termination of this extenfive open- 
ing on the coaft. 

The watering place to which I intended to refort lying to the fouth of 
our anchorage, we weighed with the latter part of the ebb, in order to 
place the fhip as conveniently to it as the fhores would admit; but in 
attempting this, the fhip ran a-ground on a fhoal that had efcaped our 
3 obfervation, 


which at 
pace of a 
r towards 
to 4 and 
hoal ridge 
feet water, 
had a few 
yater neap 


for future 
as likewife 
1d whether 
gable for 
ion. The 
the fhores, 
ppeared to 
the water 
hefe waters 
muft have 
ch other. 
t very well 
that had 
regularity 
of equal 
the water, 
ocean, al- 
feveral cir- 
bearance of 
five open- 


he fouth of 
n order to 
it; but in 
fcaped our 
bbfervation, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


obfervation, lying between our laft anchorage and the fhore. An an- 
chor was immediately carried out, and on the return of the flood the 
veffel was hove off, without having received any apparent injury. 

The next morning Mr. Swaine was fent with a party to clear away 
the ice before the run of water, and prepare a convenient fpot for the 
reception of the cafks; whilft another boat was employed in fearch of 
the moft convenient anchorage for the fhip. This being found about a 
mile to the fouthward of the run of water, we proceeded in the evening, 
took our ftation there, and moored with a cable each way in 5 fathoms 


depth at low water, foft bottom, compofed of fmall loofe ftones, and 
fine black fand. 


CHAPTER 


109 


1794- 
April. 


Leen rome 


Friday 25. 


I; 
i yt 


ti 
hee 
ee 


ee 


1794+ 
April. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


CHAPTER V. 


Dangerous fituation of the fhip in confequence of ice—Examination of the 
upper part of Cook's river—dts final termination proving it to be only an 
extenfive arm of the fea, it obtains the name of Cook's inlet-— Foined by 
the Ch: ham—Mr. Puget’s narrative during the feparation of the two 
veffels—Vifited by Ruffians—Quit Cook's inlet-—Aftronomical and nautica! 
obfervations. 


HA vInG taken a ftation as conveniently to the fhore as circumftances 


| nema nd > : i ; 
Smurnya6, Would permit, on faturday morning we fat ourfelves earneftly about 


the feveral neceflary duties we had to perform, amongft which was the 
procuring of wood and water from the fhore. This fervice was greatly 
interrupted by the floating ice, waich by the rapidity of the tides was 
rendered very dangerous to our boats, the utmoft caution being re- 
quired to prevent their being crufhed, not only when they were along 
the fide of the fhip, but in their communication with the land, by the ice 
which was in motion, and by that lodged on the fhore ; againft which the 
more buoyant mafles, though of confiderable fize, were driven with 
great violence and dafhed to pieces. Some anxiety was likewile felt for 
the fafety of our cables, though every precaution in our power was ta- 
ken for their proteétion. 

In the afternoon we were vifited by twenty-three of the natives in a 
large fkin canoe. Thefe people were deftitute of any weapons, and 
were conduéted by a young chief, named Chatidooltz, who feemed to 
poffefs great authority, and to be treated with much refpeét by every 
individual of the party; whofe humble demeanor manifefted the inferi- 

1 ority 


tion of the 

be only an 
- Foined by 
of the two 
nd nautica! 


ccumitances 
eftly about 
ich was the 
was greatly 
e tides was 

being re- 
were along 
, by the ice 
ft which the 
Hriven with 

ife felt for 
wer was ta- 


matives In a 
apons, and 
b feemed to 
t_ by every 
the inferi- 

ority 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ority of them all, excepting one, named Kanz/tooch, who appeared to be 


111 


1794. 
April. 


fomewhat younger than the chief, and to whom alfo the re(t fhewed —~— 


much attention. This man attended the chief on ail occafions, and was 


the only one who was permitted to fit on the fame feat with him, the 
others {quatting themfelves down on the deck. At firft half a dozen 
only were admitted on board, but towards the evening the chief ear- 
neftly folicited that they might all be allowed to enter the fhip, and that 
their canoe might be taken on board. Apprchenfive that fome pilfer- 
ing aéts might be committed, I made the chief acquainted with my ful- 
picions, and the confequent objection I had to their fleeping on board. 
This, though we were totally unacquainted with each others language, 
was communicated by figns too expreffive of our meanings to be mif- 
taken, as were the affurances of the chief that I might rely on their 
honefty ; at the fame time exprefling much apprehenfion for the fafety 
of his people and their canoe, who were in a dangerous predicament, 
from the large maffes of ice that were now paffing the fhip. ‘Thefe ar- 
guments, together with the extremely good behaviour of thofe few of 
their countrymen who had vifited us, not many leagues from our 
then ftation, induced me to comply with the earneft defire of Chatzdooltz, 
and on their coming on board each prefented me with one or two mar- 
tin {kins. They feemed to be highly gratified with the indulgence grant- 
ed them, fcrupuloufly exaét in every particular, and behaved with a degree 
of modefty and caution left they fhould give offence, that was beyond 
example, and extremely engaging. 

Some of our gentlemen in queft of game on fhore, had fallen in with 
a family of about eighteen Indians, from whom they received the kind- 
eft attention and civility ; and they had in return invited four or five of 
them on board, which invitation they readily accepted. The latter party 
were evidently of a different tribe or fociety from thofe with Chatzdooltz ; 
but they neverthelefs were upon amicable and friendly terms, and paffed 
a moft cheerful evening together, and feemingly much to their mutual 
fatisfaction. After eating a hearty fupper of falt meat and bifcuit, they 
refted very quietly until the next morning, when each of the party re- 
ceived from me prefents of {nuff and tobacco, ear-fhells, iron. chifels, 


beads, 


t 
th 
14 
ai 
ef 
; 
Hi 
' 
| 
8 

) 


i 
‘t 


— 


112 


1794. 
April. 


Ce +—Y 


Sunday 27. 


Monday 28, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


beads, hawk’s bells, buttons and needles, all of which feemed to be highly 
valued, and were accepted with expreffions of the moft grateful acknow- 
ledgment. 

As the drift ice did not feem to be in fuch abundance as on the pre- 
ceding day, the chief and his party took their léave, and evinced their 
approbation of the treatment they had received by finging as they pad- 
dled round the fhip; on which occafion Chatzdooliz, being the only one 
flanding up in the canoe, performed many antic tricks that were very lu- 
dicrous. The behaviour of thefe people whilft on board was perfectly 
correfpondent with the aflurances given by their chief, and was in 
every refpeét, not only free from the leaft cenfure, but deferving the 
higheft commendation. They were permitted without any reftraint to go 
where they pleafed, and to fatisfy their curiofity in examining whatever 
attracted their attention, and without incurring the leaft difapprobation. 
The chief promifed to repeat his vifit in the courfe of a few days; and I 
endeavoured to make him underftand that game or fifh would be very 
acceptable to us, but the figns he made in return did not encourage us 
to hope for a fupply of thefe refrefhments ; on the contrary, he re- 
quefted and procured fome bread and meat to take home with him, 
which evinced that food at this feafon of the year with them, was not in 
abundance. 

Since the 21ft the weather had been very ferene, and the intenfity of 
the cold had greatly abated; the thermometer in the day time now {tood 
at 40, and the nights were attended with little froft. 

Anxious to avoid every poffible delay, Mr. Whidbey, with two boats 
equipped for ten days, was difpatched with direétions to examine the river 
Turnagain, fo long as his ftores and provifions fhould laft; but fhould 
that river be foon found to terminate, then to profecute the examination 
of the eaftern fhore to the eaft Foreland, from thence acrofs the river 
to the weft Foreland, and to continue his furvey along the weftern fhore 
back to the ftation of the fhip; having fuppofed from the appearance of 
the land that an open‘ng, which might prove extenfive, did exift a few 
leagues to the north-eaftward of the north Fexciucd. In the mean time 
I fhould 


o be highly 
ful acknow- 


on the pre- 

vinced their 

s they pad- 

he only one 

ere very lu- 
vas perfectly 
and was in 
eferving the 
{traint to go 
ig whatever 
ip probation. 
days; and I 
ould be very 
*ncourage us 
rary, he re- 
1e with him, 
, Was not in 


e intenfity of 
e now ftood 


th two boats 
mine the river 
; but fhould 
 eXamination 
rofs the river 

eftern fhore 
hppearance of 
d exift a few 
he mean time 


I fhould 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


I fhould endeavour, as foon as our bufinefs on board was tolerably for- 


113 


1794. 
April. 


ward, to fatisfy myfelf with refpeét to the termination or further extent —~— 


of thefe waters. 

The drift ice already mentioned as exceflively troublefome, and great- 
ly obf{tru€ting our operations with the fhore, had latterly been confidered 
in a diminifhing ftate; but contrary to our expeétations, it was much 
augmented by the flood tide, and large maffes, forming almoft complete 
fields of ice, were driven by the increafed rapidity of the {pring tides 
(that now moved at the rate of nearly 5 miles an hour) againft the 
bows of the fhip with alarming violence, and made me regret too late 
having difpatched the boats; not only on account of their fafety, for 
which I became very apprehenfive; but alfo, left we fhould be driven 
from our ftation by this powerful opponent, without being able to leave on 
fhore any inftructions for their direétion. 


The following day brought no favorable alteration; the quantity of Tuelday 29. 


ice and the rapidity of the tide, particularly on the flood, were greatly 
increafed and were truly alarming. One large body of ice hooked the 
{mall bower cable, and with the violence of the tide broke it about 15 
fathoms from the bows; at the fame time the cable of the beft bower, by 
which alone the fhip now rode, was conftantly preffed with fuch immenfe 
weights, that we fhould have had no hope of its being able to fuftain 
them, had it not been a new fixteen-inch cable, nearly three inches in 
girth more than thofe of our eftablifhment, which had been procured at 
the cape of Good Hope, and to all appearance was very ftrong and 
well made. 

Notwithftanding however the confidence we had in this, our fituation 
was very irkfome and extremely uncomfortable, from the apprehenfion 
left the cable fhould be unable to refift the violent fhocks it repeatedly 
received; for in the event of its breaking, we fhould then be reduced to 
only one anchor and a thirteen inch cable for our prefervation. 

All communication with the fhore was at an end, and our apprehen- 
fions for the fhip’s fafety were now increafed by the violence with which 
the ice, nearly as hard and ponderous as the folid rock, was frequently 
driven againft the fhip’s bows, occafioning fuch fhocks as to awaken our 


fears, left the hull of the veffel fhould fuftain fome material injury. In 
Vou. III. Q 


addition 


Wednef. 30. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


addition to thefe very unpleafant circumftances, on heaving in the flack 
of the cable at high water we difcovered it to be chaled, by its having 
rubbed againft fome rocks at the bottom. This accident was as unex- 
pected as it was ungrateful to our feelings. ‘To have quitted a ftation fo. 
precarious, and fo pregnant with difafters of the moft alarming nature,. 
would have been a molthappy relief; yet, had we been ever fo much in- 
clined, we were denied this refource, for not a breath of air had been in. 
motion during the laft twenty-four hours. Had we attempted to move, we 
mu{t have refigned ourfelves to the immediate influence anc impetuofity 
of the {tream, encumbered with huge maffes of ice, through a very narrow 
and intricate channel, without being able to leave behind us the leaft 
intimation for the guidance of the abfent part of our little community m 
the boats. Our {mall bower anchor and cable were not confidered to be 
irretrievably loft, and were of too much importance to be willingly aban- 
doned. Thus circumftanced, we had no alternative but to remain, and 
encounter as long as we might be able fuch a maflive body of ice, as I 
believe no commander of a Greenland fhip, though fuch veffels are 
ftrengthened and proteéted for this efpecial purpofe, would have at- 
tempted to have refifted, unlefs obliged fo to do by the moft urgens 
necellity. 

Towards flack water, particularly on the reflux, we had fome fhort 
intermiffions of thefe threatening dangers; in one of which, about noon 
the following day, by means of crecping we fortunately hooked the broken 
cable; but the rapid return of the ice with the flood afforded but fufhicient 
time to afhix a buoy to it, for the purpofe of recovering it with more fa- 
cility at the next favorable opportunity. 

Juft about the time of high water we were vifited by ten Ruffians, and 
about twice that number of Indians, in a large open rowing boat; 
who with great difficulty and much circumfpection got to the fhip 
through the drift ice, which had now almolt formed one conneéted field 
from fide to fide. On their arrival the fhip was tolerably quiet, but on 
the return of the ebb we were fo incommoded by the ice, that our vifi- 
tors expreffed great concern for our fafety. They frequently afked if 
the fhip did not make much water, and whether we were duly attentive 
to 


RR TEE 


(ot er oggener 


Cite ni SRE Rene ke ot ee 


EN CREE) RON 


aie ese oF SRS 


Sie 


PY 
¥ 
s 


ees 


Sa apsskt le ip lk ut cede DR 


Ui San sats ua 


Doers See pe ee a eet Nae 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


to that particular, This was perhaps fugge..-:d to them by their not 
feeing the pumps at work, for whole fervices very fortunately we had 
little occafion. If I rightly underftood them, they had come with an 
intention of paffing the night with us; but after remaiming on board 
three very unpleafant hours, they took the advantage of an extenfive 
open fpace between the fields of ice and departed. 

Being ignorant of the Ruffian Janguage, and our minds being filled 
with the greateft anxiety, we were ill calculated for the reception and 
entertainment of ftrangers, and confequently not likely to benefit by 
their converfation, or by any information they might have been able to 
have communicated. They however very clearly gave me to underftand, 
that our anchorage was not in a river, but in an arm of the fea, which 
finally clofed about fifteen verfts beyond the flation we had taken. 
This intelligence appeared to correfpo id with what had been {cen from 
the boats on the 24th, which had given us reafon to believe, that bevond 
the extent of our excurfion on that day it was fcarcely navigable for 
boats. We alfo underftood, that the river Turnagain terminated not far 
within its entrance, where they had walked over a hill or mountain that 
occupied the {pace of fifteen or fixteen verfts, and that they had there 
defcended into an arm of the fea that had communication with Prince 
William’s found; acrofs which ifthmus is the route, by which they ftated 
that all their intercourfe between the Ruffian fettlements, in this and that 
extenfive inlet, was now carriedon. One of thefe eftablifhments I under- 
flood was about eight miles to the fouth-eadt of the eaft Foreland, where 
a Ruffian two-mafted veffel was then lying; and that they had another 
near the north Foreland, from whence the party had come; and a third 
on the ifland of St. Hermogenes. In Prince William’s found I under- 
ftood the Ruffians had an eftablifhment in port Etches, and another near 
Kayes ifland. Throughout the whole of this converfation, they feemed 
to ufe every endeavour to imprefs us with an idea, that the American 
continent and adjacent iflands, as far to the eaftward as the meridian of 
Kayes ifland, belonged exclufively to the Ruffian empire. 

Whilft we were thus annoyed by the ice, and kept in a continued 
ftate of impatience and folicitude, the weather, though cold, was de- 

Q2 lightfully 


116 


179. 
May. 


Thurlday 1. 


Friday 2, 


Saturday 3. 
Sunday 4. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ightfully ferene and pleafant, and onthe 1ft of may we had the fatis- 
faction of feeing a lefs quantity of ice brought up by the flood tide, and 
at low water we had the good fortune to recover our anchor and cable. 
The next day, however, we were again much inconvenienced by the 
ice, and in the hope of a clearer bottom, we fhifted our ftation a hitic 
to the fouth-eaftward, but by no means improved our condition; for at 
low water the cable was found to have hooked to a rock, and whilft 
we were endeavouring to clear it, the fhip on fuddenly fwinging in fhore 
grounded, and fo remained until fhe was floated off by the return of the 
flood tide. On founding, much more water than the veflel drew was 
found clofe around her ; and from hence it is reafonable to fuppofe, that 
the fhip had refted on one of thofe apparently moveable fabrics of rock 
before defcribed, which lie in great numbers over all the {hallow flats, ex- 
tending from thefe fhores as far down as the low waier of the {pring 
tides enabled us to difcern. 

At the flack of the flood tide, with a light breeze from the fouth, we 
weighed, ftood more into mid-channel, and anchored in 12 fathoms, 
fandy bottom. The weather altered, and a material change took place 
the next day. The fky was obfcured by thick mifty rain and fog, that 
continued until the forenoon of funday, when the weather became again 
fair and pleafant, and we had the fatisfactvon of feeing the furface of the 
water nearly free from ice, and of re-commencing our bufinels with the 
fhore. 

In the evening we had the happinefs of receiving Mr. Whidbey and 
his party on board, after having accomplifhed the fervice he had been 
fent to perform, 

His courfe had been dire€éted from the fhip’s ftation along the larboard 
or eaftern fhore, to the fouth-weft point of entrance into this branch, 
which, after His Excellency the Ruffian ambaffador at the Britifh court, I 
call Pont Woronzow, fituated in latitude 60°8’, longitude 210° 36’ ; 
and its north-eaft point of entrance lying from point Woronzow N. 97 E. 
diftant two miles, I call Point MACKEN z1E, after the Right Honorable 
James Stuart Mackenzie. From point Woronzow the eaftern fhore 
takes a dire€tion s.19 W., for four miles, to a point which I call Point 
CAMPBELL; 


ai vi wie aes » 
as Ba eo thot contr aera eee Tee 


RCIA? neal G0 te ae he aia 


panacea e 


ee eee 


AtIS- 
and 
ble. 
the 
title 
reat 
huil{t 
hore 
f the 
was 
that 
rock 
, @X- 
ring 


, we 
ioms, 
place 

that 
4 gain 
rf the 
a the 


and 
been 


oard 
nch, 
rt, I 
P 36’ ; 
37 E- 
rable 
fhore 
DINT 
BEL ne 


3 
4 
y 
P| 
% 
4 
i 


TENG ot 


Via oe at i 


i ie reco tad beh og 
MERE T NELED 


Sra nih Tea 


Ais 
eae 


ree bie 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CampsBetc, and which, with point Poflefion, may be conficd as th 
outer north-eaft and fouth-weft points of Turnagain river. 

Mr. Whidbey proceeded clofe along that fhore, but he was foon inter- 
rupted by a fhoal that extends from it to the north-eaft point of Turn- 
again ifland, and obliged us to pafs along the north fide of the ifland, 
which in a direétion E.N.£. and w.s.w. is three miles and a half long 


and half a league broad. Near its weft point a fhoal ftretches about half 


a league in a north-welt direétion, from the weft point of the ifland, 
where the latitude was obferved to be 61°8’.. Endeavours were made 
to get in with the larboard or north-eaft {hore without fuccefs, being 
again repulfed by the fhoals that extend from three to four miles from 
it. The examination was continued up this arm in 5, 6, and 7 fathoms 
water, favored by a ftrong flood tide, but fo frefh a gale from the eaft- 
ward, that a very heavy and irregular {well was produced, which in two 
inftances nearly filled the large cutter, broke off the head of the rudder, 
and required the utmoft efforts and exertions of the party to preferve 
the boat from finking. The fhores in their vicinity were inacceffible, 
and, under circumftances fo difcouraging, they had no other probable 
means of bettering their condition, than by inclining as near to the 
fouthern fhore as the fhoals that extended from it would permit ; this 
was effected, and when the range of the arm was fhut in, the water be- 
came f{moother. About five in the evening they reached a fmall iflet 


lying clofe to the fouthern fhore, in a direétion from the weft point of 


Turnagain ifland, s. 45 £., diftant fourteen miles. ‘The flood at this time 
being nearly expended, and this feeming likely to prove an eligible reft- 
ing place for the night, no time was loft in endeavouring to obtain fome 
relief from the uncomfortable fituation to which they had been reduced 
by the feas that had broken into the boat, and had wetted moft of 
their arms and apparel. ‘Their repofe during the night was greatly 
difturbed by large quantities of ice that were brought down by the ebb 
tide, and occafioned them great labour and difficulty to prevent the 

boats being broken adrift. 
The ftrong eafterly gale continuing, and the tide being adverfe to 
their purfuit, the party was detained until noon the next day on the 
illet, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


iflet, which lies about a league to the fouth-weft of what may be confi- 
dered as the inner fouth-weft point of entrance into Turnagain river, 


whole inner north-eaft point lies from it N. 42 £., at the diftance of 


three miles and three quarters. The latitude on the iflet was obferved to 
be 60° 574’, its longitude 210° 43; low water afforded a good opportu- 
nity for viewing the furrounding region. The fhores between the outer 
and inner points appeared to be from 3 to 4 leagues afunder; each fide 
formed a bay at high water, but the fhores of thefe bays could not be 
approached, on account of the fhallow flat that extends from the land 
on the northern fide from three to five miles, and from the oppofite 
{hore about half that diftance, between which is a channel about a league 
anda half wide, which 1s alfo interrupted by a fhoal that appeared in 
many places to be dry, and fituated about midway between the iflet and 
Turnagain ifland; lying in a direétion N.£. and s.w., about a league 
and a half long, and half a league broad, leaving between its fouth point, 
and the fhoals extending from the fouthern fhore, a channel not more 
than half a league in width. 

With the firft of the flood the party proceeded in foundings from 7 
to 11 fathoms, until they had paffed the inner points of entrance, when 
the depth of water fuddenly decreafed to 4 fathoms, and fhortly after to 
2 and 3 feet, even in mid-channel, from whence the direétion of the 
river extended about s. 70 £.; this was purfued for about 4 leagues from 
the place where the water had firft become fhoal; the fhores were com- 
pact, and the width was now contraéted from a league to half that dif- 
tance. Mr. Whidbey feveral times crofled from fide to fide, without 
finding more than thirty feet water, nearly at the conclufion of the flood 
tide, and in a channel not more than an hundred yards wide. From 
hence this arm, (for it was now proved to be no longer intitled to the 
name of a river) appeared ftill to extend in the above direétion for about 
7 miles further, where in latitude 60° 54’, longitude 211° 30’, it feemed 
finally to terminate in a circular manner, furrounded by high fteep bar- 
ren mountains, covered with perpetual fnow. This termination, though 
fearcely admitting of a doubt, Mr. Whidbey was very anxious to 
afcertain more pofitively than by the diftant view that had been af- 


2 forded 


———————— 


Sette Ey 


* 


* 
iy 
sa 
ot 
s 
t 
§ 
4 


{ 


‘onft. 
‘iver, 
ce of 
ed to 
ortu- 
outer 
1 fide 
at be 
land 
ofite 
MATUC 
ed in 
t and 
ague 
yoint, 
more 


ym 7 
when 
r to 

the 
from 
om- 
dif- 
hout 
ood 
rom 
D the 
bout 
med 
bar- 
bugh 
s to 
af- 
rded 


Sze See 


ee ee 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


yorded of it; but as they had now advanced as far up as a very rapid 
flood tide would carry them, they could not attempt to contend with 
the ebb, which returns at the rate of five or fix miles an hour; and the 
fhores on either fide within their reach did not afford the leat fhelter 
where they could have waited for the fucceeding flood, and have been 
protected, during the ebb, from the dangers to which they mufl of necef- 
fity have been expofed, from the immenfe maffes of ice in all direétions, 
fome lying aground, others floating, or rolling by the force of the ftream 
over the foft mud that compofes the bottom. For thefe reafons they 
were obliged to return with the ebb, and did not find any fhelter until 
they had arrived within a league of the iflet before mentioned, where 
about nine in the evening they reached a fall cove, that admitted of their 
boats being hauled up clear of the ice during the night. 

The country bordering upon the bays between the outer and inner 
points of Turnagain arm is low, well wooded, and rifes with a gradual 
afcent, until at the inner point of entrance, where the fhores fuddenly rife 
to lofty eminences in nearly perpendicular cliffs, and compofe ftupendous 
mountains that are broken into chafms and deep gullies. Down thefe 
cufhed immenfe torrenis of water, rendering the naked fides of thefe pre- 
cipices awfully grand; on their tops grew a few ftunted pine trees, but 
they were nearly deftitute of every other vegetable produétion, The 
tide in this fituation rofe thirty feet perpendicularly, fo that at low water 
this arm muft be dry or nearly fo; and as Mr. Whidbey confidered it 
unfafe to be navigated, and undeferving any further examination, he pro- 
ceeded in the morning of the oth in the execution of his further orders, 
towards point Poffeffion, which by our obfervations is fituated in latitude 
bu? 3’, longitude 210° 18’. The bottle left there by Captain King was 
fearched for without effect; and as the party proceeded to the fouth-welt, 
they met the Ruffian boat on its way to the fhip; but as they were bound 
in different dire€tions, the interview was fhort, and without acquiring 
any information in addition to that which had been already detailed. On 
the commencement of the flood the party was obliged to ftop at a point 
lying from point Poffeffion, s. 65 w., at the diftance of 7 miles. Here 
a diftant view was obtained of the fhores before them to the fouth-well, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The whole fpace, fo far as they were able to difcern any objeéts, was 
incumbered with an immenfe number of conical rocks, detached from 
each other on a bank of fand and fmall ftones, that extended a league 
and upwards from the fhore. Thefe recks are of different elevations, 
and as few of them are of fufficient height to appear above the furface at 
high water, the navigating of this fhore with fuch rapid tides required to 
be undertaken with the greateft caution. The ebb tide in the night be- 
ing ill calculated for this purpofe, their tents were pitched on the upper 
part of the beach, clear of the fnow, with which the ground was as yet 
in moft places covered. 

In the evening, on the difcharge of fome mufkets that had become 
damp, fifteen Indians came from the woods, and with great cheerfulnefs 
and affability welcomed their new vifitors, by prefenting them with fome 
dried falmon; which very friendly behaviour Mr. Whidbey amply re- 
quited, and accompanied them to their habitations, which were about a 
mile from the boats, confifting of two huts that had been recently built, 
each containing a family of about fifteen perfons, of different ages and 
both fexes ; whofe behaviour was in every refpe&t marked with the fame 
honeft and orderly decorum exhibited by thofe of their countrymen who 
had vifited the fhip. 

The next morning their furvey was continued through this rocky la- 
byrinth, extending along the fhore about 7 leagues, to a point lying from 
the eaft Foreland v.35 £., diftant 2 leagues. The utmoft circum{pec- 
tion was required to conduét the boats clear of thefe dangerous pyrami- 
dical rocks, rifing perpendicularly from a bafe at the depth of 4 tog 
fathoms, and perfeétly fteep on every fide within the diftance of a boat’s 
length. Had our boats grounded on any of them with the rapidity of the 
falling tide, nothing lefs than inftant deftruétion could have been expeéted. 
This very extraordinary rugged region appeared to join the fouthern fide 
of the fhoal, on which the Refolution had grounded in the year 1778; 
and hence it muft be confidered as a moft fortunate circumftance, that 
neither Captain Cook nor ourfelves had attempted to pafs on the fouth 
fide of that fhoal. 

Between 


bis si aa Hare es Acnyaia kate el oee Ak ERS Lari alas Rit 


Bests 


eitedgcal 
oer 


Ia 
| 3 
| a 
ae 
9 


was 
from 
ague 
Hons, 
ice at. 
ed to 
it be- 


ipper 
Ss yet 


come 
alnefs 
fome 
y re- 
yout a 
built, 
$s and 
fame 
1 who 


y la- 
from 
fpec- 
ami- 
tog 
boat’s 
bf the 
béted. 

fide 
778; 

that 
outh 


veen 


fcee eer seeet neem: eo 


a 


} 
< 
i 


ssteh aininiana oar 


aia 


aR aeacnRiE: Adetenctamaeiemenc abled 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Between the point where this fhoal terminates and the eaft Foreland 
isa {hallow bay, with foundings of 7 and 8 fathoms, within a conve- 
nient diftance of the fhore, fheltered from the eaft, fouth, and fouth-weft 
winds, and not much expofed to thofe which blow from the oppofite 
quarters. Mr. Whidbey’s examination of this place, however, was not 
very minute, being anxious to accomplifh the more important objects of 
his expedition, On reaching the eaft Foreland he obferved the lau- 
tude to be 60°43’, longitude 209° 19. This comprehended the ex- 
tent of the furvey on the eaflern fhore. After crofling over to the 
weft Foreland, a diftance of eight miles and an half in a weft direction 
between thefe points, they hauled up their boats, to prevent their being 
injured by the ice, which defcended in vaft bodies down the river, and 
refted here for the myht; where they were vifited by our Indian 
paflengers, who exprefled much pleafure on feeing them again, and 
prefented them with the only eatables they had to offer, a few dried fal- 
mon. ‘The next morning (may the 2d) the weather was hazy. a heavy 
{well rolled from the fouth, and broke with much violence on the fhore, 
along which they had continued their furvey to the north Foreland, 
fituated in latitude 61° 4’, longitude 209° 37’. The {pace between this 
point and the weft Foreland forms a fpacious open bay. Shallow wa- 
ter extends from the latter to within about 5 leagues of the former 
point, from whence a depth of 5 fathoins was found clofe to the main 
land. Many of the natives were feen about their habitations as our 
party pafled along the bay; and, where they had occafion to land, fome 
of thefe good people obferving that the boats were prevented by the 
fhoals from reaching the {hore, they rufhed into the water, notwithftanding 
the weather was very cold and unpleafant, and offered their friendly affif 
tance to land our gentlemen, by carrying them through the water; which 
acceptable fervice they not only performed with the greateft care 
and attention, but made their new vifitors fome trivial prefents; which 
were recompenced by returns highly fatisfaétory to them. The ebb tide 
having commenced by the time they had reached the north Foreland, 
our party ftopped for the night clofe in the vicinity of the Rufhan 
eftablifhment, mentioned by thofe who had vifited the fhip in the 

Vou. Ul. R large 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


large open boat, to which our gentlemen received a moft friendly invi- 
tation. 

At this ftation there was only one large houfe, about fifty feet long, 
twenty-four wide, and about ten feet high; this was appropriated to 
the refidence of nineteen Ruffians, under the directions of an elderly 
man, who conduéted our party into the houfe by a {mall door, that was 
its only entrance, and feated them at a table near the upper or further 
end of the habitation, where a repaft, confifting of dried fifh and cran- 
berries, was produced ; but the offenfive fell of the houfe prevented 
any relifh foc thefe dainties, and on their hoft perceiving a relu€tance 
to partake of the refrefhments he had fet before them, he ordered the 
cranberries to be taken away, and after they had been beaten up with 
fome train oil they were re-produced, with the hope of their being 
rendered in this ftate more palatable. Thefe hofpitable endeavours 
to entertain their vifitors proving unfuccefsful, and our gentlemen 
having facrificed as much to politenefs as their ftomachs would bear, 
felt great relief in once more breathing the pure though cold air, and 
returned to their tents; where the badnels of the weather detained 
them the following day, and afforded them an opportunity of repay- 
ing the intended hofpitality of their Ruffian friends, who very heartily 
partook of fuch cheer as the party had to offer. 

By the affiftance of a very indifferent interpreter, Mr.Whidbey un- 
derftood that the Ruffians had been at this ftation nearly four years, 
yet there was not the leaft appearance of cultivation, although in the 
fummer feafon the foil moft probably was capable of producing many 
ufeful articles of food. This, however, feemed to be of little moment 
to the European refidents, as they appeared to be perfeétly content to 
live after the manner of the native indians of the country ; partaking 
with equal relifh and appetite their grofs and naufeous food, adopting 
the fame fafhion, and ufing the fame materials for their apparel, and 
differing from them in their exterior appearance only by the want of 
paint on their faces, and by their not wearing any of the Indian or- 
naments. So far as any conclufion could be drawn from this fhort in- 
terview, the Ruffians feemed to live upon the moft intimate terms of 


friendfhip 


adi ysis a Mies ma CRT aC tie satel cia Neel yi 
ahi sit SRE Ei Epis SRA eta EEE OSI 


WI- 


ng, 
to 
rly 
was 
her 
“an- 
ited 
nce 
the 
with 
ing 
Urs 
nen 
ear, 
and 
ined 
pay- 


ruly 


un- 
Pars, 
the 


any 


ent 


——— 


el mace Sie eat ae 


erat 


ep RY OE PTE SOF ETO ET 
Ss a a Sora ig Bio =F i 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


triendfhip with the Indians of all defcriptions, who appeared to be per - 
feétly fatisfied in being fubjeéted to the Ruffian authority. 

The weather proving more favorable, on the 4th the party again pro- 
ceeded early in the morning, and continued their furvey from the north 
Foreland along the weftern fhore; where, for the fpace of about 2 
leagues to the north of this point, tolerably good anchorage was found, 
and commodious communication with the fhore, abounding with wood 
clofe to the water fide, and affording feveral ftreams of excellent water. 
But this fpace was greatly expofed to the eaft and fouth-eaft winds, 
which are evidently the moft prevailing and violent in this country ; as 
Mr. Whidbey remarked, in every place where he had landed, that all 
the trees that had fallen were lying with their heads toward the weft and 
N.Ww., and that all the perennial vegetables alfo were lodged with their 
tops in the fame direétions. From this extent the fhoals gradually 
{tretched to the diftance of five miles from the fhore, until they joined 
on to point Mackenzie; the land between this point and the north 
Foreland was compofed of a low and perfeétly compaét fhore, without 
the fmalleft difcernible opening, fo near as the fhoals allowed them to 
approach; and having now fully accomplifhed the objeét of their ex- 
pedition, they returned to the fhip. 

It now only remained to determine the extent of the place we were in; 
and notwithftanding that the low water at {pring tides had fufficiently 
fhewn that we were already advanced nearly to its utmoft navigable 
boundary, yet fo extraordinary and unexpeéted a termination of this ex- 
tenfive inlet demanded a more minute inveftigation. 

Whilft our wood and water were completing, which the ice had pre- 
vented our accomplifhing ; on tuefday morning, accompanied by Mr. 
Baker, Mr. Menzies, and fome other gentlemen, I departed with the 
yawl and {mall cutter, provided with fupplies for four days. Our exa- 
mination was direéted along the weftern {hore ; and we were not long in 
determining that, at a little diftance from the place where we had for- 
merly founded, the fhoals, which were dry at low water, conneéted the 
two fhores together; and from an eminence that we afcended, we faw the 
{pace beyond, which at high tide becomes an extenfive fheet of water, 

Ra now 


Tuefday 


o 


i So in as eee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


now occupied by numberlefs banks of fand one behind the other, with 
{mall pools of water between them. Notwithftanding thefe indications 
that any further examination was unneceflary, I relolved to continue 
our refearches as far as it might be found navigable for the boats; and 
for that purpofe we kept on the weftern fhore, although we could not 
approach very near it, on account of the fhoals that extended from it, 
on which were lodged a very large quantity of ice. The depth of water 
was generally 1, 2, and 3 fathoms, very irregular, and now and then 4 
fathoms at about half flood. 

As we advanced to the north-eaft, the weftern fhore gradually inclined 
towards the eaftern fhore, until they were not more than half a mile 
afunder, forming ftill a fmall continuation of the branch, in which we 
found from 8 to 12 feet water, nearly at high tide; this we followed 
about 2 miles, when our curiofity became fatisfied by feeing its eaftern 
banks unite with thofe on the weftern fide, and terminate in a circular 
form, the moft diftant part being about half a league from us, in which 
{acc was fome banks of dry fand. 

The fhores we had paffed were compaét ; two or three fmall ftreams of 
frefh water flowed into the branch between low f{teep banks ; above thefe 
the furface was nearly flat, and formed a fort of plain, on which there 
was no fnow, and but very few trees. This plain ftretched to the foot 
of a conne€éted body of mountains, which, excepting between the weft 
and north-weft, were not very remote; and even in that quarter the 
country might be confidered as moderately elevated, bounded by dif- 
tant iiupendous mountains covered with fnow, and apparently de- 
tached from each other; though poffibly they might be conneéted by 
land of infufficient height to intercept our horizon. This we had found 
to be the cafe with the conneéted ridges on the coaft of North Weft 
America, whofe lofty fummits formed in many inftances the bafes only 
of the ftill more ftupendous detached mountains. To the northward 
round by the eaft, and towards the fouth-eaft, the nearer mountains, 
though of a height inferior to thofe in the oppofite region, were capped 
with fnow, and appeared to form an uninterrupted barrier; the defcend- 
ing plams from which feemed, by their apparent uniformity, to indi- 


cate 


with 
ons 
‘inue 
and 
not 
mit, 
vater 
en 4 


lined 

mile 
h we 
owed 
{tern 
cular 
vhich 


ms of 
thefe 
there 
foot 
welt 
r the 
vy dif- 

de- 
rd. by 
ound 
Welt 
only 
hward 
tains, 
hpped 
cend- 
indi- 


cate 


ee 
Pai 
=! 
ie 
af 
ze 
: 
~ 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


cate no probability of their being any where interfeéted by water. ‘That 
which flowed between the banks of the river {till retained a very confi- 
derable degree of faltnels, and clearly proved, that neither by falls, flats, 
marfhes, or fens, any large body of frefh water found its way to the 
ocean by this communication, and that confequently, according to the 
general acceptation of geographical terms, this can be no longer confi- 
dered as a river; I fhall therefore diftinguifh it henceforth as an antet. 

Thus terminated this very extenfive opening on the coaft of North 
Weft America, to which, had the great and firft difcoverer of it, whole 
name it bears, dedicated one day more to its further examination, he 
would have fpared the theoretical navigators, who have followed him in 
their clofets, the tafk of ingenioufly afcribing to this arm of the ocean a 
channel, through which a north-weft paflage exifting according to their 
doétrines, might ultimately be difcovered. 

Whilft we were engaged in making the neceflary obfervations for af- 
certaining the final termination of Coox’s INLET, the northern extent 
of which was found to be in latitude 61° 29’, longitude 211° 17’, we 
were attended by a party of the natives, who conduéted themfelves in 
the fame orderly manner as thofe we had before feen; they invited us 
with great earneftnefs to their habitation, which was found on the plain 
about a mile from the water fide; it confifted of a houfe fimilar to thofe 
we had feen on the 24th of april, and, like them, appeared to have been 
conftru€ted by the Ruffians; but as it was greatly out of repair, we 
fuppofed it was now only appropriated as a temporary refting place for 
travellers. Our vifit, I believe, was very acceptable, if a judgment might 
be formed by our reception and the cheerful and affable behaviour of the 
whole party, who, on finding that our intentions were to depart, folicited 
us to prolong our ftay; and, as an inducement for doing fo, gave .s to 
underftand, that our friendly young chief Chatedooltz was at no great 
diftance, and would foon arrive at their dwelling. But our curiofity being 
fatisfied, and having no bufinefs to detain us longer, we took our leave, 
and direéted our way back to the fhip with the firft of the ebb tide ; and 
found but juft fufhcient depth of water for the boats over the {hallow flat 
we had to pafs, extending about 5 leagues. About four o'clock in the 

afternoon 


Wednef. 7. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


afternoon we arrived on board, where every thing was in readinefs to 
return down the inlet the next morning. 

Although, by the information we had thus acquired, the profpeét of 
concluding our furvey of the coaft during the prefent feafon was greatly 
improved, yet it was not poffible to avoid a certain degree of mortifica- 
tion from the refleétion, that our opinions refpeéting the extent to which 
thefe waters were likely to lead, had been foextremely erroneous. This 
evidently proved the fallacy of analogous reafoning, which the human 
mind is too apt to render fubfervient to fome favorite hypothefis, and 
too frequently to adopt, even under the appearance of manifeft contra- 
dictions. 

In the evening two guns were heard in the offing, and on wednefday 
morning a brig was feen at anchor before the entrance into this place, 
which proved to be the Chatham. . Mr. Baker was immediately fent to 
advife the commanding officer that we fhould retur~. by the earlieft 
opportunity. 

About noon Mr. Puget came on board, from whom I ler :ned, that 
on the evening of our feparation he had carried a prefs of fail in or- 
der to keep up with us, which, together with a very heavy, irregular 
fea, occafioned the veffel to labour extremely, and yet fhe made {fo lit- 
tle progrefs, that their diftance from us was gradually increafed until 
the Difcovery was no longer vifible. The next morning (march 16th) 
upwards of four feet water was found in the Chatham’s hold; this in a 
great meafure accounted for the preffure and uneafinefs under which 
the veffel had laboured the preceding evening. To difengage themfelves 
from this inconvenience both pumps were employed until eight o'clock. 
Mr. Puget ftated likewife, that during their paffage from the Sandwich 
lands the Chatham had proved rather crank, and that her upper works 
had been found very leaky. 

Agreeably to the appointed rendezvous, Mr. Puget had commenced 
and continued his examination of the weftern fide of this inlet from cape 
Nouglas to our prefent ftation ; it was found to be a compaét fhore, 
without any collateral branches, or navigable openings ; but as fome 
further obfervations were neceflary for adjufting our furvey of that 
coaft, which in all probability would be procured in our paffage down 

the 


Peter cee. 


» tO 


t of 
atly 
ica- 
rich 
Chis 
man 
and 
itra- 


{day 
lace, 
t to 
rlieft 


that 
| or- 
rular 
D lit- 
ntil 
6th) 
ina 
hich 
elves 
ock. 

ich 
orks 


inced 
ape 
ore, 
ome 
that 


FES SRA 


A Ae ieee & 


ene 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the inlet, the delivery of lis documents was poftponed until we fhould 
arrive in port Chalmers: neverthelefs, as the principal occurrences ap- 
pertain to his refearches in this inlet, I fhall here infert the particulars 
of the information fo acquired. 

Few circumftances worthy of remark feemed to have taken place dur- 
ing the Chatham’s paffage to the coaft of America, which was feen at day- 
light on the 10th of april; and at noon, in latitude 56° 56’, cape Greville 
bore by compafs N. 50 w., and the fouthernmoft land in fight s. 74 w. 
Her courfe was now direéted at the diftance of 7 to 15 leagues from the 
land, which, by the 12th at noon, brought them to the latitude of 58° 
22, cape St. Hermogenes by compafs bearing s. 55 w., and the coaft in 
fight from s. 85 w. tos.395 w. Favored with a frefh breeze from the 
s.8.£, they {teered towards cape Douglas, between the barren ifles and 
point Banks, for the purpofe of acquiring fome information refpe€ting 
Smoky bay. Between cape St. Hermogenes and point Banks many de- 
tached rocks were feen, lying at fome diftance from the main land, but 
the fhores in their immediate neighbourhood appeared to be bold, and 
free from any vifible danger. The s.£. wind inc:eafed in the evening, 
attended with fome fnow. In paffing point Banks they were vifited by two 
Ruffians, who, by the help of an indifferent interpreter, informed them 
that no veffel had gone up the inlet this feafon; and from hence they 
concluded that they fhould precede the Dilcovery in itsexamination. By 
the moft intelligent of the two, whofe name was George Portoff, they 
were alfo informed, that to the fouth-eaft of point Banks they had pafled 
a very fine harbour, where the Ruffians had an eftablifhment, and where 
a floop, mounting eight carriage guns was then lying, under the com- 
mand of Alexander Berrenoff ; which gentleman he faid would be happy 
to vifit the Chatham in the morning, could he be informed where fhe 
was likely to be found; but this was fo intirely dependant upon circum- 
ftances that no appointment could poffibly be made. Portoff ftated, that 
this eftablifhment confifted of forty Ruffians, that they had another of 
equal confequence in Prince William’s found, and fome fmaller ones up the 
inlet. Mr. Puget endeavoured to procure fome information relative to 
Mr. Billings’s voyage of difcovery, under the Rufhan authority, in thefe 
regions, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


regions, and alfo concerning the navigable extent of the inlet; but all his 
inquiries proved unfuccefsful, as the Ruffians either could not, or would 
not, comprehend any of thofe queftions. On their departure they very 
obligingly took charge of a letter which Mr. Puget had addreffed to me, 
communicating the information of the Chatham’s arrival, and the plan 
of operations he intended to purfue. 

The wind, which had veered in the night to the n.«., fell calm 
early in the morning of the 13th, and was attended by a very heavy fall of 
fnow; which continued, notwithftanding a fine breeze {prang up about 
noon from the n.w., with which their courfe was ftill dire€ted towards 
the weftern fhore, inthe hope, that fome interval of clear weather would 
enable them io find fhelter, in the vicinity of the place where their fur- 
vey was intended to commence. But as a {trong ebb tide fat out from 
that fhore, and as the wind had fhifted more to the weftward, with an 
appearance of very unfettled weather, Mr. Puget was induced to ftand 
over towards cape Elizabeth; as the fhores there were known to afford 
both fhelter and anchorage, to which it was highly important to refort, 
until the feafon fhould be more propitious to the arduous tafk of dif- 
covery. 

The obfcurity produced by the falling fnow, rendered their fituation 
very irkfome and unpleafant as they approached the eaftern fide of 
the inlet, efpecially as at this time they were threatened with a ftorm. 
At length they difcovered that they had entered a bay to the north of 
cape Elizabeth, with the appearance of a harbour to the eaft, and a 
cove before them on the northern fide, that promifed to afford fecure 
anchorage. For this they immediately fteered, and pafled fome funken 
rocks that lie about a quarter of a mile from the fhore. Here they felt 
the influence of a very ftreng flood tide from the eaftward, through the 
channel formed by the iflands lying off that fhore, which, having met 
with fome oppofing current, appeared like breakers, extending nearly 
half way acrofs the entrance into the cove ; and although the depth was 
not lefs than 14 fathoms, yet fo violent was the agitation, that the cabin 
windows were obliged to be fecured by the dead lights. The cove having 
the appearance of being an eligible refting place until the weather 


2 fhould 


} 
| 


WSS tice ETE 


erence Te Ph es een 


his 
yuld 
ery 
me, 
plan 


calm 
1 of 
bout 
rards 
ould 
- fur- 
from 
h an 
ftand 
fford 
efort, 


of dif- 


hation 
de of 
orm. 
th of 
nd a 
ecure 
inken 
y felt 
h the 

met 
early 

was 
cabin 
aving 
ather 

ould 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fhould permit them to become better acquainted with the adjacent 
fhores, they worked in, and anchored in 5 fathoms water, fandy bottom. 
The fouth-weft point of the cove, ina line with cape Elizabeth, bore by 
compas s. 5 W.; a narrow channel leading to fea between the ifiands and 
the main land, s. 48 £.; the bottom of the cove, n.67 w.; and the near- 
eft fhore s.57 w., a quarter of a mile diftant. 

The very menacing appearance of the weather in the afternoon, di- 
reéted them to lofe no time in fearching for a place of greater fafety ; and 
about four o’clock a boat, that had been fent on this fervice to the north- 
eaftward, returned with the very pleafant intelligence, that at not more 
than half a league from the cove there was a harbour, affording every 
fhelter and prote€tion that could be required. During the abfence of 
the boat the gale, as well as the fall of fnow, had greatly increafed, and 
both were ftill increafing; the wind however was favorable to their pro- 
ceeding to this retreat, at which they foon arrived. It proved to be a 
perfect bafon, and they anchored in it at a convenient diftance from the 
fouthern fhore. To having thus providentially gained this protected 
fituation, they probably owed their prefervation; for during the night 
they had a very heavy fall of fnow, attended by a moft violent ftorm 
from the fouthward, and an intenfe froft, the thermometer being at 20. 
To the fury of this ftorm they would have been very dangeroufly ex- 
pofed at their former anchorage, for notwithftanding that the very fnug 
{tation they had now taken was not more than three hundred yards from 
the weather fhore; yet fo violent was the gale, that they were obliged to 
let go a fecond anchor to prevent the veflel from driving. 

The wind in the morning had much abated of its fury, but the fall of 
fnow and the feverity of the froft ftill continued. This inclemency of 
the weather did not prevent the vifits of the natives. About twenty-fix 
of thefe good people, in {mall fkin canoes, approached the Chatham with 
fome little caution. All the party, excepting one canoe, ftopped at the 
entrance of the harbour until this one had reconnoitred, who meeting 
with an agreeable reception, the appointed fignal was made, and the 


others without further hefitation inantly repaired alongfide, and were 
admitted on board, 


Vou, HI, Ss Their 


13o 


17940 
fay. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Their conduét was exaétly fimilar to that of their more northern neigh- 


—.-—~ bours who had vifited the Difcovery, all their a€tions were direéted by 


the ftri€teft honefty; the moft implicit confidence was repofed in all their 
dealings, and in no one inftance did they abufe the indulgences that 
were fhewn to them. They were very eager, expert, and clever in all 
their commercial dealings. They bartered away their garments, wea- 
pons, fifhing-tackle, and ornaments in great variety, but neither offered, 
nor appeared to have any furs for fale. Their various articles of drefs, 
&c. were exchanged principally for {poons and beads, as thefe people 
placed but little value on iron or copper. Many of them fpoke the Ruf- 
fian language, and from what could be inferred from their converfation 
and figns, it fhould appear that they are much attached to the people of 
that nation, 

The wind at n.w. bringing more favorable weather in the evening, 
the Chatham proceeded about half a league along the fouthern fhore, in 
order to take a flation near an excellent run of water, and which in other 
refpeéts. was. more commodious for tranfafting their bufinefs with the 
fhore. When moored the watering place bore by compafs s.17 £., at the 
diftance of a cable and a half; the points of entrance into the harbour, 
s.81w., and N.70Ww.; fome detached rocks above water, from N. 66£. 
to. N. 77 E.; the oppofite fide of the harbour being about a mile diftant. 

Owing to the extreme inclemency of the weather, their operations of 
refitting were greatly retarded; ftorms fucceeded ftorms, blowing from 
all quarters with great violence, and attended with very heavy falls of 
fnow. In one of thefe,, on the 19th, the mercury in the thermometer fell 
to 15, which was the greateft degree of cold they experienced. 

The wind between eaft and s. £. blew on the 22d with more than its 
former fury, and during the nighi obliged them to. ride with two anchors: 
a-head until the next morning; when, after fome very heavy rain, the wind 
moderated, the clouds, difperfed, and by noon the weather had become 
ferene and pleafant, the mercury having rifen to 42. This favorable 
change enabled them to accomplifh all their neceffary bufinefs with the 
fhore, and on the following morning. they failed: out of the harbour, for 
the purpofe of proceeding towards cape Douglas; but calm weather 
about 


gaa pe i ea 


BEERS SS SENSES TET Rat 


ae 


igh- 
| by 
heir 
that 
1 all 
wea- 
red, 
refs, 
ople 
Ruf- 
ition 


le of 


ling, 
e, in 
ther 
1 the 
t the 
our, 
GE. 
ant. 
of 
rom 


ls of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


apout noon obliged them to anchor in the cove before mentioned, im- 
mediately on the outfide of the harbour, where a fingle Ruffian took up 
his refidence amongit a fmall party of the natives. This man, with an- 
other of the name of Mallacha, who faid he commanded a floop mount- 
ing eight guns, had, during the boifterous weather, vifited the Chatham. 
On much anxiety being at that time expreffed to procure fome tidings of 
the Difcovery, and as fome intelligence feemed likely to be gained by 
fending over to cape Douglas, Mallacha took charge of a letter from 
Mr. Puget, which he promifed fhould be fafely delivered, and an anfwer 
returned in cafe the Difcovery had arrived in the inlet. Mr. Puget pre- 
fented him with an affortment of ufeful commodities, and added to thefe 
fome provifions and rum. This tranfaétion took place on the 23d, and 
he promifed to be back, or to meet the Chatham on her way towards 
cape Douglas, in the courfe of a few days; but on their arrival in this 
cove, they were greatly furprized by receiving a vifit from the refident 
Ruffian ina ftate of intoxication, who delivered a requeft from Mallacha 
for an additional fupply of rum, and who, from this man’s account, ap- 
peared to have been in this cove ever fince he had quitted the Chatham, 
and ina conftant ftate of inebriety. Mr. Puget, juftly incenfed at Mallacha’s 
unpardonable conduét, refufed his requeft; and confidered the following 
information given by the other as deferving of little credit. He ftated, 
that about twelve or fourteen days before fome Indians had feen a three- 
matted veffel pafs to the north of the barren iflands on her way up the 
inlet, and that an Englifh veffel had anchored off the Kodiak for about 
four hours, and then was driven to fea by a fouth-eaft gale, and had been 
no more feen. 

On this occafion I cannot help obferving, that the difcrediting of thele 
reports was probably more owing to incorreét interpreters than any inten- 
tion on the part of the Ruffians to deceive, and it {hews the great uncer- 
tainty of any information obtained, when a competent knowledge of the 
language made ule of is not mutually poffeffed by the parties converfing. 
This cannot probably be more fully exemplified than in the prefent inftance, 
in which it is fair to prefume, that the intelligence conveyed was founded 
on faéts; for the Difcovery had unqueftionably paffed to the north of the 

S 2 barren 


Fagan sagas 


Pets ce ela 
a : 
= 


‘fl 

} 

ij 

i 1 . 

4 ‘ ‘ 

i Be 132 

4, ' 

i 

i ot 
1 Bhs 4 

an 

i \ 

\y i 

* tle | 

ith 


Se 
ET rae 


“ {} 
4 \ ae al 
Sata 
Sv t 
NP ii) 
iy} it iy 
is Phill wf 
RS ie 
A Ce 
ib Rt 4 
Bei We ht ah 
don lity 
il 4 | Beh 
PY Wet 
Me it 
h " 1 | 
nee Ta 
# eS 
‘ a} tials 
' 4 
oie. # 
rl 
* 
eOM VE ‘ 
ire ” 
NG A 
mw. By 
bhi 5 
an ti! 
Pes) i 
‘~~ 
a 


bY abe oe 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


barren lands, and had direéted her courle up the inlet about the time 


Uay—_ alluded to: we had likewife been becalmed on the evening of the 5th of 


april, with moti of our fails clewed up, within four or five miles of the 
eaftern coalt of Kodiak, where we remained flationary in good foundings 
neatly four hours, and might ealily have been confidered at anchor ; 
from whence, with the wind ta the eaflern quarter, we were driven to 
fea, and contended with much boillerous weather. ‘The Indians allo, 
who vifited the Difcovery wluillt becalmed, clearly underftood {he was an 
Mnghth vellel; thus the reports made to Mr. Puget feem to have cor- 
refponded with our mouons,- and adimit a prelumption, that a judgment 
rather too hally was formed of the veracity of thefe Rufhans. 

But to refume Mr. Puget’s narrative, it appeared that on fhore, in the 
cove near the Indian village, a crofs was erected, on which were feveral 
inferiptions in the Rufhan character, 

A flrong gale from the s.r., attended with very thick mifly weather, 
continued, and detained the Chatham until the evening of the 28th, 
when the wind becoming lefs violent, preparations were made for failing 
the neat morning. About midnight, a party, in a dozen canoes, arrived, 
conducted by Portoff the Ruffian, who had vifited them when off point 
Banks, and prefented them with a fupply of cod and halibut, being the 
firft they had caught this feafon. Portolf was queftioncd concerning the 


letter intrufted to his care off point Banks, by Mr. Puget; in reply to 


which he fated, that it had been fent to a {hip they had received intelli- 
gence of being in the inlet, but the Indians who had been difpatched 
after her had returned unfuccelsful, without obtaining any certain in- 
formation where the vellel was to be found. 

In the low grounds, at the head of the cove, the officers of the Chat- 
ham had been fo fortunate as to kill fome wild geefe and ducks. The 
weather, on the 2gth, bemg fair, with a pleafant breeze from the north- 
ward, they. finally quitted this place, which obtained the name of Port 
CuaruamM; itis fituated behind the ifland which forms cape Elizabeth, 
and from that promontory extends to a point in a direction N. 45 E.s 
five miles and an half, and from thence it terminates in an. excellent 
harbour, about two miles long from welt to eaft, and one mile broad 
from 


PES ROA aed 


Sa RS EE in ee 


ime 
1 of 
the 
ings 
lor; 
1 lO 
illo, 
san 
COV. 


NCE 


r the 
‘eral 


her, 
8th, 
ling 
ved, 
point 
r the 

the 
y to 
elli- 
shed 


in- 


hat- 
The 
rth- 
DRT 
eth, 
b Evy 
lent 
oad 
rom 


cs PS igs ee eS RE ARES AN PRES Es ee 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


from north to fouth, affording fecure and convenient anchorage. ‘The 
paflage into it pafling to the north-weft of cape Elizabeth, is free from 
all obftruétions, but fuch as ‘are fufficiently confpicuous, or cafily avoid- 
ed; thefe confift principally of fhoals, that extend a little diitance from 
cach point of the cove, and an iflet, about which are fome rocks that 
lic to the fouth-weft of the fouth-eaft point of entrance into the harbour. 
A narrow channel exifts between the rocks and the main land, from 7 
to 12 fathoms deep. ‘The foundings in general in port Chatham are to- 
lerably regular from 5 to 25 fathoms, the bottom a {tiff clay, the fhores 
in molt places are a low border, very well wooded with pine trees and fome 
fhrubs. ‘his border occupies a {mall {pace between the water-fide and 
the foot of the mountains that compole the neighbouring country, up 
which, to a certain height, trees and other vegetables were produced ; 
but their more clevated parts appeared to be barren, and their ftun- 
mits were covered with f{now, 1n all probability perpetual. ‘The Chat- 
ham’s anchorage, off the run of water, was found to be in latitude 59° 
14’, longitude 209° 4’, variation 24° eaflerly. ‘The rife and fall of the 
tide, ncar the change of the moon, was 14, but during the neap tides 
not more than 10 or 11 feet. High water about an hour after the 
moon had paffed the meridian; but this and other circumftances relative 
to the tides were found to be greatly influenced by the force and direc- 
tion of the winds. ‘The fituation of the harbour, in refpeét of its vicinity 
to the occan, its free accefs, egrefs, and very convenient communication 
with the fhore, are confidered by Mr. Puget to be at leaft equal, if 
not fuperior, tothe generality of the ports that we had vifited in thefe 
regions. 

After quitting port Chatham, owing to faint variable winds it was 
near noon on the goth before they had reached within a few miles of 
cape Douglas, where the coaft is compofed of a low traét of country, 
ftretching into the fea from the bafe of very lofty mountains wrapped 
in {now, which alfo covered the furface of the land quite down to the 
water’s edge. This was likewile the cafe with that which appeared to 
be the extremity of the cape, fituated in latitude 58° 52’, longitude 
207°21'; off which, a few miles to the northward, lics a very low flat 

ifland ; 


a you~ 


134 


1794- 
May. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ifland; and to the northward of the mountains that form the promon- 
tory of cape Douglas is a lofty rugged ridge, that at a diftance feemed 
to be detached, and to give an appearance of many openings in the coaft ; 
but on a nearer approach it was found to be firmly connected by land 
Jefs elevated, and forming a deep bay between the cape and the lower 
borders of mount St. Auguftin, This became the firft objeét of their 
examination. 

Light baffling winds rendering the progrefs of the veffel extremely 
flow, a boat was difpatched to facilitate the operations of their furvey. 
By noon the weather had materially changed ; a fwell rolled in from the 
eaftward, and as this was attended by other indications of a return of the 
fouth-eaft and eafterly ftorms, the boat was recalled, and the Chatham 
ftood to the northward, in the hope of finding fome place of fhelter; 
but the wind being unfteady, and the tide fetting faft towards the low 
fneres of cape Douglas, they anchored in 21 fathoms water, foft bottom. 
Mount St. Auguftin bore by compafs n.24w.; an appearance like a 
harbour, s. 83 w.; the above low flat ifland from s. 39. to s.77 E., 
diftant about a mile; and a ledge of rocks {tretching from its north-eaft 
point, N. 825. At low water the extent of this reef was very materially 
increafed. A very uncomfortable night was paffed in this expofed fitu- 
ation, which however they had no means of quitting, becaufe it fell 
calm, and continued fo moft part of the night; yet the atmofphere bore 
a very tempeftuous appearance, and they had a very heavy and irregular 
fwell from the eaftward, which with the ebb tide detained them at anchor 
until ten in the forenoon of the 1ft of may. In the a& of weighing the 
cable parted, by which unfortunate accident the anchor was irrecover- 
ably loft. 

With a gentle breeze from the N.£. they ftood to the weftward in 
order to examine the bay, and found the depth of water to decreafe from 
17 to g fathoms. At this time a long reef was difcovered, on which the 
fea broke with great violence, extending froma low rocky iflet lying 
before the apparent harbour above-mentioned. The fhores of the bay 
in moft dire€tions feemed to be compaét, but encumbered with large 
rocks and ftones; this appearance induced Mr. Puget to retire from fuch 

1 dangers, 


sh eat eae 


ibiaraccacts: 


EA ot ae Ra ea ee ip oe ee Oke 


Ba Scr te epee 


o 


i ROUND THE WORLD. 


ions i dangers, and to dire&t his courfe to the northward for mount St. Au- 1704. 
| 4 guftin. The depth of water was 10, 11, and 12 fathoms, on paffing at iy 
aft ; ; the diftance of about 4 leagues from the bottom of the bay, which is 

land < formed by an extenfive low country, lying between the bafe of the rug- 

ee ee ged range of mountains before mentioned, and the water fide. The 

hee i termination of this bay not appearing to have the leaft navigable open- 


Scar 


ing in it, a more minute examination was deemed unneceffary. 


nely g As they approached mount St. Auguftin it was found to conftitute a 
vey. i‘ very remarkable ifland, rifing with a uniform afcent from the fhores to 
| the ‘ its lofty f{ummit, which is nearly perpendicular to the center of the ifland, 
F the 4 inclining fomewhat to its eaftern fide. The width of the paffage between: 
ara : it and the main land is about fix miles, through which they failed within 
Iter; a about half a league of the weftern fhore of the ifland in 7, 5, and g fa- 
low | thoms water, and after paffing its weftern extremity, anchored on the 
tom: 4 north fide in 12 fathoms water, muddy bottom; the fhores of the ifland. 
ke a bearing by compafs from N. 65 £. to s. 4w., the neareft fhore s. 10 £., 


about two miles diftant, and its moft elevated part fituated in latitude 
59° 22’, longitude 207° 10’, s.73 £. This ifland is ftated by Mr. Puget 
to be about g leagues in circuit; towards the fea-fide it is very low, from 
whence it rifes, though regular, with rather a feep afcent, and forms 
a lofty, uniform, conical mountain, prefenting nearly the fame appear- 
ance from every point of view, and clothed down to the water's edge 
with fnow and ice, through which neither tree nor fhrub were feen to 
protrude; fo that if it did produce any, they muft either have been very 
fmall, or the fnow muft have been fufficiently deep to have concealed 
them. ‘The landing upon this ifland was effected with fome difficulty on 
the cbbing tide, in confequence of the fhore being bounded at the diftance 
of a quarter of a mile by innumerable large detached rocks, through 
which a paffage was found with much labour for the boat. Fragments 
of rock fimilar to thofe which have been already deferibed, appre~red to 
lie off moft parts. of the ifland, but no where at fo great a diftance as 
from its northern fhore. 

In the evening Mr. Puget ftates that they were vifited by two Ruffians, 
accompanied by a {mall party of the natives, whofe refidence was toward 
the 


ea te is eda pcs Pe Bee Oe eG Ge a 


Rcke RE See 


‘ 
Oy 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the north-eaft point of the ifland; their vifit was not of a very intereft- 
ing nature, as they brought with them nothing to difpofe of, nor could 
they give any account whether any veffel had paffed up the inlet in the 
courfe of the feafon. On this fubjeét the gentlemen in the Chatham be- 
gan to be very anxious, but as they entertained not the leaft doubt that 
they had preceded the Dilcovery in their furvey, a letter communicating 
fuch intclligence was entrufted to their Ruffian vifitors. 

Early in the morning of the gd of may they proceeded to the siete 
ward with a light air from the s.s.w., attended with fair and pleafant 
weather; and as they advanced along the weftern fhore of the mlet, it 
was obferved to be indented and broken into coves and {mali bays, that 
appeared likely to afford convenient anchurage. The points of thefe 
bays were in general fteep and rocky, behind which rofe a compaét moun- 
tainous country to a confiderable height, being a continuation of the 
range extending from cape Douglas, clad in perpetual fnow; and feem- 
ingly deftitute of any vegetable produétions except on a narrow flat 
margin commencing at the foot of thofe mountains, and forming the fea 
fhore, which was tolerably well wooded. At noon their obferved latitude 
was 59° 34; the northernmoft land then in fight, a low point covered 
with trees, bore by compafs N. 25 £.; cape Elizabeth, n.81£.; the 
iland of St. Auguftin, from s. 40 £. to fouth, diftant 3 leagues; the 
neareft fhore diftant three miles ; and to the north-weft there were three 
iflets, behind which was the appearance of anchorage and fhelter. The 
foutherly breeze increafing in the afternoon enabled them to make great 
progrefs, obferving as they pafled a few {mall bays or coves on the com- 
pact weltern fhore. In the evening they were met by one hundred and 
fifty fkin canoes, which were eftimated to contain about three hundred 
of the natives; fome carried three perfons, others two, and a few only 
one perfon. They fpoke the Ruffian language, pulled off their hats or 
caps, and bowed as they paffed; feveral attempted to reach the veffel, 
but were prevented by the favorable breeze, which was too valuable at 
this time to be facrificed to the curiofity of the Indians. The Chatham 
continued her route along the fhores, fimilar to thofe already defcribed, 
unl 


a 


sd a ase aaa oneal CS 


Pahl 


eft- 
yuld 
the 
be- 
that 
ang 


rth- 
fant 
t, it 
that 
hefe 
oun- 
' the 
2em- 
flat 
e fea 
tude 
ered 
the 
the 
hree 
The 
preat 
om- 
and 
dred 
only 
or 
f{el, 
le at 
ham 
bed, 


nil 


SO NTH ATTN TE te 


i a EA eS oes ret CIT 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


until ten o'clock, when fhe hauled her wind, and plied under an eafy fait 
during the night. 

At this time they had reached that part of the weftern fhore which 
had undergone our previous examination. By Mr. Puget’s journal it 
appears, that a compatt, conne€ted body of very high mountainous land 
binds the weftern fhore of this inlet, at no great diftance from the water 
fide, all the way from cape Douglas to the volcano; from whence the 
fame lofty range continues until it branches off to the north-weft, towards 
thofe mountains that, from the upper part of the inlet, bore the appear- 
ance of being detached. The found, whofe waters appeared to us on 
the 15th of april to wafh the bafe of the volcano mountain, was ap- 
proached by them much nearer than by us, and is defcribed by Mr. 
Puget as having been feen quite round; in its fouth-weft part is a fmall 
opening formed by two low points covered with wood ; the entrance is 
very narrow, and at low water a flat, interfperfed with large detached 
ftones, appeared to extend from the commencement of that low land to 
its termination, including the paffage into the opening or rivulet. Under 
thefe circumftances it was confidered as unworthy of any further examina- 
tion, and with the affiftance of the flood tide their route was purfued to the 
northward, between the low ifland and the main land, in foundings from 
30 to 13 fathoms; keeping near the former, in the expe€tation of feeing 
fome of the Ruffians from the eftablifhment that Malacha had ftated to be 
onthe ifland. This was paffed within about half a league of its weftern fide, 
and a fignal gun was fired, but to no effe€t. About eight o’clock they 
anchored for the night in 12 fathoms water, coarfe gravelly bottom. 
The north-weft point of the ifland bore by compafs v.33 £., diftant 4 
miles, and the fouth point s. 30 w., diftant 3 leagues. Early in the 
morning of the 5th of may they proceeded towards the weft Foreland, 
with foundings from 13 to 25 fathoms, until within about 4£ miles of 
the fhores of the main land, north of the ifland, when the depth de- 
creafed, and as the flood tide was then over, they anchored in 10 fathoms 
water, rocky bottom. The weft Foreland bore by compafs N. 42 £., 4 
or 5 miles diftant; the north-weft point of the ifland, s. 34 £.; the bot- 


tom of a very open bay, formed by the land retiring a little to the weft. 
Vou. IIL. T ward 


£7946 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ward of the welt Foreland, N.17 w.; at low water the fhoal noticed by 
Meffrs. Portlock and Dixon was diftin@ly feen from the matft-head, from 
s. 80 £. to s. 74 £.; and a detached rock lying off the north-eaft point of 
the ifland, s. 45 E. 

Mr. Puget reprefents the country from the, abeve fuppofed found as 
delcending from the bafe of the mountains, and gradually forming an 
inclined plane, terminating at the water fide in a compact beach, or. 
low cliffs well wooded; the mountains rife very perpendicularly, and, 
like the others that incompals this region, are lofty, apparently barren, 
and always covered with fnow; from the fhores of this open bay a fhoal 
extends fome diftance into the inlet. Whilft they were waiting for the: 
return of flood, fome of the natives gave them to. underftand, that a 
three-mafted veffel had paffed up the inlet not many days before, and 
to confirm the truth of their report, produced the beads and other ar- 
ticles they had procured from the fhip, which they defcribed to be at 
anchor at no great diftance. 

Notwithftanding the behaviour of thefe people was as. orderly and civil 
as can poflibly be imagine¢, nothing could prevail with them to carry a: 
letter to the veffel they fpoke of; not from the labour or danger that 
might attend their expedition, but from an objection that they had to the 
letter itfelf; which they could not be induced even to touch. A fimilar 
inftance of this nature occurred to Mr. Whidbey, who wifhed to intruft 
to the care of our Indian paffengers a letter to be delivered to the Chatham 
on her arrival in their neighbourhood, but they alfo declined having any 
thing to do with it. This cautious conduét proceeds, in all probability, 
from their being inftruéted to behave in this manner towards {trangers by 
their Ruffian mafters, who feemed on all occafions to poflefs great influ- 
ence and authority over them. 

On the firft of the flood tide the Chatham failed round the weft Fore- 
land, at the diftance of about a mile from the fhore, with foundings from 7 
to 12 fathoms. A rock was obferved that is vifible only at half tide, about. 
the fourth of a mile from the extremity of the point, from whence they 


were vifited by two Indians, who confirmed the intelligence refpecting 


the Difcovery, and put the matter beyond all doubt, by diftinétly pro- 
nouncing 


8 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nouncing my name, and pointing out the dire€tion where the veffel 
would be found. Mr. Puget immediately fo directed his courfe, and we 
had the pleafure of meeting as already related. 

Every thing being in readinefs to depart from a fituation that had pro- 
duced us fuch a continual anxiety, and had in other refpects been ex- 
tremely uncomfortable, we weighed with the firft of the ebb about one 
o'clock on wednefday afternoon, and with a light breeze from the fouth- 
ward turned down the channel to the Chatham, and anchored for the 
night off the north-weft point of Turnagain ifland in 15 fathoms water, 
having found the foundings, as on our paflage up the inlet, very ir- 
regular. Here we were vifited by two Ruffians, who came in a large 
canoe or boat paddled by ten Indians; one of the Ruffians was the prin- 
cipal perfon of the party with whom Mr. Whidbey had’ met near the 
north Foreland, the other a clerk, or perfon of fome fuch defcription 
belonging to the eftablifhment on the eaftern {hore to the fouthward of the 
eaft Foreland; their errand was intended as a vifitto us, and as we were 
bound towards their places of abode, they readily accepted an invitation 
to proceed with us, inftead of returning in their open boat. On the 
making ebb tide, about two o’clock on thurfday morning, we again pro- 
ceeded with a light breeze from the northward. Our courfe was directed 
a little nearer to the ifland than before, by which means we now pafled over 
in 3f fathoms water the north part of the fhoal that extends from the welt 
end of Turnagain ifland. In confequence of this fpit, and the fhoals 
from the northern fhore, which alfc projeé&t ina point towards the ifland, 
the navigable channel is reduced to {carcely a mile in width; the deepeft 
water, which does not exceed 6 and 7 fathoms at half tide, is neareft to 
the northern fide. From this fhoal as we {teered to the fouth-weft; the 
depth of water foon increafed to 12 fathoms. Our route to the weit- 
ward was now direéted about half a league or 2 miles to the fouth of our 
former track, in which we confidered ourlelves clear of fhoals or other 
interruptions; but we had not proceeded more than 6 miles in a well 
direction from the ifland, when the depth of water again decreafed to 7, 
5, and 4 fathoms, and on the boat that was founding a-hcad coming into 
ji fathoms, we fteered more to the northward; and on the depth in- 

T 2 creafing 


139 
1794: 
May. 


Wednel. +: 


Thurfday 8. 


Saturday 10, 


A VOYAGL OF DISCOVERY 


ereafing we refumed our wefterly courfe, with regular foundings from 
7 to 16 fathoms, in which latter depth the flood tide obliged us to an- 
chor, until with the affiftance of the ebb tide, by five in the afternoon. 
we had nearly approached the north Foreland, when the Ruffian com- 
mandant teok his leave, with a promife of returning in the evening. 
We anchored again on the return of the flood, about a league to the 
fouthward of his refidenee, but faw nothing more of him; the other 
Ruffian. however remained on board, in order to condué& us to their 
fettlement on the eaftern fhore, whither we did not arrive, owing to faint 
variable winds, until faturday morning, when we anchored before a {mall 
creek in 10 fathoms water, fandy bottom. The eaft Foreland by com- 
pals bore nN. 34 w., the welt Foreland, v.74 w.; the voleano. s. 390 w. ; 
the fouthernmoft part of the eaftern fhore in fight, s. 95 £.; and the 
ereek, N.70£., about a league diftant. In this fituation the obferved 
latitude was 60° 35’, longitude 209° 21’. 

Soon after we had anchored, the commanding officer at the place fent 
a very civil meffage, requefting we would vifit their habitation, with 
which after breakfaft, accompanied by Mr. Menzies and our Ruffian paf- 
fenger, Icomplied. As we drew near to the fhore the depth of water 
gradually decreafed,. until in the entrance of the creek we found but one 
fathom from fide to fide. On our arrival here we were faluted by two 
guns from a kind of balcony,. above which the Ruffian flag was difplayed 
en the top ofa houfe fituated on the cliffs, which in moft places.compofe 
the fhores of the upper part of the inlet, rifing perpendicularly from a 
beach, which generally commences at high water mark. The compii- 
ment of two guns was: repeated on our landing, where we met fome 
Ruffians, who came to welcome and conduét us to their dwelling by a 
very indifferent path; which was rendered more difagreeable by a moft 
intolerable ftench,. the worft, excepting that of the fkunk, I had ever the 


inconvenience of experiencing; occafioned I believe by. a depofit made: 


during the winter of an immenfe colleétion of all kinds of filth, offal, &c. 
that had now become a fluid mafs.of putrid matter, juft without the rail- 
ing that inclofed the Ruffian factory, over which thefe noxious exhala- 
tons fpread, and feeme’ to become a greater nuifance by their combi- 


1 nation 


aa wean sie an at ees 


Scab un einige Clio shad na ASN LO a ote ie ae 
Ee Sr yy et ey Nain abe a eae 


4 
a 


3S 
id 

= 
= 


; x 
. 
a 
a 
4 


' 


ag 
‘ 
q 


Saeoeiga 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nation with the effluvia arifing from the houfes. We were however 
conftrained to pafs fome time in this eftablifhment, which occupied a 
{pace of about an hundred and twenty yards f{quare, fenced in by a very 
ftout paling of {mall fpars of pine and birch, placed clofe together about 
twelve feet high. Thefe were fixed firm in the ground, yet they ap- 
peared to be a very defencelefs barricade againft any hoftile attempts, 
even .f the "=dians, as the whole might eafily be reduced to afhes by fire 
on. ou. *. as could alfo th.!. * .ufes within the fence, thofe being 
built with wood and covered in with thatch. The largeft of thefe, re- 
fembling in its fhape a barn, was about thirty-five yards long, about as 
many feet in breadth, and about ten or twelve feet high ; this was appro- 
priated to the refidence of thirty-fix Ruffians, who, with their commander 
Mr. Stephen Zikoff, then on an excurfion to prince William’s found, 
comprehended the total number of Ruffians at this ftation; all of whom 
excepting the commander refide in this houfe, which principally con- 
fifts of one common room, anfwering all the purpofes of fhelter, feed- 
ing, and fleeping in. For their better accommodation when at reft, 
two platforms, each about eight feet wide, were raifed about eight or. 
nine inches from the ground or floor, and extended from end to end 
on each fide of the room; thefe were divided into eighteen open par- 
titions or ftalls, one of which was allotted to each perfon, as his parti- 
eular apartment, the middle of the room being common to them all. 


The ftalls were divided like thofe in the ftables of public inns, by pofts. 


only, on which hung their {pare apparel, with their arms and accoutre- 
ments. The room though unglazed was tolerably light, as in the win- 


dows a fubftitute for glafs was made ufe of, which we fuppofed to be a: 


thin membrane from the inteftines of the whale; this admitted.a fuffi- 
cient quantity of light for all their purpofes, and excluded the wind and 
imclemency of the weather. The largeft of thefe: windows was at the 
furtheft or upper end, near which ftood a very humble: wooden table 


very rudely wrought, and furrounded by forms of the fame material: To. 


thefe we were conduéted by two of the party who feemed'to have fome 


fuperiority over the reft, one of whom appeared to be the principal’ 


perfon in. the abfence of Mr. Zikoff, the other a kind of {teward or per- 


fon. 


142 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


179% fon charged with the moveable property belonging to the fattory. If 
—v—~ we underftood them right this fettlement had been thus eftablifhed twelve j 
years, notwithftanding which we did not perceive that any attempt had 4 
been made either to cultivate the land, or to fupply themfelves more 
comfortably by the introduction .-f dcmeftic animals. The only refrefh- 
ment they had to offer, was fome cold boiled halibut, and raw dried fal- 
mon intended to be eaten with it by way of bread. This very homely 
fare produced us no difappointment; for had it been otherways, and 
confifting of the greateft niceties, we fhouid not have been inclined to 
have partaken of the repaft, ina place, where the atmofphere we inhaled 
was fo extremely offenfive, that every fenfation that is unpleafant was 
excited, excepting that ofhunger. This occafioned the fhortening of 
our vifit as much as common civility would allow, and as we prepared to 
' feek the relief of a purer air, we were attended by our two leaders in 
a taking a view of the reft of the fettlement. “ We found it to confift of a 
fmaller houfe fituated at the weft end of the large one, in which Mr. 
Zikoff the commander refided, and two or three and twenty others of 
different dimenfions all huddled ‘ogether without any kind of regularity, 
appropriated to the depofiting _ftores, and to the educating of Indian 
children in the Ruffian language and religious perfuafion; they were 
alfo the refidence of fuch of the natives as were the companions, or the 
immediate attendants on the Ruffians compofing the eftablifhment. Our 
attention was next directed to the veflel we had been informed belonged 
tothis place. She was found hauled up juft above the general line of 
high water mark, clofe under the cliffs on which their houfes were 
ereéted. Her burthen I eftimated at about fixty or feventy tons; fhe 
was very clumfily rigged with two mafts, and her hull had the oakum 
dropping out of the feams, and was in other refpeéts much out of repair. 
In this fituation fhe had been for two years, and was {till to remain there 
two years longer, when this party would be relieved, and the veflel re- 
paired, in which they would return to Kamtfchatka. 


The place where the veflel was laid up was hardly within fight of their 
habitation, fhe could therefore in the event of any mifunderftanding with 
the natives have been eafily fet on fire, or otherwife deftroyed, which 
. could 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


If 4 could not have been fo eafily accomplifhed had fhe remained in the creek, 
welve 7 where the water feemed to be of fufficient depth to keep her conftantly 
t had a afloat, and by that means to afford the Ruffians a retreat that might 
more 4 prove very defirable in the event of any infurreétion. ‘Their apprehen- 
frefh- b, ’ fions however on this {core did not feem very great, for they were very 
etile . ill provided to defend themfelves againft any attack. ‘The whole of their 
ely armour eonfifted of two {mall brafs fwivel guns, each carrying about a 
aged pound fhot, mounted on the balcony at the top of the large houfe, which 
ees is fufliciently high to overlook all the inclofed premifes; a fimilar piece 
Pale of ordnance at the door of the entrance, about a dozen mufkets hanging 
de hens apparently in conftant readinefs near the upper end of the great room, 
ng of with two or three piftols, and a few fhort daggers. 
cabin Our curiofity and inquiries thus fatisfied, I invited thefe two gentlemen 
ee E to accompany us on board, with which they readily complied. They 
ine . prefented me with a few fkins of the land animals found in the neigh- 
. Me 4 bourhood, and a very fine halibut, which was highly acceptable, as it 
a: was the firft frefh fifh we had procured this feafon. A brifk northerly 


breeze prevailed on our reaching the fhip; this temptation to proceed 

was too great to allow of our remaining at anchor, though it neceffarily 
cis fhortened the ftay of our vifitors. On their departure I gave them a 

ee fmall affortment of fuch things as were moft likely to prove ferviceable 
Our . & in their retirement, which they very thankfully accepted. 

We now direéted our courfe along the eaftern fhore, towards the en- 
trance of the inlet; but the northerly breeze being foon fucceeded by 
light variable airs, our progrefs became fo flow, that it was ten at night 
on monday, before we had arrived within about eight miles of point Bede, Monday 12. 
bearing by compals s.44 5. Here we anchored in 30 fathoms water, 
and were vifited by three of the natives, who brought the letter Mr. Puget 
had given in charge to fome of the Ruffians, and who prefented us with 
four halibuts, which they faid were fent by Mr. Berrenoff; this gentleman 
they faid was on fhore, and that he had direéted them to fay, that if we 
hes fhould remain at anchor until the next morning, he would pay usa vifit. 
wk As I much wifhed for the pleafure of feeing Mr. Berrenoff, who we 
ne had been given to underftand was the com:andant of all the Ruffian 


Sela eftablith. 


larity, 
ndian 


n ged 


ne of 


were 
; fhe 
akum 
“pair. 
there 
el re- 


144 


17946 
May. 


Sn aueed 
‘Tuefday 13. 


Wednel. 14. 


‘i huriday 15. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


eftablifhments on the Kodiak, and about the entrance into this inlet, I 
did not depart as I had purpofed in the morning; but hearing nothing 


further of ‘him, with the firft of the ebb in the afternoon, and a light 


breeze from the nN. w. we proceeded to the fouthward. In the morning 
we had been vifited by feveral of the natives, all of whom conduéted 
themfelves like their neighbours with the utmoft propriety. As we ap- 
proached point Bede, Portoff, to whom Mr. Puget had intrufted a letter 
addreffed to me off cape Douglas, came with it on board, accompanied 
by two of his countrymen. From him we underftood that Berrenoff, 
who was then on his way, would be with us in the courfe of the after- 
noon or evening; that he was very anxious for an interview with us, and 
that he requefted we would not proceed to fea. On their departure one 
of them promifed to provide us with a large fupply of fifh by the morn- 
ing. About day-light he met the fhip off the Barren ifles, and punétu- 
ally performed his promife, by affording us halibut fufficient to ferve the 
whole of the crew two or three days. Hearing no tidings of the com- 
mandant, and having a fteady breeze from the eaftward, we plied towards 
the ocean until noon, when the weather affuming a very unfavorable 
appearance, attended with a heavy fwell from the eaftward, we anchored 
off the north part of point Bede in 31 fathoms water, having the fouth- 
ernmoft part of that point and cape Elizabeth in a line, bearing by com- 
pafs s. 54 £.; thenearelt fhore, being a detached rock with fome f{maller 
ones about it, N. 51 E., three fourths of 2 mile diftant; land we fuppofed 
to be the points of entrance into Graham’s harbour, from Nn. 35 £. to 
N.12., the former at the diftance of 2, the latter at about 9 leagues; 
the volcano, N. 64 w., and the Barren ifles from s.8 £. to s.18 £. In 
this fituation our obfervations on the following day fhewed the latitude 
to, be 59° 194’, longitude 208° 41’; and the variation of the compafs by 
three fets of azimuths, differing from 26° 16’ to 27° 35’, gave the mean 
refult 26° 53° eaftwardly. 

The friendly Ruffian, who had fo amply fupplied us with halibut, 
again appeared, and ftated, that Mr. Berrenoff would on a certainty be 


with us in the courfe of the afternoon; and, as I now underftood he | 


would bring an Englifh interpreter with him, an interview became infi- 


nitely 


. 


ogee a RR ENE ISR et SAPS ORIT SS SE 


t, I 
hing 
ight 
ning 
Eted 
: ap- 
etter 
nied 
noff, 
fter- 
and 
> one 
OrN- 
nétu- 
e the 
com- 
yards 
rable 
ored 
buth- 
com- 
aller 
bofed 
E. to 
pues 5; 
In 
itude 
s by 


ean 


ibut, 
y be 
dhe 
infi- 


| itely 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nitely more defirable, from the profpe& we had of acquiring fome inte- 
refting intelligence refpeéting thefe regions ; yet, as I had been twice 
difappointed in fimilar affurances, the third engagement by no means 
warranted any further delay, efpecially as the caufe which had produced 
our detention no longer exifted. For thefe reafons, with the affiftance 
of the ebb tide, and a wefterly wind, we proceeded about two o'clock, 
but it was fo flowly, that it was eight o’clock in the evening before we 
had pafled cape Elizabeth; which, from the refult of our obfervations, 
appeared to be fituated in latitude 59° 9, longitude 208°53'; which po- 
fition, like that of the reft of the coaft vifited by us this feafon, is con- 
fiderably to the eaftward of the longitude as ftated by Captain Cook, the 
difference being from 1° 8’ to 1°12’ or 1°14’. The delineation of the 
fhores of this inlet and its foundings will likewife affume, in a few in- 
ftances, a trivial difference from the reprefentation of that able and il- 
luftrious navigator, in confequence of our having been able to appro- 
priate a greater length of time to the examination of it than it was in 
Captain Cook’s power to beftow; yet the difagreement of the two fur- 
veys is fo inconfiderable, that it will require the eye of a critical obfer- 
ver to difcover the particulars in which they vary. 

Thus we took our leave of Cook’s inlet, where, from our different in- 
terviews with the Ruffians fettled on its fhores, it might have been rea- 
fonably expeéted that much information would have been derived, 
concerning the obje&ts and advantages in contemplation, from the ex- 
tenfion of that empire to fuch remote regions. Ignorance of each 
other’s language, that infurmountable obftacle to the attainment of fuch 
kind of knowledge, attended on all our inquiries, and in moft inftances 
rendered them extremely inconclufive, and often very contradiétory to 
what we had at firft underftood. This difficulty was not a little increafed 
by the want of information in moft of our Ruffian vifitors, with re- 
gard to every thing that appertained to the fcience of geography. Our 
repeated converfations with the perfon who conduéted us to the fettle- 
ment on the eaftern fhore, led us to imagine that a navigable branch of 
this inlet extended from the eaftern fide, and communicated with an im- 
menfe lake to the north-eaft, in which were whales, feals, fea otters, and a 

Vou. II. U variety 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


variety of falt-water fifh; that the fhores of it were too diflant to be 
vifible from each other; and that he knew not in what direétion it uni- 
ted with the ocean; but that Mr. Zikoff was gone thither, on an ex- 
ploring expedition, All this we fuppofed we had perfectly compre- 
hended, until our arrival at the factory, when in order to become better 
acquainted with circumftances of fo much importance to us, I fought for 
a confirmation of what we had thus been told; but, to my great fur- 
prize, when I had afcended the balcony at the top of the houfe, I was 
made to perceive in the moft unequivocal manner, that it was the tnle¢ 
atfelf that had been meant, and that the eaftern navigable branch was 
no other than Turnagain arm, (which nearly communicates with Prince 
William’s found) in which Mr. Zikoff was gone to a Mr. Colomene, 
who commanded a Ruffian eftablifhment near cape Hinchinbrook. 

This incident will afford fufficient proof how little dependence is to 
be placed on information affumed from perfons but ill qualified to an- 
fwer our queftions if underftood, and with whom, for want of language, 
our communication was neceffarily very uncertain and imperfe&t; it will 
alfo fhew, on how flight foundation the theories of mediterranean feas, 
and of a north-weft paflage, may often reft. 

Intelligence procured from fuch authority and under fuch circum- 
ftances, and unfupported by other corroborative evidence, or that does 
not carry with it the ftrongeft prefumptive proof of its being correét, 
ought always to be received with the utmoft caution. By this rule I 
had uniformly governed my conduét; and in the inftance of the com- 
munication of this inlet with prince William’s found,. I did not confider 
myfelf warranted to credit the information we had received to that ef- 
fe&t, until it had been ftated, without the leaft deviation or contra- 
digtion, as well on board the Chatham as the Difcovery, that a branch 
of that found extended within a few miles of the upper end of Turna- 
gain arm. 

Hence thefe two extenfive inlets appeared to be feparated from each 
other only by a narrow ifthmus of compaé mountainous land, that pre- 
cluded all poffibility of any navigable interior watercourfe through it 
from 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


from any part of the fhores of the intervening peninfula ; and rendered a 
minute examination of the coaft of this peninfula of little importance, as 
it would have occupied a large portion of time, and could not have 
furthered the attainment of the great object we had in view, any more 
than a complete furvey of the numerous iflands, that in the courfe of the 
two preceding fummers we had difcovered lying before the continental 
boundaries. For this reafon I determined to make the beft of our way 
towards prince William’s found, and to examine the fhores of the penin- 
fula, fo far only as could be done from the fhip in pafling along its coaft. 
This would greatly tend to facilitate our operations this feafon, which, 
notwithftanding they had commer: ed at a very early period, had yet ac- 
complifhed little in comparifon to the extent oi coaft we had yet to fur- 
vey in the courfe of this fummer. Trufting that our examination of 


a 


prince William’s found, though coinmencisiz only f:0m its fouth-weft 
point of entrance, would juftify this proceeding, our . durfe was directed 
thither. 

I had it in contemplation during this pur!iii, fhould circui::tances con- 
cur, to ftop fhort of prince William’s four at port Andrews; fo named 
by Mr. Portlock, but called by the Ruffians Blying found; where we 
had been informed by our vifitors, (particularly by Portoff who was 
by far the moft intelligent,) that they had an arfenal, and that one or 
two Englifhmen, affifted by fome Ruffian artificers, were building with 
the timber of the country a fhip as large as the Difcovery. This intelli- 
gence had been obtained in confequence of my having repeatedly in- 
quired, where there was a convenient fituation for laying the Difcovery 
on fhore; being apprehenfive that her bottom might have received fome 
injury, from the numerous a.>Jents to which fhe had been lately ex- 
pofed. 

Blying found was ftrongly recommended by Portoff, who affured me 
that the rife and fall of the tide on a very convenient beach, was fully 
fufhcient to anfwer-all our purpofes, and that his countrymen not only 
pofleffed the means, but would be happy in rendering us every affiftance 
we might require; and that on Mr. Berrenoff being made acquainted with 
our arrival there, he would immediately repair thither, that nothing in 
Ue2 their 


27948 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


their power might be wanting to relieve our neceffities. But as our 
availing ourfelves of thefe fervices would greatly depend on the exifting 
circumftances at the time of our arrival in that neighbourhood, and par- 
ticularly as Blying found was not fo central for carrying into execution 
our furvey of prince William’s found as I could have wifhed, I made no 
arrangements for benefiting by thefe very kind and friendly offers. 

Having accomplifhed by cur joint labours the examination of the 
fhores of Cook’s inlet from cape Douglas to its utmoft extremity, and 
from thence to the eaft Foreland, I fhall conclude this chapter by re- 
marking, that although circumftances did not permit us to make fuch 
aftronomical obfervations on the fpot as I confidered to be neceffary for 
determining the longitude of our ftation at the head of Cook’s inlet, yet 
we were fortunate in obtaining thofe that very fatisfactorily fhewed the 
rates of our chronometers, from which authority we were enabled to af- 
certain the longitudinal menfuration of our furvey, and to deduce from 
fubfequent obfervations what I confidered as its true longitude. 

The obfervations for obtaining the latitude, the rates of the chrono- 
meters, and the variation of the compafs, were made on fhore, at the 
watering place near the fhip’s ftation at the head of Cook’s inlet; (they 
were as follow) 

Kendall’s chronometer fhewed the longitude according to the Karaka- 


kooa rate to be - - - - 208° 9g! 35" 
Arnold’s No. 14, according to the fame rate, - 209 31 25 
Ditto 176, ditto, - - 209 50 40 
True longitude deduced from fubfequent obfervations as 
before ftated, - - - - - 210 53 15 


By this authority, and twelve fets of altitudes taken be- 
tween the 26th of april and 6th of may, both days inclu- 
five, Arnold’s No. 176 was found to be faft of mean time 


at Greenwich on the 6th of may at noon, - 8° 44 46” 30” 
And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of 52 37 
Arnold’s No. 14, faft of mean time at Greenwich, 3 58 18 30 
gaining as above, - - 22 


Kendall's 


eee 


— 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Kendall’s faft of mean time at Greenwich, ‘ 
gaining as before, - “ : 

The latitude, - - - - - 61° 17’ 

The variation of the compafs in twenty fets cf azimuths 
by three different compafles, differing from 27° 27’ to 31° 
18’, fhewed their mean refult to be - - 29 30 eafterly. 

Our fituation at this ftation did not admit of any opportunity for 
meafuring the rife and fall of the tides, but in a very rough way; by 
which it appeared, that on fpring tides it amounted to about twenty-feven 
feet, and that it was high water fix hours after the moon had pafled the 
meridian, 


CHAPTER 


150 


1794e 
ay. 


(nese seen 
Friday 16, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


CHAPTER VI. 


Paffage from Cook's inlet to Prince William’s found—Meet a large fleet of 
canoes—Spring the bowfprit in a gale of wind—Carry away the fore- 

_ yard—Arrive in port Chalmers—Survey of Prince William’s found by 

_ the boats—A violent fiorm—Vifited by a few Ruffians—Some account of 
their eftablifhments in the found—Chatham difpatched to continue the fur- 
vey of the coaft eaftward from cape Hinchinbrook—Aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations. . 


Tue weather was delightfully ferene and pleafant, and the morning 
of the 16th was ufhered in by a fight we little expeéted in thefe feas. A 
numerous fleet of {kin canoes, each carrying two men only, were about 
the Difcovery, and, with thofe that at the fame time vifited the Chat- 
ham, it was computed there could not be lefs than four hundred Indi- 
ans prefent. They were almoft all men grown, fo that the tribe to 
which they belonged muft confequently be a very confiderable one. They 
inftantly and very willingly entered into trade, and bartered away their 
hunting and fifhing implements, lines and thread, extremely neat and 
well made from the finews of animals; with bags ingenioufly decorated 
with needle work, wrought on the thin membrane of the whales intef- 
tines; thefe articles, with fome fifh, and fome well executed models of 
canoes with all their appendages, conftituted the articles of commerce 
with thefe people, as well as with our Indian friends in Cook’s inlet; for 
excepting thofe furs given to me by Chatzdooltz’s party, not an article of 
this defcription had been offered for fale, or even feen in the poffeffion 
of the natives, as forming a part of their apparel, as was the cafe in my 
former 


UREN Joe PPE BE 


enn ll eaRameaetiatanae, | i —_— ™ 


- a ae ae ee 


es ashram heh a mat 2a ant Ss BAN pate pe 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


former vifit to this country. The clothing of thefe Americans now 
chiefly confifted of garments made from the {kins of birds or quadrupeds, 
of not the leaft value. This humble fafhion had moft likely been intro- 
duced by their Ruffian friends, for the fake of increafing the number of 
the {kins of the fe otter, foxes, martin, ermine, and of fuch other ant- 
mals as come under the denomination of furs, which they find to be 
worth the trouble of exporting. 

Thefe good people, like all the others we had lately feen, conduéted 
themfelves with great propriety; and as the wind was very light, they 
continued with us until near noon, when they all retired to a bay or 
harbour we were then abreaft of. Our progrefs from Cook’s inlet had 
been fo flow that the Barren ifles were yet in fight, bearing by compafs 
s. 34 W. to s. 48 w.; and the eafternmoft of the iflands near cape Eliza- 
beth, from s. 46 w. to s. 55 w., diftant about 5 leagues. On the infide 
of this ifland a low flat point projected towards the main land, and gave 
us reafon to doubt, whether between thofe iflands and the main land a 
fafe navigable channel would be found; this however could be of little 
importance, as port Chatham is very acceflible by paffing round cape 
Elizabeth, which at this time was hidden from our fight. The weft point 
of the above bay or harbour bore by compafs s.72 w., 5 miles diftant; 
the land forming its eaftern point, which is a projecting promontory, 
appearing at a diftance like an ifland, N. 42 w. to N.2 £., about half a 
league from us. Towards the fea it terminates in an abrupt cliff mo- 
derately elevated, and is conneéted to the main land by a low peninfula 
covered with trees. Its north-weft fide prefented every appearance of 
affording fheltered anchorage, and to that part of the bay moft of the 
canoes repaired. We now fteered towards the northernmoft part of the 
coaft in fight, bearing by compals nN. 29 £.; the obferved latitude in this 
fituation was 59° 93’, longitude 209° 48’, placing the fouthernmoft part 
of the above promontory, which we fuppofed to be the fame that Mr. 
Portlock calls point Gore, in latitude 59° 11’, longitude 209° 40’; the 
bay or harbour on its weft fide we fuppofed to be port Dick. At firft 
however this fuppofition admitted of doubt, for inftead of point Gore 


lying 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


lying 14 leagues to the caftward of cape Elizabeth, our furvey made 
thefe promontories fearcely 10 leagues apart. 

On reference to our pofition on the coaft, the land feen before us 
forming the north extreme could be no other than the fouthernmoft of 
Pies iflands ; towards which with a pleafant breeze from the s.w. we 
made great progrefs, at the diftance of 3 cr 4 miles from the fhore. 
Two openings were paffed, and we obferved along the coaft feveral low 
detached parcels of rocks, at a greater diftance from the main land than 
we had generally remarked along the exterior coaf's of this country. 
One group in particular lying s. 75 w., diftant near four miles from the 
fouthernmolt of Pies iflands, muft be very dangerous in thick weather, 
efpecially as at high water during the fpring tides it is probably over- 
flown. The coaft we failed along this day is in moft parts very moun- 
tainous, and defcends rather quickly into the ocean, excepting in thofe 
places where it is broken into vallies, fome of which are extenfive, and 
gradually incline to the water fide. Thefe in fome inftances were ftill 
buried in ice and fnow, within a few yards of the wafh of the fea; whilft 
here and there fome of the loftieft of the pine trees juft fhewed their 
heads through this frigid furface. 

We could not avoid remarking, that the whole of this exterior coaft 
feemed to wear a much more wintry afpeét than the countries bordering 
on thofe more northern inland waters we had fo recently quitted. 

The fouthernmoft of Pies iflands in feveral points of view forms a very 
conf{picuous peak, and although not remarkable for its great height, yet 
from its fingular appearance it is not eafily to be miftaken in this neigh- 
bourhood, as it defcends with great regularity from its fummit to the 
water’s edge; its fouth extremity by our obfervations, is fituated in lati- 
tude 59° 19’, longitude 210° 21’. To the north-eaftward of this ifland 
the coaft {till prefented a broken appearance, and our north-eaftern point 
of view in the evening exhibited a cluflter of iflands and rocks, extending 
fome diftance from the main land; thefe we fuppofed were thole named by 
Mr. Portlock Chifwell’s ifles, lying before port Andrews, that 1s to fay, 
Blying’s found, for which we continued our courfe until ten at night, when 
we hauled to the wind under an eafy fail, in order to keep our flation for 
3 continuing 


ade 


> us 
t of 

we 
ore. 
low 
than 
itry. 
. the 
ther, 
»ver- 
oun- 
thofe 
and 
» {till 
vhilft 


their 


coalt 


ring 


very 
, yet 
eigh- 
> the 
lati- 
fland 
boint 
nding 
dby 

fay, 
yhen 
1 for 
uing 


Be Oa cn sete eae 


i 
mens oe 


sais 


ag 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


continuing our examination of the coaft in the morning. The depth of 
water was 75 fathoms, about 5 miles from the fhore. ‘The fine weather 
with which we had been indulged was of fhort duration. The wind by 
one in the morning had veered round to the eaft and n.r., and in a 
few hours reduced us to clofe-reefed topfails; and finding in the fore- 
noon that the bowfprit was dangeroufly fprung in a flanting dircétion, 
from the cap nearly to the collar of the foreftay, we lay to about an 
hour for the purpofe of giving it fuch fecurities as our fituation per- 
mitted us to apply, and then again ftood to windward, under the courfes 
and clofe-reefed topfails. Notwithftanding that it rained very heavily, 
the gale continued to increafe, attended with a great fea from the eaft- 
ward, which reduced us to our forefail and ftorm ftayfails, until four in 
the afternoon, when the mainfail and clofe-reefed topfails were again 
fet. This prefs of fail I was induced to carry to prevent as much as 
poffible our falling to leeward during the gale, which on funday morn- 
ing moderated, but the rain continued. 

We now made fail, and ftood towards the land; the wind veered to 
the fouthward of eaft in the forenoon, which enabled us to fteer for the 
Chifwell ifles; and on the rain ceafing, in the afternoon, we got fight 
of them, bearing by compafs N.N.w.; but the wind returning again 
from the n.£., the night was paffed in making fhort trips, with the hope 
that the weather would prove more favorable to our wifhes; but in this 
we were difappointed, the wind continued to be unfettled between eaft 
and N.E., accompanied by mifty rainy weather, with fome fhort inter- 
vals of funfhine, which afforded an opportunity of afcertaining the la- 
titude to be 59°16, longitude 211°193’. The hazinefs of the atmo- 
fphere to the northward prevented our feeing the coaft; in the after- 
noon we paffed Chifwell’s ifles, and found the center of the fouthernmoft 
group to be in latitude 59°31’, longitude 211° 10’; from this the eatft- 
ernmoft, which is a fingle detached rock, hes Nn. 54£., about a league 
diftant ; and the northernmoft, which the hazy weather permitted our 
feeing, having feveral lefs iflets and rocks about it, lies N.15 £., five 
miles diftant. ‘Thefe were all we faw of the Chifwell ifles, which are a 


group of naked rugged, rocks, feemingly deftitute of foil and any kind 
Vou. HI. x. of 


en oe 


‘ 2 ie 

oo it 
Bates 
ee | 


git 


153 


1794. 
aviav. 


eee amd 


Saturday 17. 


Sunday 18. 


Monday 19. 


oie 


—— ae 


f ee 
ee 


a Soe 


aan 


a a 


Tuefday 20, 
Wednef. 21. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


of vegetation. The badnefs of the weather precluded our afcertaining 
their diftance from the fhores of the peninfula, and prevented my carry- 
ing into execution the defign I had meditated of vifiting the Ruffian 
eftablifhment, {tated to be in the vicinity of this part of the coaft; which 
continuing to be obfcured by a very denfe haze or fog, would have re- 
quired far more authentic and accurate documents than were in our pof- 
feffion, to direét us with fafety to that ftation, and would have occu- 
pied more time than I was now willing to devote to this purpofe. 

As the fhip had been fubjeét to very great motion, in confequence 
of the heavy fea that had attended the laft gale, without complaining 
in any refpeét, I concluded that fhe had not fuftained any material da- 
mage in her bottom, and therefore I determined to make the beft of 
our way to Prince William’s found. The wind continuing to blow from 
nearly the direétion we wifhed to fteer, we plied to windward, but only 
increafed our diftance from the point we wifhed to gain, until the even- 
ing of the goth; when, with a light foutherly breeze, our courfe was 
direfted for the fouth part of Montagu ifland, which was feen on wednef- 
day morning ; but the rain and thick weather prevented any diftiné&t view 
of it until the forenoon, when the atmofphere becoming clear we were 
enabled to procure the neceflary obfervations for fhewing the latitude at 
noon to be 59° 38’, longitude 212° 524’. The fouthernmoft land in fight 
at that time bore by compafs s. 88 w., the fouth point of Montagu 
ifland n. 64 w., diftant ten miles ; hence that point appears to be fitua- 
ted in latitude 59° 46’, longitude 212°41’; the northernmoft part of 
Montagu ifland in fight, apparently a low projeéting point, covered with 
wood, n.1 w., diftant feventeen miles; and the outermoft of a clufter 
of fix rocky iflets ftretching from it, N.7 £. Thefe iflets were not feen 
by Captain Cook, nor do they appear to have been noticed by thofe 
who have followed that able and indefatigable navigator in this hemi- 
{phere. Thefe iflets feemed to be chiefly compofed of fteep cliffs near- 
ly level on their tops, and may ferve as a direétion in thick or gloomy 
weather to the fouth point of Montagu ifland, lying from it, according 
to our eftimation, about Nn. 62 £., diftant feventeen. miles. They are 
tolerably 


tes. Mees 


Bae 
Re sant ae 


tee? Nias Sh 


ing 
rry- 
flan 
hich 


re- 
pof- 


CCUu- 


ence 
ning 
| da- 
ft of 
from 
only 
ven- 
was 
dnef- 
view 
were 
He at 
fight 
tagu 
itua- 
rt of 
with 
ufter 
feen 
hofe, 
emi- 
ear- 
omy 
ding 

are 


ably 


Ses ee itil 


Sag err sen Soma 


see 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tolerably well wooded, and are not liable to be miftaken, particularly 
for the Chifwell ifles, becaufe thofe appear to be intircly barren. 

My intention was to have paffed along the fouth-eaft fide of Montagu 
ifland, but the wind veering again to the eaftward, and the weather be- 
ing again overcaft, we bore up, and in the evening we anchored within 
the fouth point of this ifland, in 21 fathoms water. Its fhores bore by 
compafs from s.30 £. to N.11 £.; the former at the diftance of three 
miles, and its neareft fhore s.53 £., one mile diftant; the iflands form. 
ing the weft fide of this channel into Prince William’s found from Nn. 12 w. 
to s. 89 w., and the fouthernmoft part of the main land in fight s.69w. 
During the night we had a light breeze from the land, with fome rain, 
and a very heavy {well that rolled round the fouth point of Montagu 
ifland, up the channel, giving us reafon to fuppofe that in all probabi- 
lity we had efcaped a boifterous and very unpleafant gale from the eaft- 
ward, having been {creened, by the lofty mountains that compofe the 
ifland, from the violence of its fury. The fame weather continued, with 
a breeze from the N. E., and a ftream that we confidered to be the ebb 
tide fetting to the eaftward, until ten on thurfday forenoon, when on 
the current taking an oppofite line of direétion we weighed, but were 
fo little affifted by the tide that we proceeded very flowly. 

Whilft we were at anchor we were vifited by four of the natives, in 
two {mall {kin canoes, one of whom was an elderly man, who feemed 
to know’we were from England, as he frequently made ufe of the words 
“ Englifh, Portlock, and Nootka ;” by the two former there could be 
no doubt of his meaning, and by the latter we fuppofed he meant the 
véffel in which Mr. Meares paffed a winter in this found. Thefe peo- 
ple brought nothing to difpofe of, nor could any intreaty prevail on 
them to venture on board, though they readily accepted fuch trivial 
prefents as were made to them, expreffing their thankfulnefs in the 
Ruffian language, and giving us to underftand, that there were fome 
people of that nation refiding up the found. 

In the afternoon the wind blew frefh from the N.£., and towards 
evening increafed toa hard gale, attended with heavy fqualls and fhowers 
of rain. In one of thefe fqualls the head of the bowfprit broke fhort off; 

X 2 but 


Friday 23. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


but as we fill continued to make fome progrefs by turning to windward, 
I was willing to keep under weigh as long as the day-light lafted, efpe- 
cially as we found tolerably good foundings on the Montagu ifland fide of 
the channel, to the north of a point which I have called Point Bazi, 
in latitude 60° 1’; but fouth of that point towards the anchorage we had 
quitted, no bottom could be reached with 60 to 80 fathoms of line, within 
a mile of the fhore. Having it thus in our power to anchor when and 
where we pleafed under a weather fhore, we remained under fail until about 
teno’clock, when a fudden flurry of wind, through a vein occupying {carcely 
a greater {pace in width than the length of the fhip, vented its whole fury 
upon us with fuch immenfe violence, that although the topfails were 
down before it was at its height, we expeéted all the mafts would have 
gone over the fide; but fortunately we efcaped with the lofs of the fore- 
yard only, and the fplitting of moft of our fails then fet; and being at 
this time not far from the fhore of Montagu ifland, we anchored in 15 
fathoms water, ftruck the topgallant-mafts, and replaced our damaged 
fails. During the night the wind blew very hard from the E.N. E., at- 
tended with fqualls, hail, and rain; but inthe morning of the 29d, the 
weather in fome meafure becoming more moderate, Lieutenant Swaine 
with the carpenters and a party of men were fent on fhore in queft of a 
fpar for a fore-yard, which was procured almoft as foon as they had 
landed ; this they had my dire€tions only to rough fquare in fuch a way 
as to allow of its being ufed for the prefent to carry us to Chalmer’s har- 
bour, where I purpofed the fhip fhould remain, whilft the boats were 
employed in exploring the navigable extent of this opening. And as Mr. 
Portlock found the rife and fall of the tide in that harbour fufficient for 
laying the veffels under his dire€tions aground, I was in hopes of being 
enabled alfo to examine the Difcovery’s bottom there; and although we 
had no reafon to be apprehenfive that fhe had fuftained any material da- 
mage by the feveral accidents of getting on fhore, yet fuch an exami- 
nation, when a convenient opportunity might offer that did not interfere 
with the other operations of the voyage, could not fail being very de- 
firable and fatisfattory. 

The 


rd, 
pe- 
- of 
it; 
iad 
hin 
nd 
out 
ely 
ury 
ere 
ave 
re- 
at 


the 
ine 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


The carpenters having done every thing then needful to the fore-yard, 
it was got off and rigged; and in the forenoon of the following day, the 
gale being fucceeded by a light breeze from the north, though {ftill at- 
tended with rain, we weighed and plied to windward, but made little 
progrefs. The wind died away about nine in the evening, when we an- 
chored for the night in 20 fathoms water, foft bottom. On funday 
morning a light breeze fprang up from the N.N.E£., nearly in the direc- 
tion of our courfe to Chalmer’s harbour; with this we plied, and about 
fix in the evening reached our deftined port. Our progrefs had been 
materially retarded by the unfteadinefs of the wind, and by two fhaals, 
fituated nearly in mid-channel, between the fouth point of the harbour, 
and a rugged rock that lies about a mile from the eaft fide of the !argeft 
of Green iflands. We fuddenly came upon the moft fouthern of thefe 
fhoals, in a depth from 19 to 6 fathoms, without there being any weeds, 
or other indications of fhallow water; but on the other, which fhoaled 
equally quick, was a fmall patch of weeds growing in 9 fathoms water, 
with 5 and 7 fathoms clofe around it. Each of thefe appeared to occupy 
no greater extent than the fhip’s length in any dire€&tion; between thefe 
fhoals and the Green iflands we found a channel, in which we turned to 
windward until we could fail into the harbour. The Chatham did the 
fame between them and Montagu ifland, without noticing thefe fhoals; 
and had we purfued the fame route, they would in all probability have 
{till remained undifcovered. As we approached the entrance of the 
harbour, a ftrong tide or current fat us fo faft to the fouthward, that we 
had nearly been driven paft the entrance; and although the tide was now 
rifing, this ftream had not the leaft perceptible indraft into the harbour, 
nor did its influence feem to extend within what we called the SouTH Pas- 
saGE Rock, lying from the north point of the harbour weft, fomething 


more than a mile diftant; and from a {mall woody iflet, lying before the . 


entrance of the harbour, N.15 w., about three quarters of a mile. We 
paffed on the north fide of this rock, and to the north of us was another, 
that obtained the name of Nortu PassaGe Rock, lying in a direc- 
tion from the north point of the harbour, Nn. 26 w., diftant 24 miles, 
and w.s.w., three quarters of a mile from the fouth point of what Mr. 
Portlock 


Sunday 25. 


$< 
et = ets SSS SS 


aa 


ae 
Fase 


158 


1794. 
May. 
Se ae 


Monday 26, 


Tuefday 27. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCC VEPY 


Portlock calls Stockdale’s harbour. Thefe rocks are ftated to have'been 
feen by Mr. Portlock in his journal, but no notice is taken of them in 
his {ketch of this part of Montagu ifland; yet they required to be parti- 
cularly pointed out, fince they are not always vifible, but are covered 
at high tide, with {carcely any weeds or other indications of their ex- 
iftence. Towards the upper part of the harbour we took a convenient 
ftation, and when moored, the north point of the harbour bore by com- 
pals s.58 w.; the woody iflet s. 45 w.; a detached rock s.38w.; the 
fouth-weft point of the harbour s. 36 w.; and the watering place at the 
diftance of about half a cable’s length n.85 w. The weather through- 
out the day having been ferene and pleafant, afforded a good opportu- 
nity for drying all the fails, which were unbent and {towed away. 

On monday morning the fore-yard was fent on {hore to be properly 
finifhed, the empty cafks to be filled with water, and whilft the other 
parts of the fhip’s company were employed in unrigging the broken 
bowfprit, and in various other repairs about the veffel, the crews of the 
boats were preparing for a furveying expedition. 

Two boat parties were equipped; one under the direétions of Mr. 
Whidbey, the other of Mr. Johnftone; the former, with the yawl and 
large cutter provided for a fortnight, received my inftructions to pro- 
ceed to the fouth-weft point of entrance into the found, and there to 
commence the examination of the weftern fhore of this inlet as far as 
poffible, and thence round to the fouth point of Snug-corner cove; 
where I purpofed that Mr. Johnftone, with the Chatham’s and our {maller 
cutter, fhould begin the furvey of its fhores fouthward, as alfo the exte- 
rior coaft to cape Suckling ; on which fervices they refpe¢tively depart- 
ed early the following morning. 

The weather, now ferene and pleafant, was favorable to thefe excur- 
fions, and to our feveral employments, amongft which we attempted 
to take fome fifh with the feine, but without fuccefs. The fhores did 
not afford any convenient fituation for ereéting the obfervatory ; this 
gave me concern, as I much wifhed to have had the inftruments on 
fhore, although I had not any doubt of obtaining all the neceffary ob- 
fervations we required by the means I otherways pofleffed. The next 
day 


f 
t 
\ 


= SO ee ee lO 


‘been 
-m in 
parti- 
vered 
ir @X- 
‘nient 
com- 
3 the 
it the 
ough- 
yortu- 


yperly 
other 
roken 


of the 


f Mr. 
1 and 
pro- 
pre to 
far as 
cove; 
aller 
exte- 
part- 


xcur- 
mpted 
es did 
; this 
ts on 
y ob- 

next 
day 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


day the weather became gloomy and overcaft in all dire€tions ; the fore- 
yard being finifhed was brought on board in the evening and rigged, 
and on the following morning the broken bowfprit was taken out, and 
found to be exceflively rotten, and defective from end to end. Whilft 
the carpenters were engaged on fhore with the fore-yard, they had found 
a {par, or rather a tree, that promifed fair to replace the bowfprit, 
but the lowering weather, which towards noon produced a very {trong 
gale from the E.N.£., attended with violent fqualls and a heavy rain, 
put a flop to all our operations on fhore for this day and until friday 
evening, when the wind moderated, and the rain which had defcended 
in torrents abated. In the courfe of the night it became calm, and 
we had hopes that a favorable alteration had taken place, but in this we 
were difappointed, for about five in the morning the wind refumed its 
eafterly direétion with increafed violence. The ftream cable gave way, 
and broke near the anchor, and on examination it was found to be 
ftranded in three different places. ~ By this accident we were obliged to 
remain unmoored during the ftorm, and at low water the fhip took the 
ground for a fhort {pace of time, but on the returning flood tide fhe 
foon floated again. This very unpleafant weather, which occafioned no 
fmall degree of anxiety for the welfare of our parties in the boats, con- 
tinued moft of the following day, but in the morning of monday the 
weather became more tranquil, the fhip was remoored, the ftream an- 
chor recovered, and our feveral neceflary concerns were again in a train 
of execution. We were a little furprized in the forenoon by the ap- 
pearance of Mr. Whidbey’s party returning to the fhip, being appre- 
henfive that fome untoward accident had befallen them, as it was not 
probable that they could already have accomplifhed the fervice they 
had been fent to perform. Their return proved to have been occafioned 
by one of the feamen having received an injury which had difabled him ; 
and as the very boifterous weather they had encountered rendered the 
progrefs of their furvey very flow, this opportunity was embraced of 
recruiting their ftores and provifions to a fortnight’s fupply, with which 
in the afternoon the party proceeded again. 

The 


159 


1794. 
May. 


Le ed 
Wednef. 28. 
Thurldaysg. 


Friday jo. 


Saturday 31. 


June. 


Sunday 1. 


Monday 2. 


{Oo 


1794+ 
June. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


‘Lhe weather was again cloudy on tuefday, with fome light rain. In 


wa—— the evening I had the mortification to underftand, that juft as the car- 


‘Luciday 3. 


Wrednef, 4. 


Thurfday 5. 


penters employed on the bowfprit were about leaving off work, they 
had found it rotten nearly in the middle, fo that their time and labour 
had been applied to no effect. ‘There was, however, another tree in 
the neighbourhood likely to anfwer our purpofe, though it was confide- 
rably larger than was neceflary, and confequently would require more 
labour and time than was altogether convenient; as two of our beft car- 
penters were now much indifpofed, owing, I believed, to their having 
been too much expofed during the late inclement weather, whilft in the 
execution of their duty. 

The next day, being the anniverfary of His Majefty’s nativity, no 
work was done, excepting that of hauling the feine, in the hope of pro- 
curing fome fifh for the people’s dinner. In this we were again difap- 
pointed ; as good a dinner was however ferved as the fhip’s provifions 
afforded, and a double allowance of grog, with which the day was 
cheerfully celebrated. 

Early in the morning of the 5th we were again bufily employed, and 
in the forenoon, for the firft time fince our arrival here, we were vifited 
by fome ftrangers who landed from their canocs, at the brewing tent; 
and as they did not feem to fhew anv difpofition for vifiting the veflels, 
I paid my compliments to them on fhore, and found that their party 
confifted of eight Indians and a Ruffian. I took fome pains to invite 
the latter on board, and requefted he would in the mean time fend the 
Indians to procure us fome fifh, for which they fhould be handfomely 
rewarded. My invitation he pofitively declined, and faid, by way of 
excufing himfelf, that he would go and fifh for us; on this the canoes 
were launched, and the whole party fat off. 

The wind was now light, in the fouth-weft quarter, but the weather 
{till continued to be unfettled, with fome fhowers of rain. In the even- 
ing two of the canoes, with four of the Indian vifitors, returned, but 
the Ruffian was not of the party, nor did thefe bring any fith or other 
article for fale. I made them fome prefents that feemed to give them 
much pleafure, and I then endeavoured to make them underftand, that I 

2 had 


; 
q 
‘ 


ee 


. In 


e Car- 

they 
abour 
‘ee in 
nfide- 
more 
t car- 
aving 
in the 


y, no 
f pro- 
difap- 
nifions 
y was 


J, and 
vifited 
tent; 
reflels, 
party 
invite 
d the 
bmely 
ay of 
anoes 


bather 


even- 
, but 
other 
them 


hat I 
had 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


had an abundance of fuch things, which I would gladly exchange with 
them for fifh, wild fowl, &c. As it had plainly appeared by the behaviour 
of the Ruffian, that he was under confiderable apprehenfion for his per- 
fonal fafety in the idea of vifiting the fhip, I fent him, by thefe Indians, 
fome bread, beef, pork, and rum, in hopes that fuch friendly teflimonies 
would diffipate his fears, and give him {uch confidence in our pacific dif- 
pofition as to encourage him to pay us another vifit. 

The atmofphere prefented a ferene and pleafant afpett, with every 
appearance on friday morning of fettled fummer weather. ‘This enabled 
us to procure fome good lunar diftances, and to add other aftronomical 
obfervations to thofe we had already made for afcertaining the rate of 
the chronometers. I did not now much regret that a proper place had 
not been found on fhore for the reception of the obfervatory, as the in- 
clemency of the weather hitherto would have rendered it an ufelefs objcét 
of our attention, and the inftruments might. have received fome damage 
had they been landed. 

The four Indians again returned, and brought with them two wild 
gcefe and two divers as a prefent from the Ruffian, who, if we under- 
ftood the mefflengers correétly, was flill afraid to venture amongtt us ; 
though he was evidently defirous of being benefited by fuch things as 
we had to give away; for the Indians appeared to have been inftruéted 
by him to afk for feveral articles, that we knew would be highly accept- 
able to him. ‘Thefe accordingly were intrufted to their charge, toge- 
ther with a repetition of the ftrongeft affurances of our friendfhip, and 
of our defire of fecing him on board. With this the Ruffian complied 
the next day, and we were informed by him, that the Indians had faith- 
fully difcharged their comm‘ffion. ‘Two other Ruffians had joined his 
party, and the three paid us an early vifit; but came empty handed, 
which I did not altogether expeét, as thofe who had vifited us off point 
Bede {crupuloufly performed their promife, by bringing us an ample 
jupply of fifth. He who had been fo unwilling to vifit the fhip we 
now found was named Ammus Niconnervitch Ballufian, ‘This perfon 
appeared to have more acquaintance with geography and fea charts 
than the reft of his companions. He feemed alfo in other refpetis to 


Vou. UI. Y be 


Friday 6, 


Saturdar - 


Mt 


; ‘ ort, ¢ 
Ye aly Ce ae 
ae rae | 


tae 
Rake 
hie 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


be an intelligent man, and foon comprehended the objeét of our vifit 
and inquiries in this part of the world, and that I much wifhed to fee 
a Ruffian chart of their modern difcoveries in this ocean. This wifh he 


‘faid could be eafily gratified as he had fuch a chart at port Etches, which 


had been recently conftruéted, and fent from Kamtfchatka; this he 
very civilly offered to fetch, and after taking fome refrefhment he de- 
parted for this purpofe, leaving his companions behind. 

A continuation of the fair weather greatly promoted all our opera- 
tions, and amongft others afforded us an opportunity of airing and fifting 
the little gunpowder we had now remaining. 

On funday the wind blew frefh from the northward, with bright 
glaring weather. In the forenoon Mr. Johnftone and his party return- 
ed, after having completed the examination of all that had fallen with- 
in the limits of his direétions, on the infide of the found; but the ex- 
tremely bad weather had fo retarded the progrefs of the party, that they 
had been prevented from carrying into execution the propofed furvey 
along the exterior coaft, without obtaining a further fupply of provifions, 
having been abfent three days longer than the period for which they had 
been provided. The following is the manner in which i}ey had been 
employed during their abfence from the fhip. 

On the evening of the day they departed, they reached the north-weft 
point of a {mall ifland, fituated about two miles to the fouth-weft of the 
fouth point of Snug-corner cove. Here Mr. Johnftone was to com- 
mence his furvey; but not having a {ketch of that part of the found 
with him, nor recollecting any ifland fo fituated, he was at a lofs to 
determine, whether a point lying N. 49 £. about half a league diftant, 
ora point at the diftance of two leagues in a north direction, was the 
point from which he was to take his departure ; but as an extenfive open- 
ing led to the north-eaftward between thefe points, in order to avoid the 
chance of its efcaping unexamined by himfelf or Mr. Whidbey, Mr. 
Johnftone rowed over to the latter, where the party refted for the night ; 
which was extremely gloomy and attended with fome rain. 

At four o’clock in the morning of the 28th of may their furvey com- 
menced from the land on which they had refted; this proved to be 


i an 


ROS Ore aa 


vilit 
» fee 
h he 
hich 
is he 


» de- 


era- 
fing 


right 
furn- 
with- 
> @X- 
they 
Irvey 
fions, 
y had 
been 


-welt 
bf the 
om- 
und 
{s to 
tant, 
the 
bpen- 
the 
Mr. 


ght ; 


om- 
> be 


an 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


an ifland, and it received the name of Biicn’s IsLanp. They now 
fteered for a point lying from its fouth point n.90£., diftant four 
miles and an half. This point Mr. Johnftone fuppofed, as it was after- 
wards proved, to be on the continent; between it and Bligh’s ifland 
were fome {mall iflets and rocks. From this point, fituated in latitude 
60°50’, longitude 213° 51’, forming the weft point of a fmall bay about 
two miles deep, in a N.N.E. direction, in which there are two fmall iflets 
and a cove near its eaft point, lying from the weft point s. 80 £. two 
miles diftant, they continued along the larboard or northern fhore of the 
opening noticed the preceding evening as extending to the norti-eaft- 
ward, ‘This was found to wind in that direction about 54 leagues, and 
then to terminate in a direétion s. 65 £., 24 leagues further, in latitude 
60° 55’, longitude 214° 35’; its width in general being upwards of two 
miles. ‘Towards its upper part were fome iflands, and had the wea- 
ther been fair inftead of extremely gloomy and rainy, the adjacent 
country would probably have afforded a very pleafant profpeét, as the 
{fhores were in general low, and bounded by a pebbly beach, from 
whence the ground rofe with a gradual afcent, was free from fnow, and 
had a verdant appearance ; it was pleafingly diverfified with trees, chiefly 
of the alder kind, which grew with confiderable luxuriance. Thefe oc- 
cupied extenfive plains along the borders of the fea, beyond which rofe 
a chain of lofty mountains buried in perpetual froft and fnow. Their 
refearches in this arm engaged mift of the day, and ihe next morning 
they returned along its fouthern thove. 

This fpacious inlet, and particii:ly tis north-eaftern part, had been 
vifited by Sen® Fidalgo ia the vear 1790, for the purpofe of inquiring 
into the nature, extent, and fituation o° the Ruffian eftablifhments in 
thefe regions. ‘This gentleinsa paid much attention to geographical ob- 


jeéts, and gave names to feveral places. His incuiry having been made 


prior to our furvey, I have continued the names fo given; butas his own 
does not appear amoneft the number, I have, in order that his labours 
may be commemorated, diftinguifhed this branch by the name of Port 
lipDALGO, 

2 The 


164 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


r794 The weather became extremely unpleafant as the day advanced, and 

t—.—~ a very hard g ‘e of wind blew from the eaftward, attended with heavy 
rain. About noon Snug-corner cove was reached, and there were great 
inducements to have fought the fhelter it afforded from the then incle- 
ment weather; but Mr. Johnftone, anxious to profecute his furvey, and 
trufting that fome other fecure retreat would be met with before night, 
purfued his route between the fouth point of the cove and the ifland ly- 
ing off it, ina paffage about a mile wide, fcattered over with many rocks. 
The eafterly gale continued increafing, and as they pafled to the fouth 
of this land they met a moft heavy fea in that direction. Againft this 
they laboured, with great fatigue and little effeét, until the evening, 
when the violence of the ftorm obliged them to retire to the ifland juft 
mentioned, where they hauled the boats on fhore to preferve them from 
the wind and fea, to which they were greatly expofed from their fituation 
before the beach. 

The party had not been landed long before they were accofted from 
the woods by the words, “ J/awlee, dawlee,” fignifying friendfhip ; and 
four Indians foon appeared uttering the fame words, with their arms 
extended, and making ule of every fign and gefture to announce their 

ft i biol pacific difpofition; which being returned, with the addition of fome 
Mh gilt ot trivial prefents from the party, friendfhip and a good underftand- 
rat ti ing was eftablifhed on both fides. The Indians’ canoe had been juft 
r hauled up within the fkirts of the woods, but it appeared that their refi- 
LE eet dence was to the north-weft, and that the violence of the ftorm had 
nee a obliged them to feek this place for fhelter; which fortunately afforded 
ae a comfortable fituation for the tents of our fatigued party, who now 
ay ftood in need of fome reft and refrefhment, having had neither through- 
Shares aie out the day. Here they remained during the night, in the expeétation 
s that the ftorm having been fo violent would be of fhort duration ; but 
inftead of abating it increafed with incredible fury, and was attended 
with heavy torrents of rain. The Indians, however, had ftolen away 
unnoticed; this led to an examination into the caufe of their abrupt de- 
parture; and it was foon difcovered, that an axe that had been ufed the 
preceding evening was miffing, and which could not have been purloin- 

ed 


and 


avy 
reat 
icle- 

and 
ight, 
1 ly- 
ycks. 
outh 

this 
in gs 

jult 
‘rom 
ition 


from 
and 
arms 
their 
ome 
and- 
jutt 
refi- 
had 
rded 
now 
igh- 
htion 
but 
ded 
way 


de- 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ed without the inexcufeable negligence of thofe who were upon watch ; 
a fault not eafily to be overlooked in fuch fituations, and which was 
properly noticed by Mr. Johnftone, who took fuch meafures as produced 
a very different conduét, in the perfons who had been thus inattentive to 
their duty, during the remainder of his excurfion. 

In the morning of the gift the wind and fea had greatly fubfided, 
but the rain ftill continued to be very heavy ; this however did not pre- 
vent the party from proceeding to the examination of the continental 
fhore, which, from the weft point of Snug-corner cove, fituated ac- 
cording to our obfervations in latitude 60° 45’, longitude 219° 48’, takes 
firft a dire€tion s.i7 ©. four miles, and then eaft about five miles fur- 
ther; where, with great difficulty and much hard labour, they arrived 
late in the afternoon. In confequence of the wind blowing again with 
extreme violence from the eaftward, the fea broke heavily upon the fhore, 
and it was not without much difficulty that they effected a landing on a 
{mall fhingly beach, between two projeéting rocks, where they again 
hauled up their boats on the fhore. 

During the night Mr. Johnftone remarked that this ftorm blew with 
equal, if not greater, fury than he had ever before experienced, and 
the fucceeding day was not much lefs tempeftuous ; but on the 2d of 


june the wind in a great degree abated, though the rain ftill continued 


with heavy and gloomy weather. Their furvey was refumed along the 
continental fhore, which took a direétion nearly parallel to port Fidalgo, 
reducing the intervening land to a narrow ftrip not more than three or 
four miles acrofs, As tne day advanced the weather became ferene and 
pleafant, and they were enabled io afcertain the latitude, on a point in the 
dire€tion N.72 £5. eight or nine miles from the point on which they 
had _paffed the laft ftorm, to be 60° 45’; having now pafled fome diftance 
up another branch of the found, named by Sen" Fidalgo, Puerto Gra- 
vina. Its north-weft fhore continued about four miles further in the fame 
line of dire€tion, and afforded fome fimall coves, with rocks and rocky 
iflets lying off it. It then fuddenly trended tothe N.N.x. for about four 
miles and an half, where port Gravina terminated, and from whence they 
returned along its eaft and fouthern fhores, which are encumbered with 

illets 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


iletsand rocks. Early in the evening they reached the fouth-eaft point 
of this branch in latitude 60° 41’, longitude 214° 114’, to the fouth-welt 
of which lies an ifland and alfo fome rocks. Here the party refted for 
the night, and took the advantage of the finenefs of the evening to 
dry their clothes and put their arms in order. In the morning of the 
gd they proceeded along the continental fhore, which, from the place 
where they had laft refted, took a direétion s. 3o£., two miles, and 
then {tretched nearly eaft thirteen miles further. Within thefe limits are 
a bay, and a fmall branch, in which are feveral rocks and rocky iflets ; 
the {hores are in general low, ending in pebbly beaches, where fhoal 
water extends fome diftance, and renders landing at low tide very un- 
pleafant. 

The fhores which they had juft traverfed from oort Gravina formed the 
northern fide of an arm from four ‘o fix miles wide; but having reached 
the above extent, its width decreafed to lefs than two miles, where it 
took a N.N.E. dire€tion for fix miles, and th: n terminated with a fhallow 
flat at the head, in latituds: 60° 44’, longitude 214° 45’. This diftance 
was not accomplifhed unt:i breakfaft time on the 4th, nor had the party 
been able to fee much about them in their paflage up this arm, owing to 
the dark, gloomy, and rainy weather that had prevailed. ‘The fhores on 
cither fide were more fleep and rocky than in the other arms they had 
examined on this excurfion, but the low ground at its head extended to 
a greater diftance before it reached the bafe of the mountains; thefe were 
greatly elevated, rofe rather abruptly, and were covered with perpetual 
fnow. The productions of the lower country were obferved to be fimilar 
to thofe that have been fo repeatedly mentioned to the north-weftward 
of New Georgia. On their landing an old bear was difcovered nearly at 
the top ofa pine tree, with two cubs; the former immediately defcend ~d 
and made its efeape, but the young ones were fhot, and afforded them 
an excellent dinner. “i he party however had fared tolerably well on this 
expedition, having fhot many wild fowl; and on moft of the rocks where 
they had landed, eggs had been procured in great abundance. As they 
returned, a channel or opening was found to the eaftward of that by 
which they had advanced; this was purfued in a direction s. 25 w., un. 


der 


int 
welt 
| for 
4 to 


the 
lace 
and 
s are 
lets : 
fhoal 


y un- 


d the 
ched 
re it 
allow 
Lance 
party 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


der the impreffion that the intermediate land, forming the fouthern fide 
of the other arm, was an ifland; and that, from the line which the conti- 
nental {hore then took, it would lead to a paflage which, on Mr. John- 
ftone’s former vwifit to this found in the Prince of Wales of London, had 
been difcovered to feparate cape Hinchinbrook from the main land by a 
channel, which, although only navigable for boats, was fufficient to an- 
fwer all our purpofes in tracing the limits of the continental boundary. 
This having always been a primary confideration with us, Mr. Johnftone 
entertained hopes of being able to profecute his furvey to the fulleft ex- 
tent I had pointed out, to which he was greatly encouraged by the favo- 
rable change the weather had affumed by the advanced {tate of the fea- 
fon, and by the long continuance of the very boifterous weather with 
which they had fo recently contended. But before they had advanced a 
league, after pafling fome iflets that lie in the channel, their flattering 
profpeét vanifhed, the atmofphere refumed its threatening afpeéct, and 
by noon the eafterly wind, attended by a heavy rain, burft fuddenly upon 
them, and blew very violently; yet, under the cover of the eaftern fhore, 
they continued their route. Here they met twenty Indians in twelve {mall 
{kin canoes, a few of whom only vifited the boats; the others, who were: 
butily employed in fifhing, did not vifit our party, and thofe who did, 
though they behaved in a very civil and orderly manner, were very un- 
willing to part with any fifh; a fingle halibut being all that could be 
obtained. 

Having returned in the above direétion from the head of the arm about 
eight miles, the party landed on an iflet lying clofe to the eaflern fhore, 
where they faw land appearing like two {mall iflands, and feeming to be 
fituated at the fouth-weft entrance of the channel they were then pur- 
fuing: but between the ftation they had taken andi thofe iflands, (it being 
low tide) a dry fand feemed to extend from fide to fide of the paflage. 
Not doubting that their furvey had hitherto been along the continental 
fhore, Mr. Johnftone was unwilling to abandon his object, without more 
pofitive conviétion of the paflage before them being clofed and impal- 
fable. For this purpofe they fteered over to the weftern or oppofite 
fhore, and on approaching within about halfa mile of it, (the fhores be- 


ing 


168 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


‘791 ing about half a league afunder) the depth of water fuddenly increafed 
—— to 3, 5, and 10 fathoms; thefe foundings were regular, clofe to the 
weftern, or ifland fide, andin a navigable channel lying s. 60 w., about 
half a mile in width; the fhoal bank from the eaftern or continental fhore 
terminating there. This faét was afcertained by one of the boats, whilft 
Mr. Johnftone in the other kept along the edge of the fhoal bank until he 
reached the eafternmoft of the two iflands, which from the iflet they had 
quitted is about g miles diftant, and lies in a s.54 w. dire€tion. To this 
place they had been conduéted by two Ruffians, with whom they had met 
in their way; and on landing were received by eight others with every 
expreffion of pleafure, indicative of their friendly and hofpitable incli- 
nations, though their poverty feermed to preclude the exercife of their 
good intentions. Their refidence at this ifland appeared to be of a 
temporary nature, fince the only fhelter they had was under a large {kin 
boat, refting with one of its gunwales on the ground, whilft the other 
was propped up by fticks at a fufficient height to admit their creeping 
under it. In this fituation did thefe ten Ruffians abide, clofe in the vici- 
nage of a large village, containing not lefs than two hundred Indians ; 
a party by much too numerous for our people to have ventured taking 
up their night’s abode fo near, had it not been for the confidence which 
the Ruffians repofed in them, and which proved not to be ill placed. 
Whilft our party was preparing for their night’s reft, the twelve canoes 
which were feen in the morning arrived, and delivered to the Ruffians the 
produce of their day’s labour, confifting of about two dozen halibut, fome 
{mall fifh, and one very fine falmon. The Ruffians immediately prefented 
the falmon to Mr. Johnftone, and defired that his people would take fuch 
of the halibut and {mall fifh as they had occafion for; thefe very friendly 
offers were thankfully accepted, and they afforded the party a moft excel- 
lent repaft, in which they were joined by their Ruffian friends. As the 
party were about to retire to reft, two large {kin canoes arrived, and 
paddled leifurely backwards and forwards in front of the village, finging a 


fong in flow time, which was accompanied by aétions fimilar to thofe 
prattifed by moft of the North Weft American Indians on their vifiting 
ftrangers. 


-afed 
» the 
bout 
hore 
vhilft 
il he 
r had 
> this 
1 met 
“very 
incli- 
their 
of a 
e {kin 
other 
eping 
» VICIs 
lians ; 
aking 
hich 
. 
anoes 
s the 
fome 
ented 
b fuch 
endly 
xcel- 
s the 
, and 
ring a 
thofe 
fiting 


gers, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


{trangers. This party confifted of about twenty in each canoe, which 
circumftance at that time of night Mr. Johnftone confidered as by no 
means pleafant, and induced him to inquire which was the officer, or who 
was the principal perfon, of the Ruffian party ; but he found there was 
no fuch perfon amongft them, they being all either matroffes or com- 
mon failors, fent from their fettlement at Noocheek, that is to fay, port 
Etches, for the purpofe of colle€ting furs. 

The new comers, although making a very confiderable addition to 
the Indian party, produced no alteration in the condué& of the Ruf- 
fians ; this was very fatisfa€tory to Mr. Johnftore, and the fufpicions 
that had before been entertained intirely fubfided. One of thefe Indi- 
ans, who appeared to be a chief, delivered to the Ruffians a paper fold- 
ed up in the form of a letter, with ten fkins, nine of which appeared to 
be beaver and one a fea otter fkin. 

Although a want of knowledge.in the Ruffian language neceffarily ren- 
dered moft of their inquiries inconclufive, yet they clearly underftood that 
the ftrangers had come immediately from Groofgincloofe, or Cook’s in- 
let, and that they, with thetr canoes, had croffed the wfthmus overland that 
Separates this found from Turnagain erm; but whether thefe Indians 
were the natives of this or that branch of the ocean could not be afcer- 
tained, 

The night was boifterous from the s.£., with very heavy rain. In 
the morning of the 5th the weather was more moderate, but unfortu- 
nately the grapnel of one of the boats being foul at the bottom, the 
boat grounded whilft they were endeavouring to weigh it; and it being ebb 
tide they could not pafs over the fhoal, fo that fhe was under the neceffity 
of remaining there until the returning flood. As their fituation was now be- 
fore the channel leading in an eafterly direction to the ocean, Mr. John- 
ftone proceeded with the other boat, in order to gain fuch information as 
might tend to facilitate their progrefs on the next tide; and having ad- 
vanced as far as the fhoal and the falling tide would permit, he ob- 
ferved, that between the point to which they had traced the continental 
fhore, fituated in latitude 60° gg1’, longitude 214° 29’, (and which, after 
Captain Witfhed, of the navy, obtained the name of Point WirsHeED) 
Vou. III. Z, and 


19794- 
June. 


‘ " 


Bg tn id a 
OR a Ne SE aa 


eeeae a 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


and Hinchinbrook ifland, the fpace was occupied by a low uninterrupted 
barren fand as far as the eye could reach, being the continuation of the 
fhoal bank that they had traced ever fince quitting the iflct on the preceding 
afternoon. This bank feemed to be impaflable, but as thefe obferva- 
tions were made at low water, a few feet only above the furface of an 
extenlive and nearly level tra¢t of fands, Mr. Johnftone thought it 
not improbable that a channel for the boats night be found winding 
through it into the ocean. He was confirmed in this opinion by the 
Rufians on his return to the ifland; where, finding the other boat in 
readinefs to depart, they took leave of their Ruffian friends, with many 
thankful expreflions for the kindnefles they had beltowed. Thefe Mr. 
Johnftone endeavoured to requite by a few trifling articles of traffic, 
which he conceived might be acceptable, and which were received with 
great pleafure by the Ruffians. 

The wind ftill blew very ftrong from the s.£., attended with thick 
rainy weather, but the hopes of being yet able to profecute their re- 
fearches along the continental fhore to the eaftward, induced them to 
continue in that purfuit towards the north-eaft point of Hinchinbrook 
ifland (which obtained the name of Point BENTINCK) as the moft 
probable means for finding the expeéted boat paflage; but on their 
reaching tiat point Mr. Johnftone perceived, as he had done in the 
morning, the continuation of the fand-bank, conneéting the land he 
was then upon with the continent; with the only difference of its being 
partly dry, the tide not being quite fo low as before. To the eaftward 
the ocean feemed to be very tempeftuous, and the {pace between point 
Bentinck and point Witfhed was occupied by a tremendous furf that ren- 
dered any paffage at that time impra¢ticable, though in more favorable 
weather it might probably be effected. 

The party had now been abfent ten days from the fhip, which was 
the period for which they had been fupplied, and as the only means of 
carrying on the furvey of the exterior coaft was round by cape Hinch- 
inbrook, a navigation far too extenfive for them to attempt with the 
remaining ftock of their provifions, and expofed to the ocean on an in- 
tirely open coaft, they were obliged, though with great relu€tance, to 
abandon 


a 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


abandon that objeét, and direét their way towards home. In doing this 
they paffed along the fhores of Hinchinbrook ifland, nearly in a weft 
dire€tion, ftill doubtful whether the land, forming the north-weftern 
fide of the channel they had thus purfued, was an ifland, or only a penin- 
fula. Should however the former conjeéture prove correét, their paflage 
to the veflels would be fhortened many leagues; and to afcertain this fa@ 
they rowed until near midnight, when, having advanced about eight 
miles from point Bentinck, their labours were rewarded by reaching tle 
weftern fide of the expe¢ted paffage leading into the found, by a chan- 
nel about half a leag 'e and about two miles long, in which were 
fome iflets and rocks, \ fhoal lying before its northern entrance. 
The land in queftion was now proved to bean ifland; from one to four 
miles wide, and about twenty miles long, in a north-eaft and fouth-welt 
direction. This ifland obtained the name of Hawxkins’s Istanp. 
After refting a few hours, early in the morning of the 6th they again 
fat off, but their progrefs was flow in confequence of a ftrong wefterly 
wind, almoft as adverfe to their returning as the eaflerly ftorms had 
been to their advancing, but with the alleviation of more pleafant wea- 
ther. They paffed along the north-weft part of Hinchinbrook ifland, 
which in a wefterly direétion is formed into coves, and {mall open bays ; 
in one of thefe they ftopped to breakfaft. Here they found a crofs 
ereCted, on which was infcribed, “ Carolus IV. Hifpan. Rex. An. 1790. 
“ PD" Salvador Fidalgo.” The north-weft extremity of this ifland was 
reached about noon, when the latitude was oblerved to be 60° 30%, its 
longitude 213° 54’, about 7} miles nearly in a weft direction from the 
paflage they had pafled through the preceding mght. This was only 
the fecond obfervation that had been obtained for the latitude during 
this expedition, but this fortunately happened to be at a confpicuous 
{tation, from whence they were able to correét the menfuration of the 
whole of their furvey, which otherwife muft have been hable to mate- 
rial error from the very inclement weather they had experienced. 
From this point the fhores, which were indented into finall coves, took 
a s.s.w. direction, about eight miles to the north-weft point of entrance 
imto port Etches; which Mr. Johnftone had my direétions to vifit if circum-. 
Z2 {tances 


Oy %*. X 


4 


16 


14 


1.25 


IMAGE E\ ALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 
ll 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


ographic 
iences 


Phot 
SC 
Corporation 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


{tances would permit him fo to do, in the hope of his being able to acquire 
fome geographical information from the Ruffians eftablifhed in that place, 
whofe habitation in the morning of the 7th they found fituated in the 
north-welt part of that port. Here they were received by the principal 
perfon, Mr. Peter Colomenee, with every mark of polite cordiality that 
might have been expetted from a perfon in his fituation, and intrufted 
with the direGtion of an extenfive commercial eftablilhment. Mr. Colo- 
mence inftantly conducted the party to the Ruffian refidence, which in 
inoft refpeéts refembled that which I had vifited in Cook’s inlet, though 
on a f{maller fcale. ‘This however was better defended, as a galiot of 
about feventy tons burthen was hauled on fhore, placed ere&t, and 
formed nearly one fide of the {quare, within which their houfes were 
built ; the whole of which it overlooked, and commanded the adjacent 
country, which is a low narrow peninfula, to a confiderable diftance 
round. On board this veffel fome Ruflians well armed conftantly re- 
fided, and on her decks fome fwivel and carriage guns were mounted ; 
and three of the latter were alfo feen at the entrance of the large com- 
mon dwelling-houfe. Here they were feated to breakfaft, confifting of 
boiled feals’ flefh, train oil, and a few boiled eggs, ferved up with a de- 
gree of neatnefs correfpondent to the delicacy of the articles of which 
the repaft was compofed. The fkin and moft of the hair were ftill ad- 
hering to the flefh of the feal, and the other articles not being very 
inviting to perfons accuftomed to a different diet, Mr. Johnftone begged 
leave to add their portion of chocolate, beef and bread, to the breakfatft, 
which was readily admitted, and to which their Ruffian hoft did ample 
juftice, 

Mr. Johnftone obferved, that there were only a few Indians in the 
neighbourhood of this fettlement, but is of opinion that they have a 
confiderable village at the head of che port. The Ruffians were faid to 
amount to an hundred, who, with thofe eftablifhed in the upper parts 
of Cook's inlet, under Mr. Zikoff, were in the intereft of one particu- 
lar company of merchants, diflinét from thofe under the direction of 
Mr. Berrenoff, who they now underftood refided chiefly at the Kodiak ; 
that his party extended their traffic principally along the exterior coatt 

2 of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


of the peninfula, towards Montagu ifland; that the accounts of the efta- 


173 


1794, 
J 


une. 


blifhment under the authority of Mr. Berrenoff in Blying found were W¥— 


correét ; and that the Englifhman’s name who was employed there in 
building a fhip, was Shields. 

From the refult of Mr. Johnftone’s inquiries, it did not appear that 
the Ruffians had tormed any eftablifhment to the eaftward of this ftation, 
but that their boats make excurfions along the exterior coaft as far as 
cape Suckling, and their galiots much further. In one of thefe expedi- 
tions a ferious difpute had lately arifen with the natives of Admiralty bay ; 
but the particulars could not be Jearned. On Mr. Johnftone’s inquiring 
for the chart of the Ruffian difcoveries in thefe regions, he found that 
Mr. Colomenee had no fuch thing in his poffeffion ; but he underftood that 
Mr. Smyloff, who commanded the galiot, was well informed, and Mr. 
Colomencee believed that he poffeffed fome documents that would have af- 
forded Mr. Johnftone much fatisfaction, had not that gentleman been ab- 
fent on an excurfion, by which means little interefting information could 
be obtained by this vifit; not however refulting from an improper 
mode of direéting the inquiries on the one part, or a difinclination to 
communicate on the other; but from the infurmountable impediment 
which had fo conftantly attended on all our inquiries, from the want 
of a common language, by which we might have been enabled to com- 
prehend each others meaning. 

During the day the weather was fair, but as the wind blew a ftrong 
gale from the weftward, againft which the boats could have made very 
little if any progrefs, Mr. Johnftone was induced to prolong his flay un- 
til the evening, at which time thefe winds generally fubfde. After 
dinner, to fhew the fenfe he entertained of Mr. Colomenee’s cordial and 
attentive reception, and in return for the fervices our party had re- 
ceived from the Ruffians at the Indian village, Mr. Johnftone prefented 
their hofpitable hoft with the few articles of traffic, and the {mall flock 
of provifions they had remaining, amongft which was about half a gallon 
of rum. This appeared to be by far the moft acceptable part of the 
whole; and Mr. Colomenee faid, it was a great length of time fince he 
had polleffed fuch a quantity of fpivituous liquor; indeed, the imme- 


an 
quate 


Sunday 8. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


diate and intemperate ufe he made of it, foon proved it to be a fortunate 
circumflance that his fituation precluded him the indulgence of fuch 
luxuries. ‘The inordinate defire in the lower claffes of thefe people for 
{pirituous liquors is a notorious fact, and had been often exhibited in 
our fhort intercourfe with thofe whom we had met with in this country ; 
but our gentlemen could not avoid being greatly hurt that a foreigner, 
capable of conducting himfelf in a manner that befpoke him worthy of a 
fuperior ftation, fhould have fo little efleem for himfelf, as to fall into 
the general error; efpecially as he was a man advanced in years, and 
whole previous deportment had very juftly inutled him to their refpeét: 
he became in an inftant an objeét of their pity, and they were under the 
neceflity of taking their leave, whilft he was fo intoxicated as to be nearly 
in a {tate of infenfibility. 

The wind, as had been expected, fubfided about cight in the evening, 
and the night was emploved in rowing acrofs the found; in the morning 
the calm was fucceeded by a northerly wind with pleafant weather, which 
brought them back to the veffels, as has been already ftated. 

A party of about twenty Ruffians vifited the {hips on funday afternoon 
from port Etches, in one of their large {kin canoes, conduéted by the 
fame perfon who had been the leader of the party that had vifited us 
amongft the ice in the upper part of Cook’s inlet. I underftood from 
him, that on his quitting the fhip they had proceeded up Turnagain arm, 
and from thence had croffed the ifthmus by land and gone to port Etches, 
where he had remained ever fince. He alfo gave me to underttand, 
that Mr. Colomenee would be with us in the morning, which took place 
agreeably to his information; and with him came Mr. Ballufian, who 
brought the chart he had gone in queft of, and very politely allowed me 
to copy it. 

By the fuperfeription of this chart, it appeared to have been exe- 
cuted in the years 178g and 1790, but we were unable to underfland any 
thing further of what was contained in its title, which was rather diftufe, 
and appeared to be as unintelligible to the Ruffians as to ourfelves; for 
they either could not, or would not read it over, nor did they inform us 
under what authority the chart had been conftruéted. The extent which 

it 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


it comprehended was, on the Afiatic flore, including the fea of Ochottk, 
from 50 to 63 degrees of north Jatitude ; the American coaft and iflands 
eaftward on the north pacific to Crofs found, and northward to fhoal 
Nefs. On comparing this chart with fuch parts of the American coaft 
as had been furveyed by Captain Cook, or feen by ourfelves, though it 
had not any great apparent pretenfions to accuracy, yet it was fatisfac- 
tory in certain particulars, with refpeét to which we had entertained 
fome doubts ; efpecially with regard to the coaft lying between cape 
Trinity and point Banks, which was reprefented in this chart as an ex- 
tenfive group of iflands under the denomination of Kodiak. The lar- 
gelt of thefe extends from cape Trinity to cape Greville, where a fepa- 
ration takes place between it and the land to the weftward of St. Her- 
mogenes ifland, which land the Ruffians call Fogniak ; and forms with 
the land to the fouthward what Captain Cook called Whitfuntide bay, 
but which is a paflage leading weftward into thofe ftraits that feparate 
the Kodiak from the continent, to the fouth-weftward of cape Douglas. 
‘Thefe ftraits are delineated as being in general upwards of 10 leagues 
wide, free from interruption ; the land about cape Trinity forming their 
fouth-weft point of entrance. The parts thus defcribed, that had not 
been feen by us, I have incorporated into our charts, but I cannot take 
upon me to be anfwerabic in any refpe€t for their accuracy. This fur- 
vey in many particulars varies very materially from that publifhed by 
Mr. Meares. 

The inclemency of the weather having prevented Mr. Johnftone from 
examining the exterior coaft, and having greatly delayed our bufinefs, 
efpecially in the carpenters’ department, Mr. Puget received my orders 
to proceed with the Chatham, and to continue the furvey of the conti- 
nental {hore to port Mulgrave, where I direéted him to remain until the 
ift of july; but in the event of my not having arrived there before that 
time, he was then to proceed to Crofs found, with further inftru€tions 
for his government. On this fervice the Chatham departed the next 
morning, as did our Rufhan friends, to whom I prefented an affortment 
of fuch articles as in their eftimation was molt valuable and ufeful, con- 
fifting of culinary utenfils, iron, fteel, copper, axes, Ke. with fome 
falted 


Wredne: 


33 


- 


i76 


1IG4. 
June. 


cme yn emed 


wonday % 


15. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


falted provifions, bread flour, rum, and tobacco, all of which were ac- 
cepted with teftimonies of the moft grateful fatisfaétion. 

The cutter that had attended Mr. Johnftone being now at Ileifure, I 
employed the three following days in taking a fketch of the harbour, and 
its adjacent fhores. During this interval the bowfprit was got in, and 
the fhip in all other refpe&ts made ready for fea the inftant the other 
boat party fhould return. 

About noon on funday Mr. Whidbey arrived, having completed the 
tafk allotted to his labours, fo that by. the joint exertions of the two 
parties, the furvey of this fpacious inlet had been fully accom- 
plifhed. 

In his paffage towards the fouth-weft point of the found Mr. Whid- 
bey vifited. two bays on the fhores of Montagu ifland, one named by 
Mr. Portlock Hunnings’s bay, the other M’Leod’s harbour. The 
anchorage in thefe he reprefents as being very much expofed, 
and conftituting nothing more than ftopping places in navigating this 
channel. The points of both ought not to be approached too near, as 
lurking rocks are fituated at fome diftance from them. In croffing from 
Montagu ifland to the fouth-weft point of the found, much broken land 
was paffed, and confidered to be a clufter of high rugged iflands. This 
conje€ture was afterwards found to be well formed, as alfo that the point 
to which I have given the name of Care PuGetT, was onthe main land 
of the peninfula. This cape is fituated in latitude 59° 55’, longitude 212° 
gt, and forms the weft point of a branch of the found leading to the 
northward; which I named Port BainsripGE. Its oppofite point, 
which I call Point ELRiNGTON, is the fouth-wefternmoft part of the 
above high rugged clufter of iflands, lying from it eaft, five miles dif- 
tant. This is a high, fteep, barren promontory of fmall extent, con- 
nected to the ifland near it bya narrow ifthmus, which at that time was 
covered with different kinds of fea fowl. On the fame fide of the port 
in aN.N.W. direétion, about five miles from point Elrington, is Point 
Pyxe, rendered remarkable by its fugar-loaf form. Between thefe 
points are fome bays, and a large opening leading to the north-eaft, 
with many rocks about the fhores juft above water; but the oppofite 
or wellern fide of the port is compaét, although fomewhat indented 

with 


fe 


~ | aut f* | owe AS 


 —— =e 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


with fmall bays and coves. To the north of point Pyke 1s a_tole- 
rably well-fheltered bay, furrounced on all fides by lofiy abrupt fhowy 
mountains; and to the north of this was a fecond bay, and a narrow 
opening leading to the north-eaft. The furvey was continued on the 
weftern fhore, ina channel in » northerly direction, and between two 
and three miles wide. On the 28th of may the party reftcd in a {mall 
cove; the night as well as the day was extremely unpleafant, the wind 
having conftantly blown a flrong gale from the x.N.£., with cold rainy 
weather. The next morning a great {well rolled from the ocean up the 
port, which terminated fix miles from their laft fleeping place in the lati- 


tude of 60° 132’, longitude 212° 124’ by a {mall traét of low land; off 


which, as well as its weftern fhore, lie fome rocks and rocky iflets. On thefe, 
although at the diftance of eighteen miles from the entrance of the port, 
and the wind blowing nearly in a direét line down the channel, the fea 
broke with fuch violence as rendered landing dangerous. Here they 
were met by a folitary Indian, who accompanied them back along the 
eaftern fide of port Bainbridge. This fhore was found to be compatt, 
until they reached the north point of the narrow opening before noticed, 
which I have called Point WaTERS, lying ina dire€tion from the head 
of the port s. 15 &., diftant 8 miles, having fome rocks and breakers before 
it. Thefe they paffed, and continued their refearches up the opening which 
took a dire€tion N. 50 E.; where, having advanced about 5 miles, the tur- 
bulency of the weather obliged them to feek fome fecure retreat, and on 
reaching a {mall indifferent cove on the northern fide, the party ftopped, 
and were with difficulty able to ere€t one fmall tent, and to make a 
fire. The violence of the ftorm here was equal to what was experi- 
enced by Mr. Johnftone and his party. It detained Mr. Whidbey until the 
ift of june, but its greateft force during his excurfion was about noon on 
the preceding day, when a very heavy guft brought down from a confi- 
derable height on the fide of the mountains, which are fteep to he water’s 
edge, an immenfe mafs of earth, trees, and frozen fnow. This was at- 
tended by a moft tremendous noife, and took place at a diftance not 
exceeding an hundred yards from the fpot where the whole party was 
affembled. It was whilft they were detained here that the accident had 

Vou. II. Aa happened, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


happened, which in a great meafure had occafioned Mr, Whidbey’s 
former return, 

Conceiving, from the direction of this opening, that. it feparated the 
broken land before mentioned from the main land, and that it communi- 
cated with the found to the north-eaftward, Mr. Whidbey continued his 
courle in that dircction, accompanied by the Indian who had been their 
gucft during the fiormy weather; and having proceeded about 6 miles 
further, nearly in the line before defcribed, they arrived in the found. The 
channel through which they had thus paffed, was in moft parts fome- 
thing Iefs than a mile wide ; it is about 11 miles in length, there are feveral 
funken rocks init; and its fhores are compofed of fteep rocky mountains. 

In the evening of the 3d, the party again reached the north-weft point 
of this paflage, which after Captain Countefs of the navy, obtained the 
name of Point CounTrEss; it is fituated in latitude 60° 19’, longitude 
212° gok’; this forms alfo the fouth-eaft point of an arm leading to the 
north-weftward, up which their courfe was directed along the larboard 
or continental fhore, paffing many large pieces of floating ice, which 
were in great abundance in this part of the found. ‘Two miles to the 
north-weft of this point they reached the entrance of a {mall opening 
about a mile in width, that took a foutherly direétion, where they 
rcfled for the night. Early the next morning they again proceeded with 
thick rainy weather, and found this opening to be compofed of two bays, 
that terminated about a league within its entrance. From hence they 
fteered to the N.N. w., paffing a bay on the weftern fhore about a league 
wide, and about 4£ miles decp, terminated by a compat body of ice 
that defcended from high perpendicular cliffs to the water fide, and fur- 
rounded by a country compofed of {tupendous lofty mountains covered 
with fnow. By this time Mr. Whidbey had advanced as far on the wef- 
tern fide of the found as to be oppofite to the anchorage of the veflels, 
about g leagues diftant in nearly an eaft and weft direétion. This fpace 
is occupied by land much broken, through which, befides an open- 
ing then before them leading to the north-eaft, there were two others 
that they had paffed by leading to the northward. From the north of 
this icy bay the continental fhore flretched x. 30 w., about fix miles up 
a fmall 


a ess te. 


bey’s 


1 the 
nuni- 
d his 
their 
miles 
The 
ome- 
veral 
tains. 
point 
d the 
ritude 
o the 
board 
which 
o the 
ening 
they 
Hf with 
bays, 
they 
eague 
bf ice 
1 fur- 
bvered 
e wel- 
reflels, 
{pace 
open- 
pthers 


th of 


es up 
fmall 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


a {mall branch, which there turned fhort to the fouthward, and termi- 
nated about a league further in a circular bafon, full of rocks, fome 
above and others beneath the furface of the water. From this bafon 
the party returned along the northern fhore, which led them to a point, 
in the opening laft mentioned extending to the north-eaft, in latitude 60° 
20, longitude 212° 26’. This paflage, which may be confidered as com- 
mencing at the north point of Icy bay, is there about two miles wide. and 
was found to extend in a direétion n. 42 £. for 94 miles, where it com- 
municated with the moft weftern of the other two openings before alluded 
to, making the land on the eaftern fide of this paffage (which from the great 
number of rocks in it is navigable only for boats and canoes) an_ ifland 
about 34 leagues long. On the weftern fide of this are two fmall branches, 
each about a mile wide, and 4 miles long, lying in a north-weft direc- 
tion, in which were alfo an immenfe number of rocks. The fhores of 
the main land continued in the direétion of the paffage, about a league 
and a half beyond the moft northern of thefe branches, to a point from 
whence the continental fhore took a direftion nN. 27 w.; this point ob- 
tained the name of Point NoweELtt, and is fituated in latitude 60° 27’, 
longitude 212° 424’. They quitted this about noon on the 5th; and after 
having advanced about 11 miles along a very rocky coaft, with fome 
iflets lying off from it, the party arrived at the fouth point of entrance 
into an opening on the main land; its oppofite point lying in the above 
dire€tion about two miles further: the fhores that were thus traverfed 
broke into fmall bays, lined by innumerab!2 rocks, and expofed to the 
whole range of the north-eaft fwell in the ia-nd, from which quarter a 
very heavy fea broke with great violence, aril rendered its navigation, 
even for boats, highly dangerous. 

This opening confifted of three fmall branches, two of them taking a 
foutherly, and the third a north-wefterly courfe. Having afcertained the 
extent of this opening, the coaft was found to ftretch from it nearly north, 
rounding a little to the eaftward, to a point that has received the name of 
Point Cucross, fituated in latitude 60° 45’, and longitude 212° 39’, and 
pafling an ifland about a league from the fhore, about four miles long, ina 
north-weft direétion. This point formed the fouth-welt point of an opening 

Aa2 about 


VIO. 


Jun . 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


about 2£ miles wide, taking a direction N. 30 w.; but as they advanced 
between thefe points of entrance, the opening divided into two very ex- 
tenfive branches, one taking nearly a northerly, the other a wefterly di- 
rection; the latter firfl claimed the attention of the party. Along its 
fouthern fhore, about four miles and a half from point Culrofs, they came 
to a bay about a Jeague and a half wide, and about g miles deep, in a 
fouth direction, where it was terminated by a fimilar boundary of ice and 
frozen {now as before deferibed, reaching from a compact body of lofty 
frozen mountains to the waters edge. Here it was fingular that 
the fhores between thefe icy bays were moftly compofed of a border 
of very low land, well wooded with trees of the pine and alder tribes, 
ftretching from the bafe of ftupendous mountains into the fea. At the 
welt point of this bay, which I have called Point Cocurane, they 
took up their night’s abode, and found it to form the fouth point of a 
branch leading to the weftward, and lying in a direction from point 
Culrofs, n.77 w., at the diftance of 8 miles; the oppofite, or north 
point of entrance, lying N.N.£., half a league diftant. This branch, on 
the morning of the 7th, was found divided into two ;_ the firft about 2 miles 
wide, took a direétion from point Cochrane, s.68 w., 24 leagues; the 
other extended from the fame ftation weft 13 miles, and then terminated 
in a dire€tion s. 33 w., about 4 miles further; its general width from 
half a league to two miles and an half. Although Mr. Whidbey had 
every reafon to prefume that his examination had hitherto been direéted 
along the continental fhore, yet from the very extraordinary manner in 
which we had found the coaft of North Weft America divided, he could 
not help entertaining fome doubts, until he arrived at the north-welt ex- 
tremity of this branch, fituated in latitude 60° 48’, longitude 211° 52’. 
Here they had approached within twelve miles ina direétion s. 60 w. of 
the fpot where Mr. Whidbey had ended his examination of ‘Turnagain arm. 
The intermediate fpace was the ifthmus fo frequently alluded to before, 
on either fide of which the country was compofed of what appeared 
to him to be lofty, barren, impaffable mountains, enveloped in _perpe- 
tual fhow; but the ifthmus itfelf was a valley of fome breadth, which, 
though it containcd elevated land, was very free from {now, and appeared 
to 


need 
J CX- 
y di- 
ig its 
came 
ina 
> and 
lofty 
that 
order 
ribes, 
t the 
they 
of a 
point 
north 
‘h, on 
miles 
5 the 
nated 
from 
y had 
e€led 
1er in 
could 
{t ex- 
h° 52". 
w. of 
arm. 
efore, 
beared 
berpe- 
hich, 
peared 
to 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


to be perfeétly eafy of accefs; a little to the eaftward of this valley, a 
rapid ftream of frefh water rufhed down a gully in the lofty mountains, 
and found its way to the fea through a margin of low land extending 
from the bafe of the mountains, and producing pine trees, cranberries, 
and a few other fhrubs. On the weftern point of entrance into this brook 
was a {mall houfe, about five feet high, and eight feet {quare, covered in 
with bark, not built after the Indian, but evidently conftruéted after the 
Ruffian manner ; formed by logs of timber, and made tight by the va- 
cancies being filled up with mofs and clay; the bottom was {trewed over 
with clean dried grafs, and appeared not only to have been recently in- 
habited, but to be a place of frequent refort. 

This houfe, and the general appearance of the country, removed 
every doubt of their fituation being then on the eaftern fide of that pals, 
by which the Ruffians maintain a communication between their fettle- 
ments in thefe two extenfive inlets.) Mr. Whidbey however, for his 
further fatisfa€tion, was very defirous of finding the road or path by 
which the intercourfe was carried on; and although he was unfuccefsful 
in afcertaining this, yet it did not appear to him that any particular 
track was neceffary, as the valley has a tolerably even furface, was nearly 
deftitute of any vegetable produétions, and was equally paffable in all 
dire€tions. Its fituation and charaéter correfponded alfo with the defcrip- 
tion of it given by the Ruflians, and Mr. Whidbey’s menfuration agreed 
nearly with the diftance acrofs as ftated by them, namely, about fixteen 
verfts. Coincidences fo conclufive were confidered by him as fufficiently 
fatisfa@tory, without croffing the ifthmus for more fully determining the 
point in queftion, which was now placed beyond all doubt; nor could it 
be neceflary for attaining the principal object of our voyage, that a 
more minute examination fhould be made of this ifthmus, or of the 
fhores of the intervening peninfula between Cook’s inlet and prince 
William’s found. 

This branch received the name of PassaGe CANAL; and the party 
having finifhed their neceffary obfervations, dined by the fide of the above 
brook. Part of their repaft confifted of two porcupines, which were re- 
prefented to refemble rabbits in tafte. Here they alfo thot a third, but its 
effluvia was fo intolerably olfenfive that no ufe could be made of it; the 


largeft 


181 


1794. 
June. 


eee amend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


largefi of the three weighed about 25]b.; fuch of their quills as were 
hard, and in a perfeét ftate, did not exceed fix inches in length, al- 
though they had others much longer, but thefe were foft and of no 
{trength. 

In their way up Paffage canal, the progrefs of the party had been much 
retarded by a ftrong weiterly wind, and they had no fooner fat out on 
their return than the wind fhifted, and blew equally flrong from the 
eaflward, which obliged them to be continually rowing unt! ten at night 
before they reached the entrance; here they refted for the night in a 
{mall bay, about half'a league to the north of the north point of en- 
trance into the canal, which I have called Point Picor, after one of 
the young gentlemen who generally attended Mr. Whidbey on thefe 
excurfions ; it is fituated in latitude 60° 474, longitude 212° 161’. Early 
in the morning of the 8th the examination of the continental fhore was 
refumed; it forms the weftern fide of the northern branch of this arm 
before alluded to, and which in a dire€tion N. 30 £. is about 4 miles 
wide. The continental fide of this branch is compofed of a ftupendous 
range of {nowy mountains, from whofe bafe low projeéting land ex- 
tends, jutting out into points, and forming the fhores, which were thinly 
wooded with dwarf pines and {tunted alders. 

At one of the points where the party had occafion to land, a fepul- 
chre was difcovered; Mr. Whidbey, in the courfe of this excurfion, had 
obferved fimilar monuments before, but they were all fo old, decayed, 
and mutilated, that it was not an eafy matter to determine exaétly for 
what fpecific purpofe they had been originally intended; but it was 
now proved that their conjeétures had been rightly formed. This 
tomb being of more recent date, Mr. Whidbey had it examined; a hole 
was found dug about a foot deep, five feet long, and four feet wide; at 
the bottom were fome thin planks, and acrofs them, nearly in the middle 
of the grave, two pieces of wood were placed about a foot afunder, and 
about nine inches thick, between which were depofited the remains of a dead 
body, rolled up in a feal fkin, and carefully tied with thongs of the fame 
material. Thefe remains confifted of fome afhes and calcined bones, 
which were concluded to be human; and as all the parts of the grave 

2 fhewed 


vere 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fhewed evident figns of the aétion of fire, it is natural to infer, that con- 
fuming their dead by fire is the prattice of the inhabitants. ‘The reli¢ts 
thus depofited were covered over with another plank, over which were 
{trewed ftones, mofs, and fome old broken paddles. The direétion of 
the grave was nearly north and fouth, with a {mall pole about eight fect 
long erected at its fouth end. The curiofity of the party having been 
thus fatisfied, every thing was reftored to its former ftate, and they pro- 
ceeded towards another low projeéting point fill on the larboard or 
continental fhore, in a direction N. 63 &. from this fpot, and at the diftance 
of three miles. Between thefe points a bay is formed, about a league 
and a half deep towards the nN.N.w., in which were feen feveral fhoals 
and much ice; the termination of this bay is bounded by a continuation 
of the above range of lofty mountains. On this fecond low projeéting 
point, which Mr. Whidbey called Point PakeNiAM, the latitude was 
obferved to be 60° 594’, its longitude 212° 29’. The width of the arm at 
this ftation was reduced to 2 miles, in which were feveral half concealed 
rocks, and much floating ice, through which they purfued their examina- 
tion, toa point at the diftance of 3 miles along the weftern fhore, which 
flill continued to be compat, extending n.308.; in this direétion 
they met fuch innumerable huge bodies of ice, fome afloat, others lying 
on the ground near the fhore in 10 or 12 fathoms water, as rendered 
their further progrefs up the branch rafh, and highly dangerous. This 
was however, very fortunately, an objcét of no moment, fince before their 
return they had obtained a diftinct view of its termination ‘about 2 
leagues further in the fame direétion, by a firm and compaét body of ice 
reaching from fide to fide, and greatly above the level of the fea; be- 
hind which extended the continuation of the fame range of lofty moun- 
tains, whoie fummits feemed to be higher than any that had yet been 
feen on the coaft. 

Whilft at. dinner in this fituation they frequently heard a very loud 
rumbling noife, not unlike loud, but diftant thunder; fimilar founds had 
often been heard when the party was in the neighbourhood of large bo- 
dies of ice, but they had not before been able to trace the caufe. They 


now found the noife to originate from immenfe ponderous fragments of 


ice, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ice, breaking off from the higher parts of the main body, and falling 
from a very confiderable height, which in one inftance produced fo vio- 
lent a fhock, that it was fenfibly felt by the whole party, although the 
ground on which they were was at leaft 2 leagues from the {pot where 
the fall of ice had taken place. Mr. Whidbey obferved, that a large 
portion of the few trees that this defolate and dreary region produced, 
had been much fhattered by the late ftormy weather; fome were torn up 
by the roots, others bent to the ground, and fome with their heads intirely 
broken off. After dinner they returned down this branch along its eaftern 
fide, which like the oppofite fhore is firm and compact, until they 
reached a narrow opening lying fouth, 4 miles diftant from the fecond 
low projecting point. This »pening led them through a narrow paflage, 
in iome places a mile in others not a quarter of a mile wide, and in an 
irregular dire€tion about s. 39 E., and about 3 leagues long, to a point on 
the continent communicating with the found, and making the land on 
the weft fide of this paflage an ifland about ten miles long, and four 
miles broad; its fouth point being the north-eaft point of entrance into 
the arm leading to Paffage canal. Here they refted for the night, and in 
the morning of the gth’continued their inquiry along the fhores of the 
continent, which took, though irregularly, about an E.N.£. dire€tion, 
ten miles to the fouth-weft point of an arm, which I called Point 
PreLLew, leading to the northward, where the obferved latitude was 
60° 51’, longitude 212° 57’. The fhores that compofe this extent of 
coaft are formed by a low border of land, extending from the bafe of 
the mountains, much indented with {mall bays, and at high tide great- 
ly interfeéted by water; it produces a few dwarf trees, and other infig- 
nificant vegetable produétions; and like the other parts of the continent 
bordering upon the found, is bounded by finall iflands, iflets, and rocks, 
extending into the found as far as they were able to difcern, and which 
rendered the progrefs of the boats tedious and intricate. Here they 
were vifited by a {mall party of the native Indians, who conducted them- 
felves with great friendlinels, and very civilly invited our gentlemen to 
their habitations, which they pointed out to be not far off; but Mr. 
Whidbey’s objet leading him another way, they mutually bade each 
other 


ling 
V10- 
1 the 
here 
large 
iced, 
nup 
irely 
ftern 
they 
cond 
lage, 
in an 
nton 
d on 
| four 
2 into 
ind in 
f the 
ion, 
DINT 
e was 
nt of 
fe of 
preat~ 
infig- 
inent 
ocks, 
hich 
they 
hem- 
en to 
Mr. 


each 


other 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


other farewell, and as our party proceeded, this arm was found to take 
a north dire€tion, in general about a league wide, and to terminate at 
the diftance of about 4 leagues, at the foot of a continuation of the 
range of lofty mountains before mentioned. Its upper parts were much 
incumbered with ice, as were both the eaftern and weftern fides with 
innumerable rocks, and fome iflets. In the evening they reached a 
point, which lies n. 83 E., at the diftance of 8 miles from the above fouth- 
weft point of the arm they had quitted; here the party refted for the 
night. About two the next morning (the 1oth) their repofe was dif- 
turbed by four Indians, who had ftruck a large halibut, that occafioned 
them fome trouble to fecure, very near the place of their lodging; this 
was at length very dexteroufly effeéted, and the interruption expe- 


rienced was amply compenfated by the fifh which they purchafed of 


the Indians, and which afforded the party feveral good and acceptable 
meals, 

At four o’clock, the ufual time of moving, Mr. Whidbey procecded 
along the continental fhore, through a paflage half a league wide, formed 
by the fhores of the main land and an ifland lying along it, about a 
league broad and feven miles long, in a direétion N.£. by E. Nearly 
in the middle of this paffage is a bay about 2 miles wide, and of the fame 
depth. This bay, which has its northern point fituated in latitude 60° 
564, longitude 219° 25’, is the weftern extent of Sen" Fidalgo’s refearch- 
es in this found, and was named by him Puerto Revilla Gigedo. To 
the eaftward of this is another bay of rather larger dimenfions, with an 
ifland in its north-eaft corner. It is a circumftance not unworthy of re- 
mark in thefe bays, fo near as they are to each other, the former pre- 
fenting a fouth-eaft, the latter a fouthern afpeét; and that the weflernmolt 
fhould be nearly free from ice, whilft the eafternmoft, with a full fouth 
expofure, fhould be terminated by a folid body of compaét elevated ice, 
fimilar to that which has -been before deferibed, both being equally 
bounded at no great diftance by a continuation of the high ridge of {nowy 
mountains ; as they pafled the ca‘lern bay they again heard the thunder- 
like noife, and found that it had been produced by the falling of the large 
pieces of ice that appeared to have been very recently feparated from the 


Vor. III. Bb mals 


185 


794A. 


June. 
ae 


Rae a 


pCa aly 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


n.afs extending in vaft abundance acrofs the paflage towards the north-eaft 
point of the ifland, infomuch that it was with great difficulty the boats 
could effeét a paffage. By noon Mr. Whidbey reached the weft point, (call- 
ed by me Pornr FremManree,) of the entrance into Puerto de Valdes, 
fo named by Sen" Fidalgo, where the latitude was obferved to be 60° 57’, 
longitude 213° 34’; from this point the arm or port abounding with rocks 
took a direétion N. 33 £., for 12 miles; where a fmall brook, fupplied by 
the diffolving of the ice and fnow on the mountains, flowed into the 
arm, which about 5 miles from thence terminated in an eafterly dt- 
rection, in latitude 61° 7’, longitude 219° 56’. The head of this branch 
of the found is under the fame parallel, and is expofed exaétly to the 
fame foutherly afpeét, as that in which the party had beheld the great 
fall of ice; and although thefe conftitute the northern limits of the found, 
yet in this branch no ice had been feen, notwithftanding it is terminated 
by fhallow water at its head, and is furrounded by fimilar fteep frozen 
mountains. The firft icy bay they met with was open to the eaft and 
s.E., nearly a degree to the fouth of the head of this branch, and the 
{econd in the arm leading to Paffage canal was expofed to the north; but 
in the bays on the fouthern fide of that canal no ice was feen, fo that it 
was not an eafy matter to account for its partial appearance. 

Farly in the morning of the 11th they returned along the caftern fide 
of Puerto de Valdes, which is from half a league to a league in width; 
the fhores are indented by fome fmall bays, and lined with rocky iflets 
and rocks. In this route they arrived at a point on the continent, lying 
from the weft point of entrance into the port s. 85 £., diftant 44 miles ; 
where they found an opening about a mile wide that ftretched s. 33 E., 
and formed a paflage about 7 or 8 miles long, between the continent and 
an ifland lying N..1g w. and s.19£., 7 miles in length, and about 2 
miles in breadth. Thefe fhores, like thofe which the party had lately navi- 
gated, abounded with rocks and rocky iflets; and on reaching the fouth- 
ern part of this paffage, it evidently appeared to be the fam: mentioned 
by Captain Cook on the 17th of may 1778, which the mafter of the Re- 
folution had been fent to examine, and that Puerto de Valdes was the 
arm 


As 


[on on SE — a nS 


le 3 


-eaft 
oats 
‘call- 
ides, 
° 57's 
rocks 
od by 
» the 
y di- 
anch 
» the 
great 
und, 
nated 
-ozen 
t and 
d the 
; but 
hat it 


1 fide 
idth; 
iflets 
lying 
iles ; 
B3 Ess 
tand 
Dut 2 
navi- 
outh- 
ioned 
pP Re- 
s the 

arm 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


arm that had cccafioned at that time a difference of opinion in Lieutenant 
Gore and Mr. Roberts. 

The fouth point of this, which is Bligh’s ifland, being the {lation from 
whence Mr. Johnftone had commenced his furvey, completed the exami- 
nation of the whole of prince William’s found, as it refpected the boun- 
dary of the continent; but the numerous iflands, iflets, rocks, and 
fhoals, which are contained within this {pace, being confidered as fegon- 
dary objeéts, did not fall within the limits of our fervice for accurately 
afcertaining or delineating; yet thefe have been noticed with every de- 
gree of circumfpeétion, that circumftances, and the nature of our re- 
fearches, would allow, without fwerving from our principal objeét, viz. 
the furvey of the fore of the continent. For this reafon I fhall here con- 
clude the report of Mr. Whidbey’s excurfion, notwithftanding that he 
examined port Fidalgo; but as no new matter occurred to him, it is un- 
neceflary to recapitulate the former obfervations ; and as we had no fur- 
ther bufinefs to detain us any longer in this fituation, we prepared to 
take our departure, having during our ftay made tlic following aftrono- 
mical and nautical obfervations. 

By the rate of the chronometers as afcertained at the head of Cook’s 
inlet, the longitude of port Chalmers was {hewn to be, on the 26th of 


may, by Kendall’s chronometer, - - - 219° 30' 20" 
By Arnold’s No. 14, - - - - 213 22 50 
Ditto 176, - - - 213 21 20 


On the gth of june Kendall’s chronometer (oped: but on applying 
a gentle horizontal motion, it was again put into action. 

From the 26th of may to the 1oth of june, No. 14, and No. 176, 
were found to be going nearly at the fame rate as afcertained in Cook’s 
inlet; hence the longitudinal diftance between Cook’s inlet, and port 
Chalmers, may be confidered as pretty correétly afcertained; but as an 
alteration was obferved to have taken place in their rate of going after 
that time, the feveral rates of the chronometers were afcertained by re- 
peated good obfervations, made from the 1oth to the 16th of junc, both 
days inclufive e; and as the true longitude of port Chalmers, was found 

Bbe2 by 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


by fubfequent obfervations to be 213° 22’, No. 14 was on the 16th of 
june, found to be faft of mean time at Greenwich, 4° 13° 47" 0” 
And to be gaining on mean time per day, at the rate of 23 
No. 176 was faft of mean time at Greenwich, g 20 46 
And to be gaining on mean time per day, at the rate of, 51 40 
Kendall’s was faft of mean time at Greenwich, 8 41 41 
Andgaining on mean time per day, at the rate of, - 26 50 
The latitude of port Chalmers was found to be 60° 167 
The variation by four compaffles, and thirty fets of ob- 
fervations ; differing from 26° 50’, to 30° 9’; fhewed the 
mean refult, to be - - - - 28 930 eafterly. 
The vertical inclination of the magnetic needle, 
Marked end, North Face Eaft, - - 77° 30 
Ditto ditto Weft, - : 77 50 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - - 76 
Ditto Ditto Weft, : - 77 
The mean inclination of the marine dipping needle, 77 8t 
At port Chalmers a confiderable difference had been obferved between 
the night and day tides; the former during the fprings rofe thirteen feet, 
four inches; whereas the latter did not rife more than twelve feet one inch ; 
and it was alfo found to be high water about an hour after the moon had 
paffed the meridian. 


CHAPTER 


feet, 
ch ; 
had 


ER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Quit prince William’s found—Geographical and other obfervations refpett- 
ing the adjacent country and tts inhabitants—Proceed in the examination 
of the extertor coafi—Pafs port Mulgrave—Intelligence received of the 
Survey having been completed to that ftation by the Chatham—Arrive in 
Crofs found— Joined by the Chatham there. 


I wap fully intended laying the Difcovery on fhore in this harbour, 
for the purpofe of examining, and if neceffary, of repairing her bottom; 
but the rife and fall of the tide was too inconfiderable for that purpofe, 
without very materially lightening the fhip; an operation that would have 
taken up more time than could conveniently be {pared ; and, without much 
labour in clearing a place in the woods, a fituation could not be procured 
fit for the reception of fuch articles, as it would have been neceflary to 
have landed: in addition to thefe circumftances, the intemperate weather 
on our firft arrival greatly militated againft fuch operations; and this be- 
ing fucceeded by the neap tides, induced me wholly to give up the de- 
fign, which I now began to confider more as a matter of curiofity, than 
as an objeét of real neceffity. 

The wind blowing a moderate breeze right into the harbour from the 
S.W. attempts were made to warp out againft it to the entrance, where 
this wind would have been favorable to our purfuit; but our ropes for 
this fervice were too much worn to fuftain the weight of the fhip, and they 
broke on our firft trial. The s.w. wind continuing, detained us untl 
three in the morning of the 17th, when, on a calm fucceeding, the {hip 
was towed to the entrance of the port; where about feven o'clock we 

2 were 


1794. 
June. 
cme sts 


Monday 16, 


Tuefday 17, 


Wednef. 18, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


were met by a gentle breeze from the s. w. to which we fpread all our can- 
vas, and directed our courfe for mid-channel, between Green and Mon- 
tagu iflands; but in our routea funken rock foon ftopped our progrefs 
by the fhip ftriking upor. it, and having at that time a falling tide, fhe 
remained faft. We had come very fuddenly and unexpcctedly into this 
unpleafant fituation, as the man at the lead had fearccly announced his 
laft foundings, which were at 10 fathoms, when the fhip ftruck; I had 
alfo founded myfelf, and had found not lefs than from g to 10 fathoms 
in every dire€tion round this rock, but had unluckily miffed the fpot on 
which the fhip now lodged, which had neither weeds nor any other in- 
dication of its exiflence; nor does it occupy a greater extent than a 
fix or eitht oared boat in any direétion. The fhip refted nearly on 
its higheft part, and at low water, the depth clefe to her bow was only 
twelve feet; whilft we had 5 fathoms under the main chains, and 7 fa- 
thoms depth of water, under her ftern. The water quitting the fhip’s 
bows afforded us an opportunity of replacing much of the copper that 
had been torn off by the ice. About eleven o’clock the return of the 
flood tide relieved us from this embarrafIment, without our having, ap- 
parently, received any damage. 

The wind being faint and baffling from the weftern quarter, with a 
flight current fetting on the fhores of Montagu ifland; prevented our fail- 
ing; but we employed the afternoon in warping further into mid-channel, 
clear of this line of funken rocks. Here we anchored in 21 fathoms 
water, muddy bottom; about a mile and three quarters from the fhores 
of Montagu ifland. The fouth pomt of port Chalmers bore by com- 
pafs s. 80 &.; the north-weit point of Montagu ifland, N. 11 w.; and the 
north point of Green ifland, N.76 w. In this fituation a few cod and 
halibut were taken during the night, and on wednefday morning calm 
rainy weather prevented our moving until late in the forenoon; when 
with a light breeze from the £.N.. we proceeded, and having paffed 
to the northward of the north Paflage rock, no foundirigs were gained 
with the hand line; but about half a league from the north-weft point of 
Montagu ifland the depth was 65 fathoms, muddy bottom: from this 
point a ledge of rocks extends about halfa mile. As we failed along 
the 


‘anes 
on- 
refs 
fhic 
this 
his 
had 
oms 
t on 
r in- 
na 
y on 
only 
7 fa- 
hip’s 
that 
f the 


’ ap- 


ith a 
fail- 
nnel, 
homs 
nores 
com- 
d the 
l and 
calm 
when 
affed 
ained 
int of 
this 
long 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the north-eaft fide of the ifland, it feemed to be divided into bays, or founds ; 
two of which appeared to be capacious, but from each of their points of 
entrance, rocks were feen to extend a confiderable diftance ; fome of which 
were level with, and others juft fhewed their heads above the furface of 
the fea. In thefe openings fimilar obftru€tions were noticed ; and as this 
fide of Montagu ifland is greatly expofed to the influence of the prevail- 
ing winds, great caution ought to be obferved in navigating near its 
fhores, until a more minute examination may point out the fituation of 
the latent dangers, of which we were unable to procure any further in- 
formation, than that, of barely feeing that fuch did exift; for as the wind 
veered to the fouthward, it led us from thefe rocky fhores, whilft it ena- 
bled us to fetch well over towards cape Hinchinbrook: in this route 
were obferved many riplings and agitations of the fea, as if it were flow- 
ing over fhallow places; but we gained no bottom with the hand line ia 
pailing through feveral of them. 

As the night approached, the wind became light and variable, with al- 
ternate calms, thefe together with the flood tide, about three in the 
morning, fat the fhip direétly towards the north point of entrance in- 
to port Etches; where, with 100 fathoms of line, no bottom could be 
reached within about a quarter of a mile of the fhore, on which the fea 
broke with confiderable violence. Fortunately however, whilft in this 
very unpleafant predicament from which we pofleffed no refources of 
extrication, a breeze fprang up from the n.£., juft fufficient to enable us 
to {tem the current, and relieved us from all apprehenfions of danger. 
This breeze was foon fucceeded by calms and light foutherly airs, which 
towards noon, with the affiftance of the flood tide, drove us into the en- 
trance of port Etches, without our being able to refift their influence ; 
and as I knew the flood would continue until near five o’clock ; we bore 
away for anchorage, but gained no bottom until we had pafled the rocky 
iflets that lie on the north-weft fide within the entrance, and were nearly 
abreaft of the lagoon within which the Ruffians have their eftablifhment. 
We anchored in 31 fathoms water, the lagoon bearing by compafs 
nN. 20 WwW. atthe diftance of halfa mile; the head of the harbour yn. 29 E.3 
and the points of entrance s.3 w. and s. 25 w. 


After 


191 


194+ 


June. 


aed 


Thurfday 19. 


192 


1794. 


June. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


After dinner, I went on fhore accompanied by fome of the officers, and 


L-.—— was received by Mr. Colomenee and Mr. Ballufian, with all the friendlinefs 


Friday 20. 


and hofpitality which the poverty of their fituation permitted them to ex- 
hibit. Here we were introduced to another gentleman named Smyloff, 
who prefided over the maritime part of this mercantile company, and who 
had under his direétions, the galiot mentioned by Mr. Johnftone as form- 
ing the fide of the inclofure, in which their habitations are built clofe to the 
landing place at the Ruffian fa€tory ; with two others of fimilar burthen. 

This gentleman having heard of our arrival in Cook’s inlet, he had gone 
thither for the purpofe of paying us a vifit, but had been difappointed of 
his object by our departure from thence, and he had been returned only 
a few days. His route had been over the ifthmus, and he defcribed Paflage 
canal to be the very place we had fuppofed it to be. He ftated, that the 
Chatham had failed out of the found on the 12th of the month with a 
favorable breeze, and that fince her departure a brig had paffed up the 
found fteering towards Snug-corner cove. We {pent a fhort time in view- 
ing thefe premifes, which afforded little worthy of attention befides what 
has already been defcribed. On our return, we were accompanied on 
board by Mr. Ballufian and Mr. Smyloff; the former after fupper re- 
turned to the fhore, but Mr. Smyloff remained with us until we were 
clear of the port; which from light and variable winds we did not effeét 
until near noon on the goth; when an excellent obfervation was pro- 
cured, which fhewed the latitude by three obfervers to be 60° 184’. Cape 
Hinchinbrook at this time, bore by compafs s.96£., diftant 2 miles. 
This promontory, according to the refult of our calculations, is fituated 
in latitude 60° 164’, longitude 213° 56’. 

Mr. Puget having received inftruétions to examine the coaft minutely 
from hence to port Mulgrave, my attention was only direéted to fixing the 
line of the intermediate external headlands, until any navigable branches 
of the fea fhould be found between thofe limits. For this purpofe we 
embraced the advantage of the favorable weftern breeze then prevailing, 
and fteered towards the fouth point of Kaye’s ifland. Our time being thus 
unintereltingly employed, I fhall fill the vacant page by making a few 

remarks 


and 
inefs 
) €x- 
yloff, 
who 
orm- 
o the 
hen. 
gone 
-d of 
only 
flage 
it the 
ith a 
» the 
vIew- 
what 
d on 
r re- 
were 
ffeét 
pro- 
Cape 

iles. 
ated 


utely 
g the 
ches 
fe we 
iling, 
thus 
few 
narks 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


remarks on fuch circumftances as had recently occurred, but had not 
found a place in the narrative of our tranfaétions. 

I cannot avoid making fome obfervations on the difference in the deli- 
neation of prince William’s found, as reprefented in Captain Cook’s laft 
voyage, and the refult of our late examination, particularly with refpeét 
to Montagu ifland, which is therein defcribed to be feven miles longer, 
and to be placed ten miles more to the fouthward, than we found to be its 
fituation and extent. 

The weft point of Snug-corner cove is alfo placed five miles to the fouth 
of the obfervations of Mr. Whidbey and Mr. Johnftone, which agreed 
very accurately together. In a direftion s. 50 w., diftant 7 miles from 
cape Hinchinbrook, and nearly at the fame diftance from the fhores of 
Montagu ifland, is a barren, flat, rocky iflet, with feveral rocks lying at 
a {mall diftance from it. Of this iflet no notice is taken either in the 
chart or hiftory of that voyage, natwith{tanding it was then feen, and its 
fituation afcertained to be nearly as we now found it, by thofe who were 
at that time on board the Difcovery. The obfervations alfo that were 
made by them for afcertaining the latitude of the weft point of Snug- 
corner cove and Montagu ifland, correfponded very nearly with our pre- 
fent calculations. Befides thefe, I have in other inftances dete&ted fome 
errors which are evidently of the prefs; but it is a circumftance not eafily 
to be reconciled with fuch high geographical authority, that the above- 
mentioned errors fhould have taken place in the conftru€tion of the 
chart; and notwithftanding that I entertain the higheft refpeét and venera- 
tion for the Right Reverend and learned editor of thofe volumes, yet I 
am of opinion, that had Captain Cook furvived to have fuperintended the 
publication of his own labours, thefe errors would have been re€tified ; 
and I am led to believe, that they muft have arifen from fome writing, or 
authentic document, relative to this particular part of his refearches, hav- 
ing been loft or miflaid. This opinion is founded on the great deficiency 
of nautical information in the hiftory of that voyage, refpeCting the fpace 
between the fouth point of Kaye’s ifland and cape Elizabeth; which, by 
paffing through prince William’s found, may be faid to comprehend a 
line of fea coaft upwards of go leagues in extent, and which employed 

Vou. III, Cc Captain 


1794- 


June. 


men = 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Captain Cook ten days to traverfe, namely, from the 11th to the a1ft 
of may 1778; a week of which was fpent in pafling through this inlet, 
almoft from its moft northern to its moft fouthern extremity; in which 
time, fufficient opportunities occurred for making the neceffary obfervations 
for the latitude, for the longitude by the chronometer, and for the varia- 
tion of the compafs; yet none of thefe (excepting the fituation of the fhip 
on the 12th at noon,) nor the pofition of any one point or ftation on the 
coaft, nor the iflands within thofe limits, are any where noticed; nor is 
there any thing relative to the tides, excepting that of the flood coming 
from the fouthward, to be met with; nor is there any topographical defcrip- 
tion of the coaft, nor of the rocks and iflands that lie off from it, fouth- 
weftward from Montagu ifland to cape Elizabeth, notwithftanding that 
that coaft was paffed at no great diftance, and that it was found to take a 
dire€tion very contrary to what was at that time expected. In addition 
to this circumftance, the nearly central fituation of this capacious inlet in 
the fpace in queftion, and its broken and infular appearance, rendered 
fuch an extent of coaft the more likely to have been noticed in a parti- 
cular manner, and would argue an inattention to nautical occurrences 
which IT believe is no where elfe to be met with in the works of that 
juftly renowned and moft celebrated navigator; and which, moft pro- 
bably, will only be difcovered by thofe whofe fituations may render it ex- 
pedient for them to refort for information to the refult of his unequalled 
labours. 

The minute examination we were empowered to make of prince Wil- 
liam’s found, not only brought us acquainted with its utmoft limits in 
every direction, but proved it to be a branch of the ocean that requires the 
greateft circumfpeétion to navigate; and although it diverges into many 
extenfive arms, yet none of them can be confidered as commodious 
harbours, on account of the rocks and fhoals that obftru@ the approach 
to them, or of the very great depth of water at or about their entrances. 
Of the former, innumerable have been difcovered, and there is great rea- 
ton to fuppofe that many others may have exiftence, of which we gained 
no knowledge. By what may be colleéted from our inquiries, Snug-cor- 
ner cove, and the paffage to it from the ocean, feem to be the leaft liable 
ta thefe obje€tions of all places of fhelter which the found affords. The 

1 place 


2a1tt 
inlet, 


hich 


tions 
raria- 
fhip 
the 
or is 
ing 
crip- 
buth- 
that 
ike a 
ition 
let in 
lered 
parti- 
»nces 
that 
pro- 
it ex- 
alled 


Wil- 
ts in 
s the 
nany 
lious 
oach 
nces. 
-rea- 
‘ined 
-Cor- 
iable 
The 


nlace 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


place of our anchorage in port Chalmers, can only be confidered as a 


195 


1794. 
une, 


{mall cove in a rugged rocky coaft; fo very difficult of accefs or egrefs, UH 


that our utmoft vigilance in founding was unequal to warn us of the rock 
on which the fhip grounded, and which is fituated n. 72 w. from the north 
point of the harbour, diftant one mile; and N. 6 £. from the woody iflet, 
at about the fame diftance, having between it and the iflet the fouth paffage 
rock, with two fhoals; on founding, (whilft the fhip was aground) towards 
the north paffage rock, another fhoal was difcovered in that dire@tion 
about half a mile off, fhoaling fuddenly from about 12 to 4 fathoms, at 
about two thirds flood. At the moment the fhip {truck I thought fhe had 
been on the bed of kelp laid down in Mr. Portlock’s fketch, which I had 
fearched for in vain; but on comparing the fituations, I found that that 
where we had been ftopped in our progrefs appeared to be confiderably 
to the fouth-weft ; hence it is very probable that there may be more of 
thefe latent dangers exifting in this neighbourhood, whofe fituation re- 
quire the moft attentive vigilance to difcover and avoid; of thefe it had 
been our lot to fall in with four in the fpace of as many miles, which 
had remained unnoticed not only by former vifitors, but by our com- 
panion alfo; and fince accident alone brought them to our knowledge, 
the prefumption is greatly in favor of the above opinion, and renders the 
navigating this fouthern paffage into prince William’s found, infinitely 
more intricate and unpleafant than had before been imagined. For the 
particulars of fuch information as we were able to colleét, I beg leave 
to refer to the annexed fketch, where it will alfo be found, that what is 
called Stockdale’s harbour is only a bay full of rocks, and of courfe was 
not worthy of any particular examination. 

Inthe neighbourhood of port Chalmers, the country as high up the 
fides of the mountains as vegetation extended, was in moft places free 
from fnow before we quitted that anchorage, and afforded us an oppor- 
tunity of forming fome judgment on the nature of the foil; which, from 
the diverfity of furface in plains, and {paces clear of trees, prefented a 
pleafing verdant appearance to the eye; but on a more attentive exami 
nation it proved to bein moft places an intire morafs, compofed of a ver: 
poor black moorifh earth, formed apparently of decayed vegetables. no! 

Cc2 futficiently 


June. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fufficiently decompofed to produce any thing but a variety of coarfe 


WY — mofles. a fhort fpiry grafs, a few cranberry, and fome other plants of a 


dwarfith ftunted growth; fome of thefe morafles compofe the fides of 
the hills, and although thefe had confiderable inclination, yet they had 
the property of retaining the water to a very deceitful and unpleafant 
degree; exhibiting an apparently dry, verdant furface, which when 
walked upon funk to nearly half leg deep in water. The foil from 
whence the forefts have {prung is of fimilar materials, and not reduced 
to a more perfeét mould; bu: this generally covers a rocky foundation, 
from whence pine trees feem to derive great nourifhment, as very large 
ones had frequently been found growing from out of the naked rock. 
Thofe about this harbour did not grow with the fame luxuriance as at the 
place from whence our fore-yard had been procured, about 5 leagues to 
the fouth-weft, but compofed rather a dwarfifh foreft; which, although 
producing many of the common berry bufhes, cannot be confidered as 
much interrupted with underwood. The fhores are in general low, and as 
has been already obferved, very {wampy in many places, on which the fea 
appears to be making more rapid incroachments than I ever before faw, 
or heard of. Many trees had beencut down fince thefe regions had been 
firft vilited by Europeans; this was evident by the vifible effeéts of the axe 
and faw ; which we concluded had been produced whilft Meffrs. Portlock 
and Dixon were here, feven years before our arrival; as the {tumps of the 
trees were flill remaining on the earth where they had originally grown, but 
were now many feet below the high water mark, even of neap tides. A 
narrow low proje¢ting point of land behind which we rode, had not long 
fince afforded fupport to fome of the largeft pine trees in the neighbour- 
hood, but it was now overflowed by every tide; and excepting two of the 
trees which {till put forth a few leaves, the whole were reduced to naked, 
dead white ftumps, by the incroachment of the fea water to their roots ; 
and fome ftumps of trees, with their roots {till faft in the ground, were 
alfo found in no very advanced ftate of decay nearly as low down as the 
low water of fpring tides. 


‘ 


The only fifh we obtained in this port was a few indifferent crabs 
from the fhores. About the out{kirts of the woods we procured a little 


wild 


Vv 
d 
O 
{ 
; 
{ 
( 
t 
1 


parle 
ofa 
es of 
had 
afant 
vhen 
from 
uced 
tion, 
large 
rock. 
t the 
es LO 
ough 
-d as 
nd as 
e fea 
faw, 
been 
Pp axe 
tlock 
f the 
, but 
. A 
long 
our- 
f the 
aked, 
Dots ; 
were 
s the 
crabs 
little 


wild 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


wild celery, and the fpruce beer that was here brewed far exceeded in 
excellence any we hiad before made upon the coaft. Our {portfmen pro- 
cured a few gecfe, ducks, goofanders, and other aquatic birds, which 
proved very acceptable; to thefe were added an old black bear, but al- 
though we were living on falted provifions, its flefh did not feem to be 
much relifhed. 

Our fituation did not permit us to become much acquainted with 
the native inhabitants of the country; for excepting thofe who had v1- 
fited us near the fouth point of Montagu ifland, none of them ap- 
proached the fhip; nor did Mr. Whidbey, although he coafted near 
four hundred and twenty miles of the fhores of the peninfula and conti- 
nent, meet with more than thirteen of the Indians; he did not fee any of 
their habitations, nor any of thofe deferted villages that we had been accul- 
tomed to find in every other part of the coaft. From whence it is evident, 
that the population of this large found is very inconfiderable when com- 
pared with its extent ; for if we admit, that all thofe feen by both the fur- 
veying parties, and the four that vifited the fhip, were all different per- 
fons, the total number of people amounted only to two hundred and 
eighty-one of all defcriptions, exclufive of the few we faw amongft the 
Ruffians at port Etches, who moft probably belonged to the village diat 
Mr. Johnftone had vifited. This number appears to be infinitely fhort of the 
computation made by Mr. Meares and other vifitors; and hence it might 
poflibly be inferred, that fince the period of their vifits the number of the 
inhabitants had greatly diminifhed, and that the caufe of this depopulation 
was to be afcribed to the Ruffian progrefs; an inference which would 
derive fome fupport from the circumftance of our having found feveral 
old graves, but only one that appeared to have been recently con- 
ftruéted. This idea however may be eafily combated, as I am well 
perfuaded that the prefent fate of population in thefe regions differs 
but little from what had been found to be the cafe on their being firft 
difcovered by Captain Cook, who fpent eight days in and paifing through 
this found ; during which time the number of the inhabitants who vifited 
the veffels under his command, did not exceed one hundred different per- 
fons of all ages, and of both fexes. Since thofe were moft probably the firft 

European 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


European veffels that had ever entered the found, as none of the na- 
tives were afraid to approach the veffels, it is natural to fuppofe that 
objects fo fingular and unaccountable would attraét the attention of every 
individual, who could find either an opportunity to gratify his curiofity, 
or to traffic for thofe commodities which were efteemed amongft them as 
articles of valuable acquifition, lithe doubt can exift that a large propor- 
tion of the inhabitants at that time made their appearance. Our not 
having feen any deferted habitations ftrongly fupports this opinion, and 
the circumftance of the antiquity of all the graves met with on the 
weltern fide of the inlet, may have been occafioned by the natives of late 
years having been more confined to the eaftern parts of the found, for 
the convenience of tranfaéting their commercial bufinefs with their Eu- 
ropean vifitors, who have uniformly made thofe parts their rendezvous. 
I would not however wifh to be underftood to mean, that the Ruffian 
eftablifhments in this country had not coft fome blood, becaufe I have 
been informed by themfelves, that both Ruffians and Indians had fallen in 
effecting their purpofe, though neither in any confiderable numbers ; but 
my reafon for alluding to this fubject is, to point out that the population 
of this country appears to have been greatly over-rated by thofe gen- 
tlemen who have vifited it fince Captain Cook’s time; fince, according 
to their eftimation, it would now appear to be reduced to one half its for- 
mer number of inhabitants. 

Mr. Meares obferves, that thefe people have no towns, villages, or 
fixed places of abode; in this refpeét he was certainly not well informed, 
and may poffibly have lam under the fame difadvantage with regard to 
the numerous and powerful nations which he confiders as being in their 
neighbourhood. ‘The general appearance of the adjacent countries gave 
us every reafon to believe that thefe regions were very thinly inhabited. 

It was remarked, that during the furveying excurfions not a fingle fea 
otter, and but very few whales or feals had been feen; and that the wild 
fowl were not met with in that plenty during Mr. Whidbey’s, as in Mr, 
Johnftone’s, expedition. 

‘This being the amount of what had principally occurred refpeéting the 

natural 


ous. 
Tian 
have 
nin 
but 
tion 


gen- 
ding 


. for- 


$s, Or 
med, 
rd to 
their 
gave 
ed. 

e fea 
wild 
Mr. 


r the 
tural 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


natural ftate of prince William’s found, I have to regret very much our 
want of knowledge of the Ruffian language, becaufe the refults of all our 
inquiries, concerning the objeét of that power, in extending its immenfe 
empire to thefe diftant and inhofpitable fhores, became from that caule in 
a great meafure nugatory, vague, or contradictory. We however clearly 
underftood, that the Ruffian government had little to do with thefe fettle- 
ments; that they were folely under the direétion and fupport of indepen- 
dent mercantile companies ; and that port Etches, which had been efta- 
blihed in the courfe of the preceding fummer, was then their moft eaftern 
fettlement on the American coaft; but I was not able to learn the number 
of different {tations they had, though I underftood from Mr. Smyloff, that 
the total of Ruffians employed between this port and Oonalafhka, both in- 
clufive, were about four hundred. This number, it fhould feem, is amply 
fufficient for the accomplifhment of the purpofe they have in view; as 
not the leaft attention whatever is paid to the cultivation of the land, or 
to any other objeét but that of colleéting furs, which is principally done 
by the Indians, whole fervices they have completely fecured, and whofe 
implicit confidence they have intirely gained; particularly thofe of Cook’s 
inlet, and the iflands of and to the fouth-welt of the Kediak; the adja- 
cent continent they reprefent as a fteril and uninhabited country. Al- 
though we could not gratify our curiofity to the extent I could have 
wifhed refpe€ting the fituation of the Ruffians, yet I could not avoid 
feeling a degree of fatisfa€tion in obferving the comfortable manner in 
which they feem to live amongft thefe untutored children of nature; ha- 
ving gained them over to be obedient to their wifhes, they appear to 
maintain their influence not by fear, as their conquerors, but by having 
found the way to their hearts, and by fecuring an affectionate regard. 
This was manifefted in all their tranfaétions, though more efpecially in their 
intercourfe with the people of Cook’s inlet and the Kodiak; many of whom, 
the women as well as the men, are retained in the fervice of the Ruffians, 
who fpeak of their attachment and fidelity in the higheft terms of praife and 
approbation, and indifcriminately employ them with their own parties on 
bufinels of the moft confidential importance. The natives of prince Wil- 
liam’s found, however, do not appear to {hare the good opinion of the 

Rufhians 


D8 ys Papeoe 
ot Te 


at le a Oe 


4 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Ruffans in an equal degree; but whether this may arife from a difference 
in their difpofitions, or whether it be owing to the Ruffians having come 
more recently amongft them, and that a fufficient intercourfe had not 
yet induced them to fubmit to a docile and confidential fubordination, 
we could not correétly determine. Although, from the converfation of 
the Ruffians, the former would appear to be the cafe, yet the Ruffians 
feemed to repofe the greateft confidence in the party Mr. Johnftone met 
with at the large Indian village, and to refign themfelves completely 
to their power. This meafure might probably be indifpenfably requi- 
fite for carrying imto effet their commercial purfuits, which cannot fail 
of being highly advantageous to the Ruffian adventurers, who it is rea- 
fonable to expe&t may be enabled to difpofe of the furs thus colleéted at 
a much better market in the northern parts of China; and this after hav- 
ing procured them at a much more reafonable rate than either the Euro- 
pean or American traders could poflibly have done; firft becaufe they 
are competitors, and fecondly becaufe they have only one place in the 
moft fouthern parts of China to refort to as a market; where the 
Canton merchants purchafe the furs nearly at their own price, and moft 
probably infinitely under their real value. 

It is very poflible that no other people will hereafter be fo well able to 
carry on this valuable traffic as the Ruffians, who, being natives of a fri- 
gid region and naturally a hardy race, and little acquainted with the luxu- 
rics of their more fouthern neighbours, have in thefe refpeéts greatly 
the advantage over all other civilized nations. Without deviating much 
from the habits and praétices continued from their earlieft infancy, the 
Ruffians can readily adopt many of the Indian cuftoms, by which means 
the manners of the two people become much affimilated. This is greatly 
furthered by their partaking of the fame fort of food, and wearing the 
fame fort of clothing. Their external appearance differs little from the 
natives; and with refpeét to the principal occupations of the Indians, 
fuch as hunting and fifhing, the Ruffian, who has no better means 
of pafling away his time, for we f{carcely faw a book of any defcription 
amongit them, is moft likely able, from his fuperior knowledge, to 
afford them in thefe purfuits fome inftruétion that may tend to render 


thofe 


iffians 
e met 
bletely 
requi- 
ot fail 
is rea~ 
ted at 
r hay- 
Furo- 
> they 
n the 
e the 
1 moft 


ble to 
Pa fri- 
luxu- 
reatly 
much 
vy, the 
means 
reatly 
ig the 
m the 
\dians, 
means 
iption 
e, to 
render 


thofe 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


thofe exercifes more interefting and advantageous. Thefe, together with 


201 


1794- 
June. 


fome ufeful utenfils, and a few articles of ornament or luxury now Wome 


and then given to the Indians, fecure to the Ruffian at leaft the charaéter 
of a defirable companion; and who from his fuperior weapons and 
knowledge in the art of war, when once a good underftanding fhall be 
thoroughly eftablifhed amongft them, will be enabled to proteét them 
againft any neighbouring foe; and the reward he will demand for fuch 
important fervices will be no more than the {kins (of little or no value to 
the natives) of thofe animals, which they have moft probably been ac- 
cuftomed to take rather for the fake of their flefh than for any other 
purpofe. The habits and general conduét of the Ruffians are not very 
likely to be adopted by any other maritime nation, there being few I 
believe who could retire to thefe frigid regions, and completely fubmit 
to a life fo very foreign to the manners and cuftoms of the civilized world. 
The intereft that the Indians feem to take in the fuccefs and welfare of 
the Ruffians, originates in principles of attachment and regard which do 
not appear likely to be eafily removed by the influence of {trangers to the 
prejudice of the Ruffian commercial intereft, and which from the prac- 
tice of the prefent day may probably be ftrengthened in the fucceeding 
generations; for although the Ruffians did not appear to us either ftu- 
dious or learned, yet it was underftood, that in all their eftablifhments 
the children of the natives are taken at an early age to apartments pro- 
vided on purpofe, where they are maintained and educated in the Ruf- 
fian language, and no doubt inftruéted in fuch principles as are moft 
likely hereafter to be advantageoufly direéted to the interefts of that 
nation. 

Thefe circumftances, with a few others that will appear under the 
head of general obfervations, are the refult of the information procured 
during our intercourfe with the native or foreign inhabitants of thefe re- 
gions; but as our fituation and means of communication, allowed of but 
few opportunities for acquiring fatisfactory intelligence, the whole I truft 
will be received with indulgence, as an humble endeavour to tranfmit 
all the light I received on a fubje&t, which in a commercial point of view 
may be interefting to perfons concerned in fimilar occupations. 

Vou. III. Dd The 


ae i ge te Re eee 


q 


202 


1794+ 


June. 


Mn mee 
Friday 20. 


Saturday 21. 


Thurfday26, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The favorable breeze with which we had failed out of prince Wil- 
liam’s found did us but little fervice, as it was foon fucceeded by a calm, 
which in a few hours was followed by a s. w. wind, with rainy unplea- 
fant weather. In the afternoon of faturday we were within about 4 
leagues of Kaye’s ifland; the wind then veered round and fixed in the 
eaftern quarter, attended with fome variety both as to its force and di- 
reélion, againft which we plied to fo little purpofe, that although every 
advantage that offered was embraced in the morning of the 26th, yet the 
fouth point of Kaye’s ifland, which after Sir Andrew Snape Hamond, 4 
have diftinguifhed by the name of Care Hamonpb, bore by compafs 
N.16£., 10 leagues diftant. After about five hours calm, a light breeze 
fprang up from the weftward, attended by fair pleafant weather; the va- 
riation of the furveying compafs was at this time obferved to be 29° 23' 
eaftwardly ; to this favorable gale we fpread all our canvas, and direéted 
our courfe towards cape Suckling. At noon the obferved latitude was 
59° 33, longitude 215° 26’; in this fituation the high land of cape Suck- 
ling bore by compafs N. 23 £., and cape Hamond, N.13£. This cape, 
according to feveral obfervations made whilft beating off it, and all agree- 
ing extremely well, is fituated in latitude 59° 482’, longitude 215° 51’. In 
Captain Cook’s laft voyage, vol. il. page 350, this very confpicuous 
cape is {tated to be in longitude 216° 58’, but in the chart it is placed in 
215° 3'; from Captain Cook’s fituation on the preceding day in longi- 
tude 215° 56’, he defcribes Kaye’s ifland to be 5 or 6 leagues to the 
weftward, hence the latter, or longitude 215° 3’, is to be taken as the 
longitude then affigned to it; and this made our obfervations for the 
longitude vary lefs from Captain Cook’s, than on the coaft further to the 
weftward. 

The difference in longitude between Captain Cook’s calculations and 
ours, appeared to decreafe as we advanced to the eaftward; for at cape 
Elizabeth it was 1°8', at cape Hinchinbrook it was 54’, but at cape 
Hamond it was only 48’. In the evening we pafled cape Suckling, 
which was found to be fituated in latitude 60° 1’, longitude 216° 19); 
and as it was my intention to recommence our furvey of the coaft from 
that point, we proceeded along it within about 2 leagues of the fhore ; 

which 


Wil- 
calm, 
plea- 
ut 4 
n the 
d di- 
very 
t the 
nd, » 
npafs 
reeze 
le va- 
9° 23) 
efted 
> was 
suck- 
cape, 
gree- 
‘, In 
cuous 
‘ed in 
ongi- 
o the 
s the 
r the 
o the 


s and 
cape 
cape 
kling, 
D 19; 
from 
10re ; 
which 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


which fhot out into fmall proje&ting points, with alternate low cliffy, or 
white fandy, beaches, being the termination of a border of low woodland 
country, extending fome diftance within, until it joins the foot of a clofe- 
connected chain of lofty frozen mountains, which is a continuation of 
the fame range that had been conftantly obferved to extend from the 
head of Cook’s inlet, along the northern boundary of Prince William’s 
found. From thefe low projecting points, fome fhoals ftretch into the 
ocean; one of thefe we paffed about two in the morning, at the diftance 
of about four miles, without gaining foundings, with 35 fathoms of line ; 
it extends in a foutherly direétion, two miles from a low point of land 
that forms the weft point of a bay apparently very fhoal, and from the 
quantity of white muddy water, that flowed from it into the fea, we 
concluded it to be the outlet of the floods formed on the low land, by 
the diffolving ice and {now on the fides of the neighbouring mountains ; 
which at this feafon of the year muft be copious, as our thermometers 
were generally between 50 and 65, and the elevated parts of the coaft 
were ftill covered with {now, as low down as where the pine trees be- 
gan to grow. From the weft point of this bay, in latitude 60° 32’, lon- 
gitude 216° 57’, the fhore, towards cape Suckling, makes a {mall bend to 
the north-weftward, but the general dire¢tion of the coaft is nearly eaft 
and weft, and appeared to us to be firm and compaét. 

At fix in the morning the wefterly wind died away, and the weather 
remained calm, or nearly fo, until noon, during which time we drifted 
a few miles to the eaftward, and fhoaled our water from 60 to 42 fa- 
thoms, without appearing to approach the fhore ; our obfervations fhew- 
ed the latitude to be 59°57’, longitude 217° 46’; at this time the weftern- 
moft land in fight bore by compafs s. 60 w. ; afmall opening in the beach, 
which, from the muddy water flowing from it, was evidently the entrance 
into alagoon or fhallow rivulet, v.66 w., diftant nine miles ; the neareft 
fhore, which is an abrupt cliff at the extremity of a range of hills that 
ftretch as it were perpendicularly to the bafe of the mountains, intercept. 
ing the low border, and terminating at the fea-fide n.g w., diftant five 
or fix miles ; and the eafternmoft land in fight, which is low, and appa- 
rently a proje€ting point, N. 54 E. . 

Dde Our 


203 


1794. 


me, 


(eee etd 


Friday 27. 


ele 
i 
WF Fy 
YoY 


204 


1794- 


June. 


eee amend 


Saturday 28, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Our fair and pleafant weather ceafed with the wefterly wind; this was 
fucceeded in the afternoon by a heavy and gloomy atmofphere, parti- 
cularly over the land, which, excepting on the border and lower hills, 
was enveloped in a dreary obfcurity ; the wind was light in the fouthern 
board, and enabled us to make fome little progrefs along the coaft, and 
though we increafed our diftance from it, yet the depth of water decreafed 
to 35 fathoms; the night was moftly calm, or attended with light vari- 
able winds, and the depth of water from 35 to 49 fathoms. By noon the 
next day the wind blewa frefh gale from the N.£., accompanied with fqualls 
and pafling fhowers of rain. The obferved latitude 59° 51’, the longitude 
218° 17’, the depth of water was about go fathoms ; in this fituation the land, 
though but indiftin€ily feen, bore by compafs as follows: the wefternmoft 
part w. by N.; the above low projeéting point, being the neareft fhore, 
N. 25 Ww., eight miles diftant; a high abrupt cliffy point forming the 
weft point of a bay, bounded by a folid body of ice or frozen fnow, 
N.21£. From the eaftern fide of this icy bay, the coaft, formed of 
low, or rather moderately-elevated land, extended to N. 64 £.; beyond 
which, high diftant fnowy mountains were feen N. 67 E. 

Againft thefe adverfe winds, which almoft conftantly attended us, we 
were obliged to ply; but as at times they varied their direétion a little, 
we gained fome fmall advantage, fo that by ten o’clock on funday fore- 
noon we tacked in 29 fathoms, within a league of the eaft point of the 
above icy bay, which I named Point Riou. It is low, well wooded, 
with a {mall iflet detached at a little diftance to the weftward of it. Eaft- 
ward from the fteep cliffs that terminate this bay, and from whence the 
ice defcends into the fea, the coaft is again compofed of a fpacious mar- 
gin of low land, rifing with a gradual and uniform afcent to the foot of 
the ftill conneéted chain of lofty mountains, whofe fummits are but the 
bafe from whence mount St. Elias towers, majeftically confpicuous in re- 
gions of perpetual froft. The obferved latitude at noon was 59° 45’, 
longitude 219° 0’; in this fituation the wefternmoft land in fight by 
compafs bore N.85 w.; point Riou, N. 23 w.; diftant g miles, from 
whence low land extended to N.55£. The wind ftill c>:tinued in the 
eaftern board, but was no longer favorable to our progreis; for in turn- 


ing 


; was 
yarti- 
hills, 
fhern 
, and 
eafed 
vari- 
n the 
jualls 
itude 
land, 
moft 
hore, 
r the 


) 
now, 


ed of 
yond 


» we 
little, 
fore- 
f the 
oded, 
Eaft- 
e the 
mar- 
bot of 
t the 
n re- 
45°» 
t by 
from 

the 
turn- 


ing 


ya bn Be Metlangton 


on the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ing to windward from this ftation we loft ground cutil tuefday morning, 
when a light breeze, attended by ferene pleafant weather, fprang up from 
the weftward, with which our ccurfe was direéted for the low land to the 
eaftward of point Riou. At noon, the obferved latitude was 59° 39’, lon- 
gitude 219° 15’, and the variation of the compafs was in the morning 
go? 20’ eafterly. The moft weftern land in fight at this time bore by com- 
pafs weft; point Riou, N. 54 w.; the neareft fhore, N. 21 w., diftant feven 
miles. This is a low projeéting point of land, fituated according to our 
obfervations in latitude 59° 47’, and longitude 219° 17’; a point which 
I named Pornt Mansy, and which I took to be the weft point of what 
in Mr. Dixon’s chart is called Admiralty bay, bore nN. 99 £., diftant 7 
leagues ; beyond which, high diftant {nowy mountains were feen ftretching 
to N.80£. As weadvanced along the coaft from point Riou the coun- 
try became lefs woody, and beyond the low projeéting point it feemed 
only to produce a brownifh vegetation, which further to the eaftward in- 
tirely difappeared, and prefented a naked barren country, compofed 
apparently of loofe unconneéted ftones of different magnitudes. 

The weather was fine, and the wind being favorable we made a plea- 
fant progrefs along the coaft, which continued to be a low compaét bor- 
der of plain land; this, towards point Manby, gradually put on a more 
verdant and fertile appearance, and to the eaftward of that point the coun- 
try was again well wooded. In the evening we paffed point Manby, and 
faw to the £.N. £. the iflands that form port Mulgrave, for which we fleer- 
ed in queft of the Chatham, but made little progrefs, as the favorable breeze 
again deferted us, and was fucceeded by a calm. At ten at night we 
heard the report of a gun in the direétion of port Mulgrave, which was 
immediately anfwered, concluding it to be fired from our confort; this 
conje€ture proved to be correét, as by four the next morning we were 
vifited by Mr. Manby, the mafter of the Chatham, in one of the Kodiak 
Indian canoes, attended by two others. The Indians had reported that 
a fhip was near the coaft, and our having anfwered their gun the pre- 
ceding evening, left little doubt on. board the Chatham of our being ar- 
rived; and under a fuppofition that it might be my intention to enter 
port Mulgrave, Mr. Manby had come off for the purpole of conduéting 


us 


205 
1794+ 
July: 


(nee sot 
Tuelday 1. 


Wednef, 2 


Thurlday 3. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


us thither. By a letter from Mr. Puget I became informed that the 
Chatham had reached port Mulgrave on the ggth of june, having com- 
pleted the examination of the continental fhore from cape Hinchinbrook 
to that f{tation, where he had found George Portoff (the Ruffian men- 
tioned in Cook’s inlet,) with nine of his countrymen, and nine hundred 
Kodiak and Cook’s inlet Indians under his dire€tions, having extended 
their excurfions in their fmall {kin canoes thus far, in queft of fea otter 
and other fkins. 

The pleafantnefs of the weather was much interrupted by the decline 
of the wefterly wind; and we had now faint variable breezes between north 
and s.£., attended with drizzling rain and thick mifty weather, that almoft 
obfcured the land from our view. Whilft we were in this fituation, the 
canoes that had come with Mr. Manby contrived to get vrobferved at a 
diftance from the fhip; and when called back, inftead of returning made 
the beft of their way to the fhore. This unpleafant weather, with alter- 
nate calms, continued until two in the afternoon, when a gentle breeze 
fprang up from the n.w.; but as by this time we had drifted too far to 
the eaftward of cape Phipps to fetch into port Mulgrave, and as I had no 
inducement from Mr. Puget’s communications to give up the advantage 
of the then favorable breeze for proceeding »!ong the coaft, we hauled as 
near to cape Phipps as the wind would allow, and after firing fume guns 
to announce our fituation to the Chatham, we bore away along the 
coaft, which from port Mulgrave is compofed of a low border, well 
wooded, extending from the bafe of the mountains into the fea. The 
feafon of the year not requiring that we fhould lie to, to wait the return 
of the day for carrying our furvey into execution, we continued under 
an eafy fail, in expeétation of the Chatham overtaking us ; but this was 
not the cafe, nor was our favorable gale of long duration. On thurfday 
morning the wind was again variable in the eaftern quarter, againft 
which, as ufual, we plied, but to little purpofe. At ten in the forenoon 
a ftrange fail was defcried to the eaftward, and at noon the obferved la- 
titude was 509°6’, longitude 221°10%. In this fituation the coaft was 
feen extending by compafs from N.w. to s. 82 E.; its neareft part N.E., 
about 3 leagues diftant; the fhores ftill continued to be covered with 

3 wood, 


the 
om- 
ook 
nen- 
dred 
aided 
otter 


cline 
orth 
moll 
, the 
ata 
made 
alter- 
reeze 
far to 
ad no 
ntage 
led as 
guns 
x the 
well 
The 
eturn 
nder 
s was 
irfday 
paint 
pnoon 
ed la- 
was 
N.E., 
with 
rood, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


wood, were low, and appeared to be much inundated, and the wat: 


In” 


° é . july. 
found their way to the fea in fhallow rivulets, through two or three Cojo 


breaks in the beach. 


The ftrange fail came up, and joined us in the afternoon. She proved 
to be the Jackall, commanded by Mr. Brown. This veffel had vifited 
thefe parts of the coaft the two preceding fummers, as a tender belong- 
ing to the Butterworth, then under the command of this gentleman, but 
at the conclufion of the feafon in 1793, fhe had been difpatched to- 
wards England, with dire€tions to fifh for whales and feals in paffing 
through the pacific ocean, and at Staten land, where Mr. Brown had 
formed a temporary eftablifhment. With this veffel, and the Prince le 
Boo his other tender, Mr. Brown had gone to Canton, from whence 
he had departed on the 24th of february; and after having a very tedious 
paflage, he had reached this coaft on the goth of the preceding month, 
with the intention of proceeding to Crofs found ; but not having been able 
to procure an obfervation for feveral days, he was fteering to the north- 
weit for that place; this miftake was now correéted, and as there was not 
much profpeét of our ftopping before we fhould reach Crofs found, Mr. 
Brown offered to accompany us thither. From him we received the 
lateft accounts of the ftate of Europe that had appeared in China before 
his failing. Thefe contained, not only the melancholy intelligence of the 
death of Louis XVI. and of the anarchy which exifted in France, but 
likewife of her declaration of war againft England, and of the attempts 
which the difcontented were making in Great Britain, by the promul- 
gation of French doétrines, to fubvert our ineftimable conftitution. The 
operation of fuch unwelcome and unexpetted tidings, breaking as it 
were froma cloud upon the minds of perfons fo little prepared to re- 
ceive them, will be infinitely eafier for the reader to conceive than for. 
me to defcribe, and I fhall therefore only fay, that they became the fub- 
jets of our moft ferious and painful reflection. 

Both wind and weather was very unpleafant; the former fettled on 
friday in a fouth-eafterly gale, attended by a heavy fwell, with fqualls 
and dark rainy weather, which reduced us to clofe-reefed topfails. We 
feparated from the Jackall, and attempted to beat to windward, but loft 


ground 


Friday 4° 
2 


Se ee 
BLA 
ad 


AS 3 ee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ground until the 6th ; when, after fome hours calm, we were favored in 
the morning with a gentle breeze from the n.w., and a return of plea- 
fant weather. We had now an extenfive view of the fea coaft, ftretch- 
ing by compafs from s.77 w. to N.86£., within which limits mount 
St. Elias and mount Fairweather rofe magnificently confpicuous, from 
the ftill-continued range of lofty fnowy mountains. This favorable 
gale foon enabled us to recover the ground we had loft, and by noon 
we reached the latitude of 59° 3’, longitude 221° 41’, and the variation in 
the afternoon was 31° 26 eaftwardly. In this fituation mount St. Elias, 
being the wefternmoft land in fight, bore by compafs N.73 w.; mount 
Fairweather was at this time obfcured by clouds; the neareft fhore. 
which was near a narrow fhallow opening into a lagoon, E.N.£. diftant 
feven miles ; and the eafternmoft land in fight s.85£. The part of the 
coaft off which we had been thus cruifing fince the preceding thurfday, 
appeared from its latitude, and relative fituation with thefe two very 
confpicuous mountains, to be that part where Captain Cook fuppo- 
fed that Beering had anchored, and to which he gave the name of 
Beering, fuppofing it to be a bay, with an ifland covered with wood 
lying off its fouthern point. But in this neighbourhood no fuch bay 
or ifland exifts, and Captain Cook muft have been led into the mif- 
take by the great diftance at which he faw this coaft; in confequence 
of which he was prevented noticing the extenfive border of low land 
that f{tretches from the foot of the vaft range of lofty mountains, and 
forms the fea fhore. The irregularity of the bafe of thefe mountains, which 
retire in fome places to a confiderable diftance, and efpecially in the part 
now alluded to, would, on a more remote view than we had taken, lead 
the moft cautious obferver to confider the appearances in the coaft, as 
indicating deep bays, or openings likely to afford tolerable, and even good 
{helter; and had it not been for the information we had previoufly re- 
ceived from Mr. Brown, who had been clofe in with thefe fhores, we 
fhould have fill fuppofed, until thus far advanced, that we had Beering’s 
bay in view, with the ifland lying near its fouth-eaftern point. This de- 
ception is occafioned by a ramification of the mountains ftretching to- 
wards the ocean, and terminating in a perpendicular cliff, as if at the 


{ca 


din 
lea- 
tch- 
punt 
rom 
‘able 
noon 
yn in 
‘lias, 
ount 
hore, 
{lant 
yf the 
{day. 
very 
Ippo- 
ne of 
wood 
bay 
Pp mif- 
ence 
y land 
, and 
vhich 
e part 
, lead 
nit, as 
good 
ly re- 
bs, we 
ring’s 
his de- 
ng to- 
it the 
fea 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fea fide; having a more elevated part of the low border, covered with 


209 


1704. 
July. 


wood, lying to the fouth-weft of it; the former ata diftance, appears to —y~—~ 


form the eaft point of an extenfive bay, and the latter, an ifland lying off 
from it; but both thefe are at the diftance of fome miles from the {ea fhore, 
which from port Mulgrave to this ftation takes a general direftion about 
s.65 £. and is chiefly compofed of a very low tract of land, terminating 
in fandy beaches ; over which, from the maft head, were feen confiderable 
pools, or lagoons of water, communicating with the ocean by fhallow 
breaks in the beach; acrofs all of which, the fea broke with much vio- 
lence. Where this low country was not interfeéted by the inland waters, 
it was tolerably well wooded; but as we advanced to the eaftward, this 
border became lefs extenfive, was more elevated, much lefs covered with 
wood, and for a few miles totally deftitute of either wood or verdure ; 
and like that part before noticed between point Riou and point Manby, 
was compofed of naked rugged fragments of rocks of various magnitudes, 
lying as it were in the front of mount Fairweather, like thofe on the fhore 
before mount St. Elias. 

The bafe of this lofty range of mountains now gradually approached 
the fea fide; and to the fouthward of cape Fairweather, it may be faid to 
be wafhed by the ocean; the interruption in the fummit of thefe very ele- 
vated mountains mentioned by Captain Cook, was likewife confpicuoufly 
evident to us as we failed along the coaft this day, and looked like a 
plain compofed of a folid mafs of ice or frozen fnow, inclining gradually 
towards the low border; which from the fmoothnefs, uniformi y, and 
clean appearance of its furface, conveyed the idea of extenfive waters 
having once exifted beyond the then limits of our view, which had paffed 
over this depreffed part of the mountains, until their progrefs had been 
{topped by the feverity of the climate, and that by the accumulation of 
fucceeding fnow, freezing on this body of ice, a barrier had become formed, 
that had prevented fuch waters from flowing into the fea. This is not the 
only place where we had noticed the like appearances; fince pafling the 
icy bay mentioned on the 28th of june, other valleys had been feen 
ftrongly refembling this, but none were fo extenfive, nor was the furface 
of any of them fo clean; moft of them appearing to be verv dirtv. Ido not 

Vou. Ill. Ee however 


210 


1794. 
July. 


— 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


however mean to affert, that thefe inelined planes of ice muft have been 
foimed by the pafling of inland waters thus into the ocean, as thé ele: 
vation of them, which muft be many hundred yards above the lével of 
the fea, and their having been doomed for ages to perpetual froft, operate 
much againft this reafoning; but one is naturally led, on contemplating 
any phenomenon out of the ordinary courfe of nature, to form fome con- 
jecture, and to hazard fome opimon as to its origin, which on the. prefent 
eccafion is rather offered for the purpofe of defcribing its appearance, 
than accounting for the caufe of its exiftence. About fix in the evening, 
we paffed within about halfaleague of cape Fairweather, fituated according 
to our obfervations in latitude 58° 504’, longitude 222° go’. This cape 
cannot be confidered as a very confpicuous promontory; it is moft dif- 
tinguifhable when feen from the fouthward, as the land to the weit of it 
retires a few miles back to the north, and there forms a bend in the coaft, 
which ts the moft confpicuous point we noticed, eaftward from cape 
Phipps. It is terminated by a low bluff cliff, on a fandy beach; near 
which are a few detached rocks. At eight in the evening mount St. 
Elias bore by compafs N. 73£ w., and mount Fairweather, nN. 10 £.; the 
length of time we had been in fight of thefe very remarkable lofty moun- 
tains, afforded us many obfervations for afcertaining their fituation; whence 
the former appeared to be in latitude 60° 224’, longitude 219° 21’, and 
25 miles from the neareft fea fhore, which is that of Icy bay; the latter 
in latitude 58° 57’, longitude 222° 47’, and g miles from the fea fhore. 
The favorable breeze continuing with delightfully pleafant weather, and 
having the advantage of day-light, nearly the whole of the twenty-four 
hours, we were enabled to keep within 5 miles of the coaft, which was now 
again well wooded, and from cape Fairweather took a dire€tion s. 43 E.3 
it is fteep and intire, with the exception of one fmall opening, that 
had the appearance of being likely to afford fhelter for fhipping; but it 
is completely bounded at a little diftance by fteep compaét mountains, 
which are a continuation of the fame undivided range ftretching to the 
eaftward. Until paft eleven at night mount St. Elias was yet within our 
vifible horizon, appearing like a lofty mountain; although at this time, it 
was at tne diftance of one hundred and fifty geographical miles; it was 


2 however 


Cen 
cle. 
of 
ate 
mg 
on- 
lent 
nee, 
ing, 
ling 
‘ape 
dif- 
of it 
oa lt, 
ape 
near 
St. 
the 
un- 
ence 
and 
Atter 
e. 
and 
four 
now 
DELS 
that 
It it 
nINS, 
the 
our 
e, it 
was 
ever 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


however foon obfcured by a thick haze gathering on the coaft, which by 
four o'clock on monday morning became a low thick fog; above which, 
the fummits of the nearer mountains were not only vifible but perfeétly 
clear, whilft the fhores were intirely hidden from our fight. This cir- 
cumftance obliged us to haul our wind, and to wait for a more favorable 
opportunity to proceed in our examination; this by feven o'clock was 
again refumed, directing our courfe for a very conf{picuous high bluff 
promontory, which, as we fuppofed, proved to be the weft point of en 
trance into Crofs found; named by me in honor of Lord Spencer, Carr 
Spencer. The wind being faint, our progrefs was flow along the 
coaft, compofed of a fteep woody fhore, much indented with coves or 
bays, of a hilly and uneven furface, with fome rocks and rocky iflets, 
fcattered about it at the diftance of about a mile. “The obferved latitude 
at noon was 58°14’, longitude 223° 21’; the wefternmoft part of the 
coaft then bearing by compafs nN. 47 w.; the outermoft of the above 
rocky iflets n. 6 £. diftant 2 miles; cape Spencer N. 59 E., off which he 
fome rocks that extend about half a league; and the ealternmoft part of 
the coaft in fight, s. 85 5. 

Shortly after noon, we were vifited by a few of the inhabitants in a ca- 
noe, who without much hefitation came alongfide, but none of them 
would venture on board, without a hoftage being fent into their canoe 
as a fecurity for their fafe return. As thefe people were likely to be- 
come our frequent vifitors, during the time we might find occafion to 
remain in this neighbourhood, their requeft was complied with; and on 
one of our feamen going into their canoe an Indian came on board, to 
whom I gave fuch things as were likely to be acceptable, and to encou- 
rage them in friendly offices. This treatment feemed to operate agree- 
ably to my wifhes, for the Indian remained on board fome time to all 
appearance perfeétly eafy and reconciled, until a breeze from the s. w. 
fprang up, and being favorable to our proceeding into Crofs found, I 
defired our man to come on board, and made figns to the Indian that he 
fhould return into his canoe; but his countrymen feemed to be very de- 
firous of detaining their new companion, making figns that they wifhed 
to take him on fhore; and it was not until fome threatening figns were 

Fea made 


Monday 7. 


212 


17946 
July. 


Tuelday 8. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


made ule of, mufkets produced, and preparations made for hoifting out 
a boat, that he was permitted to quit the canoe, into which, the Indian 
on board, immediately returned. 

It is not eafy to determine on what were the intentions of thefe people, 
whether they were friendly, or whether otherways inclined; but judging 
from appearances the former would feem to have been the cafe, as 
their behaviour was civil and orderly, and they were alfo very good 
humoured. No fooner had our man got on board the fhip, than he was 
prefented with a fea otter fkin, and fome other trifles, by a perfon who 
appeared to be the principal or chief of the party, and to whom I made 
a very ample return. After this they departed finging fongs, and we 
proceeded up Crofs found, which isa very fpacious opening in the coaft ; 
and as Captain Cook very correétly obferves, branches into feveral arms, 
the largeft appearing to take a northerly direftion. On the furface of 
the water in the found were a great number of fmall, though hard pieces 
of loofe ice; fome of which, at firft fight, occafioned confiderable alarm, 
from their {trong refemblance to fea-beaten rocks, juft level with the 
furface of the water, which had the appearance of breaking over them 
with great violence, and prefented the navigating of this inlet as an ex- 
tremely intricate and difficult tafk; efpecially, as no bottom could be 
reached with 80 and go fathoms of line, clofe to thefe apparent dangers. 
A little time however foon difcovered them to be nothing more than 
dark-coloured and dirty pieces of ice, which left me without any appre- 
henfions for our fafety, and I had afterwards every reafon to believe that 
this found is free to navigate, and is not incommoded with either rocks 
or fhoals, that are not fufficiently confpicuous to be eafily avoided. 

The fouth-weft wind was too faint to admit of our reaching a place of 
anchorage on either fhore, and as in the evening it was fucceeded bya calm, 
accompanied by thick foggy weather, we were obliged to fubmit during 
the night to the influence of the exifting tides or currents; not being able 
to gain bottom with 140 fathoms of line, until about eight in the morn- 
ing; when the roaring of the furf on the rocks in an eaftern dire€tion, 
announced we were faft approaching them; and at that time we gained 


foundings 


* Out 


dian 


ople, 
ging 
e, as 
good 
> was 
who 
made 
d we 
‘oat ; 
arms, 
ce of 
pleces 
larm, 
1 the 
them 
n e€x- 
ld be 
gers. 
than 
ppre- 
e that 
rocks 


ace of 
calm, 
ring 
p able 
orn- 
ion, 
ined 
ings 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


foundings at 46 fathoms; but as the next caft, decreafed the depth to 40 
fathoms, we immediately anchored ona bottom of fand and mud. 

About ten o’clock in the forenoon the fog difperfed, and we difcovered 
that our fituation was on the eaftern fide of the found, nearly midway 
between two rocks about a mile afunder, and each lying about half a mile 
to the weflward of two points of land, the one forming the north, and 
the other the fouth point of a {pacious harbour, without any vifible dan- 
ger or obftruétion to our entering; and as it appeared to be an cligible 
{tation for the veffels, whilft the boats fhould be employed in the exami- 
nation of this fpacious inlet, Mr. Whidbey was fent to examine, and fix 
upon a convenient fituation. 

About noon the Chatham arrived off the entrance of the found, on 
which Mr. Manby was difpatched, to conduét her to our ftation. Mr. 
Whidbey returned about three o'clock in the afternoon, after having 
found a tolerably convenient cove behind the land that forms the north- 
ern point of the harbour, which is a finall ifland. This place being 
fufficient to anfwer all our immediate pnrpofes, we loft no time in pro- 
ceeding thither, and juft as the anchor was up, the depth of water fud- 
denly decreafed from 40 to 11 fathoms. The channel was afterwards 
founded but no danger was difcovered, the fhalloweft water being 9 fa- 
thoms clofe to our former foundings of 11 fathoms, which was found to 
be upon a fimall patch of rocky bottom, with 90 to 4o fathoms all 
around it. We foon reached the cove, and moored in 14 fathoms water, 
fiff clayey bottom, within about a cable’s length of the {hore ; where, in 
the evening, the Chatham moored likewife. 

In the courfe of the day we had been vifited by fome of the natives in 
a very civil and friendly manner; they fold us a few fifh, and fome in- 
different fea otter fkins, for our various articles of traffic; but for the 
{kins they preferred old clothes of any defcription, to cloth in the piece. 

As the view we had hitherto obtained of Crofs found had been very 
imperfe€t, the next morning I rowed about the found, in order to deter- 
mine on the beft mode of carrying the examination of it into effe&. 
Having left nothing behind us unafcertained without the found, it ap- 
peared to me very evident, that only one boat party could be advan- 

tageoully 


213 


1794- 


July. 


eee amend 


Wednef, g. 


= 
— 


eee — sea ees 


= 


onc le Be i BY ZEN ee 


ees SETS 


ee 


rs 


i . <e 
oom 


} 
im 
Ae 


T surlday 10. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


tageoufly employed, and that the furvey would be a very irkfome and 
tedious tafk, in confequence of the immenfe numbers of large pieces of 
ice that were floating in the found in every dire€tion. To guard as much 
as poffible againft accidents, I dire€ted that inftead of two boats as here- 
tofore, three fhould be equipped for this fervice, with a fortnight’s fup- 
ply of provifions, under the direétions of Mr. Whidbey, who had my 
orders to go back to cape Spencer, as we had to that place now traced 
the continental boundary eaftward from Cook’s inlet; and there to com- 
mence and profecute its examination, fo long as their provifions would 
hold out. On this fervice he accordingly departed early on thurfday 
morning, accompanied by Mr. Menzies in the purfuit of botanical re- 
fearches. Thofe on board were now fully employed in the various fer- 
vices the veflels required: thefe principally confifted in caulking the 
decks and top fides of the Difcovery, brewing fpruce beer, which here 
proved to be extremely good, and in repairing our fails and rigging; 
this latter had now become an obje& of our moft ferious attention, and 
called fo~th all our management and ingenuity, as we had little rope left 
to replace thofe that were by this time worn down to the very laft {lage 
of being ferviceable. 

The plan of our operations thus arranged ; and having received from 
Mr. Puget, his journal and chart of the coaft, eaftward from Prince Wil- 
liam’s found; I fhall proceed in the following chapter to ftate fuch infor- 
mation, as was procured during the feparation of the veffels, in which 
it will appear, that I have adopted the name of Beering’s bay, inftead of 
that of du nralty bay, fo named by Mr. Dixon; this I have done from 
a conviction of its being the place that Beering had vifited, and in con- 
formity with Captain Cook’s intentions, that the bay in which Beering 
had anchored fhould bear his name; and for the following reafons alfo. 

On reference to the chart of Mr. Dixon, who firft named that place Ad-. 
miralty bay, another fpacious bay is therein defcribed to the eaftward of it, 
having an ifland lying off its fouth-eaft point, and called Beering’s bay ; 
this has evidently been done in conformity to Captain Cook’s chart, for 
the diftance at which Meffrs. Portlock and Dixon pafled the coaft, gave 
them the fame fort of view of it, and precluded their detecting the error 


into 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


into which Captain Cook had fallen from fimilar circumftances. Captain 
Cook alfo reprefents an extenfive bay to the weftward of Beering’s bay, 
and hence the two charts exaétly correfpond. I had confidered Mr. 
Dixon’s to have been the firft European veffel that had ever entered that 
bay; but our Jate minute examination has fhewn, that between cape 
Suckling, and cape Fairweather, only one fuch bay exifls; and con‘c- 
quently it muft be that in which Beering had anchored, and from whence 
at that time he fent Chitrow the mafter of the fleet to reconnoitre the 
bay. “ Chitrow found between fome iflands a convenient anchoring 
“ place fecure from all winds, but there was no occafion to make ufe of 
“at."* Now fince port Mulgrave is formed by iflands, and fince it is the 
only place on the coaft between cape Hinchinbrook, and cape Fairweather 


1794. 
July. 
ae en’ aad 


* Vide Mul- 


ler’s account 


> of Beering’s 


that affords “a convenient anchoring place fecure from all winds”; and voy+8: 


fince that fituation will be found to correfpond with the latitude affigned 
to Becring’s anchorage, as ftated by Mr. Smyloff to Captain Cook at 
Oonalafhka in o€tober 1788; it is hardly probable that Beering could 
have anchored any where elfe, or that Controllers bay, and Kaye’s ifland, 
could have been the places alluded to in Muller’s account of Beering’s 
voyage, becaufe that bay is rendered inaccefhible by fhoals, and is inca- 
pable of affording any fhelter to fhipping. ‘This bay then, fince no 
other exifts within the limits in queftion, muft be the fame which Cap- 
tain Cook meant to diftinguifh by the name of Beering’s bay, in honor 
of its firft difcoverer; although it is not found to be fituated in the iden- 
tical fpot on the coaft that Captain Cook at that time did fuppofe, but 
further to the north and weft. Had circumftances permitted Captain 
Cook to have approached nearer to thefe fhores on pafling by them, there 
cannot remain a doubt but that this miftake would not have taken place 
and in all probability he would not have been fo much at a lofs to have 
reconciled the accounts of the Ruffian difcoveries on this part of Ame- 
rica. For thefe reafons the bay in our chart bears Beering’s name, but 
port Mulgrave, and other places in the bay noticed by Mr. Dixon, re- 
main unaltered. 


CHAPTER 


aia 
; . 


Store 


oe PEI G 


a Sc a Rei 


he 
1 
mk 
a 


1] 
iE 


1794: 


July. 
and 


—-\y— 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


CHAPTER VULI. - 


Mr. Puget’s narrative of his tranfaétions and furvey of the coaft, between 
Prince William’s and Crofs founds ; during the Chatham's feparation from 
the Difcovery. 


THE Chatham on the 12th of june got clear of Prince William’s 
found, and her courfe was direéted round cape Hinchinbreck along the 
eaftern fide of that ifland, at the diftance of about a league from its 
fhores ; thefe were fomewhat irregularly indented with {mall bay: taking 
a dire€tion N. 53 %., about feventeen miles to point Bentinck. About 
2 miles to the fouth of that point, commences the fhoal noticed by Mr. 
Johnftone, as extending acrofs to the oppofite continental fhore of the 
paffage, that he attempted to pafs. This fhoal, not only formed a barrier 
to that paffage, but f{tretched in an eaftwardly dire¢tion along the exterior 
continental fhore, at the diftance of about five miles, without having either 
break or opening in it. Mr. Puget proceeded along this fhoal at the 
diftance of about two miles from the breakers, the depth from 7 to 9 
fathoms; and having now advanced about 10 or 11 miles from point 
Bentinck, the fhoal, which was chiefly compofed of a dry barren fand, 
though in fome places producing a little verdure, took a more foutherly 
turn, and increafed its diftance from the high land, which extended in a 
more northerly line: that of the fhoal was about s. 41 £., along which, 
Mr. Puget fteered at the diftance of about a league; the depth of water 
varying from 44 tog fathoms. By nine in the evening, he had advanced 
7 or 8 leagues along the fhoal, when the favorable breeze being fucceeded 
by light baffling winds, and thick hazy weather, he was obliged to haul 
off 


ween 
from 


lam’s 
x the 
n its 
king 
bout 
Mr. 
f the 
brrier 
erior 
ither 
t the 
to 9 
oint 
fand, 
erly 
ina 
hich, 

ater 
nced 
reded 
haul 


of F 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


off under an eafy fail, with intention of renewing the examination the 
next morning. This fhoal was obferved to fhoot out into ridges of high 
fand, ftretching from 3 to 6 or 7 miles from the main land, which in fome 
places is compofed of a low fhore, in others of fleep abrupt cliffs; the 
whole apparently was well wooded, and in two places it had the appear- 
ance of having {mall inlets at the back of the fhoal; but the clofe conne&- 
ed range of lofty fnowy mountains, running nearly parallel to the coaft at 
no great diftance, plainly fhewed the limits of their extent, befide which 
there was no channel through the fhoal, by which they could have been 
approached. Towards midnight, the wind and weather became more un- 
fettled, and at laf produced a {trong gale from the eaftward; this induced 
Mr. Puget to ftand to the fouthward, left it fhould have proved the 
forerunner of one of thofe very unpleafant eafterly ftorms we fo fre- 
quently contended with, and which had fo much retarded the progrefs 
of our refearches in thefe regions; but in the forenoon of the 13th, the 
wind became fteady, and the weather being tolerably well fettled, the 
Chatham again ftood to the northward, and by four in the afternoon 
was again in fight: of the continent, prefenting a low fhore, which by 
compafs bore from N.w. to N.£. In about an hour foundings were 
had at the depth of 20 fathoms, and fhortly after the fhoal was again 
feen extending along the coaft, of which the Chatham was within about 
2 miles at feven o’clock, and being at this time in 6 fathoms water fhe 
tacked. The fhoal here formed one conneéted barricr along the coaft, 
extending by compafs from N. 66 E. to s. 76 w., as far as could be dif- 
cerned in either point of view; and as the veffel was now, not more than 
2 or 3 leagues to the fouth-eaftward of the place from whence fhe had 
hauled off the preceding evening, there could not be the leaft doubt of 
this being a continuation of the fame fhoal bank. 

The weather being fair, afforded a good opportunity of feeing the 
adjacent fhores. At tl:e time Mr. Puget tacked, the ifland lying to the 
north-weft of Kaye’s ifland, which he named Wincuam Isianp, bore 
by compafs N. 87 E. to N. 81 F., two rocky iflets lying off the north-welt 
point of Controller’s bay, which after Sir Henry Martin, Icailed Pornt 
Martin, and is fituated in latitude 60° 134’, longitude 215° 36’; bore, 
Vou, III. Ff the 


age: 


ES” 


ap Sgt Sy 


ESM 


Sere ae 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the one N. 59 £., the other N.52£., and a fmall apparent opening in 
the main land, y.3 £. The fhoal in this point of view, appeared to 
unite with point Martin, and to admit of a paflage between them and 
Kaye’s ifland towards cape Suckling. To afcertain this faét Mr. Puget 
ftood towards Kaye’s ifland, purpofing to pafs between it and Wingham 
ifland; but as the wind then blew frefh from the n.£., he plied during 
the night, and the next morning tacked within about a league of point 
Martin, bearing by compafs nN. 10w., having the cliffy iflets between 
the veflel and that point, with a continuation of the fhoal, which had 
now been traced from Hinchinbrook ifland to this ftation; where the 
depth of water was io fathoms; yet its termination could not be dif- 
cerned, as it was feen extending towards the fouth-eaft, completely pre- 
venting any communication with the fhore, and rendering the expected 
paffage to cape Suckling a very doubtful matter. In order to gain fome 
information on this head, Mr. Le Mefurier, one of the midfhipmen, was 
fent in the cutter to examine, whilft the Chatham ftood over to Kaye’s 
ifland in queft of anchorage, and of a pafflage between it and Wingham 
ifland; the latter in a north and fouth direétion is about a league long, 
and about a mile broad, forming with the north-welt point of Kaye’s 
ifland a paffage apparently navigable about a league in width, with re- 
gular foundings from 20 to 6 fathoms, until its eaflern extent was 
reached; when the depth fuddenly decreafed to 3 and 2} fathoms. This 
circumftance compelled Mr. Puget to defift from proceeding until he 
fhould be better acquainted with the paflage; and on difpatching a boat 
for that purpofe, the depth from ifland to ifland was found not to exceed 
from 2 to 3 fathoms. Inconfequence of this report, Mr. Puget waited 
for the return of the cutter near the north-weft part of Kaye’s ifland in 7 
fathoms water, its fhores bearing by compals s.14 w. to N. 385.; 
Wingham ifland from N.15 £. to N.17 w.; the weflernmoft part of the 
main land in fight, N. 47 w., and the neareft fhore, being a fteep greeny 
point on Kaye's ifland, s. 11 w., one mile diftant. 

Towards midnight Mr. Le Mefurier returned, and reported that he 
firft proceeded round the north and eaft fides of Wingham ifland, where, 
clofe to its fhores, he found from 15 to 19 fathoms water, in a narrow 
channel 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Bin channel formed by a continuation of the above fhoals, at the diftance of th id 
d to about half a mile to the north and eaft of Wingham ifland, from whence -—y— $3 
and he fteered for the northern fide of Kaye's ifland, with 3 to 5 fathoms 
uget water: at no great diftance to the north of his courfe, was the edge ws 
ham of the fhoal, interfperfed with dry fand banks appearing to unite with the ae 
ring main land, which at a confiderable diftance rofe to lofty mountains, and Aa 
0iNt formed the boundary of Controller's bay. From the north-eaft point of ei 
ween Kaye’s ifland he proceeded to two {mall iflets, that lie in an eaftern di- a 
had re€tion from it, towards cape Suckling. Not far from thefe the depth H 
> the of water was from 4 to 44 fathoms. He then proceeded about 2 miles : 
dif- in a northerly direétion, having from g to 6 fathoms water near the 
pre- edge of the fhoal, which now appeared to continue to cape Suckling; 
e€ted this was the extent of his refearches eaftward, from whence he returned " 
fome by the paflage between Wingham ifland and Kaye’s ifland, with foundings : 
was from 4 to 6 fathoms, until he reached the fhallow part that had {topped 
aye’s the progrefs of the Chatham, over which was not found more than.from 
sham 2 to 3 fathoms. So far as Mr. Le Mefurier had gone, there had not : 
long, appeared any impediment to the Chatham’s making a paflage between 
aye’s thefe iflands and cape Suckling, which would not only greatly expedite : 
h re. her progrefs along the coaft, but it might prove to future vifitors a de- «tot ae 
was firable circumftance to be informed that fuch a paflage was navigable, Ha gate A 
This in cafe of their being caught in a fouth-eaft gale, between Kaye’s ifland 
il he and cape Suckling, in which cafe they might be enabled to elude thofe ae 
boat ftorms and their attendant dangers. a 
kceed With this intent the Chatham proceeded the next morning (15th june) i, 
aited round the north fide of Wingham ifland, that being the fafeft channel, 
in 7 | and keeping clofe to its fhores had 15 and 17 fathoms water; but on the 
SE. wind failing, the flood tide drifted her to the eaftward, and on to the fhoal: : 
f the a {mall anchor was immediately carried out, and at eleven fhe floated off, bn 
breen and came to an anchor in 13 fathoms water, near the eaft fide of Wing- bl a 
ham ifland, without having received the leaft injury by this accident. hia, 
at he It was now nearly high water, and a favorable breeze prevailed from the gaa 
here, weftward; but as it was not confidered prudent to venture through fo are 
rrow ; intricate a channel, and of which fo little knowledge had been obtained, i 


F f 2 on 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


on a falling tide; Mr. Puget determined ‘to remain at anchor until near 
low water, and in the interim to difpatch Mr. Le Mefurier again, for the 
purpofe of acquiring fome further information relative to this paflage. 
At five in the evening, the Chatham was again under fail with a light 
welterly wind, but on its being fucceeded by a calm, the velffel was by 
the influence of the tide again fat upon the fhoal ; a light breeze of wind 
from the north very opportunely fpringing up, the fails foon backed her 
off, and fhe again anchored near Wingham ifland in g fathoms water, 
about a fourth of a mile from its eaftern fiore. 

Mr. Le Mefurier did not return before midnight, having from the 
before mentioned rocky ‘lets followed a {mall intricate channel leading 
into the ocean, where the depth of water had gradually increafed from 
4 to16fathoms. In this channel he had found a very heavy fwell from 
the fouthward, and that the bottom was a bed of rocks. He alfo afcer- 
tained that the fhoal, over which the fea broke with great violence, con- 
tinued quite to cape Suckling. 

‘The principal objeét having been thus accomplifhed by the tracing of 
the continental boundary to cape Suckling, and by finding that the fea 
coaft from Hinchinbrook ifland to that cape, is rendered inacceffible by a 
conneéted fhoal bank of fand, extending feveral miles from the main land, 
and particularly from Controller’s bay, the whole of which it occupies 
to the diftance of 6 leagues from the fhore or elevated land; Mr. Puget 
did not confider the delay that would moft probably attend his naviga- 
ting this channel, confiftent with the important objeé {till in view, which 
would fully employ the remainder of the feafon. For this reafon he 
gave up his intention of paffing by this channel to cape Suckling, and 
in the morning of the 17th, though not without fome difficulty, owing 
to the want of wind, and the irregular fet of the tide; he paffed round to 
the weit fide of Wingham ifland, and with a light north-eafterly breeze, 
direfted his courfe for cape Hamond, with gloomy and unfettled wea- 
ther. 

On quitting this ftation Mr. Puget remarks, that according to the in- 
formation he had obtained from the Spaniards, the channel through 
which the cutter had pafled, and found navigable for fhipping, was ftated 

ta 


ew kw ee fF! lll OK eC UlClC(CiOC Mlle iS 


near 
- the 
age. 
ight 
s by 
wind 
1 her 


ater, 


. the 
ding 
from 
from 
f{cer- 
con- 


ng of 
1e fea 


eeze, 
wea- 


e in- 
ough 
ated 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


to be totally clofed, and impaffable even for boats; but in Mr. Dixon’s 
delineation of the coaft, the fhoal extends to the fouth-weft part of Kaye's 
ifland, including Wingham ifland, feveral miles within it. Over a large 
portion of the {pace thus allotted to this fhoal the Chatham pafled, with- 
out being able to reach bottom with 70 fathoms of line. Such an crror 
in this publication is hard to account for, and may have a bad tendency ; 
as the mifreprefentation in this inftance, would neceffarily have the effect 
of deterring ftrangers from feeking the excellent fhelter which thefe 
iflands afford againft the fouth-eaft winds, which are the moft prevailing 
ftorms, and are molt to be dreaded. Wingham ifland Mr. Puget repre- 
fents as forming on its eaft fide a tolerably well fheltered roadftead, even 
again{t the eaftwardly winds, where good anchorage will be found to the 
fouthward of the firft {mall beach from its north point, at a commodious 
diftance from the fhore; here the north-eaft point of Kaye’s ifland bore 
by compafs eaft, and cape Suckling, nN. 76£.; this is the only fpace open 
to the ocean, and even this, is intercepted by the rocky iflets, bearing 
N. 83 £., and the intermediate fhoal, which completely prevents any very 
heavy fea from rifing in that-dire€tion; good anchorage will alfo be found 
on the north and weft fides of this ifland. The place where the Chatham 
anchored off Kaye’s ifland, is alfo well proteéted from the moft prevailing 
winds. Repeated trials were made to take fome fifh with hooks and lines, 
but to no effeét; fome refrefhments were however procured, as the weft- 
ern fide of Wingham ifland afforded a fupply of upwards of fixty dozen 
of eggs, which proved excellent, although taken from the nefts of fea- 
fowl; confifting chiefly of two forts of gulls, fea parrots, fhags, and cur- 
lews; no ducks were here feen, and only two geefe were obferved. The 
eggs were taken from fteep, rugged, rocky cliffs, conftituting in many 
places the fhores of this ifland, which is moderately elevated, well 
wooded, and has on its eaftern fide two {mall f{treams of frefh water. It 
did not appear to be much the refort of the natives; but near the north- 
eaft point of Kaye’s ifland, Mr. Le Mefurier found a village that had. 
been recently deferted. He defcribes the north fide of that ifland as a 
low tra€t of land well wooded, and that its fhores. are indented in fmall 
bays or coves: behind Controller’s bay, and the fhoal coaft that lies to 
the 


iN) 
tu 
to 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


aie the north-weft of it, extended a continuation of the fame lofty frozen 

—“-—/ mountains that had bounded the northern branches of Prince William’s 
found, and what had been noticed as appearing like two fmall openings, 
were, from the hills of Wingham ifland, feen to be intirely clofed. Whilft 
the Chatham was at anchor off it, the variation was obferved to be 27°, 
the latitude of its north point 60° 52’, its longitude 215° 46’. 

This is the fubftance of the information derived by the examination 
of that part of the coait comprehended between cape Hinchinbrook and 
cape Suckling; and as the furvey of the continental fhore eaftward to 
Beering’s bay, was carried on by the Chatham, at a much greater diftance 
from the land, than had been the cafe in the Difcovery, and from which 
nothing illuftrative of our refearches could be obtained, I fhall pafs on to 
the tranfaétions of the brig after her arrival in Beering’s bay. 

On the evening of the 26th of june, the Chatham arrived off point 

Manby; the water was found to be much difcoloured at the diftance of 
4 miles from the fhore, where bottom could not be gained with the hand 
line, nor were any riplings, or other indications of fhallow water, or hid- 
den dangers noticed. The fame appearances had been obferved by us 
on board the Difcovery in feveral inftances, to the eaftward of cape Suck- 
ling, which I concluded were occafioned by the vaft quantity of frefh 
water produced by the diffolving ice and fnow on the fides of the moun- ) 
tains at this feafon of the year ; this draining through the low border of 
land becomes impregnated with the foil, and being fpecifically lighter 
than the fea water on which it floats, produces the effe&t noticed by Mr. 
Puget. At this time a favorable wefterly breeze and fair weather pre- 
vailed, with which, as the veffel was paffing along the north-weft fhores of ( 
Beering’s bay about eight in the evening, the report of a gun was heard 
from the land; this was foon accounted for by the appearance of five 
Kodiak Indians in two fkin canoes, who repaired on board the Chatham, 
and acquainted Mr. Puget that there was a party of nine Ruffians on 
fhore, from whom they brought a letter addreffed in Englifh to the 
commander of either the Difcovery or Chatham. This letter dated the 
13th of june, was from Mr. Shields the Englifh fhip-builder before. men- 
tioned, in the fervice of the Ruffians at Blying found. 


ERIS CLES FREER PT 


et oe ee Be ere ce 


Ud 
i 


. >. ee ee ee ee 


Mr. 


rozen 
liam’s 
lings, 
Vhilft 


> 27°, 


1ation 
k and 
rd to 
{tance 
which 
on to 


point 
nce of 
hand 
yr hid- 
by us 
Suck- 

frefh 

oun- 
der of 
ighter 
y Mr. 
r pre- 
bres of 
heard 
rf five 
ttham, 
Ans on 
o the 
pd the 


| men- 


Mr. 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Mr. Shields had been informed, that our veffels had met with feveral 
accidents, and that I much wifhed to find a convenient fituation for lay- 
ing the Difcovery on fhore; this fervice he ftated could no where be 
better performed than in Blying found, and offered in the frankeft and 
handfomeft manner, to afford us every affiftance in the power of himfelf 
or his people, that the ftores of the company could furnifh. Mr. Shields 
regretted very much that he had not known the Dilcovery was in his 
neighbourhood until after our departure. He remarks in his letter that 
he had not written four Englifh words in the courfe of the preceding 
four years, yet his letter did great credit not only to his abilities and un- 
derftanding, but to the goodnefs of his heart; which manifefted in the 
higheft degree, thofe ever living inherent principles of attachment to 
their native country, government, and laws, which the generality of 
mankind, however far removed, are found to poffefs. Whether fuch ge- 
nerous notions are more to be afcribed to the Britifh, than to any other 
nation, I will not pretend to determine; but that they exifted in their ful- 
left extent not only in the mind of Mr. Shields, but in the minds of four 
other Englifhmen who were with him, was unqueflionably evident, as 
thefe alfo by the fame conveyance fent notes, rcquefting in the moft ear- 
neft and ferious manner to be informed as to the health and welfare of 
His Majelty, and the profperity of old England, from whence they had 
all been abfent fome years at nearly the remoteft habitable extent of the 
globe, cut off from all conneétion with their country, families, and friends. 

On my perufing this letter, I concurred with Mr. Puget in lamenting 
our not having been fo fortunate as to meet Mr. Shields, as his letter in- 
dicated him to be an intelligent perfon, from whom in all probability 
fome valuable information might have been procured. 

Mr. Puget fent an invitation to the Ruffians by the Indians, and pur- 
fued his courfe along the fhore, which from point Manby took a direc- 
tion firft nN. 85 £., 2 leagues, and then v.63 £., 8 miles further; here 
the land falling back formed a fmall bay, with a low ifland about two 
miles long to the N.N.E. of it, from whence, the coaft extended more 
eafterly towards an opening formed by two bluff points, lying nearly eaft 
and weft of each other half a league afunder; the eafternmolt of thet 

points 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


points named by Mr. Puget Point LAToucue, is fituated in latitude 59° 
51', longitude 220° 444’; the fhores were compofed of a continuation of 
the low border, extending from the foot of the mountains to the fea fide, 
they were nearly f{traight and compaét, and were bounded by ice or frozen 
fnow, which alfo greatly abounded in the above opening, which ob- 
tained the name of Dicces’s Sounp. In the morning of the 27th 
the wind being unfavorable to the veffel’s proceeding in its examination, 
a boat was difpatched for that purpofe, and fhortly after her departure a 
number of canoes made their appearance to the fouthward, which oc- 
cafioned fome little concern, as the inhabitants of the bay are reputed to 
be a treacherous, unfriendly, and barbarous tribe. Thefe apprehen- 
fions were ho«vever foon done away by a vifit from Mr. Puget’s old Ruf- 
fian acquaintance Portoff, who informed him, that the canoes which had 
occafioned his anxiety belonged to him, and were then fifhing for his 
Englif> friends. This was foon confirmed by their carrying on board a 
plentiful fupply of halibut, which proved to be extremely good, and was 
very acceptable. Thefe canoes contained a numerous party of the 
Kodiak, and Cook’s inlet Indians; many of them were old acquaintances, 
but not a fingle native inhabitant of the bay was in the party. From 
Portoff was underftood, that he had quitted Cook’s inlet about a month 
or five week’s before, with feven hundred fkin canoes, carrying about 
fourteen hundred Kodiak and Cook’s inlet Indians, with nine RuMans, 
all under his dire€tions, on an expedition to procure fea otter and other 
furs; and that the whole party were now affembled in this bay. Their 
route had been clofe along the coaft, and in a fhallow bay about 8 
leagues to the eaftward of cape Suckling, (mentioned by me early in the 
morning of the 27th of june) they ftopped at a {mall river, which emp- 
ties itfelf into that bay, andis called by them Rica, malo, unala. Its en- 
trance is ob{truéted by a bar, on which with eafterly winds the fea breaks 
with great violence, and in the fineft weather is only navigable for boats; 
but within the bar the depth increafes for a little diftance, and then it 
ftretches towards the mountains; from this river they had gone to an- 
other a few leagues further to the eaftward, (probably the fame opening 
noticed by me at noon on the 27th of june) this was obftruéted by a 
fimilar 


le 59° 


on of 
a fide, 
rozen 
h ob- 
e7th 
ation, 
ture a 
ch oc- 
ited to 
rehen- 
1 Ruf. 
ch had 
for his 
pard a 
nd was 
of the 
tances, 
From 
] onth 
about 
ffians, 
other 
Their 
bout 8 
in the 
emp- 
Its en- 
breaks 
boats ; 
hen it 
to an- 
bening 
by a 
imilar 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fimilar bar, and a lefs depth of water within it, and is called by them 


Riko bolfhe unala. Here Portoff had met between fifty and fixty of the es 


native Indians, who treacheroufly murdered one of the Ruffians whilft 
afleep at a little diftance from the main body; on difcovering which 
a fkirmifh had enfued, in which fix of the native Indians were killed, 
and their chief taken prifoner ; after this they quitted their ftation, and 
{topped at another fmall rivulet on the eaftern fide of Icy bay, from 
whence the whole party had come hither about fourteen days before the 
arrival of the Chatham. In addition to this informacuon, Portoff faid, 
that a very dangerous rocky fhoal, about 15 miles in length, hes by 
compafs in a direétion s. by w., 63 miles from a place called by them 
Leda unala. This Mr. Puget conccived to be near the point that I had 
called point Riou. Portoff himfelf had been on this fhoal, taking fea 
otters, and {tated that the firft difcovery of it was owing to a Ruffian galiot 
having had the misfortune fome years before to be wrecked upon it; 
two of the crew were drowned, but the reft efcaped in their boats. Since 
that period an annual vifit had been made to it for the purpofe of killing 
{ea otters, which are there met with; and as it generally proves advan- 
tageous, Portoff meant to ftop there on his return. 

From the Spaniards alfo I afterwards became acquainted, that a very 
dangerous rock exifted in this neighbourhood, the fituation of which they 
had taken great pains to afcertain, and had found it to lie s. 41 £. from 
cape Suckling, at the diftance of 26 leagues, and which was called by them 
Roca Pamplona; when this was delineated on our charts it appeared to 
lie in a direétion s.77 £., diftant 8 miles from the rocky fhoal defcribed 
by Portoff; hence it may be inferred, that Portoff and the Spaniards 
intend the fame fhoal, though it is not ftated by the latter to be fo exten- 
five as by the former. 

It is without doubt dangeroufly fituated for the navigation of this coaft, 
and it may poffibly have proved fatal to Mr. Meares’s confort, Mr. T%:_- 
ping, who with his veffel was never heard of after leaving Prince Wil- 
ham’s found in 1786. 


The Ruffians, it feems, in navigating this coaft make but little ufe of 


the compafs, even in fteering for the above fhoal; on fuch occafions they 
Vou. OL. Gg depart 


of 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


depart from fome particular point on the coaft, fhape a courfe by the 
land, and never fail to hit upon fome part of the fhoal; and hence arifes. 
the probability of its being extenfive, as has been already mentioned. 

Portoff alfo ftated, that in the north-weft part of Controller’s bay, a 
river like Rzko malo unala, emptied itfelf over thofe fhoals. This I had 
likewife underftood to be the cafe from Mr. Smyloff, but I left that cir- 
cumftance to be decided by the Chatham. 

The weather in the forenoon fell calm with fhowers of rain, attended 
with a rolling fwell from the s.w.; at noon, poimt Latouche bore by 
compafs n. 34 w., a league and a half diftant; the neareft fhore Nn. 45 £., 
two milcs diftant; and an opening in a low fhore, which commenced 
about a league from point Latouche, taking a direétion s. 14 £., bore by 
compafs s. 78 £. Shortly after noon the boat that had been fent to ex- 
plore Digges’s found returned, and Mr. Puget became informed, that it 
was clofed from fide to fide by a firm and compaét body of ice, beyond 
which at the back of the ice a fmall inlet appeared to extend N. 55 E. 
about a league. The depth of water at the entrance of the opening is 
great, and on its north-eaft fide is a bay which afforded good anchorage, 
but had a moft dreary afpe€ét from its vicinity to the ice; notwithftanding 
which, vegetation was in an advanced ftate of forwardnefs. 

From the time of the Chatham’s arrival off point Manby to this fta- 
tion, the foundings were at fir{t from 60 to 4o fathoms, and then 35 to 
20, 13 and go fathoms. Digges’s found was the only place in the bay 
that prefented the leaft profpeét of any interior navigation, and this was 
neceffarily very limited, by the clofe conneéted range of lofty fnowy moun- 
tains that ftretched along the coaft at no great diftance from the fea fide. 
Mr. Puget’s attention was next dircéted to the opening in the low land, 
but as the wind was variable and adverfe to the progrefs of the veffel, a 
boat was again difpatched to continue the inveftigation of thefe fhores, 
which are compaét from point Latouche, and were then free from ice. 
This opening was found to be formed by an ifland about two miles long, 
in a dire€tion s. 50 £. and N. 50 w., and about a mile broad, lying at 
the diftance of about half a mile from the main land. Oppofite to the 
fouth part of this, named by Mr. Puget Knicut’s Isiann, is Elea- 

nors 


the 
rifes. 


y, a 
had 


. Cire 


nded 
e by 
[5 Ev 
nced 
re by 
O ex- 
hat it 
yond 
joes 
ing 1s 
rage, 


iding 


s fta- 
35 to 
2 bay 
IS Was 
oun- 
fide. 
land, 
el, a 
lores, 
1 Ice. 
long, 
ng at 
o the 
Elea- 


nor’s 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nor’s cove, which is the eaftern extremity of Beering’s bay, in latitude 
ro? 44 longitude 220° 51’. Kunght’s dland admits of a navigable pal- 
fage all round it, but there are fome rocks that lic about half a mile 
from its welt point, and there is an ifflet fituated between it and the main 
land on its north-eaft fide. From Eleanor’s cove the coalt takes a direc- 
tion s. 30 w., about fix miles to the caft point of a channel ieading to the 
fouth-weft, between the continent and fome ilands that lie off it; this was 
confidered to lead along the fhores of the main land to point Mulerave ; 
and in the event of its proving navigable, the examination of the bay 
would have been complete, and the veflel brought to our appointed place of 
meeting, which was now fuppofed to be at no very great diftance. At this 
time about fifty canoes of Portoff’s party were about the boat, the In- 
dians in which carried on an advantageous commerce in purchafing white 
fhirts, ftockings, cravats, and other parts of the officers apparel, (which 
comforts were readily parted with) for fuch things as were deemed curio- 
fities, confifting of bows, arrows, darts, fpears, filh-gigs, whale-gut 
{hirts, and fpecimens of their very neat and curious ncedle-work ; articles 
with which thefe people, though at fo great a diftance from home, were 
well provided, in expeétation of finding a profitable market before they 
returned. In all their dealings they manifefted great keennefs, and feemed 
to know very well what they were about; yet they dealt with the ftricteft 
honefty, and with the moft implicit confidence of being fairly treated. 

During this intercourfe, two of the native inhabitants of the bay paid 
the Chatham a vifit; and after the ufual ceremonious fong was ended, 
they repaired on board without the leaft hefitation. A few p-efents of 
iron, looking-glaffes, and other trinkets, feemed to have the effect of 
making them feel perfeétly eafy and at home; not a moveable efcaped 
attention, but underwent a moft minute examination. 

In the evening, the Kodiak and Cook’s inlet party, having finifhed their 
commercial bufinefs very fatisfa€torily; Portoff, after diftributing a fevr 
pinches of fnuff to fome, and filling the boxes of others, formed them 
into three divifions, and difpatched them all in queft of fea otters: on 
this fervice they departed with the greateft cheerfulnefs, whilft Portoff 

Gee remained 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


remained on board the Chatham, where lie was foon joined by the reft of 
his countrymen and the other {quadron of their Indian perty. 

In the morning of the 28th the Chatham entered the channel before 
mentioned; (a boat having been fent forward to carry on the examina- 
tion of the continental fhore:) here the depth of water was go fathoms. 
After having advanced a fhort diftance, the channel was found to unite 
with a paffage that took a winding courfe through the iflands to the 
wellward, and was incommoded with many rocks and huge ftones, fimi- 
lar to thofe noticed in Cook’s inlet. 

The channel leading along the centinent was found on examination: 
to be not more than fifty yards wide, though nearly at high water; for a 
fmall fpace the depth was only 15 feet, but it quickly increafed to 10 
fathoms. This narrow fhallow part was carefully examined as it was. 
pafled over ; ‘the depth loon increafed to 17 fathoms, when port Mulgrave 
was feen; point Turner bearing s.393 w. The number of native vifitors 
now amounted to ten, who feemed on the moft friendly terms with the 
Kodiak party: one of the former by figns and words, ufed all his elo- 
quence to point out the impoflibility of the veflel’s pafling through this 
narrow paflage, and that ultimately fhe would return by the fame way 
fhe was going; in this however he was miftaken, for by keeping in mid- 
channel the depth was no where found to be lefs than 3 fathoms. This 
paffage is about fix hundred yards long, lying from the entrance of the 
channel s. 60 w., 2 miles, in which {pace the continental fhore forms a 
{mall bay, and to the fouthward of the narrow part it takes a more fouth- 
erly dire€tion; along it are fome iflets and rocks, and the weftern fide 
of the channel is much broken. About a league from the narrow part 
the depth continued to be from 17 to 12 fathoms, until a fhoal was 
reached that lies acrofs the paflage; with this Mr. Johnftone had been: 
acquainted on a former vifit, and he now entertained hopes of finding a 
fufficient depth for the Chatham to pals over it, for which purpote a 
boat was difpatched to fearch for its deepeft part. The boat had fearcely 
put off when the depth of water fuddenly decreafed to 5 fathoms, and 
the veffel inftantly grounded. The cutter which was in fhore amongtt 
the iflands was immediately recalled, and attempts were made to heave 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 
the Chatham off, but it being then falling tide they proved ineffeéiual ; 


and as it was near the top of the fprings, a bower anchor was carried out 
and a ftrong purchafe prepared, left the veflel fhould be pinched in 
floating the next tide. 

The native Indians here made their appearance again, and brought 
with them a fupply of excellent falmon; they feemed to exult in the 
correétnefs of their information, and perfifted that no paffage for the vef- 
fel would. be gained by that route to port Mulgrave. Mr. Puget how- 
ever conceiving that they had now proceeded too far to abandon this 
defign without making further attempts, determined to give it another 
trial. 

It was low water about eight in the evening, the tide not having falien 
more than fix feet perpendicularly fince the veffel had grounded. At 
this time the boats were founding for the deepefl water, when the ude 
flowed fo much fafter than was expeéted, that before eleven o'clock the 
veffel floated, and fhe was hove off into 13 fathoms water, without ha. 
ving received the leaft apparent damage. Here the Chatham remained 
during the night, which was dark and gloomy, attended with rain and a 
frefh eafterly gale of wind. The ebb tide on the morning of the goth 
fell five feet lower than it had done on the preceding cvening; this af- 
forded a perfect view of the furrounding fhoals, which were in moft 
places dry, with two large rocks. Between thefe the Chatham had 
grounded, and had fhe been {teered a few yards only to the right or left, 
it is moft probable fhe would have refted ca one of them, which would 
have endangered her overfetting. About the conclufion of the ebb, a 
boat was fent to examine two places on the bar that were not dry, one of 
thefe, though narrow, was. found. to be fufficiently deep and free from. 
danger, provided its line of direétion was marked. with buoys; this was. 
immediately done, and at half flood the Chatham pafled through it, ha- 
ving not lefs than 3 fathoms water, which foon after deepened to 15 
fathoms. As. the fhoals were approached that are laid down by. Mr. Dixon 
to the north-eaft of point Turner, which is a low narrow {lrip of land 
forming the fouth-eaft point of the ifland that proteéts port Mulgrave 
from the ocean, the depth again decreafed to 4 and 34 fathoms; but by 


palling. 


‘ 


9 
230 
17Q fo 
] lv 
fulve 
"een pone 


A VOYAGE © DISCOVERY 


paffine to the weftward of the moft fouthern of thefe fhoals, a good chan- 
nel was found, through which the veffel paffed, and about noon an- 
chored in port Mulgrave in 12 fathoms water, tough clayey bottom ; 
point ‘Turner bearing by compafs s. 932 £.; the above fhoals, s.65 to 
s.$01.: mount St. Ehas, x. 69 w.; the neareft fhore fouth, three ca- 
bles length; and the fhoals about the fame diftance. 

‘Thus, by perfevering, Mr. Puget made his way through a channel 
which, though he found pratiicable, he does not recommend to be fol- 
lowed: efpecially as the communication between port Mulgrave and the 
ocean is eafy and commodious, by the paflage to the fouth and weftward 
of point Turner. 

The continental fhore from thefe narrows having been partly examined 
by the boat, fhe was again fent to finifh the furvey of it to cape Phipps, 
the eaftern point of Becring’s bay. In the evening fhe returned, having 
accomplifhed this fervice; by which it appeared, that from the narrows 
the continental fhore takes a courfe s. 28 w. for about a league, and is 
indented with {mall bays or coves, and that there are many iflets lying 
near the land. Ata little diftance from a point, lying from point ‘Tur- 
ner N. 86 £., about a league diftant, the main land takes firft a foutherly, 
then a wefterly and north-welt direftion ; forming a rounding bay about 
4 miles acrofs to cape Phipps; which, according to our obfervations is 
fituated in latitude 59° 33’, longitude 220° 29/; point Turner lying from 
it s.77£., diftant two miles. About the fame diftance within cape 
Phipps is a fmall opening in the low land acceffible only for boats, near 
which was found an Indian village, that had the appearance of having 
been very recently deferted; not one of its former inhabitants was to be 
feen, excepting about fifty dogs that were making a moft dreadful how!- 
ing. This circumftance gave rife to an opinion, that the arrival of 
Portoff’s party in-this neighbourhood had induced the native Indians to 
quit their habitations, and retire to the woods, or further along the coaft 
to the eaftward; and Mr. Puget thinks that this idea was fupported by the 
defcription that Portoff firft gave of thefe people, as being a treacherous, 
cruel tribe, by whom his numerous party were kept ima ftate of con- 
{tant anxiety for their geneval fafety. It alfo led to a fuppofition, that 
at 


han- 
.an- 
om: 
35 to 
€ ca- 


unnel 
> fol- 
d the 
ward 


nined 
nIpps, 
aving 
TrTOWS 
and is 
lying 

_‘Tur- 
herly. 
about 
ions 1s 
py from 
cape 

, near 
aving 

5 to be 
howl- 
ival of 
ans to 
e coaft 
by the 
erous, 

Ff con- 
, that 

at 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


at fome earlier period the Ruffians had made ufe of harfh and coercive 
meafures to bring the inhabitants of this bay to a friendly intercourfe; 
this however, had been pofitively denied by Portoff, who afferted, that no 
fkirmifh whatever had hitherto taken place between thefe people and 
their modern Ruffian vifitors; though according to his own ftatement, he 
had at that time met with only thirty of the natives, notwithflanding that 
Mr. Dixon in th vear 1787, computes their number to be feventy ; and 
Mr. Joh: une, 9 vifited this bay 1. :"> year following, is of opinion, 
that they amountcu at that time to on hundred and fifty of both fexes, 
and allages. This apparent difference may however be owing to the 
wandering life which the North Weft Americans are found to lead, par- 
ticularly in the fummer feafon, for the purpofe of procuring a fupply of 
fifh, and other articles of food, for their maintenance during the winter ; 
and as it was afterwards proved, that thele fhores were not {fo thinly in- 
habited as had been imagined, the ftatement made by Portoff is likely to 
be correét. 

Portoff was not at this time on board the Chatham, and Mr. Puget was 
a little furprized at receiving a meffage from him by one of the Ruffians, 
inquiring if a gold watch-chain, and feals, were mifling from the velffcl, 
as the captive Indian chief, who had been permitted to {leep in the cabin 
the night Portoff remained on board, had produced thefe valuables, and 
had alleged that he had received them as a prefent from Mr. Puget, who 
until that inftant, was unconfcious of his lofs. On the meffenger being 
made acquainted with the theft, he replied that Portoff would deliver 
them up the next morning, which on the goth he accordingly performed. 
On this occafion Portoff expreffled great indignation at the robbery, and 
confidered himfelf as being very fortunate that he had been able to ob- 
tain the chain and feals uninjured, and to have an opportunity of refto- 
ring them, whilft he had the power of fo doing. Portoff embraced this 
occafion to inform Mr. Puget, that on the evening of the 28th, whilft he 
and his whole party were on one of the {mall iflands in port Mulgrave, 
they were furprized by a vifit of about fifty of the natives ; and notwith- 
ftanding the fuperior numbers of his party, he had fo little confidence in 
the courage of the Kodiak and Cook’s inlet Indians, that he was ex- 


) 


2 tremely 


9 


< 


17946 
July. 


31 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


tremely anxious to be quit of fuci dangerous vifitors, and had deter- 
mined on returning to the Kodiak as foon as the Chatham fhould leave 
the bay; in the mean time he purpofed to remove his whole fquadron 
from its then ftation to point Turner. For this purpofe he departed, 
and on the morning of the 1ft of ju'v, ke returned with his numerous 
little fleet, and pitched his encampment on that point. 

In the evening the Chatham was in readinefs for fea saeeblek to my 


direétions; but as the weather during the day had been pleafant with a 


fine weflerly breeze, Mr. Puget was in conftant expeétation of feeing the 
Difcovery, and deemed it moft prudent to remain ftationary until the 
next morning, rather than rifk a longer feparation by proceeding to fea. 
His conjeftures of the Dilcovery being nigh at hand, were in a great 
meafure confirmed late in the evening; and Mr. Manby was difpatched as 
before related. The next morning however brought no tidings to the 
Chatham either of Mr. Manby, or the veffel; but as it had been pre- 
vioufly fettled, that Mr. Manby’s not returning fhould denote the arrival 
of the Difcovery, Mr. Puget concluded fhe was coming into port Mul- 
grave, and remained at anchor in that expeétation. 

In the afternoon Mr. Puget vif; the Ruffian encampment on point 
Turner, and found the whole party comfortably fituated. Portoff had 
an excellent {mall tent made of Ruffian fail cloth, which feemed to be 
appropriated to his fole ule, and as a depofit for their fire arms, ammu- 
nition, and other articles of value; near which, an Indian hut was ereéted 
for the refidence of the other Ruffians; the captive chief and his family, 
and the reft of the party, were fo fituated, that no furprize could be well 
apprehended; their fpears, formed at the point like a {pontoon, were 
placed near each habitation, in readinefs to aét on the defenfive ; and 
their daggers, and other weapons were equally well difpofed. ‘Their 
temporary habitations were each formed by two canoes placed edgeways, 
about four feet afunder, and their paddles conftituted a kind of roof, over 
which were laid thick {kins of land animals, which effectually protected 
them from the inclemency of the weather; and formed, though a fmall 
and low, yet a comfortable refting place; the bottom being firft covered 
by a mat, f{lrewed over with clean dry grafs. Many fea otters that were 


jut 


leter- 
leave 
idron 
arted, 
erous 


o my 
vith a 
ig the 
til the 
to fea. 

great 
hed as 
to the 
nN pre- 
arrival 


t Mul- 


point 
off had 
to be 
ammu- 
prected 
family, 
pe well 
, were 
bP; and 
Their 
eways, 
, over 
tected 
{mall 
overed 
t were 


jutt 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


juft brought on fhore by fome of the Kodiak Indians, gave Mr. Puget 
an opportunity of feeing their manner of preparing thofe fkins, which 
differed materially from that praétifed by the other inhabitants of the 
coaft, in whofe poffeffion we have found that fpecies of fur. Thefe peo- 
ple drew the fkin over the body of the animal, without making any inci- 
fion either in the back or the belly, and in that ftate the fkins were hung 
up to dry; but whether they underwent any other procefs prior to their 
being fent to market was not underftood. ‘The flefh of thefe animals is 
efteemed to be a very great dainty; and whilft fome were employed in 
fkinning, the furrounding company were bufily engaged, with their 
knives, in fcraping the blubber or fat from the carcafe, and in that raw 
{tate eating it with the greateft relifh. The reft of the animal was boiled, 
with the wild vegetables procured in great abundance, in and about the 
woods, and afforded the party an excellent repaft. The bones of the 
fea otter, with thofe of all other amphibious animals, are preferved with 
the greateft care by thefe Indians, but for what nurpofe Mr. Puget was 
unable to learn. ‘Thofe of the party who were not thus engaged, feemed 
to be induftrioufly employed in making fuch articles of curiofity, as 
found the moft ready market amongft their Englifh friends. 

In the evening the canoes that had been fent with Mr. Manby returned 
without him, and as they brought neither letter nor meffage, it ferved to 
confirm Mr. Puget in his former opinion, that the Difcovery was coming 
into port; efpecially as the wind and weather were extremely unfettled, 
and confequently, very unfavorable to the examination of the coaft to the 
eaftward. The arrival of a large party of native Indians the next morn- 
ing, on the fouthern fhore of the main land oppofite to point Turner,, 
threw the whole Ruffian encampment into a ftate of confufion, and 
caufed every preparation to be made for aéting on the defenfive; in the 
mean time the captive chief was difpatched in a Kodiak canoe, for the 
purpole of ufing his endeavours to bring about a friendly intercourfe, and 
to eftablifh a good underftanding. On this occafion feveral meffages 
pafled, but no interview took place between the two parties during the, 
day, which was very unpleafant, the wind being very boifterous from the 
eaftward. Early in the morning of the 4th, alarge wooden canoe, with 

Vou. III, Hh twelve 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


twelve of thefe ftrangers, vifited the Ruffian encampment, and were wel- 
comed to the fhore by a fong from the Kodiak Indians ; this compli- 
ment being returned in the fame way, a conference took place ;_ in which 
the native chief exerted his utmoft eloquence to point out the extent 
of their territories, and the injuftice of the Ruffians in killing and taking 
away their fea otters, without making tl.em the fmalleft recompence. 
After thefe grievances had been enumerated with great energetic force, 
the chief fent a fea otter {kin to Portoff, and on his accepting this pre- 
fent, a loud fhout was given by both parties: this was followed by a 
fong, which concluded thefe introdu€tory ceremonies. The vifitors now 
landed, and were conduéted to the encampment, where the friendly re- 
ception they met with, induced the chief to difpatch his canoe, with fuch 
information to the reft of his tribe, that they foon repaired to point 
Turner; and after fimilar ceremonies of fongs and dancing, thefe like- 
wife landed, amounting to about fifty, in whofe poffeffion were fix ex- 
cellent mufkets, kept in the higheft order, and each had a large iron dag- 
ger that hung from his neck in readinefs for immediate fervice. 

But as no confidence could be placed in their profeffions of friendfhip, 
fo large a party excited in Portoff the moft ferious apprehenfions for the 
fafety of his people, efpecially, as the native Indians took up their abode 
in the vicinity of his encampment; and although at that time it contained 
nearly nine hundred, whilft the number of the natives did not amount 
to more than feventy perfons, amongft whom, were fome women and 
boys, yet he greatly areaded an attack; being confcious that the major 
part of his people would be unequal to refift the impetuofity of fo daring 
and defperate an adverfary. 

Mr. Puget relieved Portoff of his diftreffing folicitude by the ftrongeft 
affurances, that fo long as the Chatham remained in his neighbourhood, 
he might, in the event of an attack, depend on every affiftance in his 
power to afford, as alfo in the exertion of his beft endeavours, to gain 
thefe ftrangers more over to the intereft of the Ruffian party. Thefe 
offers were received by Portoff with marks of the moft lively gratitude, 
as he had confidered his fituation as being extremely critical, but was 
now, from Mr. Puget’s aflurances of proteétion, made perfectly eafy; 

and 


a 


S. bee bet beet het oe 


wel. 
npli- 
hich 
<tent 
king 
ence. 
orce, 
pre- 
bya 
; now 
ly re- 
fuch 
point 
» like- 
iX @X- 


1 dag- 


dfhip, 
or the 
abode 
tained 

ount 
n and 
major 
Haring 


ongeft 
hood, 
in his 
O gain 
Thefe 
itude, 
t was 
eafly; 

and 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


and for the purpofe of preferving the good underftanding that appeared 
to have taken place, he diftributed amongft his vifitors fome large and 
{mall blue beads, with fheet copper, and bracelets made of that metal. 
This meafure appeared to have its defired effeét, as the chief and his party 
feemed to be well pleafed, and foon after they all retired from the encamp- 
ment, apparently well fatisfied with their reception. The trivial articles 
given by Portoff, were the only fpecies of merchandize the Ruflians 
had with them; even thefe, had been brought in very {mall quantities ; 
and it would appear that they were very inadequate to the purchafe of 
furs from the tribes or nations, in the more fouth-eaftern parts of this 
coaft; but a commercial intercourfe with the native inhabitants of 
North Weft America to the eaftward from prince William’s found did 
not appear to be an objeét of the Ruffian purfuit. 

Late in the evening, Portoff acquainted Mr. Puget, that the Difcovery 
was coming round the point; a gun was immediately fired, and Mr. John- 
{tone difpatched in the cutter; but the veffel under fail foon appeared 
like a galiot, and was fuppofed to be a Ruffian, until the return of Mr. 
Johnftone about four in the morning, who had found the veffel to be the 
Jackall, which anchored near point Turner. Here Mr. Johnftone 
learned, that fhe had parted from the Difcovery the preceding afternoon, 
and that fhe had after that time been driven fome leagues to the eaftward. 

As Mr. Puget did not receive by this veffel any letter or meflage, he 
ftill fuppofed that I fhould return to port Mulgrave, to wait a more fa- 
vorable opportunity for profecuting the furvey of the coaft. The wea- 
ther ftill continued in the fame unfettled ftate until the evening, when 
the clearing of the weflern {ky ftrongly indicated a favorable change. 
In the morning of the 5th the whole party of native Indians quitted port 
Mulgrave, and left the Ruffians in quiet pofleffion of point Turner. 
Before their departure, their number had gradually increafed to an hun- 
dred and upwards. The feveral chiefs had occafionally vifited Mr. 
Puget, who made them all prefents of fuch articles as were by them confi- 
dered valuable, and were well accepted. Mr. Puget mentions alfo, that 
after an arricable intercourfe had been eftablifhed between the two par- 

Hhe ties, 


236 


1704e 
July. 
ee and 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ties, they entertained each other with fongs and dances, according to the 
different cuftoms of each particular tribe. 

A fine breeze having fprung up about noon from the N. w., the 
Chatham quitted port Mulgrave. Here Mr. Puget ftates, that they 
were enabled to procure fome tolerable refrefhments ; the fhores pro- 
duced an abundance of very good wild celery, which had been daily 
boiled with portable foup in their peas, and had been eaten alfo as fal- 
lad; but to the bounty of their Ruffian friend Portoff, they had been 
more confiderably indebted, for a conftant and ample fupply of fith, 
chiefly halibut, with fome few cod and falmon. Thcefe were all he had 
to beftow, but he furnifhed them in fo handfome and fo difinterefted a 
manner, as plainly indicated, that he poffeffed a mind and difpofition, 
not only capable of great aéts of generofity, but Imghly intitled to a 
more refpeétable poft in civil fociety, than the lot of his fortune feemed 
to admit. His behaviour from his firft vifit, had been marked by a 
fteady, uniform line of conduét, that manifefted a juft fenfe of thofe 
obligations, which although demanded by the rights of hofpitality, are, 
when fo very pleafantly conferred, deferving the higheft commendations 
and acknowledgments; befide which, Mr. Puget had little in his power 
to offer. Some few trivial articles were however moft thankfully ac- 
cepted by Portoff, who took charge of fome books likely to be fervice- 
able as a prefent for Mr. Shields, to whom, and likewife to Mr. Berre- 
noff, the condu€tor of the company’s affairs at the Kodiak, Mr. Puget 
wrote in fuch terms of the condu& of this honeft failor, as he moft richly 
had deferved. 

Mr. Puget concludes the account of his tranfaétions at this place by no- 
ticing, that in failing into port Mulgrave it ts neceflary to give a good birth 
to point Phipps, in order to avoid a {mall reef that ftretches from it into the 
fea. From the inner or north point of this cape, point Turner lies s. 83 E., 
diflant two miles and three quarters; this point is bold, and muft be kept 
clofe on board, for the purpofe of avoiding the fhoals that lie at a little 
diftance to the eaftward of it; between thefe fhoals and the point, good 
anchorage is found in 8 to 14 fathoms, clear good holding ground; the 
variation by the Chatham’s com pals was 26° eaftwardly;_ the rife and fall of 

the 


Ad 


. he ice 


> the 


, the 
they 
pro- 
daily 
s fal- 
been 
 fith, 
> had 
ted a 
ition, 
to a 
emed 
by a 
thofe 
, are, 
ations 
power 
Ly ac- 
rvice- 
Berre- 
Puget 
richly 


Dy no- 
t birth 
to the 
83 Es 
e kept 
n little 
good 
1 the 


fall of 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the tide perpendicularly was about nine feet, and it was high water 30’ 
after the moon had paffed the meridian. 

The dangers in Beering’s bay, particularly between point Manby and 
the iflands forming port Mulgrave, are confidered to be numerous, fince 
feveral rocks were feen, juft fhewing their heads above water; but Mr. 
Puget had not leifure to undertake a minute examination of thefe latent 
dangers, or of the iflands juft mentioned forming the port, which, by its 
fouth-eaftern entrance, is free from any danger or interruption, and af- 
fords ample fpace to turn in, between the main land and the ifland. 

Here the Chatham was employed in reaching the ocean with a wefterly 
wind until fix in the evening, when her cuurfe was direéted for Crofs found. 
On approaching cape Spencer, a dozen of the natives in one canoe vi- 
fited the brig, all of whom expreffed the fame want of confidence that 
had been exhibited to us, and not one of them would ven'ure on board, 
without a hoftage being fent into the canoe. As this ¢¢yvinony had not 
been before obferved by any of our North Weft Americas vifitors. it waa 
not at firft comprehended, but on the demani Liing underftocd, Mr, 
Puget ordered one of his people into the canoe; upon which the chief 
immediately repaired on board, and a large fupply of halibut was foon 
purchafed with iron, Whuilft this trafic was going on, and the hoftage 
remained in the canoe, the chief feemed perfeétly fatisfied, and recon- 
ciled to his fituation; but the inftant the man was defired to come from 
out of the canoe on board, the chief returned. This exceffive fufpicion 
and diftruft, which had been by no means the general charaéter of the 
North Weft Americans, is not eafily to be accounted for; unlefs it be 
fuppofed, which 1s too much to be apprehended, that fome of their civilized 
vifitors had given them caufe for ado,<iig this precaution. 

Mr. Puget and the gentlemen on buard the Chatham had been equally. 
deceived with ourfelves by the appearance of the ice, and had tacked to 
avoid approaching too near foise pieces which they had fuppofed to be 
rocks; but after difcoveri:ig tiie miftake they foon joined us as already 
mentioned, without noticing either rocks, fhoals, or other interruption 
in failing up the found, excepting the ice before mentioned. 


CHAPTER 


237 


1794. 
July. 
| Sad 


238 


1794. 
July. 


‘Thurfday 10. 


A VOYAGE OF DiSCOVERY 


CHAPTER Ix. 


Tranfactions in Crofs found—Proceea ‘0 fea—Account of a boat excurfion— 
Defcription of port Althorp and Crofs found—Afironomical and nautical 
obfervations. 


A LTHOUGH the weather, during the night and morning, had been 
very rainy, yet it did not prevent our being vifited by the natives in 
feven or eight canoes, containing men, women, and children ; who, irom 
this early vifit, we had great reafon to fuppofe had their refidence at no 
great diftance. It appeared that they had taken up a temporary abode 
on one of the two fmall branches in this cove, for the purpofe, it fhould 
feem, of being our near neighbours. Their numbers were afterwards 
fo augmented that we had frequently near an hundred about the veflels, 
who, notwithftanding the weather was foggy, rainy, and very unpleafant, 
furnifhed us with a tolerable fupply of halibut and falmon ; the latter was 
of a very inferior fort, and poffeffed little or no tafte ; in addition to thefe 
effentials, they difpofed of a few indifferent fea otter fkins: in this traffic 
they dealt very honeftly, and in the other parts of their conduét they 
feemed to fhew an open, cheerful, and lively difpofition; yet no one 
was inclined to truft himfelf in our power on board, although on fhore 
they were affable and familiar. 

Since our arrival on the coaft this feafon, the ftate of my health had 
been too indifferent to allow of my taking any fhare in the feveral diftant 
boat excurfions ; but as it feemed to be highly probable, from the ex- 
tremely broken appearance of this extenfive opening in the coaft, that 
Mr. Whidbey might be led to a great diftance, in land, by purfuing the 


continental 


>is 


l > ee @ en, ee oo ee eee eee 


=—— el 


on— 
utical 


been 
res in 
irom 
at no 
abode 
hould 

ards 
effels, 
afant, 
Pr was 
> thefe 
raffic 

they 
lo one 
fhore 


h had 
liftant 
€ eX- 
, that 
g the 


nental 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


continental fhore, and by that means be precluded from examining the 
various iflands that appear to lie before it, and to form the external 
boundaries of this found; and confidering myfelf now fufficiently re- 
cruited to be equal to that tafk, early in the morning of the 14th I fat 
out for that purpofe, but by noon I was obliged to return, in confe- 
quence of being feized with a moft violent indifpofition, which termina- 
ted in a bilious cholic, that confined me for feveral days to my apart- 
ments, 

During my abfence a fail had been defcried in the offing, which had 
been fuppofed to be the Jackall, and on my return a boat was fent to 
afford her every affiftance in our power. At three the next morning 
the boat returned from the veffel, which was found to be a brig named 
the Arthur, commanded by a Mr. Barber, belonging to Bengal, but lait 
from port Jackfon. At noon fhe anchored in this port, off the ifland 
forming its weftern fide, to the fouth of the ftation we had taken. The 
Indians were as ufual about our veffels, bufily employed in commercial 
dealings ; but on the arrival of this veffel, I thought it proper to prohi- 
bit the purchafe of furs, by any of our people. 

The fame very unpleafant weather continued with little variation ; ihe 
wind blowing a ftrong gale from the eaftward. On friday afternoon our 
amicable intercourfe with the inhabitants of the country was in fome 
meafure interrupted, by one of them having been deteéted in .2 aét of 
ftealing fome of the lower part of the rudder chains. Some mufkets had 
been fired to induce thofe in the canoe to return their prize to no effeét; 
the launch was therefore fent in purfuit of the canoe, and juft as the 
Indians were about to land the canoe overfet, by which accident the 
ftolen goods were loft, with fuch other valuables as they had colle&ted 
during the day; and the party, confifting of two women and a man, were 
made prifoners, and with their canoe, brought on board. The three 
delinquents were ordered into irons; but they had not been long fo cir- 
cumftanced, before I received a very humble petition from the two 
ladies, who on promifing they would not again be found fo offending 
were liberated. ‘The man remained in confinement until the next morn- 
ing, when I underftood that fome fimilar a¢ts had been committed on 

A board 


1794. 


july. 
ee aaeed 


Tuefday 15; 


Friday 18, 


Saturday 19, 


Tuelday 22. 


Wednef. 29. 
Saturday 26. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


board the Chatham; this information induced me to confider, that 
making an example of the thief in our poffeffion, might be attended 
with the defirable effet of preventing further mifdemeanors ; and for this 
reafon he was punifhed with four dozen lafhes, after which his canoe was 
returned tohim, and he with his ladies was difiniffed. 

On this correétion being infliéted, the reft of the canoes quitted the 
cove, and no one came near us until tuefday, when one only came along- 
fide. On the Indian meeting a friendly reception, his neighbours were in- 
duced to follow his example, and our former intercourfe was perfeétly re- 
eftablifhed. Amongft the number who now vifited us, was one of the wo- 
men who had been overfet in the canoe, and who in that f{cuffle had hurt 
the feparated part of the lower lip; but on receiving the neceffary fur- 
gical affiftance for healing the wound, for which purpofe fhe came regu- 
larly on board every morning, it was foon perfeétly healed. 

The Arthur failed on the 23d, and on the faturday following the Jackal 
arrived, and anchored near us; on this occafion the former reftrictions 
as to the purchafe of furs were again enforced, 

Mr. Brown ftated, that he had quitted port Mulgrave the morning after 
the Chatham had failed, and had left Portoff and his party at point Turner; 
but on his meeting with a hard gale from the eaftward, he was obliged 
to return thither, with the lofs of fome fpars, and with material damage 
to his fails. ‘The Ruffian party he found ftill at their encampment, but 
underftood that fix of the Kodiak Indians had been captured by the na- 
tive inhabitants. Portoff requefted Mr. Brown would afford him fome 
affiftance to regain his people; for which purpofe, with a numerous fleet 
of canoes, and one of the Jackal’s boats, Portoff direéted his courfe up 
the bay, and foon met with the hoftile Indians, who, after a long difcuffion 
delivered up five of their prifoners, and in return received five of their 
comrades, being part of a number which in retaliation, the Ruffians had 

captured, but the remainder of the party amounting to twelve men and 
women, were detained by Portoff, until the other Kodiak Indian fhould 
‘he reftored. Mr. Brown’s fecond vifit to port Mulgrave was of fhort 
duration, and Portoff with his numerous fleet quitted it a few hours be- 
fore his departure, 
We 


hat 
ded 
this 
was 


the 
ong- 
> In- 
y r= 
> WO- 
hurt 
- fur. 
regu- 


ackal 
stions 


r after 
inner; 
mage 
, but 
e na- 
fome 
5 fleet. 
fe up 
uffion 
their 
s had 
n and 
nould 
fhort 
s be- 


We 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


We were now in hourly expeétation of the party’s return under the 


command of Mr. Whidbey, for the comfort and even fafety of whom, —j~— 


it was not poffible for us to avoid having the moft anxious folicitude, as 
the weather that had generally prevailed fince our arrival in this place, 
had been of an extremely unpleafant nature. In the afternoon, however, 
we were very agreeably relieved of our anxiety for their welfare, by their 
returning all in good health and fpirits; after having traverfed the conti- 
nental fhore fo far as to be within about 20 leagues of cape Decifion, from 
whence a clear channel had been feen into the ocean. To this {tation a good 
inland navigation had been found, excepting that in an eafterly direétion 
from the anchorage of the veffels at the diftance of about 10 leagues, the 
paflage though fufhciently fpacious, was at that time greatly incommoded, 
and, in fome places, nearly clofed by large fragments of floating ice. This 
inconvenience having already occafioned us much annoyance, and mo- 
ments of the moft anxious concern, I did not choofe to combat again fuch 
difficulties, efpecially as by purfuing our route by the ocean, it would af- 
ford us an opportunity of delineating the exterior coaft; and as Mr. John- 
{tone had accomplifhed the fervice, which want of health had prevented 
my effeéting, I dire€ted every thing to be taken from the fhore, and the 
veflels prepared for failing the next morning; but it was not until mon- 
day in the forenoon that the wind permitted us to move, when, with a 
light air from the north, and with the affiftance of all our boats, we were 
enabled to get out of the port which Ihave named Port ALTHORP. We 
had no fooner arrived in the found than the breeze died away, and the 
flood tide obliged us to anchor until one o'clock. At this time a breeze 
again {prang up, but being from the s. w., we were employed until mid- 
night in turning out of the found. We ftood to and fro off cape Crofs 
to wait the return of day, in order to carry on the examination of the 
external coaft fouthward towards cape Decifion, which was now difco- 
vered to be either the coaft of along ifland, or an archipelago extending 
to the latitude of 56°15’, and probably further fouth. Near its fouth- 
eaftern extremity, I intended to take the firft convenient fituation that 
might offer for the veffels, whilft the boats were employed in completing 

Vou. II. li the 


241 


1794- 
uly. 


Monday 28. eit. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the furvey of the {mall portion of the continental fhore that now re- 
mained for our examination. 

Previoufly however, to my proceeding in this part of my journal, I 
fhall ftate the fervices performed by Mr. Whidbey during his late excur- 
fion, which according to the direftions he received commenced on the 
forenoon of the 10th from cape Spencer, with very thick foggy unplea- 
fant weather; this inconvenience, in addition to the immenfe numbers of 
huge pieces of floating ice, very much retarded his progrefs acrofs the 
found. Having at length effeéted this objeét, the continental fhore from the 
cape above-mentioned was found to take nearly a north direétion for 
about 3 leagues to a low pebbly point; n.N.w. from which, five miles 
further, a {mall brook flowed into the found, and on its northern fide ftood 
the ruins of a deferted Indian village. To reach this ftation, the party had 
advanced up an arm about 6 miles wide at its entrance, but which had 
decreafed to about half that width, and their further progrefs was now 
{topped by an immenfe body of compaét perpendicular ice, extending 
from fhore to fhore, and conneéted with a range of lofty mountains that 
formed tic head of the arm, and as it were, gave fupport to this body of 
ice on each fide. Their courfe was now direéted acrofs the arm, and 
on its eaftern fide, compelled by the inclemency of the weather, the party 
“topped until it fhould prove more favorable to their purpofe. Thefe 
fhores are compofed of a border of low land, which on high tides is over- 
flown, and becomes broken into iflands. Here were ereéted two pillars 
fixteen feet high, and four feet in circumference, painted white; on the 
top of each was placed a large fquare box; on examining one of them 
it was found to contain many afhes, and pieces of burnt bones, which 
were confidered to be human; thefe reliéts were carefully wrapped up in 
fkins, and old mats, and at the bafe of the pillars was placed an old 
canoe in which were fome paddles. 

The weather in the night was dark with conftant rain, and on the fol- 
lowing morning it improved but little; yet as it permitted the party 
to fee from point to point, Mr. Whidbey profecuted his refearches, and 
found the fhores of the icy barrier taking a direétion s. 53 £. 44 leagues, 
to a point, which I have called Point WimB.Levon, lyin, from 


3 cape 


| > i — ile ee ee 


— 


“~ Oo 


P Y@. 


al, I 
curs 
1 the 
plea- 
rs of 
; the 
n the 
n for 
miles 
ftood 
y had 
1 had 
; now 
nding 
s that 
dy of 
and 
party 
hefe 
over- 
D illars 
bn the 
them 
hich 
up in 
n old 


e fol- 
party 
, and 
AgueS, 

from 
cape 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


cape Spencer N.53 £., diftant eleven miles. In paffing this fpace, they 


were obliged to make their way through a great quantity of floating ice, Uy— 


and between three fmall rocky iflands lying at a little diftance from the 
main land, which oppofite to thefe iflands terminates in {teep, rugged, 
rocky cliffs. ‘This poir’ forms the north-weft point of entrance into 
an extenfive branch of the found extending to the eaftward; its oppofite 
point of entrance, which I named Point Lavinia, is the north- 
eaft point of port Althorp, and lies from it s.12£., at the diftance of fix 
miles. Between thefe points is a group confifting of one low, and two 
high rocky iflands, with fome rocks and iflets about them; from hence 
the fhore took a circular direftion to the N.N.£. for about a league, and 
formed the weftern entrance of a {maller branch about 2 miles wide, ex- 
tending to the north and north-weftward ; at the entrance of which, in 
mid-channel was only found 18 fathoms water; a circumftance we had 
been little accuftomed to meet with in our examination of the feveral 
branches of this very extraordinary country; as in almoft every other 
inftance their depth had been far greater, than we had been provided to 
reach. Up this opening the party advanced nearly in a north-weft di- 
re€tion about 2 leagues, where their further progrefs was nearly {topped 
by fhoals, rocky iflets, and rocks, extending acrofs the branch, which de- 
creafed to about a mile in width, and for the {pace of about two miles, was 
occupied by thefe iflets and rocks; beyond them on the weftern fhore 
was a {mall fhallow opening, that appeared to communicate with one of 
a fimilar defcription, and which had been noticed in the other arm a few 
miles below the icy barrier, but was too fhallow to be approached by 
the boats. About 4 miles from hence ina northerly dire€tion this branch 
finally clofed, being in moft places greatly encumbered with ice. On 
the return of the boats, they were much incommoded by the fhoals that 
extend from the north-eaft fide of the arm, to within halfa mile of its 
fouth-weft fide. About its entrance the foundings were regular, of a 
moderate depth, and afforded good and fecure anchorage; but at this 
feafon, veffels would be much inconvenienced by the immenf? quantities 
of floating ice; this impediment, in addition to the weather being again 
very foggy, {topped the progrefs of their refearches early in the after- 

Iie noon, 


243 


1794. 
July. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


noon, and obliged them to retire about a league within the entrance on 


~ the eaftern fhore. About ten of the natives in two canoes had been met 


with, who had conducted themfelves in a very civil and friendly manner. 
‘Toward the evening.and in the night, the ice accumulated fo much as to 
threaten deftru€tion to the boats, which under the circumftances of their 
fituation, could not without inconvenience and delay be hauled on fhore: 
the utmoft vigilance of the party became requifite to prevent their being 
damaged, which was happily effected, though with the lofs of a grapnel, 
as the Chatham's cutter had by the ice been unavoidably forced adrift. 
This, though an important lofs, (none of the boats having a {pare grap- 
nel) was foon compenfated by the ingenuity of Mr. Le Mefurier, who 
had the command of the cutter, and who immediately conftruéted one of 
wood, that anfwered the purpofe of an iron one extremely well, during 
the reft of the excurfion. 

The morning of the 12th, though unpleafant, was rather more favo- 
rable to their purfuit, which was fill greatly impeded by the ice. From 
the eaft point of this branch, which I have called Point Dunpas, fitu- 
ated in latitude 58° 21’, longitude 224° 1’, the coaft takes an irregular 
E.N.E. dire€tion about feven miles to a point, from whence this branch 
of the found appeared to be very extenfive in an £.s.£. point of view, 
and was upwards of 3 leagues acrofs. The party proceeded from point 
Dundas to this ftation, through a channel from 2 to 3 miles in width, 
between the continental fhore, and an ifland about feven miles long and 
three miles broad, lying in a N.£. and s. w. direétion. This fpacious 
inlet prefented to our party an arduous tafk, as the fpace between 
the fhores on the northern and fouthern fides, feemed to be intirely 
occupied by one compact fheet of ice as far as the eye could diftin- 
guifh, Whilft the boats remained at this point tuey were vifited by the 
natives in feveral canoes, that had come from out a fmall fhallow brook 
a little to the weftward of the point. Excepting a few indifferent fea 
otter fkins, thefe people brought with them no articles for traffic. To 
the north and eaft of this point, the fhores of the continent form two 
large open bays, which were terminated by compaét folid mountains of 
ice, rifing perpendicularly from the water’s edge, and bounded to the 

north 


{ 
2 
t 
e 
t 
a 
V 
a 


on 
met 
ner. 
As tO 
heir 
ore: 
eing 
onel, 
lrift. 
rap- 
who 
ne of 
ring 


favo- 
‘rom 
fitu- 
cular 
anch 
iew, 
oint 
ridth, 
r and 
ious 
ween 
irely 
iftin- 
) the 
rook 
t fea 

To 
two 
ns of 
» the 
north 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


north by a continuation of the united lofty frozen mountains that extend 
eaftward from mount Fairweather. In thefe bays alfo were great quan- 
tities of broken ice, which having been put in motion by the {pringing 
up of a northerly wind, was drifted to the fouthward, and forcing the 
boats from the northern fhore, obliged them to take fhelter round the 
north-eaft point of the above ifland. This made Mr. Whidbey apprehen- 
five, that the {till apparent connected body of ice from fide to fide, would 
at length oblige him to abandon his refearches by this route, unlefs he 
fhould find it poffible to force a paflage through this formidable ob- 
ftruction. 

In attempting this, the party fucceeded far beyond their expeétations, 
for they gained an open navigation, and by four in the afternoon arrived 
at a low and nearly round ifland about 2 Icagues in circuit, lying from 
the former ifland nN. 83 £., diftant 3 leagues. This ifland is moderately 
elevated, its fhores pleafant and eafy of accefs, and well ftocked with 
timber, moftly of the pine tribe. It prefented a much more inviting 
appearance than they had been accuftomed to behold, and the wind and 
weather being more favorable than for fome time paft, they continued 
along the continental fhore, pafling within fome iflets that lie about a 
league to the eaftward of the round ifland, until nine in the evening, when 
it became calm, and the party refted for the night at the entrance of a 
brook, in a bay on tl:e northern or continental fhore, which from the 
round ifland lies s. 82 £., diftant ten miles. Here in the morning of the 
13th they were vifited by fifteen Indians, men, women, and children, 
who conduéted themfelves in the moft civil and affable rnanner, and 
took much pains to explain, that they had recently been engaged in a 
war with the inhabitants of the fouthern fide of the branch, in which 
they had been beaten, and pointed to a deferted village, where thofe of 
their comrades who had fallen had been buried. Thefe people appeared 
to be a part of a very poor tribe, and had {carcely any thing to difpofe of; 
for which reafon Mr. Whidbey made them prefents of fome few trivial 
articles, which were very thankfully received, and then he refumed his 
examination, and found the continent from the laft mentioned open bay 
compact, and taking a courfe fomewhat irregularly s. 50 £. 7 leagues, 
to a point, which I called after the feat of my anceftors, Pornr Cou- 

VERDEN, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


VERDEN, where the obferved latitude was 58° 12’, longitude 225° 7’, 
At the diftance of 2 miles to the north-weft of this point, the party 
paffed a {mall cove with an ifland lying before it, and half a league fouth 
of the point, a high barren rocky iflet. 

The branch that had been thus navigated, was here about five or fix 
miles wide, and at this ftation was united with a very extenfive arm, 
taking a s.s.£. and n.n.w. direétion. The latter becoming the firft ob- 
je&t of attention, the boats proceeded to the northward, along the wef- 
tern or continental fhore, which in this neighbourhood conftituted a 
narrow border of low land, well wooded with ftately trees, moftly of 
the pine tribe, behind which ftill extended a continuation of the lofty 
{nowy mountains. About two miles to the north of point Couverden 
were paffed one fmall ifland and three rocky iflets; one of which lies 
nearly in mid-channel, and having advanced about 4 or 5 leagues up this 
arm, the oppofite fhore that had appeared to be compact now feemed 
to be broken. The progrefs of the party in this purfuit was greatly re- 
tarded by a frefh northerly wind, and a conftant ftream fetting againft 
them, fo that it was noon on the 14th before they reached a point lying 
N.10 Ww. from point Couverden; where Mr. Whidbey obferved the lati- 
tude to be 58°35’. From this point the eaftern fhore of the arm ftill 
prefented the fame broken appearance, but that along which they had 
paffed was firm and compact, indented with a few coves, and fome iflets 
and rocks lying near it. Both fides of this arm were bounded by lofty 
{tupendous mountains, covered with perpetual ice and fnow, whilft the 
fhores in this neighbourhood appeared to be compofed of cliffs of very 
fine flate, interfperfed with beaches of excellent paving ftone. This 
point forms a projecting promontory, about a league long, ina norther- 
ly dire€tion, from which the continental fhore ftill continued in the above 
line about nine miles, where, near a {mall brook, the party refted for 
the night. Moft of the preceding day had been foggy and rainy, the 
latter increafed greatly during the night, and detained them until nine in 
the forenoon of the 15th; when, having a gentle breeze in their favor, 
they proceeded along a ftraight and compatt fhore, and by noon reach- 
ed a {mall iflet, where the obferved latitude was 58°54’, longitude 224° 


47’. 


Pe Ea ek Ge a 


= «> sem 45 = 4A ft oe ee 


wk 
party 
fouth 


or fix 
arm, 
ft ob- 
> wel- 
ted a 
ly of 
lofty 
erden 
h lies 
p this 
>emed 
tly re- 
gaintt 
_ lying 
e lati- 
m ftill 
y had 
P iflets 
lofty 
{t the 
very 
This 
rther- 
above 
pd for 
7, the 
ine in 
favor, 
reach- 
224° 
47’ 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


47’. This iflet is about two miles from the weftern fhore of the main 
channel, which ftill continues to be five miles wide. Another iflet lies 
to the north, between it, and the fouth point of an ifland about five 
miles long and a mile broad, lying along the weftern fhore, and forming 
a channel that is about a mile wide, having at its fouthern entrance 
fhoals that extend nearly from fide to fide. Up this channel the boats 
paffed, and found the continental fhore now take a direction N.22 w., 
nine miles from the above iflet, to a point where the arm narrowed to 
two miles acrofs ; from whence it extended ten miles further in a direétion 
N. 30 W., where its navigable extent terminated in latitude 59°12’, lon- 
gitude 224° 33’. This ftation was reached in the morning of the 16th, 
after paffing fome iflets and fome rocks, nearly in mid-channel. Above 
the northernmoft of thefe (which lies four miles below the fhoal, that 
extends acrofs the upper part of the arm, there about a mile in width,) 
the water was found to be perfeétly frefh. Along the edge of this fhoal 
the boats paffed from fide to fide in fix feet water, and beyond it, the 
head of the arm extended about half a league, where a {mall opening 
in the land was feen, about the fourth of a mile wide, leading to the 
north-weftward, from whence a rapid ftream of frefh water rufhed over 
the fhoal; but this, to all appearance, was bounded at no great diftance 
by a continuation of the fame lofty ridge of fnowy mountains fo re- 
peatedly mentioned, as ftretching eaftwardly from mount Fairweather, 
and which, in every point of view they had hitherto been feen, ap- 
peared to be a firm and clofe-conneéted range of {tupendous mountains, 
for ever doomed to fupport a burthen of undiffolving ice and fnow. It 
was here remarked, that notwithftanding the quantity of frefh water 
which flowed into this arm from the brook juft mentioned, the fhores 
were perfeétly free from fnow or ice, although they were three fourths of 
a degree to the north of thofe parts that had undergone the examina- 
tion of the party in the early part of their prefent expedition, where 
they had been much annoyed by ice, and it became another inftance of 
the local exiftence of thefe fubftances. 

It may reafonably be prefumed that this ftream is alone indebted for its 
exiftence to the diffolution of the fnow and ice in its vicinity at this fea- 


Tepe | 


247 


1794. 
July. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fon of the year; as it feemed to be too inconfiderable, and the adjacent 
mountains appeared to be too compaét, to admit of its deriving its fource 
from any other caule. 

Up this brook, the Indian party, which had now accumulated to upwards 
of an hundred, gave our gentlemen to underftand, tliat eight chiefs of 
great confequence refided, and they folicited the party, with much earneft- 
nefs, that they would remain in that neighbourhood fome days, to give 
the chiefs an opportunity of paying them a vifit. Inquiries were made 
for the chief of the tribe then prefent, but no one of the Indians affumed 
that character. Their behaviour was peaceable, civil, and friendly ; but 
our party having a more important objeét to purfue than that of recei- 
ving new vifitors, declined the propofed civility, and returned down the 
arm, along the eaftern fhore, which was low, indented into fmall bays 
and coves, and appeared to be a border that extended from the bafe of 
the mountains that lie behind it, and which took a direétion s. 40 £., 44 
leagues to a point that obtained the name of Poinr SepucrTion, in 
confequence of the artful character of the Indians who are faid to refide 
in its neighbourhood. 

From this point lies a range of {mall iflands about four miles ina fouth 
direction. The fouthernmoft is a flat barren rock, but on the others, 
trees were produced. From hence the oppofite fhore forming the eaft- 
ern fide of the arm was about two miles diftant, and at this point a 
branch of it extended n. 18 w., about eleven miles; and fhewed that 
what had been taken for a low border uniting with the mountains, was a 
narrow ftrip of land from one to two miles acrofs. This branch after 
winding in a wefterly direétion about 3 miles further, terminated this 
extenfive arm in its north-wefterly direétion, by low land formed imme- 
diately at the foot of high ftupendous mountains, broken into deep gul- 
lies, and loaded with perpetual ice and fnow. 

Through the low land uniting with the narrow ftrip, flows another 
brook, much f{maller than the former, but originating apparently from 
a fimilar caufe, the diffolving ice and fnow. On this low fpit, as alfo 
on the border, feveral very large pine trees were feen, with fome birch 
and {mall alder trees. The examination to this extent occupied the party 


until 


cent 
urce 


vards 
fs of 
nef{t- 
give 
made 
umed 
: but 
recel- 
yn the 
_ bays 
afe of 
Ee 43 
YN, In 


refide 


fouth 
pthers, 
e eaft- 
joint a 
d that 
was a 

after 
rd this 


imme- 


p gul- 


other 
’ from 
NS alfo 
+ birch 
party 
until 


of his fincerity. 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


until the afternoon of the 16th; when they returned along the eaftern = 1794 
fhore, which, as they advanced to the fouth, became high, fteep, and Comey 
craggy. 

On this occafion it may not be improper to remark, that the upper 
part of this arm, which after the place of my nativity, the town of Lynn in 
Norfolk, obtained the name of LyNN CaNnAt, approaches nearer to thofe sata it 
interior waters of the continent, which are {aid to be known to the traders 
and travellers from the oppofite fide of America, than we had found the 
waters of the north pacific penetrate in any former inftance. ‘This ap- 
proximation is towards the fouth-welt fide of the Arathapelcow lake, as 
laid down in Captain Cook’s chart, from which its diftance is about it. 
three hundred and twenty geographical miles; but from the clofe con- Tats 
neétion and continuation of the lofty {nowy barrier, fo frequently before 
adverted to, trending fouth-eaftward, and nearly parallel to the direc- 
tion of the continental fhore, little probability can remain of there being 
any navigable communication, even for canoes between fuch waters and “tie 
the north pacific ocean, without the interruption of falls, cataraéts, and Oh Rae 
various other impediments. Opell 

The boats were fhortly joined in their way down the canal by a large 
canoe, in which there were about twenty Indians, with a chief who af- 
umed the charaéter of king or principal chief over all the people refiding 
up the brook. He introduced himfelf ina friendly and courteous manner, 
made Mr. Whidbey a prefent of a fea otter fkin, and cheerfully received ‘ie 
a fuitable return; but like the Indians who had vifited the veffels, he did lps 
not care to venture himfelf in the power of our party, and nothing could 
induce him to get into the yawl, but Mr. Whidbey himfelf going as a 
hoftage into his canoe, and there remaining fo long as he might think 
proper to ftay in the boat. With this requeft Mr. Whidbey did not 


think proper to comply, yet they accompanied our party down the canal, els 
who in the evening refted for the night on the eaflern fhore, about five 4 
miles to the fouthward of point Seduétion; on their landing, the chief Saat 
fhewed much civil attention, and as he had before done on all occafions. sey 


ufed his utmoft endeavours to mprefs our gentlemen with a good opinion 


Vou. IIL. Kk 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVE§¥ 


This chief Mr. Whidbey reprefented ds a tall thin elderly man. He 
was dreffed in a much more fuperb ftyle than any chief we had hitherto 
feen on this coalt, and he fupported a degree of ftate confequence, and 
perfonal dignity, unufual to be found amongft the chicis of North-Weft 
America. His external robe was a very fine large garment, that reach. 
ed from his neck down to his heels, made of wool from the mountain 
fheep, neatly variegated with feveral colours, and edged, and otherwife 
decorated with little tufis, or frogs of woollen yarn, dyed of various co- 
lours. His head-drefs was made of wood, much refembling in its fhape, 
a crown, adorned with bright copper and brafs plates, from whence 
hung a number of tails or ftreamers, compofed of wool and fur wrought 
together, died of various colours, and each terminating by a whole er- 
mine fkin. The whole exhibited a magnificent appearance, and indica- 
ted a tafle for drefs and ornament, that we had not fuppofed the natives 
of thefe regions to poffefs. 

The very cordial behaviour of thefe new acquaintances did not, how- 
ever, prevent Mr. Whidbey from being on his guard, and knowing that 
there were many others in the neighbourhood, he caufed every one of 
his party to fleep in the boats at their grapnels, a little diftance from the 
fhore, and gave particular dire€tions that the watch fhould be vigilantly 
attentive, as he had reafon to expeét more of the natives would arrive in 
the courfe of the night. In this conjeéture he was not miftaken, for at 
the next dawn of day it was difcovered, that another large canoe, with 
three {maller ones, had found their way into the cove unperceived by 
thofe who were on watch, and at the fame time two other large canoes, 
attended by feveral fmaller ones, all full of Indians, were advancing at 
no great diftance, and thofe already in the cove, were in motion towards 
the boats. On this fufpicious appearance, for they were all armed, and 
prepared for hoftilities, Mr. Whidbey took fuch inftant precautions as 
were moft likely to repel any attempt that might be in contemplation ; 
and by the time our party had increafed their diftance a little from the 
fhore, and were prepared to aét on the defenfive; the chief, who had 
fhewn fuch marks of friendly attention during the preceding day and 
evening, was, with his followers, alongfide of the yawl, purfuing a mode 


of 


He 
herto 
, and 
-Welt 
‘each. 
Intain 
erwile 
us CO- 
fhape, 
hence 
‘ought 
ole er- 
indica- 
latives 


, how- 
1g that 
one of 
om the 
ilantly 
rive in 
for at 
bp, with 
ved by 
anoes, 
ing at 
owards 
td, and 
ions as 
lation ; 
bm the 
ho had 
ay and 
h mode 


of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


of behaviour very different to that which he had before obferved. He 
now waited for no invitation, but on his coming alongfide, with an empty 
box in his hand, he jumped into the yawl, feemingly with no other in- 
tent than that of plundering the boat: fortunately, however, the awning 
being {pread much impeded his progrefs, and prevented the reft of his 
companions from following his example, before he was obliged to retire, 
and put off with his canoe. By this time the other canoes had divided 
their forces, and had gone again{t the other two boats, where they ex- 
perienced a fimilar repulfe. Notwithftanding that their numbers had 
now increafed to at leaft two hundred; yet {eeing our boats were fo 
well prepared, and ready to aét on their defence, they declined making 
any further attempt, and feemed to content themfelves with vaunting 
only. One chief in particular became very valiant, he was of the laft 
party that had arrived, and was in a large canoe full of Indians, who 
were well provided not only with fpears, but with feven mufkets, and 
fome brafs blunderbuffes, all in moft excellent order. He advanced, and 
hailed the yawl with a {peaking trumpet, which he held in one hand, 
and had a fpying glafs in the other; a powder horn was flung acrofs his 
fhoulders, and a clean bright brafs blunderbuts was lying near him, which 
he frequently took up and pointed at Mr.Whidbey, in fuch a manner as 
evidently fhewed he was no ftranger to the ufe and management of fuch 
weapons; and by his adroitnefs in the ufe of the trumpet and telefcope, 


it would feem that he had not been unfuccefsful in copying this part of 


maritime education. Little doubt remained with our party as to the hoftile 
intentions of thefe people, and it was probably a very happy circum- 
{tance that they had not been more aétive in carrying their defigns into 
effet ; for, befide the arms already mentioned, each man was provided 
with a fhort handy dagger, very conveniently tied round his wrilt. Had 
they with thefe weapons affailed our boats, and got pofleffion of them in 
the night by furprize, which was evidently what had been meditated, 
their proje€t might poffibly have been attended with ferious confequences, 
if they had poffeffed fufficient courage to have maintained a conteft; this, 
however, fecemed to be very doubtful, as our boats remained for a fhort 

Kk 2 time 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


time nearly ftationary, waiting their affault, but this they all thought 
proper to decline. 

Some chafiifement for fo unprovoked and treacherous breach of hof- 
pitaiiy and good faith, might probably have been attended with the 
defirable ef cct of preventing fimilar aggreflions in future; but as our 
party had received no injury from their evil intentions, Mr. Whidbey 
very humanely defifted from taking any revenge ;_ and notwithftanding he 
had them much in his power, and could not have fired upon them with- 
out making great flaughter, he nevertheleis did not avail himfelf of his 
fituation, but left it at their option to retire, or to become more active 
agereflors. By his having directed his courfe toward mid-channel, the 
canoes were drawn from the fhore into the middle of the canal, where 
they were lels liable to be troublefome, as it had appeared that on all 
fuch occafions they were defirous of fecuring a retreat, by being near 
to the rocks or woods. The whole Indian party followed the boats for 
about three miles, when they gave up their purfuit, and retired, making 
a great noife, and holding up fea otter fkins, which they feemed to 
pollefs in great abundance. 

With this party three chiefs only had appeared, although, according 
to their own account, the tribe refiding up the brook had belonging to 
it, eight chiefs. The whole of this party, w!ach had been colleéted ata 
very fhort notice, feemed to be fighting men, or perfons of that defcrip- 
tion, there being neither f{lriplings nor women amongft them, excepting 
five principal ladies, each of whom, agreeably to the fafhion of the na- 
tions of this part of America, fteered and conducted one of the five large 
canoes, the flation allotted to them in all warlike enterprizes, as has been 
defcribed on a former occafion. By this ftrength it will appear, that 
if, as it is prefumed, thefe were three only, of the eight chiefs of the 
brook, and that the other five were equally powerful, this muft be 
amongft the moft numerous tribes we had yet become acquainted with, 
on the coaft of North Welt America. 

The party being at length relieved from thefe very troublefome vifi- 
tors, with the pleafing reflection of not having been driven to the ne- 
ceflity of depriving any one of life, purfued their route quietly along the 

eaftern 


i 


ith- 
his 
Hive 
the 
1ere 
all 
lear 
for 
cing 
1 to 


ling 
r to 
ata 
rip- 
ting 

na- 
arge 
peen 
that 

the 


be 


ith, 


vifi- 
ne- 
the 
tern 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


eaftern fhore. The weather was dark and gloomy, and as the day ad- 
vanced the wind blew ftrong from the fouthward, attended with much 
rain. At breakfaft time a point, called by me Point Sr. Mary’s, was 
reached in latitude 58° 434, longitude 225° 2’, forming the north point of 
a bay, which I named Berners Bay, about 4 miles acrofs, in a direétion 
s,20E., about 5 miles decpto the N.N.E. From the fouth point of this 
bay, which I called Point BripGet, the continental fhore took a direc- 
tion s. 26 ©., and having advanced about 10 miles pafling a fmall ifland, 
with fome rocks and iflets about it, the feverity of the weather obliged them 
to take fhelter amongft a group of fmall iflets, where, during the night, 
they experienced a hard gaie from the fouthward, attended with a heavy 
rain, which detained them until eight in the forenoon of the 18th, when the 
party refumed their examination in a channel difficult to navigate, even 
for boats: it being much incommoded with numberlefs rocks between this 
eroup of iflets and the continent, which ftill continued in the direétion 
before mentioned. Beyond thefe iflets to the weftward, lies a larger 
ifland, and from the fhore of the main land, a fhallow bank extends nearly 
half'a league, commencing about a league from the place at which the 
party had flept the night preceding. In paffing through this intricate 
navigation, fmokes were feen in various directions, and many Indians were 
obferved about the fhores, along which the party having now advanced 
about five miles, they came to the north point of a fmall bay where the 
fhoal bank terminated. Here they {topped to dine in exceffively cold 
rainy weather, with a ftrong gale of wind from the fouthward. From 
this {tation the fouth point of the large ifland, which ina N.w. and s. rE. 
direétion is about fix miles long, and about two miles broad, lies 
N.77 W., diftant two miles and a half, and forms the north point of a 
chann«] into the mainarm, about a mile and three quarters wide; the 
fouth point of this channel being alfo the weft point of a narrow branch 
leading to the fouth-eaft. After dinner, accompanied by a canoe and 
twelve Indians, the route of the party was directed up this fouth-eaftern 
branch, but their progrefs in confequence of the very bad weather was 
rendered extremely flow, and towards the evening they had the further 
mortification of being joined by another large canoe full of Indians. 


As 


to 


1794- 
July. 


Go 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


As the day declined with every profpeét of a difmal boifterous night, 
the party anxioufly looked out for fome place of fhelter, and endea- 
voured to get rid of the Indians by firmg fome mufkets over their heads: 
but inftead of this meafure having the defired effeét, it feemed only to 
make them more daring, aad encouraged them to advance nearer to the 
boats. Thus unpleafantly circumftanced, they continued at their oars 
unul ten at night, without having gained more than 4 miles from the 
place where they had dined, and without the moft diftant probability of 
the Indians taking their leave. Although this branch had every appear- 
ance of being cloted not far a-head, yet as Mr. Whidbey wifhed to afcer- 
tain that fact pofitively, the party {teered for che fhore with an intent of 
there pafling the night; this the Indians perceived, made the beft of their 
way thither, and got poffeffion of the beach before them, where they drew 
up in battle array, with their fpears couched ready to receive our people 
on landing. There was now no alternative but either to force a landing 
by firing upon them, or to remain at their oars all night. The latter 
Mr. Whidbey confidered to be not only the moft humane, but the moft 
prudent meafure to adopt, concluding that their habitations were not 
far diftant, and believing them, from the number of finokes that had 
been feen during the day, to be a very numerous tribe. So tar as the 
branch had been difcernible before dark, which was not more than a 
mile wide, there was every reafon to think its termination had been 
feen; but fhould the party have been deceived, it was here infinitely too 
rocky and dangerous to be confidered as navigable for fhipping, and fo: 
that reafon unworthy any further examination, at the rifk of a ferious 
difpute with thefe troublefome people. ‘Thefe confiderations determined 
Mr. Whidbey to return through the channel above-mentioned into the 
main canal, where about the dawn of day on the 19th the boats arrived 
ata point which obtained the name of Point Rerrear, fituated in 
latitude 58° 24', longitude 225° 12’. Here they ftopped to take fome 
reft, and having breakfafted, Mr, Whidbey, although in fome meafure 
departing from the {crupulous exaétnels with which our furvey had been 
hitherto conduéted, became fatisfied that the branch he had thus quitted, 
was but barely navigable for boats, and therefore purfued his refearches 


about 


ight, 
lea- 
ads : 
ly to 
9 the 
oars 
n the 
ity of 
pear- 
u{cer- 
“nt of 
their 
drew 
eople 
nding 
latte) 
> moft 
e€ not 
it had 
as the 
Nan a 
been 
‘ly too 
nd for 
erious 
mined 
o the 
rrived 
ted in 
fome 
eafure 
1 been 
uitted, 
arches 


about 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


about fixteen miles, to a point called by me Potnt MarspeN, along 


July. 


the caftern fhore of the canal, concluding it to be the continent, taking ~-~—~ 


a direction s.g E.; it 1s compofed of land, very moderately elevated, 
covered with fine timber, chiefly of the pine kind, and terminating at 
the water-fide, with alternate fteep rocky cliffs and fmall fandy bays, 
with a few detached rocks and iflets lying near it. ‘The wind was ftill 
boifterous, with thick, rainy, unpleafant weather, fo that they could 
feldom fee a mile before them; they were, however, fometimes favored 
by a light northerly wind, with which, on the goth, they advanced about 
10 leagues further, ftill finding the eaftern fhore compact, and the coun- 
try of a fimilar defcription to that they had paffed the preceding day. 
Here, at a point in latitude 57° 37’, longitude 205° 29’, which I called 
Poinr Parker, the party took up their abode for the night, which 
was very rainy; but in the morning of the 21ft the weather became fair, 
and gave them a diftinét view of the furrounding region. It was feen 
that they were advancing in a very fpacious ftrait or channel, to all ap- 
pearance free from interruption ; its weftern fhore, diftant feven miles, 


appeared to confift of an extenfive traét of land, or a large group of 


iflands, that feemed to form channels, which took a wefterly direction 
towards the ocean; the latter appearing the moft probable, I have ho- 
nored this country with the name of King GrorGe Tur Turrp’s 
ARCHIPELAGO. 

The flood-tide, although of fhort ¢vrvion, not running more than two 
hours, had, fince their paffing to the fouth of the fpacious branch, com- 
municating with Crofs found, becn reguiarly obierved to come from the 
fouthward, and ftongly indicated thet tis channel hkewife communica- 
ted with the ocean in a foutherly direCuion. As the weather was now 
favorable to that purfuit they loff ao cune, but ftul kept along the eaftern 
fhore, which, from point Parker, took. a general direction s.7 ©. indent- 
ed into feveral {mali bays ; the fhores are low, and at lugh tide are much 
divided by the water. A league to the s.r. of point Parker, im one of 
thele bays, is an opening about the eighth part of a mile wide, where 
many of the natives in their canoes were aflembled, and from the treat- 
ment our party had lately received, it was neceflary that their fire-arms 


3 fhould 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fhould be in readinefs, but as fome of them had been loaded many days 
Mr. Whidbey ordered them to be difcharged into the air; this foon af- 
ter produced a return of nearly an equal number from the Indians on 
fhore ; but as the boats approached the opening, the canoes were all 
haftily paddled off by the natives, and foon difappearcd. 

In the entrance 5 fathoms water was found, and after advancing about 
half'a mile it proved to be only a fhallow rocky place, having a fmall 
part of its fouthern fide an ifland at high water. On each fide of the 
entrance fome new habitations were conftruéting, and for the firft time 
during our intercourfe with the North Weft American Indians in the vi- 
cinity of thefe habitations, were found fome fquare patches of ground in 
a ftate of cultivation, producing a plant that appeared to be a f{pecies of 
tobacco; and which, we underftood, is by no means uncommon amongfl 
the inhabitants of Queen Charlotte’s iflands, who cultivate much of this 


plant. On the return of the boats the Indians again made their ap- 


pearance ina large body, headed by a chief who manifefled a friendly 
difpofition, by frequently taking up and laying down his mufket, and 
making figns that thofe in the boats fhould do the fame. On this being 
complied with, he fent a young man dreffcd in a fearlet coat and blue 
trowlers to mvite our party on fhore; but Mr.Whidbey thought proper 
to decline the intended civility, but gave the meflenger to underftand he 
wanted fome fifh; on which the young man, though not without fome 
hefitation, got into the yawl, and difpatched his canoe for the purpofe of 
obtaining a fupply. It was not long before the canoe returned with 
fome {mall herrings, for which they were well rewarded: and no fooner 
was this intelligence known on fhore, than the whole tribe were in motion, 
and in the courfe of a few minutes the boats were furrounded by upwards 
of five hundred Indians of all! ages and both fexes, feemingly with no other 
intent than that of carrying on a fair and brifk trafic. This crowd 
however became very unpleafant, and on Mr. Whidbey pointing out to 
the chief that the throng was inconvenient to our party, he made a fhort 
haranguc to the furrounding multitude, and they all returned to the fhore; 
the chief followed his people, and fent an abundant fupply of filh to the 
boat 


days 
1 af- 
5 on 
e all 


oUt 
mall 
the 
time 
e Vi- 
d in 
es of 
nef 
this 
ap- 
ndly 
and 
eine 
blue 
oper 
dhe 


ome 


fe of 


with 
oner 
ion, 
ards 
bther 
owd 
it to 
hort 
ore; 
b the 


dat 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


boats, for which kindnefs a handfome reward was fent back, and Mr. 
Whidbey purfued his refearches. 

About ten miles from point Parker, a projecting point was pafled, 
which Icalled Pornry Samuet, this forms the north point of Hood’s bay, 
which is about a league and a half acrofs, having fome iflands nearly in its 
center. On the fouth point of this bay the party {topped to breakfaft, and 
were vifited by fourteen canoes from the Indian tribe they had laft feen, 
in none of which were more than four perfons. Their errand feemed 
purely for the purpofe of trading, in which they conducted themfelves 
with the greateft good humour, and the ilri¢teft honefly ; and {eemed to 
be infinitely more inclined to difpofe of their fea otter fkins, than of their 
fifh. Of the former they had great abundance, and many were thrown into 
the boats, for which they thankfully received any trifling article of wear- 
ing apparel in return. Mr. Whidbey defcribed their canoes as not mate- 
rially differing from the general fafhion of thofe of Nootka, and the parts 
to the north-weft of that place, although they were better contrived, far 
more ferviceable, and infinitely neater than any of that fort which he 
had feen on this coaft. From thefe people he underftood, that the weft- 
ern coaft was compofled of feveral iflands which they had lately pafled 
through, and had traded with veffels in fome port on the exterior coaft, 
from whence they procured moft of the European commodities they had 
about them, confifting chiefly of wearing apparel ; of which, coats and 
cloth trowfers feemed by them to be preferred to every other article, 
excepting arms and ammunition: copper and iron being reduced to 
very inferior value. 

Ouitting this {lation Mr. Whidbey continued his furvey along the call. 
cru fhore, {till in the direétion of s. 7 .; two {maller bays were now paffed, 
and off the points of each of them, iflets and rocks were feen lying at a 
little diftance. In the evening a point was reached in latitude 57° 1: 
near which the party refted for the night ima finall cove. Soon after 


) 
)° 


dark they were vilited by fome Indians, who on being given to under- 
liand that their company was not defired, quietly departed. Here they 
evidently experienced the oceanic {well rolling from the fouthward: and 
ter proceeding the next morning 13 miles, s.108., they arrived at a 


Vou. IT, 1 pont. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


1794 point, from whence a clear and diftin& view of the fea was gained, be- 
—.—! tween the high land of cape Decifion, lying s.g £., and the fouth ex- 
tremity of the land, forming the weftern fide of thefe fraits lying fouth. 
Here Mr. Whidbey obferved the latitude to be 57° 1’, longitude 225° 
39. ‘The fhores of the eaftern fide, along which they had paffed fince 
the morning of the 1gth, were confidered in general to be not more 
than moderately high, and terminating uniformly in a bold fhore, free ( 
from fhoals or other interruptions to navigation; excepting, that the 
flood tide is of fhort duration, the ftream having been generally found 
to fet downwards. The furface of the country is compofed of rygged 
rocks, but in their chafins was a tolerably good foil, which produced an 
abundance of very fine timber of the pine tribe im greai variety, fome of 
which trees meafured twenty-three feet in girt; but the oppofite fhore 
feemed to be compofed of rugged mountains lefs fertile, and rifing by a 
more fteep afcent from the water fide. From this point, which obtained 
the name of Point Garpner, in a direétion s. 23 £., lie fome rocks 
and a {mall ifland, the former at the diftance of three quarters of a mile, = ] 


and the latter at that of three miles. It forms alfo the fouth-weft point t 
of entrance into another very fpacious arm of the fea, that takes a di- ' 
rection toward the N.r., where, after continuing their examination for : 
about 10 miles along its larboard or north-weftern fhore, off which lie : 
many detached rocks; the party refted for the night near a point which : 
Icalled Point TowNSHEND. 

In the morning of the 23d the weather was again dark and gloomy; it F 
however permitted them to fee, that the furrounding regions were too t 
much divided by water, to admit of the moft diftant probability of their u 
being alle to complete their f{urvey up to cape Decifion, during this expe- I 
dition; the party having already been abfent the length of time for which if 
they had been provided, and being now diftant upwards of an hundred and \ € 
twenty miles from the veficls. Mr. Whidbey was therefore obliged to = 
decline any further profecution of his refearches, and to make the beft of a 
his way back to Crois found. They had now a ftrong gale from the eaft- i 
ward, which afier they had paffed point Gardner veered to the s.£., greatly " 


increafed, and was attended with heavy rain; but as it was fair, and juft 


3 permitted 


|, be- 
h ex- 
fouth. 
225° 
fince 
more 
, free 
it. the 
found 
ugged 
‘ed an 
me of 
fhore 
x bya 
tained 
rocks 
a mile, 
point 
sa di- 
el for 
ch hie 
which 


Y3 it 
re too 

their 
expe- 
which 
ed and 
red to 
eft of 
> eaft. 
rreatly 
d juft 


uitted 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


permitted the boats to carry their clofe-reefed forefails, they made great 
progreis until the yawl’s maft was carricd away, which compelled them 
to ftop in a {mall cove to repair the damage. Here they embraced an 
opportunity of taking fome refrefhment of which they flood in great 
need, as they were all extremely wet and very cold. Soon after quitting 
this place, they pafled clofe by the village of friendly Indians, but not one 
of them was feen, and it is moft probable that the badnefs of .he weather had 
confined them to their habitations. At the time of flarting from the cove, 
Mr. Whidbey had intended to avail himfelf of the favorable gale, by run- 
ning all night; but by eleven o'clock the atmofphere became fo thick, 
and the night fo dark, that’ he was obliged to abandon that delign, and 
take fhelter in a {mall cove on the eaftern fhore, 21 leagues from point 
Gardner. On the following morning the weather was calm, fair, and 
pleafant; but the preceding gale had left behind it a fhort irregular {well, 
which rendered their paflage acrofs the ftraits, fo extremely tedious and 
flow, that they did not reach the fouth-caft point of the branch leading 
into Crofs found until near noon; when from this point, which obtained 
the name of Point Aucusra, and is fituated in latitude 58° 31’, longi- 
tude 225°10', their courfe was direéted along the fouth-weft fhore; but 
the continued agitation of the water, fo obftruéted their rowing, that 
they had not advanced more than 2 leagues, before it was time to halt for 
the night. 

The weather continued to be calm and pleafant, and as they again 
proceeded on the morning of the 25th, this fide of the branch was found 
to be compofed chiefly of rocky cliffs, with iflets and detached rocks, ly- 
ing at fome diftance from the fhore, which was compact, not very high, 
but weli covered with wood, taking a direction \. 60 w., 17 miles, to a 
point which I called Point Sopura; forming the north-eaft point of 
entrance into a deep found, which I named Port FREDERICK, about 
a league wide, in an eaft and welt direétion, winding to the fouthward, 
and apparenily much divided by water. From the weil fide of this 
found the fhore took a more northerly direétion, with fome iflets lying 
near it, to a pert, which is the northern extremity of this fuppofed ar- 
chipelago, and which obtained the name of Poin r Apotpuvs, fituated 

Lle in 


259 + 4 
re 
; jy a | 
794+ 
July. : 4 
ean gummed bisk hl 
hit tt 
‘ | 
; | 
if 
aah | 
gel 4 
if 


ml 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


in latitude 58° 18’, longitude 22 4° 282’. This point the party reached 
in the evening, and about a league to the fouth-welt of it they refted for 
the night in a finall cove under a high hill, where a box was found about 
four feet fquare, placed upon wooden pillars about fix feet from the 
ground, ‘his box contained the remains of a human body very care- 
fully wrapped up, and by its fide was erected a pole about twenty feet 
high, painted in horizontal ftreaks red and white; the colours were frefh 
and lively, and from the general neatnefs of the whole, 1t was fuppofed 
to be the fepulchre of fome chief. The next morning in making the beft 
of their way towards the veflels, the fouthern fhore was found from point 
Adolphus, to contain many open bays, and to take an irregular courfe 
about s.77W., feventeen miles and a half to point Lavinia. In this 
route they pafled to the fouth of the group of rocky iflands, noticed on 
the 11th at point Wimbledon. Thefe iflands form a kind of termination 
to Crofs found, and almoft feparate it from the paflage to the ocean 
which had now been difcovered; but between thefe iflands and the fhores 
that form the northern and fouthern fides of entrance into this fpacious 
branch, there are two narrow channels; the northernmoft being the 
widefl is near a mile acrofs, the fouthernmoft is about half that width, 
both of which are free from rocks, {hoals, or any other impediments, 
excepting the large mafles of floating ice, which at that time rendered 
each of thefe channels very dangerous to navigate, although in the fum- 
mer feafon; and in the winter, they arc moft probably intirely clofed, or 
impaflable. ‘The fhores of that branch had the appearance of affording 
fome good harbours, but thefe mult neceffarily be greatly inconvent- 
enced by the ice, which did not appear to Mr. Whidbey and his party, to 
have been much diminifhed in the courfe of the fortnight they had been 
abfent, although they had not experienced quite fo much difficulty in 
paffing through it on their return, as on their outfet, which was accom- 
plifhed as before ftated, having, notwithftanding the extremely fevere and 
boifterous weather that had generally prevailed, completed in about fix- 

teen days a traverfe of upwards of five hundred miles. 
Such being the refult of Mr. Whidbey’s refearches, I fhall now pro- 
ceed to notice fuch circumftances refpe¢ting the port in which the vef- 
{els 


i ———— 2 


~ 


ched 
d for 
bout 
1 the 
care- 
r feet 
frefh 
pofed 
> beft 
point 
ourle 
n this 
sd on 
ation 
ocean 
hores 
.clous 
x the 
idth, 
nents, 
dered 
fum- 
d, or 
rding 
veni- 
ty, to 
been 
ty in 
com- 
e and 
t fix. 


pro- 
e vel- 
{els 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fels had taken their flation, and the neighbouring fhores of Crofs found, 
as fell under my obfervation. 

Although the exiftence of this fpacious arm of the ocean has been pub- 
licly denied by fome vifitors fubfequent to its original difcovery by Cap- 
tain Cook, yet in common juftice to the abilities of that able navigator, 
it muft be obferved that he has given a much more accurate defeription 
of it, than from the tranfitory diftant view he had of it, might have been 
reafonably expeéted. The recent examination it has now undergone 
has however fhewn, that cape Crofs is not precifely its fouth-eaftern 
point of entrance, as from that cape a traét of low rocky land extends 
in a north direction about feven miles to a point, from whence the fouth- 
ern fhore of the found takes a fharp turn about N. 40 £., and conftitutes 
that as the fouth-eaft point of entrance, to which I have given the name 
of Point BINGHAM; it les from cape Spencer s.17 £., diftant ten 
miles, and affords a bold entrance into the found, without rock, fhoal, 
or any permanent obftacle. This appears to be the cafe alfo in every 
other part of the found, and if it do poflefs any navigable objection, it is 
the unfathomable depth of it, which every where exilts, excepting very near 
the fhores, along which, in many places are detached rocks; thefe how- 
ever lie out of the way of its navigation, and are fufficiently confpicuous 
io be avoided. 

The northern fhores of this found from cape Spencer to point Win- 
bledon, which I confider as its boundary in that quarter, have been al- 
ready noticed in the account of Mr, Whidbey’s excurfion ; and as I con- 
iider point Lavinia to be its eaftern boundary, there yet remains to ftate 
of what its fouth-eaftern part is compoled. 

Between the above-mentioned eaftern boundary and point Bingham, 
on that fide, there are two openings ; the firft lying from point Bingham 
y.60 £., diftant four miles, appeared to be about a mile and a quarter 
wide, and to take a direétion s. 30 8. for fome diftance. This was not 
examined by us, but will moft likely be found to afford anchorage and 
fecure fhelter; the other is the port Althorp which we had laft quitted. 
This has its fouth point of entrance, which has obtained the name of 
Potn't Lucan, fituated in the fame line of direétion, ten miles from 


point 


°61 


1794+ 
July. 
nn pene 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


point Bingham. From point Lucan, in a direétion about N.w., lies a 
narrow high ifland, about two miles and a quarter in length; and between 
its fouth-caft point and point Lucan there are two {mall iflets, which ren- 
der that paffage not fo commodious for failing in and out of the port, as 
that by which we had entered, being to the north of that ifland, between 
it, and the weltern part of aclufter of three {mall iflands, which extend 
about two miles from the caftern fide of the port. This channel is 
clear, free from danger, and is about a mile and a quarter in width, with 
a tolerably fnug cove, juft within its north-weft point of entrance, where 
we anchored, and remained during our ftay. The high narrow ifland 
affords great protection to the northern part of this port, which, oppo- 
fite to that ifland, is about two miles and an half wide; but nearly in the 
middle of the harbour, and oppofite the fouth point of the ifland are 
fome detached rocks; and at point Lucan, which is fituated from the 
fhip’s cove s. 23 £., four miles and an half diftant, the width of the har- 
bour is two miles, from whence it extends s. 36 £., about 2 leagues, and 
terminates in a bafon, that affords good and fecure anchorage, the 
beft paflage into which is on the eaftern fhore. The cove in which the 
{hips were ftationed afforded good anchorage alfo, but it was not fo 
well fheltered as the bafon, nor was there any frefh water in it that 
could eafily be procured ; a difadvantage that can be readily done away 
by re‘orcing toa itream of excellent water clofe at hand, on the eaftern 
fhore, where our cafks were filled in the boat. The furrounding coun- 
try is chiefly compofed of a rugged rocky fubftance, covered with a foreft, 
confifting in general of pine trees ; and where the fleep acciivities do not 
forbid their growth, they were feen down to the water’s edge. 

The weather, for the moft part, during our continuance in port was 
boifterous, rainy, and unpleafant, which allowed but few opportunities 
for making aftronomical obfervations. The refults, however, of fuch as 
we were enabled to procure, are as follow: (viz.) 

On the 12th of july, in Crofs found, the chronometers fhewed the fol- 
lowing longitudes ; (viz.) Arnold’s No. 14, 223°55 ; Arnold’s No. 176, 
224° 44’; and Kendall’s, 224° 44’. The true longitude being 223° 55’; it 

appeared 


eS a 
een 
ren- 
as 
een 
tend 
el is 
with 
here 
land 
ppo- 
1 the 
| are 
the 
har- 
and 
the 
n the 
ot fo 
that 
way 
{tern 
oun- 
reft, 
D not 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


appeared that No. 14 was correét, and that No. 176 and Kendall’s were ee 
uly. 


each of them 9’ 30” to the eaftward of the true longitude. ——— 
By twenty fets of obfervations, taken between the 12th 
and 26th of july, Arnold’s No. 14 was found to be faft of 
mean time at Greenwich at noon on the 26th, 26° 9° 
And gaining, per day, at the rate of - 2s ‘ 
Arnold’s No. 176 faft of mean time, on the fame day, 9 5425 ‘ 
And gaining, per day, at the rate of - 1 
Kendall’s, faft of mean time, on ditto, - 8 58 2 
And gaining, per day, at the rate of : 25 8 
The latitude of the place of o| ition, by three meri- 
dional altitudes, P P . 58° 12" 
The mean variation, by four compafles and forty-four fets 
of obfervations, differing from 27° 32’ to 32° 42’, fhewed 
the variation tobe —- - - - 30° 
The vertical inclination of the magnetic needle. 
Marked end, North Face Eatft, - - 79° 28' 20” 
Ditto ditto Wett, - - 79 36 40 {hy 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - - IT AG 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - - 79 35 
Mean inclination of the magnetic needle, - 78 58 35 


263 


CITAPTER 


1.6 


14 


1.25 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


+ 
+ 
” 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 


e 
S 


by £6, 


(716) 872-4503 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


CH A.POPE-R: -X, 


Proceed to the fouthward along the exterior coaft of King George the Third’s 
archipelago—Arrive in port Conclufion—Tranfacitons there—Two boat 
excurfions--Complete the Jurvey of the continental fhores of North-We/i 
America—Aftronomical and nautical obfervations. 


O UR attention being now directed to the furvey of the exterior coali 
Tuctday 29, Of George the Third’s archipelago, at the dawn of day, on the goth, 
with a frefh wefterly breeze, we made fail along the fhore, to the fouth- 
ward ; cape Crofs bearing by compafs v.68 £., diftant four or five 
miles. From this cape the coatt takes a direction s. 31 £., abont 7 leagues 
to another promontory, that obtained the name of Carre Epwarp ; 
off which les a clufter of fmall iflets and rocks. The coaft between 
thefe capes is much broken, and has feveral openings in it that appear- 
ed likely to afford fhelter ; but the vaft number of rocks and {mall iflets, 
fome producing trees, and others intirely barren, that extend to the 
diflance of three or four miles from the fhore, will render the entering of 
fuch harbours unpleafant and dangerous, until a more competent know- 
ledge of their feveral fituations may hereafter be acquired: that which 
appeared to be the eafieft of accefs, lies about two leagues to the north- 
ward of cape Edward, and as it is in latitude 57°44’, I was led to con- 
fider this opening as Portlock’s harbour. We did not reach cape Ed- 
ward until the afternoon, as the wefterly breeze was foon fuccceded by 
faint variable airs, that blew direétly towards the fhore, which was vi- 
fible only at intervals, owing to the thick foggy and rainy weather, and 
which rendered the view we had obtained of this part of the coaft, by 


no 


hird's 
boal 
-Wefi 


-coalt 
2gth, 
fouth- 
r five 
AgUCS 
ARD ; 
tween 
ppear- 
ilets, 
to the 
ing of 
snow- 

hich 
10rth- 
> con- 
e Ed- 
ed by 
as Vi- 
r, and 
ft, by 


ho 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


no means fatisfa€tory. During the night the wind fettled in the weftern 
quarter, notwithftanding which, by its blowing gently, our diftance from 
the fhore was increafed to about g leagues, and at day-light the next morn- 
ing, cape Edward bore by compafs nN. 27 w., diftant twelve miles; from 
whence the coaft bends more to the eaflward, and takes a dire€tion about 
S.30E., toavery confpicuous opening, which I fuppofed to be that repre- 
fented in fome late publications, as feparating the land on which mount 
Edgcumbe is fituated from the adjacent fhores, and named the Bay of Iflands 
by Captain Cook, who imagined at the time he paffed it, that fuch a fepa- 
ration did exift. We were oppofite to this bay about eight in the morning, 
but the intermediate fpace between the bay of Iflands and cape F.dward 
was paffed in very thick foggy weather 5 this difadvantage, in addition to 
the diftance we had been from the land, may fubjeét the delineation of that 
fhore to fome error. Near the land forming the fouthern fide of the bay 
of Iflands are feveral {mall iflets, and from the fouth point of the bay, which 
I called Potnt Amrita, the coaft extends 8.5. fixteen miles, to 
cape Edgcumbe, having nearly in the middle of that {pace an opening, 
with two {mall iflets lying before it, and prefenting an appearance of a 
good harbour, which I called Port Mary; the other parts of the 
coaft that were paffed at the diftance of about a league, are indented 
with {mall open bays. 

As the day advanced a brifk gale from the n.w. attended us, with 
fair and pleafant weather, which enabled us to afcertain the fhip’s fitua- 
tion, At noon the latitude was found to be 57° 41’, longitude 224° 19’. 
The moft northern part of the coaft at this time in fight bore by com- 
pafs N.N.w.; port Mary Nn. 22 £., eight miles diftant; and cape Edg- 
cumbe s. 80 :, four or five miles diftant. This cape, by the fame ob- 
lervations was found to be in latitude 57° 2’, longitude 224° 254’, which 
is one mile to the fouth and eighteen miles and an half to the eaft- 
ward of its fituation, as flated by Captain Cook. We had now alfo a 
very good view of mount Edgcumbe, and notwithftanding that it muft 
be confidered as high land, yet it was intirely free from fnow, and 
feemed to us but an inconfiderable hill, when compared with the 
mountains we had generally feen, extending along the fhores of this 


Vor. HE Mm 


continent. 


Wednet. 30. 


266 


1794. 
July. 


Tem’ amend 


Thurldas 3. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


continent. Cape Edgcumbe forms the north-weft point of a fpacious 
opening, that branches into feveral arms, and is called by Mr. Dixon 
Norfolk Sound; its oppofite or fouth-eaft point, which I have dif- 
tinguifhed by the name of Point Woopuouse, lies from the cape 
s. 50 §., at the diftance of feventeen miles. One of the northern 
branches of the found, by its communication with the bay of Iflands 
makes, it feems, the intermediate part of the fea-coaft an ifland. On 
the northern fide of the found, two leagues within cape Edgcumbe, 
are, what appeared to us, two iflands, and N.N.w. from point Wood- 
houle, lies an extenfive group of iflets and rocks that extend three or 
four miles from the fhore, which, from that point, with little variation, 
takes a courfe s.36r. ‘This part of the coaft is much broken into 
{mall openings, with iflets and detached rocks lying off it. We had ad- 
vanced about fixteen miles only from point Woodhoufe at eight in the 
evening, after which, the night was paffed in ufing our endeavours to 
retain our {tation near this part of the coaft; but we found ourfelves on 
thurfday morning, much further from the land than we had expected ; we 
had, however, a favorable breeze from the weflward, with which we 
flood towards the fhore, but the weather becoming thick and foggy, we 
were under the neceffity to haul off the coaft until ten in the forenoon, 
when the land being again vifible, about four miles from us, we refumed 
our examination, palling fome {mall openings, with feveral iflets and de- 
tached rocks lying near to them; but of which we were precluded any 
diftinét view by the hazinels of the weather. 

This difadvantage had attended us almoft generally fince our depar- 
ture from Crofs found, and although I have reafon to believe that we 
had nearly afcertained the general line of the coaft, yet it is poffible 
that there may be openings or harbours that we were unable to notice, 
as circumftances would not admit of our devoting fufhicient time to a 
more minute examination. 

By noon we had paffed the fouth extremity of this archipelago, which 
was now found to ftretch a few miles further fouth than Mr.Whidbey 
had eftimated; our obfervations placed it in latitude 56° 10’, longitude 
225°372', It conftitutes a very remarkable promontory, that terminates 

in 


acious 
Dixon 
e dif. 
2 cape 
rthern 
Iflands 
|. On 
‘umbe, 
W ood- 
ree or 
riation, 
‘nn into 
iad ad- 
in the 
urs to 
ives on 
d; we 
ich we 
sy» we 
renoon, 
‘fumed 
and de- 
ed any 


depar- 
hat we 
y0ffible 
notice, 
ec to a 


which 
hidbey 
igitude 
linates 
in 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ina high bluff rocky cliff, with a round, high, rocky iflet lymg clofe to 


it becomes a very narrow point of land, which having been feen by 
Captain Colnett in his mercantile expedition to this coaft, was by him 
named Cape Ommancy, and the opening between it and cape Decifion, 
Chriftian Sound. 

Our conjectures of foon finding a port in this neighbourhood, did not 
long remain unconfirmed, for after advancing 7 or 8 miles from cape 
Ommaney, we difcovered on the eaflern fhore of the archipelago an 
opening that took a fouth-weft direction; and as it appeared likely to 
anfwer all our purpofes we worked into it, with a frefh breeze directly 
again{t us until {even in the evening; when we anchored off a cove about 


207 


1994. 
; ; : ‘ July. 
it, and by its fhores on its caflern fide taking a fharp northerly direction, aya 


4 t 
fdtra te 


7 


half a league within the entrance of the harbour, On friday morning the Fut 1. 


ft of auguft the veflels were moored head and ftern in this cove, there 
not being fuflicient room for them to fwing; and whillt thofe on board 
were fo employed, accompanied by Mr. Whidbey and Mr. Johnftone, 
{who were each to undertake a diltinét expedition, and by which means 
we entertained the hope of being enabled to connect the furveys of the 
prefent, with thofe of the two preceding feafons) I rowed to the entrance 
of the port, in order to be better able to arrange the mode of conduéting 
that fervice: this appeared to be no difficult tafk, as there were two 
given points before us, and both were nearly in view. The one was cape 
Decifion, where our examination of the continental fhore had finifhed 
the former feafon, and the other was point Gardner, from whence Mr. 
Whidbey had returned on his laft excurfion from Crofs found. Mr, 
Whidbey was direéted to recommence his refearches from that point, 
whilft Mr. Johnflone proceeded to cape Decifion, there to begin his ex- 
amination along the eaftern fhore of the found northward, until the two 
parties fhould meet, or be otherways informed by notes which each party 
was to leave in confpicuous places for the government of the other, 
deferibing the extent of their refpective furveys. 

The {pace now to be explored occupied about a degree of latitude, 
and although I hoped that the examination of it with tolerable weather, 
would not employ the boats more than a week; yet in order that it fhould 

M m2 not 


Saturday 2. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


not be left unaccomplifhed for want of provifions, each of the parties was 
provided for a fortnight. The Difcovery’s yawl and large cutter was 
to proceed with Mr. Whidbey and Mr. Swaine; and the Chatham's 
cutter, and the Difcovery’s fmall cutter, with Mr. Johnftone and Mr. 
Barrie; with this arrangement both parties departed early in the morning 
of the ad, in the profecution of their refpeétive purfuits. 

The ftation we had taken, though fufficiently commodious for our 
purpole, was extremely folitary; there were no inhabitants on the adja- 
cent fhores, nor was there the fmalleft appearance of any part of our 
neighbourhood being a place of their refort, fo that our time was not 
likely to be very intereftingly employed, or our attention diverted from 
fuch neceffary concerns as the ordinary fervices of the veffels now re- 
quired. hele confifted principally in repairing our fails and rigging in 
the beft manner we were able. ‘This had now become a bufinefs of con- 
{tant employment. Some of the carpenters were caulking, others cut- 
ting fuch fpars and timbers for plank as were wanted; and the brewers on 
{hore were making fpruce beer, which with a little famphire, and fome 
halibut, caught with our hooks near the entrance of the harbour, were the 
only refrefhments the place afforded. 

The five following days we had light variable winds, attended by much 
rain; but the weather being more pleafant on friday, I was employed in 
making a furvey of the harbour. Its fouthern point of entrance is fitu- 
ated N.15 £., about 2 leagues from cape Ommancy, its oppofite point 
lying N.7 w., 2 miles diftant. The depth of water in mid-channel be- 
tween thefe points is 75 fathoms, but decreafes. to 8 or 10 clofe to the 
fhores, without rocks or fands, excepting near the points, which are 
fufficiently evident to be avoided. South s.w., about half a mile from 
the north point of entrance, is a moft excellent and {nug bafon about a 
third of a mile wide, and half a mile long; but its entrance is by a very 
narrow channel half a mile ia length, in a direétion s. 70 w., with fome 
iflets and rocks lying off its fouth point; thefe are fleep nearly clofe to 
them, as are the fhores on both fides, which vary from a fixth toa twelfth 
ofa mile afunder, with a clear navigable paflage from 8 to 12 fathoms 
deep in the middle, and 5 fathoms on the fides. The foundings are to- 

lerably 


ies wag 
er was 
tham’s 


id Mr. 


orning 


or our 
e adja- 
of our 
yas not 
1 from 
OW re- 
zing In 
»f con- 
rs Cut- 
vers On: 
1 fome 
ere the 


ymuch 
byed in 
is fitu- 
> point 
nel be- 
to the 
ch are 
e from 
bout a 
a very 
h fome 
lofe to 
twelfth 
hthoms 
are to- 


lerably 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


lerably regular in the bafon, from go in the middle, to 10 fathoms 
clofe to the fhores. Immediately within its north point is a fine fandy 
beach, and an excellent run of water, as is the cafe alfo at its head, with 
a third fandy beach juft within its fouth point of entrance. In the vici- 
nity of thefe beaches, efpecially the firft and third, is a {mall extent of 
low land; bu the other parts of the fhores are compofed of f{teep rugged 
cliffs on all fides, furrounded by a thick foreft of pine trees, which grew 
with more vigour there than in the other parts of the harbour. From 
its entrance to the head, it extends about a league in a direction s. 39 w., 
free from any interruption, although it is inconvenient from its great 
depth of water. Near the fouthern fide of entrance lies a fmall iflet and 
fome rocks, but thefe are intirely out of the way of its navigation. The 
foundings cannot be confidered as very regular, yet the bottom in general 
is good; in fome places it is flony, in others fand and mud; but in the 
cove where the veflels were at anchor the bottom is rocky. The head of 
this cove approaches within the fourth of a mile of the head of another 
cove, whofe entrance on the outfide is about 2 miles to the fouth of the 
fouth point of this harbour. In the entrance of that cove the depth is 7 
fathoms, weeds were feen growing acrofs it, and to the north of it is a 
{mall iflet with fome rocks. The furrounding fhores are generally fteep 
and rocky, and were covered with wood nearly to the water’s edge, but 
on the fides of the adjacent hills were fome fpots clear of trees, and 
chiefly occupied by a damp moift moorifh foil, in which were feveral 
pools of water. The furface produced fome berry bufhes, but the fruit 
at this feafon of the year was not ripe. This little information I pro- 
cured from fome of our gentlemen, who had made fome excurfions 
about the neighbourhood. In the above cove on the weft fide were found 
a few deferted Indian habitations, which were the only ones that had 
been met with. Our not having becn vifited here by any of the natives, 
was rather a mortifying circumflance, as they generally occafioned us 
fome entertainment, and frequently added fome variety to fuch refrefh- 

ments, as by our own efforts we were enabled to procure. 
From the gth to the 13th the weather had been moftly boifterous, 
unfettled, and rainy; this kind of weather fince our arrival had pre- 
vented 


269 


17946 
Auguft. 


aed 


Wednef. 13, 


ee SS back oe eee 


ee 


\2 
ef 
et, 
pie 
My 


270 


/ 
TQ 4. 


Augall. 
ees 


Yridiv 56 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


vented our making any lunar obfervations, but had afforded me fufficient 
opportunities for alcertaining very fatisfactorily the rates of the chrono. 
meters, by fuch means as were in my power on board, not having ere¢t- 
ed the obfervatory on fhore; for as a convenient fituation could not be 
found near the f{hip, and as I was in hopes we fhould not long be de- 
tained at this flation, I was not particularly anxious to land the inflru- 
ments; and under the circumftances of the weather, I had not much to 
regret that they had remained unremoved. 

Other objects began to claim our ferious attention. The plan that I had 
adopted for drawing our laborious examination of this coaft to a conclu- 
fion, by the furveys on which the boats were now employed, I had fully 
expected would have been accomplifhed in a week or ten days at the fur- 
theft, but the whole time for which they had been provided was now ex- 
pired, and the 15th arrived without bringing any relief to our very anxious 
concern for their welfare. This unpleafant flate of fufpenfe continually 
brought to our recollection the various untoward accidents to which our 
expeditions in fuch {mall open boats had been liable; and when we ad- 
verted to the very treacherous behaviour of the Indians experienced by 
Mr. Whidbey in his late excurfion from Crofs found, and the fimilar difpo- 
fition that had been {hewn to us the preceding feafon by thofe people who 
inhabit the countries not far diftant to the fouth-eaftward, our minds were 
filled with apprehenfion, and every hour increafed our folicitude for the 
return of our abfent friends. The fervice that each party had to per- 
form, called them, if not into the immediate neighbourhood of thefe 
unfriendly people, at leaft into the vicinity of the places to which they 
frequently refort; and as they are by nature of a cunning, defigning, 
and avaricious difpofition, they were much to be feared: for although 
they could not be confidered as a courageous tribe, yet the very unwar- 
rantable and impolitic conduét of the feveral traders on this coaft, in fup- 
plying them fo amply with fire arms and ammunition, and m teaching 
them the ufe of thofe deflru¢iive weapons, has not only given the na- 
tives a degree of confidence that renders them bold and importunate, but 
the dread which they before entertained of mufketry is greatly leffened 
by their becoming fo familiar to them; and they are now fo well fur- 


nifhed, 


ficient 
rono- 
erect- 
10t be 
re de- 
nftru- 
ich to 


Thad 
onclu- 
1 fully 
1e fur- 
Ww CX- 
1x10US 
nually 
ch our 
we ad- 
ced bv 
difpo- 
e who 
s were 
or the 

per- 
’ thefe 
h they 
ening, 
hough 
Mnwar- 
n fup- 
iching 
he na- 
>, but 
MTened 
Il fur- 
ufhed, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nifhed, as to confider themfelves when in their large canoes nearly on an 
equality with us, and of courfe are daily becoming formidable, efpeci- 
ally to the parties in our {mall boats. Thefe diftrefling confiderations, 
in addition to the protraéted abfence of our friends, gave us but too 
much reafon to be apprehenfive, that we had at length hazarded our 
little boats, with the {mall force they were able to take for their defence. 
once too often. 

Whilft we endured this irkfome anxiety, it is a tribute that is juflly 
due to the meritorious exertions of thofe under my command, that I 
fhould again acknowledge the great confolation I derived on all pain- 
ful occafions like this, by having the moft implicit confidence in the 
diferetion and abilities of my officers, and the exertions and ready obe- 
dience of my people. Thefe happy refleétions left me no grounds for 
entertaining the moft diftant idea that any precaution would be wanting 
to guard againft, or effort unexerted to avert, fo far as human prudence 
could diétate, the threatening dangers to which I was confcious they 
mult neceffarily be expofed. 

In the hourly hope that thefe confoling refleétions would orice more be 
proved to have been well founded, by the fafe return of the boats, I di- 
re€ted that every thing fhould be got in readinefs to proceed with all dif- 
patch in fuch direétion as circumftances might require ; for which pur- 
pole the veffels were moved to the oppofite fide of the harbour, as be- 
ing a more convenient fituation for our immediate departure. Here 
we remained in the moft uncomfortable ftate of fufpenfe that can be 
imagined until the 19th; when, in the midft of a deluge «f rain, with 
the wind blowing very ftrong from the s.r., we had the 1 defcribable 
fatisfa€tion of feeing the four boats enter the harbour together from 
the northward. The parties foon reached the veflels, all well, and 
communicated the glad tidings of their having effe€tually performed 
the fervice, and attained the object that had been expeéted from this ex- 
pedition. 

The accomplifhment of an undertaking, the laborious nature of which 
will, probably, from the perufal of the foregoing fheets, be more eafily 
conceived than explained: a fervice that had demanded our conftant 

2 and 


Tuefday 19, 


— er aot 
em er espe eer ye ay 


79 
“ 


1794. 
Augutt. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


‘and unwearied attention, and had required our utmoft abilities and exer- 
tions to bring thus to a conclufion, could not, after the indefatigable la. 
bour of the three preceding years, fail of exciting in the bofoms of our 
little community, fenfations of a nature fo pleafing and fatisfaétory, that 
few are likely to experience in the fame degree, who were not participa- 
tors in its execution; and to the imagination of thofe alone, muft I refer 
the happinefs we experienced on this interefting event. 

In order that the valuable crews of both veffels, on whom great hard- 
{hips and manual labour had fallen, and who had uniformly encountered 
their difficulties with unremitting exertion, cheerfulnefs and obedience, 
might celebrate the day, that had thus terminated their labours in thefc 
regions ; they were ferved fuch an additional allowance of grog as was 
fully fuflicient to anfwer every purpofe of feftivity on the occafion. 
This foon prompted a defire for mutual congratulations between the two 
vellels, ex prefled by three exulting cheers from each ; and it may be eafily 
conceived that more heart-felt fatisfaétion was fcarcely ever more reci- 
procally experienced, or more cordially exchanged. 

We had now no reafon for remaining in this port, which, in confc- 
quence of this vifit, obtained the name of Port ConcLusi0N, except: 
ing that which a continuation of the inclement weather produced, which 
detained us until the evening of the 22d. But before I proceed to the 
recital of fubfequent occurrences, it is neceffary that I fhould advert 
to the manner in which the late furvey in the boats had been executed. 

Agreeably to the direétions Mr.Whidbey had received, he proceeded 
to the ftation where his former refearches had ended; here he arrived 
about noon on the 3d, after paffing clofe along the weftern fhore of the 
{trait, until he was oppofite to the branch leading to the eaftward. In 
his way he paffed feveral openings on the weftern fhore, fome of which 
he had reafon to {uppofe communicated with the ocean in a wefterly 
direction, and others feemed to afford tolerably well {heltered anchorage. 
The weather at this time was fo thick and rainy, that the party had 
but a very imperfeét view of the inlet before them. They, however, 
continued along its larboard fhore, in a direétion N.65 £., for about fix 
miles and an half, paffing feveral fmall rocky bays, and at this inlet ar- 

rived 


d exer- 
able la- 
of our 
ry, thar 
rticipa- 
I refer 


ut hard- 
untered 
“dience, 
in thefe 
as was 
ecafion. 
the two 
de eafily 
re reci- 


1 confe- 
except. 
, which 
| to the 
advert 
ited. 
oceeded 
arrived 
> of the 
rd. In 
which 
wefterly 
horage. 
rty had 
owever, 
yout fix 
inlet ar- 
rived 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


vived at a high fteep bluff rocky point, named by me Point Narean, 


273 


1794. 
Augull. 


fituated in latitude 57°10’, longitude 226°6'; off which lies a ledge of --y—~ 


rocks about half a mile, and from this point the coaft takes a more nor- 
therly dire€tion; but the weather became fo thick that the party was 
obliged to flop about two miles beyond it, where the operation of the fame 
caufe detained them until eight o’clock the next morning ; when, with 
very hazy unpleafant weather, they refumed their inquiries, and paffed 
between a coaft much indented with fmalJl bays, and vaft numbers of 
fmall iflets and rocks, both above and beneath the furface of the water. 
The weather cleared up towards noon, and enabled Mr. Whidbey to 
obferve the latitude to be 57° 18’, on a {mall iflet, clofe to a point named 
by me Point Pyavs, lying from point Napean nN. 38 £., ten miles and 
an half diftant. From this ftation a tolerably diftin&t view was obtained 
of the inlet, in which the party had advanced thus far nearly in the 
dark. It was now feen to be a fpacious arm of the fea, containing, in 
moft dire@ions, many iflands, iflets, and rocks; the country on the left 
hand fide, being that fhore the party had coafted, excepting about point 
Napean, feemed in general to be but moderately elevated, and although 
it is compofed of a rocky fubftance, produced a very fine foreft, chiefly 
of pine timbers ; but the oppofite fide of the inlet was too far off to 
notice any thing refpeéting it. From this ftation the party proceeded ftill 
along a very rocky fhore, about fix miles further, ina dire€tion N. 41 r., 
to a point called by me Point Gamsrer, which forms the fouth point 
of a branch leading to the northweftward : its oppofite point of entrance, 
named by me Point Hueéu, lying from it N. 29 £., at the diftance of 
five miles. Beyond this, another extenfive branch appeared to ftretch to 
the northward, but the former being the objeét of their firft inquiry, 
they proceeded along its weftern fhore; this is low, and in many places 
is terminated by fandy beaches. On one of thefe, about ten miles from 
point Gambier, they refted for the night, which was very ftormy from 
the fouthward, with continual rain, and dark gloomy weather; this lafted 
until ten in the forenoon of the 5th, when the wind moderating, and the 
weather permitting them to fee fome little diftance before them, they 
proceeded, with a favorable brecze, up this branch of the ocean, called 

Vou. IIL, Non by 


~ 


\ VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ae Ag 25 StS eT ee 2 


a ee ee oes 


by me Seymour's Canat, which, at this place, is from two to three miles 
wide, and which kept gradually increafing to its head, where, in a direc- 


tion of N.£. and s.w., it is nearly two leagues acrofs: on the weftern 
fide are many finall bays, and it terminates, at its north-weft extremity, 
in a fmall brook of frefh water, in latitude 57°51’, longitude 226°, ly- 
ing from point Hugh wn. 33 w., diftant twenty-nine miles. One mile 
from the fouth point of the brook is an ifland, about three miles and an 
half long, and half a league broad ; and half a mile from the fouth point 
of that ifland les another ifland, about the fame width, and fix miles 
long ; both thefe iflands lie in the above direction, and occupy the mid- 
dle of the branch, having a great number of iflets on their north-eatt 
fides, and fome rocks on their oppofite fhores. Here were feen five 
Indians, who were very fhy. ‘The party caught fome young ducks, 
but they were very fifhy, and bad eating. The adjacent country is mo- 
derately high, and was covered with timber of large growth, excepting 
towards point Hugh, which is a lofty rocky promontory, from whence 
extends a ledge of rocks, where the fea broke with confiderable force. 
Owing to the badnefs of the weather thefe rocks were not pafled until 
ten at night on the 6th, and even then not without the moft imminent 
danger, occafioned by a heavy rain and the darknefs of the night, which 
prevented the party from difcovering their perilous fituation until they 
were nearly amonglt the breakers, when, by timcly and great exertion, 
they happily pafled clear of them, and refted for the night, about a mile 
on the north-eaft fide of that point. The rain continued, with a {trong 
gale from the fouthward, until the forenoon of the 7th, when the atmof- 
phere becoming more clear, their fituation was difcovered to be on the 
weftern fide of the branch which was feen from point Gambier, extending 
to the northward, about four miles in width; but was now feen to take a 
more welterly direétion, nearly parallel to Seymour’s canal, which the 
party had quitted; and making the intervening fhore a long narrow {trip of 
land. The oppofite or north-eaft fide of this northern branch is compofed 
of a compact range of ftupendous mountains, chiefly barren, and co- 
vered with ice and fnow. The route of the party was along the fouth- 
wet fide; this is nearly ftraight, compaét, and free from rocks or other 

interruptions, 


e miles 
direc- 
veltern 
remity, 
6°, ly- 


e mile 


and an 
1 point 
x miles 
1¢ mid. 
rth-eaft 
en five 
ducks, 
is mo- 
cepting 
whence 
> force. 
ed until 
minent 
, which 
Hl they 
Kertion, 
t a mile 
a {trong 
atmo!- 
on the 
tending 
take a 


ich the 


{trip of 


mpofed 
and co- 
t fouth- 
br Other 
iptions, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


interruptions, and favored by a s.r. breeze, they advanced about 12 
leagues from point Hugh; where they flopped for the night, oppofite 
to a high round ifland, lying in the middle of the channel. 

From this ftation, fituated in latitude 58° 1’, longitude 226° 9’, in the 
morning of the 8th, they departed with calm rainy weather, and pur- 
fued their refearches along the weftern fhore, which now took a direétion 
N.10W.,, eight miles, to a point named by me Pornr Arpen, where 
this branch divided into three arms; that which appeared to be a conti- 
nuation of the arm they had been navigating took a north-eafterly direc- 
tion; the fecond, lving about a league to the x. w., not more than half 
a mile wide, took a north-wefterly direction, and, apparently, made the 
Jand on its fouth-welt fide an ifland. About 3 leagues up this arm is a 
finall iflet nearly in mid-chamnel. ‘This afforded another inftance of the 
partial exiftence of the ice, which here intirely blocked up this arm, 
whilft the others were free from any fuch inconvenience. The third and 
wideft arm took a general courfe nx. 81 w., and is about a league in 
width; this agreeably to our ufual praétice was firft purfued along the 
fouthern fhore about 5 leagues to point Young, forming the eaft point of 
a cove, with an ifland and rock in its entrance, and another at the bot- 
tom of the cove. At this point the width of the arm decreafed to about 
halfa league, and from it the fouthern fhore ftretched x.42w. Atthe 
diftance of about feven miles the eaft point of another fmall cove was 
reached, with an iflet lying near it. At the back of this iflet was an 
Indian village, and another was feen on an oppofite point lying north, 
about a league and a half from this cove, on the land forming the north 
fide of the arm, am! feemed to be the north-weft point of the land be- 
fore mentioned, appearing to be an ifland., 

As Mr. Whidbcy advanced from this cove, the fhore flill continuing the 
fame line of direQion, he recognized the fpot, from whence in his excur- 
fion from Crofs found on the night of the 18th of july he had retired, in 
confequence of the hoftile behaviour of the natives, and he now became 
fatisfied that he had been miflaken in fuppofing at that time the branch 
to be clofed; as it was now evident that it communicated with that which 
the party had thus navigated, making the intermediate Jand, which had 

Nn 2 hitherto 


1994. 
Auguft. 


\cseerere, ames 


276 


1794. 
Auguit. 


Cl 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


hitherto been confidered as a part of the continent, one extenfive ifland, 


~ which I called ApMiRALTY ISLAND. 


In order however that no doubt fhould in future «rife, Mr. Whidbey 
proceeded to point Retreat. After paffing the village, which from 
that point lies s. 33 £., at the diftance of about 10 miles, the boats were 
followed by many large and fmall canoes ; and as the evening was draw- 
ing near, to get rid of fuch troublefome vifitors a mufket was fired over 
their heads, but this as before had only the effect of making them lefs 
ceremonious; this was proved by their exertions in paddling to come up 
with our party, which they did very faft, until another fhot was fired at 
the largeft canoe, and was fuppofed to have {truck her, as the Indians all 
fell back in the canoe, and were quite out of fight; they, however, ma- 
naged to bring their canoe’s ftern in a hne with the boats’ fterns: in 
that fituation they paddled backwards with all their ftrength, and at the 
fame time fcreened every part of their perfons, by the height and fpread- 
ing of their canoes’ bows, excepting their hands, which, in the a&t of pad- 
dling only became vifible, fo very judicioufly did they provide for their 
fafety in their flight ; in which, having gained fome diftance from our 
party, who had quietly purfued their courfe, the canoes ftopped for a 
fhort time, as if for confultation, but foon made the beft of their way 
back to the village, and Mr. Whidbey proceeded without further inter- 
ruption .o point Retreat. In this route the party paffed by the fouth- 
weft fide of a very narrow ifland, about half a mile broad, and about a 
league and an half long; this before had been pafled on its north-eaft 
fide, in the night of the 18th of july, but it was then fo dark that it 
was not difcovered to be an ifland. ‘Vhe channel, about three fourths 
of a mile wide, which was now purfued, is by rocks and iflets rendered 
equally unfafe and intricate with that mentioned on the former furvey, 
fo that the communication between thefe two extenfive branches of the 
ocean is, by thefe impediments, very dangerous for the navigation of 
fhipping. In this fouth-weft channel, about a league from point Retreat, 
on the fouthern fhore, is a deep cove, which, with the narrow ifland ly- 
ing before it, forms a very fnug harbour, of good accefs by the paflage 
round to the north of point Retreat; as the rocky part of the channel 

lies 


ifland, 


hidbey 
from 
Ss were 
draw- 
d over 
>m lefs 
me up 
ired at 
ians all 
or, ma- 
ns? in 
lat the 
{pread- 
of pad- 
yr their 
m our 
for a 
ir way 
r inter- 
fouth- 
hbout a 
rth-eaft 
that it 
fourths 
ndered 
furvey, 
of the 


Retreat, 
and ly- 
paflage 
hannel 

lies 


tion of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


lies to the fouth-eaft of this cove, to which Mr. Whidbey gave the name 
of BarLow’s Cove. The fhores of Admiralty ifland, which now had 
been completely circumnavigated, and found to be about 60 leagues in 
circuit, are, excepting at this and its fouth-eaftern part, very bold, afford 
many convenient bays, likely to admit of fafe anchorage, with fine 
ftreams of frefh water flowing into them, and prefented an afpect very 
different from that of the adjacent continent, as the ifland in general is 
moderately elevated, and produces an uninterrupted foreft of very fine 
timber trees, chiefly of the pine tribe; whilft the fhores of the continent, 
bounded by a continuation of thofe lofty frozen mountains, which ex- 
tend fouth-eaftward from mount Fairweather, rofe abruptly from the 
water-fide, and were covered with perpetual fnow, whilft their fides 
were broken into deep ravines or vallies, filled with immenfe mountains 
of ice. 

Such was the contraft exhibited at point Retreat, where Mr. Whidbey 
had an opportunity of feeing feveral of the points that had been fixed 
by his former obfervations, and which, on the prefent occafion, affifted 
him in correéting his furvey, for he had thus far been able to procure 
but one obfervation for the latitude, fince his leaving port Conclufion. 

From point Retreat the party returned to Barlow’s cove, where they 
refted for the night. The next morning a ftrong gale blew from the 
s.E. with a very heavy fall of rain; this greatly unpeded their progrefs 
in their way down this paflage, which dividing Admiralty ifland from the 
continent, obtained the name of Srepnens’s PassaGe; the point on 
which the northern village is fituated, was found to be, as had before been 
conjectured, the weft point of entrance into the narrow icy arm, in which 
was again feen the iflet noticed the preceding morning in an E.s.£. di- 
rection, whence it was clearly afcertained, that the intermediate land, 
forming the north fide of Stephens’s paffage was an ifland, which after 
the Bifhop of Salifbury, I named DouG as’s Istann; it is about 
twenty miles long, and fix miles broad in the middle, but becomes 
narrow towards each end, particularly that to the eaftward, where it 
terminates in a fharp point: the channel between this ifland and the 
main land, being rendered by the ice impaflable, the boats were fteered 

over 


277 
1794. 


Augult. 
aed 


278 


1794+ 
Augutt. 


ee aimed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


over to the fouthern fhore for proteétion againft the fouth-eaft wind, 
which had now become fo violent, that it was late in the evening before 
they had paffed the fouthernmoft village; and after they had proceeded 

about three miles to the eaftward of it, they refted for the night. 
Although the party had been a confiderable time within fight of the 
village of thefe unfriendly people, not a fingle individual had been feen; 
but they were heard making a moft hideous and extraordinary noife in 
their houfes, the found of which reached the refting place of our party, 
by whom it was fuppofed, that fome perfon of confequence had been 
hurt by the fhot fired the preceding evening at the large canoe, and 
which not improbably had been the occafion of their hafty retreat. In 
the morning of the 10th they were vifited by an old Indian man, and a 
boy, who after receiving fome prefents went about their bufinefs, and 
our party proceeded to the arm leading to the north-eaft from Stephens’s 
paflage, having its weftern pcint of entrance, which I have called 
Point SatisBury, fituated in latitude 58° 11’, longitude 226° 3’, in 
which the great quantity of floating ice, with a {trong northerly wind 
againft them, fo retarded their progrefs, that a paflage was with great 
difficulty effeéted: the weather here was feverely cold, with frequent 
fhowers of fleet and rain. From its entrance it extended N. 11 §., about 
13 miles, where the fhores fpread to the eaft and weft, and formed a 
bafon about a league broad, and 2 leagues acrofs, ina N.w. and s.F, 
dire€tion, with a fmall ifland lying nearly at its north-eaft extremity. 
From the fhores of this bafon a compact body of ice extended fome dif- 
tance nearly all round; and the adjacent region was compofed of a clofe 
conneéted continuation of the lofty range of frozen mountains, whofe fides, 
almoft perpendicular, were formed intirely of rock, excepting clofe to 
the water fide, where a few f{cattered dwarf pine trees found fufficient 
foil to vegetate in; above thefe the mountains were wrapped in undif- 
folving froft and {now. From the rugged gullies in their fides were 
projeéted immenfe bodies of ice, that reached perpendicularly to the 
furface of the water in the bafon, which admitted of no landing place for 
the boats, but exhibited as dreary and inhofpitable an afpeét as the ima- 
gination can poffibly fugeeft. The rife and fall of the tide in this fituation 
was 


- wind, 
before 
ceeded 


of the 
n feen; 
roife in 
"party, 
id been 
oe, and 
at. In 
, and a 
fs, and 
>phens’s 
» called 
6° 3’, in 
ly wind 
th great 
requent 
., about 
yrmed a 
nd s.£, 
tremity. 
ome dif- 
f a clofe 
fe fides, 
clofe to 
ufficient 
nD oundif- 
les were 
to the 

place for 
he ima- 
ituation 
was 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


was very corfiderable, appearing to be upwards of eighteen feet. The 
examination of this bafon, &c. engaged the party until near noon of the 
11th, when chey returned along the eaftern fhore, which is a continua- 
tion of the fame range of lofty mountains rifing abruptly from the water 
fide; by dark they reached the ifland mentioned on the 7th, as lying in 
the middle of Stephens’s paflage; here they took up their lodging for the 
night, which was very {tormy from the fouth-eaftward, and attended with 
a heavy rain. In the morning of the 12th the wind became more mo- 
derate, but the rain continued with an extremely unpleafant crofs fea, 
which the violence of the wind during the night had occafioned. This 
greatly retarded their progrefs down the paflage, the eaftern fhore of 
which was found to be much indented with {mall bays, and to take a ge- 
neral direction from a fpot oppofite to the ifland they had quitted s. 41 E., 
about twelve miles, to a point which I named Point StyLeMaAN, form- 
ing the north-weft point of a harbour, fituated in latitude 57° 53’, lon- 
gitude 226° 22°; the oppofite point of its entrance lying from it s. 33 E., 
at the diftance of 2 miles. This harbour, which obtained the name of 
Port SNETTISHAM, firft extends about a league from its entrance in a 
north-eaft dire€tion, where on each fide the fhores form an extenfive 
cove, terminated by a fandy beach, with a fine {tream of frefh water. 
On the north-weft fide of entrance is a {mall cove, in which there is alfo 
a run of water, with an iflet lying before it. The fhores are high and 
{leep, and produce very few trees. Several {mokes were feen, but none 
of the inhabitants made their appearance. From the fouth point of this 
port, which I called Point Anmer, the fhore takes a direétion s. 29 £., 
nine or ten miles, to a point, that obtained the name of Point Coke, 
and which forms the north point of a deep bay, about four miles wide, 
which I called Hotkuam Bay ; this the party did not reach until the 
morning of the 13th, when, nearly in the middle of it, were found 
three {mall iflands ; to the wefternmoft of which a fhallow bank extend- 
cd from each fide of the bay, which is bounded by the ftill continued 
lofty range of mountains. Much floating ice was feen within the iflands. 
From point Coke, in a dire€tion s. 43 w., two miles and an half, are 
two finall rocky iflets, nearly in the middle of the branch, and from 

the 


280 


1794. 
Auguit. 


en peed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the fouth point of this bay, which I called Point Astiey, the fhores are 
very rocky, and contain many {mall open coves, taking a foutherly dire€tion 
thirteen miles, to a point. which obtained the name of Point Winp- 
HAM, fituated in latitude 57° 31’, longitude 226° 36. This point forms 
the eaftern point of entrance into Stephens’s paflage: here they again 
arrived in the fpacious part of the inlet noticed from point Gambier. 

As the party advanced feveral iflets were feen in various directions, 
and from point Windham, on the eaftern fide, were fome bays; the 
fhores took a general direttion s. 25 £., twelve miles and an half, to a 
point named by me Point Hosart, being the north point of a {mall 
branch, where the party refted for the night, and on the following 
morning they found its points of entrance to lie from each other N.11 w. 
and s.11£., about a league afunder. From its entrance it extends 
S.70E., 5 or 6 miles, where it terminated. Some iflets and funken 
rocks lie near its fouth point, which I called Pornt WALPOLE. From 
point Hobart extends a bank of fand a little diftance from the fhore, 
but there is a clear paffage between it and the iflets, within which, it 
forms a fnug harbour, with foundings at a confiderable diftance from the 
fhore from 10 to 6 fathoms water, fand and muddy bottom. It is 
bounded by lofty mountains, and from their bafe extends a {mall border 
of low land forming the fhores of the harbour, which I called Port 
HouGuton. On quitting this place many rocks were feen along the 
fhores, which took a direétion s.12w., fix miles and a half, to a very 
confpicuous low projeéting point, which obtained the name of Cape 
FANSHAW, fituated in latitude 57° 11’, longitude 226° 442’. Here was 
feen an old deferted village, and a fpacious branch of the inlet 8 miles 
wide, leading to the eaftward and fouth-eaft. 

From its very extenfive appearance in thefe direétions, Mr. Whidbey 
became apprehenfive, left their utmoft exertions fhould not enable them to 
draw their labours to a conclufion during his prefent excurfion, and for 
this reafon, he loft no time in proceeding along its northern fhore, which 
from cape Fanfhaw takes a direction s.66£., fixteen miles, to a low 
narrow point of land two miles long, and half a mile broad, ftretching 
fouth from the general line of the coaft on each fide of it; but this dif- 

2 tance, 


res are 
re€tion 
NIND- 
- forms 
"again 
bier. 
-€tions, 
s; the 
f, toa 
a {mall 
lowing 
111 W. 
extends 
funken 
From 
e fhore, 
hich, it 
rom the 
It is 
border 
Port 
ng the 
b a very 
CAPE 
ere was 
8 miles 


hidbey 

hem to 
and for 
, which 
> a low 
etching 
this dif- 
tance, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tance, Owing to the badnefs of the weather, and a ftrong gale from the 
eaftward, was not reached before the 15th in the afternoon. At this 
low point, which I called Point Vannepurt, the width of the branch 
decreafed to about thrce miles and an half, in a fouth dire€tion, to 
a fteep bluff point, where, as alfo from this ftation, the fhores of the 
branch took a more foutherly courfe. South from this point a fhoal 
extends about a mile, and on its eaftern fide a fall bay 1s formed, 
from whence the eaftern fhore trends s.94 £., feven miles, to another 
point, where a fhoal {tretches out about three fourths of a mile from the 
fhore; this prevented the boats approaching the point, although feve- 
ral attempts were made, in the hope of gaining fhelter from the in- 
clemency of the weather, but it was to no effect, and the party was 
obliged to remain cold, wet, and hungry (having no provifions cooked) 
in the boats, until the morning of the 16th: when the weather became 
fair and clear, and fhewed their fituation to be before a {mall extent of 
low flat land, lying immediately before the lofty mountains, which here 
rofe abruptly to a prodigious height immediately behind the border. A 
few miles to the fouth of this margin the mountains extended to the water- 
fide, where a part of them prefented an uncommonly awful appearance, 
rifing with an inclination towards the water to a vaft height, loaded with 
an immenfe quantity of ice and {now, and overhanging their bafe, which 
feemed to be infufficient to bear the ponderous fabric it fuftained, and 
rendered the view of the paflage beneath it, horribly magnificent. 

Soon after paffing this very remarkable promontory, the arm of the 
fea over which it hangs appeared to be intirely clofed by a beach, ex- 
tending all round the head of it; at the fouth-eaft extremity was a large 
body of ice, formed in a gully between the mountains that approach 
the water-fide, from whence, much broken ice feemed to have fallen, and 
had intirely covered the furface of the water in that dire€tion. From the 
fouth-weft corner iffued a narrow ftream of very white water, that feemed 
to have obtained this appearance by the melting fnow draining through 
the low land that was feen lying in that direétion ; and as it was confidered 
not to be navigable, Mr. Whidbey was anxious to lofe no time in the fur- 
ther extenfion of his refearches. Having now been abfent longer than the 

Vou. III. Oo time 


si 


oy 


at 
ai) 
ba 
« * 
iy ah, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


time for which the party had been fupplied, and being diftant upwards of 
an hundred miles from the veffels, towards which they had to proceed 
along a coaft, the principal part of which might require a very minute 
examination; he made the beft of his way back, along the fouthern 
fhore of the branch, 

We became afterwards informed by Mr. Brown of the Jackal, that 
the above narrow ftream was found, on his fubfequent vifit to this place, 
to afford a pafflage for canoes and boats, and that it communicated with 
the apparently fhoal inlet that Mr. Johnftone had made feveral unfuccefs- 
ful attempts to enter on the 28th of auguft, 1793. Mr. Brown alfo 
ftated, that the intervening land which had the appearance of forming 
the head of the arm between its fouth-eaft and fouth-weft extremities, is 
an ifland, fituated on a very fhallow bank, which, at the depth of a 
few’ feet, conneéts the two fhores, and at low water fpring tides be- 
comes dry. This may ferve to account for the report of the Indians to 
Mr. Brown the preceding year, and which he obligingly communicated 
to me on the arft of july, 1793, refpeéting Ewen Na/s, by which means 
an inland navigation for canoes and boats is found from the fouthern 
extremity of Admiralty inlet, in latitude 47° 3’, longitude 237° 18’, to the 
northern extremity of Lynn canal, in latitude 59° 12’, longitude 224° 34’. 
By this information it likewife appeared, that our conclufions at the end 
of the laft feafon, refpeéting cape Decifion being a continental promon- 
tory were not precifely correét, as, by the fhallow boat paffage difcovered 
by Mr. Brown, that cape is found to be feparated above the level of 
high-water mark from the continent. 

Mr. Whidbey obferves, that in no one inftance during his refearches, 
either in the feveral branches of Prince William’s found, 1h thofe extend- 
ing from Crofs found, or, in the courfe of Ins prefent excurfion, did he 
find any immenfe bodies of ice on the iflands ; all thofe which he had feen 
on fhore, were in the gullies or vallies of the conneéted chain of lofty moun- | 
tains fo frequently mentioned, and which chiefly conftituted the conti- 
nental fhore from Cook’s inlet to this ftation; though, in different places 
thefe mountains are at different diftances from the fea fide. He likewife 
oblerves that all the iffands, or groups of iflands, were land of a mode- 

rate 


ards of 
yroceed 
minute 
yuthern 


ul, that 
s place, 
ed with 
fuccels- 
wn alfo 
forming 
ities, 1s 
th of a 
des be- 
dians to 
inicated 
h means 
outhern 
, to the 
24° 34’. 
the end 
romon- 
covered 
level of 


earches, 
extend- 
», did he 


nad feen 


moun- | 


conti- 

it places 
likewife 
mode- 
rate 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


rate height, when compared with the flupendous mountains that com- 
pole the continental boundary, and were {till {een to continue in a fouth- 
eaftern direétion from this {hallow paffage, whilft the land to the weft- 
ward of the paflage affumed a more moderate height, was free from 
fnhow, and produced a forelt of lofty pine trees. ‘Thefe obfervations 
more particularly applying to the former, than to the fubfequent, part 
of this furvey, Ihave, for that reafon, thought proper to introduce them 
in this place, and fhall now refume the fubject of Mr, Whidbey’s excur- 
fion. 

The day being fair and pleafant, Mr. Whidbey wifhed to embrace 
this opportunity of drying their wet clothes, putting their arms in order, 
and giving a thorough cleaning to the boats, which, from the continual 
bad weather, had now become an object of real neceffity. For this 
purpofe the party landed on a commodious beach ; but before they had 
finifhed their bufinefs a large canoe arrived, containing fome women and 
children, and fixteen {tout Indian men, well appointed with the arms of 
the country, but without any fire-arms. They behaved in a very friend- 
ly manner on the beach for a little time, but their conduét afterwards 
put on a very fufpicious appearance; the children withdrew into the 
woods, and the reft fixed their daggers round their writs, and exhibi- 
ted other indications, not of the moit friendly nature. To avoid the 
chance of any thing unpleafant taking place, Mr. Whidbey confidered 
it moft humane and prudent to depart, and he continued his route down 
the branch along its fouth-weft fhore, paffing fome iflets that lie near it. 
The Indians did the fame, but kept on the oppofite fhore, and in the 
courfe of a little time the canoe difappeared. In the hope of being quit 
of thefe people the party ftopped to dine near the high bluff obferved 
from point Vandeput, but before they had finifhed their repalt the fame 
Indians, who muft have turned back unperceived, for the purpofe of 
crofling over to follow the boats, were feen coming round the point of 
the cove in which was the party, and not more than a quarter of a mile 
{rom their dinner ftation; as the canoe approached a mufket was fired 
over it, in order to deter the Indians from advancing ; but this, as on for- 
mer occafions, feemed to encourage them, and they appeared to come for 

Oo 2 ward 


283 


1794. 
Auguft. 
Cy SY 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ward with more eagernefs, but on a fecond fhot being fired at the canoe 
they inftantly retreated with all poffible fpeed, and were foon again be- 
hind the point: yet as Mr. Whidbey fufpeéted they might be inclined to 
attempt by furprize, that which they dared not venture to do openly, he 
haftened the meal of his party, and put off from the fhore; this was 
{carcely effeéted, when his conjeétures were proved to have been well 
founded, by the appearance of a number of armed people iffuing from 
the woods, exaétly at the fpot where our party had dined; and nearly 
at the fame inftant of time, the canoe was again feen paddling round the 
point of the cove. 

This conduét, on the part of the Indians, greatly attra€ted the ob- 
fervation of the party, and whilft they were watching the motions of 
thefe people, their attention was fuddenly and moft agreeably called 
to an object of more pleafing concern; that of the boats under Mr. John- 
ftone’s dire€tion, coming within fight about two miles diftant. 

The ftratagem thus praétifed by thefe Indians is alone fufficient to fhew, 
that our apprehenfions ca board, for the fafety of our abfent friends, 
had not been without reafon ; and it is one, amongft many other cir- 
cumftances, which taught me to believe, that we were but juft in 
time, for the accomplifhment of the arduous and hazardous fervice in 
which we had been fo long engaged; as the very unjuttifiable conduct 
of the traders on this coaft, has encouraged the inhabitants to attempt 
fuch acts ‘of hoftility, that the means we poffelled to repel their attacks, 
would, in all probability, have been infufficient for our proteftion, had 
it been our lot to have tried the experiment one year later. 

On the fight of the two other boats all the Indians difappeared, and 
our two parties were not long before their forces were united. It was 
immediately underftood that Mr. Johnftone had examincd the coaft 
from cape Decifion to this ftation. On this occafion Mr. Whidbey re. 
marks, that it is not poffible for language to defcribe the joy that was 
manifefted in every countenance, on thus meeting their comrades and 
fellow-adventurers, by which happy circumftance, a principal obje& of 
the voyage was brought toa conclufion; and the hearty congratulations 
that were mutually exchanged by three cheers, proclaimed not only the 
pleafure 


e canoe 
ain be- 
lined to 
nly, he 
this was 
en well 
1g from 
| nearly 
und the 


the ob- 
tions of 
called 


, John. 


10 fhew, 
friends, 
her cir- 
juft in 
rvice in 
conduct 
attempt 
attacks, 
yn, had 


od, and 
It was 
ie coaft 
bey re- 
lat was 
les and 
pje&t of 
ulations 
nly the 
leafure 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


pleafure that was felt in the accomplifhment of this laborious fervice, 
but the zeal with which it had been carried into execution, and the lau- 
dable pride that had been entertained by both parties, in having been 
inftrumental to the attainment of fo grand an object. 

The little fquadron now proceeded to a cove about a league to the 
weftward, where they took up their abode for the night. In the courfe 
of the evening no {mall portion of facetious mirth paffed amongft the 
feamen, in confequence of our having failed from old England on the 
fot of Aprit, for the purpofe of difcovering a north-weft paflage, by 
following up the difcoveries of De Fuca, De Fonte, and a numerous train 
of hypothetical navigators. 

Early in the morning of the 17th both parties fat out on their return 
to port Conclufion, and being favored with a frefh gale from the s.£. 
they made great progrefs under fail. 

In the event of the two parties meeting, and confequently a finifhing 
ftroke being put to the examination of the fhores of North-Weft Ame- 
rica, within the limits of my commiffion ; Mr. Whidbey had my direc- 
tions to take poffeffion of the faid continent, from New Georgia north- 
weftward to cape Spencer, as alfo, of all the adjacent iflands we had 
difcovered within thofe limits; in the name of, and for, His Britan- 
nic Majefty, his heirs, and fucceffors: this, on the parties {topping 
to dine, was carried into execution; the colours were difplayed, the 
boats’ crews drawn up under arms, and pofleffion taken under the dif- 
charge of three vollies of mufketry, with all the other formalities ufual 
on fuch occafions, and a double allowance of grog was ferved to the re- 
{pe€tive crews, for the purpofe of drinking His Majefty’s health. The 
happy meeting of the two parties, having taken place on the birth-day of 
His Royal Highnefs Frederick Duke of York, the found in which they 
met I honored with the name of PRINCE FREDERICK’s SOUND, and 
the adjacent continent, north-weftward from New Cornwall to Crofs 
found, with that of New NorFouk. 

From hence the boats made the beft of their way to the veffels, with- 
out any particular occurrence, until they arrived at port Conclufion, 
when the wind blowing very hard from the fouthward, brought with it 

2 a heavy 


286 


179}: 
Augutt. 


i 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


a heavy confufed fea, which, with the meeting of the tides, produced a 
kind of race. Here the boats, for fome time, were in a moft critical fitu- 
ation, but by the great exertions of their crews, they were at length pre- 
ferved, and arrived fafe, as has been before related, 

It now remains to recount the circumftances attendant on Mr. John 
ftone’s expedition; who, from cape Decifion, found the exterior coaft 
firlt take a direction N. 39 w., about 3 leagues, and then x. 10 w., 
about the fame diftance, to the north point of a harbour about a mile 
wide ; the intermediate fhore, between it and cape Decifion, has in it 
many fall open bays, and at fome diftance from it, lic many rocks, 
This flation was reached in the forenoon of the 3d, the harbour was 
found free and cafy of accefs, by keeping near the fouthern fhore ; in 
general it is about a mile wide. At firft it takes a north-eaft courfe for 
about a league, and then terminates in a s.s.£. direétion, about a league 
further, having fome iflets and rocks in it, notwithftanding which it af- 
fords very excellent fhelter, with foundings from 17 to 94 and 12 fa- 
thoms water. It is conveniently fituated to the ocean, has its north 
point in latitude 56° 174’, longitude 225°58’, and obtained the name of 
Port Macarssury. Its north point, which I have called Point 
Harris, is rendered very remarkable, by its being a projeéting point, 
on which is a fingle hill, appearing from many points of view like an 
ifland, with an iflet and fome rocks extending near a mile to the fouth- 
weft of it. North from hence, three miles and an half, and then n.N.«£. 
about the fame diftance, is the fouth point of a large bay, full of in- 
numerable iflets and rocks, with a great number of very finall branches 
in various directions ; its examination occupied much time, and its fouth- 
ern extremity reached to the latitude of 56°15’, longitude 226° 15’; its 
eaftern branch to latitude 56° 28’, longitude 226° 18’; and its northern 
extremity to latitude 56° 33’, longitude 226°12’. Between the two lat- 
ter the party met with about a dozen of the natives, who occupied a 
fingle habitation on the fhore, and were the firft people Mr. Johnftone’s 
party had feen on this expedition. The 5th was very flormy, with much 
rain, but the 6th was fair and pleafant, which enabled them to finifh 
the examination of this intricate found, and in the evening they reach- 
ed 


ROUND THE WORLD. 287 


duced a ed its north-weft point of entrance, which I called Point Exiis, where ak ee 
rk ; 2 ; ge , : uguit. 
ical fitu- they remained during the night. It is fituated in latitude 56° 31’, longi- Gym 


gth pre- tude 225°56. This alfo forms the fouth-eafl point of another fmall in- a 
ket, which is equally intricate, and as much incommoded with iflets and 


r. John rocks, The examination of this employed the whole of the 7th. It ‘t | 
jor coatt forms a narrow arm, extending from point Ellis x.56 &. for ten miles, ia ba 
LAG We, where it terminates. Here they found a fingle houfe, fimilar to that be- HM 
ita mile fore mentioned, and containing about as many inhabitants. From hence I 
las In it they returned along the northern fide of this arm, from half a mile to ¥ 
lv rocks, half a league in width, and about feven miles from its head to its north 
your was point, which forms alfo the fouth point of a bay or inlet, full of iflets ty 
1ore 3 in and rocks, the north point of which, called by me Point SuLLIVAN, ae Y, 
ourfe for lies in latitude 56° 38’, longitude 225° 514’. From point Sullivan the at 
a league fhores were lefs rocky, and became firm and compact, taking a direétion ' 
ch it af: N.g W. thirteen miles, to a confpicuous point, which after Vice Admiral | "ey 
d 12 fa- Kingfmill, obtained the name of Point Kinesmiztt. From this point, e 
its north which is the fouth point of the fpacious inlet, up which Mr. Whidbey : 
name of had purfued his refearches to the north-eaftward ; the fhores took a di- i: 
Point rection N. 47 E., fix miles and a half to another point, which I called ‘ 
g point, Point CorNWALLtS, and which forms the fouth-weft point of entrance | 
like an into an arm leading to the fouth-eaft. The fpace between thefe two Hit & 
ne fouth- points is occupied by two bays, each taking a fouth-eafterly direétion, aahe 
nN N.N.E. {from a mile to half a league wide, and 4 or 5 miles deep, in which as it a 
Il of in- ufual along the coaft were many iflets and dangcrous rocks. he exami- ag 
ranches nation to this extent, employed the party until the 10th in the morning, RP tf 
ts fouth- when they quitted the main inlet, and purfued the arm leading to the i 
P15 3 Its fouth-eaftward, which firft took a direétion s. 68 £. for g miles, and then i‘ 
northern s. 26 &. for 7 miles and a half further; here a branch was entered about ot 
two lat- half'a league wide, that took a s.s.w. direétion for about 8 miles, where ne 
upied a it terminated in latitude 56° 384’. The fhores of the fouthern parts of 2) 
inftone’s this branch, which I have diftinguifhed by the name of Port CamMpeEN, Raat 
th much are pretty free from iflets and rocks, but thofe to the north-welt of it, are f , : 
to finifh lined with them, and render the approaching of it extremely dangerous. Cate 
y reach- The termination of this branch reaches in a north and fouth direétion, 


ed within 


083 


1794. 
Augutt. 
ee mmm 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


within about 2 miles of the north-eaft extent of the {mall inlet which the 
party had examined on the 7th, and in the fame line of direétion, within 
about 4 miles of the northern part of that which had engaged them on 
the 5th and 6th. So very tedioufly and flowly were our refearches car- 
ried into cffe¢t in this very broken and extraordinary region ! 

At the head of the laft mentioned branch was a fmall Indian village 
confifting of three houfes, and containing about forty or fifty perfons, 
On meeting fome of the Indians here who had been feen in the fouthern 
branches, it gave rife to an opinion, that fome {mall paffage exifled which 
had efcaped the notice of the party ; but this Mr. Johnftone obferves was 
foon explained by the Indians who took up their canoe, and pointing toa 
fall valley ina foutherly direétion, made figns that could not be miftaken, 
that they had walked, and had brought their canoe, over the ifthmus. 
The next morning, although very wet and hazy, they returned along 
the eaftern fide of this arm, and paffed its north-eaft point, which from 
the head lies about N.N.£. at the diftance of about 4 leagues, near which 
are fome rocks. ‘The party immediately entered another branch, about 
the fame breadth, which took firft a dire&tion s. 68 £. for about 5 miles, 
and then turned irregularly round to the fouthward. The weather being 
clear about noon, the obferved latitude was found to be 56° 42’, longitude 
226° 25’. The branch in which they had thus advanced, although too fhal- 
low and rocky for the pafling of any veflels larger than boats or canoes, and 
even for them intricate and dangerous, would not have been further exa- 
mined, had not the tide been found running ina very contrary direétion, to 
that which had been obferved at its entrance, the flood tide here fetting to 
the northward. This circumftance gave rife to an opinion, that this branch 
would be found to communicate with the main inlet they had left under 
Mr. Whidbey’s examination extending to the north-eaft; and fhould it 
make the intermediate very broken land an ifland, it would greatly faci- 
litate their furvey of what they fuppofed to be the continental fhore. 

This hope induced Mr. Johnftone to perfevere, but inftead of the 
channel {tretching to the eaftward as it was wifhed, and expeéted to do, it 
extended to the weftward of fouth, and communicated with a bay in the 
north-weft part of Clarence’s f{trait, which had been examined by Mr. 

Johnitone 


ROUND THE WORLD. 289 


ich the fohnftone on the 11th of feptember, 1793; but this communication was 174; 
within not at that time afcertained, in confequence of the numerous iflets, rocks, Hy» 
lem on and fhoals that exift in that bay, and render it intively unnavigable for 
es car- fhipping. The party now diftinétly faw port Protection and the adjacent 
fhores, and having taken the neceflary angles that their further furvey 
village would demand, they returned by the way they had arrived; but the pro- 
erfons, grefs of the boats was rendered very flow by the numberle!s rocks and 
outhern iflets, and the examination of the feveral little bays into which the fhores 
1 which were broken. To the eaftward were feen high diftant mountains covered 
ves Was with fnow, but the land in their neighbourhood was, comparatively 
ing toa fpeaking, low, of a very uneven furface, much divided by water, and 
iftaken, covered with wood. Mr. Johnftone unwilling to lofe any advantage 
fthmus. that prefented itfelf, fopped but a fhort time on‘ the night of the 12th, 
1 along in order that he might take the benefit of the flood tide the next morning, 
h from which returning about half after one, they proceeded with it clofe along 
r which the eaftern fhore round every cove and corner ; for they could not by any 
, about other mode have determined its boundary, as they were at this time fur- 
5 miles, rounded by a very thick fog, that obfcured every diftant obje€t until 
or being about ten in the forenoon, when a frefh wefterly breeze brought fair and 
ngitude clear weather, and difcovered their fituation to be near the weft point of a 
00 fhal- fmall branch, in latitude 56° 55’, longitude 226° 16’. The adjacent 
oes, and fhores in all direétions, but particularly to the north-weft, were lined 
ler €Xa- with iflets and rocks, that extended nearly two miles into the opening, 
ion, to which was here about 2 leagues acrofs. 
ting to This branch about a mile wide ftretched about 5 miles in an eaftwardly 
branch dire€tion, and there it terminated ; but before the party had reached this 
t under extent, Mr. Johnftone ftates, that the remains of no lefs than eight de- 
hould it ferted villages were feen; fome of them were more decayed than the 
tly faci- others, but they all uniformly were fituated on the fummit of fome pre- 
re. cipice, or fteep infular rock, rendered by nature almoft inacceffible, and 
of the by art and great labour made a ftrong defence; which proved, that the 
o do, it inhabitants had been fubjeét to the incurfions of hoftile vifitors. Thele 
in the fortified places were well conftruéted with a ftrong platform of wood, laid 
by Mr. on the moft elevated part of the rock, and projeéting fo far from its fides 


hni{tone Vou. LI. Pp as 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


as to overfpread the declivity. The edge of the platform was fur- 
rounded by a barricade raifed by logs of wood placed on eachother. In 
the vicinity of thefe ruins were many fepulchres or tombs, in which dead 
bodies were depofited. Thefe were made with a degree of neatnefs fel- 
dom exhibited in the building of their habitations. A wooden frame was 
raifed about ten feet from the ground, the upper half of which was in- 
clofed, and in the open part below in many, though not in all of them, 
was placed a canoe; the flooring of the upper part was about five feet 
from the ground, and above that the fides and top were intirely clofed in 
with boards, within which were human bodies in boxes wrapped up in 
fkins or in matting. Thefe repofitories of the dead were of different fizes, 
and fome of them contained more bodies than the others; in the largeft 
there were not more than four or five, lying by the fide of each other, not 
one appearing to be placed above the reft; they were generally found 
near the water fide, and very frequently on fome confpicuous point. 
Many of thefe facred monuments feemed to have been ere¢ted a great 
length of time, and the moft ancient of them had evidently been repaired 
and {trengthened by additional fupporters of more modern workmanfhip. 
Hence it would appear, that whatever might be the enmity that exifted 
between the feveral tribes when living, their remains when dead were 
refpetted and fuffered to reft quietly and unmolelted. 

Having fatisfied their curiofity in thefe refpects, and having gained the 
head of the arm, they ftopped to dine in a cove a little way from its ter- 
mination. Hitherto the party had not feen any of the natives, but at 
this time they were vifited by feveral who came chiefly from the head of 
the arm, where they muft have been fecreted, or they could not have 
efcaped being noticed. ‘The number of thefe people accumulated very 
faft, and in a very little time, they amounted to upwards of a hundred, 
amongft whom were achref, and feveral of the Indians feen at the ifth- 
mus on the preceding thurfday and funday. Whatever might be the real 
intention, or the difpofition of thelfe ftrangers, their numbers and gene- 
ral appearance, induced Mr. Johnftone to defire them to keep at a 
greater diftance; this the Indians did not feem inclined to do, although 
every fign to that effect was made, and our party armed in readinefs for 

their 


yas fur- 
er. In 
ich dead 
nefs fel. 
ame was 
was in- 
f them, 
ive feet 
Tofed in 
d up in 
nt fizes, 
: largeft 
her, not 
y found 
; point. 
a great 
repaired 
ranfhip. 
exilted 


id were 


ined the 
its ter- 
but at 
head of 
bt have 
ed very 
undred, 
he ifth- 
the real 
gene- 
p ata 
though 
nefs for 
their 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


their defence. As their numbers increafed, fo were they encouraged to 
advance; on fome mufkets being fired they ftopped for a fhort time, but 
{oon again followed the boats as they returned down the arm, keeping 
juft without the reach of mufketry. Although thefe people had amongtt 
them fome guns, and were otherways well armed with their native wea- 
pons, Mr. Johnftone did not impute to them any hoftile intention, but 
attributed the ardour with which they had ftriven to join our party, toa 
defire of bartering away their fea otter {kins, of which they appeared to 
have many, for European commodities. The fituation of the party on 
this occafion was in a very confined place, and being furrounded by luch 
a tribe of armed Indians, with reafon to apprehend there might be others 
at no great diftance, it became prudent to avoid, if poffible, a nearer in- 
tercourfe, by which alone the true fpirit of their defign could have been 
known, and in which they mult have been greatly interefted, as they 
continued to follow the boats, until after they had gained a more open 
fituation. One of the canoes now advanced before the reft, in which a 
chief ftood in the middle of it, plucking the white feathers from the rump 
of an eagle, and blowing them into the air, accompanied by fongs and 
other expreffions, which were received as tokens of peace ard friendfhip. 
The canoe was now permitted to come alongfide Mr. Johnftone’s boat, to 
whom the chief inftantly prefented a fea otter fkin, for which Mr. John. 
ftone made him a fuitable return, with every expreffion likely to be un. 
derftood of his pacific difpofition; the Indians feemed to be fincere in 
their profeffions alfo, as they now came to the boats unarmed, and with the 
utmoft confidence in their fecurity. Expreflions of mutual friendfhip 
were now exchanged, and on its being fignified to the chief, that as night 
was approaching the canoes fhould no longer follow the boats, he returned 
to the reft of his countrymen; but they ftill continued to paddle after 
our boats until a mufket or two were difcharged, when they all dropped 
a-ftern and were no more feen. 

However fatisfa€tory the latter part of the natives’ conduét may appear 
to be, as to their friendly intentions, yet a diftruft which prudence on fuch 
occafions ought always to fuggeft, induced Mr. Johnftone to proceed as far 
as he conveniently could before he flopped for the night; but as the fhore 

Pps was 


291 


1 794- 
Auguft. 


nena ene 


292 


1 794- 
Augutt. 
... 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


‘ 
was quite fteep and compaét they continued to row until after midnight, 
when they came toa grapnel, and refted in the boats. This day had proved 
extremely fatiguing to the people, as they had been nearly the whole of 
the twenty-four hours on their oars. In this route they had reached the 
main arm of Prince Frederick’s found, and had found the fhores to form a 
large rounding, though not lofty promontory, in which were feveral {mall 
open bays, and near it feveral detached rocks. This promontory obtained 
the name of Point Macarrney, the weftern extremity of which is fitu- 
ated in latitude 57° 14’, longitude 226° 12’. From hence the fhore trends 
N.15 E. about a league, where the width of the found is about 7 miles 
acrofs, in a direétion N. 47 Ww. to point Napean. From this ftation 
N. 28 £., at the diftance of about a league and a half lies a {mall ifland, 
with patches of rocks from this point reaching nearly to its fhores. The 
promontory ftill took a rounding direétion about N. 65 E., five miles fur- 
ther, from whence the fouthern fhore of the found extends nN. 75 £. fe- 
venteen miles, to the weft point of a {mall cove, the only opening in the 
fhore from point Macartney; but off the little projeéting points be- 
tween this cove and that point, are detached rocks lying at no great dif- 
tance from the fhore. This extent was not reached until the afternoon 
of the 16th, in confequence of the wind blowing hard from the eaftward, 
attended with a heavy rain, againft which they contended with their ut- 
imoft exertions, left the exhaufted ftate of their provifions fhould oblige 
them to retire before they could join the other party. This cove ex- 
tended s. 34 £. about a league, where it terminated, and according to 
our furvey, formed a narrow ifthmus between it and the head of Duncan’s 
canal, about 2 miles acrofs in a northern dire€tion; and is another ftri- 
king inftance of the very extenfive, and extraordinary infular ftate of the 
region lying before the weftern coait of the American continent, be- 
tween the 47th and sgth degrees of north latitude. 

Having dined, the party refumed their furvey along the fouthern fide 
of the found, which took nearly an eaft direétion. They had not far 
advanced, when about five in the evening they had the joyful fatisfaétion 
of meeting Mr, Whidbey and his party as before recited. 

Mr, 


idnight, 
| proved 
vhole of 
‘hed the 
> form a 
ral {mall 
»btained, 
vis fitu- 
e trends 
7 miles 

ftation 
! ifland, 
3. The 
iles fur- 
55. fe- 
¢ in the 
ints be- 
reat dif- 
ternoon 
ultward, 
heir ut- 
| oblige 
ove ex- 
ding to 
uncan’s 
her {tri- 
e of the 
ent, be- 


ern fide 
not far 


sfaétion 


Mr, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Mr. Johnftone ftated, that the part of the coaft that had claimed his 
attention during his laft excurfion is a peniniula, conneéted with the 
more eaftern land by the laft mentioned narrow ifthmus, and that it is by 
no means fo high or mountainous as the land compofing the adjacent 
countries on the oppofite or north-eaftern fide of the found, which at no 
great diftance confifted of very lofty, rugged, dreary, barren mountains, 
eovered with ice and {now; but that the land compofing the peninfula 
was chiefly of moderate height, and produced a noble foreft of large, and 
ftately nine trees. of clean and ftraight growth, amongft which were a few 
berry bufhes and fomealders. ‘The fhores along the bays and arms they 
had vifited were in general low, and prefented a probability that if the 
wood were cleared away, the foil of the country might be advantageoufly 
employed under cultivation. ‘Thefe bays and arms abounded with a 
greater number of falmon and fea otters, than Mr. Johnftone had obferved 
on any other part of the coaft; and as they were found in the greateft 
abundance at the heads of thofe places, it was inferred that falmon, and 
other fmall fifh, form a large proportion of the food of the fea otters, 
which are thus induced to frequent thefe inland channels, to which at this 
feafon of the year fuch fifhes refort. 

Mr. Whidbey in his. obfervations on Admiralty ifland, remarks, that 
notwithftanding this ifland feemed to be compofed of a rocky fubftance 
covered with little foil, and that chiefly confifting of vegetables in an 
imperfeét {tate of diffolution, yet like the peninfula juft adverted to, it 
produced timber, which he confidered as fuperior to any he had before 
noticed on this fide of America. He alfo ftates, that in his two laft ex- 
curfions feveral places were feen, where the ocean was evidently in- 
croaching very rapidly on the land, and that the low. borders extending 
from the bafe of the mountains to the fea fide, had, at no very remote pe- 
riod of time produced tall and ftately timber.; as many of their dead trunks 
were found ftanding ereét, and ftill rooted faft in the ground, in different 
ftages of decay; thofe being the moft perfeét that had been the leaft fub- 
ject to the influence of the falt water, by which they. were furrounded 
vn every flood ude: fuch had been the incroachment of the fea on thefe 

fhores, 


203 


1794 
Augu it, 


een amend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fhores, that the fhorter ftumps in fome inflances at low water mark, 
were even with, or below the furface of the fea. 

This fame appearance has been noticed before in port Chalmers, 
and on this occafion Mr. Whidbey quotes other inftances of fimilar in- 
croachments not only in Prince William’s found, but alfe in Cook’s inlet; 
where he obferved fimilar effects on the fhores, and is of opinion from 
thefe evidences, that the fhallow banks occupying fo large a part of Gray’s 
harbour, have recently been produced by the operation of one and the 
fame caufe: and it is not lefs reafonable to conclude, that the waters of 
the north pacific, have, poffibly for ages, had a general tendency to pro- 
duce the fame effeét, on all the Coaft comprehended within the limits before 
mentioned. 

A return of fair and clear weather on the 18th enabled them to fee that 
large traét of broken land lying between Crofs found and cape Omma- 
ney, which has been defcribed as having a range of high mountains 
capped with fnow extending through it; but from thefe fill continuing 
to have the appearance of being difunited in feveral places, it tended to 
corroborate our former opinion; and although as before we had not had 
an opportunity of afcertaining the faét, I have been induced to confider 
the country as being divided into many iflands, and have for that reafon 
termed it anarchipelago. The ftrait that feparates this land from the eaftern 
fhore, which after Lord Chatham, I have called Coa THAM Srratr, Mr. 
Whidbey confiders as likely to be one of the meft profitable places for 
procuring the fkins of the fea otter, on the whole coaft; not only from the 
abundance obferved in the poffeffion of the natives, but from the im- 
wenfe number of thofe animals, feen about the fhores in all direétions. 
Here the fea otters were in fuch plenty that it was eafily in the power 
of the natives to procure as many as they chofe to be at the trouble of 
taking. I was alfo given to underftand by Mr. Brown of the Jackal, 
who followed us through thefe regions, that the fea otter fkins which he 
procured there were of an extremely fine quality. | 

The principal objeét which His Majefty appears to have had in view, 
in direéting the undertaking of this voyage having at length been com- 
pleted, I truft the precifion with which the furvey of the coaft of North 

Welt 


- mark, 


ialmers, 
ilar in- 
’s inlet; 
yn from 
’ Gray’s 
and the 
aters of 
to pro- 
s before 


fee that 
Omma- 
UNtains 
tinuing 
nded to 
not had 
‘onfider 
t reafon 
‘eaftern 
iT, Mr. 
ices for 
rom the 
he im- 
edtions. 
} power 


Jackal, 
ich he 


n view, 
com- 
North 
Welt 


uble of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Weft America has been carried into effeét, will remove every doubt, and 
fet afide every opinion of a north-weft paffage, or any water communica- 
tion navigable for fhipping, exifting between the north pacific, and the 
interior of the American continent, within the limits of our refearches. 
The difcovery that no fuch communication does exiit has been zealoufly 
purfued, and with a degree of minutenefs far exceeding the letter of iny 
commiffion or inftructions; in this refpeét I might poffibly have incurred 
the cenfure of difobedience, had I not been intrufted with the moft liberal, 
difcretionary orders, as being the fitteft and moft likely means of attain- 
ing the important end in queftion. 

The very detached and broken region that lies before fo large a portion 
of this coaft, rendered a minute examination altogether unavoidable : this 
had frequently the good effeét of facilitating the labours of our furvey, 
by its leading us through narrow, fhallow, intricate channels, which cut 
off extenfive traéts of broken land, and by thus fhewing their feparation 
from the continent, their further examination became unimportant to 
the objeét of our inquiry. 

For this reafon I have confidered it effential to the illuftration of our 
furvey, to ftate very exaétly not only the track of the veflels when navi- 
gating thefe regions, but likewife thofe of the boats when fo employed, 
as well when I was prefent myfelf, as when they were conducted by Mr. 
Whidbey or Mr. Johnftone, on whom the execution of that laborious 


and dangerous fervice principally fell, and to whom I fecl myfelf indebted. 


for the zeal with which they engaged in it onall occafions. The perufal of 
thefe parts of our voyage to perfons not particularly interefted, I am con- 
(cious will afford but little entertainment; yet I have been induced to give 
a detailed account, inftead of an abftract, of our proceedings, for the pur- 
pofe of illuftrating the charts accompanying this journal; of {hewing the 
manner in which our time day by day had been employed; and, for the 
additional purpofe, of making the hiftory of our tranfaétions on the north 
welt coalt of America, as conclufive as poffible, againft all fpeculative opi- 
nions refpecting the exiftence of a Ayperborean or mediterranean ocean 
within the limits of our furvey. 

2 I fhall 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


I fhall now conclude the account of our tranfaétions at this place by 
the infertion of fuch aftronomical and nautical obfervations as were made 
during the time we paffed at this f{tation. 

On the ed of auguft in port Conclufion the chronometers fhew the 
following longitudes, viz. Arnold’s No. 14, 225° 37'; Arnold’s No. 176, 
225° 38; and Kendall’s, 225° 34’ 30"; the true longitude being 225° 37’ 
30”, it appeared that Arnold’s No. 14 was 30’ to the weftward, Arnold's 
No. 176 go’ to the eaftward, and Kendall’s 2’ 30” to the weftward of 
the true longitude. 

By eighteen fets of obfervations taken between the ed and 18th of 
auguft on fhore with the artificial horizon, Arnold’s No. 14 was found to 
be faft of mean time at Greenwich at noon on the 18th of 


augutt, - - - - - 4" 38' 13” 30” 
And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 24 00 

Arnold’s No. 176, faftof mean time at Greenwich on ditto 10 13 33 00 
And gaining per day at the rate of, - - 49 37 

Kendall’s faft of mean time at Greenwich on ditto 9 8 30 00 
And gaining per day at the rate of, - : 26 11 


The mean variation by two compaffes and eighteen fets 

of obfervations, differing from 24° 9’ to 27° 10’, was_ 25° 30’ 
The latitude of the place of obfervation by four meri- 

dional altitudes, taken on fhore with the artificial horizon, 56 14 55 


lace by 
‘e made 


1ew the 
fo. 176, 
25° 37" 
\rnold’s 
yard of 


18th of 
yund to 


13” 30” 
24 00 
93 00 


49 37 
30 00 


26 11 


GS 


BOOK THE SIXTH. 


PASSAGE TO THE SOUTHWARD ALONG THE WESTERN COAST 
oF AMERICA; DOUBLE CAPE HorN; TouCH aT Sr. 
HELENA; ARRIVE IN ENGLAND. 


CHAPTER I. 


Depart from port Conclufion—Arrtval at Nootka—Tranfattions there— 
Vifit Maquinna at Tah/heis—Aftronomical obfervations for correcting the 
Survey between cape Douglas and cape Decifion. 


THE preparations that had been made for our departing immediately 
on the return of the boats, proved of little importance, as the s.r. gale 
which commenced on the day of their arrival, continued with little varia- 
tion to blow very violently from the dire€tion in which I purpofed to 
fteer, attended with very heavy rain, and thick foggy weather until friday 
evening, when the atmofphere became fomewhat clearer, and the wind 
more moderate. Although it continued to be contrary to our purfuit, 
yet being completely tired of remaining in this ina€tive folitary fituation, 
I determined to put to fea, and with the Chatham departed from port 
Conclufion. We plied towards the ocean, but made little progrefs, as 
we were ftill attended by adverfe winds and thick foggy weather. 

It was not until the morning of the 24th that we reached the open 
ocean, in accomplifhing of which, we were in imminent danger of lofing 
the veffels about twelve o’clock the preceding night, by being driven on 
cape Ommaney. The faint variable winds, and the great irregularity of 
the tides, fat us fo near to that promontory, and the rock that lies near it, 
that it required our utmoft efforts in towing to keep the veffels off from 

Vou. III. Qq the 


Friday 22. 


Sunday 24+ 


98 


1794+ 
Augutt. 


ce ed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the land, and confequently from the inevitable deftru€tion that muft have 
followed. A very heavy weftern {well at this time broke with great fury 
not half a mile from us; and as no anchorage, or even bottom could be 
found, our fituation for fome time was moft ferioufly alarming; from 
which however, we were moft providentially extricated, by a gentle 
breeze {pringing up from the n. w., when in the moft perilous and criti- 
cal ftate that can be imagined. 

This breeze by two in the morning, enabled us to gain a fufficient dif- 
tance from the fhore, to allow the boats, which had been employed in 
towing the fhip from the rocks, to be taken on board. In the execution 
of this bufinefs we had the misfortune of lofing Ifaac Wooden, one of 
the cutter’s crew, who unfortunately fell overboard; and although a boat 
was inftantly fent to his affiftance, yet as he was no fwimmer, and as in 
falling he unluckily ftruck his head againft the boat’s gunwale, he funk 
fo immediately that no help could be afforded him. This poor fellow 
had affifted in moft of the boat excurfions, was highly regarded by his 
comrades, and much regretted by his officers; in fhort, he was a good 
man, and an aétive failor ; and to commemorate his unexpeéted and me- 
lancholy fate, I named the rock which lies off cape Ommaney, Woop- 
EN’S Rock. 

At day-light we had a frefh gale from the n. w., and having now finally 
accomplifhed fo much of my commiffion, as appertained to the difcovery 
of any navigable water communication, from the north pacific into the 
interior of the American continent, my attention became direfted to the 
adjuftment of thofe differences that had arifen in my negociation with 
Sen" Quadra as to the ceffion of Nootka; under the idea that a fufficient 
time had now elapfed, fince the departure of Lieutenant Broughton, for 
the arrival of the neceffary inftruétions at that place, by which I might 
be enabled to regulate my future conduét, with refpcét to the reftitution 
of thofe territories. 

In this expe€tation our courfe was direéted fouth-eaftward towards 
Nootka, paffing about 3 leagues to the weftward of the Hazy iflands; 
thefe form a group of fmall rocky iflets a league in extent, lying s. 7 £., 
at the diftance of 16 leagues from cape Ommaney ; s. 62 w. from cape 
3 Decifion ; 


uft have 
eat fury 
could be 
g; from 
a gentle 
nd criti- 


cient dif. 
loyed in 
Kecution 
, one of 
th a boat 
nd as in 
he funk 
r fellow 
d by his 
s a good 
and me- 
Woob- 


w finally 
lifcovery 
into the 
d to the 
ion with 
ufficient 
ton, for 
I might 
ftitution 


towards 
iflands ; 
PS..9 EB, 
om cape 
Decifion ; 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Decifion, and 3 leagues weft from Coronation ifland, which is t: _ 1ear- 
eft land to them. At noon the fouthernmoft land in fight, being C° de 
St. Bartolom, forming the north point of entrance into Puerto del Bay- 
lio Bucareli, and difcovered by Sen" Quadra in 1775, bore by compafs 
s. 87 £.; the neareft fhore was a confpicuous promontory, which I 
diftinguifhed by the name of Care AppINGTON after the fpeaker of 
the Houfe of Commons, Nn. 73 £., diflant 4 or 5 leagues; Warren’s 
ifland in the entrance of Clarence’s ftrait, N. g E.; mount Calder, N.1£.; 
Coronation ifland, N. 13 w. to N. 30 w.; and cape Ommaney, N. 44 w. 
In this fituation the obferved latitude was 55° 292’, and the longitude, 
agreeably to the pofition of feveral confpicuous ftations as fixed by for- 
mer obfervations, and now very accurately correfponding, was found to 
be 225° 58’; but by the chronometers, allowing their rate and error as 
afcertained at port Conclufion, the longitude was by Kendall’s chrono- 
meter 226° 4’, by Arnold’s No. 14, 226° 3 45", and by No. 176, 226° 15' 
30"; hence it would appear, that fomeé alteration in their rate of going 
had taken place fince the laft obfervations were made in port Conclufion, 
on the evening of the 18th; and particularly in No. 176, which it is ne- 
ceffary to remark, had for the purpofe of obferving with, been there taken 
on fhore. 

In the afternoon we paffed C°del St. Bartolom, which, according to 
our obfervations, is fituated in latitude 55° 124’, longitude 226° 34’. From 
this cape, in a direétion s.21£. at the diftance of 14 miles, and 12 
miles from the neareft part of the contiguous fhore, lies a very low flat 
rocky iflet, furrounded by rocks and breakers, that extend fome diftance 
from it; from thefe circumftances, and from its being fo far diftant from the 
main land, it is rendered one of the moft dangerous impediments to na- 
vigation that we had met with on the exterior coaft; and hence it obtained 
the name of the Wotr Rock. S.11 w. from this rock, at the diftance 
of 3 leagues, lies a {mall high ifland, named by Mr. Dixon, Forrefter’s 
Ifland; between thefe we pafled, and fo far as we became acquainted 
with the channel, it appeared to be clear and free from interruption. 

After paffing Forrefter’s ifland, our courfe was direéted towards the 
north-weft point of Queen Charlotte’s iflands, with an intention of exa- 
mining their exterior coaft, for the purpofe of correéting any error that 

Qqe might 


Monday 25. 


isiole) 


1704. 
September. 


Nee teed 


Monday 1. 


Tuefday 2. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


might have occw red in our former furvey: but this we were unable to 
accomplifh, on account of the thick hazy or ioggy weather which for the 
moft part obfcured the land from our view, and when vifible, it was feen 
but indiftinétly. ‘This weather was attended by calms, or light variable 
winds, {c adverfe to our purfuit, that ii was not unul the 1ft of feptember 
that we gained fight of the weflernmoft of Scot's lands. At noon this 
land bore by compals n.8 £., and our obferved latitude being 50° 21’, 
fllewed the longitude to be 230° 35'; but by the chrenometers allowing the 
rate as before {tated, Kendall's chronometer gave 230° 46’ 453. Arnold’s 
No. 14, 230° 45° 45"; and No. 176, 231°0'15". Now, although we 
were not pofitively certain as to the identical part of the ifland to which 
thefe calculations applied, (it being but juft vifible in the horizon) yet, 
concluding the longitude as had been afcertained by its bearings, and the 
obferved latitude of the fhip to be moft correét ; the former opinion, that 
the chronometers had varied fince our laft obfervations by them in port 
Conclufion, was now very much f{trengthened, as we were thoroughly con- 
vinced that no error, either in making the prefent or any of the former 
obfervations, had taken place ; the moft particular care and attention 
having ever been obferved throughout the whole voyage on all fuch 
occafions. 

The wind at N. w. gradually increafed to a gentle gale, accompanied 
by clear and pleafant weather, which brought us by fix in the evening of 
the following day to an anchor in Friendly cove, Nootka found ; here 
we found His Catholic Majefty’s armed veffels the Princiffa, Aranfafu, 
and the St. Carlos, belonging to the eftablifhment at St. Blas, with the 
Phoenix bark, commanded by Mr. Hugh Moor, from Bengal; the floop 
Prince le Boo, one of Mr. Brown’s fquadron, commanded by Mr. 
Gordon from China, who had been employed in colleéting furs during the 
fummer upon this coaft, moftly to the northward of Nootka; befide thefe 
Englifh traders, was the Wafhington, J. Kendrick, commander, of Bofton 
in America; who had been employed in the fame purfuit, but whofe 
veffel was now under repair. 

The Princiffa commanded by Sen" Fidalgo had arrived from St. Blas 
only the day before, and had brought hither Brigadier General Don 

Jofe 


able to 
for the 
yas {een 
variable 
tember 
,0n this 


50° 21’, 
ying the 
\rnold’s 
ugh we 
> which 
mn) yet, 
and the 
on, that 
in port 
ily con- 
former 
ttention 


ll fuch 


apanied 
ning of 
1; here 
ranfafu, 
yith the 
e floop 
DY Mr. 
ing the 
e thefe 
Bofton 

whofe 


dt. Blas 
1 Don 
Jofe 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Jofe Manuel Alava, colonel of the regiment of Puebla, and governor of 
Nootka. 

The appointment of this gentleman as governor of Nootka, had 
taken place in confequence of the death of our highly valuable and much 
efteemed friend Sen" Quadra, who in the month of march had died 
at St. Blas, univerfally lamented. Having endeavoured, on a former oc- 
cafion, to point out the degree of admiration and refpeét with which the 
conduét of Sen Quadra towards our little community had impreffed 
us during his life; I cannot refrain, now that he is no more, from ren- 
dering that juftice to his memory to which it is fo amply intitled, by 
ftating, that the unexpected melancholy event of his deceafe operated 
on the minds of us all, in a way more eafily to be imagined than de- 
fcribed ; and whilft it excited our moft grateful acknowledgments, it 
produced the deepeft regret for the lofs of a chara€ter fo amiable, and 
fo truly ornamental to civil fociety. 

The Difcovery having in the courfe of the day greatly outfailed the 
Chatham, the latter did not arrive until after dark; for this reafon, our for- 
mal vifit to the governor was deferred until the day following. Mr. Puget 
had come down the coaft from Woody point, much nearer to the fhore 
than we had done; and from him I learned, that between the entrance of 
the found, and the breakers which are about 7 or 8 miles to the weftward 
of it, he had met with much fea-weed; growing about 2 miles from the 
fhore in very irregular depths of water, from 5 to 10 fathoms, rocky 
bottom, until within about 2 miles of Friendly cove, when the fea-weed 
difappeared, and the depth of water greatly increafed. 

On wednefday morning we waited upon the governor, who ftill re- 
fided on board the Princifla, where we were received by him and Sen 
Fidalgo with marks of the moft polite and friendly attention. I was 
foon given to underftand by Sen" Alava, that his appointment to this 
government had taken place as above ftated for the particular purpofe of 
finifhing the pending negociation, refpeéting the ceffion of thefe territo- 
ries; which, in confequence of the different conftru€tion put on the firft 
article of the Spanifh convention, of the 28th of o€tober 1790, by the 
late Sen™ Quadra and -mylelf, had, fince the month of feptember 


1792; 


201 


1794- 
September, 


cmon ton 


Wednel. 3, 


302 


1794- 
September, 


ee amend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


1792, been intirely fufpended. The prefent governor however was ftill 
unprovided with the credentials neceffary for finifhing this bufinefs; but 
on his departure from St. Blas in june, thefe documents were hourly 
expected, and a veffel was waiting there in readinefs to be difpatched to 
this port, provided they arrived in time for her reaching Nootka on or 
before the 15th of o€tober; but in the event of her not being able to 
effeét a paflage by that time, fhe w2s .0 repair to Monterrey. In confe- 
quence of this arrangement Sen" Alava purpofed to remain here until 
that period fhould arrive; and as no communication from England, ei- 
ther of a public or private nature, had yet reached me, I confidered it to 
be highly probable, that a duplicate of my inftruétions for the like pur- 
pofe might be tranfmitted by the fame conveyance. 

Under this impreffion, and the confideration of many other circum- 
{tances relative to the fituation of both veffels, I thought it moft advife- 
able to determine on remaining till that period with Sen" Alava; indeed it 
was not very likely, from the various important duties we had now to 
execute, with the inadequate means we poffeffed for doing fo, that we 
fhould be enabled to proceed much before that time. Our ftore of cord- 
age was completely exhaufted, nor had wea fathom of rope but what 
was then in ufe; the whole of it was much worn, and had been fpliced 
in feveral places, and therefore it became neceffary to contrive fome 
means for procuring a fupply before we could venture to fea again. The 
quantity which our Spanifh friends, or the trading veffels in this port, 
were likcly to afford us, was very inadequate to our neceffities, which 
obliged us to refort to the expedient of converting fome of our cables 
into cordage. This would neceflarily prove a tedious bufinels, efpecially 
as we had to conftruét a machine for that purpofe. The Chatham was 
not only in a fimilar predicament with refpeét to cordage, but fhe re- 
quired caulking, and immediate repair in fome of her plank, that was found 
to be rotten. _ Both veffels demanded many fpars to be cut and prepared ; 
the fails and cafks ftood in need of great repair; and it had become effen- 
tially important, that the obfervatory fhould be ereéted on fhore, for the 
purpofe of afcertaining more pofitively the rate and error of our chrono- 

meters, 


was ftill 
efs; but 
> hourly 
tched to 
(a on or 
able to 
1 confe- 
re until 
land, ei- 
red it to 
ike pur- 


circum- 
- advife- 
indeed it 
now to 
that we 
of cord- 
ut what 
{pliced 
re fome 
n. The 
Is port, 
, which 
cables 
pecially 
am was 
fhe re- 
is found 
ppared ; 
e effen- 
for the 
throno- 
meters, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


meters, in order to correét our furvey from cape Douglas to cape 
Decifion; for notwithftanding that I had little doubt in my own mind 
of the mode that had been purfued, yet I was fenfible that correfpond- 
ing obfervations at this place would be very fatisfactory. 

With thefe objects in contemplation, our time was not likely to be 
unprofitably employed; and although I would gladly have poftponed 
the execution of thefe feveral tafks until our arrival in a more fouthern 
clime, where we had reafon to believe the weather would be more favo- 
rable to our wifhes, and where the neceflary refrefhments of which we 
all ftood fo much in need, might have been procured in greater abun- 
dance; yet it would have been highly indifcreet, and extremely dange- 
rous, for the veflels to have put to fea again, until a fupply of cordage 
could be provided. In addition to this, other circumftances feemed to 
demand, that I fhould remain within the reach of any difpatches that 
might have been forwarded through New Spain; which could only be 
done by ftaying here, or reforting to fome of the fouthern Spanifh 
fettlements, where we fhould lofe the advantage of procuring the {pars 
and plank which were now required; and as moft of our bufinefs muft 
have been ill executed on board the veffels, I telt little encouragement, 
when I refleéted on the treatment we had experienced the preceding year 
from the aéting governor of California, to expeét being indulged with 
permiflion for performing it on fhore, in any of the ports under his ju- 
rifdi€tion. 

Thefe weighty confiderations induced me to refolve on continuing at 
Nootka until all our important operations were -ompleted; and if in the 
mean time I fhould receive any inftruétions for the government of my 
condu@, as to the reftitution of thefe territories, by the expected Spanifh 
packet, or by any other conveyance, I fhould be upon the fpot to aét 
with Sen" Alava as the nature of my orders might require. 

I took an early opportunity of reprefenting to Sen" Alava our neceffi- 
tous condition, and requefted his permiflion to ereét our obfervatory and 
tents on fhore. To this requeft he gave his moft hearty concurrence, 
and feemed very earneftly to regret, that the ftate of their eftablifhment 

precluded 


303 


1794. 
September, 


\ ese eed 


304 


17946 
September. 


Thurfday 4. 


Saturday 6. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


precluded him from adminiftering to our wants in that effe€tual manner, 
to which he was prompted by his inclinations. 

Sen" Saavadra, who had remained in charge of Nootka fince our for- 
mer vifit, joined our party on 4oard the Princiffa, where the day paffed 
in making inquiries about the civilized world, and in deploring the tur- 
bulent and unhappy ftate of Eurcpe. The melancholy circumftances 
that had been detailed by Mr. Brown, were now confirmed by thefe gen- 
tlemen to the clofe of the year 1793; and we became much concerned 
by the events that had happened, and alarmed at the fatal confequences 
which it was natural to f{uppofe they muft produce. 

The weather was gloomy with continual rain, but it did not prevent 
Magquinna and Clewpaneloo, with fome other chiefs, and a few of the na- 
tives, from vifiting the veflels. The two former received fuch compli- 
ments as were fuitable to their rank, with which they were highly fatis- 
fied; and the latter difpofed of a fcanty fupply of fifh at a very exorbi- 
tant price. Fifh had become of great value amongft thefe people, as 
either from the badnefs of the feafon during the preceding fummer, or 
from their negleét and inattention in providing their ufual fupply for the 
winter, they had experienced the greateft diftrefs for want of provifions 
during that period; and had not Sen" Saavadra adminiftered to their re- 
lief, many of them would probably have fallen a facrifice to the fcarcity. 
And although the provident care he had taken was inadequate to all 
that was demanded of him, yet the affiftance he had been able to afford 
them, was, much to the credit of the natives, acknowledged by them 
with the moft grateful expreffions. 

The governor, Sen™ Fidalgo, Saavadra, and fome others of the Spa- 
nifh officers, honored us with a return of our vifit on thurfday morning; 
but in confequence of our reduced ftock of powder, I was under the 
necefflity of declining the ufual ceremony of faluting, which was very 
politely excufed and difpenfed with by the whole party. 

The weather continued very rainy and unpleafant until faturday morn- 
ing, when the clouds difperfed with a breeze from the weftward, and the 
weather became clear and agreeable, The tents, obfervatory, and in- 
{truments, were now fent on fhore; the fails dried and unbent, and our 

various 


manner, 


our for- 
y pafled 
the tur- 
ni{tances 
efe gen- 
ncerned 
quences 


prevent 
‘the na- 
compli- 
ly {atis- 
exorbi- 
ople, as 
mer, or 
’ for the 
ovifions 
heir re- 
carcity. 
e to all 
o afford 
by them 


he Spa- 
lorning ; 
der the 
s very 


morn- 
and the 
nd in- 
nd our 
various 


ROUND THE: WORLD: 


various fervices were put in a train for execution, in which we were 
aflifted by fome Spanifh caulkers and carpenters, who were employed on 
board the Chatham; and on monday following having conftruted a 
machine, we began making rope from the materials of a new bower 
cable. 

Whilft the wind continued in the weflern quarter, it regularly died away 
every evening; and through the night light airs prevailed from the land, 
which were fucceeded by the refrefhing wefterly breeze from the fea in 
the dav time, accompanied by cheerful pleafant weather; which, with the 
advantage of the fociety we here met, made our time pafs as agreeably as 
could well be expe@ed in thefe rude and diftant regions. 

On wednefday the wind again blew frefh from the s.r. and exhibited 
another of the very rare inflances of lightning and thunder in this coun- 
try, which with torrents of rain continued moft of the night. 

The wind returned again to the weftward on thurfday evening, and 
brought with it fair and pleafant weather ; with which the Aranfafu failed 
for St. Blas, and throug: Sen" Alava’s civility, I tranfmitted by this 
opportunity a letter to the Admiralty, ftating our having accomplifhed 
the furvey of North Weft America, and the expeétation I was in of re- 
ceiving their final inftru€tions for the accomplifhment of the other objeés 
of my commiffion. 

Both wind and weather, as might reafonably be expefted on the ap- 
proach of the autumnal equinox, became now very changeable; on 
the 19th the atmofphere was dark and gloomy, with drifting fhowers ; 
and the wind from the s.£., which in the afternoon fuddenly fhifted to 
the n.F., blew in heavy fquals, accompanied by a very heavy fall of 
rain, Notwithflanding that the wind came direétly from the land, yet 
towards midnight, when the gale feemed to be at its height, an extremely 
heavy fwell rolled in from the ocean, and broke with great fury on the 
thores of the found that were expofed to its influence; and even thofe of 
this little cove were by the furge greatly annoyed. This kind of weather 
continued until the 17th, and much retarded our feveral works, which 
could not yet be confidered as in any flate of forwardnefs. The violence 
of the equinoxial gales from this time feemed to have abated, and a feries 


Vou, I. Rr of 


1794. 
September, 


(ese setae 


Mondey 8. 


Wednef, 10, 


Tharflayis. 


Wednel. 17 


306 


1794- 
September. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


of fair weather, with regular land and fea breezes, enabled our people 
to make all the progrefs that the tedious nature of their feveral labours 
would permit. 

Since our arrival we had occafionally been vifited by Maguinna, Clew- 
paneloo, with fome of the inferior chiefs, and many of the inhabitants, 
who fold us a few fifh, and brought to market fome venifon; but moft 
of thefe people had now retired to their winter habitations up the found. 
Thefe Sen" Alava exprefled a defire to vifit, and as we all knew that fuch 
an excurfion would be highly flattering to Maguznna, and to the other 
chiefs and people, a party was formed with three of our boats, and a 
Spanifh launch to carry the luggage. Notwithftanding that we were 
well perfuaded of the friendly difpofition of the natives, yet I confidered 
it neceffary that the boats fhould be equipped for defence, as on all other 
fuch occafions. The fettled flate of the weather had now not only fa- 
vored and forwarded all our tranfaétions, but was extremely inviting, to 
the relaxation we had in view. 

Sen™ Alava and Fidalgo, with Mr. Menzies, accompanied me in the 
Difcovery’s yawl; Mr. Puget, attended by fome of the officers of the 
Chatham, was in the cutter; Lieutenant Swaine, with fome of the gen- 
tlemen of the Difcovery, were in our large cutter; and with thofe in the 
Spanifh launch, our party confifled of fifty-fix officers and men. No. 
doubt was entertained that Maguinna, who had been informed of the 
honor intended him, would be in readinefs to receive us, and for this 
reafon our courfe was firft direéted towards Tahfheis, the place of his 
refidence. But as we were not much affifted by the wind, it was near 
fun-fet before we arrived at a very pleafant {pot not far from Maguinna’s 
village, where we pitched our tents; and as the day was too far ad- 
vanced, our ceremonial vifit was deferred until the next day, and a mef- 
fage to that effect was fent by Clewpaneloo, who had attended us from the 
fhips. But Maguznna, who with his people was in readinefs to receive us, 
inftantly difpatched a meffenger, requefting that we would repair to his 
refidence that evening. This however we thought proper to decline, but 
in order that Magutnna might be fatisfied of our intentions to vifit him 
in the morning, fome of the gentlemen walked to the village, and ex- 

plained 


people 


labours 


L, Clew- 
bitants, 
at molt 
t found. 
iat fuch 
e other 
and a 
e were 
fidered 
ll other 
nly fa- 
ting to 


in the 
of the 
1e gen- 
‘in the 
1 = No 
of the 
for this 
of his 
is near 
uanna’s 
far ad- 
a mel- 
om the 
ive US, 
to his 
le, but 
it him 
ad ex- 
slained 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


plained to him, that it was the latenefs of the hour only that prevented 
our then complying with his requeft. 

Matters being comfortably arranged for the night, centinels were 

planted, as well to avoid any furprize from the natives, as to prevent our 
own people from ftraying to their habitations, from whence difputes or 
mifunderftandings might have arifen; {tritt orders were iffued to this ef- 
feét, and being uniformly adhered to, the night pafled without the leaft 
interruption, 
- After breakfalt on friday morning, we proceeded with the four boats to 
Tahfheis, and were welcomed on our approach to the fhore by a vocife- 
rous old man, exclaiming “ Wacofh, wacofh :” by which he meant to exprefs 
friendfhip, and the good intentions of the natives towards us. ‘Thefe fen- 
timents being returned in a fimilar manner by our party, we landed, and 
were received by Maguinna and two of his brothers, Whaclaffe puliz, 
and Tatoochfeatticus, with repeated expreflions of “ Wacofh,” until we 
were almoft ftunned with their gratulations. This ceremony being 
concluded, we were conduéted through the village to Maqutnna’s habita- 
tion, where we were led to feats prepared and covered with clean mats 
at the upper end of the houle. 

Having taken our feats, about thirty men began each to beat with a 
{tick on a hollow board, in order to affemble the inhabitants of the vil- 
lage to that fpot; this fummons being readily obeyed, Maguznna in- 
formed the affembled crowd with great earneftnefs, and in a fpeech 
of fome length, that our vifit was to be confidered as a great honor 
done to him, and that it had taken place in confequence of the civil 
and orderly behaviour of all the inhabitants of the found under his au- 
thority towards the Englifh and the Spaniards. . This, he obferved, was 
not the cafe with Wicananifh, or any other chief whofe people commit- 
ted a€ts of violence and depredation on the veffels and their crews that 
vifited their country; but that fuch behaviour was not praétifed at 
Nootka, and that for this reafon they had been more frequently vifited ; 
by which means, their wealth in copper, cloth, and various other articles 
of great value to them, had been increafed far exceeding that of any 
of their neighbours, He particularly mentioned fome tribes, but by 

Rra appellations 


897 


1794- 


September. 


’ 
Ct 


“eae 


*” 


308 


1794+ 
September, 


(eer pee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


appellations we were not acquainted with, over whom he feemed to 
confider our vifit to him as a great triumph; and from his manner of 
{peaking, there evidently appeared to exift no fmall degree of jealoufy 
between them. He then proceeded to enumerate the various good qua. 
liies that marked the character of the Spaniards and the Englifh; that 
both were ftrongly attached te himfelf and his people, and that he hoped 
that we fhould be much pleafed by being entertained according to their 
manner of receiving vifitors. 

The performers I believe were all in readinefs without, and anxious 
to begin their part; for the inflant Maguinna had ceafed f{peaking, the 
hollow board mufic recommenced, and a man entered the houfe mott 
fantaftically dreffed in a war garment, which reached to the calves of his 
legs, but not below them; this was varioufly ornamented, as was alfo his 
face with black and red paint, fo that his features appeared to be moft 
extravagantly diftorted, or more properly fpeaking, they were fcarcely 
diftinguifnable; his hair was powdered, or rather intirely covered with 
the moft delicate white down of young fea fowl, and in his hand he bore 
a mufket with a fixed bayonet, making altogether a moft favage, though 
at the fame time a whimfical figure; this man was followed by about 
twenty more, decorated with confiderable variety after the fame fafhion, 
but differently armed; fome like himfe!f with mufkets, others with piftols, 
{words, daggers, {pears, bows, arrows, filh-gigs, and hatchets, feem- 
ingly with intent to difplay their wealth and power, by an exhibition of 
the feveral implements they poffeifed, as weli for the ufe of war, as for 
obtaining the different 1 -ceffaries of life. 

This indefcribable group of figures was drawn up before us; and 
notwithftanding we were perfeétly fatisfied of the harmleis and peaceable 
intentions of thefe people, yet I believe there was not one of our party 
intirely free from thofe fenfations which will naturally arife from the fight 
of fuch unufual objeéts ; whofe favage and barbarous appearance, was not 
a little augmented by their a€tions and vociferous behaviour, accompa- 
nied by anexhibition, that confifted principally of jumping in a very pe- 
culiar manner. In this effort the legs did not feem to partake much of 
the exertion, although they fometimes raifed themlelves to a confiderable 

2 height ; 


ed to 
nex of 
aloufy 
d qua- 
; that 
hoped 
> their 


x10us 
g, the 
> molt 
of his 
fo his 
e moft 
arcely 
d with 
ie bore 
though 
about 
afhion, 
piltols, 

feem- 
tion of 
as for 


; and 
ceable 
party 
e fight 
as not 
ompa- 


ry pe- 


erable 
eight ; 


ch of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


height; and we underflood that thofe were confidered to be the beft 
performers, who kept their feet conftantly parallel to cach other, or in 
one certain pofition, with the leaft poffible inclination of the knees. After 
thele had finifhed their part, Maquenna performed a maf{k dance by himfelf, 
in which, with great addrefs, he frequently and almoft imperceptibly 
changed his mafk; this feemed to be a very favorite amufement of his, 
as he appeared to be in high fpirits, and to take great delight in the 
performance. The mafks he had made choice of, certainly did credit to 
his imagination in point of whimfical effeét; his drefs was different from 
that worn by any of the other performers, confifting of a cloak and a 
kind of fhort apron, covered with hollow fhells, and {mall pieces of cop- 
per fo placed as to ftrike againft each other, and to produce a jingling 
notfe; which, being accompanied by the mufic before defcribed as a fub- 
ftitute for a drum, and fome vocal exertions, produced a favage difcor- 
dant noife as offenfive to the ear, as the former exhibition had been to 
the eye. Butas the objeét of our vifit was a compliment to Maquinna, 
a previous determination to be pleafed infured our plaudits, which were 
bountifully beftowed, and received with great pleafure and fatisfaétion by 
the furrounding {peétators. 

A paufe now took place in the entertainments, which however was 
foon filled up to the great gratification of our hoft and his friends. ‘The 
prefenis that had been provided for tie occafion were now exhibited to 
public view, confifting of copper, blue cloth, blankets, ear fhells, and 
a variety of {mall articles of lefs value; thele were feverally diftributed 
by Sen" Alava and mylelf to Maquinna and his relations, according to 
the rank and confequence of each; in thefe tokens of our friendfhip we 
fucceeded fo well, that our liberal donations foon refounded through the 
village, and the glad tidings were received with loud acclamations of ap- 
plaufe. On thefe fubfiding, we had a fecond vocal and inftrumental 
performance, which concluded by a return from Maquinna for the pre- 
fents we had made. In this Maquinna did not perfonally appear; Wha- 
claffé pultz, ating as mafter of the ceremonies, firft addreffed Sen™ Alava 
ina fhort fpeech, refpe€ting the friendfhip that had. fo long been eftablifhed 
between the Spaniards, and the tribes under the authority of Maguenna, 

who 


309 


1794+ 


September, 


a 


310 


1794- 
September. 


Eee ee amend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


who, he faid, was highly pleafed by the trouble he had taken in paying 
him this diftant vifit; and that, as a proof of Maquinna’s fincerity, he was 
then about to make fome return for the repeated inftances of friendfhip 
he had experienced, by placing a fea otter fkin at the feet of Sen" Alava. 
I then received a fimilar compliment, as did Sen" Fidalgo and Mr. Puget, 
after which Sen" Alava and myfelf were each prefented with a fecond 
fea otter fkin, which concluded the ceremonies of this vifit. 

The day was not yet far advanced; and being fair and pleafant, we 
amufed ourfelves in ftrolling through the village; and found it, although 
extenfive, far from being numeroufly inhabited. This was accounted 
for by Maquinna, who ftated, that many families were ftill abfent, not 
having yet procured their {tock of provifions for the enfuing winter fea- 
fon; at which time, if all their habitations are fully occupied, its popu- 
lation cannot be much lefs than eight or nine hundred perfons. Maquin. 
ma’s habitation was confiderably larger than any of the others, and had » 
very fuperior advantage over them all by being lefs filthy ; it was ac pre- 
feat not more than half occupied, nor was it intirely covered in, though 
it did not appear to have been recently ere€ted; but we remained ig- 
norant of the reafon why fo large a proportion of the roof remained un- 
finifhed. The conftruétion of the Nootka houfes, efpecially with refpeét 
to their infide, has been fo fully treated by Captain Cook, as to preclude 
any material addition from my pen; yet it is fingularly remarkable, 
(although particularly reprefented in Mr. Webber’s drawing of the vil- 
lage in Friendly cove) that Captain Cook fhould not have taken any 
notice whatever in his journal, of the immenfe pieces of timber which 
are raifed, and horizontally placed on wooden pillars, about eighteen 
inches above the roof of the largeft houfes in that village; one of which 
pieces of timber was of fize fufficient to have made a lower maft for a 
third rate manof war. Thefe, together with the large images, were at 
that time fuppofed to denote the habitation of the chief, or principal per- 
fon of the tribe; and the opinion then formed, has been repeatedly 
confirmed by obfervations made during this voyage. One or more 
houfes in many of the deferted villages, as well as in moft of the inha- 
bited ones we had vifited, were thus diftinguifhed. On the houfe of 

Maquinna 


aying 
he was 
ndfhip 
Alava. 
Puget, 
fecond 


nt, we 
though 
ounted 
nt, not 
er fea- 
popu- 
faquin- 
1 had » 
ac pre- 
though 
ned ig- 
ed un- 
refpeét 
reclude 
rkable, 
the vil- 
en any 
which 
ighteen 
which 
for a 


ere at 
al per- 
eatedly 
more 
e inha- 
ufe of 
nguinna 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Maquinna were three of thefe immenfe fpars; the middle piece was the 
largeft, and meafured at the but-end nearly five fect in diameter; this 
extended the whole length of the habitation, which was about an hun- 
dred feet long. It was placed on pillars of wood; that which fupported 
it within the upper end of the houfe was about fifteen feet in circumfe- 
rence, and on it was carved one of their diftorted reprefentations of a 
gigantic human figure. We remained totally unacquainted with the inten- 
tion of, or the purpofe that was to be anfwered by, thele fingular roof trees ; 
but it is natural to fuppofe that they muft be direéted to fome important 
objeét, as the raifing of fuch immenfe maffes of timber twelve or four- 
teen feet from the ground, and placing them firmly on the pillars by 
which they are fupported, muft, to a people fo totally devoid of mecha- 
nical powers, be a moft tedious and laborious operation. 

Our curiofity being fatisfied, and our pockets completely emptied by 
the unremitting folicitations of the inhabitants of Tahfheis, of the ftock 
of trinkets with which we had been provided, we proceeded to the upper 
end of the arm, which afforded me an opportunity of explaining to 
Sen™ Alava tle manner, in which the numerous canals and branches in 
the continent he had feen delineated on our charts, terminated; as this. 


ended in the fame way, by a low border of land in the front of a valley,. 


through which fome fmall ftreams of water were difcharged; but the 


adjacent fhores were infinitely lefs high than we had been accuftomed to. 


oblerve; where having ftrolled a little about in the fkirts of the woods, 
we returned to our encampment. Here we found Maguinna with feve- 
ral of our Tahfheian friends, who were very folicitous that we fhould re- 
turn and partake in the evening of an entertainment fimilar to that we 
had received in the morning; but as we had appointed to be at home on. 
funday morning, and had promifed a vifit to our friend Clewpaneloo at 
his principal refidence called Mooetchee, which was at a confiderable 
diftance from Tahfheis, it was not in our power to comply with the civil: 
folicitations of Maguinna and his fraternity. 

We were honored at dinner with the company of Maquznna, molt of 
his family, and many of the other chiefs; who, with the moft unequivocal 
affurances of their friendfhip, and with expreffions of the great pleafure 
they 


312 


1794. 
September. 
yd 


Saturday 27. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


they had derived from our vifit, bad us farewell after dinner, and we 
departed. 

As Mooetchee is fituated near the upper part of the next branch to 
the eaftward of Tahfheis canal, our route was dircéted back by the 
way we had come; and having reached in the evening the dividing point 
of thefe two arms of the fea, which is fituated about N.6E., fix or 
feven miles from Friendly cove, we pitched our tents for the night, in 
order to have the day before us for vifiting Clewpaneloo, whofe habita- 
tion was about feven or eight miles from us ; towards which place, after 
breakfaft on faturday morning, we proceeded ; and as our vilit was not 
intended to be a very long one, the Spanifh launch was left in a plea- 
fant fituation, in order to pitch the encampment, and provide a dinner 
againft our return; by which means our journey to the fhip the next 
day would be materially fhortened. Our progrefs was not very rapid, 
as both wind, and the ftream which I believe in general runs down, 
were adverfe to our purfuit, which was through a region fo wild and 
inhofpitable in its appearance, as occafioned Sen" Alava frequently to 
exprefs his aftonifhment, that it could ever have been an objeét of con- 
tention between our refpective fovereigns. The fhores either conttituted 
impenetrable forefts, produced from the fiffures of a rugged rocky 
country, or were formed by ftupendous barren precipices, rifing per- 
pendicularly from the water to an immenfe height; fo that, excepting 
the ice and cataraéts to which we had been accuftomed in many other in- 
ftances, Sen™ Alava was enabled from this {hort excurfion to form 
a very complete idea of the general character of thofe countries to the 
northward of this ftation, which had fo long occupied our time and 
labour. 

It was nearly three in the afternoon before we reached the village of 
Mooetchee, which confifted of a few houfes huddled together in a cove, 
with as little regularity in the difpofal of them as was apparent in the 
conduét of its inhabitants; who crowded about us, and produced us much 
inconvenience, although with the moft inoffenfive and peaceable defign. 
Our friend Clewbaneloo, though their chief, feemed not to poflefs fuf- 
ficient influence to reftrain this behaviour, even within his own habi- 

tation, 


nd we 


nch to 
by the 
point 
{ix or 
ght, in 
habita- 
2, after 
vas not 
a plea- 
dinner 
1e next 
y rapid, 
down, 
ild and 
ently to 
of con- 
{tituted 
rocky 
ig per- 
epting 
ther in- 
o form 
to ihe 
me and 


lage of 
a cove, 
in the 
s much 
defign. 
efs fuf- 

habi- 


tation, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tation, to which we were conduéted by a very narrow pallage be- 
tween the houfes; the filth of which, and the combination of fo 
many offenfive exhalations, rendered it highly neceffary to our feel- 
ings, that as much difpatch as poffible fhould be ufed in the diftribu- 
tion of our prefents, which, when effected, would leave us_perfettly 
at liberty to depart, without giving the leaft offence to our hoft or 
to any of his ‘riends. On this occafion, ceremonies fimilar to thofe 
praétifed at Tahfheis were here obferved; but the want of order and 
decorum, independently of the difference in point of numbers between 
Tahfheis and Mooetchee, evinced the fuperiority of Maguinna’s autho- 
rity, when compared with that of the neighbouring chiefs; amongft 
whom Clewpaneloo was reputed to be one of the firft in wealth and 
power; and I certainly noticed as many of their large fquare boxes, in 
which they generally keep their valuables, in his habitation, as I had 
done in almoft all the other houfes colleétively taken, but what they 
contained we did not intirely learn; yet, if credit were to be given to 
our landlord, they were all well appropriated, being, according to his 
account, filled with the fkins of the fea otter, bear, deer, martin, and 
other animals of the country, or with copper, iron, cloth, and other 
European commodities. 

Our part being performed, and our ftore of prefents exhaufted, we re- 
turned to our boats, accompanied by Clewpaneloo, who made us in return 
prefents fimilar to thofe we had received from Magutinna ; to which he 
added one infinitely more valuable than all the reft. This was a very 
fine buck, juft killed; which being depofited in our boat, we took 
leave of Mooetchee, amidft reiterated acclamations of “ Wacofh, Wacofh,” 
with repeated intreaties of the moft friendly nature to prolong our ftay ; 
but as the day was now far advanced, no time was loft in making the 
beft of our way towards the ftation where the Spanifh launch had been 
left; this we reached in the evening, and found every thing comfortably 
prepared for our reception. 

As we bent our way homewards the next morning, we ftupped at an 
anchoring place called by the natives Mowenna, in great repute with 
the traders on this coaft, and particularly fo with the Americans. It is 

Vou. IL. Ss fituated 


313 


1794. 
September. 
LS 


314 


1794. 
September. 
ed 


Monday 29. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fituated on the weftern fide of the found, between four and five miles to 
the northward of Friendly cove, over which it poffeffes (though further 
from the fea) feveral advantages in point of fecurity and accommodation. 
The land in its neighbourhood continues to be iow to a greater diftance 
than about Friendly cove, and feems to be compofed of lefs rocky mate- 
rials. The extent of this harbour is but fmall, but being well proteéted 
againft all winds, and its diftance from the ocean preventing its being 
much affected by the f{well, feveral veffels might ride here in_perfeét 
fafety; and as it has a fair navigable channel out of it in a foutherly di- 
rection, veffels can fail out of this harbour whenever the land wind 
prevails to pufh them clear of the fouwd, with infinitely more eafe than 
from Friendly cove ; out of which, they are firft obliged to warp a con- 
fiderable diftance, and to anchor not only in an inconvenient depth of 
water, but on an uneven rocky bottom; in addition to which in the event 
of the wind fuddenly fetting in ftrong from the fea, their fituation becomes 
by no means pleafant. The departure from Friendly cove, although not 
dificult in the fummer feafon, yet (as I have been given to underftand) is 
fubjeét in the winter to great, and indeed dangerous, inconvenience, from 
the heavy fea which rolls in ftormy weather into the found; efpecially 
during the s.£. gales, againft which, from its vicinity to the ocean, it is 
not fufficiently protefted. As a military eftablifhment however, it is 
greatly to be preferred to Mowenna, as nothing can pals or repafs into 
the found unobferved at Friendly cove. 

About noon we arrived on board. Nothing of any moment had oc- 
curred during our abfence; the weather, which had been favorable to our 
excurfion, had been fo hkewife to the feveral employments of re-equip- 
ment, though we had yet much remaining to perform. 

On monday afternoon arrived a very {mall fhip called the Jenny, 
belonging to Briftol; the fame veffel that had vifited Nootka in o€tober, 
1792, then rigged as a three-mafted {chooner, and commanded by Mr. 
Baker, who had proceeded in her to England, with the cargo of furs he 
had then colleéted. She was now commanded by a Mr. John Adamfon, 
who had returned with her from England, and had in the courfe of the pre- 
ceding fummer in the neighbourhood of Queen Charlotte’s iflands, col- 


leéted 


niles to 
further 
dation. 
liftance 


y mate- 
otefted 
| being 
perfeét 
erly di- 
d wind 
fe than 
a con- 
>pth of 
e event 
ecomes 
igh not 
fand) is 
», from 
ecially 
n, it is 
r, it is 
als into 


ad oc- 
to our 
equip- 


Jenny, 
étober, 


y Mr. 
furs he 
lamfon, 
le pre- 
s, col- 


le€ted 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


le€ted upwards of two thoufand fea otter f{kins, with which he was bound 
to the Chinefe market, and from Canton was to be employed as packet 
in the fervice of the Eaft India company. He brought us the agreeable 
intelligence of having met Mr. Brown in the Jackal on the coaft, in the 
latitude of 54°, for whofe fafety we had entertained fome apprehenfion ; 
for when we left Mr. Brown in port Althorp, it was his intention to pro- 
ceed to the fouthward through the inland navigation, and as the inhabi- 
tants of thofe fhores had a€ted a very fufpicious part towards Mr. 
Whidbey, we were fearful left Mr. Brown’s {mall force might not have 
been equal to his proteétion. 

The ferenity of the weather continued to favor our operations with 
little interruption. The wind blew for a few hours on tuefday afternoon 
from the s.£, attended with rain; but the n.w. wind again prevailed, 
and the weather became fair and pleafant the next morning. 

On the day following I was honored with the company of the Gover- 
nor, Sen™ Fidalgo, Saavadra, and moft of the Spanifh officers to dine on 
board the Difcovery. The very exhaufted {tate of my ftores, and ftock 
of articles neceflary on fuch occafions, had precluded my receiving this 
pleafure fo frequently as I could have wifhed. 

I was very agreeably furprized by receiving a meffage from the gover- 
nor on faturday afternoon, purporting that the expe€ted Spanifh packet 
from St. Blas was in the offing; thefe however were but fhort lived hopes, 
for we no fooner had recourfe to our glaffes, than we became of opinion 
that the veffel in queftion was the Jackal. But as the wind at this time 
blew ftrong from the s. £. attended with dark, rainy, hazy weather, and 
as fhe could not reach the port before dark, fhe ftood to fea again; du- 
ring the night the s.£. gale increafed with inceffant rain, and a very 
heavy {well rolled into the found; the next day the weather was more 
moderate, and in the evening the Jackal arrived. It was now that I re- 
ceived the information of Mr. Brown’s having paffed through the fhallow 
paflage mentioned in Mr. Whidbey’s laft furvey in the boats, which ap- 
pertaining immediately to the region then under confideration, I thought 
it moft properly introduced in the narrative of that expedition. Since our 
Separation with the Jackal, Mr. Brown had collected upwards of a thou- 

Ss fand 


315 
1794- 


September, 


een ome 


Tuefday 30. 
O&ober. 


<7 
Wednef. 1. 
Thurfday 2. 


Saturday 4. 


Sunday 5. 


h 
i} 
hw 
he 
he 
i oe 
ae 


316 


1794. 
O€tober, 


Lenn roe 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fand prime fea otter fkins, and feveral of inferior quality. Mott of thefe 
had been procured from thofe people, whofe conduct had put on fuch a 
fufpicious appearance in the opinion of Mr. Whidbey and his party, in 
his way from Crofs found: they had behaved very properly to Mr, 
Brown, whofe readinefs to enter into a tra%ic with them might proba. 
bly operate in gaining their good opinion, for it had been evident, on 
many occafions, that our difinclination to a commercial intercourfe had 
excited the difpleafure of feveral tribes we had met with; this opinion 
was confirmed, by their ufual formalities on firft vifiting the veflels, which 
generally concluded with a defire to open a negociation for the difpofal 
of their merchandize. 

As the month of ottober advanced, we knew perfeétly well, both 
from our former and prefent experience, that the fummer feafon of this 
country was faft drawing to a conclufion, and as moft of our material 
bufinefs with the fhore was now nearly finifhed, I took the advanrage 
of monday, being a fair day, to receive on board the obfervatory in- 
ftruments and tents. Our fuel and water was yet, however, to complete, 
which would unavoidably detain us three or four days longer, fo that 
waiting the ftipulated time, after which the Spanifh packet was not to 
be expeéted, could now be of little moment, when compared to the im- 
portance her arrival might poffibly be of, in expediting our return to 
England. This, however, did not happen, nor did any circumftance 
worthy of notice take place during this anxious interval. At midnight 
on the 16th we put to fea, in company with the Chatham. The Prin- 
ciffa, Captain Fidalgo, with Governor Alava on board, was to follow 
us the next day. Monterrey was appointed as the next rendezvous, 
where thefe officers entertained little doubt of our meeting a reception, 
and every refpeét fuitable to our fituation and wifhes. In this opinion 
I was induced to concur, from a converfation that had lately paffed 
between Sen" Alava and myfelf, when I became acquainted that the re- 
prefentation I had made to Sen" Quadra of the treatment we had received 
on our former vifit to New Albion, had in confequence of his deceafe been 
tranfmitted to the viceroy at Mexico, whofe very humane and liberal in- 

tentions 


of thefe 
fuch a 
rty, in 
oO Mr. 
proba- 
ent, on 
rfe had 
opinion 
, which 
difpofal 


1, both 
of this 
naterial 
vantage 
tory in- 
mplete, 
fo that 
not to 
the im- 
turn to 

ftance 
idnight 
e Prin- 

follow 
ezvous, 
eption, 
ppinion 

paffed 
the re- 
leceived 
fe been 
eral in- 
entions 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tentions towards us, had, no doubt, been materially mifunderflood by 
Sen" Arrillago. 

Having bad farewell to Nootka, and made fuch remarks on our ordi- 
nary tranfa¢lions there as appeared to me deferving attention, I fhall now 
proceed to {tate the refult of our labours at the obfervatory, and fhew 
from what authority I deduced the longitude of the various ftations 
in our late furvey, which in many inftances differs materially from the 
longitude affigned to them by Captain Cook. I have already {tated my 
reafons for fubfcribing to our own calculations in preference to thofe 
made by Captain Cook; and muft again repeat, that I have prefumed 
{fo to do, under the conviétion of our having had the means of being 
accurate, more fully in our power than fell to the lot of that renowned 
and illuftrious navigator. 

On feptember 6, in Nootka found the chronometers fhew the follow- 
ing longitudes; viz. Arnold’s No. 14, 232° 32’ 50°; Arnold’s No. 176, 
232° 49 5”; and Kendall’s, 232° 32’ 50". The true longitude being 
239° 31' 30", it appeared that Arnold’s No. 14, and Kendall’s, were each 
of them 1° 0’ 40”, and Arnold’s No. 176, 44 25” to the weftward of the 
true longitude. 

On the 6th of o€tober at noon, Arnold’s No. 176 was found by the 
mean of twenty-nine days equal altitudes, to be faft of mean time at 


Greenwich, - - - - - 10" 49’ 45" 56” 
And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 41 57 
Arnold’s No. 14, faft of mean time on the fame day, 4 57 10 56 
And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 23 4 
Kendall’s, faft of mean time on ditto, - 9 30 52 56 
And gaining on mean time per day, - - 28 30 


By obfervations taken on fhore with the artificial horizon, between 
the 6th of feptember and 11th of oftober, 1794, the chronometers were 
found to be gaining on mean time, viz. Arnold’s No. 176, 41” 57; Ar- 
nold’s No. 14, 23” 6”; and Kendall’s, 28” 29'” per day; by which it ap- 
peared, that when opportunities did not offer of obtaining equal alti- 
tudes for afcertaining the rates of the chronometers, common altitudes 
if taken with care, would anfwer the fame purpofe; this is exemplified by 

3 the 


317 


17940 
Ofétober, 


ee) 


318 


1794 
O&tober. 


Ce sa 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the above obfervations, as the difference of the rate between two of the 
chronometers was only one fourth, and that of the other, viz. Arnold’s 
No. 176, rather more than half a fecond, which is accounted for by the 
very unequal rate in general of that chronometer. 

The latitude, longitude, variation, and inclination of the magnetic 
needle, were found to be the fame as on our firft vifit to this place in 
the year 1792. 


CHAPTER 


of the 
rnold’s 
by the 


Agnetic 
lace in 


PTER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER IL 


Depart from Nootka found—Violent form—Arrive at Monterrey—Receive 
on board the Deferters from the Chatham and Dedalus—Excurfion into 
the country—Examine a very remarkable mountain—Aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations. 


A LIGHT breeze from the land favored our progrefs out of Nootka 
found, and by day-light on friday we were about 3 leagues from the land, 
when the wind fuddenly died away, and was fucceeded by a calm with 
thick hazy weather continuing the whole of the day, and giving the vel- 
fels an appearance of being ftationary; the depth of water continued to 
be the fame from noon until midnight, 75 fathoms, muddy bottom. At 
this time the haze was fucceeded by a very thick fog, without the leaft 
air of wind; and although by the depth increafing we imagined that we 
were proceeding from the coaft, yet our motion was fo flow, that by fix 
in the evening of faturday, we were {till im foundings at the depth of 100 
fathoms, muddy bottom, and by the lead when on the ground, the veflel 
feemed to lie as if atanchor. This obfcurity in the atmofpherc had pre- 
vented our feeing the Chatham fince the preceding evening, but the 
ferenity of the weather, and the apparent ftationary fituation of the 
Difcovery, made me conclude that fhe could not be far off. Our 
powder being much exhautted, the fog fignal had not been made; but 
in order to afcertain the fact, a gun was now fired, and to our great 
aftonifhment it was not anfwered. ‘The fog and calm ftill continued, and 
the depth of water gradually increafed, at eight o’clock we had 105 fa- 
thoms, with fandy bottom. The fog now difperied, and the calm was 

fucceeded 


319 


1794. 
Oétober. 

naira ara 

Friday 17. 


Saturday 18, 


320 


1794+ 
O€tober. 


epee 


Sanday 19. 


Monday 20. 


Friday 24. 


Sunday 26. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


{ucceeded by a light breeze from the £.N.£.; another gun was now fired, 
and a falfe fire burnt as a fignal to our confort, but neither was anfwered. 
After repeating thefe fignals in the fame manner at three o’clock on fun- 
day morning to no effect, we made all fail, fteering to thes.s.r. At 
day-light the high land over Nootka and Clayoquot, was ftill in fight, 
bearing by compafs from Nn. 6 w. to E.N.£.; our diftance from the coaft 
was 10 or 12 leagues. The foundings we had gained at midnight at the 
depth of 135 fathoms, proved to be at the diftance of about 7 leagues 
from point Breakers, and fomething more from the general line of the 
coaft to the eaftward of that point. This I confidered to be the edge of 
a bank of foundings that appeared to lie along the coaft, which com- 
menced a-breaft of cape Lookout, and terminated a little to the north- 
ward of Nootka. Near the-entrance of De Fuca’s ftraits it feemed to 
ftretch further into the ocean, as at the diftance of 8 leagues from thofe 
fhores we had only 58 fathoms water, with muddy bottom. 

In looking round for the Chatham a veffel was difcovered a-ftern, for 
which we immediately fhortened fail, but foon finding it to be the Spanifh 
fhip Princiffa, we again direéted our courfe as before with all fail fpread 
toa pleafant eafterly breeze and fair weather; with this favorable weather 
we were not long indulged, for in the evening the wind veered to the s.s.r., 
and by monday in the afternoon, increafed to fo ftrong a gale as to oblige 
us to clofe-reef our topfails. The wind fixed in the fouth-eaftern quarter, 
and became variable, with fometimes clear, and at others cloudy weather : 
this gale did not reduce us below our topfails, although we plied not only 
againft it, but againft a very heavy fouth-wefterly {well to fo little pur- 
pofe, that by noon on friday we had by our reckoning (for we were un- 
able to gain any obfervation) only reached the latitude of 47° 12’, longi- 
tude 232°12’. Inthe evening the wind veered to the s.s. w., with which 
we made a tolerably good progrefs to the fouth-eaftward until funday 
morning, when it became light and variable, with alternate calms, anda 
very heavy fwell from the w.s. w. 

This uncomfortable weather was fucceeded by a frefh breeze from the 
N.E., which as ufual veered to the s.£. on monday morning, and in the 


afternoon increafed to a gale fo violent, as to make it neceffary that we 
fhould 


fired, 
wered. 
n fun- 
. At 
fight, 
> coaft 
at the 
eagues 
of the 
sdge of 
1 com- 
north- 
med to 
a thofe 


rn, for 
spanifh 
fpread 
eather 
P S.S.E., 
oblige 
juarter, 
eather: 
Dt only 
le pur- 
ere un- 
longi- 
which 
funday 


, anda 


om the 
in the 
hat we 
fhould 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fhould ftrike the topgallant-mafts, and bring to, under the ftorm ftayfails ; 
this gale was attended with an extremely heavy rain uni midnight, 
when the f{torm fuddenly moderated, and the wind veering to the s.w. 
we ftood to the s.£. under our courfes and clofe-reefed topfails. 

The obferved latitude on tuefday was 44°14’, longitude by account 
233° 27’; in the afternoon all our canvas was again fpread, but by wed- 
nefday morning the wind had again refumcd its fouth-eaftern direétion, 
with hard fqualls and heavy rain, which again reduced us to the forefail 
and ftorm ftayfails. 

Since our departure from Nootka we had conftantly been incommoded 
by a very heavy wefterly and fouth-weft fwell, which at this time was 
greatly increafed, notwithftanding the fea, raifed by the violence of the 
wind from the fouth-eaft; thefe together caufed a very confufed agita- 
tion of the ocean, and although the fhip was made as fnug as poffible by 
the topgallant-mafts being ftruck, and by every thing, that conveniently 
could L> taken from aloft, yet fhe was extremely uncomfortable, and 
fhippe’ = * cuantities of water, About noon the gale moderated, and 
on the va ~ curning to the s.w., we again made fail to the fouth-eaft- 
ward. The afternoon was tolerably fair; vaft flocks of wild geefe and 
ducks were obferved, flying to the fouthward, which indicated that in a 
more northern climate the winter had fet in with much feverity. 

The wind, although variable between s.£. and s. w. was moderate, 
with frequent calms, and the weather, comparatively {peaking with that 
we had fo recently experienced, might be confidered as tolerably fair, 
notwithftanding which, we made little progrefs until monday morning, 
when the wind feemed fixed in the north-weft quarter, with very plea- 
fant weather. To this favorable gale we {pread all our fails, flecring for 
cape Mendocino; the fouthern promontory of which, at noon, bore by 
compafs s. 51 E., and with the coaft to the north of it, in fight to the 
N.E., was about 9 or 10 leagues diftant. The obferved latitude 40° 40’. 
longitude according to our former calculations of the fituation of cape 
Mendocino, 235° 30’, the variation 14° eaftwardly. 

At this time the longitude by the chronometersagreeably to the Nootka 

Vox, III. Tt rate, 


324 


1794+ 
O€tober, 


ee 


Tuefday «8. 
Wednef. 29. 


November, 


ce Sash 


Monday 3. 


322 


1794: 
November. 
Qe pae 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


rate, was by Kendall’s, 235° 27’; Arnold’s No. 14, 295° 22'; and No. 
170, 235° 55° 

As we drew in with the fhores of the northern part of the cape, having 
fince noon fleered s.z. by compafs about 3 leagues, we fuddenly came 
into difcoloured water, with a very irregular fea; but foundings could 
not be gained with the hand line, nor at the rate we were then going, 
could bottom have been reached at a greater depth than from 7 to 10 
fathoms. 

As I intended before we proceeded to Monterrey to vifit the bay of 
Sir Francis Drake, and from thence in our boats to acquire a better 
knowledge than we had hitherto gained of port Bodega, our courfe after 
paffing this promontory was direéted along the coaft to the fouth-eaft for 
that purpofe. 

In the evening about fun-fet a very fingular appearance was obferved 
over the interior mountains, immediately behind the high land of this 
lofty proje€ting promontory. An immenfe body of very denfe clouds 
enveloped the fummits of thofe mountains, rifing in a confufed agitated 
ftate like volumes of fteam from a boiling cauldron of great magnitude; 
thefe expanded to the northward, and ob{cured all that part of the ho- 
rizon, whillt to the fouthward, it was perfecily clear and unclouded. 
From our own experience, as well as from the information we had de- 
rived from the Spaniards, we had long been led to confider cape Men- 
dlocino as fituated on the divifionary line between the moderate and 
boiflerous climates of this coaft. For this reafon, however unfcientific it 
may appear, we could not avoid entertaining an idea, that from the im- 
menfe accumulation of exhalations, which the ftupendous mountains in 
this immediate neighbourhood arreft, arofe thofe violent fouth-eaft florms, 
with which, further to the northward, we fo frequently contended, and by 
which, the coaft of New Albion to the fouthward of this lation, is certainly 
but feldom, and never in fo violent a degree affeéted. This extraordi- 
nary appearance inclined us to believe that fome turbulent weather was not 
far remote, but from what quarter we could not guefs, as the fteady favo- 
rable north-welt gale, and the appearance of clear and fettled weather, in 
the dire€tion we were fteering, did not give us reafon to apprehend any 

2 inconvenience 


ROUND THE WORLD. 32 


we 


d No. inconvenience from the wind fhifting to the fouth-eaftward; and its ea 
blowing from the oppofite point had always been confidered as the har- —-+—— 
laving binger of moderate and pleafant weather. This general rule was on Tueldsy 4 
came tuefday morning partly confirmed, and partly contradiéted, as the va- 
could pours we had obferved colleéting on the preceding evening, were now 
going, found to have been deftined to difcharge their fury from a quarter we 
to 10 had leaft expeéted. During the night we had made fuch progrefs 
along the coaft, that by four in the morning it became neceffary to haul 
bay of to the wind, in order that we might not overfhoot our intended port 
better before day-light. At this time the wind at N.N.w., attended with a 
€ alter moft tremendous fea from the fame quarter, had increafed to fuch a 
“aft for degree of violence, as allowed us to haul off the fhore under our forefail 
and ftorm ftayfails only; but the forefail, though a very good one, not 
yferved being able to refift the violence of the ftorm, was about fun-rife blown Wednef. 5 
of this nearly to pieces; this was immediately replaced with the beft we had, 
clouds the topgallant-mafts were ftruck, and the fhip made as fnug as poffible; 
gitated but unable to fcud with fafety before the ftorm, we lay to, with the 
nitude ; fhip’s head to the weftward, under the ftorm ftayfails, it being impoffible 
the ho- to fhow more canvas, and of courfe too hazardous to fteer for that part 


louded. 
ad de- 


of the coaft I wifhed to make, or to attempt running under our bare poles 
into a port, of which, we had fo little knowledge as that of the bay of Sir 


P Men- Francis Drake; to keep the fea, was therefore our only prudent alterna- 

hte and tive. 

ntific it During this ftorm I felt a high degree of fatisfa€tion, that we had not 3 
he im- made a more fpeedy paflage from Nootka to Monterrey, as from the rd 
ains in direétion in which it had blown, I confidered, that had we been arrived 4 
torms, in that port, we fhould have been expofed to the whole of its fury, i 
and by and the violence of the fea that had attended it. As Monterrey was 
Prtainly now lying s. 50 £. of us, I could not fuppofe from the diftance of that é 
raordi- 1 port, that the gale had not reached fo far, for excepting the ftorms we ore 
vas not ; experienced at and off New Zealand, this was certainly the moft violent 
y favo- of any we had met with during this voyage; the fhip however was by no : 

her, in : means fo uncomfortable as we had found her on many other occafions. 

nd any : The waves although extremely high, were long and regular, the fky was 

snience Tte hard 


374 
1704. 
November, 


ened 


Thurlday 6, 


A VOYAGE OF DISC’ VERY 


hard and clear, and intirely free from clouds. About the horizon and’a few 
degrees above it, was feen a bright glaring haze; and as this at intervals 
became more perceptible, the violence of the wind was conftantly ob- 
ferved to be increafed. 

In this fituation we remained until the ftorm moderated, though it ftill 
blew extremely hard: we now wore and ftood for the land under the 
forefail and ftorm ftayfails, in the hope, that by the time we fhould arrive 
near the fhore, now at the diftance of 45 leagues, the violence of the ftorm 
would in a great meafure have abated. It was not however before ten 
at night that it had fulficiently moderated to allow of our fetting the clofe- 
recfed topfails ; at midnight we had the topgallant-fails fet for about an 
hour, but the wind foon again increafed, and feeing the land at no great 
diftance about two o’clock in the morning of the 6th, we hauled off 
fhore, and plied under an eafy fail to wait the return of day, when find- 
ing ourfelves about 3 or 4 leagues from ‘point Anno Nuevo, point Pinos 
in fight bearing by compafs s.r. £., and having a moderate breeze 
with fine pleafant weather, we fteered for Monterrey, where about two 
in the afternoon we anchored, and moored nearly in our former fituation. 

Here we found the Chatham, fhe having arrived in the evening of the 
ad. By Mr. Puget I was informed, that whilft we were becalmed and 
ftationary off Nootka, the Chatham on the evening of the 17th of o€to- 
ber was favored witha light breeze from the eaftward, which gradually 
increafed ; with this Mr. Puget f{teered to the fouth-eaft, concluding we 
were doing the fame, and he was not undeceived until noon of the 18th, 
when the fog with them had fufficiently difperfed, to fhew that the Dif- 
covery was not within their vifible horizon. Mr. Puget was equally at a 
lofs with ourfelves, to account for the feparation that had then taken 
place; but as he confidered that we had preceded the Chatham, and fhe 
having at that time a pleafant breeze from the eaftward, he thought it 
moft advifeable to make the belt of his way to the fouthward, and on 
the 19th m the morning whilft we continued to be within fight of Nootka, 
the Chatham had increafed her diflance near 40 leagues from the fhore. 
This circumflance, in confequence of the fucceeding winds, afforded the 
Chatham a fuperior advantage in getting to the fouthward, and which 

1 in 


la few 
tervals 


tly ob- 


it fill 
ler the 
arrive 
> {torm 
re ten 
> clofe- 
out an 
oO great 
led off 
n find- 
t Pinos 
breeze 
ut two 
uation. 
of the 
pd and 
f o€fto- 
adually 
ing we 
b 18th, 
he Dif- 
ly ata 
taken 
and fhe 
ight it 
and on 
lootka, 
fhore. 
Hed the 
which 
in 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


in all probability was confiderably augmented, by the Chatham having 
{tood further from the coaft to the fouth-weftward, than we had done 
during the prevalence of the fouth-eafterly winds. On reference to the 
journals it appeared Mr. Puget had been enabled fo to do, by the wind 
having been much further to the fouthward with the Chatham than with 
the Difcovery; by which means on the wind’s fhifting to the s.w. as is 
mott frequently the cafe after the fouth-eafterly gales, our confort made 
much better flants alon= -1e t to the fouthward, than we were able 
todo, becaufe we wereiv .nuck irertoit. The Ciiat: am had to con- 
tend with nearly the like boifterous weather we had experienced until fhe 
had paffed cape Mendocino on the goth of the preceding month; when, 
at the diftance of 40 leagues from the cape the weather was pleafant, with 
welterly and north-weft winds. The greateft diftance fhe had on this 
paffage been from the coaft, was ftated by Mr. Puget at 93 leagues from 
cape Difappointment, and from thence, fouthward to cape Mendocino 
from 60 to 70 leagues; the greatcft diftance we had been from the coaft 


did not exceed 78 leagues off Deftruétion ifland, but to the fouthward of 


cape Lookout we were not more than from 16 to 4o leagues from the land. 

The north-weft ftorm we had fo lately contended with, and to which 
I had confidered this anchorage as dangeroufly expofed, Mr. Puget in- 
formed me had been here felt, at the fame time; but that the gale had Leen 
principally from the weftward; and although it certainly blew flrong, vet 
it neither prevented the ufual communication with the fhore, nor would 
have caufed any apprehenfion for the fecurity of vellels riding in the bay, 
if tolerably well provided with anchors and cables. Indeed the Chatham 
rode it out, with cables that had been long in :xfe, and were in the laft 
ftage of being ferviceable. This was by no means an unpleafant faét to 
afcertain, as it tended to prove, that although the weather may be ex- 
tremely boifterous out at fea, and in the offing, yet this bay may be ap- 
proached with the greateft facility, and will afford extremely good fhelter 
againft thofe winds, to which, apparently, it is moft expofed. 

Our profeffional inquiries being mutually fatisfied, I had the pleafure 
to underftand from Mr. Puget, that he had met the moft cordial recep- 
tion from our former friend Sen" Arguello, the lieutenant of the Prefi- 

dio, 


526 


1794. 
November. 


|S aed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


dio, who then, as on our firft vifit to this place, :a the abfence of the 
governor of the province, officiated in that capacity. From this gen. 
tleman we were likely to meet very different treatment to that which we 
had received from Sen* Arrillago, whofe reftri€tive arrangements on our 
laft vifit to Monterrey, had obliged us to feek tha* hofpitality and pro- 
te€tion from the untutored inhabitarts of the Sandwich iflands, which we 
defpaired of obtaining in any of the ports under his jurifdiétion. Sent: 
Arrillago having been ordered to fome inferior eftablifhment, had re- 
figned his authority at this place, and had departed about two months 
previoufly to our arrival, and a lieutenant in the Spanifh army, Don 
Diego de Borica, had been appointed fome time fince, to the govern- 
ment of this province, and was now daily expected at Monterrey. 

As foon as the fhip was fecured, an officer was fent to the Prefidio with 
the ufual ceremonious compliments, and with an apology for our not 
having faluted. On landing I was received by Sen" Arguello, to whofe 
kind and benevolent offices we had before been greatly indebted, with 
marks of the greateft friendfhip and refpeét. He expreffed the fatisfac- 
tion he fhould receive by having it now in h* power to fupply us 
with the various neceflary refrefhments the cou: afforded ;_ and being 
without the leaft reftraint, he fhould endeavour to adminifter to our 
amufement and recreation. Whatever means he poffeffed that were like- 
ly in any way to contribute to the happinefs or comfort of the prefent 
time, or to our future welfare, he was now impowered, by the orders 
that had been tranfmitted to this government from the viceroy of New 
Spain, feduloufly to afford, and prompted by the intereft he felt in 
our accommodation, he fhould with great pleafure carry thofe orders 
into effeét. 

The people who, on our firft vifit to this Prefidio, had deferted from 
the Dedalus and Chatham, we found here, with direétions for their be- 
ing delivered up to me; but as the governor of the province was fo foon 
expected, I deferred taking any fteps in this bufinefs until he fhould ar- 
rive; nor did I ereé&t our tents or obfervatory on fhore for the fame rea- 
fon, as I confidered it would be more refpeétful to fubmit thefe mat- 
ters to the approbation of Governor Borica himfelf than to Sen" Ar. 
guello, 


of the 
is gen. 
ich we 
on our 
id pro- 
nich we 

Sen*: 
had re- 
months 
y, Don 
govern- 


dio with 
our not 
o whofe 
sd, with 
fatisfac- 
ipply us 
d being 
to our 
ere like- 
prefent 
b orders 
of New 
p felt in 
> orders 


ed from 
heir be- 
fo foon 
ould ar- 
me rea- 
Pfe mat- 
ben” Ar- 
guello, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


gucilo, from whom I only folicited permiffion to recruit our wood and 
water, and to obtain fome neceffary refrefhments. 

On friday morning I received from Sen" Arguello the only letter that 
had arrived at this place for me; this letter was from the Conde Revilla 
Gigedo, the late viceroy of New Spain, in reply to one I had written 
to his excellency on the 22d of may, 1793. In the moft polite and 
friendly terms the count informed me of Mr. Broughton’s fafe arrival at 
Madrid, and exprefled the higheft approbation of the conduét of Sen" 
Fidalgo, whofe fervices I had reprefented to him we had been greatly 
indebted to, on heaving the Chatham down at Nootka. Thofe very 
obliging offers he had before made, in wifhing to contribute to our health 
and welfare, by whatever means of afliftance this country could beftow, were 
in this letter repeated. It was dated on the goth of o€tober, 1793, about 
the time when we firft felt the influence of Sen" Arrillago’s difinclina- 
tion towards our little fquadron. It was addreffed to me at Monterrey, 
with dire€tions there to remain for my reception, until it fhould be un- 
derftood I had taken my leave of thefe regions, and in the event of my 
fo doing, without repairing to this place again, the letter was then 
to be tranfinitted to me in England. From thefe circumftances it would 
appear, that the correfpondence I had been thus honored with, was not 
intirely of that complimentary nature that Sen" Arrillago had thought 
proper to confider it; and that the viceroy did expeét that I fhould make, 
at leaft, a fecond viftt to Monterrey, was evidently proved by the defer- 
ters having been fent hither, inftead of being forwarded to Nootka, as 
he had formerly intended to do, but which determination, Sen" Arguello 
informed me, he had been induced to alter, under the perfuafion of this 
being the molt likely place of our meeting with them, 

Not having received official intelligence at this port from England, 
and there being here no difpatches waiting the arrival of Sen" Alava, 
through which channel I might poffibly have obtained fome fort of in- 
formation, by which my future proceedings might, in fome degree, have 
been regulated, I could not help feeling very great difappointment, anxi- 
ety, and concern. I was not, however, totally deftitute of hope, that 
fome letters might have arrived at St. Diego. To afcertain this faét 

notwith- 


327 


1794° 


November. 
em’ aimead 


Friday 7. 


328 


1794- 
November, 


\emeeeen seed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


notwithftanding that it was from hence to St. Diego more than four hun- 
dred Englifh miles, Sen" Arguello very obligingly ordered an extraordi- 
mary courier to be ready the next day, whofe return from St, Diego 
might be expected in ten or twelve days, and before the expiration of 
that time, I had no idea of quitting this {tation. Under the circumftances 
of the mortifying difappointment I now felt, I was unable to form any 
plan for our future operations, excepting that which J had before medi- 
tated, of remaining here a fufficient time to’ recruit ihe health and 
ftrength of our little community. For, notwithftanding that we were not 
materially affected with indifpofition, yet the health of moft of us de- 
manded care and attention. The fatiguing fervice in which we had now 
been fo long employed, and the very few frefh meals we had been ena- 
bled to obtain fince the middle of the preceding month of march, muft 
be fufficient to convince the judgment, without the appearance of a€tual 
difeafe, that three weeks or a month would be well dedicated in availing 
ourfelves of the refrefhments and recreation, in which we had now fo fa- 
vorable an opportunity to indulge. 

Frefh beef, which was extremely good, was daily and unlimitedly 
ferved to the crew of each veflel; but vegetables were a {carce commo- 
dity, owing to the drynefs of the feafon, which gave the country an ap- 
pearance of being parched up; and the few articles which had been pro- 
duced on the fimall portion of land allotted here to the purpofe of gar- 
den ground were nearly exhaufted. We, however, were not apprehen- 
five of wanting fufficient variety to cover our tables, as in the imme- 
diate neighbourhood of the bay there were an immenfe number of wild 
gecle, ducks, plovers, curlews, and other wild fowl; to which, by little 
excurfions into the country, our fportfmen added an abundance cf very 
fine quails and fome hares, which afforded us excellent repafts in ad- 
dition to their amufement. It was fomething fingular that none of thefe 
{pecies of wild fowl, had been found in any degree fo numerous on either 
of our former vifits to Monterrey. 

The weather was fair and pleafant, with a moderate breeze from the 
fea, which in the evening brought in the Princiffa. We had confider- 
ed this vellel to have been to the northward of cape Mendocino, whilft 


we 


ir hun- 
raordi- 
Diego 
1on of 
ftances 
rm any 
> medi- 
th and 
ere not 
us de- 
ad now 
en ena- 
h, muft 
f actual 
wailing 
w fo fa- 


mitedly 
ommo- 
an ap- 
on pro- 
of gar- 
rehen- 
imme- 
of wild 
by little 
f very 
in ad- 
rf thefe 
) either 


om the 
nfider- 
whilft 


we 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


we contended with the north-weft ftorm to the fouth of it, and an’ idea 
had arifen, from the appearance of the evening that preceded the gale, 
that the Princifla muft, in that fituation, have experienced much blow- 
ing weather from the fouth-eaftward; but on inquiry this was not found 
to be altogether the cafe; fhe was, however, to the north of the promon- 
tory in queftion at that time, and her progrefs, like ours, had been 
greatly retarded by contrary winds; but on the 1ft of november, in the 
latitude of 45° 30’, fhe having generally kept about go leagues from the 
coaft ; thefe adverfe winds were fucceeded by a pleafant gale from the 
north-weft, which continued during the remainder of the paflage. 

This faét, though not proving cape Mendocino to be fo fingularly 
fituated as we had fuppofed it to be, with refpeét to moderate or boif- 
terous weather, yet ferves to fhew that it has an influence on the winds 
that prevail during the winter feafon, as the fouth-eaflerly ftorms are 
fcarcely ever known to the fouthward of cape Mendocino; where, whilft 
the north-weft gale reduced us to our ftorm ftayfails for twenty-four 
hours, the Princiffa to the north of it, felt nothing of its fury; but, on 
the contrary, had only a moderate nortn-weft gale, to which the whole 
of her canvas was f{pread. 

We had the pleafure to meet our friends in the Princiffa very well, 
though much difappointed, like ourfelves, in not receiving any official 
communications from Mexico; but as the courier was in readinefs to de- 
part the next morning, Sen* Alavaembraced this opportunity to make 
the neceffary inquiries at St. Diego. 

In the night the wind blew ftrong from the northward ; and on the re- 
turn of day it confiderably increafed from the north-weft. Notwithftand- 
ing the veffels rode without the leaft inconvenience or apparent danger, 
yet, as our cables had been a long time on board, and had endured great 
trials, the topgallant mafts were got down, the yards and top-matts f{truck, 
and the veffels made perfeétly fnug ; by noon, however, the wind modera- 
ted, and we had a return of fair and pleafant weather ; all hands were 
now employed in different fervices, amongft which, recruiting our {tock 
of fuel and water, was 10 inconfiderable labour; no difficulty was ex- 
perienced in procuring the former, but the drynels of the feafon had 

Vou. III. Uu rendered 


$29 


1794. 
November, 


emmy 


33° 


1791. 
November. 


Monday 10. 


Vuetday 13. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


rendered the latter very fcarce. The wells that we had dug, on our firft 
vifit to Monterrey, though not perfeétly dry, afforded too {mall a quantity 
to anfwer our demand, and we had no means of obtaining a fufficiency 
of water nearer than up a valley about half a mile to the eaftward of the 
Prefidio, and full that diftance from the fea-fide, where a fluggifh 
{tream oofed through the bed of a water-courfe, compofed of a loofe 
fandy foil; and here, by finking feveral cafks, temporary wells were 
formed, which afforded only a fcanty fupply, though the water was ex- 
tremely good. This mode of procuring it was very tedious, and the dif- 
tance which the cafks, when filled, had to be rolled, through a loofe 
{andy gully, to the boats, was very great, and proved to be a very labo- 
rious tafk, yet the water was infinitely preferable to any that could 
have been colleéted from the ftagnated brackifh pools, in the vicinity of 
the Prefidio. 

On funday part of the fhip’s company were indulged with a run on 
fhore, and the day following we were bufily employed in facilitating, as 
much as poffible, the procuring of our water, by the beft arrangement 
in our power, notwithftanding which we could not prevent its being a 
very laborious bufinefs. 

The weather continued to be remarkably pleafant, and on tuefday 
evening Sen" Don Diego Borica arrived at the Prefidio, where, the next 
morning, accompanied by Mr. Puget and moft of the officers of both 
veflels, I waited upon him, to congratulate him on his fafe arrival, and 
to acquaint him with my reafons for vifiting the countries under his 
jurildiGtion; thefe attentions, I had the pleafure to find were perfeétly 
fatisfa€tory, and were received in a manner that was highly compatible 
with the refpeétive {tations that each of us had the honor to fill. 

The indulgence I had folicited, and which had been granted by Sen" 
Arguello, was now very politely extended by the governor, with further 
permiffion to ere& our tents and obfervatory on fhore, under the direc- 
tion of our officers, and prote€tion of our own guard, to which he very 
obligingly added the affurance of doing every thing in his power that 
could in any way contribute to make our ftay as pleafant and agrec- 

2 able 


- 


EO ee 


ROUND THE WORLD. 331 Bits 
eae ig bi 
sur firft able as their limited fociety and the lonelinefs of the country would ,, 1794 a 
uantity afford, ——— Hips iat 
ficiency After this introdu€tory difcourfe, we underftood from Sen" Borica, 3 ey 
1 of the that, accompanied by his wife and daughter, a young lady about eleven Bs) 
fluggith years of age, and a fuitable number of attendants, he had come from . Baa 
a loofe Mexico to this place on horfeback; as no other mode of conveyance ns Ae 
ty were was to be procured. They were provided with a fmall camp equipage, aan 
waxes: which was occafionally pitched, either as a retreat from the heat of the i wash 
eae fun, or for reft during the night. Upwards of eight months had been githe 
a loofe employed in performing this journey, through a cour: ry very thinly in- “ny 
ry labo- habited, and which afforded but little comfortable accommodatic.a for i Bey tie 
t could travellers. oy rier 
cinity of In the evening an exprefs arrived from Mexico, which broxsht dif- cage 
patches from the viceroy of New Spain to the governor, together with the Rea tiit 
Jute oae long expected inftru€tions to Sen" Alava, refpe€ting the ceffion of Noot:a ite Nay? 
ting, as to the crown of Great Britain, but nothing addrefled to me acewrs panied ie gs 
ngement thefe credentials ; and, from a converfation with Sen* Borica, I was not x iat 
being a flattered with the leaft probability of receiving any intelligence from suit 
St. Diego, becaufe it was not likely, had any difpatches for me arrived aes Bate «| 
taefday there, that he fhould have remained ignorant of the circumftance ; and ‘ it * e 
haces as the deftination of Sen" Alava was well known to the officers com- } ‘it tie 
of both manding the fouthern potts of this province, letters for either of us, payed 
akan would moft likely, immediately on their arrival, have been tranfmitted eat | 
ae hither. hae 
nertebtliy The embarraffment I had been long under was now very materially aa 
patible increafed, and I was greatly at a lofs as to what meafures were beft sibs 
to be purfued. From this dilemma, however, I +:us very unexpeétedly ei | 
by Sen’ relieved the next day, by Sen" Alava very obligingiy confiding to me, Wreduef. 12. oie 
further that part of his inftruétions which ftated, that no further altercation fae 
a Airec: ’ would take place with refpeét to the precife meaning of the firft article ae 
he very ‘ of the convention of the 20th of o€tober, 1790, as the documents trant- 
oe that mitted by the late Sen’ Quadra and mylelf, had enabled our refpeétive 
1 agree- courts to adjuft that matter in an amicable way, and nearly on the terms 
able which I had fo repeatedly offered to Sen" Quadra in feptember 1792. In 


Uu2 addition 


382 


1794 
November. 
en aed 
* This how- 
ever was not 

the faét, as 
thele frefh 
Inftru¢iions 
were addreff- 
ed in the fut 


inftance to 


me, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


addition to which the Spanifh minifter’s letter fet forth, that this bufinefs 
was not to be carried into execution by me, as a frefh commiffion had 
been iffued for this purpofe by the Court of London.* The fame was 
announced to governor Borica by the new viceroy of Mexico, the Mar- 
quis de Branciforte, with inftru€tions to receive the perfon aéting under 
this commiffion into their Prefidio’s. 

Having maturely confidered the feveral paris of this intelligence, I 
concluded that from the length of our voyage, and the various accidents 
to which the fervice in which we were employed would neceffarily ren- 
der us liable, Government did not expeft we fhould remain longer in 
thefe feas, than the furvey of the American coaft might require; and in 
truth we were not now ina fit condition to protract our ftay in thefe 
regions. . 

The very exhaufted ftate of our ftores and provifions not only de- 
manded fuch fupplies as were not eafily within our reach, but as 
the Difcovery had been frequently aground, it was highly probable 
that her bottom might ftand in need of fome very material repair, of 
which we had remained intirely ignorant, not having been fo fortunate 
as to meet with a proper fituation for the purpofe of her undergoing this 
neceffary examination. 

One of the great objeéts of our voyage, the furvey of the coaft of 
North Weft America, being now accomplifhed, and relying on the au- 
thenticity of the intelligence I had derived from Sen" Alava, I did not 
long hefitate, but determined on making the beft of my way towards 
England, by the way of cape Horn, agreeably to my inftruétions ; and 
as Thad no intention of vifiting any part of the American coaft to the 
northward of the 44th degree of fouth latitude, 1 purpofed that our courfe 
from hence fhould be direéted towards that latitude without {topping, un- 
lefs we fhould be fo fortunate as to fall in with the Gallapagos iflands, 
whofe undefined fituation I much wifhed correétly to afcertain; and of 
courfe it would neceflarily be {ome time before we reached our next refting 
place. On this account it became highly expedient that we fhould fail 
from hence with as great a quantity of water as we might be enabled to 
procure, for the reception of which the coopers were direéted to repair, 
and 


ufinefs 
on had 
me was 
e Mar- 


y under 


ence, I 
‘cidents 
ily ren- 
ager in 
and in 
n_ thefe 


nly de- 
but as 
rrobable 
pair, of 
yrtunate 
ing this 


oalt of 
the au- 
did not 
towards 
bs; and 
to the 
r courle 
ng, un- 
lands, 
and of 
refting 
uld fail 
bbled to 
repair, 
and 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


and put into order every cafk on board capable of holding water ; inmany |, 


333 


1794. 


vember. 


cafes this was attended with great trouble, from the length of time they U+ 


had been in ufe, and the hard fervice that many of them had endured. 

Although the very great diftance, and the badnefs of the road we had 
to pals in getting the water down to the fea-fide, made the obtaining of 
this indifpenfable article a very tedious and fatiguing bufinefs, yet as we 
were in the mean time benefiting from the air, the exercife of the fhore, 
and the excellent refrefhments of the country, I could not confider our 
detention here as a lofs of time, becaufe I was affured that it would be 
attended with the ineftimable advantage of fecuring to us all, that ftate of 
health which the remainder of our voyage we had-yet to perform home- 
wards, would neceffarily require. . 

Some doubts having arifen in my mind, as to the fafe arrival in Eng- 
land of the copies (which I had forwardcd thither) of our furvey of the 
American coaft to the northward, from Fitzhugh’s found to cape Deci- 
fion, and fouthward from this port to the goth degree of north latitude 
{.deemed it expedient that a duplicate of the former papers, together 


with a copy of our furvey during the preceding fummer, as alfo that of 


the Sandwich iflands, fhould from hence be tranfmitted to the Admiralty ; 
that in the event of any mifchance having befallen the others, or any 
unfortunate accident happening hereafter to us, our labours might not 
be intirely loft to our country. The like information, in conformity to 
my original promife to my much-lamented friend the late Sen™ Quadra, 
had. been folicited by Sen™ Alava, for the ufe and information of the 
Spanifh court, and with which of courfe I complied. The prepa- 
ration of thefe documents would neceflarily occupy fome time, but I had 
tittle doubt of their being finifhed by the time we fhould in other re- 
fpetts be ready to depart. 

The deferters from the Chatham and Dedalus had, at my requeft, been 
delivered up to me, at leaft fuch of them as were the fubjeéts of Great 
Britain. An account of expences, amounting to three hundred and 
twenty-five dollars and an half, was. exhibited againft them; but as I did 
not confider myfelf authorized to difcharge this debt, (though of its 
having been incurred by the deferters, I could entertain no doubt) of 
which 


334; 
1794. 


Sunday 16, 


Wednef, 19. 


ovember, - 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


which I acquainted Governor Borica, by letter, on funday morning, and 
at the fame time added, that I fhould:reprefent the bufinefs fully to the 
Board of Admiralty, and that; J shad no. doubt that the ftri€teft juftice 
would. be done. With this the. governor feemed to be complete- 
ly. fatisfied, and in his letter to this effeét, after expreffing the greateft 
approbation, he, in virtue of the harmony and good underftanding 
that continued to .exift between us, folicited my good offices in behalf of 
the deferters before mentioned. 

- The weather, fince the 8th, had been delightfully pleafant; in the 
day-time the wind blew a gentle gale from the fea, and during the night 
a.calm, or gentle breeze, prevailed from the land, fo that the precaution 
we had taken of ftriking our yards and topmafts, fince the moment of our 
having fo done, ceafed to be neceflary. This agreeable weather caufed 
the water in the bay to be fo very tranquil, that landing was eafily effeéct- 
ed on any of its fhores, and rendered our intercourfe with the country 
extremely pleafant. 

The fame caufe operated to invite the excurfions of feveral parties into 
the country on foot and on horfeback. Thefe were rendered further 
agreeable and pleafant, by the friendly and attentive behaviour of our 
Spanifh friends, of which I was feldom able to avail myfelf, not only 
from the various matters of bufinefs in which I was deeply engaged, 
hut from the very debilitated {tate of my health, under which I had fe- 
verely laboured during the eight preceding months; I was, however, 
on weédnefday able to join in a party to the valley through which the 
Monterrey river flows, and was there gratified with the fight of the moft 
extraordinary mountain I had ever beheld. On one fide it prefented the 
appearance of a fumptuous edifice fallen into decay; the columns which 
looked as if they had been raifed with much labour and induftry, were of 
great magnitude, feemed to be of an elegant form, and to be compofed 
of the fame cream-coloured ftone, of which I have before made mention. 
Between thefe magnificent columns were deep excavations, refembling 
different paffages into the interior parts of the fuppofed building, whofe 
roof: bemg the fummit of the mountain appeared to be wholly fup- 
ported by thefe columns rifing perpendicularly with the moft minute 
mathematical 


ig, and 
to the 
juftice 
nplete- 
rreatetft 
anding 
half of 


in the 
© night 
aution 
of our 
caufed 


-effeét- 


ountry 


es into 
further 
of our 
Mt only 
gaged, 
ad fe- 
wever, 
ch the 
mott 
ed the 
which 
ere of 
pofed 
pntion. 
! bling 
whofe 
y fup- 
minute 
atical 


MONTERREY, 


~~ = 
~~ s 
™“ < 
z ~ 
~ S 
fe = 
~ 
x 
\ S 
~S : 
“XN ie 
N ~ } 
x . a 
S h 
= : 


MM PAT SN 


(BLE 


i 


‘e 
< 
te if 
3 a 1 
Z. 4 ‘ar 
~~ - 
< i 
% ~ 
2 & 
iu ~ 


uber del pron a Sketch taken on the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


mathematical exaétnefs. The whole had a moft beautiful appearance of 


human ingenuity and labour; but fince it is not poffible, from the rude ——.---~ 


and very humble race of beings that are found to be the native inhabi- 
tants of this country, to fuppofe they could have been capable of raifing 
fuch a ftru€ture, its being the proc..tion of nature, cannot be quel- 
tioned, and it may not be prepofterous to infer, that it has been from 
fimilar phenomena that man has received that archite€tural knowledge, 
by which he has been enabled to raife thofe mafly fabricks, which have 
ftood for ages in all civilized countries. 

In this excurfion I had an opportunity of feeing what before I had 
been frequently given to underftand ; that the foil improved in richnefs 
and fertility, as we advanced from the ocean into the interior country. 

The fituation we had now reached was an extenfive valley between 
two ranges of lofty mountains, whofe more elevated parts wore a fteril 
and dreary afpeét, whilft the fides and the intervening bofom feemed to be 
compofed of a luxuriant foil. On the former fome pine trees were pro- 
duced of different forts, though of no great fize, and the latter generally 
{peaking was a natural pafture, but the long continuance of the dry 
weather had robbed it of its verdure, and had rendered it not very. in- 
terefting to the eye; yet the healthy growth of the oak, both of the 
Englifh and holly-leaved kind, the maple, poplar, willow, and ftone 
pine, diftributed over its furface as well in clumps as in fingle trees, with 
a number of different fhrubs, plainly fhewed the fuperior excellence of 
the foil and fubftratum in thefe fituations, to that which was found bor- 
dering on the fea fhore. 

The fame uninterrupted ferenity of the weather continued, and on 
friday evening the courier from St. Diego returned, but it brought no 
‘ind of intelligence whatever; and the 24th being the day fixed for the 
return of the exprefs to Mexico, I embraced that opportunity for tranf 
mitting to the Admiralty a brief account of our tranfactions during the 
preceding fummer, and a copy of our furveys made in that and the for- 
mer year, which hadbeen prepared for that purpofe. Thefe documents, 
agreeably to the advice of the governor and our other Spanifh friends, 3 
took 


335 


1794. 
November. 


336 


1794. 
November, 


econ aed 


Thurfday27. 


Saturday 27. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


took the liberty of addreffing to the marquis of Branciforte, viceroy of 
New Spain, and requefted that he would do me the favor of forwardin 
them to England by the moft early and fafe conveyance. 

All expeétation of Mr. Broughton’s return and of his refuming the com- 
mand of the Chatham being now at anend, I appointed Lieutenant Puget 
to that ofice, Mr. Baker, and Mr. Swaine I removed to be the firft and 
fecond lieutenants of the Difcovery; Mr. Thomas Manby I appointed to 
the vacant lieutenantcy, and Mr. H. Humphreys, to be the matter of 
the Chatham in his room. 

Our bufinefs with the fhore now began to draw nigh to a conclufion ; 
the yards, topmafts, and topgallant-mafts were got up, and the rigging 
put into cundition for fea fervice, but a fufficient flock of water was how- 
ever not yet obtained; whilft this was completing, I difpatched Licutenant 
Swaine on thurfday morning with three boats over to the miffion of S* 
Cruz, in order to procure a fupply of garden ftuff, as the continuation 
of the dry weather, here, had made every f{pecies. of efculent vegetables 
extremely fcarce. Mr. Swaine returned on Saturday evening, having 
been tolerably fuccefsful, fo that with our live ftock and the other refrefh- 
ments that Monterrey had afforded, we were likely to take our leave of 
it, with as good a ftore for the prefervation of health, and to be as well 
provided for the long and diftant paflage we had to perform, as from 
any port in the known world. The two following days were employed 
in receiving on board the tents, obfervatory, inftruments, and all other 
matters from the fhore, and in getting the fhip in readinefs to proceed. 

The variety of objeéts that had occupied my time whilft at Monterrey, 
had, as at Nootka, precluded my attending to little more of our aftro- 
nomical bufinefs, than that of afcertaining the rate and error c ‘ the chro- 
nometers, according to the meridian of thefe places as fixed by our for- 
mer obfervations: yet I had confidered thefe to be of fifficient authority 
to anfwer all the purpofes of correcting our furvey of the coaft in the 
re{pective vicinity of thofe ftations. By comparative obfervations made 
by Mr. Whidbey with Mr. Ramfden’s circular inftrument, and thofe 
made with the artificial horizon by myfelf, I was in hopes of adducing 
further 


‘oy of 
irdin 


Com. 
Puget 
ft and 
ted to 
ter of 


ufion ; 
igging 
; how- 
tenant 
of S# 
uation 
tables 
laving 
ofrefh- 
ave of 
aS well 
from 
ployed 
other 
bed. 
errey, 
aftro- 
chro- 
nr for- 
ority 
in the 
made 
thofe 
ucing 
nrther 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


further reafons in fupport of the means I had adopted for fixing of the 
longitude, and for correéting our general furvey of this coaft during the 
preceding fummer, between Trinity iflands and cape Decifion; and I 
had the fatisfa€tion to find the fame correfponding accuracy at Monter- 
rey as had appeared at Nootka. 

On the 13th of november in the bay of Monterrey the chronometers 
fhewed the following longitudes : 


Arnold’s No. 14, - - - . 238° 0 50" 
Ditto, 176, . - - - 238 33 5 
Kendall’s, - - - 237 59 19 


The true longitude being 238° 25’ 45”, Arnold’s No. 14 
appeared to be 24’ 55”, Kendall’s, 26’ 30” to the welt- 
ward, and Arnold’s No. 176, 7’ 20” to the eaftward of the 
true longitude. And by altitudes taken on fhore with the 
artificial horizon on the 28th of november, Arnold’s No. 


14 was found to be faft of mean time at Greenwich, at 


noon on that day, - - - - 5° 19' 23" 0” 
And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rateof - 24 1 
Arnold’s No. 176 was faft of mean time at Green- 
wich, - - - - - 11 28 21 30 
And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of - - 5O 25 
Kendall’s faft of mean time at Greenwich, - - - 9 58 23 
And gaining on mean time per day at the rate of - 30 53 


By equal altitudes taken on fhore with the circular in- 
flrument between the 13th and ggth of november, the 
following are the rates at which the chronometers were 
found to be gaining per day; (viz.) 


Arnold’s No. 14, mn A : Z ' 23 55 
Ditto 170, - - - - - 5° 19 
Kendall’s, Se “s s _ x : 30 52 


The very inconfiderable difference between the rates thus found, and 
thofe afcertained by the artificial horizon, muft be received as a proof of 
Vou. ITI. XX the 


337 


1794+ 
Novemher. 


ee aueeedd 


338 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


1794 the correétnefs of that method, which fhould be reforted to, whenever 
November. : 
Lamyeew better authority cannot be had. 
The above true longitude, latitude, variation, and inclination of the 
marine dipping needle, were found to correfpond with our obfervations 


made on our former vifit to this place indecember, 1792. 


CHAPTER 


enever 


of the 
yations 


TER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


CHAPTER IIL 


Leave Monterrey—Some account of the three Marias iflands—Proceed to 
the fouthward—Aftronomical and nautical obfervations. 


"THE method that had been purfued to preferve as great a regularity as 
was poffible in the rate of the chronometers, had fo far fucceeded with No. 
14, that its rate as afcertained at Nootka and at Monterrey, differed only 
543 this made me very anxious to fall in with fome place whofe longi- 
tude had been fettled by profeffed aftronomers, by which means the accu- 
racy of ou: calculations would be confirmed, or the error they might have 
been liable to, would by fuch comparifon become apparent; leaving it at 
the difcretion of geographers, or of thofe who might hereafter follow us, to 
adopt or rejeét fuch correftion as their own judgment might direét. For 
this purpofe, no {tation appeared to me to be fo eligible as cape St. Lucas, 
at the fouth extremity of the peninfula of California, (on a moderate 
computation not more than eight er ten days fail from Monterrey,) as at 
St. Jofeph’s, in the immediate neighbourhood of that promontory, the 
tranfit of Venus had been obferved, and other aftronomical cbfervations 
had been made by profeffors in that fcience, whence its pofitive fituation 
had been correétly determined. But as our obfervations during the pre- 
ceding autumn for fixing the longitude of the coaft of New Albion, fouth- 
ward from hence to the joth degree of north latitude, had been all re- 
duced to port St. Diego as a central ftation, and the rate of the chrono- 
meters for correéting that furvey had been there afcertained; I deemed it 
expedient to fteer firft for the ifland of Guadaloupe, for the purpofe of ex- 
amining whether the fituation we had before affigned to that ifland from 
X x2 the 


339 


1794. 
December, 


caren ss 


« 5: a4 
Se ay 


349 


1794. 
Deceinber. 


VY .,—-Y 


Tuefday 2. 


Vhurfday 4. 


Monday 8. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


the refult of thofe obfervations, would agree with the longitude in which 
we had now placed Monterrey. 

With a freth breeze from the n.£. attended with fair and pleafant 
weather, on tuefday the 2d of december we quitted Monterrey, and bad 
adieu to governor Alava, and the reft of our Spanifh friends, from whofe 
great kindnefs and hofpitality we had not only derived much relaxation 
and happinefs, but by their attention to our future wants, we had every 
profpett of a continuation of that health, which now feemed to be efta- 
blifhed, by the refrefhiments we had there procured. 

From Monterrey bay our courle was directed to the s.r., but in the 
evening the gale died away, and after about twelve hours calm, it was 
fueceeded by light variable adverfe winds, which continued until near 
noon on thurfday, when it fixed in the weftern quarter, blowing a plea- 
fant gentle breeze. ‘The obferved latitude was 35° 29’, longitude 238° 
16. The coaft of New Albion was ftill in fight, bearing by compafs 
from N.E.to N.w. by x. This was the laft we faw of it; the wind be- 
tween W.N.w. and N.N.W. gradually increafed to a pleafant gale, which 
by the evening of the 8th brought us in fight of the ifland of Guadaloupe; 
this we paffed in the night, and from the obfervations made on the pre- 
ceding and following day, which exaétly agreed with the fhips run by 
the log, I had the fatisfaétion of finding its fituation exaétly to correfpond 
with that which we had before affigned to it; hence it is fair to prefume, 
that the whole of this coaft which has fallen under our examination, has 
been laid down relatively correétly, however our longitude may be found 
to vary from other navigators or obfervers. 

Having afcertained this faét, and being unwilling to lofe any opportu- 
nity by which the advancement of geography might in the flighteft de- 
gree be furthered, I fteered over to the coaft of California, for the pur- 
pole of fixing in our way towards cape St. Lucas, the pofition of fome of 
the moft projeéting points between that promontory, and the part where 
we had quitted its fhores the foregoing autumn: but in fo doing I had no 
intention of approaching fufficiently near to attempt a minute delinea- 
tion of the coal. 


which 


leafant 
nd bad 

whofe 
ixation 
every 
ve efla- 


in the 
it was 
il near 
a plea- 
le 238° 
ompals 
‘ind be- 
, which 
sloupe ; 
he pre- 
run by 
refpond 
efume, 
on, has 
e found 


pportu- 
teft de- 
he pur- 
fome of 
where 
had no 
elinea- 


At 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


At day-light in the morning of the gth we had fight of the illand of 
Cerros, bearing by compafs from £.N.§. to N.E. about 10 leagues dif- 
tant. This ifland is reprefented in the Spanifh charts to he about 10 
leagues long, and to be lying before an extenfive bay, on the fhores of the 
peninfula. The fouth-weftern point of this bay is a very projeéting pro- 
montory named Morro Hermofo: weft from thence is laid down a {maller 
illand called Natividad. To theleas the day advanced we drew fomewhat 
nearer, but the land was {till too far off to admit of our forming any cor- 
re€t judgment as to the produétions of the country, or the fhape of its 
fhores. ‘Thole of the ifland of Cerros wore an uncven broken appear- 
ance, though on a nearer view they feemed to be all conneéted. ‘The 
fouthern part, which is the higheft, 1s occupied by the bale of a very re- 
markable and lofty peaked mountain, that defcends in a very peculiar 
rugzed manner, and by projeéting into the fea, forms the fouth-welt end 
of the ifland into a low craggy rocky point; this as we pafled at the dif 
tance of 5 or 6 leagues, feemed, like the other part of the ifland, to be 
deilitute of trees, and nearly fo of all other vegetable productions. Nativi- 
dad appeared to be more moderately elevated, and at noon bore by com- 
pals N. 70 £.; the fouth-eaft point of the ifland of Cerros, n..464.; the 
peaked mountain, N.37£.; its fouth-weft point, N. 27 £.; its north- 
weflernmoft part in fight, N. 20 £.; and ifle de St. Benito, which is a 
{mall ifland, feemingly with fome rocks and iflets about it, N.11 w., dift 
tant 8 or g leagues. In this fituation the obferved latitude was Or ets oP 
longitude by Arnold’s No. 14, 244° 384, by Kendall’s 244° 382’ and by 
Arnold’s No. 176, 244° 54’. The variation, by the furveying compals, 
was at this time 8° eaftwardly. 

‘The weather continued to be fair and pleafant, and, with a gentle 
breeze from the north-weft, we proceeded along the fhore. In the af- 
ternoon we had fight of what we fuppofed was Morro Hermofo, which 
at that diftance appeared to be infular, and, | ke Natividad, feemed to 
be moderately elevated. Although we were too far diftaut to attempt 
an accurate delineation oi thefe fhores, .vet we were enabled pretty 
clearly to afcertain the pofition of their molt prominent points, and, from 
the refult of our calculations. the ifland of Cerros appeared to form on 


1%S 


a MY 


ocean | 
348 al 


Voie 
ery 
1794+ RAS 
: “ hd 
Jeceinher, bg ChNae | 
] “ aM, 


Pudisus ¢ 0 1 Wo, 
Sa) | 


Pit 
vant 


342 


1794. 
December. 
suring Seeeal 


Wednel, 10. 


Thurfdayt3, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


its weltern fide a deep bay, between its north-weft and fouth-weft points, 
which are about 5 leagues apart, in a direction N. 20 E. and s, 20 w.; the 
peaked mountain being the part whofe fituation we were beft able to fix, is 
in latitude 28° 8’, longitude 244° 58’. From this mountain the ifland St. 
Benito lies x.65 w., at the diftance of twenty miles, and the ifland of Nati- 
vidad s. 4 £., diftant fourteen miles. The latter appeared to be about four 
miles long, ina s.e. and n.w. direétion, and, like the ifland of Cerros, 
prefented a barren and dreary afpect. Behind it was the point which we 
had taken for Morro Hermofo, in latitude 27° 52’, longitude 245° 7’. 
The channels round thefe iflands, and between them and the main land, 
are, in the Spanifh charts, reprefented as clear and navigable ; we were 
not, however, fufficiently nigh to them to fatisfy ourfelves in this particu- 
lar. During the night our courfe was direéted more foutherly, which, 
although it kept us within fight of the land, yet by the morning it had 
increafed our diftance further from the coaft than I had reafon to expect, 
from the way in which it has been laid down. We were now at the dil- 
tance of 12 to 14 leagues, and whether the parts in fight were or were not 
immediately on the fea fhore, it was not poffible for us to determine, but 
the fhore was fufficiently marked to admit of our making the neceffary 
obfervations, as we failed along it, for the objeét T had in view. The 
northernmoft point in fight at noon, being the fame land that had form- 
ed the northern extremity ever fince the morning, bore by compafs Nn. 
3 w., diftant 17 leagues, a particular high part, appearing to form the 
north point of a bay or opening on the coaft, N.17 £., at the fame dif- 
tance; and what appeared to form a very confpicuous point, from 
whence the coaft feemed to take a very eaftwardly turn, N. 25 £., diftant 
13 leagues. In this fituation the obferved latitude was 26° 48’, longitude 
245° 264’ ; and, if the above eftimations be correét, the latter point will 
be found to lie in latitude 27° 20, longitude 245° 4g. Several turtles 
were feen at this time on the furface of the fea, one of which was taken 
by our fmall boat. ‘Towards fun-fet the weather became cloudy, the 
wind veered to the fouthward, and threatened us with a heavy rain, 
but by midnight the wind refumed its north-weft direétion, and the wea- 
ther became fair and pleafant. Not being in fight of the coaft on thurf- 

i day 


ar 


points, 
é3 the 
fix. is 
nid St, 
f Nati- 
ut four 
JEFros, 
ich we 
yA Ro 9! 
45° 7". 
1 land, 
e were 
articu- 
which, 
“it had 
>xpect, 
he dif- 
2re not 
ne, but 
ceffary 
The 
form- 
pals N. 
rm the 
e dif- 
from 
diftant 
gitude 
nt will 
urtles 
taken 
Vy the 
rain, 

b wea- 
thurf- 
day 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


day morning I fteered more to the eaflward, and by day-light on the 
12th we were within fight of a high round mountain, which we fuppoted 

was on the main land of the peninfula, bearing by compals n.k. 4 £. 
The part of the ocean in which we had now arrived abounded with 
bonitos, albicores, and various other fifhes of the tropical regions, with a 
great many turtles. ‘Thefe fcemed fo perfeétly indifferent to any interrup- 
tion that we occafioned them, either by pafling near to, or even over them, 
that I. was induced to fend the finall boat to take fome of them up, and 
in about half an hour fhe returned loaded with thirteen very fine green 
ones, each weighing from feventy to two hundred pounds. They all 
proved to be extremely good eating. Some of them were ftuck with the 
turtle peg, but moft of them were taken into the boat unhurt. The ob- 
ferved latitude at noon was 25° 11’, longitude 247° 484’, and the variation 
of the compaf{s 9° eaftwardly. The above high round mountain at this 
ume bore N. 30 E., diftant 25 leagues, .and land fuppoled by us to be an 
ifland, s.95 £.; to the eaftward of which our courfe was direéted until 
two in the afternoon, when our conjectures were difcovercd to have 
been ill founded; for, inftead of this land proving to be an ifland, it 
formed the weft point of a fpacious open bay, the contiguous fhores to 
which were very low, and bounded by breakers, whilft the more interior 
country rofe in fmall detached hillocks, giving the whole from the deck 
the appearance of a group of iflands, but from the maft-head it was 
feen to be all conneéted, for which reafon we hauled our wind, and 
pafled to the weftward of this land, which, in every point of view, even 
ata very little diftance, feemed to be infular, owing to the lownefs of the 
land to the eaftward of the elevated part that forms the point, and which, 
in a fouth-eaft and north-weft direétion, appeared to occupy an extent 
of about five miles. It is higheft in the center, from whence its north- 
weftern extremity fhoots out and defcends gradually to a low point of 
land, with an even furface, but in every other part the acclivity was 
{teep and irregular; and the furface, broken into deep chafms, terminates 
at the water-fide in abrupt rocky cliffs. On its northern fide lies an iflet 
with fome rocks at a little diftance from the fhore, on which there was 
an appearance of fome verdure and fertility, but where its furface was 
rockv 


343 


1794. 
December. 
Kereta 


i iduyv a2. 


O44 


1794. 
Derember. 


ere emma 


Siurday 13, 


Sunday 14. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


rocky and broken it had a fteril and barren afpett. In the evening 
we paffed within about five miles of this point, which I fuppofed was 
the fouth point of the bay dela Magdalina, and which, according to our 
obfervations, 1s fituated in latitude 24° 53’, longitude 247° 56’, from 
whence, ina fouth-eaft direétion, at the diftance of about 3 or 4 leagues, 
is another elevated part of the coaft, which, like the former, at a little 
diftance, has the appearance of being infular. As the coaft, for fome 
extent to the fouth-eaftward of this flation, is in the Spanifh charts re- 
prefented as low, and dangerous to approach, we f{trecched to the fouth- 
eaftward during the night, and on faturday morning, there being no 
land in fight, we ftood to the eaftward, and foon regained a diftant view 
of the coaft, which was Ligh and mountainous. 

Being favored with a fine gale from the north-weft, and delightfully 
pleafant weather, we made great progrefs towards the land, for which 
we continued to fteer until nine in the evening; when, being in 8o fa- 
thoms water, and conceiving the land to be not far off, we hauled to 
the wind and plied under an eafy fail, with foundings from 80 to go 
fathoms, until five on funday morning, when we again ftood towards the 
land, and to our great furprize, at day-light, found it to be 8 leagues 
diflant, and bearing by compafs from N. 54 E. to s.68 E. By ten in the 
forenoon we were within about 3 leagues of the fhore, at which time we 
bore away, and {leered for cape St. Lucas. The parts of the coaft to which 
we were now oppolite were ina great meafure compofed of fteep white 
rocky cliffs, from whence the country rofe with a very broken and un- 
even furface to a ridge of {lupendous mountains, which were vifible at a 
great diffance into the ocean. The fhores jut out into fmall projeding 
points that terminate in abrupt cliffs, and having lefs elevated land be- 
hind them, gave them at firft the appearance of being detached iflands 
along the coafl. but, on a nearer approach, this did not feem to be the 
cafe. Phe general face of the country was not very inviting, being 
deftitute of trees and other vegetable productions. 

The objerved latitude at noon was 25° 12’, longitude 250°, and the 
variation of the compals 7° eaftwardly, — At this time the northernmoft 
part of the exterior coaft of California in fight bore by compafs Nn. 15 &.; 
the 


vening 
fed was 
to our 
Y, from 
leagues, 
a little 
xr fome 
Marts re- 
e fouth- 
eing no 
int view 


ehtfully 
yr which 
n 8o fa- 
auled to 
30 to go 
‘ards the 
leagues 
pn in the 
time we 
to which 
sp white 
and un- 
ible at a 
ojecting 
land be- 
H iflands 
be the 

, being 


and the 
‘lernmolt 
1.15 Bes 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the neareft fhore N.63 £., diftant 3 leagues, and a point to the north 
ward of, and intercepting our view of cape St. Lucas s. 39 F., diffant 6 
leagues, beyond which the cape foon appeared, and was found to he 
from that point s. 47 £., diftant 2 leagues. In the afternoon we paficed 
this point, or promontory, which gradually, though not very regularly, 
defcends from the range of mountains before mentioned, and terminates 
at its fouth extremity in a hummock of low, or very moderately clevate:! 
land, that had the fame rocky fer! oppearance as that we had been on. 
pofite to in the morning. 

The weather had been very favorable to the objeét [had had in view 
in thus dire€ting our courle to the fouthward. According to var obler 
vations cape St. Lucas is fituated in latitude 22° 5’, longitude 250° 16' 
18”. The very fharp turn which the coaft takes from that point towards 
the gulph of California, enabled us in a very precife manner to afcertain 
the moft projeéting part of the cape, which according to the Spanith 
charts, and the information [ had procured from the Spaniards them- 
felves, is fituated under the fame meridian as their eftablifhment of St. 
Jofeph, and which agreeably to the Spanifh printed chart compiled by 
Miguel Coftanfo in 1770, is ftated to be in latitude 23° 3! 42”, longitude 
250°17'30". On the confirmation of our calculations by this authority 
I derived much gratification, as I had now great reafon to prefume, that 
the pofition of the weftern coaft of America between cape St. Lucas in 
California, and cape Douglas in Cook’s inlet, as heretofore ftated by me, 
would be found tolerably corre&t. The very trivial variation that had 
occurred in the rate of Arnold’s No. 14 for the preceding two or three 
months, induced me to place my principal reliance upon it, and by 
which the longitude of cape St. Lucas differed from the above, only 1’ 
12”. By Arnold’s No. 82 on board the Chatham, the longitude of the 
cape was 250°9'; Arnold’s No. 176, gave 250° 37’; and Kendall’s, 25. 
21'30". From thefe feveral refults it fhould feem, that Arnold’s No. 176 
varied moft from the truth; and as I have had occafion before to ob- 
ferve, this deviation may poffibly have arifen by the motion it received on 
its being taken on fhore, for the purpofe of difcovering its rate of going. 
Vou. IIL. Yy \s 


o 


340 


1794 


December. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


As the fituation of the Marias iflands lying between cape St. Lucas 


—————v_ and cape Corientes before the port of St. Blas, had been varioufly defined 


Monday 15. 


Tuelday 16, 


Wrednel 19. 


by different perfons, and as thefe iflands were nearly in our route, an 
opportunity was likely to be afforded me for determining their pofition; 
and on confidering the length of the paflage we had yet to perform, I 
was induced to hope we might at thofe iflands be enabled to recruit our 
flock of water; for thefe reafons our courfe was directed towards the Ma- 
rias, witha frefh gale from the northward, and delightful weather. The 
fea fill abounded with fifhes, and feveral turtle were feen; but as our 
former fupply was not yet exhaufted, and as the gale was too favorably 
tempting to admit of a moment’s delay, they remained unmolefted. 
According to Dampier, the iflands for which we were then ftecring are 
fituated 2.s.E., at the diflance of go leagues from cape St. Lucas; ac- 
cording to the Spanifh chart 47 leagues ; and by the Spanifh MS. chart 
they are ftated to be 60 leagues from that promontory. This irrecon- 
cilable difference rendered it no eafy talk to determine on which to rely; 
the difference in the Spanifh charts rendered the accuracy of each equally 
queftionable, and our own experience had proved both of them to be 
very erroneous in feveral inftances. Under this uncertainty about nine 
o'clock on monday night, being then 42 leagues from cape St. Lucas, 
and in the dire€tion in which the Marias were faid to lie, we plied under 
an eafy fail until the next morning, when we made all fail, fteering to the 
r.s.£., which courfe, by nine in the forenoon, brought us in fight of 
thofe iflands, bearing by compafs £.4..; in this direétion we inftantly 
fteered, but as we were not fufficiently up with the land to gain ancho- 
rage before dark, the night was pafled in preferving our fituation with 
the land, and in the morning of the 17th we fteered for the paffage be- 
tween the northernmoft and the middle, or Prince George's ifland, fo 
aiftinguifhed by Dampier. ‘The moft northern and largeft ifland of 
this group, is about thirteen miles long, ina s.£. by E. and N.w. by w. 
direction, which is alfo nearly the line in which thefe iflands feemed to lie 
from cach other. As we pafled along the northernmoft ifland it ap- 
peared to be but moderately elevated, notwithftanding that we had de- 
levied it at the diflance of near 18 leagues; its higheft part is towards the 


fouth 


Lucas 
lefined 
te, an 
fition; 
orm, I 
it our 
ie Ma- 

The 
as our 
orably 


ing are 
IS; ac- 
. chart 
‘recon. 
o rely ; 
equally 
1 to be 
it nine 
Lucas, 
under 
to the 
ght of 
{tantly 
ancho- 
In with 
ge be- 
nd, fo 
nd of 
by w. 
1 to lie 
it ap- 
lad de- 
ds the 
fouth 


ROUND THE WORLD. 347 


fouth, from whence it gradually defcends and terminates in a long low 174 
point at its north-weft extremity, which according to our obfervations —j~— 
is fituated s.68 £., and at the diftance of 64 leagues from cape St. Lucas. 
A {mall low detached iflet, and a remarkably fleep white cliffy rock, he 
off this point of the ifland, whofe fhores are alfo compofed, but particu- 
larly fo on its fouth-welt fide, of fleep white rocky cliffs; the fame fort 
of fubftance feemed to be its principal component part, and although in 
fome places it was tolerably well covered with a low kind of fhrubs, yet 
upon the whole it prefented but a dreary and unproduétive feene. Its 
fouth-eaftern extremity, which likewife defcends gradually from the fum- 
mit of the ifland, terminates alfo in a low projecting point with fome rocks 
lying off from it. On either fide isa fall bay; that on the eaftern fide is 
bounded by a beach, alternately compofed of rocks and fand, and as we 
gained foundings of 95 fathoms at fome diftance as we pafled bv it, 
little doubt was entertained of its affording good anchorage, prov ded 
the bottom fhould be good ; as it is protected againft the general prevail- 
ing winds. The furf however broke with fome violence on its fhores, and 
as it did not feem from the {canty portion of its vegetable produétions, 
and the apparent drynels of the foil, to poflefs what we principally, and 
indeed only wanted, water; we proceeded towards that ftation which 
Woods Rogers defcribes to have occupied, and where about the fime 
feafon of the year, he procured a great fupply of excellent water. This 
was on the north-eaft fide of Prince George's ifland. ‘n our way thither 
we paffed between Prince George’s and the north-we!icinmoft ifland, in 
a paffage about fix miles wide, with foundings from 20 to 4o fathoms, 
fandy bottom, and fo far as we became acquainted witn its navigation, it is 
free from danger or interruption. The fouth-wef fide of Prince George’s 
ifland is bounded by detached rocks lying at a imall difiaace from its 
fhores; thefe in general, but more fo on its northern and eaftern fide. 
defcend gradually from the center of the ifland (whofe fummit is nearly 
as high as that of the northernmoft ifland,) and terminate at the water 
fide in a fine fandy beach. ‘This was infinitely more verdant than the 
other ifland, as its vegetable produétions extended from the more ele- 
vated parts to the wafh of the fea, and grew with fome luxuriance, 
ay 2 though 


ee 


348 


17946 
December. 


lend 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


though we did not perceive any trees of great fize on the land, nor dict 
it feem to afford any ftreams or runs of frefl water. Some gullies were 
feen as we paffed along, which in addition to the cheerful appearance of 
the country, flattered us with the hope, that on further examination they 
would be found to afford us the fupply of water we needed. Having fhort- 
ly after noon, reached the {pot pointed out by former vifitors as moft likely 
to furnifh this effential article, we anchored on a clear fandy bottom, in 
10 fathoms water, about three quarters of a mile from the fhore, on the 
north-eaftern fide of Prince George's ifland; its eaft point bearing by 
compafs s.16 £., about two miles and a half diftant; its north-eaft point, 
nN. 68 w., diftant two miles; the north point of the northernmoft ifland, 
N. 46 w., about 6 leagues diftant; and the moft fouthern ifland, which is 
the fmalleft, from s. 21 E. to s. 45 E., about 4 leagues diftant. 

Two boats were immediately difpatched with Mr. Whidbey and Mr. 
Manby in different dire€tions in queft of water, which however, if found, 
would not be got on board without fome difficulty, on account of the 
furf which broke on every part of the fhore, but not fo violently as to 
prevent the parties from landing. In the evening both returned; Mr. 
Whidbey had extended his excurfion to the north-weilward from our an- 
chorage, without hnding any water, and Mr. Manby had been equally 
unfuccefsful to the fouth-caftward round the fouth poimt of the ifland, 
On its fouth-eaft fide the beds of many fpacious watci courfes were feen, 
which in the rainy feafon appeared to give vent to copious flreams, as 
fome of them were twenty feet in width, J:. {ome a inoiftnels was obler- 
ved, and Mr, Manby was of opinion, that by digging wells, water might 
have been piocured. A fupply by this means was however precarious, 
and as we could not devote any time to uncertainties, I determined to de- 
part without further delay, and at eight o'clock we were again under fail. 

Our vifit to thefe iflands not having afforded us an opportunity of 
making a very accurate delineation of their fhores, or of acquiring fuch 
information as might render them objeéts worthy the particular attention 
of future vifitors to thefe feas, I have not fubjoined any fketch of them, 
and fhall content myiclf by noticing, that the anchorage we quitted, is 
fituated according to our obfervations made on the preceding day. and 
the 


10r dic 
Ss Were 
ince of 
yn they 
r fhort- 
t likely 
om, in 
on the 
ring by 
t point, 

land, 
hich is 


nd Mr. 
‘found, 
of the 
ly as to 
d; Mr. 
our an- 
>qually 
land. 
re feen, 


might 
arious, 
to de- 
er fail. 


nity of 


e& fuch 
ention 
“them, 
ted, 18 
iv and 
the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the day after we failed (not having obtained any obfervations on the day 
of our arrival and departure) in latitude 21° 28’, longitude 253° 54’; and 
that in adireftion N. 50 w. and s.50 £.; thefe iflands occupy a [pace of 
about 14 leagues; the length of the northernmoft has been already ftated, 
its breadth is about nine miles; the next in fize and direétion is Prince 
George’s illand, this is about 8 leagues in circuit; and the third, or 
fouth-eafternmoft, is about nine miles round. In navigating near them 
we obferved no danger; fome detached iflets and rocks are about the 
fhores, but all are fufficiently confpicuous to be avoided; and the regu- 
larity of the foundings, fo far as our examination extended, gave us rea- 
fon to believe, that fecure anchorage might be obtained againft the pre- 
vailing winds, at a commodious diftance from the fhore. 

From the gentlemen who had landed (being myfelf from the ill flate of 
my health unable to go on fhore) I became acquainted, that the foil of 
Prince George’s ifland feemed to be principally of a fandy nature, ou 
which the chief valuable produétion was /2gnwm vite, befides which, was 
an almoft impenetrable thicket of finall trees and bufhes of a thorny na- 
ture, together with the prickly pear, and fome plants of the orange and 
lemon tribe; the whole growing as clofe to the water fide as the wafh of 
the furf would permit. Some of the ignwm vite which was cut clofe to 
the beach and brought on board, worked up full eight inches in dia- 
meter at heart; this wood was very ponderous, of a clofe black grain, 
and extremely hard. Before this time I did not recolleét to have met with 
this fpecies of wood growing on any of the iflands in thefe feas, and it is 
not improbable, that in the more interiov parts of this land the trees may 
be of a much larger fize. About the outfhirts cf the woods, for except- 
ing where in the rainy feafon the defcending waters had formed a path, 
the thicket was impenetrable; many birds weie teen, thofe of the larger 
kind were hawks of feveral forts, green parrots with yellow heads, paro- 
quets, pigeons, doves, and a variety of finail birds, many of which were 
of beautiful plumage. Pelicans, gulls, curlews, terns, and fandpipers 
were obferved, but no quadrupedes were feen, although in the fand on 
the bottom of fome of the water-courfes Mr. Manby noticed the footing 
of an animal, which he confidered to be about the fize of a fox; many 
turtle 


1794. 
Deceinber. 


— 


vw 


— 


35° 


1794. 


December, 


ay ome 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


turtle tracks were on the beach, and nearly a hundred of dead manatee. 
or fea-cows, were lodged at fome diftance beyond the prefent range of 
the furf. The carcafles of thefe animals, from their then ftate of putre- 
faction, were confidered by Mr. Manby to have been fo left about ten 
or twelve days before, and as they all feemed to be nearly in the fame 
{late of decay, the only conjecture that could be reafonably formed, was, 
that they had been fo depofited in a violent foutherly ftorm. ‘They were 
eagerly devoured by the vultures, hawks, and other birds of prey that 
had afflembled about them in great numbers, and it appeared to be, not 
improbable that the carnivorous animals of the Marias are frequently 
regale| with fuch fumptuous repafts, for, befides the fea-cows that re- 
mained intire, the {keletons of many handreds of the fame or tiumlar ani- 
mals hed seen in like manner caft on fhore, at more remote and diffe. 
vent periods, A variety of fifh, common to the tropical regions were 
fee: zat numbers about the fhores; amongft thefe the fharks were 
very bow! and daring, they followed the boats, and made rev cated at- 
tempts .o catch the oars, in which one of them at length fucceeded, but 
with the lols of five of its teeth, which were left in the blade of the oar, 
A few {nakes and guannas were alfo feen, and fome of the latter were very 
good eating. No traces of human vifitors were perceived, though on 
{hore fome drift wood was found, with evident marks of its having been 
worked or hewn with European tools. 

This appeared to me to be the fub{tance of the information we acquired 
by calling at thefe iflands, which are not more than 160 leagues from 
Acapulco, and in the immediate vicinity of St. Blas. In the Spanifh 
M.S. chart they are placed weft from that port, at the diftance of 
about 20 leagues, which appeared to correfpond exaétly with our ob- 
fervations, in refpeét to the bearings from cape St. Lucas, and to differ 
only three leagues in the diftance from that promontory ;_ this was further 
proved (fo far as eftimated diftances could ve relied upon) by the diftant 
view we had had of the continent in that direction at our laft place 
of anchorage; notwithftanding which, thefe iflands do not feem to have 
engaged or attracted the attention of the Spanifh government, 

As 


ROUND THE WORLD. aot 


anater, As on leaving the Marias it was my intention to make cape Corientes. Pm gia | 
inge of in order to afcertain its latitude and longitude, our courfe was direéted —~ ol 
/putre- between the iflands and the main land; fteering well to the eaftward at otis ia 
ut ten firft, in order that we might avoid a fhoal faid to extend fome dittance 
e fame from the fhores of the fouthernmoft of the Marias ; at midnight we pur- 
d, was, fued a more foutherly courfe, but the wind, though attended with fine 
y were ] pleafant weather, was fo moderate, that at day-light the iflands we had Thurdayis. 
-y that 7 left were ftill in fight, bearing by compafs the fouthernmoft n. 82 w. to eet 
be, not N.72w.; Prince George's ifland, x. 70 w. to N.64 w.; the eaft point t 
juently of the northernmoft, n.58 w.; and a diftant view of the continental ‘ is 
hat re- 4 fhore from N.£. by N. to E. by s. This was too remote to form any judg- ig! ‘ 
ar ani- , ment refpeéting the country, further than its appearing to have a very ang 
d diffe. lofty and uneven furface, {welling into various eminences of different fect 
Ss were : forms and magnitude. 
Ss were 4 The obferved latitude at noon was 21°, longitude 254° 27’, and the 
ted at- 4 variation of the compafs 7° 30’ eaftwardly. In this fituation the high yi 
ed, but j land over cape Corientes bore by compafs s. 25 £., land appearing like a 
he oar, ; a {mall ifland, lying at fome diftance from the continent s. 66 &.; the aa 133 
e very 4 northernmoft part of the main land in fight N.N.e., and the fouthern- 
gh on ‘ moft of the Marias iulands v.58 w., diftant g leagues. Much to our bs 
i been : furprize, in the afternoon we approached a {mall black rugged rock, or, f 
more properly fpeaking, a clofely-conne&ted clufter of fmall rocks, Bryaed 
quired 4 which though deferving of attention, from their fituation, and the fafety ie ‘| 
5 from of the navigation between cape Corientes, St. Blas, and the Marias, yet Loe 
panifh j they are not inferted in either of the Spanifh charts, nor do they ap- ’ 
ice of pear to have been noticed by any former vifitor with whofe obferva- ies 
r ob- tions I have become acquainted. The fpace they occupy does not ap- ns 
differ : pear to exceed the dimenfions of a large fhip’s hull, nor are they much ea ta 
lurther j higher. ‘They are at a greai diftance from any land, and, fo far as we it 
liftant could perceive on pafling by them at the diftance of about half a league, mig Tt | 
place the water near them appeared to be deep in every direétion. We could ta 
have 4 not gain foundings clofe rownd them with the hand-line, nor did this {mall erst } 


rocky group feem to be fupported by any bed of rock or fhallow bank. 
As ' The fhores of the main land, to the eaftward of them, at the diftance of aay 
1 about 


352 A VGYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


pei, about 8 leagues, appeared to be broken, and about ten miles within them 

Ley are two fmall iflets. Thefe rocks, according to our obfervations, are 
fituated in latitude 20° 45’, longitude 254° 27’, lying from the land men- 
tioned at noon as appearing like a fimall ifland s. 76 w., 6 leagues dif- 
tant, and from the fouthernmoft of the Marias s. 36 £., at the diftance of 
12 or 13 leagues. 

In the evening the breeze that had been very moderate all day, frefh- 
encd, and towards midnight we pafled cape Corientes, at the diftance of 
about 5 leagues; this time was rather unfavorable for the fixing of its 

Fiday 19. pofition; but as it was flill in fight at day-light the next morning, bear- 
ing by compafs ny. 8 £., and having been conftantly within our view du- 
ring the night, I fhould fuppofe that it’s fituation as refulting from ou 
obfervations will be liable to no very material error. Thefe placed cape 
Corientes in latitude 20° 22’, longitude 254° 40’; from whence if this 
flatement be correét, the above rocky group will be found to lie n, 26 w., 
at the diftance of g leagues. 

The American coaft to the fouthward of cape Corientes not continu- 
ing to take a dire€tion favorable to our route, we were no longer defirous 
of keeping near its fhores, and I therefore made the beft of our way towards 
the ifland of Cocos and the Galipagos, with an intention of {topping at one 
or both of thofe places. At noon the obferved latitude was 19°15’, longi- 
tude 254° 48’; the coaft at this time was ftill in fight, bearing by com- 3 
pafs north, n.85 £., and its neareft part north-eaft, about 10 leagues q 
from us. We were now accompanied by many of the tropical fifhes, and 
oceanic birds, and notwithftanding that we had a frefh breeze from the 
north-weftward, the weather was very fultry and unpleafant. The ther- 
mometer within thefe two days had rifen from 70 to 81, and the heat 
that we now experienced was attended with a degree of oppreffive incon- 
venience, that exceeded any thing of the fort I had ever before felt, under 
fimilar circumftances of fuch an alteration in the height of the mercury. 
The unpleafantnefs of the atmofphere on faturday morning became great- 
ly increafed by the north-wefterly wind dying away, and by its being fuc- q 
ceeded by calms or light variable airs. The atmofphere was perfeétly 
clear, ferene, and unincumbered either with fogs or clouds, which made 


: 
‘ a 


It 


in them 
yns, are 
id men- 
‘ues dif- 
ance of 


, frefh- 
tance of 
xr of its 
x, bear- 
new du- 
om oun 
ed cape 
2 af this 
|, 26w.,, 


-ontinu- 
defirous 
towards 
g at one 
’, longi- 
y com- 

leagues 

es, and 

om the 

1e ther- 
he heat 
b incon- 
, under 

hercury. 
le great- 
ing fuc- 
lerfectly 
lh made 

it 


rw) 


ROUND THE WORLD. 959 nae 
% 


it very difficult to account for the extraordinary change in the climate |, 1794. ee 
between our then ftation and the three Marias iflands, as the diflance ~-\-—~ re ie 
did not exceed 70 leagues. This may poffibly be accounted for by the ? ip i 
projetting promontory of cape Corientes, and other parts of this moun- Ae | 
tainous country intercepting thofe cool refrefhing gales from the north ed 
that are fo grateful and acceptable to the human conftitution. 

That part of the globe we had now to pafs over having been little 
frequented by perfons poffefling the means of making due obfervations Me fod 
on the vertical inclination of the magnetic needle, I purpofed to procure 
fome obfervations at different intervals when the fhip was fufhciently 
fteady for this purpofe. This day in latitude 18° 20’, longitude 255° 40’, ia: 


the Marked End, North Face Eaft, fhewed 38° 17’ wi 
Ditto Ditto Welt, : 38 3 pacts 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - 34 3 wie 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - 36 20 an MRR 
Mean vertical inclination of the north point of the eater | 
marine dipping needle - - - 36 41 We 
The horizontal inclination or variation was about 6 eaftwardly. ke 
A continuation of very light winds made our progrefs very flow, 
through an ocean on whofe furface great numbers of turtles, in every ba 
direction, were lying afleep, and we had only to lower down the boat, a at 
and without interrupting the progrefs of the fhip, make choice of as ree 
many as we required; though under our prefent circumftances we eee 
would readily have waved the acquifition of thefe luxuries for a little ae 


more wind, as with that which now prevailed, the fhip’s motion through 
the water was fcarcely perceptible. 

We had again fight of the American coaft on funday morning; it bore sunday 21. Ah 
by compafs from N.5£. to eaft, to N. 72 £.; but at fo remotea diftance ote tt 
that we loft every appearance of it by noon, when the obferved latitude ws 
was 17° 50’, longitude 255° 52’. During the two preceding days we had maa | 
very light variable winds {rom the eaftward and s. £. with alternate calms, shee 
and very oppreflive fultry weather; but by the thurfday following we had Th{t.:- » le 
fome little alleviation, as the wind then blew a moderate fteady breeze cat 
Vou. IL. Zz from eae 


354 


17946 
December. 


aan’ @amend 


Vednef, gt. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


from the north-weflward, Whilft the light winds continued we were 
greatly incommoded by a very heavy fwell from the fouth-eaftward, 
which made the fhip extremely uneafy; this had now in a great meafure 
fubfided; but the weather though perfeétly clear was ftill very hot and 
fultry, the thermometer night and day varying from 81 to 83. Had it 
not been for our anxious folicitude to get forward, and the exceffive heat 
of the weather, our fituation would have been by no means unpleafant ; 
the ocean was tranquil, and abounded with a great variety of fill; its 
furface as it were was covered with turtles, and the numerous fea fowls 
hovering over, and diving for their prey, prefented fuch an animated 
fcene, as the ocean, unaffilted by intervening land, or other objects, is 
{eldom, I believe, found to exhibit. We were here at no lofs to provide 
a repaft for this our fourth Chriftmas day fince we had quitted the civi- 
lized world; and with the addition of the frefh beef, mutton, and poul- 
try we had brought from Monterrey, the officers tables prefented 
fuch an appearance of luxury as is not frequently feen in fuch dif- 
tant regions of the ocean. In addition to our frefh provifions, and 
what the fea afforded, the people were ferved fuch an extra allow- 
ance of grog as was fufficicnt for the celebration of the day, and to call 
to their recollection their friends and favorites at home; on which occa- 
fion, though perhaps the circumftance may appear too trivial here to be 
noticed, yet as tlic feutiment arofe fpontaneoufly from the gratitude of 
the crew, I am induced to mention it; the memory of Sen" Quadra, and 
the health of Tamaahmaah were noi forgotten. 

The fame light baffling winds continued to impede our progrefs, which 
was tardy and irkfome beyond all defcription; in addition to which, fome 
of our water caiks were found to have leaked out; this, very contrary 
to my wilhes, obliged me to reftrain the allowance of water to three quarts 
aman per day. So very flowly did we proceed, that by the 31ft at noon 
we had only reached the latitude of 13°50’, longitude 259° 5’ 30”; the 
latter was deduced from 116 fets of lunar diftances, as follow, with the 
fun and aldebaran on different fides of the moon between the 27th and 
gift of december. ‘Thofe taken on the 27th, and brought forward by 
Arnold’s No. 14, gave the following refv!ts, 


The 


were 
tward, 
veafure 
ot and 
Had it 
ve heat 
eafant; 
th; its 
a fowls 
imated 
e€ts, Is 
provide 
1€ C1VI- 
1 poul- 
efented 
ch dif- 
ns, and 
allow- 
to call 

occa- 
e to be 
ude of 
a, and 


which 
, fome 
ntrary 
quarts 
t noon 
Ys the 
ith the 
th and 


rd by 


The 


ROUND TILE WORLD. 


The mean of G fets ) a © welt of her, by Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto 4 ditto Mr. Baker, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Manby, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Orchard, 
Ditto 6 ditto, taken on 29th, by Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Baker, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Manby, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Orchard, 
Ditto 6 ) abaldebaran eaft of her, Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto 6 ditto \! Baker, 
Nitto 4 ditto N inby, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mi. Orchard, 
Ditto 6 Da © weftofher,taken 31ft, Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Baker, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Manby, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Orchard, 
Ditto 4 ) abaldebaran eaft of her, Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Baker, 
Ditto 6 ) ab aldebaran eaft of her, Mr. Manby, 
Ditto 6 ditto Mr. Orchard, 
Ditto 3 ~~ ditto Mylelf, 

Ditto of 3 days’ obfervations, in 28 fets, Mr. Whidbey, 
Ditto ditto 28 Mr. Baker, 
Ditto ditto 28 Mr. Manby, 
Ditto ditto 29 Mr. Orchard, 


Ditto of the whole, colleétively taken, being the refult 
of 116 fets of lunar diftances, fhewed the longitude, 


at noon on the 31ft of december, 1794, to be 
At which time Arnold’s No. 14 fhewed 


176 - 

Kendall’s ° . 

And by the dead reckoning - 
Zz 2 


2 


Amd ea oc Co 
AwaMnNnoanodnvwn we 
Co 2 fe BC 
Vr NGA Oo 


td 
7 


= 


oO 
— 
Q 


a An 


355 


1794. 
December. 


TS aed 


J, 
v. Sp 
PO 
4 ye ey 
NX 
\N 2 
=) ol og cy. = 
<i mite’ xi] _ - 
a © es t= ae 
3 oil =H) 3 ee 
4) —S— 
=u alice oe 
YS 


s& > Ss ” \ VAR Vf N 
“aa a> a, mm ee 
NF Ate 

S y, a 


356 
17946 


December. 
omen pore 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Hence, as I confidered the longitude deduced from the lunar obferva- 
tions to be correct, or nearly fo, it will appear evident that the chrono- 
meters, fince the commencement of the very hot weather, had been gain- 
ing confiderably lefs than the rate we were allowing as afcertained at 
Monterrey ; for which reafon a new rate was, from thefe and fubfequent 
obfervations, found and adopted for pointing out our longitude, by the 
chronometers, from this ftation fouthward to the ifland of Cocos. 

By this mode No. 14, at noon, on the 31ft of decem- 
ber, appeared to be faft of mean time at Greenwich, —5"31' 36” 45” 

And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 20 
No. 176, faft of mean time at Greenwich on the fameday, 11 51 59 45 

And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 4l 5 
Kendall’s faft of mean time on the fame day, - 10 11 43 45 

And to be gaining on mean time per day at the rate of, 21 35 


CHAPTER 


bferva- 
hrono- 
Nn gain- 
ined at 
fequent 
by the 


TER 


see ia 


ROUND THE WORLD, 


CHAPTER IV. 


Vifit the ifland of Cocos—Some defcription of that ifland—Aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations there — Proceed to the fouthward—Pafs between 
Wenman's and Culpepper's ilands—See the Gallipagos rflands, and afcer- 
lain their fituation. 


Du rine our paffage thus far from Monterrey, it did not appear 
that we had been much affected by currents, the log and the obferva- 
tions having in general correfponded very nearly, and the difference 
between the longitude, by the dead reckoning, and that which I confi- 
dered to be the true longitude, had not exceeded half a degree, the dead 
reckoning having been in general to the eaftward of the truth. 

The wind in the north-weftern quarter continued to blow a fteady 
breeze, and as we advanced to the fouth-eaftward it increafed in its 
force ; the heat was lefs oppreffive, and the mercury in the thermome- 
ter fell to a general temperature of about 78 ; the atmofphere was genc- 
rally clear, and the fea, which was remarkably fmooth, abounded with 
immenfe numbers of flying fifh, dolphins, bonitos, albicores, and a great 
variety of fmaller fifhes ; of turtles we eafily procured as many as we 
could difpenfe with. 

By noon on monday we had reached the latitude of g° 27’, and the 
longitude, brought forward from the preceding lunar obfervations, with 
the new rates of the chronometers, was fhewn by Arnold’s No. 14 to be 
263° 36’ 15", No. 176, 263° 34’ 15", and by Kendall’s 263° yo’; the dead 
reckoning at this time fhewed 265° 33’; whence it became evident that 
we were now materially affected by a current fetting to the weftward, 
1 as 


Monday 5. 


358 


1795: 
January. 


ney ate a) 


Sunday 11. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


as this deviation had been gradually increafing fince the 31ft of december, 
and by our daily obfervations for the latitude, the direétion of this cur- 
rent feemed to be irregularly between the north-weft and fouth-weft, the 
reckoning being fometimes to the north, fometimes correfponding, and 
at others to the fouth of the obfervations. 

In this fituation the vertical inclination of the magnetic necdle was a. 
under: 


Marked end North face Eaft, - — 24° 50 
Ditto ditto Weft, - ner 25 3 

Ditto South face Eatft, - - 21 45 

Ditto ditto Weft, - - 24 90 

Mean inclination of the marine dipping needle, - 24 54 


The variation being about 74 degrees caftwardly. 

‘The two fucceeding days we were fet to the fouthward, at the rate of 
about half a mile per hour, and on wednefday the wind from the north- 
caitward again became very light, and I found it neceflary to begin 
diftilling frefh water from the fea; by this procefs, without any great 
additional expenditure of fuel, a fupply of from twelve to eighteen gal- 
Jons of frefh water was procured in the courfe of each day ; and al- 
though it could not be confidered of the firft quality, yet it was per- 
feétly frefh, and applicable to all the purpofes of cooking. In this re- 
fpect it was highly acceptable, as by the affiftance of the diftilled water, 
we were enabled to appropriate to greater advantage the abundant re- 
frefhments which the fea ftill continued to afford, and which were fome 
compenfation for the very tedious and tardy progrefs that the faint baffling 
winds permitted us to make. 

Since wednefday we had frequently noticed very ftrong riplings on the 
furface of the water, but felt {carcely any efleét from currents. The 
obferved latitude on funday was 7° 47’, longitude, by Arnold’s No. 14, 
266° 27’; No. 176, 260° 20’; Kendail’s, 266° 33’; and by the dead rec- 
koning 268° 32’; fo that admitting No. 14, as I conceived it to be, near- 
eft the truth, the error in the reckoning, fince the 5th, had only increa- 
fed 19’. The variation of the compafs was now about 8° eaftwardly. 
During the laft week the clouds, particularly in the northern quarter, 


2 had 


5k 


‘ate of 
north- 
begin 
great 
n gal- 4 
nd al- 
Is re- 


vater, 
nt re- 

fome 
fling 


n the 
The 
0. 14, 
t rec- 
near- 
crea- 
rdly. 
Arter, 


had 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


had fometimes hung about the horizon very dark and heavily, but 
they had now difperfed without any rain, excepting about noon on the 
preceding day, when we had a fmart fhower that lafted near two 
hours, and was the firft rain that had fallen with us fince our arrival at 
Monterrey in the beginning of november laft. 

As we thus gently advanced to the fouth-eaftward, the riplings on the 
furface of the water became more frequent, and were attended with a 
greater degree of agitation, making a ruftling hiffing noife, like a tide 
in fhoal water; and though we felt fomething of their influence, they 
feemed infinitely more to affe€t the Chatham in her fteerage ; yet, from 
the refult of our obfervations, they did not appear to be the confe- 
quence of any current, which gave rife to an idea, that probably the 
{pace we were then paffing over was of very uneven bottom. To afcer- 
tain this fa€t foundings were tried, but no bottom was found in thefe 
riplings with 140 to 170 fathoms of line. During the night of the 12th, 
and until noon the following day, we had a frefh breeze from the n.N.£., 
which afterwards veered round to the eaftward and r.s.5, nearly in the 
direétion in which I wifhed to fteer. On wednefday noon we had reach- 
ed the latitude of 5° 37’, longitude 268° 31’, approaching nearly to the 
parallel of the ifland of Cocos, and about 2 or 3 degrees of longitude to 
the weitward of its meridian, according to the different accounts of its 
fituation in the ocean; and as we had no indication whatever of our 
having left it to the weftward of us, our courfe was directed eaftwardly, 
as the moft probable means of finding the ifland. 

We were ftill attended by vaft numbers of fifhes, varying both in 
fize and fpecies ; few birds were now about us, and the abundance of 
turtles was fo much decreafed, that, on thurfday, notwithflanding the day 
was for the moft part calm, our boat’s crew caught only two. The 
weather flill continued clear, and gave us fo good a view all around 
us, that had any land been within the limits of our horizon, it could not 
have efcaped our notice. After having paffed to the fouth of the Gth 
degree of north latitude, we again found ourfelves under the influence of 
the current, that, during the 14th, had fet us 18’, in a direction s. 47 £., 
and, during the laft twenty-four hours, at the fame rate, in a direétion 

N. 625, 


359 


17956 


January. 


Keren med 


rueldautae 
Tuelday 13. 


Wednef. tt. 


Tharle 


We 


ehh Me 
y \ 
pitnet 
“ My 
‘ rh 
OF Mah 
4 
“}.tyagt } 
Bae ny 
Piha a H 
iG. 
a ee | ile 
‘ne 
‘ ii 


Z 
id 
390 


1795. 
’ 


Jaaary.s 


Friday 16, 


Saturday 17. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


n.628. Alight breeze fpringing u, {oon alter noon from the north, 
we purfued our eaftwardly courle, intenc..g to incline a little to the 
fouthward., This, however, we were prevented do ag, from the current 
continuing to fet to the E.N.E. at the rate of a mile per hour; fo that 
at noon the following day our obferved latitude was 5° 51’, and the lon- 
g.tude 269° 32’. 

The tranquil flate of the wind and fea, which with fo little interrup- 
tion had for fuch a length of time attended us, now feemed likely to un- 
dergo a very material change. A very heavy fwell rolled from the wett- 
ward, and the atmofphere became loaded with denfe, heavy clouds, par- 
ticularly between the s.£. and s. w.; in this dire€tion our view was li- 
mited toa very few miles. The wind now blowing a gentle breeze from 
the nN. w. amore foutherly courfe was purfued, in the hope of regaining 
what we had loft by the current having driven us to the northward. 
Towards midnight after about three hours calm, the wind came from the 
fouthward, and obliged us to f{teer again to the eaftward; this I much 
regretted, as we had not, with all our efforts, yet been able to get fo far 
fcouth, as the latitude affigned to the ifland we were in queft of, which 
acccrding to Lord Anfon’s voyage is ftated to be in 5°20’, and by the 
Buccaneers in 5°15’. I could not help being apprehenfive, that a con- 
tnuation of thefe adverfe winds and currents would chlige us to pafs to 
the northward of the ifland without feeing it; for, by our obfervations on 
faturday, after making every allowance, inftead of our being in latitude 
5° 22’, which was fhewn by the reckoning, the refults of our meridional 
and double altitudes (which agreed extremely well together) proved our 
latitude to be 5° 46’, and that we were alfo feveral miles to the eaftward 
of our account, the longitude being 270° 37’.. The variation at this time 
was 87° eaf{twardly. 

Between this and the preceding noon, we had pafled over upwards of 
a degree of longitude, without being able to fee far to the fouth of the 
latitude of 5° 30°, owing to very thick hazy gloomy weather; hence it 
was very poflible, that we might have paffed to the northward of the 
ifland of Cocos. This was confidered by fome on board to have been 
highly probable, from the circumftance of our being now attended by 
valt 


north, 
to the 
‘urrent 
fo that 
1e lon- 


ferrup- 
to un- 
e welt- 
is, par- 
was li- 
e from 
raining 
hward, 
‘om the 
[ much 
t fo far 
, which 
by the 
a con- 
pals to 
ions on 
latitude 
idional 
red our 

{tward 
is time 


ards of 
of the 
ence it 
of the 
ie been 
ed by 
valt 


ROUND TITE WORLD. 


vaft numbers of the different fpecies of birds that are generally found 
frequenting the fhores of the uninhabited tropical iflands ; but this did 
not amount to proof, as thofe birds might have been attraéted to the 
neighbourhood of our then fituation by the great numbers of bonitos, 
albicores, and other fifhes, with which the fea at that time abounded : 
and as we were fuccelsful in taking as many of them as we could make ule 
of, they made us ample amends for the deficiency of turtle, which did 
not appear to be an objeét of much regard, as I believe moft of us be- 
gan to be ured of that food, which was only uicd to diverfify our other 
provifions. 

The currents with which we had met, fhewed that little reliance 
was to be placed on the longitude, affigned to any land in this part of 
the ocean, from the teftimony of thofe who had fo long fince vifited thefe 
regions, but who had not been provided with the means we pofleffed for 
afcertaining the ftrength and dire¢tion of thefe ftreams. 

For fome days paft we had been fet confiderably to the eahward, and 
as, from the feveral authorities I had confulted, it did not appear that we 
had yet reached the moft eaflern fituation affigned to the ifland in quef- 
tion, the prefumption was that it was ftill to the eaflward of our prefent 
track; and although I fhould have been greatly mortified to have been 
obliged to abandon an objeét that had fo much attraéied my attention, 
yet, from the reduced ftate of our water in confequence of this unex- 
pectedly tedious paffage, and the worn-out and defective {tate of our wa- 
ter-cafks, the reaching of the ifland of Cocos became a matter more of 
neceflity than choice; as I was very unwilling to enter any port in 
the continent. There feemed, however, no profpeét of effecting this, 
unlefs we fhould be able to fhape fuch a courfe as would counteraét 
the ftrength of the adverfe north-eafterly current. For this purpofe, 
with the wind at s.s.w. we fteered to the s.£., and in the evening had 
a tolerably diftinét view a-head, but the fouth-weft horizon was ftill ob- 
feured in dark denfe clouds, and haze; the night was moftly calm, but 
in the following morning the weather was ferene and clear, attended 
with a gentle breeze from the N.w., with which we fteered to the fouth, 


Vou. IIL. 3A and 


Sunday 18. 


1795+ 


January. 


a) 


Monday 19. 


Euefday eo. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


and at noon were in latitude 5° 33, longitude 271° 7’; having been fer 
during the laft twenty-four hours 13’ to the north, and 11‘ to the eaft of 
our reckoning. 

The clear weather was not of long coniinuance in the fouthern quarter, 
although the oppofite fide of the horizon retained its former appearance; 
for by fun-fet we could not fee a mile from the fhip in the eaflern, fouth- 
ern, or fouth-weftern quarters. “The various kinds of birds became more 
numerous, and having at length reached the ftated parallel of the ifland, 
we plied during the night, which was attended by variable winds, fome rain, 
and dark gloomy weather. ‘This continued untul noon the next day, when 
the obferved latitude was 5°14’, longitude 271°9'; being 10’ to the 
north, and 4’ to the eaft of what the log fhewed. ‘The weather now 
admitted of an extenfive view all round, but no land was in fight; and as 
the number of birds was confiderably leffened, fome additional reafons 
were offered in fupport of the former opinion, that we had left the ifland 
to the fouth-weftward of us. Of this however I was by no means con- 
vinced, as in my feveral traverfes over the pacific ocean, I had feldom 
found that fuch indications amounted to a proof of the very near vicinity 
of land. 

With the wind between the fouth and s.w., although I had continued 
during the night to the fouth-eaflward, we were not able to keep our 
fouthing; for the obferved latitude at noon the following day was 5° 16, 
the longitude 271° 52’, which was 24’ further north, and 10’ further eaft 
than was given by our reckoning. 

In the courfe of the laft three or four days we had, in different in- 
ftances, been deceived for a fhort time both by night and day, by very 
heavy dark clouds which aflumed the appearance of land. Shortly after 
noon a fimilar refemblance was feen from the matft-head at a great diflance, 
bearing E.N.&., which was not given credit to as being land, until aided 
by a gentle breeze and the current, we had approached nearer to it by 3 
leagues, when it was decided beyond all queftion to be land. Concluding it 
to be the long-looked for ifland of Cocos, at the diftance of 14 or 16 
leagues, the glad tidings were communicated by fignal to our little 
confort. All the turtles had now left us, but we had {till many fifhes and 

fea 


iF 
se 


Tae Con gery 


een fet 


ealt of 


juarter, 
irance ; 
fouth- 
e more 
-ifland, 
ne rain, 
y, when 
to the 
icr now 

and as 
reafons 
e ifland 
ns con- 


feldom 
vicinity 


ntinued 
ep our 
S 5°10, 


her eaft 


ent in- 
y very 
ly after 
lance, 
il aided 
it by 9 
ding it 
or 16 

br littie 
hes and 
fea 


te 


ape Ee 


ta 


728 
ei 
ae 


ears ae 


, 


2 SRR 


ROUND THE. WORLD: 


ica fowl attending us, though thefe were not quite fo numerons as on the 
preceding evening. “The night was calin, or accompanied with light vari- 
able winds, which continued with rain and dark gloomy weather wuti! noon 
the next day, fo that no obfervations could be obtained for afcertaining the 
fhip’s fituation: we had however made fome progrefs, as the ifland now 
bore by compals v.79 8. to NX. 81 £.. not more than 6 or 7 Jeagues from 
us. In this we had been much aflifled by the current fetting us direétly 10 
wards the land, the fouth-weft extremity of which appeared in this point 
of view, to rife abruptly from the fea in fteep rugged cliffs to a conft- 
derable height: and then ina moderate afeent to its moft elevated part ; 
this was a hil of no very ercat fize: from whence it defeended with a 
more uniform declivity to us northern extremity, which appeared like a 
detached ilet. 

The wind, which had been variable in the evening, beeame very light, 
and Iwas not without my apprehenfions that the current might force us 
paft the ifland, before we might have an opportunity of making choice 
of a fituation for anchoring. That no time might be loft, about two m 
the following morning, being then fufficiently near the Jand for one of 
our boats to be in with the fhores by day-light. Mr. Whidbey was dift 
patched in the cutter to make the neceflary examination. During this 
and the three or four preceding nights the fea had prefented a very lumi- 
nous appearance, but I was not able to afcertain with fatisfa¢iion the 
caufe of it. After the boat had left the fhip, we ufed our utmofl endea- 
vours to preferve our ftation to the fea t-welt of the ifland, but to no 
effeét : the current foon after day-lght dros e us beyond its weflern end, 
and although our head was to the fouth-wefl, we were driven at a great 
rate paft its nerthern fide, within a few miles of its fhores.  ‘Thefe ap- 
peared to be indented into fmall bays, with rocks and aflets Iving near 
them; but they by no means exhibited that inviting appearance which 
has been reported of them by Lionel Waicr * and others. ‘Thefe fhores 
were chiefly compoled of broken perpendicular chify preciptces. beyond 
which the furface rofe unevenly to the fummit of the afland: the whole 
compofing one rude connetted thicket of {mall trees near the fhore, but 
on the more elevated and interior parts many large fpreading trees were 
»Av {cen, 


W 


gO4 


1795. 
January. 
Lape 


Friday 23. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


feen; fome cocoa nut trees were alfo obferved in the chafms of the rocky 
precipices, but they did not feem now to flourifh in fuch abundance, as 
was moft likely the cafe when their fruit gave a name to the ifland. 

Being intirely without wind, the current fat us faft to the north-eaft- 
ward from the land, which at noon bore by compafs from s.17 w. to 
S.35 W., diflant 7 or 8 miles. ‘The weather at this time afforded us a 
good opportunity for afcertaining the fhip’s place, which by feveral cor- 
rect obfervations was found to be in latitude 5° 40’, longitude 273° 8’. 
By thele and other obfervations that had been made on the goth, the 
fhip zppeared to have been fet by the current during the two days 60 
miles, in a dire&tion N. 50 £.; this fhewed that the ifland, which we did 
not confider to be more than moderately high, when firft feen was up- 
wards of 20 leagues diftant. 

In the morning as we were driving near to the fhores of the ifland, fome 
falls of water were obferved defcending from the cliffs into the fea, and as 
we ftood much in want of this neceffary article as more of our cafks were 
found to have leaked out, no {mall degree of impatience was experi- 
enced for the return of the boat, as her long abfence had been attributed 
to want of fuccefs in finding a fafe place for anchorage. This however 
did not prove to be the cafe, for her fuppofed detention was wholly oc- 
cafioned by the great diftance to which the current had fet the fhip from, 
the ifland. About four o’clock I had the fatisfa€tion of being informed 
by Mr. Whidbey, that the fhores abounded with f{treams and falls of moft 
excellent water, together with fome cocoa nuts, and plenty of wood for 
fuel, eafily to be procured; efpecially in two {mall bays, both of which 
afforded anchorage fufficiently {heltered from the prevailing winds at this 
feafon of the year ; the one on the north-eaft,. the other on the north-weft 
part of the ifland. Mr. Whidbey gave the preference to the moft eaft- 
ern, for which, therefore, with a light breeze from the north, we im- 
mediately fteered, but were unable to ftem the current till about nine at 
night, when the wind frefhened from the N. £.; and with this, about four 
on friday morning, we reached the fituation Mr. Whidbey had chofen, and 
moored in 33 fathoms water, fandy and graveily bottom, and (fo far as 
we became acquainted.) good holding ground, and free from rocks. The 
ealt 


rocky 
nee, as 


th-eaft- 
7 W. to 
ad usa 
al cor. 
279° S 
th, the 
lays 60 
we did 


vas up- 


d, fome 
and as 
ks were 
experi- 
ributed 
owever 
plly oc- 
ip from, 
formed 
of mofh 
lood for 
which 
at this 
th-welt 
b{t eaft- 
ye im- 
nine at 
ut four 
n, and 

bD far as 
The 
eaft 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


eaft point of the bay, which is a fmall conical iflet lying clofe to the 
north-eaft extremity of the ifland, bore by compals s. 51 £., diftant half 
a mile; the weft point of the bay s.75.w.; a fteep rocky iflet lying off it 
bore from s. 87 w. to N. 60 w.; and the watering place at the mouth of 
a very fine {tream emptying itfelf over a fandy beach, s. 13 w., about 
three quarters of a mile diflant; the Chatham moored within us in 26 
fathoms water, on the fame kind of bottom. 

As foon as the fhip was fecured I went on fhore, and found that all 
our wants could be eafily fupplied; that although there was fome furf 
on the beach it was inconfiderable, and that not only water and fire- 
wood, but that cocoa-nuts were alfo to be procured in great abundance. 
No time was now loft in fetting about obtaining a duc fupply of thefe 
eflential articles, and in the performing fuch other bufinefs as had become 
requifite on board; where, at noon, by the mean of four obfervations, 
with different perfons and inftruments, the latitude was fhewn to be oa 
95.15. This differing fo materially from the latitude as fated in Lord 
Anfon’s and other voyages, and the gencral appearance of this ifland fo 
little correfponding with the defcription given of the ifland of Cocos, 
efpecially by Dampier, and Wafer, gave rife to fome doubts in my mind 
as to its being the identical ifland fo deferibed by thofe gentlemen. Be 
that as it may, the advantages it afforded us, not only in the articles 
already mentioned, but in an abundance of very fine filh, were very 
important; and as the foil was apparently capable of affording a variety 
of ufeful vegetables, this ifland did not fail to attraét our particular at- 
tention; and being anxious to acquire every information refpeéting it 
that the fhort ftay I purpofed to make would allow of, I difpatched Mr. 
Whidbey on faturday morning, in the large cutter, to take a fketch of 
its fhores. This fervice he performed, and returned about four in the af- 
ternoon, having found them to be compofed of fteep perpendicular rocky 
cliffs, with fome iflets and rocks lying near them; on which the fea 
broke with fo much violence as to preclude any attempt to land in any 
part, excepting in the bay to the weftward of the anchorage we had 
taken, where Mr. Whidbey had been before, and in that in which the vef- 
fels were moored; which were the only two fituations on the ifland to which 


veffels 


Saturday 243 


300 


1797. 


wy 
t 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


velleis could refort. On funday morning To made a fhort excurfhion to 


Cae the wellern bay, aud although a more coptous f{tream of frefh water wa, 


found to flow mito it, yet it is certainly not fo eligible a fituation for pro- 
curing the good things which the iffand afforded as that which we occupied, 
It was about half ebb when we reached its fhores, where we landed with 
tolerable convenience. After we had breakfafled, we fatisfied our curiofity 
in taking a view of the adjacent country ; this was contincd by an im- 
pencirable thicket nearly to the limits of the fandy beach, which coin. 
pofes the bottom of the bay, where, on our return to the boats, we 


found fome difficulty in re-cmbarking, owing to an increafe of the furf 


which at that time broke upon the beach. 

At the place on fhore, where our operations were going on, I had 
obferved evident marks of European vilitors, froin the trees having been 
felled with axes and faws, whillt the decayed flate of the remaining 
umps proved that they had not been very recently cut down. In this 
weflern bay, near to the frefh-water brook, a bottle was fufpended on 
a tree, containing a note direéted to the commander of any veflel that 
might vilit the land, and figned “ James Colnett ;” ftating, that the fhip 
Rauer, South-Sea whaler, of London, had arrived on the 26th of july, 
1793, and, after procuring wood, water, and other refrefliments, had pro- 
ceeded on her voyage, all in good health: that, previoufly to her de- 
parture, a breed of hogs and goats had been left on the ifland, and a va- 
riety of garden feeds had been fown, but the {pot where thefe valuable 


articles had been depofited did not happen to fall within the limits of 


our obfervation. 
By the time we reached the veffels the rain fell very heavily, and I 
became acquainted, on my arrival on board, that the furf had fo much 
increafed, as very materially to retard our bufinefs with the fhore. ‘The 
rain was accompanied by a frefh gale from the s.w., at the commence- 
ment of which the current, which, though by no means regular in its force, 
fometimes being barely perceptible, at others running at leaft at the 
rate of two miles per hour.) yet had hitherto fet uniformly to the E.N.x., 
now changed its direction and fet to the weftward, but at a very een- 
tle rate. 
This 


flor to 
ter Wa; 
or pro- 
cupied, 
ed with 
ariofily 
aq Im- 
1 com. 
ats, We 


the furf 


, I had 
i been 
naining 
In this 
ded on 
Tel that 
the fhip 
of july, 
ad pro- 
her de- 
da va- 
aluable 


mits of 


and I 
much 
. The 
nence- 
s force, 
at the 
EAN.E., 


y gen- 


This 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


This uncomfortable weather continued, though with fome intermiffion, 
during the 26th; we, however, made great progrels in completing 
our water and fuel, and having nearly exhaufted the neighbouring fhores 
of their cocoa-nuts, I difpatched two boats with Mr. Manby, the next 
morning, to the weftern bay, where they were produced in great plenty, 
to procure a full fupply of them. ‘The boats returned about noon, not 
having been very fuccefsful, as the heavy furf prevented their landing 
in that part of the bay where the fruit was moft abundantly produced. 

By the afternoon we had taken on board about thirty-five tons of wa- 
ter, with as much wood as we could flow; and having thus finifhed all 
our bufinefs with the fhore, we quitted this land in the evening, and 
made the beft of our way to the fouthward. 

Having adverted to the fituation and advantages which this finall 
{pot of land poffeffes, I fhall now more particularly notice fuch matters 
as occurred to our obfervation whilft we rematied there. 


It does not appear from any account with which I am acquainted, 
to whom we are indebted for the difcovery of this valuable little 
ifland ; nor, indeed, do the feveral deferiptions of the ifland of Cocos 


much accord with each other, or agree with what we found to be its 
fituation or appearance, ‘The ifland feen by Lord Anfon, of which he 


BS 


Cocos, is {tated in his voyage to be fituated 13/ to the fouth of what was 
found by our calculations to be the latitude of this ifland; and fhould 
this error in the latitude be confidered as reconcilable, it is likely we 
may both intend the fame ifland. I have not the leaft doubt that the 
ifland we Jaft quitted is the fame which Chipperton vifited, and called it 
the ifland of Cocos. He, I fhould fuppole, anchored in the weftern 
bay, but his defcription is too confined to draw from thence any fatis- 
factory conclufion: but the greateft difference is in the accounts given 
of the ifland of Cocos by Dampier and Lionel Wafer; thefe differ fo 
very materially from our obfervations, in point of extent of fituation 
and appearance, that their reprefentations muft either be exceflively 
erroneous, or they muft belong to fome other ifland. After  tak- 
ing all thefe circumftances into confideration, it appeared to me by 


no 


1795. ha 
January. 49 
Te anes \ 


was within fight for five days, and confidered by him to be the ifland of 


tyf we) 
305 
1795+ 


January. 


eae mn amend 


A VOYAGE OF 


DISCOVERY 


no means unlikely, that fome other  ifland might exift not very far 
remote from this, to which thele apparently contradictory reports might 
more properly apply. 

Two opinions were formed refpecting an infeription that was found 
cut on a rock near to our watering place; the letters, which had been 
originally but ill executed, were much defaced. 

Look ¥ as’ you goe for ye I Coco. 

This I confidered as purportung, * Look to fouth as you go, for the 
* land of Coco,” but the more prevailing opinion amongtt us was, that 
it meant, “ Look as you go for the ifland of Coco,” meaning this iden- 
tical ifland. ‘Lhe defaced character after the word “ look” might poffi- 
bly have originally been intended to fignify the north, yetas we met with 
“0 Other in its vicinity, it is probable that this latter opinion was moft 
correct; for which reafon I have adopted the name of Cocos for the 
land in queftion, 

According to the fketch made by Mr. Whidbey, the ifland of Cocos 
is about 4 leagues in circuit, lying ina N.£, and s.w. direction; it is 
about four miles long, and two miles broad, with feveral detached rocks 
and ificts fcattered about its fhores ; thofe lying off its fouth-weft part ex- 
tend to the greateft diftance, which is nearly two miles, but they cannot 
be confidered as dangerous becaule they are fufliciently high to be feen 
The fmall bay in which we had anchored at the north-eait 
end of the ifland is greatly to be preferred to the other weltward of it ; 
for the final] iflet that lies off its north-welt point adds greatly to its pro- 


and avoided. 


tection from the wind and fea. ‘The width of the bay from point to point 
of the two iflets that form each of its extremities is about a mile, ina 
direétion s. 52 8. and N. 52 w., and from this line its extent to the bot- 
tom of the bay is allo about a mile; the foundings are regular from 12 
to 50 fathoms, and veflels may ride very {nugly, within Iefs than half a 
mile of the beach, in about 20 fathoms water, but in a lefs depth the 
The'wellern bay is 
more extenfive and more expoled, and its foundings are neither fo regu- 


bottom did not appear to be fo free from rocks. 


lar, nor is the bottom fo good; but from the abundance and great va- 
riety of vegetable productions that grow clofe to the verge of high water 
mark 


y far 
night 


ound 
been 


r the 
, that 
iden- 
polli- 
t with 
; molt 
yr the 


Cocos 
13 it is 
rocks 
rt CX- 
annot 
e feen 
h-eait 
of it; 
§ pro- 
point 
, ina 
e bot- 
pm 12 
half a 
h the 
bay is 
recu- 
at va- 
water 
mark 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


mark in both bays, it fhould feem that neither of them are fubjeét to 


very violent ftorms, or heavy feas. The climate was confidered by us C—~—~ 


as temperate and falubrious, for although the thermometer was ufually 
between 78 and 80, we did not feel that oppreffive heat which we had 
experienced further to the northward; and notwithf{tanding that our 
people were greatly expofed to the heavy rains that fell while tranfaéting 
our bufinefs on fhore, yet not the leaft interruption from want of health 
took place, which in various other tropical iflands frequently attends 
the execution of fimilar fervices. 

This ifland cannot be confidered as having a pleafant appearance in any 
one point of view, foralthough its inland furface is much diverfified by 
hills and valleys; yet the only low land of any extent that we were certain 
it pofleffes is in the bottom of the two bays, each of which form the 
extremity of one of thefe valleys bounded by craggy precipices, from the 
foot of which extends a narrow ftrip of low flat land that terminates in a 
beach at the water fide, refembling more the dreary profpeét exhibited at 
the heads of the feveral branches of fea we had fo recently explored on the 
coaft of North Weft America, than any thing elfe I could compare them 
to. Every other part of the fhore feemed to be compoled of ftecp, 
broken precipices of rock, of which fubftance the interior of the ifland 

yas apparently compofed, as the naked cliffs were frequently feen pro- 
truding their barren fides through the thicket, which otherwife co- 
vered the furface of the ifland. This thicket, fo far as we were enabled 
to afcertain, was chiefly compofed of a great varicty of trees of a mo- 
derate fize, with an impenetrable underwood of the vine or fupple jack 
kind, which oppofed any excurfion into the country; fome attempts 
were, I believe, made to penetrate thither by the water courfe, but this, 
from rocky precipices and other obftruétions, was found to be equally 
impratticable; our knowledge of its produ€tions muft confequently be 
confined to our obfervations on the fmall margin between the woods and 


the fea fhore, the only part that was acceflible to us. In refpeét of 


its future utility, the firft objeét of confideration to maritime people is 
the abundant fupply of water that it affords. This abounds in every part 
of the ifland, and is to be eafily procured at the ftations to which veflels 

Vor, Ill. oB can 


= 


: 
se 
a ea 


fe ad 
vl e) 
1705. 
January. 


ee aed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ean refort. From its purity and limpid appearance, and from its being 
deftitute of any colour or unpleafant tafte, either from dead leaves or 
other putrid or rotten matter, though very heavy rains had fallen dur- 
ing the time we had been at anchor there, it may reafonably be inferred 
that the larger flreams of water have a more remote and permanent 
fource than the accidental fhowers that at this feafon of the year may 
defcend upon the ifland. The foil in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the flreams that fall into each of the bays is of a poor, loofe, fandy 
nature; but ata little diftance behind the beach, and in the fiffures of 
the rocks, a rich black mould was obferved, apparently capable of 
affording much vegetable nourifhment; and this may alfo be the cafe in 
other parts of the ifland, although we had no power of afcertaining the 
fact. All its vegetable produétions appeared to grow luxuriantly, and 
covered the ifland in one intire wildernefs, On the rocky cliffs near the 
fea fide, whofe uneven furface admitted the growth of vegetables, a 
coarfe kind of grais is produced, that afforded an excellent retreat for 
the different kinds of fea fowl which reforted thither to rooft and build 
their nefts, or more properly {peaking to lay their eggs, as they are at 
little pains to form a neft of any defcription. About thefe cliffs grew a 
very particular kind of tree, fomething like the cloth plant of the South 
Sea iflands, but much larger; fome of thefe grow to the height of about 
thirty feet, are of a lightifh coloured bark, free from branches to the 
top, which is fomewhat bufhy, and for that reafon was called by us 
the umbrella tree. There were fome few other trees whole foliage 
ftrongly refembled that of the bread fruit, but as no one of them was in 
bearing near the beach, I was not able pofitively to determine their {pe- 
cies. Many of the trees that compofed the foreft, efpecially in the inte- 
rior and elevated parts of the ifland, feemed to be of confiderable tize, 
fpreading out into large branches towards their tops, which in point of 
height greatly furpaffed the others. I was inclined to believe that thefe 
trees were of the fame fort with thofe from which we principe 'y obtained 
our fuel, although near to the fea fide they did not grow 10 large as 
on the hills; Mr. Manby, who moft commonly fuperintended that fer- 
vice, gave me the following account of them. ‘This tree is very generally 

2 produced 


eing 
S OF 
dur- 
erred 
nent 
may 
hood 
andy 
es of 
le of 
afe in 
g the 
, and 
ir the 
les, a 
at for 
build 
are at 
rew a 
outh 
about 
o the 
by us 
oliage 
vas In 
ir {pe- 
inte- 
- fize, 
int of 
thefe 
ained 
ge as 
t fer- 
erally 
luced 


ik 
ey 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


produced all over the ifland, its trunk grows very ftraight to the height 
of twenty or thirty feet before it throws out its branches, which are fo 
clofe, large, and fpreading, as to afford extremely good fhelter againit 
both fun and rain ; the ftems of feveral were capable of fquaring to twelve 
or fourteen inches; the grain ts clofe, fomewhat variegated, and reddifh 
towards the heart ; it yielded to the axe with tolcrable eafe, to the faw 
it was equally fitted, and, being free from knots, it fplit without much 
labour ; its leaves are of a dark green colour, fmooth at the edge, and 
not much unlike the laurel, though rather longer; the feed refembling a 
{mall acorn is borne in clufters. ‘The wood is well calculated for burn- 
ing. Mr. Manby defcribes another fort, (which we cut for fucl alfo,) as 
having a whitifh fmooth bark, growing tall and ftraight, and producing 
but few branches. Its leaf is large, and in fhape refembling that of the 
horfe-cheftnut, of a light-green colour, with a velvet furface; it ap- 
peared to be fit for little elfe than fire-wood, and not the moft proper 
even for that purpofe, as it has a thick pith in the center of it that 
occupies a large portion of the ftem or branches, ‘The wood is of a 
white clofe grain, fplits readily, but does not burn remarkably well. The 
cocoa-nut trees, which grow not only on the fea-fhore but high up on 
the fides of the hills, were the only trees we faw that bore any fruit, al- 
though, in one of the rivulets, an unripe guava was picked up, which, 
moft probably, had come from the interior country ; in additicn to thefe, 
we noticed an abundance of different forts of ferns, fome of which pro- 
duced a ftem nearly fix inches in diameter, and grew to the height of 
nearly twenty feet ; thefe, as well as I recolleét, were exaélly of the fame 
defcription as thofe commonly found in New Zealand. Such were the 
moft general vegetable produétions of this ifland that fell under our ob- 
fervation, to which we further added the feeds of apples, peaches, melons, 
pumkins, with beans, peas, &c. Thefe were fown by Mr. Swaine, 
in a {pot cleared for that purpofe, where he was of opinion they were 
likely to thrive. 

With refpe& to the animal kingdom, fifh and fowl fcemed to be in 
great abundance, and we entertained hopes that future vifitors may be- 
nefit by Captain Colnett’s liberality ; as juft before Mr, Swaine left the 

3B 2 ifland 


371 


1795+ th 
January. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


if]and a young hog, in very excellent condition, was feen by him and 
fome of his party, but on his difcovering our people he haftily retreated 
into the thicket. Although at no very great diftance from this ifland 
we had feen fuch numbers of turtle, it was fingularly remarkable that 
there was not the moft diftant fign of their reforting to thefe fhores, 
which abounded with white and brown rats, and vaft numbers of land 
crabs. All the birds of the oceanic tribe, common to the tropical re- 
gions, repaired hither in great flocks, and were by no means bad eating. 
Befide thefe were feen hawks, a fpecies of brown and white herons, 
rails, a kind of blackbird, and a few others, that chiefly inhabited the 
woods; which, with fome ducks and teal, were what was obferved 
principally to compofe the feathered race. A great variety and abun- 
dance of excellently-good fifh frequented the fhores; fharks alfo were 
very numerous, and the moft bold and voracious I had ever before 
feen. Thefe affembled in the bay in large fhoals, conftantly attended 
on our boats in all their motions, darting at the oars, and every thing 
that by accident fell, or was thrown overboard. They frequently 
took the fifh from the hooks before they could be got clear of the 
water, and what was ftill more fingular, when one of their own fpecies 
was fo taken, and they perceived he could no longer defend himfelf, he 
was inflantly attacked, torn to pieces, and devoured by his companions, 
whilft yet alive; and, notwithftanding that thefe monfters fubjeéted 
themfelves to be greatly annoyed by the harpoons, knives, &c. of our 
people, by which they received many deep wounds, yet even that did 
not deter them from renewing the attack upon the one which was caught, 
until every part of the vittim’s flefh was thus torn from its bones. On 
this occafion we had an opportunity of obferving, that it is erroncous to 
fuppofe the fhark is under the. neceflity of turning on his back for the 
purpofe of taking his prey, as thefe fharks moft commonly attained their 

objeét without firft turning themfelves, as has been generally believed. 
The general warfare that exifts between fea-faring perfons and thefe 
voracious animals, afforded at firft a {pecics of amufement to our peo- 
ple, by hooking, or otherways taking one for the others to fea{t upon, 
but as this was attended with the ill confequence of drawing immenfe 
numbers 


rs 
oa 
fe 
Oy 
i 


ROUND THE WORLD. a3 ) a 


im and numbers round the fhip, and as the boatfwain and one of the young gen- 1795+ iim ai 
treated tlemen had both nearly fallen a facrifice to this diverfion, by narrowly aga tity 
| ifland efcaping from being drawn out of the boat by an immenfely large fhark, \ ie 
le that which they had hooked, into the midft of at leaft a {core of thefe voracious Anae 
fhores, animals, I thought proper to prohibit all further indulgence in this fpe- rane d Sd 
of land cies of entertainment ; which, independently of its being likely to be fir 6 
cal re- attended with ferious confequences, was in itfelf of too cruel a nature to ys 
eating. be witneffed without pain. Thefe fharks appeared to be of three dif- ia 
herons, tinét forts; the moft numerous were of the tyger kind, thefe were beau- ihe 
ted. the tifully ftreaked down their fides ; the other forts were the brown and the Rf 
bferved blue fharks ; and it was fingularly remarkable, that although they all vo- Hit 
- abun- racioufly devoured the two former, yet when one of the latter was caught, athe 
(0 were it remained unmolefted by the reft, and even when killed, and cut up, His 
before its flefh was not eaten by its companions. | , if ji 
tended The other kinds of fifhes that fell under my notice, befide thofe com- fi ose 
y thing mon to the tropical feas, were two forts of bream, the large fnapper of the ;; es | 
quently Weft Indies, a fort of rock fifh, and another kind commonly called yel- ae 
of the low tail ; thefe were all very excellent, and took the hook readily ; and to qe. 
{pecies thofe who may follow us, and ftand in need of refrefhments, they may ne 
(elf, he prove a moft defirable refource ; and there can be little doubt but that per- eed sy 
anions, fons under fuch circumftances would foon fall upon fome expedient, to {tit 
byeéted evade the inconvenience to which they might be liable from the extreme 4 iy 
of our vigilance of the fharks. Nor is it improbable, that on a more minute mae 
hat did examination, the furface of this little ifland may be found to produce he 
caught, 4 many articles of refrefhment ; but as we did not ftand much in need of An 
On 4 any, excepting the neceflary article of water, our attention was undirected ud 

ouss0 4 to fuch inquiries, being wholly engroffed in ufing every poffible means of 4 

Or. the J difpatch in providing ourfelves with thofe few particulars with which we Bat! 

1 their 4 could not difpenfe. ee 
ved. We happily ftood in no great need of fearching for refrefhments at any Hie 

L thefe ' great diftance from the fhores of the ifland; for, excepting that I conti- ik 

t /peo- 4 nued to be in a very feeble and debilitated ftate, there was not on palit 

UPON “ board either of the veffels a fingle individual who was not in the 
pmente higheft health imaginable. In confequence of the indifpofition under at 

mbers which 


Banc tet ogee 


Se 


es 


O74 


1795¢ 
January. 


| Se aed 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


which I had fo long laboured, I was only able to go once on fhore in 
each of the bays, or I might poffibly have acquired more knowledge re- 
fpe€ting this fmall though valuable fpot of land. The comfort we derived 
from the water and the few other fupplies there obtained juftly intitled it 
to our confideration; and as from its fituation it is not unlikely that it 
may becomea place of importance to thofe whole purfuits may direét them 
to this part of the pacific ocean, I truft I fhall be excufed for having 
dwelt fo long on a fubject which I could not but regard as deferving at- 
tention; not only as far as it refpeéts the produétions of the ifland, but 
alfo to fhew, that the defcription of the ifland of Cocos given by Dampier 
from the obfervations of others, and that {tated by Lionel Wafer from 
his own, are either extremely inapplicable to its prefent circumftances 
and appearance, or have reference to fome other ifland in its neighbour- 
hood. It is much to be regretted that Dampier had not himfelf 
vifited this ifland, as from the great accuracy of moft of the obfervations 
made by that judicious traveller, few doubts could have arifen concerning 
the identity of the ifland he meant todefcribe. I am more inclined to at- 
tribute this deviation from the truth to mifreprefentation, than to any 
other caufe, from our having acquired a tolerably competent knowledge 
of that part of the ocean between the 5th and 6th degrees of north lati- 
tude, for at leaft 4 degrees of longitude to the weftward of the ifland in 
queftion, in which fpace there is not much likelihood of there being any 
other ifland. 

For the purpofe of commemorating our vifit to the ifland of Cocos, I 
direéted that the date of our arrival, with the names of the veffels and 
the commanders, fhould be cut on the fame rock where the other infcrip- 
tion was found; the two former I underftood was executed, but it feems 
that fome obftacle arofe to prevent the infertion of the latter. The 
reafons before ftated for fuppofing that this ifland may hereafter prove 
ufeful to thofe who may traverfe thefe feas, demanded that the utmoft 
attention fhould be paid to the fixing with accuracy its true pofition. By 
the refult of all our obfervations, comprehending 152 {ets, taken between 
the 29th of december 1794, and the 16th of january 1795 ; and 154 fets 
taken afterwards between the 28th of january, and the 16th of february 

following, 


— 


a 


Fue 


meray 


ee 


re in 
ge re- 
erived 
tled it 
hat it 
t them 
laving 
ng at- 
d, but 
mpier 
- from 
tances 
ibour- 
rimfelf 
vations 
erning 
l to at- 
10 any 
ledge 
h lati- 
and in 


g any 


cos, I 
Js and 
ifcrip- 
feems 
The 
prove 
tmoft 
By 
ween 
4 {ets 
uary 
wing, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


following, the longitude of the anchorage deduced thus from thefe 306 
fets of lunar diftances from the fun and ftars, each fet as ufual containing « 


ix obfervations, appeared to be as follow: 
The mean of 37 fets on both fides ) before our arrival by 


Mr. Whidbey, 272°54' 46” 


a 

iy 

ia 
a 
( 
Le 
ws 
4 


Ditto 37 ditto ditto Mr. Baker, 273 1 43 
Ditto 37. ditto ditto Mr. Manby, 273 3 3 
Ditto 38 ditto ditto Mr. Orchard, 273 4 58 
Ditto 3 ditto ditto Myfelf, 273° 2 55 
Ditto 32 ditto after ourdeparture Myfelf, 273 8 42 
Ditto 34 ditto ditto Mr. Whidbey, 273 10 38 
Ditto 36 ditto ditto Mr. Baker, 273 14 55 
Ditto 25 ditto ditto Mr. Manby, 272 53 15 
Ditto 27 ditto ditto Mr. Orchard, 273 21 53 
The mean of. the whole 306. fets colleétively taken, and 
reduced to the anchorage by Arnold’s No. 14, according to 
its new rate, fhewed the true longitude ta be i 273 «5 34 
From this authority, and from feveral fets of altitudes of 
the fun carefully taken whilft in the bay, the errors and rates 
of the chronometers were found to be as follow : 
Arnold’s No. 14, faft of mean time at Greenwich at noon 
on the 27th of january 1795, - - - 5°41’ 3" 20" 
And to be gaining per day on mean time at the rate of 20 2 
Arnold’s No. 176, faft of mean time at Greenwich at fame 
time, - - - - - - 12 11 18 20 
And to be gaining per day on mean time, - 41 5 
Kendall’s faft of mean time at Greenwich at fame time, 10 21 19 20 
And to be gaining per day on mean time - 21 35. 


The latitude by twenty meridional altitudes of the fun 
and fea horizon, by the back obfervation taken by five 
different obfervers with different inftruments, and varying 


from 5° 39’ to 5° 37’ 20", fhewed the mean refult tobe = 55°35 12 


375 


1795+ 


anuary, 


a gen 


Wednel. 28. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The longitude according to the Monterrey rate was, 


By Arnold’s chronometer, No. 14, - - 279° 36 40" 
Ditto ditto 176, - - 274 47 55 
And by Kendall’s, : - - - 274 55 10 


By which it appeared that No. 14 was 31’ 5", No. 
176, 4220", and Kendall's chronometer, 1° 49/ 35" 
to the eaftward of the true longitude. 

The variation of the compafs by four fets of azi- 
muths differing from 8° 14’ to 7° 21’, fhewed the mean 
refult to be - - - - 

The vertical inclination of the magnetic needle, 


7 45 eaftwardly. 


Marked End, North Face Eaft, “ P : 19° 47’ 
Ditto ditto Weft, - - - 20 17 
Ditto South Face Eaft, : - - 19 17 
Ditto ditto Weft, . - - 19 40 

Mean inclination of the north point of the magnetic dipping 
needle, - i‘ r : ‘ , 19 45 


The rife and fall of the tides were, by the fhore, found to be very con- 
fiderable and regular twice in the twenty-four hours without any appa- 
rent ftream, and were not in the leaft influenced by the currents. The 
night tides appeared to be the higheft, and were eftimated to rife nearly 
ten feet perpendicularly, though the furf was too high to admit of any 
correct meafurement. The time of high water was pretty clearly afcer- 
tained to be about 2" 10’ after the moon paffes the meridian. 

Having, as before ftated, put to fea from the ifland of Cocos, on the 
evening of the 27th of january, and having no intention of ftopping fhort 
of the ifland of Juan Fernandez, or fome port on the coaft of Patagonia, 
for the purpole of again recruiting our water and ftore of fire-wood, the 
fhip’s courfe was direéted fouthwardly, but with fo gentle a breeze during 
the night, that although we had all fail fet, yet, in the morning of the 
28th, the ifland continued in fight until about nine in the forenoon, 
when it bore by compafs N. 30 w., diftant forty-fix miles ; fhortly after 
this time we loft fight of it, not from its being beneath the horizon, but 
from its being obfcured by clouds and an hazinels in the atmofphere. At 

noon 


ire phere aA 
fee Ne ae th ey 


wardly. 


19° 47° 
20-17 
LQ 17 


19 40 


19 45 
ry con- 
appa- 
The 
nearly 
of any 


vy afcer- 


on the 
g fhort 
agonia, 
od, the 
during 
of the 
enoon, 
y after 
bn, but 
e. At 

noon 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


noon the obferved latitude was 4° 43’, the longitude 273° 17°; by which 
it appeared that, fince quitting our anchorage, a current had fet us in a 
dire€tion s.12 £., eighteen miles. In the afternoon fuch immenfe fhoals 
of fifhes were playing about on the furface of the water as to be miftaken 
at firft for breakers. During the night the wind was very light from 
the weftward, and on the following morning the weather was calm, with 
very heavy rain; but in the forenoon, although the atmofphere continued 
very gloomy, we procured the neceffary obfervations to {hew the latitude 
to be 3° 29’, the longitude 279° 25, whence we appeared to have been 
fet by a current 46 miles, in a direétion s.5 £.; a few turtles were this 
day about the fhip, fome of which were taken. In the afternoon we had 
a light breeze variable between the eaft and s. s.£., with which we ftood 
to the fouth-weftward; the night was -nearly calm with very heavy rain, 
but the next morning we had again a fouth-eafterly breeze with fome rain, 
which in the forenoon ceafed, and permitted us to obferve the latitude at 
noon to be 2° 35’, which was go’ to the fouth of what was fhewn by the 
log. With a moderate breeze, varying between s. by w. and s.r. wé 
ftood on fuch tacks, as would enable us to make the beft of our way to 
the fouthward, and at noon on the 31ft the obferved latitude was 2° 11’, 
the longitude 272° 12’, from which it appeared that the current during 
the laft twenty-four hours had fet us 12 miles to the fouth, and from the 
2gth at noon 41 miles to the weftward. Since leaving the ifland of 
Cocos we had obferved many riplings on the water, and had experienced 
an uncomfortable irregular fwell from the fouthward. On the 1ft of 
february the weather became more pleafant, and the wind at s. s. 5. blew 
fo fteady a breeze, that I concluded we had at Jength reached the regular 
trade wind. In the forenoon we paffed by fome fea weed and drift wood, 
a cocoa nut, and a ftick of fugar cane about nine feet long; all of which, 
excepting the former, appeared to have been no great length of time in 
the water. The obferved latitude at noon was 1° 31’, longitude 270° 26’; the 
former agreed exaétly with the log, but by the latter we appeared to have 
been fet fince the preceding noon 10 miles in a weft direction. The vaft 
numbers of fifh that {till attended us afforded us a very profitable amufe- 
ment, and many birds were flill about us. ‘he wind which now hung 


Vou. IIL. 3C tar 


arr 
Dit 


17Q5. 


January. 


come eames) 


Friday 30. 


Saturday 31. 


February. 
EE 
Sunday 1. 


378 


1795: 
February. 


een ad 


Tuelday 3. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


far to the fouth, obliged us to make a much more wefterly courfe than | 
could have wifhed, as I had entertained hopes of being able to pafs 
near enough to the Gallipagos iflands to have had an opportunity of 
afcertaining their true fituation; but as the wefternmolt of them are faid 
to be under the meridian of the ifland of Cocos, which was now nearly 
three degrees to the eaftward of us, the chance of fucceeding in this ex- 
pectation was now fo little, that I gave up every idea of accomplith- 
ing that object. 

Land was difcovered on monday forenoon to the w. s. w.; it then ap- 
peared to be a very {mall ifland, which at noon bore by compalfs s. 72 w., 
8 or g leagues diftant. As our obferved latitude was 1° 26’, longitude 
268° 43’, and the variation of the compafs 8° eaftwardly, we appeared to 
have been fet in the courfe of the laft twenty-four hours 10 miles to the 
north, and 28 miles to the weftward. The influence of this current fet- 
ting to the w.N. w. was very perceptible, for although with a light air 
of wind during the afternoon our courfe was direéted to the fouth-weft- 
ward, yet fo rapidly were we driven in the above direttion of the cur- 
rent, that, at fun-fet, this ifland bore by compafs s. 46 w., and another 
ifland, which had been difcovered about an hour and an half before, 
bore, at the fame time, N.72 w. During the night we had a light 
breeze from the s.s.w., with which we ftood tothe s.e.; but fo far were 
we from ftemming the current, that, at day-light on the following morn- 
ing, the firft of thefe iflands bore by compafs s. 68 £., diftant 6 leagues, 
and the fecond n.17 w., 12 miles diftant. At fuch a rate had we been 
driven by the current between thefe iflands, that, notwithftanding we 
ufed every endeavour to preferve our ftation by keeping as the wind 
veered on the moft advantageous tacks, yet, at noon, the firft ifland bore 
by compals E. by s., at the diftance of g leagues, and the other N.v.E.4 E., 
at the diftance of 17 miles. In this fituation the obferved latitude was 
1° 28', longitude 267° 49’, by which the current appeared to have fet us, 
fince the preceding day at noon, ten miles to the north, and fifty miles to 
the weftward. 

In pafling between thefe iflands, which lie from each other n. 42 w. 
and s. 42 £., at the diftance of twenty-one miles, we obferved neither 
danger 


than | 
O pals 
rity of 
re faid 
nearly 
his ex- 


nplifh- 


en ap- 
72.Wa, 
\gitude 
rred to 
to the 
ant fet- 
ght air 
h-wett- 
he cur- 
nother 
before, 
a light 
hr were 
morn- 
eagues, 
e been 
ing we 
wind 
d bore 
E.% Evy 
e was 
fet us, 
iles to 
. 
42 W. 
either 
danger 


4 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


danger nor obftruétion; the fouthcrnmoft, which is the largefl, did not ane die | 
: : : . 2 february, wre hi 
appear to exceed four miles in circuit, and the northernmoft about half Cay mA 


aleague; the former ts fituated in latitude 1° 92’ 30", and longitude 268° 
16’. Its north-weflern fide forms a kind of long faddle hill, the north- 
ern part of which is higheft in the middle, and fhoots ont into a low 
point, which at firft fight was confidered by us to be an iflet, but was 
afterwards believed to be united. A fmall peaked neck or iflet hes off 
its fouth-welt fide, which, like all the other parts of it, excepting that 
towards the north, is compofed of perpendicular naked rocky cliffs. On 
the low north-weft part we faw what we fuppofed to be trees, but we 
were by no means certain, for the ifland in gencral prefented to us a very 
dreary and unproduétive appearance. The northernmoft ifland rofe in 
naked cliffs from the fea, off which are two [mall iflets, or rocks ; that on 
its eaft fide is remarkable for its flat table top, and for its being perfo- 
rated nearly in the middle. The fituation of thefe iflands, the eaftern- 
moft being nearly 5° to the weftward of the meridian of the ifland of Co- 
cos, gave us at firft reafon to fuppofe them a new difcovery, and not a 
part of the group of the Gallipagos, as all the ancient accounts agree in 
placing the Cocos due north from the wefternmoft of that clufter of 
iflands ; but when we took into confideration the very rapid currents by 
which we had been controlled, they eafily accounted for errors to which 
other navigators muft neceffarily have been fubjeéted, who have not, like 
ourfelves, been fo well provided with the means of afcertaining the full 
effe&t of their influence; which had, fince our leaving that ifland, pro- 
duced a difagreement of upwards of two degrees of longitude in our dead 
reckoning. ‘The decifion of this point remained, therefore, to be deter- 
mined by our further progrefs to the fouth; for, in the event of the firft 
or fouthernmoft, being Wenman’s ifland, and the moft northern, that 
called Culpepper’s ifland, the northernmoft of that group of iflands, lit- 
tle doubt was entertained of our meeting with more of them in purfuing 
our fouthern courfe; in doing which we were not very expeditious the 
two fucceeding days, as the wind between s.s.w. and s.s.F. was very 
variable in point of ftrength; and although we endeavoured to take every 
advantage it aiforded, fo little progrefs did we make againft the adverfe 
gC 2 current, 


379 fice, | 


380 


1795+ 
February. 


eee aed 


Friday 6, 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


current, that, on the 5th, the moft fouthern of thefe two iflands was fill 
in fight, and at noon bore by compafs Nn. 31 w., diftant 8 or 9 leagues, 
The obferved latitude at this time was 59’, longitude 268° 27, by the 
dead reckoning 271° 24'; having, in the laft twenty-four hours, been fet 
by the current feven miles to the north, and forty-eight miles to the weft- 
ward. As we were now approaching the equator, and as the fea was to- 
lerably {mooth, fome further obfervations were made on the vertical in- 
clination of the magnetic needle, which fhewed 


The marked end North tace Eaft, - - 7 8 
Ditto ditto Welt, - - 8 3 
Ditto South face Eaft, : - 7 28 
Ditto ditto Weft, - : 7 18 
Mean inclination, - - : - 7 28 
The variation of the compafs, at the fame time, - 8 eaftwardly. 


We advanced fo flowly from thefe iflands, that at fun-fet the fouthern- 
moft of them was {till within our view, bearing by compafs n. 12 w. 
The wind was moftly at s.s.w. during the night, with this we ftood to 
the fouth-eaftward, and at day-light on friday morning difcovered a more 
extenfive land than the two iflands we had juft paffed, bearing by com- 
pafs from s.10 £. to s.35£. This land appeared to be very lofty, to 
be at a confiderable diftance from us, and to be divided into three or 
more iflands; but as we approached it the lefs elevated parts were feen 
to be conneéted, fo that, in the forenoon, it feemed to be only divided in- 
to two portions, and even this divifion was rendered doubtful, as we drew 
nearer to it, by the low land rifing to view until about noon, when the 
whole extended by compafs from s. 42 E. to s.10E., with a detached 
rock s.2w. In this fituation the obferved latitude was 28’ north, the 
longitude 268° 32’; having been fet, in the laft twenty-four hours, by the 
current twenty-fix miles to the weftward. This, however, appeared to 
have taken place in the early part of that day, as fince our having 
made the land in the morning, we had approached it with a light 
breeze, without having apparently been influenced by any current 
whatever. 


In 


as full 
agues, 
by the 
een fet 
> welt- 
vas to- 
ical in- 


vardly. 
ithern- 
12 W. 
ood to 
a more 
y com- 
fty, to 
ree or 
re feen 
é ed in- 
e drew 
en the 
tached 
h, the 
by the 
red to 
aving 
light 
rrent 


In 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


In the afternoon a pleafant breeze fprang up from the fouth-weftward, 
with which we ftood clofe-hauled in for the land, and before fun-fet faw 
very plainly, that what we had for fome hours before confidered to be two 
iflands, was all conneéted by deprefled Jand on which was a hummock, 
that had alfo appeared like a {mall ifland; and beyond this low land, at a 
confiderable diftance to the fouthward, was feen an extenfive lofty table 
mountain. The land immediately before us formed alfo towards its eaft- 
ern extremity a fimilar table mountain, and towards its weftern point a 
very regular fhaped round mountain, which, though not of equal height 
to the others, was yet of confiderable elevation, and in this point of view 
feemed to defcend with great uniformity. The eafternmoft, terminating 
in a low point with fome {mall hummocks upon it, at fix in the evening 
bore by compafs s.47£.; the wefternmoft, which terminated more ab- 
ruptly, s.13 w.; and the detached rock, which is fteep, with a flat top, 
s.71 w. The whole of this conneéted land appeared now to form an 
extenfive lofty traét; and as I had no intention of ftopping, the object 
for confideration was, on which fide we fhould be moft likely to make the 
beft paffage? The fouth-weft wind from its fteadinefs, and the ap- 
pearance of the weather, feemed to be fixed in that quarter, and as we 
approached the fhore we found a fifong current fetting to windward; I 
therefore did not hefitate to ufe our endeavours to pafs to the weftward 
of this ifland, which under all circumftances appeared to me to be the 
beft plan to purfue. 

We drew in with the ifland until about nine at night, when we were 
within about a league of its fhores, and finding that the windward current 
was the ftrongeft near to the land, the night was employed in making fhort 
trips bc*ween the fhores of the ifland and the flat rock before mentioned, 
frequently trying for foundings with 100 fathoms of line without fuccels. 
The next morning we were nearly up with the weftern extremity of the 
ifland, and as the weather was fair and pleafant with a very gentle breeze 
of wind, I wifhed, whilft the fhip was turning up along fhore, to acquire 
fome knowledge of what the country confifted, and for that purpofe im- 
mediately after breakfaft Mr. Whidbey, accompanied by Mr. Menzies, 
was difpatched with orders to land fomewhere to the fouthward of the 
weftern 


981 


4 


1795. 
February. 


ep nt 


Saturday 7. 


ao F-“eR 


382 


179 


5s 


February. 


-y 


ee | 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


weltern extremity of the land then in fight, which had been named Cape 
Berkeley. The part of the ifland we were now oppofite to, and that 
which we were near to the preceding evening forming its north-weftern 
fide, either fhoots out into long, low black points, or terminates in abrupt 
cliffs of no great height, without any appearance of affording anchorage 
or fhelter for fhipping. The furf broke on every part of the thores with 
much violence, and the country wore a very dreary defolate afpect, being 
deftitute of wood, and nearly fo of verdure to a confiderable diflance 
from the fea fide, until near the fummit of the mountains, and particu- 
larly on that which formed nearly the north-weflern part of the ifland ; 
where vegetation, though in no very flourifhing flate, had exiflence. 
The obferved latitude at noon, being then within 4 or 5 miles of its 
fhores, was 74’ north, the longitude 268° 292’; in which fituation the 
{teep flat rock, called Rodondo rock, bore by compafs Nn. 26 w.; the 
eafternmoft part of the ifland now in fight, N.78&., and cape Berkeley 
in a line with more diftant land, fuppofed by us to be another ifland, 
fouth. As we advanced, the regular round mountain affumed a more 
peaked fhape, and defcending with fome inequalities, terminated at the 
north-weft extremity in a low barren rocky point, fituated according to 
our obfervations in latitude 2’ norths:.268° 30’ eaft. From it the fteep 
flat rock lies N. 2w., diftant 12 miles; and the fhores of the north-weft 
fide of the ifland, fo far as we traced them, took a direétion about N. 50 E. 
fixteen miles; the wind for the moft part of the day continued light and 
variable between the weft and s.w., but with the help of the current 
which ftill continued to run in our favour, we palled in the afternoon to 
the fouth of cape Berkeley, from whence the fhores to the fouthward of 
that point take a rounding turn to the eaftward, and fhoot out into low 
rocky points. The interior country exhibited the molt fhattered, broken, 
and confufed landfcape I ever beheld, feemingly as if formed of the 
mouths of innumerable craters of various heights and different fizes. 
This opinion was confirmed about five in the afternoon on the return of 
Mr. Whidbey and his party, from whom I underftood, that about 2 
leagues to the eaft fouth-eaftward of cape Berkeley, a bay had been 
difcovered round a very remarkable hummock, which feemed likely to 
afford 


Cape 
| that 
oftern 
brupt 
orage 
5 with 
being 
flance 
rticu- 
{land ; 
; of its 
mn the 
as the 
rkeley 
ifland, 
1 more 
at the 
ing to 
{teep 
h-weft 
i. SOE. 
ht and 
urrent 
oon to 
ard of 
to low 
roken, 
of the 
fizes. 
urn of 
nout 2 
been 
cely to 
afford 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


afford tolerably good anchorage and fhelter from the prevailing winds; 
but as Mr. Whidbey had little time to fpare, and as the fhores afforded 
neither fuel nor frefh water, he was not very particular in this examina- 
tion, but endeavoured to gain fome knowledge concerning the gencral 
produétions of the country. During the fhort time the gentlemen were fo 
employed on fhore, thofe remaining in the boat, with only two hooks and 
lines, nearly loaded her with exceedingly fine fifh, fufficient for ourfelves, 
and fome to fpare for the Chatham. Our opinion, that this part of the 
ifland had been greatly fubje€t to volcanic eruptions, appeared by this 
vifit to have been well founded; fince it fhould feem, that it is either 
indebted for its elevation above th2 furface of the ocean to volcanic 
powers, or that at no very remote period it had been fo profufely 
covered with volcanic matter, as to render its furface incapable of more 
than the bare exiftence of vegetables; as a few only were found to be 
produced in the chafms or broken furface of the lava, of which the fub- 
ftratum of the whole ifland feemed to be compofed. Inftead of the dif- 
ferent fpecies of turtles which are generally found in the tropical, or 
equatorial regions, thefe fhores, however fingular it may feem, abounded 
with that defcription of thofe animals which are ufually met with in the 
temperate zones, bordering on the arétic and antar€tic circles: the 
penguin and feals alfo, fome of which latter I underftood were of that 
tribe which are confidered to be of the fur kind, were feen, as likewife 
fome guanas and fnakes; thefe, together with a few birds, of which in 
point of number the dove bore the greateft proportion, were what ap- 
peared principally to compofe the inhabitants of this ifland; with 
which, from its very uncommon appearance, I was very defirous to have 
become better acquainted; but we had now no time to fpare for fuch an 
imauiry, nor fhould I indeed have been able perfonally to have indulged 
my curiofity, as I ftill continued to labour under a very indifferent ftate 
of health, which in feveral other inftances had deprived me of fimilar 
gratifications. 

At fun-fet the fteep flat rock bore by compafs N. 5 w., and the land in 
fight from nN. 56w. to s.g£.; the former, being the north-weft point of 
the ifland, and the latter, the Jand that was ftated at noon to be ina line 
with, 


383 


1795. 
February. 


een etal 


384 


1795¢ 
February: 


Tee aed 


Monday 9. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


with it, ftill ata confiderable diftance from us; both of which feemed to 
form very projecting points, from whence the fhores retired far to the 
eaftward; but whether only a deep bay was thus formed, or whether the 
land was here divided into two feparate iflands, our diftance was too 
great to determine. 

In the evening the wind frefhened from the s.s.w., with which we 
plied to the fouthward, and having fill the ftream in our favor, we kept 
near the {hore where the current continued to be the ftrongeft. At 
midnight this breeze was fucceeded by a calm, which lafted until day- 
light the next morning, when, with a light breeze, and the afliftance of 
the current, we made fome prognefs along fhore. As we advanced, 
land further diftant, and apparently detached, was difcovered to the 
$.$.£.; at noon the obferved latitude was 184’ fouth, the longitude 268° 
23’; in this fituation we were oppofite to the land mentioned the pre- 
ceding day at noon. ‘This takes a circular form, and {hoots into feveral 
{mall low projecting points. From the moft confpicuous of thefe, called 
cape Douglas, the adjacent fhores take on one fide a north-eaftwardly, 
and on the other a foutherly, direétion. ‘The above, being the neareft 
fhore, bore by compafs N. 78 E., diftant five miles; the fouthernmoft part 
of this land in fight s.39 £.; the weft point of the laft-difcovered de- 
tached land, which is named Chriftopher’s point, s.28£.; and cape 
Berkeley n.14.w. The land we were now abreaft of bore a ftrong 
refemblance to that feen the preceding day, equally barren and dreary 
towards the fea-fide, but giving nourifhment to a few {cattered vegeta- 
ble productions on the more elevated part, which rofe to a table moun- 
tain of confiderable height and magnitude, and is the fourth moun- 
tain of this table-like form of which this land is compofed. 

The wind, during the afternoon and night, blew a gentle breeze from 
the fouthward, but as we continued to be affifted by the current fetting 
to windward, we made fome progrefs in that dire€tion, and were fuff- 
ciently to the fouthward the next morning to afcertain pretty clearly 
that the laft-difcovered land, now bearing s. 54 £., diftant g leagues, was 
diftinét from the fecond difcovered land, or ifland; and that its weftern 
part, Chriftopher’s point, lies from the fouth point of the fecond-dilco- 

2 - — vered 


1ed to 
‘o the 
er the 
1s too 


ch we 
> kept 
. At 
1 day- 
nce of 
anced, 
to the 
le 268° 
e€ pre- 
feveral 
called 
vardly, 
neare({t 
ft part 
ed de- 
1 cape 
{trong 
dreary 
egeta- 
moun- 
moun- 


from 
fetting 
e fufh- 
learly 


‘Ss, WaS 


veftern 
difco- 


vered 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


vered land, which is called cape Hamond, s.19 ¥., at the diftance of 
twenty miles. 

Thus concluded our examination of thefe fhores, which proved to be 
thofe of the Gallipagos iflands. The wind now feemed to be fettled in 
the fouth-eaftern quarter, blowing a fleady pleafant gale; and as the 
weather was fine, we were once more flattered with the pleafing hopes of 
having at length reached the regular fouth-eaft trade wind; we therefore 
made the beft of our way to the fouth-weftward with all fail fet, and at 
noon obferved we were in latitude 44’ fouth. ‘The longitude by the feveral 
chronometers, agreeably to their rates as afcertained at the ifland of 


Cocos, was by Arnold’s No. 14, - - 267° 54 90" 


Ditto 176, - - 267 52 45 
Kendall’s, - - - 267 52 30 
but by the dead reckoning it appeared to be - p72 2 0 


The variation of the furveying compafs was 8° eaftwardly, and the 
vertical inclination of the marine dipping needle was 


Marked End, North Face Eaft, - - - 2° 50’ 
Ditto ditto Weft, - - - 2 45 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - - - 2 30 
Ditto ditto Weft, - - - 2 30 


Mean inclination of the north point of the marine dipping needle, 2 29 

The very exaé correfpondence of the longitude by the chronometers, 
and which had uniformly been the cafe ever fince our departure from the 
ifland of Cocos, induced me to believe, that at leaft the relative pofition 
in point of longitude of that ifland: with thefe would be found correét ; 
and I truft, that the means adopted to afcertain the longitude of the for- 
mer, will not be found liable to any material error. 

On reference to the relative pofition of the land to which our attention 
had been direéted fince the 6th of this month, the delineation of its fhores 
from our obfervations, will be found to bear a very ftriking refemblance to 
that of the wefternmoft of the Gallipagos, as laid down in Captain Cook’s 
general chart; and although the fituation of Wenman’s ifland does not 
correctly agree, yet the correfpondence of the larger portions of the land 

Vout. IIL. 3D with 


385 


1795: 
February. 
en amie 


t 


386 


1795: 
February. 
en ed 
* This con- 

jectare was, 
on my return 
to England, 
fully con- 

firmed, by 

the informa. 
tion L recei- 
ved in conie- 
quence of 

Captain Col- 
nett’s vilit to 
thele lands. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


with the above chart, is doubtlefs a further confirmation of their being the 
fame as is therein intended to be reprefented ; from whence I fhould fup- 
pofe,* that the firft and third portions of land feen by us conftituted 
Albemarle ifland, and that the fecond was Narborough’s rfland. ‘Thele 
names were given by the Buccaneers, as alfo that of Rodondo rock to the 
fteep flat rock, and Chriftopher’s point to the weft point of the third land; 
and under this perfuafion, this is the fouth-weft point of Marlborough 
ifland, which is fituated according to our obfervations in latitude 50’ 
fouth, longitude 268° 34’ eaft. 

From thefe conclufions, all the objeéts I had had in view in fteering this 
fouth-eaftwardly courfe from Monterrey appeared to have been accom- 
plifhed; fince I had not entertained the moft diftant intention of ftopping, 
to make furveys or correét examinations of any iflands we might fee. But 
as the fituation of thofe which were lying not far out of our track had 
been varioufly reprefented, I anxioufly wifhed to obtain fuch information 
as would place this matter out of all difpute for the future; and having 
been enabled to effeét this purpofe to my fatisfaCtion, it was fome recom- 
pence for the very irkfome and tedious paflage we had experienced in 
confequence of the light baffling winds that had conftantly attended us 
after we had paffed cape Corientes; fince which time, to our ftation this 
day at noon, our progrefs upon an average had not been more than at 
the rate of 10 leagues per day. 

I fhall now proceed to ftate, what little more occurred to my knowledge 
or obfervation refpeéting that part of the Gallipagos iflands that we were 
now about to leave. The climate appeared to be fingularly temperate 
for an equatorial country. Since our departure from the ifland of 
Cocos the mercury in the thermometer had feldom rifen above 78, and 
for the three preceding days it had moftly been between the 74th and 
76th degree; the atmofphere felt light and exhilarating, and the wind 
which came chiefly from the fouthern quarter was very cool and refrefh- 
ing. The fhores appeared to be f{teep and bold, free from fhoals or hid- 
den dangers ; fome riplings were obferved, which at firft were fuppofed to 
be occafioned by the former, but as foundings were not gained when we 
were 


e 


ROUND THE WORLD. 387 


ig the were in them, thefe riplings were attributed to the meetmg of currents. ven 
| fup- The lofty mountains of which this land.is prmcipally compofed, except- e~— Hitt 
tuted ing that which forms its north-weftern part, appeared to us in general to a 
Ihele defcend with much regularity from a nearly flat or table fummit, and to 
to the terminate at the bafe in proje€ting points on very low Jevel land; fo that, 
land; at a diftance, cach of thefe mountains appeared to form a diftinct ifland. 
rough This circumftance may probably have given rife to the different flatements ia 
le 50! of former vifitors concerning the number of this group of iilands; all of ‘ mit 
: them however agree in their <fording great ftores of refrefliment in the oe 
ig this land and fea turtles, in an abundance of moft excellent fifh of feveral * aS 
ccom- forts, and in great numbers of wild fowl. Our having feen but few tur- ba fg 
ping, E tles whilft in the neighbourhood of thefe iflands, is no proof that thefe 
. But 4 animals do not refort thither; for in the fea we faw neither feals nor pen- ae? 
k had i guins, yet the fhores were in a manner covered with them; and in addi- raat 
nation 4 tion to this, the parts of the coaft that were prefented to our view, con- 
aving ] fifted principally of a broken rugged rocky fubftance, not eafily acceff:- ee | 
ecom- 4 ble to the fea turtle, which moft commonly, and particularly for the diet 
ced in q purpofe of depofiting its eggs, reforts to fandy beaches. With refpeét to pis 
Hed us 4 fifh, we had ample proof of their abundance, and of the eafe with which ey 
bn this 4 they are to be taken; but in regard of that great defideratum, frefi 
an at q water, fome affert that the iflands afford large ftreams, and even rivers; Mie 
q whilft others ftate them to poffefs only a very fcanty portion, or to be x ae 
ledge a nearly deftitute of it. This however is but of little importance, as, A 
were 4 from their vicinity to the ifland of Cocos, where perpetual fprings tet 
erate 4 feem to water every part of that ifland, veffels ftanding in need of ; 
d of E a fupply, may eafily procure a fufficient quantity for all purpofes; Wer | 
Band and fince we faw in their neighbourhood many whales which we aT 
1 and conceived to be of the fpermaceti kind, it is not unlikely that thefe 
wind j fhores may become places of defirable refort to adventurers engaged in 
frefh- : taking thofe animals. Notwithftanding that our vifit did not af- a 
r hid- a ford an opporit nity for difcovering the moft eligible places to which ees we 
fed to 4 veffels might repair; it neverthelefs, by afcertaining the a€tual fituation 4 
en we of the weltern fide of the group, has rendered the tafk of procuring fuch ie 


eit : 3De2 information (im 


388 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


1795: information more eafy to thofe, who may ‘with to benefit by the advan- 
Lenya tages thefe iflands may be found to furnifh. 
I fhall now take my leave of the Gallipagos iflands, and with them alfo 
of the north pacific ocean, in which we had paffed the laft three 
years. 


CHAPTER 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


advan- 


m alfo 


Eres CHAPTER V. 


Proceed to the fouthward—The Difcovery fprings her main-maft—Scurvy 
makes its appearance—Pa/fs the flands of Maffafuero and Juan Fernan- . 
dez—Arrive at Valparayfo—Vifit St. Fago, the capital of Chili. Sante 


“ 
rad el tok 
1795- AR et 


On taking our final leave of the north pacific ocean, I could not avoid _Februsy. wie 
feeling fome regret in refleéting, that although I was convinced we had = Thate 
very effeétually delineated its eaftern fhores, yet that the geography of a aH er | 
very large portion of that coaft which gives bounds to its weftern limits, gs 
ftill remained very imperfeétly, and indeed almoft intirely, unknown to ; oe 
Europeans. The examination of thefe parts however had not formed an ae 
objeét of the prefent expedition; nor could we, without a complete re-equip- bt Gar 
ment of both veffels in fome eftablifhed arfenal, have undertaken a fervice LO 
of that nature with any reafonable profpect of fuccefs, had it been within me a 
the limits of my commiffion. The length of time we had now been ab- Toe 


fent from our native foil, the unpleafant intelligence we had recently re- 
ceived of the ftate of Europe, and the defire we had of adding our little 
{trength to the means adopted for the reftoration of good order and re 
tranquillity at home, all combined to reconcile us to any difappointment ne 
which the thirft for exploring or difcovering new countries might have in- 
{pired; and operated to fatisfy our minds as to the neceffity of making 
the beft of our way towards thofe regions, where our fervices in another 
line of duty might poflibly be more acceptable to our country. 
Our progrefs however was not equal to our wifhes, for by the Wednef. 11. 
a 11th at noon we had only reached the latitude of 2° 3’ fouth, when 
PTER . the vertical inclination of the magnetic needle was obferved to be, 
fe Marked 


39° 


1795. 
February. 


Netan pacedl 


Vnarfday12. 


Friday 13. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Marked End, North Face Eaft, . 0° 40’ 
Ditto Ditto Weft, - © 30 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - Oo 30 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - O 20 
Mean inclination of the north point - © 30 
The variation of the compafs at this time was 7 45caltwardly. 


The wind between s.£. and £.s.£. blew a fteady but very gentle 
breeze, and although the atmofphere was moftly free from clouds, yet 
the weather was temperate and pleafant; the thermometer aight and day 
remaining between 75 and 76. On thurfday in the afternoon the ver- 
tical inclination of the magnetic needle was found to be as under; 


Marked End, North Face Ealt, - 1° 32’ 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - 1 38 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - 1 40 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - 1 17 
Mean inclination of the fouth pornt, - 1 32 
The variation of the compafs, - 7 50 caftwardly. 


The fame hight winds with pleafant weather continued until the fol- 
lowing day, when, after about ten hours calm, a breeze fprang up from 
the s.e., which gradually increafed, and the next day at noon the lati- 
tude was obferved to be 4°15) fouth, longitude 265°15'. The vertical 
inclination of the marine dipping needle was as follows: 


Marked End, North Face Eatt, “ BS on! 
Ditto Ditto Weft, a 5 32 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - 5 55 
Ditto Ditto Weft, ~ 6 3 
Mean inclination of the fouth point, - 5 46 
And the variation of the compafs, - 9g 7 ealtwardly. 


Since our departure from the Gallipagos iflands we had felt the influ- 
ence of acurrent fetting to the weftward, though this did not appear to 
be of great ftrength, as the error of the dead reckoning im longitude to 
this fituation in the ocean had not increafed more than a degree. 

The extremely bad failing of the Chatham had, throughout this voyage, 
very materially retarded the progrefs of our labours, but firice our laft 

departure 


eh Sa aioce ties 


CR 


ssi eriesss 


Rites 


rardly. 
gentle 
is, yet 
nd day 


1e ver- 


ardly. 
he fol- : 
p from ; 
e lati- 
ertical 4 


prdly. 

p influ- 
pear to 
ude to 


oyage, 
ur laft 
barture 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


departure from Monterrey the evil feemed to have much increafed : and 
confidering that our operations to the fouthward might acquire fome 
advancement from our preceding her, I informed Mr. Puget, that I fhould 
make the beft of my way with the Difcovery towards the ifland of Juan 
Fernandez; and in the event of his not arriving there before our de- 
parture, he was provided with further inftruétions, which, with fuch as I 
might leave for him at that flation, would be fufficient for his future 
government. After having made thefe neceffary arrangements, we made 
all fail in the Difcovery with a pleafant fteady gale from the s.s.c. 
Many oceanic birds and numbers of fifhes ftill attended us, and we were 
now and then fortunate in taking fome of the latter. By the evening 
the Chatham was a confiderable diftance aftern, and by the next forenoon 
intirely out of fight from the maft-head; fo that the diftance we had 
gained of her in twenty-four hours could not be much fhort of 5 
leagues. 

Our progrefs now was not only very expeditious, but very pleafant ; 
the wind blew a fteady gale between £.s.£. and s.s..; the fea abound- 
ed with a great variety of fifhes, and was remarkably {mooth; the wea- 
ther, alternately clear and cloudy, with fome flight fhowers of rain, was 
very temperate and agreeable, the thermometer ftanding between 75 and 
77. On faturday in fouth latitude 12° 43’, longitude by 


Arnold’s No. 14, - - 7 = 255° 3F 
176, - : $ : 255 0 
Kendall’s, - - = . 254 54 


And by the dead reckoning, continued from the ifland of Cocos, 260 32 
In this fituation the vertical inclination of the magnetic needle was, 


Marked End, North Face Eatt, - 29° 5 
Ditto Ditto Weft, - 23 50 
Ditto South Face Eaft, - 23 58 
Ditto Ditto Welt, - 23 18 
Mean inclination of the fouth point, 23 23 
The variation of the compafs, - - 4 55 eaftwardly. 


As we advanced the wind decreafed in its force, and gradually inclined 
to the eaftward and northward of eaft, with nearly the fame pleafant 
1 weather. 


Ewa 
‘ at , 
i) 


39? 


1795+ 


February. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


weather. On the 26th, in latitude 19° 44’, longitude 259° 45’, the ver- 


L_—— tical inclination of the magnetic needle was found to be, 


Thuriday: 6, 


March. 


Sunday 1. 


Monday 2. 
Wednef. 4. 


Sunday 8. 


Marked End, North Face Eaft, : 36° 20 
Ditto Ditto Weft, - 36 17 
Ditto South Face Eatt, - 35 23 
Ditto Ditto Weft, - 95 15 
Mean inclination of the fouth point, 35 49 
Variation of the compafs, - - 2 45 ealtwardly, 


The trade wind during the two fucceeding days was light and variable 
in the eaftern quarter, and on the 1ft of march we feemed to have reached 
the variable winds, having a frefh breeze, attended with a very heavy 
fwell from the north-wellward.. The obferved latitude at noon was 


23° 24, longitude by Arnold’s No. 14, - - 255° 3) 
176; - . 254 52 

Kendall’s, - - - 254 53 

And by the dead reckoning, = < - 260 25 


The variation of the compafs was 4° eaftwardly. In the afternoon we 
again reached the temperate zone; and notwithflanding that fince our 
departure from the Gallipagos iflands we had paffed under a vertical fun,’ 
the height of the mercury in the thermocter had at no time exceeded 
77 degrees. 

The north-weft wind continued with fair pleafant weather until the 
evening of the 2d, when it veered to the north, and became light and 
variable between the N.N.£. and E.N.E. On wednefday, in latitude 26° 
45> longitude by Arnold’s No. 14, 258° 39’, we pafled fore drift wood, 
and we had many birds and fifhes about the fhip. Some good lunar ob- 
fervations had been lately procured by fome of the officers, which fhewed 
the longitude to be about 5’ to the weftward of Arnold’s No. 14, 18’ to 
the eaftward of No. 176, and 9’ to the eaftward of Kendall's chronome- 
ter; the dead reckoning at the fame time fhewing 264° 10’; the variation 
was 4° eaftwardly, and the thermometer from 73 to 75. 

From this time our progrefs was much retarded by the wind being ad- 
verfe, and varying between fouth and £.s.£.; the weather however 
continued fair and pleafant until the morning of the 8th, when the breeze 
2 frefhened, 


“ 


he ver- 


vardly. 
variable 
reached 
y heavy 
yon was 
255° 3 
254 52 
254 53 
260 25 
noon we 
ince our 


ical fun,” 


»xceeded 


intil the 
ight and 
tude 26° 
ft wood, 
nar ob- 
1 fhewed 
h, 19° to 
ronome- 
ariation 


eing ad- 


1owever 
ic breeze 


fhened, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


frefhened, attended by fome fhowers and fmart {qualls ; in one fe, 1195, 
the heavieft we had experienced for a great length of time, the head of Kcenateedl 
the mainmaft was difcovercd to have been very badly fprung, about five 
feet below the rigging and about feven feet above, and oppofite to its 
former defeétive part. The fails on the mainmaft were immediately 
taken in, and on further examination of the wound, the head of the matt 
was feen to be in a very weak and fhattered condition. No time was loft 
in relieving it of its weight, by getting every thing down upon deck that 
was above the top, and the carpenters were immediately employed in 
preparing two anchor ftocks as /i/hes to fupport the maft-head. At noon 
the obferved latitude was 8°, the longitude 259° 32’; the variation of the 
compafs 5° 3’ eafterly, and the thermometer from 70° to72°%. ‘The wea- 
ther was tolerably favorable for applying fuch remedies to the defeét in 
the maft as we poffeffed ; and on monday afternoon, it being as well fe- 
cured as was in our power, the mizentop-maft was fubftituted for a main- 
top-maft, that being as much as the weak ftate of the lower maft was ca- 
pable of fuftaining, and the maintop-gallant-maft was got up fora mizen- 
top-maft. By this unfortunate accident our quantity of canvas was fo 
reduced, that our progrefs towards the appointed rendezvous was ren- 
dered very flow; we however made the beft of our way, with winds very 
variable both in refpeét to force and direétion, though generally attended 
with moderate pleafant weather. 

Without the occurrence of any circumftance worthy of recital, we 
paffed on until the 14th, when we found ourfelves in latitude 33° 19’, lon- 
gitude 262° 49’, and variation 4° eaftwardly. At this time, to my utter 
aftonifhment and furprize, I was given to underftand from Mr. Menzies 
that the fea {curvy had made its appearance amongft fome of the crew. 
This was a circumftance for which it was not eafy to account. The high 
{tate of health which every individual on board the fhip (myfelf excepted) 
had appeared to enjoy for fome months before, and the refrefhments we 
had been conftantly in the habit of procuring fince our arrival at Monter- 
rey, together with the very pleafant weather that had attended us fince that 
period, all confpired to render the caufe of this unfortunate malady the 
more inexplicable, efpecially as there had not been the fmalleft abatement or 
Vou. III. 3K relaxation 


Monday ge 


Saturday 14. 


5394 


1705. 
March, 
yee 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


relaxation in the mealures I had adopted at the commencement of our 
voyage; but on the contrary, the moft rigid obfervance had been paid 
to all thofe circumitances, which had been proved from experience to be 
the happy and effectual means of preferving that molt valuable of all 
bleflings, health, All thefe precautions and falutary meafures on this 
oceafion feemed to have loft their effeét, for the number of our fcorbutic 
invalids increafed, and with them alfo my folicitude, which may probably 
be more eafy to imagine than to defcribe. The baneful efleéts which feldom 
fail to be confequent on this diforder at fea, filled my mind with apprehen- 
fions for the fafety of our patients; and having prefumed that we had at 
length profited fo much by the experience and indefatigable labours of that 
renowned navigator Captain Cook, as that by due attention we could on 
acertainty protect feafaring people from the fatal confequences hitherto 
infeparable, under fimilar circumflances, from this malignant diforder, the 
difappointment which I felt on this occafion was inexpreffible. This was 
the fecond inflance in which it had appeared during the voyage. The firft 
was on our paflage from Nootka to the Spanifh fettlements in New 
Albion; but I was then in fome meafure able to account for its appear- 
ance, our people having been for many of the preceding months ex- 
poled ina very arduous and fatiguing fervice to moft inclement weather, 
with only the very finall portion of refrcfiments we were enabled to pro- 
cure during that time. ‘Thefe reafons did not now exift, and I remained 
in the greatefl uncertainty concerning the caule of its origin, until at 
length it appeared to have been derived from a fource from whence I leaft 
expeéted it; namely, from a difobedience of my pofitive injunétions 
and orders on the part of the cook, who had been ftriétly forbidden on 
any account whatever to allow the {kimmings of the boiling falted meat 
to be eaten by the people. Of this difobedience the fhip’s cook, a fteady, 
grave, and valuable man, came aft on the quarter deck and made a vo- 
luntary confeffion; and flated, that he had not only aéted in direét oppofi- 
tion to my repeated injunctions im the prefent inftance, but alfo on the for- 
mer occafton; though he had not been induced at any other time during 
the voyage, by the importunities of the people, to tranfgrefs, in giving to 
the crew the {kimmings of the boilers to mix with their pulfe, which at 


both 


of our 
on paid 
ce to be 
» of all 
on this 
-orbutic 
robably 
1feldom 
prehen- 
e had at 
s of that 
could on 
hitherto 
rder, the 
This was 
The firft 
in New 
| appear- 
nths ex- 
weather, 
to pro- 
emained 
until at 
e I leaft 
unétions 
den on 
ed meat 
A fteady, 
de a vo- 
oppoli- 
the for- 
during 
iving to 
hich at 


both 


ROUND THE 


WORLD. 


both thofe times, but particularly the prefent, they had been able to 
procure in great abundance from their Spanih friends. 

On his examination it appeared that he had been lefs fcrupulous in 

ymplying with the demands of the people, in confequence of arguments 
that had been frequently urged and fupported by fome on board, who 
feemed to be acquainted with the opinions of the prefident of the Royal 
Society, and who ftated, that Ae conceived that pulfe with any kind of 
greafe was not only a wholfome food, but allo very antifcorbutic. 

When the great infipidity of peas or beans alone, without the aid of 
butter, or other qualifying material, is taken into confideration, it is not 
much to be wondered at that a deviation from reflri¢tive rules in thofe 
refpeéts fhould have taken place, with people fo totally indifferent and 
carelefs of themfelves as are the generality of feamen. ‘The very unre- 
ferved and fecling manner in which the cook acknowledged his tranfgref- 
fion, and the contrition he fhewed for having thus departed from his 
duty, intitled him to my full forgivenefs; on which he earneftly aflured me, 
that he would in future attend firiétly to my dire€tions, and I had reafon 
to believe that he performed his promife. The cook’s name was John 
Brown, which I feel a fatisfaétion in recording, from his having been the 
means of eftablifhing a faét of fo much importance to maritime perfons, 
by the two experiments which his honefly compelled him to make 
known, at the rifk of a punifhment for difobedience of orders. 

All our antifeptics were reforted to, but they did not feem to aét fo 
well as on the former occafion; and fince the number of f{corbutic pa- 
tients increafed daily, I had reafon to believe that the pernicious in- 
dulgence which had produced the difeafe, had been a very general prac- 
tice amongft the crew. 

With the wind blowing a fteady gale, chiefly between N.N. E. and N. w.,, 
attended with fair and pleafant weather, we made as much progrefs as 
could well be expeéted in our crippled condition. In the courfe of the 
preceding week we procured feveral very good lunar obfervations for the 
longitude, which, when reduced by Arnold’s No. 14 to the 18th at noon, 
fhewed their refults <o be as follow: 


Eego The 


Wednel, 18; 


s, 


Friday 20. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The mean of 31 fets taken by Mr. Whidbey, - 279° a5! 55" 
Ditto 18 ditto Mr. Baker, - 273 36 48 
Ditto 30 ditto Mr. Swaine, - 273 32 30 
Ditto 37 ditto = Mr. Manby, : 273 18 37 
Ditto BYe) ditto Mr. Orchard, - 27317 44 


The mean of the whole 136 fets colleétively taken, 
fhewed what I confidered the true, or nearly the true lon- 


gitude to be, - “ = - - 273 25 30 

By Arnold’s chronometer No. 14, the longitude was 273 5 3o 
176, ditto ° 272 7 

Kendall’s, ditto ditto : 273 7 45 


From thefe ftatements it fhould feem, that the chronometers were at 
this time materially gaining on the rate now allowed. The dead reckon- 
ing fhewed 280°1’. The obferved latitude was 33° 50’ fouth, and the 
variation of the compafs 9° 15/ eaftwardly. 

At day-light in the morning a ftrange fail had been difcovered at a 
great diftance aftern, or rather upon our weather quarter; fhe was foon 
found to be drawing up to us, although we had all the fail fet that we 
were able to carry; and as fhe appeared to be a brig, little doubt was en- 
tertained of her being the Chatham; the opinion of her being our confort 
was confirmed about four in the afternoon by her anfwering the private 
fignal, and as fhe had now evidently the advantage of us in point of 
failing, we did not fhorten fail, but left her to overtake us; which how- 
ever was not effeéted until about nine o’clock on friday forenoon, when 
Mr. Puget came on board, and I had the pleafure to underftand from him, 
that, like ourfelves, they had had very fine weather ever fince our fepa- 
ration; and that on the 2d of march he had met with a large Spanifh 
merchant fhip named the Rofalie, Antonio Jofeph Valaro, mafter, laden 
with cocoa and jefuit’s bark from Guayaquil, and bound round cape 
Horn to Rio de la Plata, and from thence to Cadiz; having quitted the 
former place on the zoth of the preceding january. ‘Phe commander of 
this veffel mentioned the lofs of the {hip Edward of London, which had 
been unfortunately caft away at a place called Manquiva, and that feve- 
ral other Britith veflels, which had been very fuccefsfully employed in 


the 


25) 55. 
36 48 
32 go 
18 37 
17 44 


25 30 
5 8° 
7 
7 45 


were at 
reckon- 


und the 


red at a 
yas foon 
that we 
was en- 
confort 
private 
boint of 
h how- 
, when 
m him, 
r fepa- 
Spanifh 
, laden 
id cape 
ted the 
nder of 
ch had 
t feve- 
yed in 
the 


/ 


the fouthern whale fifhery, had vifited different ports on the coaft of 4795. 
Peru and Chili, where they had been well received; and that the Enghfh +—Y--~ 
were in high eftimation in thofe countrics. From this gentleman Mr. 
Puget became informed, that the anchorage at Juan Fernandez was 
confidered as very bad and greatly expofed; that a Spanifh frigate had 
lately been loft there; and that the ifland afforded but very few refrefh- 
ments. On thefe accounts he ftrongly recommended, that in cafe the 
Chatham ftood in need of any articles of naval ftores, that fhe fhould 
repair to the port of Valparaifo, as being the moft likely place on the 
coaft of Chih for procuring fuch fupplies. 

After Mr. Puget had obtained this information, and exchanged with 
Sen" Valaro fome mutual, though trivial marks of civility, they parted, 
and each veffel purfued her courfe with a pleafant gale at £E.N.£., which 
enabled the Chatham the next morning to crofs the fouthern tropic in 
the longitude of 257° 40’, about a degree and a half to the caftward of 
our track acrofs that line, about forty hours before them. The winds had 
permitted the Chatham to fteer a more eafterly courfe than we had been 
enabled to do, which, with our reduced rate of failing, had contributed 
to form this early junétion, and had obtained me a great degree of 
fatisfaction, as it had rendered our {topping at Juan Fernandez intirely 
unneceflary. 

The very unferviceable and damaged ftate of our main-maft demanded, 
that we fhould without delay repair to fome port more eligible than this 
ifland was likely to prove for adminiftering to our neceflities, efpecially 
as the head of the maft, in addition to the former accident, had upon a 
more minute furvey been found to be very rotten. A defeé of fo feri- 
ous a nature, admitting of no delay in the application of the moft effeétual 
remedy, left no doubt in my mind refpecting the meafures that it would be 
moft defirable to purfue for the accomplifhment of that objeét. 

In confequence of the {trong injunétions contained in my inftruétions, 
not to vifit any of the Spanifh fettlements on this coaft, excepting in the 
event of the molt abfolute neceflity, I deemed it expedient to fubmit to 
Mr. Puget, and the principal officers of the Difcovery, the ftate and con- 
dition of the maft from the carpenters written report, together with that 


83 part 


ROUND THE WORLD. 397 


398 


1795+ 
March. 


meee 


~ | 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


part of my fecret inflruétions relative to the matter in queftion. Thefe 
1aving been maturely taken into their confideration, they were unani- 
moufly of opinion, that for the good of His Majefty’s fervice intrufted to 
my care and execution, and for the prefervation of His Majefty’s flip, it 
was indifpenfably neceflary that the Difcovery fhould immediately repair 
to the neareft port, for the purpofe of procuring a new main-mait; fince 
the difabled one, with every repair that it was poffible to give it, would 
full be very inadequate to the fervice that might be demanded of it in thofe 
boifterous feas, which at this feafon of the year we muft neceflarily ex- 
peét to encouater in paffing round cape Horn. 

The port of Valparaifo feeming to be the moft likely to fupply our 
wants, and being the neareft to us, our courfe was directed thither with 
a frefh northerly breeze, and fair and pleafant weather. At noon the 
obferved latitude was 33° 55° fouth, the longitude by 


Arnold’s chronometer, No. 14, - 277° 36° 
176, - 276 31 
Kendall's ditto . m 277 99 
And by the dead reckoning, = 284 19 
And the variation of the compafs was 10 eafterly. 


About four o’clock in the afternoon the ifland of Maffafuero was feen 
bearing by compafs E.N.E., 11 or 12 leagues diftant. The wind at this 
time blowing a frefh breeze rather to eaftward of north, our courfe was 
dire€ted to the fouthward of this ifland; but from its diftance, and the 
approach of night, we were unable to fee much of it. At midnight we 
were paffing within about 4 leagues of its fouthern fide, its centre then 
bearing by compafls N.15 w. The latitude of the fhip by the log fince 
noon was at this time 34° 3! fouth, the longitude by Arnold’s No. 14, 
according to the laft rate was 278°56’, and by the lunar obfervations 
brought forward by No. 14, allowing the fame rate, 279° 17’; but as 
the chronometers were evidently gaining, and that very materially, the 
true longitude of this ifland was deduced from fubfequent obfervations, 
which fhewed its centre to be in 279° 26’ eaft. Its latitude from the 
preceding and following days obfervations, which with the fhip’s run 
agreed exceedingly well together, was 33° 4g’ fouth. This ifland did not 
appear 


Thefe 
inani- 
led to 
hip, tt 
repair 
- fince 
would 
1 thofe 
ily ex- 


ly our 
ar with 
yon the 


fterly. 
as feen 
at this 
rfe was 
and the 
ght we 
re then 
g fince 
0. 14, 
ations 
but as 
ly, the 
ations, 
bm the 
)’s run 
did not 
3 p pear 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


appear to exceed 3 leagues in circuit: its furface is hilly, rugged, and 


uneven, and it appeared to terminate abruptly in rocky cliffs at the Ge 


water's edge. During the night we had a frefh breeze with fome fqualls, 


which continued the next morning, when the jury maintop-fail yard was Saturday 214 


carried away; not in confequence of a prefs of fail, but like many others 
of our materials, from being quite worn out and rotten. This was im- 
mediately replaced with another, of whofe ftrength and qualities we had 
not a much better opinion. At about ten in the forenoon the ifland of 
Juan Fernandez was {een bearing by compafs N.60 2. The latitude was 
fhewn by obfer vations at noon to be 33° 56’ fouth, longitude by 


Arnold’s No. 14, - - 280° 16" 30" 
176, - - 279 18 
Kendall’s, ~ _ - 280 15 
By the laft lunar obfervations brought forward 
by No. 14, - - oP 280 36 30 
And by the dead reckoning, - 286 51 
The variation of the compafs at this time, 13 eaftwardly. 


We had fenfibly felt the influence of a current during the two laft days, 
fetting to the eaftward at the rate of ten miles per day. In this fituation 
the fouth- weft point of Juan Fernandez, or rather what we fuppofed to 
be Goat ifland, bore by compafs Nn. 39 £., at the diftance of 18 miles. 
In the afternoon we paffed the fouthern fide of Juan Fernandez, at the 
diftance of about 14 miles, which was too indiftinétly {cen to attempt any 
delineation of its fhores. Its fouth-weft point appeared by our calcu- 
lations to be fituated in latitude 33° 45’ fouth, and longitude correéted by 
fubfequent obfervations, 281° 8’ 47” eaft. Its afpeét in this point of view 
was not very inviting; the point terminates im a high fteep bluff, its eaft- 
ern part feemed to be lefs elevated, and the whole compofed a group of 
broken irregular hills, forming altogether as rude and grotefque a feene 
as the imagination can well fancy. 

The wind feeming now to be fixed in the northern quarter, and being 
to the fouthward of our port, our courfe was direéed to regain the pa- 
rallel of its latitude; this was accomplifhed by monday noor, being then 
by obfervation in latitude 32° 55’ fouth, true longitude 28.° 30’; the 

wind 


7 


<-) OS eeeee 


vg elo a 
| TOR 


400. 


1795- 
March. 


Re od 


Tuelday 24. 


Wrednef, 27. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


wind was ftill at N.N.w., with fair and pleafant weather; the thermome- 
ter from 66 to 68, and the variation of the compafs 13° 42’ eaftwardly. 
Having now got to the northward of Valparaifo, our courfe was fo or- 
dered as to preferve that fituation. ‘This however proved to be a very 
unneceflary precaution, as towards midnight, in latitude 32° 51’, the 
wind, after becoming light and variable, was fucceeded by a frefh breeze 
at fouth, that feemed to be equally fteady and fixed in its dire€tion as 
the northerly wind had been before; fo that we had now again to haul 
to the fouthward, in order that we might keep to windward of our port. 

On tuefday forenoon we gained a diftant view of the lofty coaft of 
Chili to the eaflward. The obferved latitude at noon was 32° 59’ fouth. 
The land at this time was too far off to diftinguifh any of its parti- 
cular parts. The wind blew frefh from the fouth, with which we 
made great progrefs towards the land, and by fun-fet the fhores were 
diftinétly feen to extend by compafs from n.50£. to s.68£., about 
10 leagues diftant. In this point of view, the fea coaft appeared to be 
comnofed of hills of various fhapes and fizes confiderably elevated; 
behind thefe the interior country rofe to a very lofty range of ftupen- 
dous mountains wrapped in perpetual fnow. Thefe were the Andes, 
and when firft feen, which was fhortly after noon, were at the dif- 
tance, I fhould imagine, of nearly 40 leagues; but we had not an op- 
portunity of making the neceflary obfervations for afcertaining that fact. 
We continued to ftand in fhore until ten at night, when, concluding we 
were within 3 or 4 leagues of the land, we tacked and ftood to the 
w.s. wv. under as much fail as we could venture to carry, for the purpofe 
of fetching, if poffible, to windward of Valparaifo. 

At two o’clock on wednefday morning we again ftood in for the land, 
which was very indiftinétly feen, owing to a denfe haze in which it was 
enveloped. ‘The wind at s.s.£. was light, and it was not until about ten 
in the forenoon that we were in with the fhores ; on which there was no 
one circumftance that could indicate our being in the neighbourhood of 
Valparaifo, nor point out whether we were to the north or fouth of that 
port, excepting our own reckoning, which fhewed it to be in the former 
direétion. 


1ome- 
ardly. 
fo or- 
1 very 
‘, the 
breeze 
jon as 
o haul 
r port. 
oaft of 
fouth. 
; parti- 
ich we 
es were 
, about 
ed to be 
levated ; 
ftupen- 
Andes, 
the dif- 
an op- 
hat fact. 
d ing we 
to the 
purpofe 


he land, 
it was 
out ten 
was no 


nood of 


of that 
former 
re€tion. 


ROUND THE 


direction. I did not think it prudent in our crippled fituation to rifk a 1795. 
difappointment, and for that reafon we ftood off {hore until an obferva- U\— 
tion for the latitude could be procured; which by the help of a double 
altitude, was accomplifhed about eleven o'clock, when we bore away in 
latitude 33° 10’ fouth, for a point not far diftant from the place where we 
expetted to find the bay of Valparaifo. At noon the above point, 
which was the moft northern part of the coaft in fight, and appearing 
like a {mall rocky ifland, lying clofe to a low or moderately elevated 
projecting point of land, and terminating at the fea fide in a round 
hummock like a bell, bore by compafs Nn. 43 £.; a rugged rocky iflet 
lying clofe to the main land, near the fouth point of a fimall fandy bay, 
being the neareft fhore, n.64 £., two or three miles diftant; and the 
fouthernmoft part of the coaft in fight, s.£. by s. 

The view we had thus gained of the coafts of the kingdom of Chili 
prefented but little to attra€t the attention, or excite the curiofity, 
of ftrangers. Thofe parts immediately on the fea fhore were com- 
pofed of rude cliffs and rocky precipices, againft which the weftern 
fwell broke with unremitting violence. Above thefe cliffs the country 
was varioufly broken by irregular eminences, fome formed of naked 
barren rocks, and others confifting of a reddifh fubftance almoft equally 
unproduétive, on which fome verdure appeared here and there, witha few 
ftunted fhrubs and bufhes, fome of which were at great diftances from 
each other; but nothing like a tree was to be feen, and the landfcape. 
bounded by the frozen fummits of the lofty Andes towering above the 
lower barren mountains that defcend from them towards the fea coaft, 
exhibited an extremely dreary, defolate, and inhofpitable picture. 

As we proceeded, a low fteep bluff point of land, beyond that which. 
terminated our northern view of the coaft at noon, was now feen lyic, 
in a direétion from it, N. 51 £., about 3 leagues diftant, and which 
proved to be the weftern point of entrance into Valparaifo bay. 

Our attention was now direéted in queft of the “ great rock or fmall 
« ifland” defcribed by Sir Richard Hawkins in 1593, as lying “ a league 
“ or better to the fouth of, and a good mark and fure fign of, the port.” 

Vou. III. 3k At, 


WORLD. 4Ou 


ee es 


a e 


: = —- 
ee re a oy 


Shh 6 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


At firft I was at a lofs to difcover, which of the two noticed at noon was 
Sir Richard’s rock, as both are much further from the bay of Valparaifo 
than he defcribes them to be; but as we advanced, I had no doubt of 
the moft northern being the “ great rock or fmall ifland.” This lies up- 
wards of 3 leagues, in a direftion s.51 w. from the point of Angels, 
which is the weft point of Valparaifo bay, and is rendered ftill more con- 
fpicuous for pointing out the port, by being fituated clofe to a very 
projeéting point called by the Spaniards P' Quraumilla, from whence 
the fhores of the main land to the fouthward take a direftion fome 
degrees to the eaftward of fouth, and thofe to the northward, as before 
ftated, towards Valparaifo. It is alfo the fouth-weftern point of a 
fpacious open bay bounded by a fandy beach, where anchorage might 
probably be found, but which muft be much expofed; and as feveral 
rocks were obferved lying ata very little diftance from the fhore, the 
chance is that the bottom may be compofed of thz fame materials. 
On the north-eaft fide of this bay a houfe and fume fmaller habitations 
were feen near it, and the country in its neighbor rhood apy eared to be 
lefs fteril and forbidding than thofe parts to which we were oppofite in 
the morning. Its furface, though unequal, was lefs broken; and al- 
though it could not boaft of a iuxuriant vegetation, yet the naked, rug- 
ged precipices, that formed a barrier againft the ocean on each fide of 
the bay, were no longer the general charaéteriftic of the interior coun- 
try, which prefented a furface of fome foil, on whofe withered herbage 
both flocks of fheep and herds of cattle were feen grazing, on the fides 
of the hills. 

Along thefe fhores, which feemed to be bold, we paffed at the diftance 
of from half a mile to half a league, without difcovering any danger which 
is not fufficiently confpicuous to be avoided; and, with the affiftance of a 
fine foutherly breeze, by two in the afternoon we were abreaft of the point 
of Angels, off which fome rocks extend to the diftance of about half a 
cable’slength. ‘Thefe we paffed at about twice that diftance, without gain- 
ing foundings. In failing round this point, the country fuddenly opened 
upon us, and prefented a fcene to which we had long been intire ftrangers ; 
the whole of the bay was now exhibited to our view terminated by a 
fandy 


ee eae ee tae oe MT eT eee REDE RE ge aor coe EE eee ee 3 RE eo een 7 


On was 
Iparaifo 
oubt of 
lies up- 
Angels, 
ore con- 
) a very 
whence 
n fome 
; before 
nt of a 
e might 
; feveral 
ore, the 
aterials. 
itations 
d to be 
pofite in 
and al- 
ed, rug- 

fide of 
r coun- 
herbage 
he fides 


diftance 
br which 
mce of a 
€ point 
t half a 
ut gain- 
opened 
angers ; 
d bya 
fandy 


4 
‘A 


Sai ate Se 


vor = 
+ 


«os te , = Sz a * * *. ~ 
Sr gS et ee Re eS een £RE Re A e w gne S 
SES SESS 3 At soviee se Keene a eFi 
& = i+ ~- 425 - . = sae i aa <a 


7 yes 1 unl: pp aapunen yy 


ad A 


PE poyeyyn, 


OSIVUVIIVA 4 Vato. 


/ 


Yy Wo 


YOY ON EN IH 


“VTL, 7 280.) 


| 


pace OR ee Sey Winey 


Ree erca ater tna AT te SE TT 


a held sped deca SEE NE ae a ee 
Fea aR: ec i al aa Pa eee enn seauaiiiie 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fandy beacli; near the upper margin of which, and on the fides of the 
adjacent hills was feen the town of Valparaifo; and although from its 
fituation it could not boaft of much pleafantnefs, yet in this point of 
view it appeared to be neat, of confiderable extent, and built with re- 
gularity ; the churches rofe above the other buildings, and the whole 
being defended by feveral forts, all confpired at once to announce, that 
we were again approaching towards the civilized world. 

In the bay and near to the fhore rode feveral fail of merchant fhips, 
engaged in their refpeétive occupations; to and from which boats were 
pafling and re-paffing tothe fhore, where a very lively {cene was exhibited 
of men and cattle; the whole exhibiting that fort of commercial inter- 
courfe between diftant countries, that the arts and civilization can alone 
carry into effeét. This pleafing profpect of at length drawing towards 
our native country, after fo long an abfence amongft the rude, yet hof- 
pitable, nations of the earth, was however not: unmixed with forebodings 
of a painful nature, left the intelligence refpefting the diftraéted ftate 
of Europe, which we had but too much reafon to apprehend would 
meet us on vifiting thefe fhores, fhould be of a more melancholy com- 
plexion than we had anticipated. 

The wind from the fouthward blowing direétly out of the bay, obliged 
us to make fome trips for the purpofe of reaching a proper fituation for 
anchoring, which was accomplifhed about three o’clock in 10 fathoms 
water, muddy bottom. | 

An officer was immediately difpatched to inform the governor of our ar- 
rival, of the occafion of our vifit, and of the affiftance we required. A fhip 
that had been feen in the offing in the morning anchored foon after us, and, 
together with the Difcovery and Chatham, made ten fail of veffels riding 
in the bay; of thefe five fhips and two brigs were Spanifh merchantmen, 
and the other the Lightning of Briftol, a South fea whaler, commanded 
by a Mr. Cook; from whom we received little encouragement to hope 
for fuch a reception at Vaplaraifo, as we confidered we had a right to 
expeét, or as our fituation demanded. Soon after we had anchored, 
however, and during the abfence of Mr. Manby, who was the officer 
fent to the governor, a Spanifh officer came on board with congratula- 

3F 2 tions 


404 


17956 
March, 


—— 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


tions on our arrival from Sen" Don Lewis Alava, a colonel in the army, 
governor of this port, and brother to our friend of that name at Mon- 
terrey. 

This meflage was accompanied by the ftrongeft affurances on the part 
of the governor of affording us every affiftance that we might require, 
and which might be in his power to beftow, and with hopes that he 
fhould foon have the pleafure of feeing myfelf and officers on fhore, where 
we might depend upon receiving every civility; adding, that the time we 
might remain at Valparaifo fhould pafs as agreeably as it was in the power 
of himfelf and the inlabitants of the town to render it. 

"It was not eafy to reconcile two reports fo very oppofite, though I 
did not hefitate to give more credit to the latter than to the former, efpe- 
cially as our firft impreffions were received from one not perfeétly fober. 
Had I entertained any doubts, my fufpenfe would not have been of long 
duration, for on the return of Mr. Manby, every thing which the Spa- 
nifh officer had ftated was confirmed; and we now underftood, that if 
thofe on board the Lightning laboured under any uncomfortable reftric- 
tions impofed by the governor, it was to be attributed folely to their own 
indifcretion and improper conduét, which had rendered fuch meafures on 
the part of the commanding officer indifpenfably neceflary for the prefer- 
vation of good order. 

Mr. Manby informed me that Sen" Alava had ftated ‘to him, that not- 
withftanding he did not entertain the Jeaft doubt that Don Ambrofio 
Higgins de Vallenar, the prefident and captain general of the kingdom 
of Chili, would confirm all the promifes which he then made; yet 
it was neceflary, before any material operations fhould take place, to 
obtain His Excellency’s fanétion and approbation for their being car- 
ried into effect. For this purpoie he fhould difpatch a courier that 
evening to the capital, St. Jago de Chili, the refidence of the Prefident, 
and where he now was, and he hoped it would be convenient to me 
to make fome communication to His Excellency by the fame conveyance, 
on the fubjeét of our vifit, and the fuccours we required. 

With this requeft of the governor's I inftantly complied; the meffenger 
was then difpatched, and we were given to underftand that a reply might 
be 


fat 


Sion yorie 


: Sister su, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


be expeéted on the faturday or funday following; in the mean time there 
was no reftraint on the officers vifiting the town; the markets were open 
to us to obtain fuch immediate refrefhments as we might require; and 
we were equally at liberty to recruit our {tock of water and of fuel. 

On thefe agreeable communications being made, the garrifon was fa- 
luted with thirteen guns, and on this compliment being equally returned, 
I waited upon the governor, whilit the veffels were mooring by the bower 
anchors ina N.N.£. and s,s. w. direétion, a cable each way; the fouthern 
anchor in 10 fathoms, the northern in 16 fathoms water, on a bottom 
of {tiff muddy clay. The point of Angels bearing by compals Nn. 35 w., 
diftant about a mile; the faluting fort on the weftern fide of the bay, 
N. 53 w., about half that diftance; the governor’s houfe in another fort, 
s.86w., about three cables diftant; a rocky point running off from the 
town, being the neareft fhore, s.7 w., one cable and a half diftant; a re- 
doubt on a hill, s. 5, £.; a confpicuous white church in the village of Al- 
mandrel, s. 65 £.; the eafternmoft fort, x. 83 £.; aremarkably lofty, rug- 
ged, {nowy mountain, terminating partly in a flat and partly in a peaked 
fummit, being a part of the Andes, n. 61 £.; the eaft point of the bay, 
N. 57 £., about a league diftant; a more diftant point, N. 17 £., 3 leagues 
off; and the northernmoft part of the coaft in fight, nN. 6 w. 

On thurfday morning, accompanied by Mr. Puget and feveral of the 
officers of both veffels, I paid my formal vifit to Governor Alava, and 
had the pleafure of receiving every mark of polite and hofpitable atten- 
tion from him, with repeated affurances that nothing fhould be wanting 
on his part to relieve our wants, or to render Valparaifo as plcafant and 
agrecable to us as its circumftances would aliow. Thefe ceremonies be- 
ing concluded we returned to the veffels, where our vifit was fhortly 
repaid by the governor, attended by moft of the principal officers and 
inhabitants of the town; and on their coming on board they were faluted 
with thirteen guns. From all thefe gentlemen we received the moft 
prefling intreaties to vifit their families; which civilities we did not fail 
to accept, expreffing our thanks for the cordiality with which they had 
been fo obligingly made. 

The 


40} 
1 7956 
March. 
(cee nad 


Thurfday26. 


— = 
a 


eae 
ng PAE 


periercs 


ge 
ar 


ea a ne ee eo 
a en 


ee 


a he 


4o0 


17956 


March. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The day was pleafantly {pent amongft our new acquaintance, who readily 


—y——_ aflifted me in making arrangements for procuring a fupply of the abun- 


dant refrefhments which this luxuriant country afforded. In doing this, 
my firft care and principal objet was, immediately to adopt the moft 
eficacious meafures that could be devifed, for cradicating the inveterate 
fcorbutic diforder which now prevailed, and which had greatly increafed 
amongft the crews of both veflels. ‘The number of {corbutic patients 
rendered incapable of attending to their duty on board the Difcovery, 
amounted to feventeen. On board the Chatham their number was not 
fo great, though the difeafe was making a rapid progrefs; and I learn- 
ed from Mr. Puget, that on his making inquiry into the caufe of it, he 
had found that the fame pernicious praétice had been indulged in on 
board the Chatham, which had taken place on board the Difcovery dur- 
ing our late long and tedious pafflage, that of permitting the fat fkim- 
mings of the boiling falted meat to be eaten by the people with their 
pulfe, and to be ufed for frying their fifh; but it did not appear that this 
unwholefome indulgence had been carried to fuch an extent on board the 
Chatham, as it had been on board the Difcovery. In confequence of 
this information, I deemed it expedient that the whole crews of both vef- 
fels fhould, in addition to the regular allowance of frefh beef and greens, 
and new foft bread from the fhore, be daily ferved with a quantity of 
grapes, apples, and onions; and I had foon the happinels of finding, 
that this falutary diet was attended with the defired effeét of intirely 
eradicating the difeafe. 

Whilft we were waiting for the return of the courier difpatched to His 
Excellency the Prefident, my time was not unprofitably employed; for I 
embraced that opportunity to vifit the feveral warehoufes, and by fo doing 
obtained a complete knowledge of the quality of the ftores and provifions 
they were capable of affording us. When this was done, I made the necel- 
fary arrangements for receiving them on board the inftant we fhould be at 
liberty to acceptthem. In the courfe of my inquiries I had the mortifi- 
cation to learn, that there was not a {par, cither at Valparaifo, or in the 
country within our reach, of a fize fufficient to be converted into a matt, 
for the purpofe of replacing our difabled one on board the Difcovery. 

1 This 


ROUND THE WORLD. 407 


adil y This was a matter of very ferious concern; but as a new maft could not 1795: al 


. . . March. i 
rbun- here be procured, the only expedient we had the power of reforting to, Woy 


; this, was to ufe our beft endeavours to repair the old one. This I purpofed iN 
molt to do by turning the maft end for end, by which means the moft defec- uf 
terate tive parts would fall below the deck; where, by the addition of the ay 
reafed jifhes we had on board by way of further fecurities, I was in hopes, that ie 
tients with great care and attention to the performance of the work, we fhould ie 
Overy, be able to render it fufficiently ftrong to anfwer the purpofe of carrying " 
as not the veffel to England. 
learn- The town of Valparaifo not affording any taverns or places for the 
it, he reception and accommodation of ftrangers, we were obliged to intrude on i 
in on the hofpitality of its worthy inhabitants for fuch conveniencies when we , 
y dur- vifited the fhore. Thefe civilities were conferred in fo handfome a man- 
_ {kim- ner as at once to relieve us from any idea of our being intruders; the nis 
. their pleafure that every one manifefted in entertaining us, completely re- is 
jat_ this moved every fentiment excepting that of gratitude on our parts, for ret 
rd the the repeated aéts of kindnefs they fo very obligingly beftowed. Amongft dint 
nce of the firft to whom we were indebted in thefe refpets was Don Juan Bar- i, 
th vel- rara, the colleétor of the king’s duties, and Don Praeta, the captain of 
greens, the port. We firft became known to thefe gentlemen in their public 
itity of capacity, and they had the goodnefs to introduce us to many others of 
nding, their friends, all of whom treated us with the greateft politenefs, attention, ihe 
ntirely and hofpitality ; but as their houfes were not more than fufficiently large ie 
for the accommodation of their own refpeétive families, a lodging on fhore ue 

to His was not to be eafily procured. The very indifferent ftate of my health | ; 
; for I at this time however, required that I fhould avail myfelf of this opportu- ‘ 
p doing nity of fleeping on fhore, and taking as much of the exercife of the 

vifions country as my ftrength would permit; for this reafon I was induced to. 

necel- apply to the governor, to allot apartments for myfelf and a few of the 

d be at officers in fome of the public buildings of the town, with which he very 

nortifi- obligingly complied; and in the event of our equipment in this port 

in the meeting with the approbation of His Excellency the Prefident of Chili, 

A matt, of which there was little doubt, the Cafa de Exercicios was appointed 

yee for our reception and refidence, This building had been ereéted fome 

This 


years. 


Saturday 28. 


Sonday go. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


years ago as a chapel of eafe, for the purpofe of accommodating the 
country inhabitants who came into the town on fundays to attend divine 
fervice, but who frequently could not find room in the churches ; and it 
had likewife been appropriated for the penitential acknowledgments of 
the women. ; 

Our time on board was bufily employed in making every thing ready 
to proceed in the fervice we had to perform, the inftant we fhould re- 
ceive the fanétion of the Prefident for fo doing. On faturday evening, 
agreeably to our calculations, the courier returned, and I had the fatisfac- 
tion to receive from His Excellency Sen* Don Ambrofio Higgins de Val- 
lenar, prefident and captain general of the kingdom of Chili, the moft 
ample confirmation of all the liberal offers which had been made to us by 
governor Alava; together with a letter containing the moft polite congra- 
tulations on our having thus far fafely accomplifhed the great objeét of 
our expedition, and having at length arrived in a country where nothing 
fhowd be wanting within the reach of his power to fupply, that could in 
any way contribute to the reftoration of our health, adminifter to our 
future comforts, or tend to re-equip the veflels, and repair the damages 
which they had fuftained. Thefe obliging and friendly offers were fur- 
ther accompanied by a communication to governor Alava, ftating, that 
if myfelf and fome of the principal officers {hould be inclined to vifit the 
capital, we had His Excellency’s permiffion to do fo; and in the event of 
our undertaking a journey to St. Jago, the governor was requefted by the 
Prefident to employ his good offices, in feeing that we were properly 
provided for the excurfion. 

I embraced the earlieft opportunity to return my moft grateful acknow- 
ledgments to the Prefident, for his extreme politenefs and liberality to- 
wards us; and I loft no time in fetting hard to work on the various fer- 
vices which now demanded our attention. My firft and principal objeét 
was to get out the main-maft; for this purpofe, on monday morning the 
fhip was moved nearer in fhore, and moored in 4 fathoms, to infure 
more effectually fmooth water for performing that operation. After 
this was accomplifhed, on the following morning, the maft was hauled up 
on to the beach between Valparaifo and the village of Almandrel, where 
a tent 


ge the 
divine 
and it 
nts of 


ready 
Id_re- 
ening, 
tisfac- 
e Val- 
> molt 
us by 
ongra- 
jet of 
othing 
uld in 
to our 
mages 
e fur- 
r, that 
fit the 
ent of 


y the 
pperly 


cnow- 
ty to- 
s fer- 
bjeét 
g the 
nfure 
After 
dup 

here 
hn tent 


y 
a 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


a tent was erefted, and at the governor’s exprefs defire a guard of ma- 
rines from the Difcovery was pofted there, to prevent thefts, or other 
improper conduét on the part of the inhabitants, as fome of the pinnace’s 
covering had been ftolen the preceding night. 

Whether this application from the governor proceeded from a fenti- 
ment of delicacy towards us, or whether he confidered that our marines 
would be more adequate to the proteétion of our property than the Spa- 
nifh foldiers, is not eafy to decide; but it appeared to be a very unpre- 
cedented and extraordinary circumftance, that a guard fhould here be 
requefted by the governor from an Englifh man of war, to do duty in 
the dominions of his Catholic majefty. The marines however were land- 
ed with a ferjeant, and planted as centinels, with pofitive orders from me, 
on no account to hurt any of the inhabitants, even though they fhould 
be deteéted in the very aét of thieving; but to fecure their perfons, 
that they might be dealt with according-to their own laws. 

On the maft being examined we had the mortification to find, that the 
damage it had fuftained was greater than we had fufpected, as it was 
{fprung nearly two thirds through, a little below the hounds. Some 
Spanifh carpenters, in addition to our own, were immediately fet to work 
upon it; and as both the veffels required much caulking, the artificers of the 
country were alfo hired for this fervice. Our fail-makers were employed 
in repairing the old and making fome new fails; the coopers in fetting up 
ca{ks for the reception of flour, and repairing thofe made ufe of for water ; 
and the armourer was making the neceflary iron work for the repair and 
fecurity of the main-maft and other purpoles, whilft thofe remaining on 
board were varioufly employed about the rigging, and in the hold for the 
reception of a quantity of fhingle ballaft. Not being yet pofitively de- 
termined whether our route home fhould be round cape Horn, or through 
the {traits of Magellan, and our cables and hawfers being worn to the 
laft extremity, a fupply of each fort was ordered to be made for both 
veffels, according to the dimenfions we required; for although we had 
found an abundance of {mall white cordage in the warehoufes, there 
were no cables ; there being little demand at Valparaifo for fuch ftores ; 
nor was there any tarred rope of any defcription, the cordage ‘rou 

Vou. Il. 3G four 


499 


1795 
March. 
ee amend 


Wednefi 1. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


four inches in circumference downwards, being all white rope, fuch as 
the Spanifh trading veffels in thefe feas ufe for running rigging. Thefe 
feveral fervices were all put into a regular train of execution; but as the 
following day was the anniverfary of our departure from Falmouth, and 
the commencement of the fifth year of our labours, all work ' was fuf- 
pended, and the people as ufual had the day to themfelves. They were 
all ferved witha double allowance of grog, and an excellent dinner, com- 
pofed of the various good things that this country fo abundantly afforded. 

All our operations were cheerfully refumed the next morning; and on 
my vifiting the artificers employed on the maft, I had the mortification to 
underftand, that on framing the heel of the maft for the purpofe of its 
becoming the head, that end, near to the place where the cheeks were to 
be fixed on to it, was found to be extremely decayed, and f{carcely in a 
better ftate than the other extremity. It was however, though rotten, 
not {prung, and having no refource but that of applying the beft remedy 
in our poffeffion, two ftout cheeks made of our {pare anchor ftocks, to- 
gether with two ftrong fi/hes, were fixed to the maft below the partners 
of the main deck, and continued up to its head; and even with thefe ad- 
ditional fecurities, it would be but a crippled ftick to depend upon: yet 
as we had no alternative, we were compelled to make the beft fhift we 
could, which would neceflarily oblige us to be particularly cautious, 
and to prefs it as little as poffible in our paffage homewards. 

The obfervatory, with the requifite inftruments, was fent on fhore, 


and, as ufual, committed to the charge of Mr. Whidbey, for the purpofe a 


of making fuch obfervations as were now become neceflary for afcertaining 
the rates and errors of the chronometers, and for finding the latitude and 
longitude of Valparaifo. Having made this and fome other arrange- 
ments for carrying into effeét the re-equipment of the veffels, I deter- 
mined to avail myfelf of the obliging permiffion of the prefident to vifit 
the capital of Chili, and ordered preparations to be made for an excur- 
fion to St. Jago. 

Our party was to confift of Mr. Puget and Lieutenant Johnftone of 
the Chatham, and Lieutenants Baker and Swaine, and Mr. Menzies of 
the Difcovery. I had already made known to governor Alava my in- 
tention 


" 
E 


ch as 
Thefe 
as the 
, and 
s fuf- 
were 
com- 
orded. 
ind on 
ion to 
of its 
ere to 
yina 
rotten, 
=medy 
<S, to- 
irtners 
efe ad- 
: yet 
ift we 
1tlous, 


fhore, 
rpofe a 

aining 

He and 
range- 
deter- 

lo vilit 
xcur- 


pne of 
ies of 

y in- 
pntion 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


tention of vifiting St. Jago, who very obligingly gave dire€tions, as Val- 
paraifo did not afford any travelling carriages, tht we fhould be pro- 
vided with a proper number of horfes and mules for the expedition; the 
former for our riding, and the latter for carrying our luggage. 

I now had the pleafure of finding that His Excellency the Prefident, 
together with his polite invitation to the capital, had alfo fent two dragoons 
from St. Jago, who were natives of Ireland, in his Catholic Majelty’s fervice, 
for the purpofe of being our guides and interpreters, and for rendering 
us every other fervice that we might require on the journey. Thefe 
people had been long in New Spain; they feemed to be highly delighted 
with the charge now intrufted to their care, and not a little proud of the 
power and confequence that was attached to it; for, as on this occafion 
they bore the immediate order of the Captain-general, they had authority 
to do many ats from which, in the capacity of dragoons only, they 
were prohibited. This power, amongft other things, permitted them to 
take any horfe or horfes whatfoever, whether in the ftables or at pafture, 
for the purpofe of facilitating the fervice on which they were employed ; 
but as our vifit to St. Jago was purely for recreation, I would not per- 
mit any compulfory meafures to be reforted to for our accommodation ; 
and a fufficient number of horfes was foon procured, at twelve dollars 
each, for the journey thither, and back again to Valparaifo. 

Every thing being prepared, we fet out early on friday morning, with 
a numerous cavalcade ; for, notwithftanding this country had been fet- 
tled a great length of time, we were given to underftand that we fhould 
find no accommodation on the road between thefe two principal towns of 
the kingdom of Chili, excepting fuch as might be met with in the vil- 
lages through which we might pafs or occafionally ftop at, and thefe 
would confift only of a fhed or uninhabited empty houfe. <A fupply of 
provifions might be depended upon, but there were neither beds, feats, 
tables, nor any fort of convenient or neceffary articles or utenfils to pre- 
pare them for our table; all thefe, with our cook, we were obliged to 
take with us; and, left we fhould be difappointed of the promifed fhelter, 
we were provided with a tent, which was packed in convenient travel- 
ling trunks, and carried on the backs of the mules, according to the 

gGe ufual 


1795. it: 
ril. heen en 


Neen aed ‘ a ale i, 


Friday 3. ated 


A VOYAGF OF DISCOVERY 


‘ufual method of travelling in this country. I could not, however, ‘help 
exprefling my concern that the poor beafts fhould be fo much loaded, 
and I objeéted to the weight propofed to be carried, efpecially the poles 
of the tent, which I fufpeéted would prove too inconvenient a burthen 


for them to move under ; indeed this circumftance produced fome alter- 


cation between the muleteers and the dragoons ; but as there was no ap- 
peal againft the injunttions of the latter, the multeeers and myfelf were 
obliged to acquiefce, and twelve mules were completely loaded with our 
tent and baggage. The horfes that had been hired we thought rather 


too {mall, and not of fufficient ftrength ; for, befides the weight of their 


rider, they had each a moft enormous heavy faddle to carry; but our 
Irifh guides undertook to anfwer for their abilities, and the event proved 
that their judgment was to be depended upon. 

From the town of Valparaifo, which is fituated on a narrow traét of 
very uneven ground at the foot of the fteep rocky precipices, which, at 
no great diftance from the water-fide, compofe the fhores, there is no 
pafs immediately into the country but for foot paffengers; for the main 


‘road, which leads into the interior parts of the country, approaches the 
fea-fhore through the village of Almandrel, whither our route was ne- 


ceffarily direfted. This village is pleafantly fituated, and is on a more 
extenfive border of low land than the town of Valparaifo; but it is 
bounded in a fimilar way behind, by fteep and nearly barren hills. The 
valleys and plains, however, in its immediate neighbourhood, are fertile, 
and large gardens were both cultivated for profit, and decorated 
for amufement. From Almandrel a tolerably good, though rather 


-{teep, road had been made, in a zigzag way, over a ridge of hills, of 
‘confiderable extent and elevation, the fummit of which occupied us 
full two hours in reaching. The old road between thefe two towns 


being a very bad one, and dangerous to pafs, His Excellency had de- 


-termined that a new and more eligible line of road fhould be made; and 


for the more immediate convenience of the inhabitants of St. Jago and 


-Valparaifo, this new road, which is about fixteen yards wide, had been 


begun from each place, and by that means an eafier and more pleaiant 
communication with the adjacent country had already been afforded to 
the 


, help 
oaded, 
e poles 
urthen 
> alter- 
no ap- 
f were 
th our 
rather 
f their 
ut our 
oroved 


ract of 
ich, at 
e is no 
> main 
ies the 
as ne- 
more 
it is 
The 
fertile, 
orated 
rather 
lls, of 
ed us 
towns 
hd de- 
P; and 
o and 
been 
ealant 
Hed to 
the 


Hh 
Hi I 


Wo Menunder delprom a Sketch taken on 


VDPES'. 


1 


ml SOON. bbuants Lill Mall VO Hobinsen 


Y 2 LM. IVDR. Whom the 45. iva VA L PARA ISO wiha diflant Iy4n- of the 


fea) 


Villawe 


The 


tO Ht [oi ae eas I ected 


Se a ee 
rane epee eee pated OP ne 


De PES etme ren te eI 


alist 


aia nical 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the inhabitants of each of thefe towns than they had hitherto enjoyed. 
We were informed by our guides, that the whole of the new road was 
not yet finifhed, but was at that time ina progreflive {tate towards com- 
pletion, and that we fhould meet the people employed upon it as we 
proceeded. 

Under the prefent circumftances of this road, and whilft the dry fea- 
fon may conti "e, it is doubtlefs as commodious a pafs as could have 
been’ «de... 2d; but, from the '»~ncls of the foil, and the acclivity 
of the hills alony the fides of whicu st is carried, it appeared to us that 
it would be liable to great injury in the winter feafon; which, we were 
told, is frequently fubjeét to extremely heavy rains, that muft neceflarily 
rufh with great impetuofity down the fides of this fteep mountainous 
country. 

Having gained the top of the road, which paffes over a deprefled part 
of that ridge of lofty hills which bind the fea coaft, we arrived in a f{pa- 
cious plain, nearly ona level with the fummit of the hills we had now left 
behind us. This plain extended to a confiderable diftance, in a north- 
eafterly, eafterly, and fouth-eaft direction, where it finifhed at the bafe 
of another ridge of hills, beyond which were feen other ranges varioufly 
diverfified, and rifing in fucceffion one after another; until our view 
was terminated by the hoary head of the lofty Andes, wrapped in 
undiffolving fhow. Had the intervening plain, and the furrounding 
rifing hills, exhibited the verdant produétions of nature, affifted by the 
hand of man, the landfeape would have been beautiful in the ex- 
treme, but this was not the cafe; and the apparent fterility of the wide 
wafte, that now encompaffed us on every fide, rendered that abundant 
fupply of good things which we had been daily accuftomed to fee in 
the market of Valparaifo, a circumftance not eafily to be accounted 
for. 

Inftead of numerous villages, fertile paftures, and fields in high cul- 
tivation, which I had expeéted to find, after paffing over the hills 
near the fea fhore, an extenfive open defert now appeared before us, 
deftitute of wood, and nearly fo of verdure; as a few ftunted trees 
only, 


% iia Fried 
2 2 Tn 


. 
= 
a Tt 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


only, and fome grovelling fhrubs, -.ere {cattered at a great diftance from 
each other; and, excepting near the banks of the fluggifh rills of water 
that crept through the plain, vegetation was f{carcely perceptible ; whilft 
the few miferable inhabitants that exifted on its furface, lived in wretch- 
ed little hovels, or huts, made principally of mud. The frames of thefe 
dwellings, of which we had feen abou: a dozen, were rudely conftru€ted 
of wood, and plaftered over with a thick coating of mud; this ferved 
as a wall, whilft the unfmoothed furface of the ground formed the floor, 
and little or no covering appeared on the roof; the whole feeming {carce- 
ly to afford a fhade againft the fcorching rays of the fun; for againft 
wind and rain thefe humble manfions could afford no fhelter. 

At one of thefe mean abodes, about fifteen miles from Valparaifo, we 
{topped to dine. The infide of the dwelling more forcibly difplayed the 
poverty of its inhabitants than had been exhibited by its external ap- 
pearance ; for it hardly contained the moft common neceffaries to the 
exiftence of human life; a dirty table, a ftool, a wretched bed in one 
corner, and five or fix croffes, comprehended all its furniture; yet it 
was not without fome decorations of a religious nature ; and what ftill 
more attracted our notice, thofe ho refided in it not only indulged 
in the luxury of taking the mattee, which is an infufion of an herb im- 
ported from Paraguay, but, to our furprize, the very few utenfils they 
poffeffed for their moft common domeftic purpofes were chiefly made 
of filver. The land about thefe miferable hovels was, like the wide fur- 
rounding wafte, in a perfeét flate of nature, without the veftige of any 
labour having been ever beftowed upon it, not even in the cultivation 
of a garden. The few wretched people who inhabit this dreary wild, 
feemed to rely intirely on the bountiful hand of Providence for their daily 
fubfiftence ; and to pafs away their lives, without entertaining a wifh to 
procure the leaft addition to their happinefs or comfort, at the expence 
of any exertion. Indolence and fuperftition appeared to influence the 
whole of their conduét, which was marked with a greater degree of un- 
cleanlinefs and thofe charaéteriftics that diftinguifh the very loweft order 
of fociety, than I had before witnefled amongf{t any people who had ever 
had the advantage of living amongft thofe conneéted with the civilized 
world. 

4 The 


Bas UES ee 


lk ra a 


Fi 
Be 
Fe 


Ee tepmamtuE aS See 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


The mules which carried our luggage were on the road before us, 
making the beft of their way to the place where we purpofed to reft for 
the night, excepting one fumpter mule, which had accompanied us with 
fome articles of provifions and provender for the day; and by adding to 
our own ftores the fupplies which thefe hovels were able to furnifh, con- 
fifting of poultry, eggs, potatoes, onions, and fruit, we made an excel- 
lent repaft, whilft our horfes were alfo refrefhed, and prepared to proceed 
with us over this extenfive defert. Having now travelled fome miles 
beyond the extent to which the new road from Valparaifo had been car- 
ried, we found the old one infinitely lefs commodious, and the difference 
between the two was very great indeed. Inftead of the fmooth. regular 
furface over which we had pafled from Valparaifo along the new road, 
this could only be confidered as a beaten track, fometimes leading along, 
or through, deep and irregular ravines and gullies, deftitute of the ap- 
pearance of any labour having ever been applied to reduce the inequa- 
lities of its furface, or to remove any of thofe impediments which conti- 
nually interrupted our travelling. 

The making of the new road had doubtlefs been a work of great la- 
bour; and to a people who are not very induftrioufly inclined, and who 
are all bigotted to former practices and original habits, it is no wonder 
that the manifeft advantages that muft refult to the inhabitants of the 
country from His Excellency’s wife undertaking, fhould be overlooked, or 
rather not feen by them; and that the execution of his judicious plan fhould 
have deprived him, amongft the lower orders of the people, of much of his 
popularity. For as the thought had firft originated with the Prefident, 
rather than not indulge a contradiétory fpirit, which our guides informed 
us had fhewn itfelf amongft the bulk of the people, the inhabitants 
feemed to be more willing to facrifice their own future intereft and com- 
fort by oppofing this beneficial defign, than to do any thing which might 
promote its fuccefs. 

Little variation occurred, in the fcenery already defcribed, in our 
journey in the afternoon, as we faw few objects to attra€ our attention 
until towards the evening, when we arrived at the village of Cafa Blanco, 
or, the white houfe. Here our guides propofed we fhould reft for the 

night, 


fihav | 
1795. bs A 
April, ih 
(eee et Wei, 
2 a 
vit 
ry | 
Vand 
Set haley! 
Be PS 
ee Fall 
ibe] 
2 Wie 
)> ea 
GH tye | 
ay 
ee FY 
ph ie 
bo) Mam 
a ak oS 
yt 
se ate 
Pea 
i Pe jie 
acted odhy } 
Th BY i 
ieee 
t Ps 
at 
ey 
ea 
WB iH 
{che 
y 
u 
wrod 
b 
ae 
pea | 
tek bi 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


night, and after travelling twenty-eight miles in a way to which we 
were little accuftomed, we all gladly agreed to the meafure. 

Cafa Blanco is a hamlet, confifting of a neat church and about forty 
houles in its neighbourhood ; which, with fome inclofures of land under 
cultivation, formed a pleafing contraft to the barren naked country 
through which our day’s journey had been direéted. ‘The principal per- 
fon of the village appeared to be the curate, who having been made ac- 
quainted with our approach, was prepared to meet us, and gave us a like 
hofpitable reception with that which had been fo generally {hewn by all 
the good people of this country with whom we had hitherto met. In 
the exercife of his humanity and good wifhes, our Reverend Friend 
{eemed to be much hurt that he had fo little to bellow; but as we fortu- 
nately did not ftand much in need of his affiftance, excepting in one re- 
{pett, that of providing us with a lodging, we foon relieved him from his 
embarraffment. This gentleman immediately furnifhed us with a houfe, 
over which he held fome authority ; a manfion precifely of the defcrip- 
tion which, we had been given to underftand, we fhould find on the 
road for our accommodation. 

This houfe, if the ftructure could be intitled to fuch a name, was fitu- 
ated nearly in the centre of the village, and was fo rudely formed, that it 
could hardly be confidered as the work of a civilized people. Its walls 
were made of driedpieces of earth cut iquare into the fhape of bricks, which 
had been laid on each other when in a wet itate, and plaftered over with 
the fame fubftance ; but by drying unequally the plafter had fallen off in 
many places. Its infide was open like a barn, and confifted of but one 
apartment, which contained nothing but our baggage, that had arrived 
fome hours before us; and had the weather been rainy, it would have 
afforded us but very imperfect fhelter. The floor was no other than the 
ground in its natural, unlevelled ftate; but though it was not remarkable 
for its cleanlinefs, it was fpacious, and in that refpeét more fuitable to the 
purpofes of. our party, than the tent we had brought with us. As it, 
however, was totally deftitute of all kinds of furniture, we were obliged 
to refort to our neighbours for fuch temporary conveniences as we fhould 
want, which they very readily fupplied: and whilft our fupper was pre- 

3 paring 


pa 


1 WC 


orty 
nder 
intry 
per- 
e ac- 
a like 
yy all 
In 
‘riend 
fortu- 
ne re- 
m_ his 
houfe, 
ferip- 
on the 


s fitu- 
that it 
s walls 
which 
br with 
off in 
ut one 
brrived 
have 
n the 
rkable 
to the 
As it, 
pbliged 
fhould 
s pre- 
paring 


SRE eS 


sien 


Myiide SSL swe rT RS 


SES 


reon  aaees 


ee ak et 
Seats 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


paring we vifited the inhabitants in the village, by whom we were re- 


ceived with the moft cheerful affability ; particularly by the younger parts W-+¥—J 


of the fex, amongft whom we noticed feveral faces which, even by the 
fide of our fair countrywomen, might have been confidered as pretty, had 
not the intolerably nafty cuftom of painting both red and white, deftroy- 
ed the natural delicacy of their complexion, and impaired the effet of 
the agreeable affemblage of their features. Their affiduity to pleafe was 
however very engaging, and the evening paffed fo pleafantly, that the 
fatigue of the day’s journey was, I believe, intirely forgotten by moft of 
us. The houfes of this village being all white wafhed, gave it a tidy ap- 
pearance, which, as we approached, impreffled us with a belief that we 
fhould find thefe dwellings infinitely fuperior to the wretched hovels we 
had paffed in the courfe of the day; but we had the mortification to dif- 
cover, on accepting the invitations of the principal people, that the fame 
want of cleanlinefs prevailed, and that wretchednefs, indolence, and 
fuperftition was exhibited here in as great a degree, as amongft the cot- 
tagers on the fun-parched defert. The only difference that we could 
difcern, between thofe people and the inhabitants of Cafa Blanco, con- 
fitted in the fuperiority of the external habiliments of the latter, who 
had evidently dreffed themfelves in their beft attire for the occafion. 

Gur time was agreeably engaged until fupper was ferved, when we 
were favored with the company of every inhabitant, I believe, belonging 
to the village; the principal perfons partook of our repaft, whilft the 
others feemed to be equally gratified in the opportunity that was afforded 
them, of fatisfying their curiofity with a f{cene fo novel and unexpeéted in 
their country. The glafs went cheerfully round, and our new friends 
did not retire until a late hour. Our blankets were then f{pread, but the 
night did not pafs fo pleafantly as the evening had promifed; for our reft 
was moft tormentingly difturbed by the vermin, which had been gene- 
rated by the former filth of our habitation, and which now took revenge 
upon us ftrangers, for having endeavoured to difpoffefs them of their 
ftrongholds by fweeping out the place. When we arofe in the morning 
we found ourfelves but little refrefhed, owing to the great annoyance we 
had {uffered from myriads of bugs and fleas, Early the next morning: 

Vot. IIL. - 3H we 


417 


1795- 


pril. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


we again fet out, and foon arrived at the foot of that range of hills that 
gives bounds to the plain on which Cafa Blanco is fituated. Thefe hills 
appeared to rife with a quicker afcent, and to a greater height above the 
plain we were then quitting, than the firft ridge had feemingly done from 
the fea fide at Almandrel. ‘The new road here led acrofs the lefs elevated 
part of the ridge, notwithftanding which, it was fo fteep that it was ne- 
ceffary to cut the road in the fame zigzag diagonal way as before, and 
in its courfe from the bafe to the fummit of the hills, it made twenty-five 
returns or angles, 

On this intermediate part of the new road the labourers were at work ; 
and we underftood from our guides, that as a fufficient number of people 
could not be procured to carry the whole of the defign into execution at 
once, his Excellency the Prefident (having the comfort, convenience, 
and intereft of the inhabitants much at heart) had, in order to facilitate the 
intercourfe between thefe two great towns, ordered the moft difficult and 
dangerous parts of the new line of road to be firft made paffable and 
commodious. The road here was of the fame width, and equally well 
made, with the part before defcribed; but as the foil confifted of the fame 
loofe fandy materials, it muft neceffarily be liable in the winter feafon to 
the fame difadvantage I have before ftated, from the defcending torrents 
of ,rain. 

We had here for the firft time an opportunity of feeing the peafantry 
of the country in a labouring capacity, and we could not help remark- 
ing, that their inaétivity in the performance of their work could only be 
equalled by the humble means they pofleffed for carrying it into execu- 
tion. There were about fifty men at work with common pick axes and 
fhovels; and to fupply the place of wheel-barrows for the removal of the 
earth from the higher to the lower fide of the road, the hide of an ox 
was {pread on the ground, and when as much earth was thrown upon it 
as would require the f{trength of two men to remove, the corners of the 
hide were drawn together by each of them, and in that ftate dragged to 
the deprefled fide of the road, and emptied where requifite, to preferve a 
gentle flope in the breadth; or elfe difcharged over the brink, and fent 
down the fide of the hill, The rocky parts, which were frequently met 
with, 


; that 
hills 
re the 
from 
vated 
1s ne- 
, and 


y-five 


vork ; 
eople 
ion at 
lence, 
ite the 
It and 
e and 
y well 
> fame 
fon to 
rrents 


antry 


mark- 
ly be 
xecu- 
s and 
bf the 
An OX 
bon it 
bf the 
ed to 
rve a 
1 fent 

met 
with, 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


with, were blown up with gunpowder; and the fragments, which fome- 
times were very large, inftead of being beaten into {mall pieces for the 
purpofe of making a more folid foundation for the pafling of carriages, 
were all moved to the lower fide of the road, and, like the earth, thrown 
from thence down the hill. By this injudicious practice the earth from 
the higher fide, which in moft places might have been contrived to have 
made a parapet along the brink, was not only carried down by thefe 
mafly fabrics of rock, but in many places the ground was torn up by 
them in their paflage down; and as it appeared to us that the brink was 
to be left in this open ragged ftate, the defcending rains muft foon caule 
gullies that will injure the road, and do it confiderable damage. The 
fuperintendents, however, feemed to have been aware that the torrents of 
water, defcending from the upper fide of the ':il! abov. where the line 
of road paffes, might have the effect in rainy weather |: wafhing away 
the loofe materials of which the road is compofed; for a channel was cut 
along the fide of the road neareft the mountain 2s seceive fuch wo‘er, and 
to carry it down its inclined plane; but it appr irea to us to be too fmall, 
and too much like a gutter to anfwer the purpofe for which it was in- 
tended. The lower fide, or brink, had neither bank of earth, nor rail of 
wood, as a fence; nor did we underftand that any fort of proteétion was 
defigned to be made, the want of which gave ‘: a very unfinifhed naked 
appearance, and in fome places, where the lower fide pafled over a f{teep 
part of the hill, or over perpendicular precipices formed by the rock, it 
appeared to be dangerous in a high degree; for in the night, or in the 
event of a horfe taking fright, or falling near this outer unprotected fide, 
there can be little chance of the ar*~al or its rider efcaping unhurt. In- 
deed it did not appear to us to be yrudent to venture too near to this 
fide in the day time, as the road had already crumbled down the hill, 
and had fallen into deep holes in many places. 

The labourers, I was informed, received their provifions, and a rial 
and an half per day, which according to the rate at which we receiy- 
ed the dollar, (viz.) at three fhillings and nine-pence each, makes the 
amount of their daily wages about feven-pence fterling, and the value of 
their food cannot exceed a groat. Thefe circumftances made it appear to 

3H2 us 


arr 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


us very extraordinary, that ina country where the expence of labour 
did not exceed eleven pence per day, more perfons were not employed 
in agriculture, and other rural improvements ; efpecially as the foil and 
climate feemed to be well adapted for cultivation, and the fituation of 
the country infured a ready market for every kind of produce ; of which, 
there could be no doubt, an abundance would eafily be procured, to re- 
ward the labours of induftry. By the introduétion. of a greater propor- 
tion of the common neceflaries of life, and by the obtaining a few of its 
comforts, it is ‘reafonable to fuppofe that a general fpinit for exertion 
would be diffufed amongft the lower orders of the people, who might 
be taught, by encouragement, to prefer a life of diligence and attivity 
to that fupinenefs which at prefent difgraces the larger part of the com- 
munity. The fubmiffive obedience that is here paid to every regulation 
or reftraint impofed by the priefts, gave us reafon to believe that it might 
be within their power to infift that each individual fhould employ him- 
felf, or be employed by others, a certain number of hours eaci day, 
cither in his own garden, or in the general hufbandry of the country ; 
for which certain rewards, proportionate to the exertion, fhould be 
affigned as an incentive to a life of induflry. This would foon produce 
an inclination for employment, which would not only promote the ge- 
neral happinefs of the people, but would be the means of fecuring to 
every one, in proportion to his diligence, the comforts that would cer- 
tainly arife from this change in the prefent ceconomy of their lives. In- 
ftead of the univerfal apathy to work that feemed to pervade the whole 
of the labouring clafs, who were dragged to their employment, without 
any felf-impulfe, like an ox to the yoke, their daily labour would be un- 
dertaken with alacrity ; and, in looking forward to the advantages that 
would refult from their exertion, they might foon be ftimulated to pre- 
fer the habits of induftry to thofe of fupinenefs and indolence. 

On reaching the top of this range of hills, we could plainly difcern the 
neat-looking village of Cafa Blanco, which added greatly to the appear- 
ance of the country we had left behind. The road forward to St. Jago 
defcends on the north-caft fide of thefe hills, but it had not fo many an- 
gles 


ibour 
loyed 
i] and 
ion of 
vhich, 
to re- 
opor- 
of its 
ertion 
might 
tivity 
-com- 
lation 
might 
, him- 
u day, 
Intry ; 
Id be 
oduce 
he ge- 
ng to 
i cer- 
&. In- 
whole 
ithout 
e un- 
s that 
Pp pre- 


rn the 
p pear 
Jago 
y ane 


gles 


© ia colli ii 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


gles or returns in it as that by which we had afcended on the other fide, 
becaufe the intermediate valley, between this range of hills and the moun- 
tains before us which we had yet to pafs, was confiderably more eleva- 
ted from the level of the fea, than the plain on which Cafa Blanco is 
fituated. 

After breakfaft, we proceeded on our journey along a very narrow 
path, which, without a guide, might have been eafily miftaken, as there 
were many fimilar to it, in various direétions, through a foreft of finall 
trees, that continued for about four miles. About four in the afternoon 
we ftopped at a mud hovel, at the diftance of nearly five miles from 
the mountain of Praow. The country we had paffed through pofleffed 
little to entertain, and lefs to intereft, the traveller: its general charac- 
ter was fimilar to that over which we had _ paffed before, excepting that 
it was more wooded, without any objects to vary the fcene ; and being 
much fatigued with our new mode of conveyance, and the heat of the 
weather, the advice of the dragoons to make this {pot our refting place 
for the night, was willingly acceded to by all parties. Some lamb and 
poultry were foon procured for dinner, which was drefled by our cook, 
and both proved to be very good. Our table was {pread under the 
fhade of fome vines clofe to the hovel, where we were attended by a few 
peafants brought thither by curiofity, who conduéted themfelves very 
refpeétfully. We retired very early to our blankets, whi as before, 
were {pread in the hovel on the bare ground. 

By the recommendation of our guides, we were on horfeback at three 
the next morning, that we might avoid the intenfe heat to which, they 
ftated, we fhould be expofed in afcending the lofty fummits of Praow; 
we accomplifhed this before fun-rife by the new road, which made thirty- 
two paffes or returns on its fide, cut out ina manner fimilar to the other 
parts of it over which we had already travelled. In afcending at this 
early hour, we found the air fo very cool, that great coats or warmer 
clothing would have been very acceptable ; and we all were of opini- 
on, that the confideration which had tempted our guides to recom- 
mend our travelling thus early, was more to inure a refting place the 
next 


42l 


795+ 


April. 


— 


vr 


7] 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


1795. next evening amongft fome of their particular friends, than to avoid 
uw— the heat; a meafure on which, however, much of our comfort might 
very poffibly depend. 

From the top of Praow the landfcape was very interefting. To the 
eaftward {tretched the extenfive valley in which St. Jago is fituated, and 
which was terminated by the lofty ftupendous Andes, whofe fummits ex- 
hibit perpetual winter. In the oppofite direétion the view of the coun- 
try was not lefs worthy of our attention; a great number of mud hovels 
“were now difcerned, that had before efcaped our notice as we had tra- 
velled along, and we now underftood that the valley through which we ° 
had juft paffed was confiderably more inhabited, efpecially near Praow, 
than thofe parts of the country nearer to Valparaifo. The people are 
chiefly peafantry, whofe principal employment is to take care of fome 
oxen and fheep that feed in the vicinity of their feveral huts. 

We defcended Praow to the north-eaft, by fewer paffes than we had 
afcended on its oppofite fide, as the valley in which St. Jago is built is 
much higher than the other two acrofs which we had travelled; the ge- 
neral chara¢ter of the country being that of an inclined plane rifing 


towards St. Jago, although its furface is broken by the ridges of - 
mountains before defcribed. The road ftill continued in an eaftern di- | be 
re€tion, and was here as well made and as broad as the turnpike roads in a a 
England. On either fide were feveral fmall orchards, and a few planta- : n 
tions with fome indifferent pafture land, on which cattle were feen graz- q 
ing under the fhade of a few fcattered trees; but the general want of 4 f 
cultivation gave the face of the country a barren and wild appearance, ae E 
deftitute of any feature that could indicate our approaching fo large . # 
and populous a city as that of St. Jago; the only people we faw were two ie Cc. 
or three travellers, and a few muleteers. Lag h 

We {topped to breakfaft about fifteen miles from the capital, whofe E g 
lofty fpires were now plainly difcerned, towering above the numerous C4 - 
houfes which the city appeared to contain. Notwithftanding our pre- © 
fent vicinity to fo large a town, we found no other place for the accom- tl 
modation of travellers than the mud hovel, where we were entertained in ‘ 


the fame way as we had been before; and where, like the others at which 
1 we 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


we had ftopped, there was no fign of any improvement whatever, either 
in the building, or in any other refpeét that might add to the comfort 
of life; the fame want of cleanlinefs, and wretched condition which I 
have before had occafion to remark, continued here to debafe the cha- 
racter of the inhabitants, who, notwithftanding their external appearance 
of wretchednefs and mifery, wore neverthelefs a contented look, and, to- 
gether with a cheerful countenance poffeffed a difpofition to oblige that 
was extremely grateful to our feelings, though their exceffive indolence 
and inaétivity created in us a mixed fentiment of pity and reproach. In 
addition to the ufual fupplies we had found on our journey, we here pro- 
cured fome excellent water melons of luxuriant growth and in high per- 
fe€tion, which were very refrefhing and acceptable. 

Having finifhed our breakfaft we again refumed our journey; the road 
was level, broad, and firm, and we had not travelled far, before on each 
fide of it were feen plantations and vineyards, in each of which a neat 
white houfe was generally fituated at a little diftance from the road. The 
appearance of cultivation and fertility in thefe low lands, when contrafted 
with the ftupendous fummits of the Andes, produced a moft agreeable 
effeét, and rendered this part of our journey very pleafant and enter- 
taining. After a {mart ride of nearly two hours, we arrived at a houfe 
about a mile from the capital, where fatigue, and a journey of ninety 
miles, made it neceffary that we fhould halt; not only for the purpofe of 
taking fome reft and refrefhment, but alfo that we might equip ourfelves 
for the vifit of ceremony we were about to make to the Captain General. 
From hence I difpatched one of the dragoons who had attended us with 
a letter to His Excellency, announcing our arrival in the vicinity of the 
capital, and ftating, that with his permiffion we would do ourfelves the 
honor of paying our refpeéts to him.at the palace in the evening; and I 
gave further direétions to the dragoon, to procure and fend from St. Jago, 
carriages fufficient to convey thither the whole party. In the mean time 
our dinner was provided and ferved, and it was our intention as foon as 
that fhould be over to drefs ourfelves in all our beft apparel, that we 
might make as uniform an appearance on this occafion as our feveral 
ftocks of clothing would enable us to do; for the extreme length of the 


voyage 


i 


423 
1705. 
April. 

—y—- 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


voyage had deprived moft of the party of the principal parts of their 
wardrobe, and we had fcarcely a coat or hat that was fit for common 
ufe, much lefs for an occafion like this. In the midft of our endeavours 
to make as fmart an appearance as we could contrive, the dragoon re- 
turned, accompanied by an officer from the Captain General, whom he 
fent for the purpofe of complimenting us and congratulating us on our 
arrival, and of defiring that we would immediately repair to the palace, 
on horfes which he had fent for the purpofe of conveying us in a fuitable 
manner to the capital. 

Although it was by no means my intention to have made fo public 
an entry as this arrangement of the Prefident’s would neceffarily expofe 
us to, yet it appeared to me that we could not decline it without giving 
umbrage, or perhaps offence; we therefore endeavoured to equip our- 
felves in the beft manner we were able, and in doing fo we referved our 
uniforms, which were extremely rotten and unfit for any fervice on horle- 
back, for the purpofe of appearing in on our vifit of ceremony to His 
Excellency. The frefli horfes which had been fent from St. Jago, we 
had imozined to be like thofe which had brought us from Valparaifo, 
but, to our great aftonifhment, thofe which had now arrived from the 
Prefident under the care and direétions of another officer, feemed to be 
very high-bred animals; and were all richly caparifoned with fine faddles 
and bridles, and faddle cloths richly decorated, and fringed with gold and 
filver lace, according very ill with the drefs in which we were under the 
neceflity of appearing. All my former objeétions to a public entry were 
now greatly increafed, and I became very defirous that we might be per- 
mitted to vifit St. Jago in a more private manner; but on reprefenting 
this to the officers, inftead of acceding to the wifhes of myfelf and party, 
whips and f{purs were inftantly produced, that nothing might be wanting 
to complete our appearance on horfeback in every particular. The ufe 
of the fpurs however was generally declined by us all, left fome embar- 
raffment or mifchance fhould take place from their being unintentionally 
applied, whilft our thoughts were engaged by the new objeéts that were 
likely to attraét our attention as we pafled through the ftreets of the city. 
‘Frivial as this circumftance may appear, yet to the officer who had charge 

of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


heir 4 of this efcort it was a matter of the firft importance. He not only ufed A 
ae j all his eloquence to perfuade us to wear the fpurs, but even cxpoftula- --\— 
anes ted with us on the impropriety of appearing without them, and the un- 
ieee 1 reafonablenels of our declining fo effential a part of drefs; all his m- 
ie q treaties were not, h: ever, fufhcient to overcome our objcétions, and 
ae q ; to his great mortification we mounted without them, and proceeded to- 
lace, q wards the capital, with a true military {tep, attended by the two officers, 
table J and our former guides the dragoons. 

q The inconvenience. we experienced on firft fetting out, from, being 
able ‘ equipped in this very extraordinary manner, was greatly increafed by the 
<pofe ; crowds of people who had affembled to fee our cavalcade pafs along, 
iving a in which they were fully gratified by the flownefs of our pace, until we 
ae a arrived at the palace; where, on our alighting, we were received by a 
deur guard which was turned out on the occafion, and were conduéted in 
Reeies i form to the audience chamber. Here we were received by His Excel- 
> His lency Don Ambrofio Higgins de Vallenar, with that fort of unaffected 
0, we welcome in which neither ceremony nor flattery appeared, and which 
rato, amply repaid us for all the little fufferings we had endured in the courle of 

the ; our journey. ‘This polite and cordial reception we had indeed anticipa- 
tobe : ted from the reports we had received, before our departure from Valpa- 
Addles raifo, and afterwards on the road to St. Jago. His Excellency’s charac- 
and a ter, not only in refpeét of his great attention and urbanity to ftrangers, 
r the af but of his parental care and conftant folicitude for the general happinefs 
were and comfort of all the people who lived under his government, were 
per- 4 the con{tant topics of our converfation; and it is not to be wondered at 
nting i if, on this occafion, we became inftantly impreffed with the juftice which 
party, iq report had done to his virtues, by his congratulations and hearty welcome 
nting E | to the capital of Chili, which were delivered by him in our own language 
Barta with a fluency that greatly excited our aftonifhment, when we were in- 
has formed by His Excellency, that he had now been refident in New Spain 
nally twenty-four years, during which time very few opportunities had occur- 
were rea to him for fpeaking Englifh, We now learned from Don Am- 
city. brofio himfelf that he was a native of Ireland, from whence he had 
arge ; Vou. III. a] 


been 
of 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


been abfent upwards of forty years, that at an early period of his life 
he had entered into the Englifh army ; but not obtaining in that fer- 
vice the promotion he had expected, he had embraced more advantage- 
ous offers on the continent. His firft commiffion in the fervice of His 
Catholic Majefty was in the corps of engineers, from whence he exchanged 
into the dragoons, and was foon raifed to the rank of lieutenant-colonel ; 
m this fituation he ferved for fome time in Old Spain, and afterwards in 
this country, until he obtained the diftinguifhed poft of military comman- 
der on the frontiers of Chili, and governor of Conception. In this 
fervice he was em ployed twelve years, and had the good fortune, by the 
conflant exercife of his humanity, and an uniform attention to the com- 
forts of the native inhabitants of the country, fo to fubdue the natural 
fiercenefs of their difpofitions, as to induce them to fubmit to the go- 
vernment of Spain. For this effential fervice he was promoted about 
the year 1783 to the exalted ftation he now fills ; fince which time he has 
been honored with repeated marks of approbation and diftinétion by 
His Catholic Majefty, who has been pleafed to confer upon h'm the or- 
ders of Charles the Third, and St. James, with the rank of licutenant- 
general in the Spanifh army. 

A. room of confiderabie dimenfions was allotted to me in the palace, 
and a large apartment adjqining to it was appropriated to the ufe of Mr. 
Puget and the reft of the officers, in which were a fufficient number of 
fmall beds for the party, covered with thin gauze, as a protection againft 
the mufquitos. The two dragoons who had attended us from Valpa- 
raiio were now appointed to be ufeful to us in the capacity of fervants ; 
and every other matter was attended to, ordered, and fettled, that evening, 
which could in any way contribute to render cvr flay at St. Jago, and 
our refidence in the palace, as pleafant as poffibie. Nor did the polite- 
nefs of the Prefident end here, for, previoufly to the fupper being an- 
nounced, he introduced to our acquaintance Don Ramon de Rofas, the 
corrigidor, and Don Francis Caffada, a captain of dragoons, who recei- 
ved the Prefident’s dire€tions to ufe his utmoft endeavours in fhewing us 
every thing in St. Jago worthy the attention of ftrangers, and to make us. 
known to the principal families refiding in the city. 

The 


life 
fer- 
ge- 
His 
ged 
jel 7 
sin 
an- 
this 
the 
om- 
tural 
> gO- 
bout 
> has 
n by 
e or- 
ant- 


alace, 
Mr. 
er of 
rain{t 
alpa- 
Ants 5 
ning, 
and 
olite- 
an- 
, the 
recel- 


g us 


ke us. 


The 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


The fupper, confifting of a great variety of hot difhes, was ferved up 
on filver, at which no perfon was prefent but Don Ambrofio the Prefi- 
dent,.Don Ramon de Rofas and ourfelves; all fort of ceremony was 
now laid afide, and, agreeably to the repeated intreaties of His Excel- 
lency, we confidered and felt ourfelves as much at home as if we had 
been partaking a repaft in England with our moft intimate acquaintances. 
The firft part of our converfation was chiefly engrofled by inquiries re. 
{petting our late difcoveries on the north-weft coaft of America. In 
this I was very happy to learn, that no part of our conduét, or tran{- 
actions with any of the fubjeéts of His Catholic Majefty, appeared to have 
given the leaft caufe for jealoufy, or complaint againft our little commu- 
nity ; and I was alfo much gratified by the very handfome compliments 
that were paid to mylelf and officers, on the fuccefsful labours of our 
voyage. After the curtofity of the Prefident and Don Ramon was fome- 
what fatisfied on this fubjeét, the former, with great indignation, recount- 
ed a circumftance which I cannot forbear to mention, although, being 
a matter only of converfation, it may poflibly appear too extraneous. 

At the time when His Excellency was the governor at Conception, 
and during the late American, French, and Spanifh war with England, 
an enterprize was meditated and planned by the Court of Great-Britain 
again{ft that place, which was then the feat of government in the king- 
dom of Chili. When Sir Edward Hughes failed with his fleet from Eng- 
land to the Eaft-Indies, it was generally believed that he was to have 
acted only in defence of our eftablifhments in that quarter, but be- 
fore that admiral had reached the firft place of his deftination in the Eaft- 
Indies, the Prefident {tated to us, that he was in poffeffion of a copy of 
Sir Edward Hughes’s orders, which had been tranfmitted to him at Con- 
ception from Old Spain, by which documents he became informed, that 
an attack was purpofed to be made by that fleet from the Eaft-Indies on 
the Spanifh fettlements in South America, and that Conception was the 
placeagainft which the enterprize would firft be attempted. In confequence 
of this intelligence a general alarm took place throughout all the efta- 
blifhments on the coaft; the fortifications, which had been much negleét- 
ed, were repaired and {trengthened; the number of troops attached to each 

Ce were 


427 
1795: 
April, 
(ean pened 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


were greatly augmented; and every preparation was made for the pur- 
pole of aéting vigoroufly on the defenfive ; and to this circumftance alone 
His Excellency attributed the abandoning of the defign, that had beets 
concerted by the Britifh Cabinet. 

Soon after fupper was ended, a number of ladies made their appear- 
ance at the iron grating that protected the window of the palace, beg- 
ging our acceptance of nofegays, and requefting that we would join the 
reft of their party, aflembled at a little diftance from the palace; but as 
I thought it would be more refpeétful to pay our compliments to His 
Excellency in the audience room, which formality was fixed for the fuc- 
ceeding morning, before we fhould vifit any one elfe in the city, we 
declined their obliging invitation for the prefent, with a promife of ac- 
knowledging their civility the following day. 

We did not retire until an early hour, when we found our beds tole- 
rably good, but we could not help being much difgufted at the infuffe- 
rable uncleanlinefs of our apartments; the floors of which, but more 
particularly that appointed for the refidence of the officers, were co- 
vered with filth and dirt. Application was inftantly made to the dra- 
goons, to procure us fome brufhes or brooms in order to {weep it out, 
but, to our great mortification, they told us that fuch things were not 
in common ufe at St. Jago; fo that the only alleviation we could obtain 
was that of water to fprinkle the duft, which was fo thick in the officers’ 
apartment, that it would rather have required a fhovel than a brufh for 
its removal. 

Every funday morning the Prefident has a levee, which is ufually at- 
tended by the military people, and the principal inhabitants of the city 
and furrounding country. Foy the purpofe of being formally introduced 
at this levee, we made ourlelves as fmart as the exhaufted ftate of our 
refpe€tive wardrobes would allow, and then repaired to the audience 
chamber ; this room, which is fpacious, was neatly, but not extrava- 
gantly, furnifhed; the anti-chamber was large in proportion, and the 
entrance to each was from the ground, through large folding doors. In 
the anti-chamber were the portraits of the feveral prefidents of Chili, 
from the firft eftablifhment of the Spanifh authority in this part of 

the 


Wp eae ee 


Ss naar 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the country, to the prefent governor, whofe portrait was one of the 
number, he infide walls of thefe rooms were covered with glazed 
tiles, refembling thofe from Holland, for about eight or ten feet from 
the floor, which had a good effect, and was a great relief to the dead 
white plafter of the remaining part up to the ceiling. At the upper 
end of the audience-room was a fmall ftage, raifed a few feet from 
the floor, upon which was placed the chair of ftate, ornamented with a 
canopy of red damafk, and decorated with the portraits of their Ca- 
tholic Majefties, which were placed on each fide of the Prefident’s 
chair. ‘The levee was attended by about one hundred and twenty 
perfons, the greater part of whom appeared in the regimentals of the 
eftablifhed militia of the country; and, in fuch a well-dreffed company, 
our thread-bare uniforms fuffered much by comparifon. I had, however, 
taken the precaution to apologize to His Excellency for the reduced 
ftate of our apparel, and he did not fail, on introducing us to his friends, 
to enumerate the hardfhips we had undergone, to ftate the length of 
time we had been abfent from the civilized world, and to conclude, on 
every occafion, with fome panegyric on the laborious undertaking in 
which we had been fo long engaged. ‘This very polite and friendly at- 
tention foon relieved us from any embarraffment which, at firft, it was 
natural we fhould feel in being thus unexpeétedly thrown into a circle of 
gentlemen, who made a very fplendid appearance, and who feemed to 
have great pride in conforming to the fafhion of the day, and the eti- 
quette of court parade. From all the gentlemen, to whom we were made 
known, we received the moft flattering congratulations on our arrival 
at St. Jago, accompanied by very friendly invitations to their houles ; _ 
and every one appeared to be anxious to make our time pafs as pleafantly 
as the circumftances of the place would permit. The fpecimen we had 
already received from our very hofpitable friends at Valparaifo, left us 
no room to doubt the fincerity of thefe ftrangers, whofe kind folicitude 


to gratify our inclinations on every trivial occafion, was infinitely 
greater than could reafonably have been expected. After we had feve- 
rally paid our compliments to the Prefident, the levee broke up, and 
we followed the reft of the party, accompanied by Don Ramon and 

Captain 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Captain Caflada, to the levee of the Bifhop of Chili, which always com- 
mences on the conclufion of the Prefident’s. Here we were again re- 
ceived with the fame politenefs and affability which had marked our re- 
ception at Don Ambrofio’s. ‘The Bifhop is addreffed by the title of 
Llluftrifima, and the palace in which he conftantly refides, in point of 
magnificence and fhow, exceeded, in a great degree, every houfe in St. 
Jago, not excepting the Prefident’s, to whom the Bifhop is the next per- 
fon in rank and confequence. The rooms here were not {fo large as 
thofe of the royal palace, but they were fufficiently capacious and. well 
proportioned ; the walls were hung with yellow filk, feltooned at the 
top, the furniture was rather gaudy than elegant, yet every object be- 
fpoke the richnefs and exalted flation of the illuftrious owner. The 
Bifhop was drefled in a loofe clerical garment of purple filk, buttoned 
clofe, with a fort of apron that extended round his waift, and reach- 
ed below his knees. This part of his drefs, I was given to under{tand, 
is commonly worn in Spain by the dignitaries of the church. 

The fame perfons who had attended the levee of His Excellency, re- 
paired with us to the palace of the Bifhop; but their deportment here, in 
point of relpect, far exceeded that which had been fhewn to the Prefident, 
Many priefts attended the levee, one of whom always conduéted to the 
Bifhop the perfon who was to be introduced, who when fufficiently near, 
bent one knee, and received in that fubmiffive attitude the benediétion of 
the church. On this occafion, the Bifhop with one hand made the 
figure of a cro{fs over the head of the perfon introduced, whilft he pre- 
fented a ring which he wore on a finger of the other, to receive an 
additional homage, paid by touching it with the lips, as in the aét of 
kifling. This ceremony was not reftri€ted to a few, for we did not 
perceive any one in the group that did not go through it; and, as 
I had made ita conftant rule to conform, on all occafions, to the inno- 
cent manners and cuftoms of whatever country we might chance to 
vilit, I fhould not have hefitated to perform the like ceremony on our 
intreduétion, had the fhghteft hint been given, either by Don Ramon 
or Captain Caflada, that it would be expected from us; but, as their 

1 filence 


Pee eee ene ee ee od =n - we 


com- 
n re- 
Ir re- 
le of 
int of 
in St. 
t per- 
ge as 
1 well 
it the 
ct be- 

The 
ttoned 
reach. 


r{tand, 


YY, re- 
ere, 1n 
fident. 
to the 
near, 
ion of 
e the 
e pre- 
ve an 
aét of 
d not 
id, as 
inno- 
ce to 
n our 
amon 

their 
tlence 


PN RII OSE ERLE Ht 9 UNE 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


filence left us completely to our own feclings, we cach of us fimply made 
our bow, which appeared to be as well accepted, and to receive as gra- 
cious a benediétion, as if we had adopted the other cuftomary forma- 
lity. 

The Bifhop made many very pertinent inquiries refpeéting the coun- 
tries we had vifited, and feemed to have great pleafure in the little in- 
formation we were able to afford him; for, at this time, we had not an 
interpreter with us, who fo perfectly comprehended what we deferibed in 
Englifh as to make a faithful tranilation of it to the Prelate; and Ido not 
recolleét that I ever felt more real regret, than on this occafion, that I 
did not fufficiently underftand the Spanifh language to hold a converfa- 
tion with this apparently intelligent gentleman, who was pleafed to em- 
brace every opportunity of beftowing fome encomium on our late re- 
fearches, and to offer his congratulations on our having fo happily con- 
cluded them. 

From the Bifhop’s palace we were conducted, by our friends, to the 
houfes of the judges and great officers of ftate, in all of which we 
experienced the fame cordiality and friendlinefs, and received the fame 
prefling intreaties to vifit their families as had uniformly been offered 
by every perfon with whom we had become acquainted fince our firft 
arrival in this hofpitable country. About two o’clock we returned to 
the palace, where we found the Prefident waiting our arrival for dinner, 
which was ferved up ona plain deal ill-conflruéted table, by no means 
correfponding with the magnificence of the dinner fervice, which was 
intirely compofed of filver. ‘The company confifted of the Prefident, 
Don Ramon de Rolas, Captain Caffada, and ourfelves; and the con- 
verfation turned chiefly on the late labours of our furvey, and the dif- 
coveries we had made on the coaft of North-Weft America, which 
were repeatedly honored with the moit flattering commendations from 
the Captain-General, who app ared to be extremely interefted in the 
events which we related. 

After drinking coffee, which is always brought in as foon as. the cloth 
is removed, every one retired to his private apartment, a cuftom which 
fo generally prevails in this kingdom, that, between the hours of three 

in 


432 


1705+ 
April. 
ements 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOV. *% 


in the afternoon and fix in the evening, no perfon is feen in the ttreets, 
the fhops are fhut up, and the fame {lillnefs prevails as if it were aétually 
night. Accuflomed as we had hitherto been to a life of conftant anx- 
icty, and to be fatisfied with little reft, we were at firft greatly at a 
lofs to difcover how we fhould employ the hours which were thus dedi- 
cated to fleep by the fociety in which we were now living; but the ex- 
ercife of the morning, the heat of the weather, the want of occupation, 
and the natural inclination to {leep after a hearty meal, foon reconciled 
us to the practice of the country; and we all indulged in a /fefla, (or 
afternoon's nap) and enjoyed it I believe full as much as the moft vo- 
luptuous Spaniard in the capital. 

Accompanied by our new friends, we were introduced in the evening 
to the family of Sen* Cotappas, a Spanifh merchant of confiderable emi- 
nence. A defcription of this gentleman’s manfion will ferve to convey 
an idea of the manner in which all the houfes in the city of St. Jago 
are built. This, like moft of the principal habitations, formed a qua- 
drangle, inclofing an open area, or court-yard, of about thirty yards 
{quare, one fide of which is a dead wall that runs parallel to the flreet ; 
and, as none of the houfes are more than one ftory in height, this wall 
totally obfcures every appearance of the buildings within. The entrance 
into the fore-court from the ftreet, was through a gateway in this wali, 
to which the houfe fronted, occupying the oppofite fide, whilft the wings, 
or two remaining fides of the fquare to the right and left, were, as 
is moft commonly the cafe, divided into offices for fervants, and fleep- 
ing apartments. Sen" Cotappas’s houfe confifted of an anti-chamber, a 
large kind of dining-parlour, and bed-chamber. All the rooms were 
very fpacious, the principal one meafured about fixty feet in length, 
twenty-five feet in breadth, and I fhould think the height of it was about 
equal to the breadth. This room was fuperbly, or rather finely, furnifh- 
ed; from the ceiling were fufpended two glafs luftres, or chandeliers ; 
and on the walls were fome paintings, the fubjcéts of which were taken 
from the facred writings ; at each end of the room were large folding 
doors. The company we here met were divided into two parties ; the 
Jadies were feated on cufhions on one fide of the room, and the gentle- 
3 men 


‘eets, 
ually 
anx- 
at a 
dedi- 
2 CX- 
ition, 
ciled 
, (Or 
it vo- 


ening 
emi- 
ynvey 
Jago 
| qua- 
yards 
treet ; 
wall 
rance 
wali, 
ings, 
e, as 
leep- 
per, a 
were 


ngth, 
hbout 
nifh- 


liers ; 


aken 


Iding 
; the 
rntle- 


men 


“ROUND THE WORLD. 


tcn were fitting oppofite to them on chairs, among{t whom we were in- 


flantly furnifhed with feats. ‘The entertainments of the evening confifted Comp 


In a concert and ball, in both of which the ladies had the principal 
fhare, and {eemed to take great pleafure in excelling in both the accom- 
plifhments of mufic and dancing. ‘The whole of the concert was per- 
formed by the ladies; one led the band on the piano-forte, whilft the 
others filled up the accompaniments on violins, flutes, and the harp ; 
the whole was extremely well conducted, and afforded us a mufical treat, 
to which we had been long intire f{trangers. 

We fhould have been extremely happy to have availed ourfelves of the 
prefling intreaties of Sen" Cotappas to join with the ladies in dancing, 
but as their country dances appeared to be very difficult, and as no one 
amongft us could recolleét the figures of any of thofe we had been ac- 
cuftomed to in England, we were under the mortification of acknow- 
ledging our ignorance, and declining the intended civility of the mafler 
of the houfe. From this difappointment in the pleafures of the evening 
we were, however, in fome meafure relieved, by fome of the ladies, who 
had retired from the dance, fending us a meflage, requefting we would 
join their party on the cufhions; with this we inftantly complied, and 
confidered ourfelves greatly indebted for this mark of condefcenfion, as it 
was departing from the eftablifhed rules of their fociety on fuch occafions. 
The generality of the ladies in St. Jago are not wanting in perfonal charms, 
and moft of thofe we had the pleafure of meeting this evening might 
rather be confidered handfome than otherways; they are, in general, 
brunettes, with expreffive black eyes, and regular features; but a want of 
that neatnefs, which is fo much valued amongft Englifhmen, and fo much 
the pride of my fair countrywomen, was confpicuous in many particu- 
lars, efpecially in the total negleét of their teeth, which are fuflered to 
become intolerably dirty. This inattention was not only in a very high 
degree offenfive, but it appeared to us incompatible with the pains that 
feemed to have been taken in the decoration of their perfons ; for, at this 
affembly, they were all fuperbly drefled, agreeably to the fafhion of the 
country. The moft fingular part of their drefs was a fort of bell-hooped 

Vou. III. 3K petticoat, 


433 


1795+ 
April. 


SF aaa. Some, eee a wenten, 


ee ee 
el 


DENRA EES See 


2 


1795+ 
Api. 


ep 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


petticoat, that reached from the waift to juft below the knees, though 
fome of them did not wear them quite fo low; immediately beneath this 
external part of their drefs appeared the under linen garment, the bot- 
tom of which, as well as the taffels of their garters, was fringed with gold 
lace. 

The general deportment of the ladies was lively and unreferved; and 
they very obligingly loft no opportunity of relieving us from every little 
embarraffinent, to which the diladvantages we laboured under, in not un- 
derftanding their language, frequently 2xpofed us; and I verily believe 
that there were few occafions, during the whole of our voyage, in which 
our want of knowledge of the Spanifh language was more fincerely re- 
gretted ; as it deprived us of the pleafure of enjoying the lively fallies of 
wit which we had reafon to believe occurred very often in the female 
circles, by the laughter and applaufe that their converfation fo frequently 
occafioned. This was certainly an evidence of their natural ingenuity, 
though it did not amount toa proof of their minds having been duly cul- 
tivated; and it is not without concern that I ftate, from the tefti- 
mony of their own countrymen, that the education of the female part 
of the fociety in St. Jago is fo fcandaloufly negle€ted, as to confine the 
knowledge of reading and writing to a few of the ladies only. Some of 
them had the goodnefs to give us their names in writing, that we might 
the more eafily difcover and learn the true pronunciation of them ; thefe 
were always written in large letters; but I do not mean from this cir- 
cumftance, or from our having received but few of their names, to infer, 
that the education of the fex is as much confined as was reprefented 
tous: yet the circumftance of their being totally unacquainted with any 
other language than the dialeét of the Spanifh {poken at St. Jago, evinced 
that their education was of a homely nature. 

Excepting the inftances which are unhappily to be found amongft the 
fex in England, the female part of the fociety poffefs a characteriftic de- 
licacy of fentiment and expreflion ; but here fuch a degree of levity is 
obferyvable in the conduét of the ladies, not only in their converfation, 
but in dancing and on other occafions, as to give a ftranger, and parti- 

A cularly 


TRAM ARs meme as a 


RSET SF sn thst tetra nt a OO 


ough 
| this 
bot- 
gold 


and 
little 
t uNne- 
lieve 
vhich 
ly re- 
les of 
>male 
ently 
nuity, 
y cul- 
telti- 
> part 
e the 
me of 
\ ight 
thefe 
is cir- 
infer, 
ented. 
h any 


inced 


ft the 
ic de- 
ity Is 
ation, 
parti- 
ularly 


RN TIL IAT AS 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


cularly an Englifhman, no reafon to entertain a very exalted opinion 
of their virtue, but rather to imprefs him with notions prcjudicial to the 
female charaéter. I muft, however, in juftice to all thofe ladies with 
whom I had the honor of being acquainted, ond they were very many, 
beg leave to ftate, that I difcovered nothing that could impeach the fide- 
lity of the married women, nor attaint the character of the fingle ladies ; 
notwithftanding that the manners and cuftoms of the country in which 
they live fanétion a freedom of fpeech, and a familiarity of behaviour, that 
tended, in our opinion, to abridge the fex of a portion of that refpect from 
the men, of which, as Englifhmen, we did not like to fee them deprived. 
To them we were indebted for the moft civil and obliging attention that 
can be imagined during our refidence in the capital ; their doors were 
always open to receive us; their houfes were in a manner our homes ; 
their entertainments were formed for the fole purpofe of affording us 
amufement ; and no endeavour was omitted that could, in any way, con- 
tribute to the pleafure we received in mixing with their fociety. Nor 
were we lefs indebted to all thofe gentlemen to whom we became known, 
who exercifed the utmoft of their powers to render our flay at St. Jago 
agreeable, by fhewing us every thing worthy of our notice, and by com- 
municating every information that was either ufeful or entertaining. We 
were under particular obligations to Don Ramon de Rofas and Captain 
Caffada, for their unremitted attention, and goodnefs in introducing us 
to all the refpeétable families refiding in St. Jago. 

The time that we remained in the capital of Chili, paffed nearly in the 
fame manner as I have already defcribed, without the occurrence of any 
incidents to require a particular relation; for this reafon I fhall pals over 
the feveral pleafant engagements we had in the different families {uring 
our refidence in this hofpitable place, and proceed to give fome ac ount 
of the public buildings in the city, and to detail fuch other informa ion 
as we were enabled to colleét, and which, probably, may not be unac- 
ceptable to my readers. In doing this, however, I fhall not pledge myfelf 
for the authenticity of the faéts, nor the precifion of the circumflances I 
am about to relate, becaufe I was not fufficiently acquainted with the 


3K 2 Spanifh 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Spam language to put the queftions that I wifhed to have refolved in 
a proper way mylelf, nor to acquire the information I fought for, in fo 
correct a manner as 1s defirable in inguiries of this nature; in addition 
to this difadvantage, I found it almoft impoffible, on a variety of occa- 
fions, to make our interpreters tranilate our queftions on fubjeéts on which 
they were not converfant, fo as to obtain, from thofe who were able ta 
reply to them, fatisfactory anfwers. 

‘The city of St. Jago, including the detached houfes, or fuburbs, I 
fhould fuppofe, cannot be Icfs than three or four miles in circumference ; 
but this is only by eftimation, as I did not converfe with any one who 
could, or did, anfwer me this queftion; but as the ftreets run at right 
angles to each other, and fome of them are little fhort of a mile in 
length, this computation cannot be very erroneous. The city is well 
fupplied with water from the river Mapocho, which has its fource in the 
mountains, at fome diftance from the capital, and is made to branch off 
in fuch a manner, on its approaching the town, as to pafs through. the 
principal {treets. This, ina hot climate, cannot but be fuppofed a very. 
great luxury, and as conducing extremely to the health of the inhabi- 
tants ; but the fame want of cleanlinefs that pervades the infces of the 
houles, here manifefted itfelf in the open air, and inftead of this ftream 
becoming the means by which the ftreets might have been kept conftant- 
ly {weet, it is rendered a moft infufferable nuifance, by the prodigious 
quantity of filth which 1s emptied into it from the houfes. As no care 
was taken that a fufficiency of waiter fhould be brought down to carry 
the foil and naitinefs away, nor to remove it in places where it forms 
ed obf{truétions to the current, and produced the moft offenfive exhala- 
tions; and as the flreets, which are narrow, are partially paved with 
{mall {tones in the middle, and with only a few flag-ftones for foot pal- 
fengers on the fides, our walking about the town was, from thefe circum. 
ftances, rendered very unpleafant. 

The river before mentioned, from whence the city is fupplied «with 
water, overflowed its banks, in the month of june, 1783, in confequence 
of an inundation, and ruthed down towards St. Jago, with fuch impetus 
Q ous 


A 


= Serena 


Meee ait 


OR ice ne oo a cae 


ae 


ed’ in 
in fo 
ition 
occa- 
vhich 
yle ta 


‘bs, L 
ence ; 
- who 
right 
ile in 
s well 
in the 
ch off 
rh. the 
a very: 
nhabi- 
of the 
ream 
{tant- 
igious 
care 
carry 
forms 
x hala- 
1 with 
t pal- 


rCunds. 


ewith 
uence 
petue 
ous 


RIT EEA 


etapa 


oe 


ae ee geet 


Ps 
= 
E 
. 
oy 


CAIDA RATES 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ous fury, that it demolifhed almoft all the dams that defende 1 the coun- 
try, did confiderable damage in the town, and filled every individual with 
fear and confternation left a fecond inundation fhould fucceed ; in which 
cafe, from the extremely defencelefs {tate in which thefe torrents had.left 
the city, there was great reafon to apprehend that not a fingle edifice 
would be left ftanding in the capital. ‘The prefent Captain-General gave 
immediate orders that plans fhould be made by the molt able and expe- 
rienced engineers.and architects, for the purpofe of: replacing a wall, or 
dam, that had principally defended the city from the river, and which 
had been deftoyed, at this time, by the inundating force of its waters ; 
but, notwithftanding that the defign he had in view was for the protection 
of St. Jago and the furrounding country, and to infure the fafety, inte- 
re{ts, and comforts of the inhabitants, yet, a popular party was made 
again{t him, as in the imftance of the new road, which he projected, and 
is now Carrying into execution between this place aud Valparaifo, and, 
after experiencing much fatigue, perplexity, and expence, It was not un- 
til the month of january, 1792, that he effeéted his purpofe fo far, as to 
begin the excavation for the new wall, or dam, againft the fide of 
the river. This will long remain a monument of his patriotifin and 
perfeverance, and he has now the gratification of hearing many of 
thofe who had before oppofed the undertaking, acknowledge this va- 
luable defign to be an effeétual protection again{t any future dan- 
ger. 

The wall is faid to have a founcu:ton fourteen feet below, and to rife 
as many feet above, the furfacc of the river; it appeared to be a very 
{trong work, well executed, and capabic of refitting any force or weight 
of water that may come againft it. [t not only affords complete fecurity 
to the town, but ferves as an ocreeable wait for the recreation of the 
inhabitants. On the fide next to the water a parapet wall is raifed, fuili- 
ciently high to prevent any accident in walking; it is about a quarter of 
a mile in length, and, at convenient diftances, flights of eafy and com- 
modious ftairs are judicioufly placed to alcend the wall. from whence a 
commanding view is obtained of St. Jago and the adjacent country. ‘The 

whole 


1793: - Hs |, 
April. tT 
Ce nnd | 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ot whole is built with brick and lime-mortar, and, on the firft ftone being 

w—.-—~ laid, an obelifk, in imitation of that in St. Peter’s fquare, and many 

others in Rome, was ereéted, on the pedeftal of which is the following 
infcription, in Spanifh : 


ala bape lg — amps 


sce Bie oiler rune ee 


D. O. M. 
In the reign of Charles the fourth : 
and 
During the Government of this Kingdom, 
by Don 
Ambrofio Higgins 
de 
Vallenar ; 
Who ordered 
Thefe dams to be conftru€ted 
in the year 


1792. 


There were two very fumptuous fabrics ere&ting in St. Jago, which, | 
when finifhed, as I was informed by the Prefident, would be unequalled pi 
in New Spain; the one is the Caflade Moneda, or the money-houfe, and a 
the other is the cathedral. £ 
#36 quadas At the diftance of about five quadras* to the fouthward of the princi- 
ee pal {quare, is ereéting, by order of His Catholic Majefty, the Money- 
Houle, or Mint. The fituation is open, healthy, and weil chofen for 
this extenfive and fpacious building, which appeared to be conftru€ting 
upon the plan of the public offices contained within Somerfet-Houfe in 
London, though the ftru€ture is by no means equal to that edifice, either 
in fize or magnificence. It is intended for the refidence of all the officers 
and people belonging to the Mint. ‘The apartments for the former are 
large and commodious, and the rooms for the latter are very convenient. 
To thefe are added a fort of hofpital for the fick, anda chapel for divine 
fervice. Large places are to be fitted up for the reception of the mate- 
rials and implements ufed in aflaying the precious metals, and feparating 
them 


eaters en 


eueiee ees 


— 
foe 


as 


ROUND THE WORLD. 439 We 


ing’ a them from the ore. The walls are built with large bricks, and the ce- 2195, ‘ice 
<i ° ‘ : ; pri. 4 

any 4 ment, or mortar, is from lime procured by the calcination of fhells. Part C+» (i 

ying q of the infide was plaftered with a moft delicate white fubftance, that had en 


the appearance of being very durable. Mott of the iron-work ufed in 
the building, and fuch as is neccflary for the implements, &c. ufed in 
the bufinefs of coining, is imported from Old Spain. Patterns for the an 
balconies, balufters, and rails, have been tranfmitted from St. Jago to rt 
Bifcay, which have been fent back in iron, moft perfeétly and fatisfactori- bh 

ly executed. All the wood made ufe of in this fabric is oak, excepting 

for the doors and windows, which are made of cyprefs. The principal 

front is to the north, and is about one hundred and fifty yards in length. 

Befides the door, or grand entrance, which is adorned with eight columns, 

there are cighteen inferior windows, and eighteen fuperior balconies. The 

two other fronts look to the eaft and to the weft, and are each of them 

one hundred and feventy-eight yards in length ; thefe are decorated in the 

fame manner as the principal front, with pillars and balconies, between | 
which are various efcutcheons, with devices alluding to the purpole for os 


hich, o | which the building is ereéted. The court-yard is forty-five yards {quare, 
alled | the whole adorned with columns, architrave, frize and cornice, which 
, and a extend round the court at fome little diftance from the building. The 
. principal entrance leads into a fpacious faloon; on the right are the 
inci- i apartments deftined for the fuperintendent, and on the left are to be thofe 
bney- 3 of the auditor; befide thefe, in the other two fronts, are the public we" 
h for . offices, the hall for drawing bills, the office for weighing gold and filver, q 
ing i the treafury, auditory, chapel, hofpital, &c. &c. After pafling through 
fe in ‘ the court-yard towards the fmelting-offices, we entered a paflage, four- % 
ither f teen yards wide, which led round all the workfhops and offices of labour : / 


cers the whole of the edifice is of the Doric order, and the diltribution of the 


r are offices and apartments appeared to have been well confidered and judi- bi 
ient. cioufly appropriated. ‘The communications were likewife commodious, “| 
vine and well concerted to facilitate the bufinefs between one office and 
ate- : another, and the whole together was a ftruCture well deferving our at- 

ting tention. 


hem a The 


440 


17935¢ 
April. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The architeé is profeffor Don Joa. Jocfea, difciple of the lieutenant. 


wey— general Don Francifco Savatini. firft architeét to His Catholic Majefty. 


Don Joefca undertook to finifh and complete this building for feven 
hundred thoufand dollars, and the Captain-Gencral, impreffed with a juft 
idea of the ufe and importance of fuch an eftablifhment, was induced 
to give his confent to the undertaking, as the calculation of the expence 
bore, in his eftimation, no proportion to the advantages it would after- 
wards infure, or the convenience it would afford. The architect, how- 
ever, feems to have been greatly miftaken in the money which he ftated 
the building would coft, as the Prefident affured me, he was clearly of 
opinion, that it would require a million and an half of dollars to be ex- 
pended on the edifice before it could be completely finithed. 

There is a fmall hill, about twelve quadras diftant from the princi- 
pal fquare, in the grounds belonging to the religious of the Dominician 
order, which is called St. Domingo. ‘This hill contains a quarry of free- 
fione, of a whitifh colour, foft, and eafily worked by the chiffel. The 
vicinity of this hill to the city, and the facility with which the ftones 
were to be procured from the quarry, induced the Bifhop Don Juan 
Gonzales de Melgarejo to begin the laborious undertaking of building 
a cathedral ; for which purpofe he gave forty-three thoufand dollars 
towards its.ere€tion, and laid the firft ftone of the edifice on the firft 
day of july, 1748. At this time there was not an artift in the kingdom 
of Chili to whofe ability a work of this defcription could be entrufted, for 
which reafon no particular plan was adhered to, and the architeéture 
feems to be a medley of whatever occurred to the perfons who fuperin- 
tended its conftruétion. The principal front is to the eaft; that fide 
which communicates with the epifcopal palace is to the fouth, and the 
north front runs parallel to the ftreet. The length of the building is 
about one hundred and twenty yards, its breadth is not lefs than thirty- 
five, and the height o! the middle aifle is eighteen yards. 

It was not until after thirty years were expired, that application was 
made to Madrid for z {l.ilful profeffional perfon to fuperintend the comple- 
tion of this edifice. In the year 1778, Don Joefca, the architect employed 


™m 


Fr 


B 
es 
q 
ye 


Pre 
mee oe Oe 


i oat sian 


* 


he 
fly. 
ven 
juft 
iced 
nce 
fter- 
1OW- 
ated 
ly of 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


in building the money-houfe, was appointed to this office, and, fortu- 
nately, at this time, the principal front was not begun. The plans he 
drew were fubmitted to the then prelate, Don Manuel! de Alday: and, on 
the firft day of march, in the year 1780, this artifl took upon himfelf the 
charge of the building, which, at this time, wanted only five arches to 
reach the line of the principal front; the elevation of which, I was 
given to underftand, is a clofe imitation of St. John de Lateran, and 
according to the defigns of the famous Barrominit. There are three 
doors in this fide, embellifhed with columns of the Ionic order; with- 
in is a handfome ftaircafe, that leads to light and elegant towers, which 
add greatly to the beautiful appearance of this front. The cathedral 
contains ten altars, and, although they appeared to have been con- 
{truéted without regard to any rule of proportion, yet they are well 
worthy of attention. The columns and pilafters of each are an excel- 
lent imitation of jafper; thefe are green, the pedeftals are red, the cor- 
nices yellow, the bafes and capitals are gilt, and the whole together pro- 
duces a very good effect. The colour of the ftone, with which this edi- 
fice is built, refembles that of the Portland {tone of England; but whe- 
ther it is of the fame durability, or not, time only will determine. The 
workmanthip of the mafon appeared to us to be ill executed, as few of 
the edges of the {tones were fo neatly wrought as to fit with exaétnefs. 
Spire: and other church ornaments, we were given to underftand, were 
intended to be ereéted, but the time when the building would be finifh- 
ed was not afcertained; the priefts, however, faid mafs in one part of it, 
which was fufficiently completed for that purpofe. 

A very large church is alfo conftruéting, under the dire€tion of the 
fame architeét; this ftruéture is built with bricks, its front is of the 
Doric order, with two large towers, in which confiderable knowledge of 
beauty and proportion feems to have been difplayed. The infide of 
this church is of the Ionic order, it contains three aifles and feven 
chapels. 

The gaols of the city having fallen into decay fome years ago, and 
becoming infecure for the confinement of prifoners, a large building, of 
the Tufcan order, was erected, and appropriated to this purpofe. This 

VoL. IIL gL {tructure 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ftru€ture has rather a magnificent appearance, and the diftribution of 
the cells and apartments it contains feems to have been made with confi- 
derable judgment. The centre of the building is occupied by a grand 
tower, in which is the city clock ; and the bell, which {trikes the retreat 
at nine o'clock ; after which, it becomes the duty of the watchmen to fe- 
cure all perfons of fufpicious appearance, or fuch as are found in the 
ftreets with unlawful weapons. 

Befide thefe public buildings, about half a quadra from the principal 
fquare is a houfe belonging to Sen" Don Jofe Ramirez de Saldana, per- 
petual regidor of St. Jago, anu one of its moft opulent citizens. The 
porch, which is in the centre of the principal front of this manfion, is 
decorated with Doric columns, and many pillars of the fame order are 
with confiderable tafte arranged on each fide of it. This building is re- 
puted to be the only one in the city in which the rules of architeéture 
have been ftri€tly obferved; and, on that account, it is highly efteem- 
ed by thofe of the inhabitants who have any knowledge of the art, or tafte 
for regular compofitions. 

A very good houfe was ereéting about fix quadras from the {quare be- 
fore mentioned, after a defign of Inigo Jones, as a country refidence for 
Sen" Don Jofe Antonio Aldunate, the Provifor General of this bifhop- 
rick, who is juftly extolled for his polifhed manners and hterary abili- 
ties. 

At the diftance of fourteen quadras from the fame fquare a chapel was 
building, at the expence of the friars belonging to the order of St. Fran- . 
cifco. The Doric prevails m the external compofition of this edifice, i 
but within the pillars are of the Corinthian order. It contains ten e 

i 


diftinét chapels, is dedicated to our Lady of Carmin, and is called the 
Little Convent. 

Having given fome account of the moft confpicuous public and . 
other buildings, that were either finifhed or ereéting, in St. Jago, I & 
fhall now proceed to ftate fuch information refpetting the population 
and commerce of this city as I was enabled to procure. 

St. Jago, the capital of Chili, is {tated to have been founded on the 
a2th of february, 1541. This city is the refidence of the Prefident, who is El 

Captain- : 


n of 
onfi- 
rand 
treat 
0 fe- 
. the 


cipal 
per- 
The 
mn, is 
r are 
is re- 
éture 
eem- 
-tafte 


e be- 
e for 
fhop- 
abili- 


l was 
Fran- 

ifice, 
s ten 
d the 


and 
o, | 
ation 


hn the 
tho 1s 
btain- 


| 


ROUND THE WORLD. 
Captain-General of the whole kingdom, and Governor and prefiding Judge 


of the audience chamber, or court of juftice. It is faid to contain thirty 
thoufand five hundred inhabitants ; and, if my eftimation of its extent be 
not very incorreét, it muft be confidered as populous. ‘The fubordinate 
cities in this great kingdom are, Coquimbo, Chillan, Conception, and 
Valdivia; and the principal towns are Valparaifo, Capiapo, Vallenar, 
St. Francifco de Borja, St. Raphael de la Rofa, La Ligua, Quillota, Los 
Andes, Melipilla, St. Jofeph, Aconcagua, St. Ferdinand, Curico, Talca, 
Linares, Nueva, Bilboa, Caugeres, and others of lefs importance. 

The kingdom of Chili is ftated to extend, in a northern and fouthern 
dire€tion, from the uninhabited parts of Atacama, which divides it from 
the vice-royalty of Peru, to the ftraits of Magellan; and, in a weftern 
and eaftern direction, from the ocean to the foot of the Cordilleras, which 
divides it from the vice-royalty of Buenos Ayres ; but I cannot help being 
of opinion, that the kingdom of Chili does not extend further fouth than 
the fouthern extremity of the ifles de Chiloe, as I fhould confider the 
American coaft, to the fouthward of thofe iflands, to be that of Patago- 
nia. It is divided into two bifhopricks, or provinces, St. Jago and Con- 
ception, each of which are under the immediate care and direction of 
an Intendant ; Brigadier Don Francifco La Mata Linares has the charge 
of the latter ; and the further title of Chief Intendant of the province of 
St. Jago is added to the reft of the pofts of honor and places of emolu- 
ment enjoyed by the prefent Captain-General Don Ambrofio Higgins 
deVallenar ; the value of whofe appointments amount, annually, to thirty 
thoufand dollars, whilft thofe of Don La Mata Linares do not exceed ten 
thoufand dollars. Thefe provinces are each fubdivided into fmall diftri€s, 
which originally were known by the name of Corregimientos, but are now 
called Subdelegaciones. 

There is about a million of fpecie coined at St. Jago every year, which 
is the fund from whence the falaries of the {tate officers, the military 
eftablifhment, and other incidental expences of the government, are 
defrayed. The army confifts of a batallion of infantry in Conception ; 
two fquadrons of horfe, one company of dragoons, and two of artil- 
lery. The cavalry of this country are all well mounted, and extremely 

gLea expert 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Agee expert horfemen, and were they as {kilful in the ufe of fire-arms as they 
“—y— are in the management of the fword and the lance, they would not be 
inferior to any troops of this defcription in Euroyc., I was given to 
underftand, that in cafe of an attack upon Valparaifo, die principal [ea- 
port of the kingdom, an army of eight thoufand men, confifling of ca- 
valry and militia, could there be affembled for its defence in twenty-four 
hours. 

The country, to the fouthward of the river Biobio, in the province 

of Conception, 1s inhabited by a nation of very fierce Indians, who for- s 
merly committed great depredations on the frontiers under the Spanifh 
authority, and lived in a continual ftate of hoftility with their civilized 
neighbours: but, in confequence of the humane, judicious, and political 
arrangements which have been made, from time to time, by Don Am- 
brofio Higgins, the number of the turbulent fpirits has been much re- 
duced, and the natives now ceafe to be regarded with any apprehenfion 
by the Spaniards. In the diftri€t which they occupy, I was given to un- 
derftand, there were ten thoufand warriors, a robuft and hardy race of 4 
men; but fo far had the wife adminiftration of the prefent Captain- 
General fucceeded, in fubduing the natural ferocity of thefe Indians, and 
in bringing the:n over to fupport the authority and interefts of the 
crown of Spain; that Don Ambrofio did not entertain the leaft doubt 
of their co-operating with the forces of His Catholic Majefty, fhould 
it be neceffary to call them forth again{t the invafion of a foreign 
enemy. 

Independently of the warfare which thefe people had, for many years, 


carried on again{t the Spaniards, they were fubje€t to continual infur- 
rections and internal commotions amongft themfelves. During the time 
that Don Ambrofio had the chief military command on this frontier, 
he happily fucceeded in terminating the feuds which had fo long prevail- 
ed amongit the feveral tribes compofing this great nation, and had in- 
troduced amongft the ferocious inhabitants of this country, a {pirit of 
induftry, and a defire to excel each other in the cultivation of the 
ground, the breeding of cattle, and other peaceful arts ; but upon his be- 
ing promoted to the elevated fituation which he now fills, with fo much 
honor 


ROUND THE WORLD. 445 


they honor to himfelf, and benefit to the country, he was under the neceflity 4795 rae 
t be of leaving the guardianfhip of thefe children of nature, and of repairing ees 
n to to the capital. Soon after his departure from the fronticrs, frefh animo- waht 
| fea- fities, and new caufes for jealoufy, arofe amongft the different tribes, rr 
f ca- which ended in a war, that was furioufly carried on by all parties. Their Hi 
-four peaceful and domeftic occupations no longer engaged their attention, Ih 
and their agriculture and breeding of cattle, which had become the fources i 
vince from whence they were enabled to derive many comforts, were abari- 
) tor- 7 doned and totally negle¢ted. Don Ambrofio, with the fame warmth of 
anifh heart and intereft for the | efs and profperity of the Indians, which, 
ilized during his refidence amon; n, had produced fo valuable an effect 
litical { on their tempers and difpoiiuons, reprefented to the Court of Madrid 
Am- the commotions that continued to exift amongft the Auraucan and other 
sh re- tribes on that frontier; and, at the fame time, propofed fuch meafures tb 
nfion as, in his opinion, were moft likely to reconcile the differences, and to 
tO Un- eftablifh a permanently good underftanding between the contending chiefs 
ice of - of the four Butalmapus, which are the four diftri€ts into which this na- eg 
ptain- tion of Indians is divided. | 
s, and : In confequence of this reprefentation, and the meafures recom- 
pf the mended by the Captain-General, he was direéted by the Spanifh court 
doubt to repair to the camp of Negrete, and there to hold a convocation, 
nould for the purpofe of hearing and redrefling thofe grievances which were eh 
preign j {tated by the feveral chiels to be the caufes of all their difcontents: vf 4 
and, as the preliminary fpeech of the Prefident, on this occafion, tends yy 
years. greatly to exhibit the natural character and general difpofition of thefe 
infur- e | people, I have been tempted to infert a tranflation of it from the Indian 
time : s language, under the impreffion that, to thofe of my readers who may F 
pnitier, Es be curious in tracing the gradations of the human charaéter, from a fa- 
evail- vage up to a civilized flate, 11 may not be unacceptable. 42 
d in- ae 2) 
frit of ; , ‘ 
f the ae 
is be- 1 aaa 
much oe The , Pr 


1onor 


I, G a < 
a, Vy \ 4 GY Y ‘ 
‘Ss Y \4 Ww “ & ae 
VS ~— «© 
4 ae 
¥ , 
re PEER qe 
= gag ag 
So HA aa3au05, =] . = is 
ae FE oF 
<b aos Bes 
” Se = 
a. VU 


PRATT EGS IIT ITO REM AT TANT PENS ae Pe mx 


te a So nn ll ET 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


“« The fpeech of Field-Marfhal Don Ambrofio Higgins de Vallenar, 
Prefident, Governor, and Captain-General of the kingdom of 
Chili, to the Auraucan and other Indian nations, met in convoca- 
tion in the camp of Negrete, on the 4th day of march, 1793. 

“ Chiefs, my antient and honorable friends! full of joy and fatis- 
faétion that I now meet upon this happy ground of Negrete, as for- 
merly on that of Longuilmo, the great chiefs and principal leaders of 
the four Butalmapus, into which this valuable country is divided, that 
ftretches from the fouth of this great river Biobio to the outer parts of 
the moft fouthern continent, and from the Cordilleras to the great ocean ; 
I falute you all with joy, and with the utmoft fincerity of my heart. I 
am ordered by the king, my matter, to falute you in His Majefty’s 
name, and to congratulate you on the felicity of this aufpicious day. 
which, through my mediation, on account of the love I bear you all, 
has reftored the ineftimable bleffings of peace to the four Butalmapus. 

* With the utmoft precifion and difpatch, I have taken care to remove 
every obftacle that impeded the attainment of this moft welcome objeét. 
I have alfo been indefatigable in difpofing the minds of thofe to peace 
who were reftlefs and prone to revenge, or to take great umbrage on little 
occafions; and I have been unweared in all the conferences I have had 
with the feveral chiefs, fince my arrival at the fort of Angels, and in 
this encampment, during the time that I have waited for the arrival of 
thofe more diftant leaders, who are now colleéted with the other mem- 
bers of this aflembly. I have patiently and fully examined the complaints 
of fome, and heard the excufes of others, on the diftreffing fubjeét of 
your diffentions, your animofities, and your wars, fo that nothing now 
remains for me to learn of all their direful caufes. To-day, however, 
the fun fhines bright, and I fee, with heart-felt joy, that on my once 
again drawing nigh unto you, a kindly difpofi‘ion appears in all, to 
terminate the unhappy differences which long, too long, have fubfifted 
between you; and I perceive that you are prepared, once more, to unite 
in thofe facred bonds of peace, in the full enjoyment of which I left 
you, on my feparation from you, and departure for St. Jago. I rejoice 
that you all wifh to bury, under the fod of this encampment, all your 
animofities, 


] 
] 
“4 
4 
| 
| 


atis- 
for- 
rs of 
that 
ts of 
ean ; 


t. J 


; Pe ot es RUE rene ee 


ees 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


animofitics, heart-burnings, difputes, and differences ; and may the pre- 
fent meeting be a commencement of perpetual felicity to all the children 
of man who refide in the countries that extend from Biobio to Chiloe. 

« Recolleét your fituation, O my friends, when I was appointed by 
His Majefty to the military command of this frontier, and deftined to fit 
down among you. There are many amongft you, who can remember the 
miferable {tate in which I found the whole country ; it was deftroyed on 
both fides the river, it was defolate and laid wafte, and all its inhabitants 
were fuffering the dreadful! calamities of unceafing furious wars, brought 
on by their own intemperance and unruly paffions ;_ many of whom were 
obliged to retire, with their women and children, to the mountains, and 
were reduced at laft to the neceflity of feeding on their faithful dogs that 
followed them! The great chiefs and Indians of the Butalmapus were 
witnefles of thefe things. Before [left you, however, (on His Majefty be- 
ing gracioufly pleafed to promote me to the prefidency of the kingdom) 
your houfes were rebuilt, your fields fmiled with a yellow harveft, and 
your paftures were richly decorated with the herds of your cattle. Your 
women provided you with comfortable garments ; the high-minded and 
unruly young men obeyed the voice of the chiefs; and none of thofe 
excefles were praétifed, which, fince my departure, have exceeded the 
cruelties and profligacy of your antient barbarifm; to which you would 
probably have altogether returned, had it not been for the zeal of your 
Commander General, who reported your proceedings to me, and hap- 
pily fufpended, until I fhould be fent amongft you, the fatal effects of 
your difcords. 

“ Ido not, however, wifh to fupprefs the merit to which you have a 


juft claim, or to conceal, that, in the midft of all thefe difturbances, you 


rigoroufly obferved the promifes you made me in Longuilmo. ‘The Spa- 
nifh fettlements, fituated on the fouthern fide of this great river, have 
been, by you, moft {crupuloufly refpected, their perfons have been held 
facred, their cattle have not been difturbed, and in no one circumftance 
have you broken the faith and goodwill which you pledged yourfelves 
to maintain. Of all this have I been made acquainted, from time to time, 
by the feveral commanders on the frontier; and for this honorable part 
3 of 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


of your conduct I give you all due thanks.» What I then promifed [ 
hkewile have ftritily performed; 1 have recommended the four Butal- 
mapus to the protection of the king; I have fupplicated him to con- 
tinue to them his paternal afliftance ; and His Majefty, with that great- 
nefs of foul, and piety of heart, which fo eminently diftinguifh his royal 
charaéter, has been pleafed to order, that you fhall be fupported and 
protected fo long as you may deferve the bleffings of his favor, by ad- 
hering to the good, feparating yourfelves from the bad, and evincing. by 
the general tenor of your conduct, your fubordination and obedience.” 

The humanity, good fenfe, patience, and perfeverance, of the Cap- 
tain General, very confpicuoufly appear upon this occafion ; and it is not 
lefs pleafing to obferve, that, even amongtt thefe untaught nations of the 
earth, their political engagements are {crupuloufly fulfilled ; and that 
the diftreffes confequent on inteftine warfare, have not the power te 
make them violate their treaties, or to break thofe promifes which they 
folemnly pledge themlelves to perform. 

The territorial pofleflions of fuch of the Indians as have fubmitted to 
the authority, and placed themfelves under the proteétion, of the Spanifh 
crown, have been all confirmed to them by treaty ; to be ufed, cultiva- 
ted, or difpofed of, agreeably to their own wifhes or determinations ; and, 
as an incitement to their future induftry and repofe, I was informed by 
Don Ambrofio, that he had purchafed from them a large traét of land, 
which he had divided, and laid out advantageoufly, for the purpofes 
of agriculture and breeding cattle; and had left it in their poffeffion, 
under the dire€tion of proper perfons to fee his defigns carried into 
effeét. 

Whilft we were under the hofpitable roof of the Prefident, I had an 
opportunity of f{eeing a chief and fix of the Indians, who had come to 
the palace to pay an annual vifit of refpett to the Captain-General. 
Thefe people were of a middling ftature, they were ftout and well made, 
of regular features, and not unlike the North-Weft American Indians ; 
they were drefled after the Spanifh fafhion of the country; but if an 
opinion can be correctly formed of the tribe they belong to from fo {mall 
a fample, they would, by no means, anfwer the expeétations I had form- 


ed 


‘d I 
ital- 
“ON- 
‘eat- 
oyal 
and 
ad- 
+ by 
e,” 
Cap- 
; not 
F the 
that 
r to 
they 


i 
v 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ed of their prowefs and military charaG@er. Thefe Indians were accom- 
panied by a Spanifh gentleman, who refides amoneft them in one of 
their villages, and is called Captain of Indians; and I underftood, that 
to each tribe an officer, of fimilar rank, is attached, who prefides over 
their interefts, correfponds with the Captain-General, and, on all ocea- 
fions, aéts as their advifer and Interpreter. 

The exterior commerce of the kingdom is principally carried on from 
the fea-ports of Conception, Coquimbo, and Valparaifo; but the latter 
has the greateft fhare of the trade, arifing from its central fituation, and 
Its vicinity to the capital: the diftance from St. Jago was formerly thirty 
leagues ; but it will be decreafed, when the new fine of road is com- 
pleted, to twenty-two leagues. From St. Jago, to the top of the firft 
hill towards Valparaifo, a diftance of about fix leagues, the road * 
finifhed ; between the foot of the hill and the city there are three bridges 
built with bricks over three fwampy places, which before were fre- 
quently almoft impaffable, and in many other parts, where the road is 
depreffed, it is paved acrofs, to give a free courfe to the rain waters, and 
at the fame time, to prevent any damage from their pafling over the 
loofe materials of which the road is compofed. This extent of road is 
now become the general refort of the inhabitants, either for walking, 
riding on horfeback or in carriages; and the valuable charaéter who 
firft projeéted it, whenever the multiplicity of his bufinefs will allow him 
to take any recreation of this nature, is conftantly attended thither by a 
numerous company of the inhabitants, and on fuch occafions he derives a 
confiderable degree of fatisfaétion in proving how eafilv he can travel up 
the firft hill from St. Jago in his coach, with the affilance of four mules 
only. 

The meafured diftance between St. Jago and Buenos Ayres I could 
not learn, but I underftood that the poft travels from thence to the capi- 
tal of Chili in twenty days; and that the country, from Buenos Ayres un- 
til it reaches the foot of the Cordilleras, which run in a northern and 
fouthern direction, and pals to the eaftward of St. Jago, 1s one intire 
defert, without trees or any other fort of vegetation ; and that it ts fo 
completely a level plain, that even a hillock does not appear on its furface. 


Vou, IIL 3M The 


419 


1795. 
April. 
Lp 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


The neareft filver mine to St. Jago is at the diftance of about feven 
leagues, and the neareft gold mine is to the borat of the city, at the 
diftance of about thirty leagues. 

The value and importance of this rich country to Old Spain is fully 
exhibited in the feveral ordinances, rules and direétions, which, from 
time to time, have been iffued to the Intendants of the provinces, and 
enforced by the fupreme council of the Indies, at the exprefs command of 
His Catholic Majefty. Thefe are comprehended under diftin& titles, or 
heads, as they have reference, or apply to, the ecclefiaftical or civil go- 
vernment of the kingdom. ‘The principal obfervances are thofe re- 
fpeéting the tenths and contributions for the endowment of the churches, 
and the fupport of the religious orders; the colleétion of the public 
revenues, the appropriation of the royal eftates, the adminiftration of 
juftice, the regulation of the internal police, and the delegation of pow- 
ers and authority in the event of foreign wars or domeftic infur- 
reétions. 

I was fo fortunate as to obtain a tranflation of moft of thefe rules 
by which the archbifhops and chief officers of ftate regulate their 
conduét; and as it does not appear to me, that I can fhew the rigid 
attention which is, and has ever been, paid by the Spanifh court to the 
interefts of the!e wealthy eftablifhments, fo well, as by quoting fome few 
of the royal commands, I have extraéted three for this purpofe. 

« Number 150. 

« By the Bull of Alexander the VIth, dated the 16th of november, 
1501, and confirmed fince by fucceflive fupreme pontiffs, the Ten rus 
oF THE InpDrEs belong to my royal crown, and half of a year’s falary 
on the benefices conferred by me; with full dominion, abfolute and irre- 
vocable, to affift the churches with a fufficient fum annually, for the 
decorous maintenance of the divine law, and for a competent falary to 
the prelates and other minifters of the holy gofpel, who ferve at the al- 
tar. In virtue of which, the fundamental difpofition of the ritual has 
been promulgated, that thefe objeéts may be duly fulfilled. My crown 
remains under the obligation of fupplying, at the expence of the reft of 
the rents of its patrimony, the fum deficient to which thefe, annually, may 

2 not 


ROUND THE WORLD. 451 ane 


en j not amount, for the endowments and other holy purpofes; and there- aoe i ia | 
the fore, it is incumbent upon all thofe a€ting under my royal authority to Ge\~—_s Vm 
be watchful over, to have good difcretion in the adminiftration of the et 
ally decimal produétions, and to divide them amongft the parties interefted, ae 
om ’ with due exaétnefs and integrity, that the holy churches, parifhes, and et 
and q hofpitals, under the immediate fovereign proteétion, may not feel any ie 
lof - injury or wrong, nor my royal exchequer be called upon for its pledged it 
or q refponfibility. I therefore command, that the royal officers do affift at 
go- 3 all the public fales and accounts of the tenths, and tha. they likewilc 
re- q attend to the ere€tions and repairs of the churches, and duly examine 
hes, i the expence of each, and that they ultimately prevent all frauds and ig 
blic Ps impofitions, to the end that the participants may have their right, and Lit 
1 of ‘ that my royal eftates may not be charged with any refponfibility for de- 
ow- 4 ficiencies. Having confidered that the new eftablifhment and fyftem of eh! 
fur- a intendancies may offer doubts, on the method propofed for carrying the “ee 
: feveral regulations into effeét, I have thought proper, conformably to : 
ules the true {pirit of the laws already in being, to annex the following cora- Ph i 
heir mands, for the purpofe of facilitating the new arrangement, and to in- By 
igid {ure the moft exaét execution of all the matters it contains.” 
the Here follow direétions for the calling of meetings, and a lift of the 
few officers commanded to attend them, with a great number of rules for fe- 
curing to the government a due adminiftration of their feveral funétions. mot 
And it will be feen, by the following extraéts, that the happinels of the ri 
ber, people, the prefervation of good order, and the improvement of the coun- fai 
HS try, are objeéts not lefs regarded by the Spanifh monarchy, than the efta- i 
ary blifhment of its religious perfuafion, or profiting by the immenfe wealth Hi! 
re- which South America is capable of yielding. ast 
the “ Confiding in the care and attention which has been manifefted by i 
to the Intendants of provinces, I command that they do, by means of them- da 
al- felves, or fubaltern judges, gain a thorough knowledge of the lives, in- a | 
has clinations, and cuftoms of the people fubjeé& to their government ; that eat 
bwn they chaftife the lazy, and thofe of bad intentions, who, far from fup- 43 ’ 
of porting the good order and police of their refpe&tive towns, caufe in- ae. 
ay quietudes and fcandal, disfiguring, with their vices and iazinefs, the good iy WS 


| 3M 2 face i 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


face of things, defpifing the laws, and perverting the defigns of thofe 
amongf{t them who are virtuoufly difpofed. ‘They are not, however, un- 
der colour or pretext of their authority, to be inquifitive, or co meddle 
in the life, genius, private purfuits, or domeftic concerns of individuals, 
nor to take cognizance of reports or uneftablifhed accufations that can- 
not influence the good example of the people, nor difturb the tranquillity 
of the public government. 

“For the due adminiftration of juftice, and the circumftances which 
have already been provided for by the foregoing articles, it appears, that 
whatever may conduce to the happinels or profperity of my vaffals, 
fhould and ought to be diligently attended to and obferved by the ma- 
giftrates and officers of police. For this efpecial purpofe, I order that 
the Intendants do procure, from engineers of the greateft renown and 
abilities, topographical maps of their refpeétive provinces, in which are 
to be diftinguifhed their boundaries, mountains, woods, rivers, lagoons, 
and all other matters worthy of note; and to this end, the engineers fo 
employed are to execute their commiffions with all the promptitude, ex- 
aétnefs, and punétuality of expreffion poffible ; they are to become ac- 


quainted with the temperature and qualities of the feveral foils, and of 


the natural produétions, not only of the animal and vegetable, but of the 
mineral, kingdoms; of the mountains, valleys, paftures, and meadows ; 
of the rivers which are capable of being widened, made navigable, and ul- 
timately to communicate with the ocean ; the expence of fuch undertak- 
ings, and the benefits that would refult to my fubjeéts from carrying fuch 
works into effect. They are to make themfelves perfeétly fatisfied in what 
places new channels or aqueduéts might be made, which would be ufeful 
for the watering of the lands under cultivation, and for the purpofe of re- 
ducing labour by the ereétion of mills. To report the ftate of the bridges : 
pointing out thofe which require repairing, and the pafles over which 
additional ones ought to be thrown. What roads can be amended, im- 
proved or fhortened ; what proteétion or guards are neceffary for their 
fecurity. In what parts are growing timbers, ufeful for fhip-building 
in the provinces, or valuable in the European arfenals ; they are to cer- 
ivy and report upon the induftry and commerce of the diftriéis ; the 
fea- 


fi 


i 
Fie 


ES SRR gi te Sat a NERS Se eR 
Phen ; RRR eee ene 
actin La ac ea le 


ore 


thofe 
, un- 
-ddle 
luals, 
can- 


illity 


yhich 
that 
iflals, 
> ma- 
r that 
» and 
h are 
oons, 
rs fo 
e, EX- 
1e ac- 
d of 
f the 
Ows ; 
nd ul- 
rtak- 
| fuch 
what 
feful 


bf re- 


Iges ; 
hich 


| im- 


thei 
Iding 
cer- 
+ the 
fea- 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fea-ports capable of fheitering veflels, which from their fituation and 


453 


1795. 
April. 


utility ought to be kept open, and fuch as are prejudicial that had better U¥— 


be fhut. The Intendants will alfo inform themfelves of the means of 
bettering the condition of my people, by augmenting their comforts, and 
by conferving the happinefs and profperity of my dominions. With 
thefe objects before them, they are to take efpecial care, that, in 
the towns or villages, within their refpective provinces, they do not al- 
low of vagabonds without deftination, nor people without inclination to 
work; but that they make the f{turdy, and of competent age to manage 
arms, inlifl into my royal regiments, engage in my marine fervice, or on 
board fhips of commerce ; or elfe that they order fuch perfons to be em- 
ployed in the repairing or ere€ting fuch public works, as fhall be judged 
moft proper, according to the circumftances of each individual’s cafe. 
Should any fuch perfons be unfit for work, and mendicants by profef- 
fion, they fhall be taken up, put into hofpitals, and there be employ- 
ed each according to his ftrength ; but if it can be proved that they are 
reftlefs unquiet fubjects of no refponfibility, and bad character, the penal- 
ties eftablifhed by the laws of the Indies are to be infli€ted, and fuch 
vagrants are to be fent to hard labour in the mines, or to the Pre- 
fidios.” 

Thefe ordinances are alfo the firft of a great number of regulations, 
which follow for the encouragement of induftry, the cultivation of the 
furface, and extending the mineral property of thefe kingdoms, in which 
is difplayed no lefs zeal and concern for the profperit: and comforts of 
all the inhabitants, whether of Spanifh extraction or ‘i: native Indians, 
than for the intereft which the Spanifh crown poffefles in {ecuring to it- 
felf the monopoly of this valuable part of its extenfive empire. For as 
the kingdom of Chil cannot but be regarded as capable of producing 
great wealth, as well from its furface as from its inexhauftible mineral 
productions, it may fairly be efleemed as one of the richeft territories 
belonging to His Catholic Majefty. In order, however, to promote the 
growth of the greateft quantity of corn and number of cattle, encourage- 
ment fhould be given to the lower orders of the people to become in- 
duftrious, and to prefer the pleafant purfuits of cultivation, to that fupine 


and 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


and inaétive way of life to which they have been too long accuftomed ; 
for if a {pirit of induftry were generally diffufed amongft them, and due 
rewards held out for working the valuable metals, the prefent habits of 
indolence would probably be overcome; and as there does not exift any 
phyfical impediment to exertion either from climate or any local cir- 
cumflance, it is not poffible to afcertain what might be the fum of the 
return from the productive labour of this highly favored country, when 
fuch labour fhould be properly direéted to the feveral fources of its latent 
wealth. The influence of the ecclefiaftical orders over the minds of the 
people, and the preference which is given by them, and the generality 
of the inhabitants, to an ufelefs unworthy life of lazinefs and begging, 
will continue to operate againft any change; and it is much to be ap- 
prehended, that nothing but a totally new modification of their prefent 
{cheme of fociety, can infure to the individuals, and to the ftate under 
which they are proteéted, the advantages that a reform in their politi- 
cal fyftem promifes in future to beftow. 

Confidering that the time we had now been abfent from the veffels 
had been of fufficient length to accomplifh the feveral fervices I had left 
to be performed, preparations were made for our return to Valparaifo ; 
and after expreffing our moft grateful acknowledgments for the weighty 
obligations conferred upon us, by the unremitting attention to our pre- , 
fent comforts, and anxious concern for our future welfare, which on 
every occafion had been exhibited by His Excellency the Prefident, and 
making offer of our beft thanks for the friendly, hofpitable, and polite 
entertainment we had received from other individuals during our ftay in 
the capital, we took our leave, and proceeded from St. Jago towards 
Valparaifo. ‘The fame mode of conveyance as that to which we had 
before reforted, was now adopted for our journey back to the fea coaft. 
Neither the road we had to retrace, nor the country on either fide of it, 
prefented any thing in the courfe of our travelling worthy of remark, 
that I have not fufhciently noticed on our journey to St. Jago, except- 
ing that the road, which from the loofenefs of the materials with which 
it is formed, had fuffered, as I fufpeéted it would, very much by the de- 
f{cending waters from the mountains, and in many places it was greatly 
injured 


x ; 
= 


SANA ZE a 


MC 5 
id due 
bits of 
ft any 
al cir- 
of the 
when 
latent 
of the 
erality 
gging, 
ye ap- 
refent 
under 
politi- 


vellels 
ad left 
raifo ; 
eighty 
r pre- 
h on 
, and 
polite 
ay in 

ards 
e had 
coaft. 
of it, 
ark, 
cept- 
hich 
e de- 
eatly 
jured 


a 
SER EER RE a SESE 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


injured by the rain that had fallen during our refidence at St. Jago; and 
it is much to be feared, unlefs fome means can be adopted for its fecu- 
rity, and to prevent the injurious effeéts of the defcending torrents, that 
this valuable defign projeéted by Don Ambrofio wil! in a great meafure 
be defeated. 

On our arrival at Valparaifo I found moft of our bufinefs ina ftate of 
forwardnefs ; the mainmaft had been repaired and was got on board, but 
On our attempting to rig the mainyard, it was found to be rotten nearly 
half through in the middle of it, and in this ftate intirely unfit for fervice; 
this was a mortification I did not expeét to have met with, and as there 
was no poffibility of procuring at this place a fpar of fufficient fize to 
replace it, the only means we had of repairing the defeét was by making 
a temporary yard out of a {pare maintopmalt, with the addition of the 
yard arms of the yard which was decayed, and which I was extremely 
forry to obferve were by no means in a perfeétly found condition. 

Although a further detention at Valparaifo was now unavoidable, yet 
that was not the only circumftance which produced me concern on this 
occafion; for this additional difafter was of fo ferious a nature, that when 
I came to refleét on the difabled condition of our main-malt, and that our 
main-yard would be in three pieces, I was under the cruel neceflity of 
giving up all further thoughts of recommencing our furvey of the coaft 
to the fouthward of the iflands of Chiloe, and to determine on making 
the beft of our way from this port round cape Horn to St. Helena. I 
could not, however, avoid having fome apprehenfion left our very crip- 
pled ftate fhould prove infufficient to preferve the veflel amidft the boif- 
terous feas we had to encounter in this paflage, notwith{tanding that every 
precaution within our power that could be deviled was reforted to, for the 
purpofe of making the maft and yard as fecure as poflible. 

The regret I felt in being thus compelled to abandon the examina- 
tion of this almoft unknown, yet interefting part of the ccaft, is not to 
be defcribed ; becaufe I had anxioufly hoped that I fhould have been 
enabled by our re-equipment at Valparaifo, to have carried into effe& 
the whole of the commiffion which His Majefty had been pleafed to in- 
truft to my execution ; but under all the circumftances of both the veffels 

condition, 


Thurfday16. 


159 


179 
Api 
-— 


70 
] 
the 


—— 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


condition, I did not confider myfelf warranted to indulge my inclinations 
at the hazard of Elis Majefty’s {hips under my command, and at the rik 
of the lives of fo many valuable men, who had cheerfully endured the 
fatigues of our former furvey, and who, after fo long an abfence from 
their native country were intitled, in a peculiar manner, to every care and 
protection that were in my power, for the purpofe of infuring them a fafe 
return to their families and friends. 

The main-yard was fent on fhore, and the carpenters were immediately 
employed upon it; but as I could not flatter myfelf that it would be in a 
flate fit to be received again on board in lefs than eight or ten days, I em- 
ployed this interval in examining the flores and provifions with which we 
had been fupplied, in attending to the repairs of the veflels, vifiting the 
obfervatory on fhore, and making fome obfervations on the harbour and 
town of Valparaifo ; with which, and the refult of the aftronomical and 
nautical obfervations made during our ftay, I fhall conclude this chapter. 

‘Lhe caulkers were yet bufy on the decks and other parts of the Dil- 
covery, and the rigging demanded infinitely more repair than I had fup- 
poled it would have required, owing to the very rotten and decayed ftate 
of almoft every rope on board. In thefe effential fervices the artificers 
were conftantly engaged, whilft the reft of the crew were employed in 
procuring a full {upply of water, and fuch a {tock of flour and other pro- 
vifions as I confidered would be neceffary until we fhould arrive at St. 
Helena. 

Ships deftined to the port of Valparaifo, fhould endeavour during the 
fummer months to make the coaft well to the fouthward of the bay, in 
order that a fair wind may be infured for entering the bay. The fouth- 
erly winds, which in general extend from 60 to 70 leagues from the 
coaft, moftly prevail until the month of may; and from the middle of 
that month during all the months of june, july, auguft, and feptember, 
I was given to underftand the prevailing winds were from the north. 
Thefe winds are commonly attended with great quantities of rain, and 
very foggy weather, but they do not often blow with much violence. 
As foon as the wind returns to the fouthward the dry feafon commences, 
and fo it continues with little variation during the remainder of the year. 
Thele 


¥ 
X 
3 
i 
. 
iiss 
ee 
Ds 
id 
« 
yes 
if, 
a 
F 
re 


{tions 
e rifk 
d the 
from 
e and 
a fafe 


lately 
eina 
lem- 
ch we 
ig the 
ir and 
ul and 
apter. 
e Dil- 
d fup- 
d ftate 
ificers 
ed in 
r pro- 
at St. 


ng the 
y; in 
outh- 
n the 
dle of 
nber, 
orth. 
, and 
lence. 
bnices, 
year. 
Lhefe 


‘ Gi et AEN TROT 5 SEAL, 
eR Rae a, . csdoae 
eRe ees et ae pee : ee 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Thefe winds, however, frequently blow very ftrong, fo as to break vef- 


fels adrift, though well fecured by anchors on the fhore, near to the --y—~ 


town of Valparaifo. Within four or five leagues of the point of Angels, 
which is the weltern point of the bay, is a low rocky point, near to which 
is a detached high barren rock ; thefe points lie trom each other s.51 w. 
and N.51£. To the northward of the above low rocky point, are 
fome f{cattered rocks, that lie about two miles from the point, and about 
a fourth of that diftance from the fhore, and to the northward of thefe 
rocks is a fandy bay, on the north-ealt fide of which is a houfe. In 
this bay I was led to believe that anchorage might be had, though the 
fituation is certainly very much expofed. ‘The point of Angels, (off 
which are alfo fome rocks lying very near to it,) may be approached by 
failing at the diftance of half a league from the fhore, and as foon as the 
point is paffed the town of Valparaifo is inftantly difcovered. About 
feven miles to the north-eaft from this point is a clufter of rocks lying 
at fome diftance from the fhore, on which the fea breaks violently ; but 
we had no opportunity of afcertaining their fituation with any degree 
of precifion. The bay is about four miles wide, and about a mile 
deep ; apparently free from any fort of danger; but as it is greatly ex- 
pofed to the northerly winds, the trading veflels conftantly moor with 
two good anchors and cables in that direétion, and with other cables 
faft to anchors on fhore, in 5 or 6 fathoms water, foft fandy bottom, 
near to the cuftom-houfe ; by which means it is expected that the officers 
of the revenue may be enabled to prevent any contraband trade, by 
vigilantly attending to their duty in the day time, and by a rowing 
guard during the night. The depth of the water gradually increafes 
with the diftance from the fhore to 35 fathoms, and the bottom be- 
comes more tenacious. In the depth of 16 fathoms, in which we took 
our ftation, it was a very {tiff clay. Here we moored a cable each way, 
to the northward and to the fouthward, the point of Angels bearing by 
compafs N. 35 w., the fort in the town N. 86 w., the redoubt on the 
hill s. 5 £., the church at Almandrel s.65 £., the eaft fort n. 83 £., the 
eaft point of the bay N. 57 £., and the neareft fhore s.7 w., a cable's 
length diftant. 

Vou. HI. 3N On 


45 


1995: 
April. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


On the top of a hill, ‘on the eaft fide of the bay, is an open or bar. 


V—-— bet battery, lately creéted with ftone and brick, and capable of mount- 


apa 


=, Sama ap haieael gaa >a 


Pa pe SR par a 


ing ten guns ; this battery commands all that fide of the bay, the beach, 
and the village of Almandrel. On the fummit of another hill is a ftone 
redoubt, of a circular form, with eleven embrafures ; thefe command 
the beach and village of Almandrel to the eaftward, the bay to the 
northward, and the town and harbour of Valparaifo to the north-weft- 
ward. Although this fortification was in a moft negleéted and ruinous 
condition, we were given to underftand, that the principal magazine 
was inclofed within its ruins. The largeft and moft confiderable fortifi- 
cation is in the middle of the town, within which is the refidence of the 
governor. It is fituated on a {mall eminence, one fide of which is open 
to the fea, and is feparated from it only by a very narrow pafs. The 
height of the lower wall, which is ftrong, and well built with mafonry, 
is about fifteen feet to the embrafures ; of which, there are fix that front 
the fea, two face the {treet to the eaftward, and two look into the 
market-place to the weftward. The upper part of the hill is furround- 
ed by another ftrong ftone wall, about ten feet in height, and half way 
up the hill; a third wall croffes it, which fhews three embrafures to the 
fea, immediately over the fort and the governor's houfe below. At 
the place where this wall terminates, which is near the fummit of the 
eminence, the fide of the hill falls perpendicularly down into a deep 
gully, by which the fort is encompaffed, and which might be the means 
of rendering this fortification unaffailable, and a place that might long 
be maintained, were it not for other hills within mufket-fhot, which 
command every part of it. The fpace inclofed by the lower wall is 
about four hundred yards in !ength, and in fome places about one hun- 
dred in breadth ; here are the barracks for the troops, and at the upper 
end is a building, in which a court is held, for the regulation of the 
police of the town. <A door, in that fide of the wall which faces the 
market-place, is the only entrance, and leads by a winding ftair-cale 
to different parts of the fortification. There is one other fortification, 
about half a mile from the fort, fituated on the weft fide of the bay, at 
the foot of a high hill, and but little elevated above the level of the 
fea, 


r bar- 
ounte- 
yeach, 
{tone 
mand 
o the 
-welt- 
1jnous 
zazine 
‘ortifi- 
of the 
open 
The 
fonry, 
. front 
to the 
ound- 
lf way 
to the 
At 

bf the 
deep 
eans 
long 
hich 
all is 
hun- 
pper 
f the 
s the 
r-cale 
ation, 
y, at 
bf the 
fea. 


t 
® 
i 
@- 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


fea. This fhews a face of five embrafures to the eaft, and in that 
dire€tion commands the welt fide of the bay ; three embrafures to the 
northward are fo difpofed, as to be able to open upon any veffel the 
inftant fhe paffes round the point of Angels; whilft two other. to the 
fouthward, command the fhips lying in the harbour or the bay. We 
computed that thefe feveral places contained about feventy pieces 
of cannon, many of which were without proper carriages, and fome 
were lying difmounted under the walls of the lower battery in the 
town. 

From the weftern fort fome rocks extend into the bay, and the bot- 
tom is too foul for veflels of any force to anchor nearer to this for- 
tification than about four hundred yards; but they may approach 
and anchor in a very eligible fituation, within about two hundred and 
fifty yards of the garrifon or principal fortrefs ; and neither of thefe 
places, in their prefent fituation, would be able to refift a well-dire€ted 
fire even from two or three frigates. — 

It appeared to us to be very extraordinary, that, under the exifting 
circumftances of Europe, and during a war between Spain and France, 
the fortifications at Valparaifo fhould remain in fuch a negleéted, ruinous, 
and defencelefs ftate, and that no meafures fhould either be reforted to, 
or appear to be in contemplation, for putting them into a more re- 
fpeftable condition ; efpecially as it is from this port that the kingdom 
of Peru principally depends for its fupply of grain; in return for which 
fugar, tobacco, indico, and fpirits, are imported into Valparaifo. Tar 
we found not only to be a very fearce but dear article, as the expence 
of the quantity which was neceffary for our new cables, was nearly 
equal to that of the workmanfhip and raw material of which they were 
compofed. 

The houfes in Valparaifo, on account of the earthquakes which fre- 
quently happen in South America, like thofe at St. Jago, confift of the 
ground floor only ; the walls are built with mud, and plaftered over with 
a preparation of lime ; they are convenient, well adapted to the climate, 
and are in general handfomely furnifhed. In the town and in the vil- 
lage of Almandrel there are fix churches, within the diocefe of the arch- 

3N 2 bifhop 


eh) 


% 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


bifhop of St. Jago, but under the direétion ‘of a vicar, who refides at 
Valparaifo, and is amenable for his conduét to the archbifhop. The 
town and its neighbourhood are under the jurifdiction of the governor, 
who receives his appointment, with a falary of four thoufand dollars per 
annum, from the king of Spain; but he is neverthelefs under the im- 
mediate orders and controul of the Captain-general. All civil and mili- 
tary caufes are heard at St. Jago. Capital offences are feldom commit- 
ted; a man was found guilty on a charge of felony, and hanged about 
three years before our arrival, a punifhment that, we underftood, was fel- 
dom known to be infliéted. 

I could not afcertam what were the revenues of the king of Spain 
on the exports and imports at Valparaifo, the colleétion of which’ is an 
important part of the governor’s bufinefs: nor was I able to fatisfy my- 
felf as to the amount of dollars which are annually fent from this port 
to Old Spain, but I had reafon to believe it was not lefs than one mil- 
lion and an half. The quantity of gold and filver coined into money at 
Mexico is prodigious ; I obtained an account of the coinage there, from 
the ift of january to the 31ft of december, 1793, by which it appeared 
that the total amount was as under: 


n gold. In filver.. Total. 
pefos, or hard dollars, pefos, pefos, 
884,262. 23,428,680. 24,312,942. 


This, however, was the greateft quantity of fpecie ever known in one 
year to have been coined in the money-houfe at Mexico. 

In anfwer to a letter, which by the defire of Sen" Don Ambrofio I had 
written to him, acquainting him with our fafe return to Valparaifo, he 
had the goodnefs to exprefs the moft ferious concern. for the decayed 
flate in which I had the misfortune to find our main-yard; and ina letter 
to Governor Alava, he direéted him to ufe his utmoft endeavours to fup- 
ply us with a new one, by fearching amongft the traders in the port ; and 
ftating that he had underftood from the {hip Mercury, a main-yard for 
the Difcovery might be procured. Although we could not on this occa- 
fion avail ourfelves of the Prefident’s kind attention, yet thefe letters 


breathed 


% Mh 
oka 
Bees 


STEMS ae Bie ONIN 


te 
= iB 


les at 
The 
nor, 
'§ per 
e im- 
mili- 
nmit- 
about 
is fel- 


Spain 
is an 
y my- 
port 
> mil- 
ley at 
from 
eared, 


I had 
o, he 
ayed 
letter 
D fup- 

and 

for 
occa-~ 
ters 


hthed 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


breathed not only fo much friendlinefs and anxiety for the prefervation 
of our little community, but exhibited fuch earneft folicitude for the fafe 
veturn of our expedition to Europe, left the important information we 
nad io communicate fhould be loft to the world, that I cannot refift 
noticing this circumftance as an additional proof of the goodnefs and 
magnanimity of His Excellency the Prefident of Chili. 

The wind, which had been generally in the fouthern quarter, blowing 
gently, and fubfiding into a calin towards the evening, changed to the 
north, and was accompanied by a very heavy rain, that continued with 
little intermiffion all the following day. After the rain ceafed, the wea- 
ther was cloudy and unpleafant until faturday, when the wind returned 
to the s.s.w., with fair and moderate weather, notwithftanding which 
the Chatham’s {mall bower cable, in confequence of its being completely 
worn out, broke, which obliged Mr. Puget to warp the veflel nearer in 
fhore, and to moor to an anchor on the beach ; after which the anchor, 
with the remainder of the cable, was recovered. On the monday fol- 
lowing the carpenters. finifhed the main yard, and it was got on board 
and rigged, the caulkers had nearly finifhed their bufinefs ; and, as I was 
very anxious to take our departure, I gave orders for the obfervatory 
and inftruments to be received on board, and the veffels to be made 
ready for proceeding to fea the firft favorable opportunity. It was not, 
however, until the 5th of may, that we had fufficient wind to encourage 
us to unmoor, which was done about fix in the morning, witha light 
breeze of wind from the fouth; but this foon dying away, we returned 
nearly to the place from whence we had come. Ona frefh breeze f{pring- 
ing up, about noon the next day, from the fouth and s. by w., we un- 
moored, and after faluting the fort with thirteen guns, (which were equal- 
ly returned) and taking our leave of Governor Alava, and the reft of our 
very hofpitable friends at Valparaifo, we made fail from the port, in 
company with the Chatham and a Spanifh brig and fchooner. 

The trade of this port is carried on in fhips from two hundred and 
fifty to feven hundred tons burthen ; in which is annually exported to 
Lima about fifteen thoufand tons of wheat and wheat-flour, large quan- 
tities of {mall cordage, dried falt fifh, and apples, pears, and peaches, in 


3 great 


Thurfday22, 


Friday 24. 


Saturday 25. 


Monday 27. 


May. 
(nce seemed 


Tuelday 5. 


Wednefi 6. 


462 


May. 


—,— lying before the cuftom-houfe, and from thence carried into the ware- 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


great abundance. All goods imported are landed on a foft fandy bank 


houfes, or removed to diftant parts of the country on the backs of mules ; 
by which conveyance the articles for exportation are in like manner 
brought down to the fhore. Moft kinds of vegetables, and a great va- 
riety of fruits, as well thofe of the northern parts of Europe, as thofe 
common in the tropical countries, were here procured in great plenty, 
were all excellent of their kinds, and were very cheap: the water was 
extremely good, though the mode of obtaining it was fomewhat tedious, 
as we were obliged to fill our cafks from pipes of a fmall bore, through 
which it was conduéted from the refervoir in the market-place down to 
the water-fide. Although there was no perceptible current in the bay, 
the rife and fall of the tide was evidently about three feet. 


ASTRONOMICAL and NauTICAL OBSERVATIONS, 
On the 27th of march, 1795, Kendall’s chronometer, ac- 
cording to the laft rate, fhewed the longitude to be - 287° 46' 50” 
Arnold’s No. 14, - - - - te - 287 53 35 
Ditto 176; - = - - - 286 30 50 


The true longitude, as afcertained at the obfervatory, by 

39 fets of lunar diftances, was - - - 288 28 52 
By which it appears, that Kendall’s chronometer was 

422"; Arnold’s No.14, 35/17”; and Arnold’s No. 176, 

1°58’ 2” to the weftward of true longitude. 
By equal altitudes, taken on the 26th of april, 1795, 

Kendall’s chronometer was found to be faft of mean 

time at Greenwich, on that day at noon, - 10h 59’ 23” 15” a 
And to be gaining on mean time, per day, at the rate of 29 34 c 
Arnold's No. 14, faft of mean time, at Greenwich, ditto, 6 15 10 15 
And to be gaining on mean time, per day, at the rate of 25 10 
Arnold’s No. 176, faft of mean time at Greenwich, ditto, 13 28 33 15 
And to be gaining on mean time, per day, at the rate of 58 57 “ 

The : 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


nk e The latitude of the obfervatory, by ‘velve meri- 1795. 

. . Ee a Apni. aT Si 
re- F dional altitudes of the 1un, was found to be 33° 1°30 Ncaioeeenil nian 
S 3 : The variation, by two different compafles, and Haan 
er by fix fets of obfervations on each, - 1449 — eaftwardly he 
a The vertical inclination of the magnetic needle Hd | 
fe Marked end, North face Eatt, - - 44° 57° ite 
ty, Ditto, ditto Weft, - < 44 40 f aot 
ras Ditto, South face Eaft, - ‘ 43 45 | 
US, Ditto, ditto Welt, = ° 43 40 
gh Mean inclination of the marine dipping needle, - 44 15 
to 
Ly 
ows 
5 
) 

2 


mu 


CHAPTER 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


CHAPTER VI. 


ba 

Gs 
fer 
pa 

) 
th 
& 

a 
ay 
* 
sey 
eee 
ie 
ba 
baa 
rae! 

oa 


Quit Valparatfo—Proceed to the fouthward—Pafs to the fouth cf cape Horn 
—Ufelefs fearch for the ifla Grande—Part company with the Chatham— 
Arrive at St. Helena— Join the Chatham there—Leave St. Helena—Cap- 
ture the Macaffar Dutch Eaft India Man—Proceed to the northward— 
Difcover anumber of veffels under convoy of His Majefty’s fhip Sceptre— 
Join the convoy, and proceed with it to the Shannon—Drfcovery proceeds 
from thence to the river Thames.—Afironomical and nautical obfervations. 


1795 
May. H AVING appointed with Mr. Puget our next rendezvous to be at 


St. Helena, with a frefh breeze varying between s.s.w. and s. by £., 

Thurfday 7 we left the bay cf Valparaifo, and paffed the point of Angels, fteering 
to the w.s.w. The weather was clear and pleafant, yet a heavy fwell 
from the s.s.w. indicated very boifterous weather in that quarter; the 
wind, however, continued to blow a gentle gale from the fouth-weftern 
quarter, with which we made confiderable progrefs. From the ex- 
tremely worn-out ftate of our fails, the foretopmaft ftayfail fplit, and 
on a furvey of our other fails and cables, we were under the neceffity of 
condemning a beft bower cable, a foretopfail, and main topmatt ftayfail, 
which were unbent, and replaced by others that could fcarcely be con- 
fidered to be in a much more ferviceable condition. 

Saturday 9. The obferved latitude, on faturday, was found to be 33° 21’ fouth, 
the longitude, by Arnold’s chronometer, No. 14, 282° 5; by No. 176, 
282° 36’ 30”; by Kendall's, 282° 6’ 45"; and by the dead reckoning 
282° 25’; the variation of the compafs 13°15’ eaftwardly. The wind 
veered for a few hours to the north-weft, and blew a frefh gale, with 
which we direéted our courfe towards the s.s.£., until it returned to its 


ea at Sr Seite AG a is SS tn Ya oN oe TN APRN yh 
2 apa = cnn Ne Pest sed? eto aaa sa 


seen ss 


e 
Sei 
te 
Ag 
a 


former 


Horn 
um— 
Cap- 
rd— 
tre— 
ceeds 
Ons. 


be at 
YE, 
ring 
{well 
the 
{tern 
ex- 
and 
y of 
fail, 


con- 


uth, 
176, 
ing 
ind 
ith 
b its 
mer 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


former fouth-weftern quarter, when we fhould have been able to have 


179} 
May. 


495 


made great progrefs to the fouthward, had we not been repeated~ yp 


ly under the neceflity of fhortening fail for the Chatham, which was far 


a-ftern. Some petrels, and fix or eight pintados, were feen about the Tuefay 12. 


fhip, and two days afterwards feveral large albatroffes were obferved at 


no great diftance. The weather continued to be pleafant until the 19th, Tuelday te. 


when the wind changed to the north-weft, and was attended by very 
thick difagreeable fqually weather. Our courfe was again diretted to 
the s.s.£.; and it gave me concern that we were not able to avail our- 
felves of this favorable wind, without rifking a feparation from the Chat- 
ham ; for, notwithftanding the additional quantity of ballaft which fhe 
had taken on board at Valparaifo, fhe did not appear to be improved 
in her failing: about noon her fignal was made with a gun to make 
more fail. The wind incrcafed from the weft and north-weilt, ac- 
companied by very heavy fqualls of hail and rain ; in the courfe of the 
night falfe fires were burnt, to denote our fituation to our confort, 
and on the next forenoon her fignal was again repeated to make more 
fail; but as we ftill kept increafing our diftance from her, about noon 
I ordered the mainfail to be hauled up, and a reef taken in each of the 
topfails. At this time, in latitude 50° 50’ fouth; longitude, by Arnold’s 
No. 14, 280° 33’ 45"; by No. 176, 281° 32’ 30”; by Kendall’s chrono- 


meter 280° 25/30”; and by the dead reckoning 281°11'; the variation of 


the compafs was obferved to be 17° eaftwardly ; and cape Noir to bear 
by compafs, according to the Spamifh charts, s.42., diftant 100 
leagues, but, by our calculations, it bore by compafs s. 46 &., and was 
at the diftance of 107 leagues. 

As we proceeded to the fouthward the weather gradually changed for 
the worfe, and the wind, which, with little interruption, had hitherto 
been agreeable to our wilhes, now became turbulent, and blew at times 
in very heavy fqualls; in one of thefe, about three o’clock on friday 
afternoon, we carried away the maintopfail fheet: this obliged us to 
take in the fail; on the gale increafing the foretopfail was furled ; 
and, fearful of any ferious accident, either to our main yard or matt, I 
direéted the mainfail to be taken in, and the topgallant yards and matts 

Vou. IIL 30 to 


Wednei, 


2060 


Friday 22. 


Saturday 23. 


Monday 25. 


Tuefday 26, 


Wednel. 27. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


to be ftruck, in order that the weak parts ‘might be ftrained as little 
as could be helped; about an hour afterwards, the ftarboard bumkin 
was alfo carried away, and the wind, at w.s.w., continued to blow 
with great violence until midnight, when it became fomewhat more mo- 
derate, and we were enabled to fet the mainfail and ftorm ftayfail. 
Falfe fires were burnt during the night as fignals to the Chatham. 
Towards the next morning, after lowering the topfails, and hauling 
up the mainfail, in a heavy fquall of wind and hail, we wore the fhip, 


to wait for our confort. In the afternoon, although the wind con- 


tinued nearly from the fame quarter, the weather became more mo- 
derate,. and we were able to get up our topgallant yards and mafts, 
and to make the beft of our way towards the fouth, direéting our 
courfe as much to the eaftward as the variation of the wind would 
permit. This favorable change, however, was not of long duration; 
for, in the afternoon of the 25th, on the wind veering to: the weft and: 
north-welt, we were obliged to clofe-reef the fore and maintopfail, 
and take in the mizentopfail. The gale continued to increafe with 
fo much violence, that, by feven o'clock on tuefday morning, we were 
under the neceffity of handing our topfails, and getting the top-gal- 
lant yards and mafts down upon deck, to relieve the mafts, and to 
make the fhip as {nug as poffible. The obferved latitude at noon was 
56° 4' fouth; by Arnold’s chronometer No. 14, the longitude appeared 
to be 285° 52’ 30”; by No. 176, 286755’; by Kendall’s, 285° 32 15”; 
and by the dead reckoning 286° 33’.. According to obfervations which 
had been procured in the two preceding days, it appeared, that the dead 
reckoning had erred thirteen miles in latitude, and twenty-five miles 
in longitude, the fhip having been fet fo far to the north-eaftward. The 
wind continued to blow very hard, varying between w. s.w. and w.N.w., 
until towards the evening, when it altered to the eaft, and £. s. E. brought 
with it a very heavy fall of fnow, and blew fo violently, that our wea- 
ther maintopfail fheet gave way, and obliged us to take in the fail. 
About fix o’clock the next morning the wind again changed to the s.w., 
and the weather became fufficiently moderate and clear to get up the 
topgallant yards and mafts, and to fet our reefed topfails. Notwithftand- 


ing 


ittle 
nkin 
slow 
mo- 
yfail. 
ham. 
iling 
fhip, 
con- 
mo- 
nafts, 
- our 
rould 
tion ; 
t and: 
pfail, 
with 
were 
»-gal- 
nd to 
was 
pared 


i 
VJ 
as 
tae 
By f 
fe 


ROUND THE WORLD 


ing that at this time there was no great preffure on any part of the ng- 
ging, fo extremely rotten and decayed were our principal ropes and 
fails, that our ftarboard maintopfail fheet broke, the gib-boom fnapped 
fhort off about the middle, and the wind fplit the mizentopfail.  Juit 
before nine o’clock in the forenoon, an ifland was feen bearing by com- 
pafs N.15 w., which at firft we fuppofed to be Diego Ramirez; but as 
that is reprefented by former navigators to be a fingle ifland in the latitude 
of 56° 38’ fouth, longitude 291° 34’; as the land in fight foon put on the 
appearance of being much broken; as we had foundings about two in 
in the afternoon at the diftance of 3 leagues in the depth of 80 fathoms, in 
the latitude of 56° 28’ fouth, longitude 291° 23'; and as Captain Cook 
had paffed between the iflands of St. Ildefonfo and Tierra del Fuego, in 
the latitude of 55° 53’ fouth, longitude 290° 19’; I had every reafon to 
believe that we had been miftaken, and that the land we had feen at nine 
o'clock was St. Ildcfonfo’s ifles, which at this time bore by compafs 
w.s.w. The wind was lefs boifterous on the fucceeding day, but 
the weather continued to be unpleafant, being very dark and gloomy, 
with frequent heavy fhowers of fnow. About eleven o'clock at night, 
ina {quall of hail, rain, and f{now, the maintopfail was fplit and was re- 
placed by another, which although whole and the beft we had, was in a 
very unferviceable condition. 

Notwithftanding that the fnow continued to fall fo very heavily that 
no obfervation for the latitude could be procured, yet by four double 
altitudes of the fun taken by two perfons with different inftruments, the 
latitude was found to be 56° 57’; the longitude carried on by the dead 
reckoning, and corrected by Arnold’s chronometer No. 14, appeared to 
be 293° 39’, and the variation of the compafs 29° eaftwardly. 

Confidering that we were now fufficiently advanced to the fouthward 
to avoid any inconvenience or interruption from the iflands which lie off 
cape Horn, I determined to fhape fuch a courfe to the north-eaftward, 
as we proceeded in our route to St. Helena, as might afford me an op- 
portunity of feeing and determining the fituation of the Ifla Grande, 
the fouthern point of which is ftated to be in latitude 45° 30’, longitude 
313° 20. On the goth we were again vifited by ftrong gales and heavy 
302 fqualls 


Thurfday 23 


Friday 30. 


June. 
Ly 
Monday 1. 


Puefday 2. 


Vhurfday 4. 


Friday in 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


fqualls of wind from the weft and north-weftern points, which frequently 
reduced us to our courfes; as we proceeded towards the north-eaft, the 
latitude by an indifferent obfervation appeared to be 55° 28’, and the 
longitude at noon brought forward by Arnold's chronometer No. 14, was 
according to the dead reckoning, 299° 9’. 

On the 1ft of june abont fix in the morning, I ordcred the foretopfail 
to be taken in, for the purpofe of allowing the Chatham to come up with 
us, as fhe was at this time far aftern. At day-light the next morning fhe 
was in fight from the maintop, but not from the deck. 

Our latitude by the dead reckoning fince the preceding day being 
46° 16’, and the longitude brought forward by Arnold’s chronometer No. 
14, 310° 8’, it was reafonable to conclude, as we hada frefh breeze from 
the weft and fouth-weft, that we were approaching very rapidly towards 
Ifla Grande; and as I was very folicitous to examine the [pace al- 
lotted to this ifland, I continued our courfe to the northward, that we 
might fall into its parallel fome leagues to the weftward of the fpot af- 
figned to it; but in the afternoon we were again vifited by a very furt- 
ous ftorm at firft from the n.w. but foon afterwards from the s.w. 
which obliged us to fteer to the eaftward, under the forefail and clofe- 
reefed maintopfail on the cap, in order that we might keep a-head of the 
fea which ran exceffively high, and broke with great violence. Under 
this reduced canvas, we outfailed the Chatham fo much as to lofe fight of 
her. The fouth-weft gale continued to blow very hard until the morning 
of the 5th, when it moderated, and was attended by clear, though fe- 
verely cold weather. We now ftood to the northward, and had the 
pleafure of rejoining the Chatham. At noon our obferved latitude was 
45° 30, longitude 312° 55’; in this fituation I efteemed it to be a very 
fortunate circumftance that the weather was fine, and that the horizon 
was remarkably clear in all dire€&tions, excepting between the n.w. and 
N.N.E.; fo that had any land been above our horizon within the dif- 
tance of from 10 to 20 leagues, it could not poffibly have efcaped our 
notice. Between the limits above-mentioned, which were occupied by 
a haze, we could alfo have difcerned land at the diftance of 5 or 6 leagues, 
and as it was in this dire€tion that we were fteering, we muft have fallen in 
with 


ry 
BS 

hy 

ig 
: 


ently 
t, the 
d the 
» was 


opfail 
y with 


ig fhe 


being 
‘r No. 
> from 
wards 
ce al- 
lat we 
ot af- 
y furt- 
s.W. 
clofe- 
of the 
nder 
sht of 
prning 
ch {e- 
d the 
e was 
h very 
brizon 
. and 
ne drf- 
our 
ed by 
4 gues, 
len in 
with 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


with it had any land there exifted. From noon our courfe was directed 
about n. by £., which by eight in the evening brought us to the latitude of 
45° 4, longitude 313° 3’. The weather continued to be tolerably clear 
until the clofe of the day, but no land was within our view, nor had we 
the leaft reafon, from any of the ufual indications, to fuppofe ourfelves 
in its vicinity, excepting from the number of birds that were about the 
fhip. 

According to Mr. Arrowfmith’s comprehenfive chart, (in which the Ifla 
Grande is placed agreeably to the affigned fituation of it by Mr. Dalrym- 
ple,) the track of Dr. Halley is laid down about a degree to the weltward 
of our path, croffing the fame parallel in the longitude of about 311° 55’; 
from which circumftance it is probable, that thofe on board that veflel faw 
a confiderable diftance to the weftward of them. Since therefore we met 
with no drift wood, nor other circumftance to indicate our vicinity to land; 
(and had any been near to us in a weftwardly direétion, fuch indications 
moft likely would, from the generally prevailing winds, have been prefented 
to us), I was led to conclude, that if M. La Roche did difcover any ifland 
under the parallel of 45° fouth, that fuch land muft have been to the eaft- 
ward of our track. Under this perfuafion, about eight in the evening, a3 
the weather had the appearance of being fine, and the wind moderate, I 
fteered a more eaftwardly courfe, with an intention, fhould the winds 
prove favorable, to continue about this parallel until we fhould pafs the 
meridian of South Georgia; from the fhores of which ifland, it is with 
great reafon fuppofed, La Roche fleered to the north, and in that 
route fell in with Ifla Grande. It is therefore moft likely, that if any 
fuch land has exiftence, it will be found not very far remote from the 
fituation affigned to it by Captain Cook ; a fact I was very defirous of 
eftablifhing. 

On faturday morning, although the weather was gloomy, with the 
wind from the north, yet it admitted of our feeing diftinétly all around 
us for feveral leagues; we continued to ftand to the eaftward until four in 
the afternoon, when in latitude 45° 6’ fouth, longitude 314° 50’, the at- 
mofphere was fufficiently clear to have feen any land above our horizon 
at the diftance of 6 or 8 leagues, but nothing of the kind was within the 

limits 


Saturday 6. 


479 


17056 
June. 


(en eed 


Sunday 7. 


Monday 8, 


1 fn) 
Puciday 9. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


limits of our view. The wind now veered to the N.£. and eaft, and 
blew a frefh gale, with which we ftood to the north, in the night to the 
s.E., and on the following morning to the s.s.£. and fouth, fo that we 
were unable to regain the parallel of 45° without employing more time 
than I had now to appropriate to this examination; being, from the 
extremely bad condition of our fails and rigging, very anxious to lole no 
opportunity of making the beft of our way to St. Helena; and for this 
reafon I gave up all further thought of fearching for Ifla Grande, and 
continued our courfe towards the N.N.E. 
This fhort inveftigation, however, will ferve to fhew that no fuch ifland 
exifts in or about the latitude of 45° fouth, between the meridians 312° 
and 315° 20 of eaft longitude; and that, as I have already mentioned, 
Dr. Halley moft likely determined the fame point, namely, that there ty 
was no fuch ifland, a degree further to the weftward. ‘ 
At inidnight the Chatham was clofe along fide of us, but by four o’clock 
the next morning fhe was nearly out of fight a-ftern of the Difcovery, our 
mainfail and topgallant-fails were therefore taken in to wait for her nearer 
approach ; atday-light fhe was feen about three miles a-ftern, and havingat 
this time a fleady frefh gale with fair weather, her fignal was made to make 
more fail, and repeated with a gun feveral times until about ten o'clock, 
when the Chatham neither making fail, nor exhibiting any reafon indicative 
of her wanting afliftance, I concluded that fome caufe of no very ferious 
nature had retarded her progrefs ; and juft as we had fet our ftudding 
fails, I had the pleafure to fee her employed in the fame bufinefs alfo. 
Shortly after noon the wind veered to the s. w. and having increafed 
our diftance from the Chatham very confiderably, we fhortened fail to 
wait for her coming up, concluding that fhe would foon overtake us un- 
der our then reduced quantity of canvas. In thefe expe€tations however 
we were difappointed ; at ten at night the wind had again frefhened from 
the N.N.W.; we now burnt a falfe fire to denote our fituation to our 
confort, but this was not anfwered, and by two the next morning the 
wind veered to the weltward, and blew a very ftrong gale, during which, 
left we fhould lofe the Chatham, we hauled up the mainfail and clofe- 
reefed the topfails; but as at day-light fhe was not in fight from the maft- q 
2 head, ES 


RFE RS 


see Sia 


Ate 
eran’ 


' 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


head, and as I did not know in what direétion to fearch for her, I could 
not but confider the inferiority of her failing had at length completed 
our feparation, and in the hope tliat we fhould meet all well at St. 
Helena, our next rendezvous, we made the beft of our way thither, 
by continuing our courfe to the north-caftward. ‘The obferved latitude 
at noon was 36° 45’, longitude according to Arnold’s chronometer No. 
14, 324° 43, and the variation of the compals 6° caftwardly. The 
wind continued to blow very hard at times, attended by heavy rains, 
and thick cloudy fqually weather, in which our fails frequently fplit, 
and our topfail-fheets and other effential parts of the rigging gave way, 
until the 20th, when it became more moderate, and in latitude 31° 38’ 
fouth, longitude 347°10', brought forward by Arnold’s chronometer No. 
14, the fhip appeared to have been fet 25 miles of latitude towards the 
north, and 34 miles of longitude towards the eaft of the reckoning. 

About half paft five o’clock on funday morning, Richard Jones, one 
of the feamen, unfortunately fell overboard from the main chains and 
was drowned. The accident had no fooner happened than a grating was 
thrown overboard, and the fhip was inftantly hove to, for the purpole of 
affording him every affiftance; but this was to no effeét, for the poor 
fellow funk immediately, and was never more feen. By this melancholy 
event the fervice loft a very able feaman, and his comrades a good mem- 
ber of their fociety. On the following day at ‘noon, in latitude 32° 9’ 
fouth, longitude 351° 15, it appeared that the fhip was g miles of lati- 
tude to the northward, and 25 miles of longitude to the eaftward of 
our reckoning; and that the variation of the compafs by two fets of 
azimuths was now 11° 20 weltwardly. The eaftwardly variation feemed 
to have ceafed about the 16th of june, as in latitude 35° 43! fouth, lon- 
gitude 232° 5’, it had decreafed to 16’, and fince that period the wefterly 
variation had been gradually increafing as we proceeded to the north- 
ward. 

No circumftances of importance, or fuch as are worthy to be recorded, 
took place, until about two o'clock in the afternoon of the ed of july, 
when after experiencing tolerably pleafant weather for the preceding ten 
days, the ifland of St. Helena was difcovered bearing by compafs N. by £.; 
about 


471 


1795: 
une, 


Lp 


Saturday co. 


Sunday 21. 


Monday 22. 


July. 
ew] 
Thurlday 2. 


472 


1705¢ 
Tuly. 
CY Reade 


(ery ar 


Friday 3. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


about eightin the evening we fhortened fail, and hauled our wind on the 
ftarboard tack, as the ifland now extended by compafs from Nn. 3 w. to 
N.35 Ww. at the diflance of about 5 leagues ; at day-light the next morn- 
ine we made fail for St. Helena bay, and about fix o'clock we had the 
happinels of difcovering the Chatham in the fouth-eaflern quarter. As we 
were now fall approaching a port from whence it was reafonable to ex- 
pect that opportunities would frequently occur, during the time of our 
re-equipment there, to communicate with our friends in| England, 1 
deemed it expedient that the order {hould be publicly read, which I had 
received from the Lords of the Admiralty, direéting me to demand the 
log books and journals which had been kept, and the charts, drawings, 
&e. which had been executed by the officers, petty officers, and gentle- 
men on board the Difcovery; and direéting alfo, that I fhould enjoin 
them and the whole of the crew not to divulge where they had been, unt 
they fhould have permiffion fo to do: anda copy of this order was fent to 
Mr. Puget, with my directions to enforce the fame on board the Chatham 
alfo. 

As we approached the bay of St. Helena, I had the mortification to 
fee a fleet of large fhips flanding out, and apparently bound to the 
northward. This fleet I confidered to be from the Eaft Indies, and that 
it was moft probably boundto England, under the proteétion of which I 
fhould have been happy to have performed the remainder of our voyage ; 
for we were in no fituation to contend with the enemies fhips of equal 
force, nor to have cfeaped from thofe of fuperior weight of metal. At 
half paft cight o’clock we anchored in 16 fathoms water, and moored 
with a cable each way. In the bay of St. Helena we found the Arnifton 
Kaft Indiaman, and an American brig. After faluting the fort with thir- 
teen guns, which were returned, accompanied by Mr. Puget, I paid my 
compliments to the governor, and underftood from him, that the fleet of 
hips which we had feen depart from the ifland as we had approached it 
in the morning, was, as [had imagined, a fleet of Eaft Indiamen, toge- 
ther with feveral fail of Dutch prizes under the convoy of His Majefly’s 

fhip Sceptre, commanded by Captain Effington. 
I was 


money motes 


fa Ee eel teal es 


n the 
Vv. tO 
10rN- 
1 the 
ls we 
» @X- 
f our 
ud, I 
I had 
id the 
ving, 
entle- 
njoin 
until 
ent to 
itham 


on to 
o the 
that 
ich I 
yage ; 
equal 
At 
oored 
nifton 
1 thir- 
id my 
eet of 
hed it 
toge- 
jefly’s 


I was 


Laneeenseites 


a et an 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


. I was received by the governor of St. Helena with his accuftomed po- 
litenefs, and having underftood from him that hoftilities had taken place 
between the court of London, and the united ftates of Holland, I fent 
an officer on board a Dutch Eaft Indiaman which I had perceived to be 
coming into the bay, and took poffeffion of her as a prize. 

The great plenty of excellent refrefhments with which we had been 
fupplicd during our refidence amongft our very hofpitable friends at 
Valparailo, had not only eradicated every appearance of the {curvy be- 
fore our departure from that port, but had fo completely re-eftablithed 
the health of every individual on board (myfelf excepted) that al- 
though we had now been fifty-eight days at fea, during which time we 
had experienced much bad weather, particularly in that part of the 
paflage as we had approached the weftern coaft of Patagonia, and until 
we had pafled round cape Horn and proceeded fome diftance to the 
north-eaftward ; and had alfo been obliged to make great exertions, and 
to endure great fatigue, owing to the repeated accidents that had befallen 
our fails and rigging, and the additional labour at the pumps confequent 
on the leak in the fore part of the veffel; I had the inexpreflible happi- 
nels of fecing all my officers and men return to a Britith fettlement, after 
an abfence from England of more than four years and a quarter, per- 
fe€tly well in health, and with conftitutions apparently unimpared by the 
extremely laborious fervice in which they had been fo long employed, 
and to which without a murmur they had, at all times, and in all wea- 
ther, uniformly fubmitted with great zeal and alacrity. 

Notwithftanding that I had the additional fatisfa¢tion to hear, from Mr. 
Puget, that the crew of the Chatham were now ina convalefcent ftate, yet 
I was much concerned to become acquainted that their health, as well 
as that of the officers, had fuffered very materially indeed im their 


late paflage from Valparaifo. Although, previoufly to our departure — 


from that port, every precaution within our power had been taken to 
make both veflels as equal as it were poflible to the tafk which they 
had to perform at the then advanced feafon of the year, through fo 
tempeftuous and inhofpitable a region; yet the fmallnefs of the Chat- 
ham had made her more liable to the influence of the bad weather 

Vou. III. oP. than 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


than the Difcovery, and this will ferve to ‘account for her progrefs 
having been fo very frequently interrupted. For fixteen days toge- 
ther Mr. Puget had been under the neceflity of keeping in the dead 
lights, and from the violence of her motion her decks and fides had be- 
come open and fo leaky, that his people were conftantly in a wet humid 
ftate when they retired from the deck, on which, previoufly to their 
making cape Horn, five men only in a watch were able to do duty ; 
the reft being rendered incapable of it by rheumatic complaints. Veffels 
of the Chatham’s fize fhould certainly make choice of the fummer feafon 
to infure a good paffage round the fouthern promontory of America ; 
for although the prevailing winds in the winter months of may, june, 
and july, may-expedite their voyage, yet this advantage is more than 
counterbalanced by the fhortnefs of the days, the feverity of the climate, 
and the very ftormy weather which is attendant on this time of the year; 
this Mr. Puget reprefented as having had the effe&t of keeping the Chat- 
ham, comparatively fpeaking, almoft under water during the greater 
part of the paffage, in which he ftated, that nothing of importance had 
occurred fince the period of our feparation, and that the reafon why our 
laft fignals were not anfwered on the night of the 8th of june, was, that 
the fupply of falfe fire on board the Chatham was at that time totally 
expended. From Mr. Puget I alfo underftood, that in and about the 
latitude affigned to La Roche’s ifla Grande, the Chatham, like the Dif- 
covery, had been vifited by a great number of birds, which, with fome 
fea weed, were the only indications he had noticed of the vicinity of 
land. 

My firft care was to take fuch precautions on our arrival at St. He- 
lena, as were moft likely to prove efficacious in preferving to the crews 
of both veffels that ineftimable bleffing, health, of which, on board the 
Difcovery, we were in fuch complete enjoyment. For this purpofe fome 
frefh provifions were procured from the ifland, and occafionally ferved 
to both fhips’ companies, with a plentiful fupply of efculent vegetables ; 
the convalefcents from the Chatham were fent on fhore, and fuch regu- 
lations were adopted as appeared to be, in my judgment, moft likely to 
infure this defirable obje&t; which, at all times, and on all occafions, 
throughout 


sa ae ah neal 


srefs 
oge- 
dead 
1 be- 
amid 
their 
uty 3 
effels 
safon 
rica ; 
june, 
than 
mate, 
year ; 
Chat- 
eater 
e had 
y our 
that 
ptally 
t the 
» Dif- 
fome 
tv of 


He- 
rews 
d the 
fome 
erved 
bles ; 
regu- 
rly to 
fions, 


ee ee 


i 

t 

S 

e 

& Zs 

ae 
: 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


throughout the voyage, had been a confideration with me of the firft ne- 
ceffity and higheft importance. 

After thefe arrangements were made, the obfervatory, as ufual, was 
committed to the charge of Mr. Whidbey; and now that the fhip was 
ftationary, the carpenters were employed in fearching for the leak in 
the fore part of the veffel, which, at times, during our late paflage from 
Valparaifo, had greatly increafed our labours, by our efforts to keep 
the fhip free from the great quantity of water which it admitted. Not- 
withftanding that our main yard had, by great care and attention, brought 
us fafely thus far, yet, as I found it would be poffible to procure a new 
one at St. Helena, meafures were inftantly taken for replacing it with 
one, on which we could more fecurely depend; whilft other parts of the 
crew were employed in the neceffary duties about the fhip, and in ob- 
taining a full fupply of water. 

According to our reckoning, this day was monday the 6th of july, but 
at St. Helena we found it (agreeably to our calculations) to be only fun- 
day the 5th of july: for, by our having failed round the world in an 
eaftern direétion, we had, fince our departure from England, gained 
one day; but as it was now become expedient that we fhould fubfcribe to 
the eftimation of time, as underftood by Europeans and the reft of the 
civilized world, to which we were now faft approaching, our former 
reckoning was abandoned, the day we had gained dropped, and, after 
noon this day, we recommenced funday the 5th of july. 

His Majefty’s fhip the Sphinx, commanded by Captain Brifac, arrived 
on tuefday, charged with difpatches from Admiral Sir George Keith El- 
phinftone* to General Clarke at St. Salvador, on the coaft of Brafil, 
who, with his army, was waiting at that port, until he fhould receive 
inftru€tions from Sir George that might enable him to co-operate with 
that admiral in the reduétion of the cape of Good Hope. A convoy, 
I underftood, was foon expeéted to fail from St. Salvador, and as I had 
reafon to believe the Chatham’s re-equipment would not take more than 
a week, I determined to fend her thither for the purpofe of going with 
the firft convoy which fhould fail from thence to England, and that I 
would be content to remain here until fome Britifh veffel of force fhould 
a P39 touch 


Monday 6, 


now by due 
regulation of 
our time 


becomes 
Sunday 5. 


Tuefday 4. 
* Now Lord 


eith. 


‘Tuefday 7. 


Friday 10. 


Monday 13. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


touch at St. Helena in her way home, or that the next convoy from the 
Eaft Indies fhould arrive, under the proteétion of which, I fhould hope 
fafely to arrive in England in the courfe of the autumn. As the fervice 
which Captain Brifac had to perform required the utmoft difpatch, our 
boats aflifled thofe of the Sphinx in recruiting her water, after which, 
on the following day, fhe immediately failed for the coaft of Brafil. 

Underftanding that our field pieces would be of ufe to His Majefly’s 
forces on the coaft of Africa, and confidering that the purpofe for which 
they had originally been put on board the Difcovery was now completely 
ferved, and that they could not be of the leaft poffible fervice to us in 
performing the remainder of ovr voyage to England, I availed myfelf 
of the Arnifton being engaged to carry troops from St. Helena to the 
fquadron under Admiral Sir George Keith Elphin{tone, to confign, by 
that conveyance, the four pieces of ordnance, and the remaining parts 
of their ammunition we had on board, to the commanding officer of 
the expedition deftined againft the cape of Good Hope ; and I was made 
happy on this occafion to have it alfo in my power to affift with our 
boats in the embarkation of the troops on board the Arnifton. 

The leak was foon difcovered to be in the bows of the Difcovery, 
and our carpenters were immediately employed in ufing their beft en- 
deavours to ftop and prevent any further inconvenience from it. 

On funday morning arrived the Orpheus of London, commanded by 
Mr. Bowen, to whom were entrufted duplicates of thofe difpatches from 
Admiral Sir George Keith Elphinftone, with which Captain Brifac had 


failed on the 8th, with dire€tions to the governor of St. Helena to ufe 


his utmoft endeavours to forward them immediately to General Clarke 
at St. Salvador. The Chatham at this time being nearly ready for fea, 
I confidered that it would be furthering His Majefty’s fervice to charge 
Mr. Puget with the care of thefe duplicate difpatches, with which, after 
receiving the following order from me, he departed for the coaft of 
Brafil the following day. 

“ Confidering it to be expedient, and for the good of His Majefty’s 
fervice, that you fhould proceed immediately to St. Salvador, in order to 
carry fome difpatches from Rear Admiral the Honorable Sir George 

Keith 


ym the 
1 hope 
ervice 
h, our 
which, 


jefty’s 
which 
dletely 
us in 
myfelf 
to the 
sn, by 
parts 
cer of 
made 
h our 


very, 
{t en- 


ed by 
s from 
c had 
o ule 
larke 
br fea, 
harge 


after 
ait of 


efty’s 
Her to 
corge 
Keith 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Keith Elphinftone, to Major General Clarke, commander of His Majef- 
ty’s forces, deftined to aét with the faid rear-admiral; and the faid Ma- 
jor General having been directed to rendezvous at St. Salvador ; you 
are hereby required and direéted to proceed, without lofs of iime, to 
the faid port, in order to deliver the inclofed difpatches accordingly ; 
and, after having performed that fervice, you will communicate to the 
commanding officer of His Majefly’s naval forces at that port, the na- 
ture of the fervice on which you have been employed, and that you have 
my dire¢tions, after delivering the faid difpatches, to ule your utmolt 
exertions, for the purpofe of immediately proceeding to England, that 
you may be enabled to carry into effect fuch further orders as you have 
received from me. But fhould you not mect with any naval officer, fenior 
to yourfelf, at that port, you will inform Major-General Clarke, that I 
conceive it to be a matter of great moment, that as little detention as 
poffible fhould take place to retard your proceeding to England as be- 
fore expreffed. If, before your arrival at the port of St. Salvador, the 
faid troops and fqiadron fhould have departed, you are to ufe the ut- 
molt precaution not to promulgate the caufe which carricd you thither, 
but having, with all expedition, completed your water, &c. &c. you are 
to proceed to England as already direéted: and, as it is of the utmoft 
importance to prevent thefe orders, difpatches, and private fignals, 
from falling into the hands of the enemy, you are to keep the fame in a 
leaden box, in order that they may be thrown into the fea, in cafe of 
capture. And that you may avoid, as much as poffible, falling in with 
the enemy’s cruizers, on your approaching the coaft of Europe, you 
will confider, as circumftances may point out, of the propriety of pro- 
ceeding round the north part of Ireland, either to the firft convenient 
port on the coaft of Scotland or England, which you can make ; from 
whence you will immediately repair to the Admiralty office, and there 
deliver the difpatches with which you are charged. 

« But in the event of your reaching St. Salvador before General 
Clarke fhould have arrived, and finding no other Britifh othcer there with. 
whom you may judge it proper to entruft the difpatches committed. to 
your care; you are to continue there fourteen days, and after the expi- 

ration 


1795; 
July. 
wy 


478 


1795. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


ration of that time you are to proceed as herein before diretted; for 


+ which this fhall be your order, Dated on board His Majefty’s floop 


Difcovery, in St. Helena bay, this 12th day of july, 1795. 
‘To George Vancouver.” 

Lieutenant Peter Puget, commanding 
His Majelty’s armed tender Chatham.” 

Previoufly to Mr. Puget’s departure from St. Helena, we were given 
to underftand, by Mr. Bowen, that it had been decreed, by the national 
affembly of France, that the Difcovery and Chatham fhould pafs the 
feas unmolefted by the French cruizers, notwithftanding the exifting 
war between the two countries. This agreeable intelligence induced 
me to alter the plan which { had formed of waiting at this ifland for 
convoy. The Eaft-India fhips, under the prote&ion of the Sceptre, 
had not yet been failed fo long from St. Helena, as to diveft me intirely 
of the hope that we might overtake them, before they fhould have 
reached thofe latitudes in which we fhould be likely to meet with any 
thing unpleafant from the enemy’s fhips of force, in confequence of 
their commanders being unacquainted with the national decree in our 
favor, or in the event of any new matter having arifen between the 
powers at war to caufe its being revoked. Every effort was therefore 
now made to expedite our re-equipment; the main yard, by the affif- 
tance of the carpenters belonging to the Arnifton, was likely to be ready 
in the courfe of a day or two, in which time, I had reafon to believe, 
our own artificers would have ftopped the leak in the fhip’s bows; and 
as I entertained hopes that, foon after this fervice fhould be performed, 
the Difcovery would, in all other refpeéts, be fit for fea, I determined 
to fail immediately, and not to wait for the uncertain arrival of any 
other veffel, which might afford us proteétion during the remainder of 
our voyage to England. 

The fupply of vegetables which St. Helena afforded us was very ample; 
but fruits of all kinds were found to be extremely fcarce, owing to the 
want of rain. So fevere and continued had been the drought for the 
three preceding years, that moft of the trees, which were not indigenous 
to the country, had withered and fallen into decay, and amongft the ex- 

1 otics 


% PPTL ET AG ANAT ERY 


ASANTE ee 


Ds le ec ear ct 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Otics that had died were fix plants of the bread fruit, which had been 
left by Captain Bligh on his return in the Providence from the iflands 
in the pacific ocean. ‘The lofs of thefe valuable plants was very much 
regretted, as they appeared to thrive, and it was hoped, would have 
come to perfection. The herbage had fuffered alfo in the fame pro- 
portion, .and, in the courfe of the period above mentioned, upwards of 
fixteen hundred head of cattle had died upon the ifland. The fheep 
were very lean and poor, and the quantity of frefh provifions that could 
be obtained was by no means equal to the fuppiy I could have wifhed 
to have procured. 

On tuefday I had the pleafure to. behold our new main yard in fuch 
a ftate of forwardnefs that it would be ready to be got on board and 
rigged the fullowing day, and had the additional fatisfaétion of feeing, 
that by the unremitted attention of the refpeétive officers, who had 
the fuperintendance of the feveral fervices which had become neceffary 
to be carried into effeét, little elfe now remained to be done than to pre- 
pare the veilel for our departure. 

Much of my time, fince our arrival at St. Helena, had been em- 
ployed about the concerns of the Dutch prize Macaffar, and in making 
the beft arrangements within my power, to fecurea fafe paflage for her 
to England. The fhip was in a very bad leaky condition, and alihough 
we were able to give her fome repair, yet it was totally out of our power 
to refit her, and put her in a proper ftate for fo long a voyage, efpe- 
cially as there was little chance of her reaching any Britifh port before 
the commencement of the winter. 

Having, from long experience, been convinced of the fkill and re- 
fources which Lieutenant Johnftone poffeffed, and which, on many try- 
ing occafions throughout the voyage, he had eminently difplayed, I de- 
rived great fatisfaction in committing the charge of the Macaffar to his 
care. For this efpecial purpofe he received my direétions to quit the 
Chatham previoufly to her departure for St. Salvador; and in addition 
to the people that were to be engaged at St. Helena, to navigate the 
prize home, I fpared, from the crew of the Difcovery, feventeen able 
feamen, on whofe exertions I could with confidence rely, to carry Mr. 

Johnftone’s 


Tuefday 146 


480 


1795 
July. 


ced 


Wednef. 15. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


Johniftone’s orders, with promptitude, into effe&t. With this fupply of 
men on whom he could depend, and with the kind affurances which I 
received from Governor Brooke, that no affiftance in his power fhould 
be wanting in the manning and re-equipment of the prize, I entertained 
great hope that, under the proteétion of the firft convoy that fhould ar- 
rive at St. Helena bound to England, little danger was to be appre- 
hended of the Macaffar’s fafe arrival, in fome port of Great Britain. 

In the bay of St. Helena, on the 4th of july, the chronometers fhewed 
the following longitudes : 


Arnold’s No. 14, - - - - 354° 9 35"" 
Ditto, 176, = - - - 355 29 5 

Kendall’s, - - “ > 852 35 5 

The true longitude, - - - 354 11 0 


By which it appeared that Arnold’s chronometer, 
No. 14 was 9/25”, and Kendall’s 1° 35’ 25” to the weft- 
ward, and that Arnold’s No. 176 was 1°9/ 5” to the eaft- 
ward of the true longitude : and, by altitudes taken on 
this day, the 14th of july, Arnold’s No. 14 was found 


at noon to be {low of mean time, at Greenwich, 17°10) 42" 50" 
And to be gaining, on mean time, per day, at the 
rate of - - - - - - 24 50 


Arnold’s No. 176, flow of mean time at Greenwich, 9g 18 29 50 
And to be gaining on mean time, per day, at the 


rate of - “ m ‘ 57 
Kendall’s, flow of mean time at Greenwich - - 1215 3 20 
And to be gaining on mean time, per day, at the 

rate of - - - - - - 28 22 


On wednefday I had the pleafure of receiving our new main yard on 
board, it was immediately rigged, and the fhip in every other refpeé 
made ready to proceed to fea. After paying my refpeéts to the gover- 
nor, and returning him my beft thanks for his hofpitality and obliging 
attention to the neceffities of our little community whilft at St. Helena, 
I left Lieutenant Johnftone on board the Macaffar, with full dire@tions 
in writing, by which he would be enabled to govern himfelf in conduét- 


ing 


EL TE A TTA IONICS A SI ETE dk ets 


{pect 
bver- 
ging 
lena, 
tions 


uét- 


Le DUTY STE eee 
aS race o. s 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


ing the veffel, of which he was put in charge to Englan. and about 
fix o'clock on the following evening, with a light breeze of wind from 
the s.z., we direéted our courfe to the north-weftward, anxioufly look- 
ing forward to that happy hour which fhould once more land us amongtft 
our refpeétive friends, from whofe fociety we had fuffered fo long and fo 
painful an abfence. 

The weather continued to be very pleafant, and we made great pro- 
grefs to the north-weftward. On faturday the 25th we croffed the equa- 
tor in longitude 21° 35’ weft from Greenwich, where the variation, by 
two fets of azimuths, was found to be 9°20’ weftwardly. From this 
time nothing occurred worthy of remark until the 5th of auguft ; when 
one of the Cape de Verd iflands was feen, bearing by compafs N.16 F. 
The weather had continued to be very pleafant, and although the winds, 
fince the conclufion of the preceding month, had veered from the fouth. 
eaftern to the weft and north-weftern quarters, yet we had not been pre- 
vented from, making our north-weftern courfe good, agreeably to my 
wifhes. 

Our people, ever fince our departure from St. Helena, had been oc- 
cafionally employed in mending the fails and rigging, and, on all fuitable 
opportunities, they had exercifed with the great guns and {mall arms ; 
whilft the extremely pleafant weather which had attended us, had greatly 
contributed to our becoming well acquainted with the management of 


both. 


About four o’clock in the afternoon of the zoth, three velfels were Tiu: 


-difcovered to the northward, and at eight in the evening eight fail were 
feen from the maft-head, bearing by compafs n.80w. All our canvalfs 
was immediately fpread, in the hope of our being able to overtake them; 
being in great hopes the veffelsin fight would prove to be the convoy which 
had left the bay of St. Helena on the morning of our arrival there; in the 
event of which, I fhould be happy to avail myfelf of the proteétion we 
fhould derive by accompanying fo ftrong a fleet to England. At day-light 
the next morning five fhips only were in fight from the maft-head, but at 
feven in the morning nine fail of large vellels were fo clearly difcerned 
as to leave in my mind no doubt of their being a part of the fleet 

Vou, II, 3Q for 


oD Ne 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


for which we had kept fuch an anxious, though hitherto unfuccefsful, 
look out, under convoy of His Majefty’s {hip Sceptre, commanded by 
Captain Effington. About five in the afternoon a boat, from the Ge- 
neral Goddard Eaft-Indiaman, came on board, and confirmed us in the 
opinion we had at firft formed, and which every hour fince had ferved to 
ftrengthen, that the fleet before us was a convoy confifting of twenty-four 
fail of Indiamen, under the proteétion of the Sceptre. Upon receiving 
this information, I ordered a boat to be hoifted out, and I waited upon 
Captain Effington, by whom I was received with that unaffeéted hearty 
welcome, and unreferved fincerity, which are known by every one who 
has the happinefs of his friendfhip, to be the true type of his valuable 
chara¢ter. 

After putting myfelf under Captain Effington’s orders, and receiving 
fuch inftru€tions as were deemed to be neceflary by him, for the regu- 
lation of His Majefty’s floop under my command, now attached to tie 
fleet which he was convoying to England; I repaired cn board the 
Difcovery, and by fpreading an additional quantity of canvas, we foon 
had the pleafure of joining company with the Sceptre. 

The fatisfa€tion I experienced, in the proteétion we had derived by 
overtaking and uniting our little force with fo powerful a flee*, was greatly 
increafed by my now underftanding from Captain Effington, that he was 
of opinion the agreeable tidings communicated to me at St. Helena, by 
Mr. Bowen, of a French decree having paffed the national affembly, in 
favor of the Difcovery and Chatham, was premature, and that, in the 
event of our having unfortunately met with an enemy of fuperior force, 
to whom of neceffity we muft have yielded, we fhould have had little 
chance of efcaping the horrors of a French prifon, in addition to the 
cruel mortification of lofing to our country much of the information 
which had been colle€ted during the voyage. This refle€tion had the 
effe&t of reconciling my mind to the flow progrefs which I was now well 
aware would neceflarily be attendant on the conclufive part of our 
paffage to England. Having been fo fortunate hitherto, as to have loft 
only one man out of both veffels on confequence of difeafe, and as few by acci- 
dents as I could reafonably have expeéted, when I duly confidered the 

2 length 


sful, 
| by 
Ge- 
the 
-d to 
four 
ving 
ipon 
arty 
who 


lable 


ving 
epu- 
O the 


1 the 
foon 


d by 
eatly 
le was 
, by 
y, In 
n the 
orce, 
little 
o the 
ation 
d the 
well 
our 
e loft 
acci- 
d the 
ength 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


length of our abfence from home, and the nature of the fervice on 
which we had. been fo long employed; I do confefs that, under the 
peculiar circumf{tances of our defencelefs fituation, I fhould have re- 
garded it as a very painful tafk to have been compelled to the ne- 
ceflity of expofing my excellent officers and valuable crew, who were 
now, comparatively fpeaking, almof within reach of the welcome 
embraces of their neareft and deareft affections, to a confliét with an 
enemy, whofe fuperiority in point of force we had not originally been 
fitted out to meet, nor were we but ina very humble way prepared to 
refift, and from whom, in point of failing, when I adverted to the fhat- 
tered condition of our mafts and rigging, I entertained no hope of our 
being able to efcape. I was, therefore, reconciled to the delays unavoid- 
able in efcorts of this nature, though they became greatly augmented by 
the deplorable condition of many of Captain Effington’s Dutch prizes, 
fome of which, I underftood, had been with great difficulty prevented 
from foundering. 

Although our progrefs was neceffarily much retarded, yet our time 
paffed pleafantly away, by having at length regained the power of devo- 
ting it, on all fuitable occafions, to the comforts of a friendly intercourfe 
with our furrounding countrymen, from the pleafures of whofe fociety 
we had been fo long eftranged. 

Nothing very material occurred until the 1ft of feptember; when, 
after contending with a frefh gale from the north and north-weftern 
quarters, which had commenced the preceding day, and had been at- 
tended with fome heavy fqualls of wind and rain; about nine o’clock in 
the forenoon, in about the latitude of 46° 12’ north, longitude 29° 30! 
weft, one of the Dutch prizes made a fignal of diftrefs: we immediately 
hove.to, and I fent the cutter to her affiftance, but fhe was found to be 
almoft a wreck, and in fuch a deplorably bad condition that it was im- 
poffible to fave her, and fhe was therefore abandoned, by order of Cap- 
tain Effington, and fet on fire about fix o’clock in the evening. After 
performing this fervice our cutter returned to the fhip, and in the aét of 
hoifling her on board fhe was by accident ftove inurely to pieces. 

3Q2 Ido 


September. 


Tuelday 1. 


484 


1795° 
September. 


swiuiday ge 


Tuefday 8. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


I do not recolleét that my feelings ever fuffered fo much on any oc- 


aed Cafion of a fimilar nature, as at thismoment. The cutter was the boat 


I had conftantly ufed; in her I had travelled very many miles; in her I 
had repeatedly efcaped from danger ; fhe had always brought me fafely 
home; and, although fhe was but an inanimate conveniency, to which, 
it may pollibly be thought, no affeétion could be attached, yet I felt my- 
felt under fuch obligation for her fervices, that when fhe was dafhed to 
pieces before my eyes, an involuntary emotion fuddenly feized my breatt, 
and I was compelled to turn away to hide a weaknefs (for which, though 
my own gratitude might find an apology) I fhould have thought im- 
proper to have publicly manifefted. 

The wind changed on fattrday, from the north-weft to the oppofite 
quarter, and blew a very hard gale, with {qualls chiefly from £. by s. ; 
about fix in the evening another of the Dutch prizes was obferved to have 
made the fignal of diftrelfs. We were direéted to give her afliftance ; 
and the relief we were enabled to afford her was very falutary, and had 
become effentially neceflary, as we found her in a very leaky ftate, and 
her crew in a very difabled fickly condition. The wind again veered 
to its former direétion, and though it continued to be fqually and unplea- 
fant, it had been more moderate during the two laft days; in one of thefe 
from the north-weft, on tuefday morning, about feven o'clock, we {prung 
our maintopmaft, an accident that might have been attended with the 
moft ferious confequences, had we not been in a fituation that afforded 
us the moft ample proteétion, and which I had no doubt we fhould be 
able to maintain until we fhould arrive in fome port of Great-Britain, 
although our quantity of canvas fhould hereafter be materially re- 
duced, as we had been repeatedly obliged to fhorten fail for the convoy. 
All the upper fails were taken in, the maft ftruck, and the carpenters 
immediately employed to remedy and provide for the difafter in the beft 
manner we were able; this bufinefs was completed about noon, and 
a topmaft with the topgallant rigging was again fet up. Notwith- 
ftanding that the weather was not very favorable to aftronomical pur- 
fuits, Mr. Whidbey procured fix fets, and Mr. Orchard three fets of 
lunar diftances, by the mean iefult of which the true longitude, at noon, 


was 


TORTIE 


RS ES I aa Reka 


isl Sule ili eno eae 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


was found to be - - - - 20°13’ 0” welt 
By Arnold’s chronometer, No. 14, : 20 14 5 welt 
Ditto, - 176, - 19 48 30 welt 
By Kendall's, : - - - 20 6 30 weft 
The obferved latitude - - - 51 2 0 
Variation of the compals, - - - 22 wefterly. 


By our courfe having judicioufly been direé&ted far to the weftward, it 
was moft probable that the coaft of Ireland would be the firft land in the 
Britifh dominions with which we fhould fall in. For thofe fhores, as the 
wind and other circumftances had allowed, we had been fleering for [e- 
veral days, and as our diftance from England every day and every hour 
decreafed, fo our happinefs became augmented in the grateful anticipa- 
tion of once more breathing our native air, once more repofing in the 
bofom of our country and expeéting friends. Every breaft, as may be 
naturally imagined, was alive to fenfations of the moft pleafant nature, 
infeparable from the fond idea of returning home, after fo long an ab- 
fence, in an adventurous fervice to promcte the general good, when un- 
appalled by the confcioufnefs of deferve reproach. In the midft of thefe 
agreeable refle€tions, however, prefages of a melancholy caft would fre- 
quently obtrude upon the mind, and damp the promifed joys in con- 
templation. Few of us had been bleffed with any tidings from our 
families or friends fince our laft feparation from them; and in the courfe 
of fuch a lapfe of time what changes might not have taken place, 
what events might not have happened to difappoint our hopes ; rob us 
of our prefent peace ; or cloud the funfhine of our future days! Thefe 
were confiderations of a moft painful nature, and tinged our joyful ex- 
peétations with folicitude and apprehenfion ! 

At length, about five o’clock on faturday morning, a fignal was made 
by one of the headmoft fhips, that denoted fhe was within fight of land, 
and foon afterwards, from our mafthead, the glad tidings were announ- 
ced that land was plainly to be feen, bearing by compafs £.s. z. At eleven 
in the forenoon it was known to be the weftern coaft of Ireland, and 
arrangements were immediately made by the Sceptre for keeping the 
fhips together, and for entering the Shannon; where Captain Effington 

1 propofed 


485 
1795. 
September. 


ee aed 


Saturday 12, 


ee  — 


og ee NE Bt eet sng AE AE a a ell 
7 : nN 


{80 


17956 
September. 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


propofed to remain with his convoy until a force more equal to the pro- 


ee tection of the valuable fleet he had thus fafely brought into His Majecfly’s 


Sonday 13. 


* Arrived all 
well in the 

Thames the 
goth of oft. 


1795+ 


dominions, fhould arrive, to efcort it from thence to England. Having 
communicated to Captain Effington fuch parts of my orders from the 
Lords of the Admiralty, under which I had failed, as applied to the 
government of my conduct on the prefent occafion, I received his or- 
ders to repair immediately to London; and the following day, after having 
feen the Difcovery fately moored, with the refl of the fleet, in the Shan- 
non, and giving fuch inftructions, as circum{lances demanded, to my 
firft Heutenant Mr. Baker, in whole zeal for the fervice, and abilities as an 
officer, a long experience juftificed me in implicitly confiding; I refigned 
my command of the Difcovery into his hands, and with fuch books, 
papers and charts as had been previoully feleéted, as being effential to the 
illuftration of the fervices we had performed, I took leave of my officers 
and crew; not, however, without emotions which, though natural, on 
parting with a fociety with whom I had lived fo long, fhared fo many 
dangers, and from whom I had received fuch effential fervices, are yet 
more eafily to be imagincd than I have the power to defcribe : and in the 
courfe of a few days I arrived at the Admiralty, where I depofited my fe- 
veral documents. 

Before I bid farewell to the Difcovery,* I muft beg leave to arreft 
the attention of my readers for a few minutes, for the purpofe of taking 
a fhort view of the geographical knowledge which had been obtain- 
ed of the earth, previoufly to the expedition which I have had the ho- 
nor to command, and the happinefs of bringing thus to a conclufion; 
and alfo to notice fuch parts of the globe as yet remain to be explored to 
make that {pecics of information complete. The effe€ting a paflage into 
the oriental feas round the cape of Good Hope, the difcovery of America, 
and the opening of a communication between the atlantic and pacific 
oceans, by paffing cither through the ftraits of Magellan, or round the 
iflands lying off the fouthern extremity of Ticrra del Fuego, engaged 
the minds and utmoft exertions of the moft illuftrious navigators during 
the three laft centuries. Thefe enterprizes have been duly appreciated 
and juftly celebrated for the important lights they have thrown upon 


the 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


the f{ciences of geography and nautical aftronomy ; for the improvements 
they have caufed in the arts; for the commercial intercourfe which, by 
their means, has been opened and eftablifhed with all the maritime parts 
of the world; and, laftly, for the happy introduction of civilization 
amonegt{t numerous tribes of our fellow creatures. 

In the firft attempts to accomplifh thefe extenfive objeéts, Great Britain 
took no part: but no fconer did fhe perceive the importance of which 
they were likely to be to her confequence and profperity as a maritime 
ftate, than her fpirit for the attainment of fuch valuable acquifitions to 
{cience became roufed. In the courfe of a very few years, no fuch effen- 
tial benefits have been fecured to mankind, nor has fo much geographi- 
cal knowledge been acquired, as fince the commencement of DISCOVER Y 
undertaken, and fuccefsfully accomplifhed, by the unremitted labours of 
Britifh navigators; whofe primary confiderations have been to dire&t 
their inquiries to objctts of an ufeful nature, and to inveftigate and fup- 
port the truth, by a plain narrative of thofe faéts, which fell within 
the {phere of their obfervation, rather than to give encouragement, by 
the obtrufion of fpecious opinions, to hypothefes, however ingenious. In 
confequence of a ftri€t adherence to this principle, the geography of the 
earth is now placed beyond the influence of conjeéture, and is deter- 
mined by fuch incontrovertible evidence, that the fmall {paces that yet 
remain unexplored in the pacific or indian oceans are too infignificant 
to become an objeét of enterprize: there are, however, parts of the 
coafts, both of Afia and America, which would yet afford employment 
for the labourers in the [cience of DISCOVERY. 

The Afiatic coaft, from the latitude of about 35° to the latitude of 
52° north is at prefent very ill defined ; and the American coaft, from 
about the latitude of 44° fouth, to the fouthern extremity of Tierra del 
Fuego, is likewife very little known; and I entertain no doubt, had not 
our late examination on the coaft of North-Weft America, fo delayed 
our return to the fouthern hemifphere, as to prevent my carrying the or- 
ders I had received into effeét, that I fhould have derived greai fatisfac- 
tion from a furvey and inveftigation of the fhores of that interefting 
country. If, however, by that portion of His Majefty’s commands, 
. whick 


487 


1795+ 
September. 
ep 


488 


1795 
September, 


epee | 


A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY 


which I have had the honor to execute, it fhall appear that a decifion 
may as juftly now take place, refpeting any navigable communication 
between the waters of the pacific and atlantic oceans, within the limits 
of our furvey, as on the hypothefis which gave as a counterpoife to the 
globe a fouthern continent, and which the indefatigable diligenceof Cap- 
tain Cook completely fubverted, I fhould hope that the purpofe for 
which His Majefty commanded the expedition to be undertaken, will 
not be confidered as having failed for want of zeal or perfeverance, 
though it fhould hereafter be found incomplete for want of judgment 
and ability. 

There were few obje€ts to which I had paid more attention, or had 
more fincerely at heart, than that of obferving fuch 2 conduét, at all 
times, towards the feveral tribes of Indians, with whom we fhould fre- 
quently meet, as fhould prevent the neceffity of our reforting to any 
meafures that might endanger the lives of a people, whofe real intentions 
were always likely to be mifunderftood, from a want of knowledge in 
us of their refpe€tive dialeéts or languages. After having refided, as it 
were, amongft them for more than two years, without having had the 
leaft occafion to fire a fhot in anger, I had fondly hoped that I fhould 
have been enabled to have completed our refearches in thofe before un- 
trodden regions, without the lofs of life to a fingle individual belonging 
to the countries we might yet find it neceffary to vifit. In this my an- 
xious concern for the great caufe of humanity I was, however, difap- 
pointed. The number of Indians from Traitor’s cove which fell in the 
unprovoked attack upon our boats, on the 12th of auguft, 1793, could 
not be afcertained ; but, independently of this unfortunate affair, I do 
not know of more than two men who afterwards loft their lives in con- 
fequence of our expeditions, from the Difcovery or Chatham. Thefe 
unlucky events did not, however, fail to produce in my mind much 
forrow and regret, from which I could find no relief but in the confo- 
ling refleétion, that nothing but the moft urgent neceffity, for our own 
prefervation, would have compelled us to have adopted coercive mea- 
furcs. 


From 


ROUND THE WORLD. 


Krom the firft moment of my appointment, to the hour in which I 
refigned the ftation I had fo long held, the health of every individual 
under my command had been my firft care ; and I had now the unfpeak- 
able happinefs of beholding the fame perfons return on board the Dif- 
covery to the river Shannon, in perfect health, as had failed with me 
from the river ‘Thames, excepting fuch of the officers as had officially 
been fent home, or had been promoted in the Chathain ; the feventcen 
feamen left at St. Helena, to affift in navigating the Macaflar to Eng- 
land*, and the under-mentioned individuals, who were unhappily loft in 
the courfe of the expedition. 

John Brown, carpenter’s mate, drowned by accident, in the execu- 
tion of his duty, off the fouth Foreland, 3d of february, 1791. 

Neil Coil, marine, died of the flux, communicated to the Dilcovery, 
at the cape of Good Hope, by an infeéted fhip from Batavia, 7th of 
auguft, 1791. 

Jofeph Murgatroyd, one of the carpenter’s crew, miffing at fea the 
eift of january, 1793. 

John Carter, feaman, poifoned by eating mufcles, in Poifon cove, 15th 
june, 1793. 

Ifaac Wooden, drowned by accident, in the execution of his duty, off 
Wooden’s rock, the 24th of auguft, 1794. 

Richard Jones, drewned by accident, in the execution of his duty, 
between the port of Valparaifo and the ifland of St. Helena, 21ft of 
june, 1795- 

By this lift it will appear that, from the 15th of december, in the 
year 1790, to this 13th day of feptember, 1795, comprehending a {pace 
of four years eight months and twenty-nine days, we had loft out of our 
compliment of one hundred men, only one man by difeafe: and at the 
time of our parting with the Chatham * at St. Helena, fhe had not, in 
the courle of the whole voyage loft a fingle man, either in confequence 
of ill health, or from any accident whatever. 

The unfortunate lofs of thefe five men from the Difcovery pro- 
duced in me infinite regret, but when I adverted to the very dangerous 
fervice in which we had been fo long employed, and the many perilous 
fituations from which we had providentially been extricated, with all 


Vou. III, gR poflible 


489 


1795. 
September. 


ee aed 


® Arrived all 
well the 2¢d 
of Novenb, 
17956 


* Arrivedall 
well i7th of 
of, 1795. 


490 A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY. 


sept et poffible adoration, humility, and gratitude, I offered up my unfeigned 
—.,-—_ thanks to the GrEAT DisrosEeR OF ALL HUMAN EVENTS, for the pro- 
te€tion which thus, in his unbounded wifdom and goodnefs he had been 
pleafed, on all occafions, to vouchfafe unto us, and which had now 


happily reftored us to our country, our families, and our friends. 


END OF THE JOURNAL. 


NOTES 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS, 


SINCE my return to England I have had feveral converiations with 
Captain Colnett, relative to the-capture of his veffel at Nootka, and the 
treatment that himfelf, officers, and crew, received from the Spaniards 
during the time they remained at that place, and afterwards whilft they 
were prifoners at St. Blas; from. the whole of which it will appear, that 
he had been extremely ill ufed, and that no dependence is to be placed 
on the accounts given to Sen" Quadra, or myfelf, by the American com- 
manders, who are {tated to have been eye-witneffes of moft of the tranf- 
aétions. ‘The documents and papers which Captain Colnett has fince 
produced to me, fully prove that the Americans wilfully mifreprefented 
the whole affair, to the prejudice of his charaGter, and the intereft of 
His Britannic Majefty’s {ubjeéts, engaged in commercial purfuits on the 
coalt of North Weft America. 

Having been particularly careful to ftate all the important circum- 
{tances that came to my knowledge during my negociation with Sen‘ 
Quadra, whether they were fuch as tended to eftablifh the claims, or mi- 
litate againft the pretenfions, of the Britifh crown to the territories at 
Nootka, I have thought it proper, in addition to what has been already 
related, to give the following brief account of the capture of the Argo- 
naut, as reprefented to me by Captain Colnett. 

The fettlement which Captain Colnett had in contemplation to make 
at Nootka, had been concerted at Macao, in november, 1789, at the 
time he entered into copartnerfhip with feveral Englifh gentlemen refi- 
dent at that place. 

On this occafion, Captain Colnett made it his particular bufinefs to 
checome informed with re{peét to the property which thofe gentlemen 

3R 2 held 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


held in the two veffels, the North-Weft America and Ephigenia, then 
on the coaft of Nootka; for as to the land, he entertained no doubt of 
its belonging to Great-Britain, as the fubjects of that ftate were the firft 
European people who had difcovered the country ; and he was further 
well fatisfied, that no other power whatever had a right to difpoflefs the 
gentlemen with whom he had engaged, of their properiy at Nootka, 
becaufe he and they confidered it to be exclufively their own. The in- 
tention of forming a fettlement was known to Mr. Hudfon before his 
departure in the Princefs Royal from Macao; and on his arrival before 
Captain Colnett at Nootka, fuch intention was moft probably communi- 
cated to the Spaniards and the native Indians, who appeared to have 
been long in expeétation of the Argonaut’s arrival, and had referved the 
greateft part of their furs for the purpofe of exchanging them with 
Captain Colnett, for the articles with which, they had learned, his veffel 
would be freighted. 

Under the ideas which Captain Colnett entertained, that this part of 
the coaft of North-Weft America belonged to Great-Britain, he hau no 
iear of entering any of its ports, becaufe he was duly authorized by the 
South-Sca company to trade in thofe feas, and had ieave to abfent him- 
felf from His Majelty’s fervice, being at that time a lieutenant in the 
royal navy. As a defence againtt hoftile Indians, the Argonaut had twelve 
carriage guns, befide {wivels and fmall arms; but not apprehending any 
thing unfriendly from the inhabitants of Nootka, nor having become ac- 
quainted before he left China, that any difference exifted between the 
courts of London and Madrid, when he arrived off Nootka, on the 3d 
of july, 1790, the guns of the Argonaut were difmounted, and were all 
in the hold of the veffel. 8 

About nine o’clock that evening, when at the diftance of about three 
leagues from the entrance into the port, a boat was obferved coming 
towards the Argonaut; but, as the weather was very hazy, it could not 
be difcovered to what nation it belonged. On being hailed, the perfons 
in her laid upon their oars, and requefted, in Spanifh, permiflion to 
come on board, with which Captain Colnett inftant!y complied. Soon af- 
ter another Spanifh boat, and one belonging to.an American veffel,, came 


alongfide 


e 
* 
a 


& 
& 
a4 
‘ 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


alongfide his velfel, and Captain Colnett now underftood that there 
were two Spanifh men of war, and an American fhip and floop, at an- 
chor in Friendly cove. On receiving this information, Captain Colnett 
hefitated for fome time, whether he fhould, or not, go into Friendly 
cove; as he had fome doubts as to the propriety of putting himfelf un- 
der the command of Spanifh fhips of war. This objection being made 
known to Don Martinez, who had arrived in the firft boat, he requefted, 
through an interpreter, that Captain Colnett would, neverthelefs, afford 
him fome affiftance, as the veffels under his command were in great dif- 
trefs for the want of provifions and other neceffaries ; and as he had 
paid fome attention to Mr. Hudfon, the commander of the P. incefs 
Royal, one of the four veffels under Captain Colnett’s dire¢tions (as 
would be feen by a letter which he produced to Captain Coln tt from 
Mr. Hudfon) Martinez hoped Captain Colnett would not be wanting in 
a return of civility, and intreated him, mn the moft earneft manner, to 
enter Friendly cove; pledging his. word of honor, not only as com- 
mander in chief of all the fhips belonging to His Catholic Majefty, on 
the nor‘hern coafts of the pacific ocean, but alfo as nephew to the vice- 
roy, and in his capacity at Nootka, as the reprefentative of the King 
of Spain; that Captain Colnett fhould be at liberty to depart when- 
ever he might think proper; Don Martinez ftating, at the fame time, 
that he was then at Nootka for the fole purpofe of watching the ope- 
rations and proceedings of.the Ruffians. ‘Thefe affurances induced Cap- 
tain Colnett to confider Don Martinez as an officer of high rank and 
charaéter ; and as he did not entertain the moft diftant idea that any 
falfehood was attempted to be impofed upon him, or that he was in the 
leaft danger of being treated by Martinez with duplicity, he fulfered the 
Spanifh launches to tow the Argonaut into port, where fhe did not ar- 
rive until midmght. 

The next morning Don Martinez invited Captain Colnett to break faft 
on board the Princiffa, and afterwards accompanied him on his return to 
the Argonaut, where Captain Colnett ordered fuch provifions and {tores 
as he could fpare to be got to hand, gave a lift of them to Don Martinez, 
and, at the fame time, requelted his acceptance of them, with which.civility 
he 


493 


ng oe ee 


A a nee oan” meee ¥ 


494 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


he appeared to be highly pleafed and thoroughly fatishied. Don Martinez 
had not been long on board the Argonaut before he felected Captain 
Colnett’s boat{wain from the reft of the crew, who being a native ol 
Gibraltar, fpoke the Spanifh language very fluently. After fome con- 
verfation with this man, Don Martinez demanded him of Captain Col- 
nett, as a fubjeét of His Catholic Majefty, and as the boat{wain was very 
defirous of leaving the Argonaut, Captain Colnett reraitted the balance 
then due from him on account of his wages, and difcharged him from his 
ferviee. ‘This circumflance was by no means a pleafant one to Cap- 
tain Colnett ; but, as Don Martinez feemed to be extremely anxious to 
obtain the releafe of this man, Captain Colnett did not think it would 
have been prudent to have refifted his application, His doubts, how- 
ever, of the profefled fincerity of Don Martinez, became increafed, .by 
his foon difcovering that the Indians declined all fort of trade with the 
Argonaut. ‘This induced him to determine upon leaving Friendly cove 
with all poflible difpatch, and he acquainted ‘Don Martinez that he pur- 
poled to depart m the courle of the day. Upon this the Spanifh officer 
offered his launch to affift the Argonaut out of the cove; and it was at 
this time agreed, that the articles with which Captain Colnett could fupply 
Don Martinez, fhould be fent to him by the return-of the Spanifh launch. 
The promifed affiftance of this boat not arriving fo foon as Captain Col- 
nett had expeéted, he fent one of his mates to Don Martinez, for the pur- 
pofe of reminding him of his engagement, and to procure the launch ; 
but, to his great furprize, inflead of the officer returning with the Spa- 
nifh boat, Captain Colnett received a meflage from Don Martinez, de- 
firing that he would inftantly repair on board the Princiffa, and produce 
his {hip’s papers for his examination. With this requeft Captain Col- 
nett immediately complied, and Don Martinez had {carcely looked at 
them, before he pofitively afferted that they were all forgeries, although 
he did not underftand a fingle word of the language in which they were 
written. With this declaration he threw them on the table, and infifted 
that the Argonaut fhould not fail from Nootka until he fhould think ipro- 
per to grant permiffion for her departure. On Captain Colnett com- 
plaining of this breach of promue and good faith, Martinez quitted the 

2 cabin 


s 
is 

& 
z 
4 


ined 
yan 
eol 
con- 
Col- 
very 
ance 
a his 
ap- 
Ss to 
ould 
1OW- 
, by 
| the 
cove 
pur- 
cer 
AS at 
ply 
nch. 

ol- 


i 
& 
x 
it 
- 
‘a , 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


cabin in an apparent rage, and inftantly difpatched an armed party from 
the deck, who, after knocking Captain Colnett down, arrefted him, and 
detained him as a prifoner on board the Princifla. Don Martinez then 
fent his launch on board the Argonaut; ftruck the Britifh, and hoifted 
Spanifh, colours ;. ordered the Columbia, an American fhip, to fire into 
the Argonaut if fhe attempted to unmoor ; made the officers prifoners, 
and put the crew into irons, After this the veffel was unloaded, and 
every inuividual was robbed of fuch parts of his private property as was 
chofen by the Spaniards. In this fituation the Argonaut, officers, and 
crew, remained for ten days, when the Princefs Royal appeared in the 
offing ; and on Mr. Hudfon, her commander, being perceived by Mar- 
tinez to be coming near to the fhore in his boat, he fent out his launch 
armed, feized the boat, and brought Mr. Hudfon on board the Princiffa, 
where a letter was prepared for him to fign, ordering the officer, whom 
he had left in charge of his veffel, to deliver her up without any refift- 
ance. At the yard-arm was rove a rope, with which Mr. Hudfon was 
threatened to be hanged, if he declined figning the letter, or if the floop 
under his command {fhould fire at the launch then ready to carry the 
propofed letter, and which, under thefe circumftances, he was compel- 
led to fign on board the Princiffa. 

From the 5th to the 14th of july, 1790, arrangements were making 
on board the Argonaut for the confinement of the officers and crew dur- 
ing their paflage from Nootka to St. Blas, whither Captain Colnett was 
given to underftand they would be fent as prifoners. 

The treatment which Captain Colnett received whilft on board the 
Princiffla had nearly proved fatal to him: he was feized with a violent 
fever, attended with a delirium, which did not abate until he was re- 
moved on board his own veflel; here he was made a clofe prifoner, 
and confined to the mate’s cabin, a place not fix feet fquare. Such 
parts of the Argonaut’s cargo as Martinez thought proper to reject, 
were retuned into the veffel again, and all the officers, and fixteen of 
the crew, who were Britifh fubjeéts, were, on the 14th .of july, fent in 
the Argonaut under confinement from Nootka to St. Blas. 

Notwithftanding 


495 


498 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


Notwithftanding the great diftinétion with which it had been repre- 
fented to Sen’ Quadra, and urged by him to me, Captain Colnett had 
been received on his arrival at this port, and which he does not deny, 
in point of treatment, was infinitely better than he had experienced 
during the time he was under the power and directions of Martinez ; 
yet the remainder of his cargo, ftores and provifions, was taken from 
out of his velfel at St. Blas, and a part only of the former was afier- 
wards reftored, whilft the wages of the Spanilh navy that were paid to 
him, for himfelf, officers, and crew, were nearly counterbalanced by the 


heavy expences brought again{ft his fhip’s company during the time of 


their captivity, for their maintenance, medical and other affiftance. 
The hardfhips which were endured, according to Captain Colnett’s 
reprefentation, by himfelf, his ofhcers, and the fixteen Britifh feamen, 
during a paflage of thirty-two days to St. Blas, are not to be defcribed ; 
but as a detail of thefe circumftances would lead me into extraneous mat- 
ter, unconnected with the object (the ceflion of the territories at Noot- 
ka) which made a ftatement of Captain Colnett’s tranfaétions in Friendly 
cove necellary in the former part of my journal, I fhall forbear to men- 
tion any thing on that head, and only infert a paflage, tranflated from 
the Spanifh paflport, granted by the viceroy of Mexico to Captain 
Colnett, at the time of the reftoration of his veflel, and his liberation 
from the Spanifh territories in America; by which it will appear, that 
although Don Eftevan Martinez had no efpecial direétions to capture 
either the Argonaut, Princefs Royal, or any other Britifh fhip, yet all 
veffels not belonging to His Catholic Majelty, might have been retain- 
ed at Nootka as good and lawful prizes: this will neceffarily leave the 
reader in fome doubt as to the means that were purfued by the Ameri- 
can traders then at Nootka, to preferve the privileges which they feem 
to have enjoyed; and I fhall conclude this relation of the bufinefs from 
the teftimory of Captain Colnett, by briefly ftating how he conduéted 
himfelf, on receiving a fubfequent paffport from the viceroy of Mexico, 
« The conduct of this officer” (Don Eftevan Jofe Martinez) “ was 
founded on laws and royal orders, which not only do abfolutely pro- 
hibit the negociation, cfteblifhment, and commerce, of aliens on our 
1 coatts 


lala 


AA ail a OO i Se 


pre- 
had 
eny, 
nced 
1€Z 3 
rom 
fier- 
id to 
y the 
1e Of 
1ett's 
men, 
bed ; 
mat- 
loot- 
ndly 
men- 
ron\ 
tain 
ntion 
that 
ture 
t all 
tain- 

the 
eri- 
eem 
rom 
éted 
LICO. 
was 
pro- 

our 
Dalts 


ec ala 


cra od Nols ales ahaa 


it naan tas a es i i Oa 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


coafts of the fouth feas of both Americas ; but ordain alfo, that they the 
faid aliens, fhal! be looked upon and treated as declared enemies, with- 
out its being underftood to be a breach of the good faith, or contrary 
to the treaties of peace; for in that concluded in the year 1760, and 
confirmed in the fecond article of that in 1763, the arrival of all alien 
veflels, or their introduction, paflage, or commerce on the faid coatts, 
are completely prohibited. 

“ Under thefe circumftances, agreed to by the treating parties, and 
pofitive declarations of the court of Spain, the veflels Argonaut and 
Princefs Royal might have been retained as good and lawful prizes; but, 
being defirous to preferve that harmony which at prefent exifts between 
our court and that of London, and confidering alfo that the fovereigns 
af both kingdoms will, upon reafonable and juft terms, amicably agree 
to the reftoration of the faid veffels, I grant a free and fafe paffport to 
their captains James Colnett and Thomas Hudfon, that they may pro- 
ceed to Macao, or fail to any other place they may choofe, with the ex- 
prefs prohibition that they fhall not put into any port or bay of our 
coafts without fome very preffing neceffity, or eftablifh themfelves 
there, cr trade in them with the Indians, becaufe they may do this in 
other places or iflands not the dominions of His Catholic Majefty.” 

After Captain Colnett had received this paffport, he petitioned the 
viceroy that he might be permitted to difpofe of the remaining part of 
his cargo on the coaft of North Weft America, but this was po- 
fitively refufed by the viceroy, who {tated that he was bound to give 
that preference to the fubje¢ts of His Catholic Majefty. Notwithftanding 
that he did not grant Captain Colnett this indulgence, -he tranfmitted to 
him another paffport, in which Captain Colnett was dire€ted to pro- 
ceed to Nootka, with orders to the commanding officer there, to 
deliver up the Princefs Royal, which veffel had been direéted to repair 
to that port, after having been fome months employed in the Spanifh 
fervice. On Captain Colnett’s return to Nootka he did not find the 
Princefs Royal there, nor could he learn any tidings of her ¢d-ftination, 
and therefore he made the beft of his way from Nootka to Macao, agree- 

Vou. III. : 38 ably 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


ably to the injunctions contained in the fecond paffport from the vice- 
roy of Mexico. 

In the year 1792, the fur trade, between the north-weft coaft of Ame- 
rica and China, gave employment to upwards of twenty fail of {hips 
and veffels, whofe names, and the countries to which they belong, 1 
have thought proper to infert, for the purpofe of fhewing that my opt- 
nions, refpecting the value of this trade, were not only founded upon 
obfervation, but confirmed by the practice of feveral European ftates, 
and adventurers from the Afiatic, Chinefe, and American {hores, 


Ships and veffels. Commanders. To what country belonging. 
Ship Butterworth,  - ~ - Brown, - London. 
Sloop Le Boo, ~ * - Sharp, - ditto. 
Cutter Jackal, ~ ° - Stewart, - ditto. 
Brig Three Brothers, - - Alder, - ditto. 
Schooner Prince William Henry, Ewen, - ditto. 
Ship Jenny, - - : - Baker, - Briftol. 
Brig Halcyon, - - « = Barclay, - Bengal. 
Brig Venus, - - : - Shepherd, - ditto. 
Snow 7 - - - Moor, - Canton. 


Brig —— ‘i - - - Coftidge, - ditto. 
Brig * é - - Barnett, - ditto. 
Ship Columbia, - -  « Gray, - Bofton, America. 
Sloop Adventure, - - - i Halwell, 


(Built at Clayoquot, tender to the Columbia) 


Ship Jefferfon, - - - Roberts, - ditto. 
Brig Hope, - : : - Ingraham, - ditto. 


- ditto. 


Brig Hancock, ° - - Crowell, - ditto. a 
Brig Wafhington, - - - Kendrick, - ditto. e. 
Ship Margaret, - - Magie, - New York. 3 
Ship Ephigenia, - - Viana, - Portugal. q 
Brig Fenis and St. Jofeph, - Andrede, - ditto. : 
Ship . : - - Unknown, - France, ; 


Befide 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


Befide thefe, the veflels already mentioned in my journal, belonging 
to His Catholic Majefty, frequently reforted to the port of Nootka. 

When fuch a fpirit for enterprize as this, is thus manifefted by the 
people of fo many different nations, and direéted from all quarters of the 
globe to thefe fhores, there can remain no more doubt, with ref{pect to 
the commercial advantages which are likely to be attendant on fuch {pe- 
culations, than that many unjuft proceedings will take place amongft 
the feveral perfons concerned, who, in the avidity for promoting their 
re[pective interefts, become competitors for the commodity of which each 
is in purfuit, and deftroy the general benefits which, under wife and good 
regulations would refult to all. A retrofpeétive view of thefe circum- 
ftances, and the behaviour of Sen" Quadra, in the negociation which, 
with him, I had the honor to conduét refpeéting the ceffion of the terri- 
tories at Nootka to the crown of Great-Britain; will ferve to fhew 
in what an important point of view the court of Spain beholds her 
interefts in this valuable country, and what alfo are the commercial 
advantages that moft probably would accrue to the adventurers on the 
coaft, were their dealings properly reftrained, and their general conduét 
wifely regulated. 

Although we did not mect with any Ruffian veffels at Nootka, yet I 
am clearly of opinion the people of that nation are more likely than 
thofe of any other to fucceed in procuring furs, and the other valuable 
commodities, from thefe fhores, with which a moft beneficial trade might 
be eftablifhed between North-Weft America, Japan, and the northern 
parts of China. Of this I was well perfuaded, from the accounts I re- 
ceived from Smyloff, and from my own obfervations on the general 
condué of the Ruffians towards the Indians, in the feveral places where 
we found them under their controul and direétion. Had the natives 
about the Ruffian eftablifhments in Cook’s inlet, and Prince William's 
found been oppreffed, dealt hardly by, or treated by the Ruffians as a 


- conquered people, fome uneafinefs amongft them would have been per- 


ceived, fome defire for emancipation would have been difcovered ; but 
no fuch difpofition appeared, they feemed to be held in no. reftraint, nor 
a5°2 did 


“Nowa poft 
captain m 
the royal 
NAVY. 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


did they feem to wilh, on any occafion whatever, to elude the vigilance 
of their directors. For fome of our commodities that were valuable 
to them, they would offer their furs in exchange; but in no inftance 
did they propofe any thing of the kind to fale to the difadvantage of their 
employers. ‘he Ruffians, moft likely, unable to reduce the inhabitants 
of the infular country to the fouth-caftward from Crofs found, have pre- 
ferred to fit down amongft thofe to the weftward; where, from the com- 
pactnefs of the coaft, and the lofty impaffable mountains which approach 
the fea fhore, the natives are reltrained from indulging in the wandering 
life to which their more eaftern neighbours are accuftemed, and who 
being a much more warlike race, may poffibly have been found by the 
Ruffians to be lefs traétable. 

Notwithftanding that our furvey of the coaft of North-Weft Ameri- 
ca has afforded to our minds the moft fatisfa€tory proof that no naviga- 
ble communication whatever exifts between the north pacific and north 
atlantic oceans, from i*e goth to the 56th degree of north latitude, nor 
between the waters of the pacific, nor any of the lakes or rivers in the 
interior part of the continent of North America; yet, as it is very difh- 
cult to undeceive, and more fo to convince the human mind, when pre- 
pofleffed of long-adopted notions, however erroneoufly they may have 
been founded,: and efpecially when circumftances may be reforted to 
which have the appearance of being capable of furnifhing’ new matter for 
ingenious fpeculative opinions, it may not be improper to ftate, that 
although, from unavoidable circumftances, Mr. Broughton* was com- 
pelled, in his examination of Columbia river, to defift from attempting 
to alcertain the navigable extent of the feveral {mall branches which fall 
into that river, yet that gentleman was thoroughly convinced, from the 
view he had obtained of each, and the circumftances attendant on them 
all, that no one of thofe branches admitted of any navigable communi- 
cation whatever with the interior country. 

With refpeét to the ancient difcoveries of De Fuca, they appear to 
be upheld by tradition alone, and ought therefore to be received with 
great latitude, and to be credited wit) flill more caution. A celebrated 

2 . writer 


SRP RE RTA ies 


: 
: 
ae 

i 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 50k 


writer on geography* appears to have been perfectly convinced that this Cana 
oral teflimony was correct, although he candidly acknowledges that. plan for pro- 
* We have no other than verbal report of De Fuca’s difcovery ; he com- A Se 
municated the information to Mr. Lock at Venice, and offered to per- a0 9 
form a voyage,” I prefume, for the further exploring of thofe regions, 

* on condition of having payment of the great loffes he had fuftained, to 

the value of fixty thoufand ducats, when captured by Sir Thomas Ca- 
vendifh in the fouth feas. John De Fuca, the Greek pilot, in 1592, 
failed into a broad inlet, between the 47°th and 48°th, which led him 
into a far broader fea, wherein he failed above twenty days, there be- 

ing at the entrance on the north-weft coaft, a great head land or ifland, 
with an exceeding high pinnacle or fpired rock, like a pillar, there. 
upon.” 

This is the whole that can be colleéted fromm the information of this 

fuppofed navigator ; which Mr. Dalrymple fays exa€tly correfponds with 

the difcoveries of the Spaniards, who “ have recently found an entrance 

in the latitude of 47° 45 north, which in twenty-feven days’ courfe brought 
them to the vicinity of Hudfon’s bay.” On making inquiries of the 
Spanifh officers attached to the commiffion of Sen" Melafpina, as alfo of 
Sen* Quadra, and feveral of the officers under his orders, who, for fome 
time paft, had been employed in fuch refearches refpeéting fo impor- 
tant a circumftance, I was given to underftand by them all, that my 
communication was the firft intelligence they had ever received of fuch 
difcoveries having been made; and as to the navigators De Fuca, De 
Fonte, and others, thefe gentlemen expeéted to have derived intelligence 

of them from us, fuppofing, from the Englifh publications, that we were 
better acquainted with their achievements than any part of the Spanith 
nation. A commander of one of the trading veffels, met with fuch a 
pinnacle rock in the latitude of 47° 47’, but unluckily there was no 
opening near it, to identify it being the fame which the Greek pilot had 

feen ; but this circumftance can eafily be difpenfed with, for the fake of 
fupporting an hypothefis, only by fuppofing the opening to be further 

to the northward. That fuch a rock might have been fcen in that lati- 
tude is not to be queftioned, becaufe we faw numbers of them, and it is 


well 


: 
“ 
pat n 
iy 
4 
‘ 
LY 
ES 
i. 


3 


Mie 


eres 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


well known, that not only on the coaft of North-Weft America, but 
on various other coafts of the earth, fuch pinnacle rocks are found to 
exift. 

On thefe grounds, and on thefe alone, ftands the ancient authority for 
the difcoveries of John De Fuca; and however erroneous they may be, 
feem to have been acknowledged by moft of the recent vifitors to this 
coat, who as well as mylelf, (as is too frequently and injudicioufly the 
cafe,) have been led to follow the ftream of the current report. By my 
having continued the name of De Fuca in my journal and charts, a tacit 
acknowledgment of his difcoveries may poffibly, on my part, be inferred; 
this however I mutt pofitively deny, becaufe there has not been feen one 
leading feature to fubftantiate his tradition: on the contrary, the fea 
coaft under the parallels between which this opening is faid to have 
exifted, is compaét and impenetrable; the fhores of the continent have 
not any opening whatever, that bears the leaft fimilitude to the defcrip- 
tion of De Fuca’s entrance; and the opening which I have called the a 

Suppofed ftrarts of Fuan de Fuca, inftead of being between the 47th and g 
48th degrees, is between the 48th and 4gth degrees of north latitude, 4 
and leads not into a far broader fea or mediterranean ocean. ‘The error, 
however, of a degree in latitude may, by the advocates for De Fuca’s 
merits, be eafily reconciled, by the ignorance in thofe days, or in the 
incorreétnefs in making fuch common aftronomical obfervations ; yet we 
do not find that Sir Francis Drake, who failed before De Fuca, was lia- 
ble to fuch miftakes. . 

The difcoveries of the Portuguefe or Spanifh admiral De Fonte, De 
Fonta, or De Fuentes, appear to be equally liable to objeétions, as thofe 
faid to have been made by De Fuca. Little reliance, I truft, will here- 

“See Dal. after be placed on that publication of De Fonta’s aceount,* wherein it is 
rymple’s — ftated that “ He failed 260 leagues in crooked channels, amongtt iflands, 


plan for pro- . : 

moringtne named the Archipelago of St. Lazarus, and on the 14th of june 164a, 
ur trade, . . . ° 

1789: he came to a river which he named Rio de los Reyes, in 53° of north 


latitude ; he went up it to the north-eaftward 60 leagues ; it was frefh 
20 leagues from the mouth, the tide rifing 24 feet, the depth not lefs 
than 4 or 5 fathoms at low water all the way into lake Belle, which he 
1 entered 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. 


entercd the 20d of june; in this lake there was generally 6 or 7 fathoms ; 
and at a particular time of tide there is a fall in the lake: that froma 
good port fheltered by an ifland on the fouth fide of lake Belle, De Fonta 
on the ift of july failed in his boats to a river which he named Parmen- 
tiers; that he paffed eight falls, in all thirty two feet perpendicular, from 
its fource in lake Belle, into a large lake which he reached the 6th of 
july. This lake he named De Fonte; it is 160 leagues long, and 60 
broad, lying £.N.£. and w.s.w. in length, having in fome places 60 
fathoms depth, abounding with eod and ling.” 

It is here neceflary to interrupt the thread of De Fonta’s curious nar- 
rative for a moment, in order, if poffible, to reconcile the nature of his 
voyage with his ftatement of faéts. After his arrival in Rio de los Reyes, 
he failed in his fhip 60 leagues to lake Belle; 40 leagues of this diftance 
were frefh water ; and then in his boats, through that lake and the river 
Parmentiers ; where, after pafling eight falls he arrived in lake de 
Fonte, which he finds abounding with cod and ling; but the extent of 
122 Belle is not mentioned, nor whether the water in lake de Fonte was 
ive! ie falt, though from common reafoning, it is natural to conclude, 
tl . . sve the water in Rio de los Reyes was frefh at the diftance of 4o 
leagues from the lake whence the river derives its origin, that the water 
in lake De Fonte, where cod and ling are faid to abound, mutt be frefh 
alfo. But to return to the narrative. Lake de Fonte contained “ feve- 
ral verv large iflands, and ten {mall ones: from the E.N.£. extremity of 
this lake, which he left the 14th of july, he paffed in ten hours with a 
frefh wind and whole ebb a lake, which he named Strait Ronquillo, 34 
leagues long, and 2 or 3 broad, with 20, to 26 and 28 fathoms depth. 
On the 17th he came to an Indian town, where he learnt there was a 
fhip in the neighbourhood; to this fhip he failed, and found on board 
only one man advanced in years and a youth; the man was the greateft 
in the mechanical part of mathematicks he had ever feen: he learnt they 
were from Bofton in New England, the owner named Gibbons, who was 
major general of Maltachufett’s, and the whole fhip’s company came on. 
the goth of july. On the 6th of auguft De Fonta made the owner fome 
valuable prefents, and took fome provifions from them, and gave Cap- 
fain 


NOTES AND MISCELLLANEOUS OBERVATIONS. 


tain Shapely, the commander of the veffel, one thoufand pieces of eight 
for his fine charts and journals. On the 11th of auguft De Fonta ar- 
rived at the firft fall in the river Parmentiers, and on the 16th on board 
his fhip in lake Belle.” 

The extenfive archipelago, in which De Fonta had failed through 
crooked channels 260 leagues; the river navigable for fhipping that 
flowed into it, up which he had failed in his fhip 60 leagues ; the water 
becoming frefh after he had entered and paffed in it 20 leagues; its 
communicating by other lakes and rivers with a paflage, in which a fhip 
had arrived from Bofton in New England; are all fo circumftaatially 
particularized, as to give the account, at firft fight, an air of probability, 
and on examination, had it been found reafonably conneéted together, 
which is by no means the cafe ; a trifling difference in point of defcrip- 
tion or fituation would have been pardoned. 

The Rio de los Reyes Mr. Dalrymple ftates (according to the Spanifh 
geographers, under the authority of which nation De Fonta is faid to 
have failed) to be in the 43d; according to the Englifh in the 53d; and 
according to the French, in the 63d degree of north latitude, on the 
weftern coaft of North America. If it be neceffary to make allowance 
for the ignorance of De Fonta, or the errors in his obfervations, any 
other parallel along the coaft may be affigned with equal correétnefs. 

Under the 43d parallel of north latitude on this cvaft, no fuch archi- 
pelago nor river does exift; but between the 47th and 57th degrees of 
north latitude, there is an archipelago compofed. of innumerable iflands, 
and crooked channels ; yet the evidence of a navigable river flowing into 
it, is ftill wanting to prove its identity; and as the fcrupulous exattnefs 
with which our furvey of the continental fhore has been made within 
thefe limits, precludes the poffibility of fuch a river having been paffed 
unnoticed by us, as that defcribed to be of Rio de los Reyes, I remain in 
full confidence, that fome credit will hereafter be given to the teftimony 
refulting from our refearches, and that the plain truth undifguifed, with 
which our labours have been reprefented, will be juftly appreciated, in 
refutation of ancient unfupported traditions. 

Ido 


zht 
ard 
hat 


ter 
its 


Sass cenPen tn tlah 


ah 


NOTES AND MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS 


I donot, however, mean pofitively to deny the difcoveries of De Fonta, 
I only wifh to inveftigate the faét, and to afcertain the truth; and I am 
content with having ufed my endeavours to prove their improbability as 
publifhed to the world. The broken region which fo long occupied our 
attention, cannot poflibly be the archipelago of St. Lazarus, fince the 
principal feature by which the identity of that archipelago could be proved 
is that of a navigable river for fhipping flowing into ‘it, and this cer- 
tainly does not exift in that archipelago which has taken us fo much 
time to explore; hence the fituation cannot be the fame, and for 
that reafon I have not affixed the name of De Fonta, De Fonte, or Fuentes 
to any part of thofe regions. It is however to be remembered, that our 
geography of the whole coaft of North Weft America is not yet com- 
plete, and that the French navigators, who have ftated the archipelago 
of St. Lazarus to be in the 63d degree of north latitude, may yet not 
be in an error. 

The ftupendous barrier mountains eee do not feem to extend in 
fo lofty and conneéted a range to the northward of the head of Cook’s 
inlet, as to the fouth-eaftward of that ftation; and it is poffible that in 
this part, the chain of mountains may admit of a communication with 
the eaftern country, which feems to be almoft impraéticable further to 
the fouthward. In this conje€ture we are fomewhat warranted by the 
fimilarity obferved in the race of people inhabiting the fhores of Hud- 
fon’s bay and thofe to the northward of North Weft America. ' 

In all the parts of the continent on which we landed, we nowhere 
found any roads or paths through the woods, in¢,cating the Indians on 
the coaft having any intercourfe with the natives of the interior part of 
the country, nor were there any articles of the Canadian or Hudfon’s 
bay traders found amongft the people with whom we met on any part 
of the continent or external fea fhores of this extenfive country. 


FINIS. 


Page 


ERRATA, 


VOL. I. 


for Cancer read Capricorn. 
for reave read reef. 
for reaved read reefed. 
for where by read whereby. 
for gunnets read gannets, 
for 29° go! read 2gi9. go. 

for 30° 50’ read 301”. 50, 

for their read the. 

for inflammatory read inflammable. 

after not infert be. 

for vere read veer. 
for Terra del Fuego read Tierra del Fuego throughout the work. 
“for bore N.E. by £. to E.N.E. ead bore from wN.£. by &. and fo in 
fimilar inftances, 
dele 28°, 
for {and read fandy. 

before little infert a. 

before was infert he. 

for Potatow read Poatatou. 

before {awing infert and. 

after plank infert : 
for Ercoei read Ereeoi. 
for pleafant read unpleafant. 
for end read ends, 
for Balabola read Bolabola, 
for antifceptics read antifeptics, 
before on infert him. 

dele the . after tranfa€tions, 
for from read to. 

for Errooe read Erceoi. 

for Erecoe read Ereeoi. 

“for Onchow read Onchow throughout the work, 
for Macoa read Macao. 

for neceflity read confidence, 

for chieftans read chieftains, 

for 295° 41/45” read 235° 41/30”, 
for probably read poffibly. 

for out read our. 

for Mr. Mears read Mr, Meares whenever the name occurs, 
after at injert a. 

for ftad read had, 

Jor fat read fet. 

after invitation infert from us. 

for fat read fet. 

ditto ditto. 

for would read might. 

for was read were. 

‘for thought vead through. 

‘for centry read fentry. 

before progrels infert flow. 

after was infert green and. 

for water-fail read water-falls, 

after to infert the, 

or induced me read I was induced, 
for Melafpina read Malafpina, 
dele that—ditto —_ ditto, 


all other 


Page at, 
316, 
820, 
922, 
3255 
349, 
34! 
3495 
353) 
3545 
360, 
362, 


364, 
3775 
378, 
380, 
38, 
384, 
Ba, 
410, 
422, 
423, 
424, 
431; 


Page 20, 
21, 
36, 
37) 
58, 
65, 
82, 


164, 
223, 


224, 
233, 
268, 
284, 
373 
370, 
411, 
420, 


423, 
429, 
437» 
439s 
441, 
4735 
474, 
471s 


486, 
487, 
186, 
4975 


Line 19, 
10, 


Line 26, 
9) 

41, 

12, 

1, 

41, 

155 

18, 

23, 

6 


laft line, 
8. 


ERRATA, 


dele that. 
for Geeenwich read Greenwich. 
for clothe read clothes, 
for fat read fet, 
for fires read fires, 
for sor read for, 
for warer read water. 
for compofe read compofes. F 
for to reftrain read from reftraining, 
anfert , after leagues, 
dele rendered. 
infert a after through. 
for and read which, 
infer in after fituation. 
J read nearly, 
for sabrook read Addenbrook. 
Jory — jf read 50° 59’, 
for feint read faint. 
infert even after that. 
for confiftent read confiftendly. 
for its read it. 
infert afterwards before to. 
for canvas read canvafs throughout the work. 
for 4! read 4 miles. ‘ ; 
infert ; after s. 61 weeefor and is read it is. 


2 


VOL. UL. 


infert an before extraordinary. 
infert who before {een. . 
for writating read imitating. 
for floated read flooded, 
infert they before were. 
for rendered it read permitted it to be. 
for mark read marks. 
infert which is before eafily. 
for Karakakooo read Karakakooa.. 
infert of after heard. 
infert which after {cales,. 
for a cheerful degree of {pirits read a degree of.cheerful fpirits, 
infert an before error, 
dele but, 
dele about. 
infert a before diftance. 
or in read on, 
fora point read point. 
for hes read Had 
dele yet, 
for augutt read feptember, 
Sor Kampfchacka read Kamfchatka 
infert it after think, 
for Arguello read Arrillaga. 
Sor ingenuity read ingenuoufnefs, 
for render read renders. 
Sor coronadoes read coronados, 
ditto ditto. 
Jfor was read were, 
tnfert the after to be, 
infert and after entrance, 
Sor give read gives, 


ERRATA, 
VOL. Il. 


Page 2, MLinc 4, infert wind after trade. 


20, dele the. 
9, for fubterranean read fubterrancous. . 
14, for dittated read induced. 
32, infert with after met. 
29, fora read an. 
28,31, for centinel read {entinel throughout the work. 
18, infert as before ta 
19, for tome read by me. 
5, dele had. 
13, infert attended-with after but. 
9, fora read an. 
7, for armour read armoury. 
g0, for he read the. 
1, for in read between, 
6, for of our read from our. 
4; 9,14, for Woodhoule read Wodehoute.. 
12, infert with after lerved.. 
1, 12,17, for Napean read Nepean. 
17, fer to the ocean read towards the ocean. 
11, for Napean read Nepean. 
aft line, for equinoxial read equinoftial. 
q, dele again. 
1, for the Chatham read her. 
6, dele the ’ in Prefidio’s, 
27, for it read he. 
2, for forwardin read forwarding. ° 
5, for bonitos read bonittos. 
3, for near read nearly. 
23, for ferns read fern, 
12, tnfert {pecies after former. 
28, for with read without. 
14, for Dominician read Dominican. 
20, for unweared read unwearied. 
24, for Indico read Indigo. 
16, for maintopfail read maintopfails. 
13, for had read I had.. 
15, for view read light. 
4, for kind to fale read kind for fale. 
21, dele in, 


are 


= Ramee ane ae ae — ‘ 6 
