The Narrative of Zosimus (Various)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf09/cache/anf09.txt).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 The Narrative of Zosimus.

 ------------------------

 Introduction.

 ------------------------

 The Greek text of this work is printed for the first time in the same
 part of "Texts and Studies" as the Acts of Xanthippe and Polyxena.  The
 sources for it are two manuscripts--one in Paris, belonging to the
 twelfth century, and the other in Oxford, dating from the fifteenth or
 sixteenth.  The latter, however, only extends to the close of c. viii.,
 the copy used by the scribe having been imperfect.  There are versions
 of the work in Slavonic, Syriac, Ethiopic, and Arabic; in the former of
 these the Blessed Ones are called the Brachmani.

 From two passages in the poems of Commodian (c. 250 a.d.) it would seem
 that the work was known in his day, and the canon of Nicephoras (c. 850
 a.d.) places it among certain apocryphal books which are to be
 rejected.  At the same time, it is doubtful whether, in its present
 form, it can be put as far back as the earlier of these dates.

 It professes to be the account of a visit to the Makares, or Blessed
 Ones, given by a hermit, Zosimus, who was privileged to visit them.
 For forty years he had abstained from bread and wine and from seeing
 the face of man, always praying to be permitted to see the life of the
 Blessed.  With the second chapter the narrative begins in the first
 person, and is continued in this up to c. xxi., just where the angels
 come to receive the soul of Zosimus, and the work is then finished off
 by one of the hermits who were present at his last moments.

 While the style is inelegant and sometimes obscure, the matter of the
 book is very interesting, and shows considerable powers of
 imagination.  The land of the Blessed is reached by means of a camel,
 which comes from the desert, and then by a storm of wind, which carries
 Zosimus along with it.  He is addressed by the river to which he comes,
 as well as by the wall of cloud which rises above it, and is finally
 lifted across it by two trees.  The origin of the Blessed Ones is
 noteworthy, as connecting the story with early literature on the Lost
 Tribes.  They are the descendants of Rechab in the days of Jeremiah the
 prophet, who, for refusing to give up their observances, are cast into
 prison by the king.  From this they are delivered by an angel, and
 brought to the place they now inhabit,--a level land covered with
 flowers,--a view of Paradise which continues all through the Middle
 Ages.  The chapters (x.-xv.) in which the Blessed describe their life
 and death are of special merit, and form the best part of the whole.
 In striking contrast to its lofty tone is the appearance of Satan with
 his 1360 demons, whom Zosimus finally overcomes and drives away.

 To the various accounts of the Earthly Paradise, the story of Zosimus
 forms an important addition; on these it may, either directly or
 indirectly, have had considerable influence, although the difficulty of
 assigning a definite date to it makes this very uncertain.

 The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning the Life of the Blessed.

 ------------------------

 I.  About that time there was in the desert a certain man named
 Zosimus, who for forty years ate no bread, and drank no wine, and saw
 not the face of man.  This man was entreating God that he might see the
 way of life of the blessed, and behold an angel of the Lord was sent
 saying to him, Zosimus, man of God, behold I am sent by the Most High,
 the God of all, to tell thee that thou shalt journey to the blessed,
 but shalt not dwell with them.  But exalt not thy heart, saying, For
 forty years I have not eaten bread, for the word of God is more than
 bread, and the spirit of God is more than wine.  And as for thy saying,
 I have not seen the face of man, behold the face of the great king is
 nigh thee.  Zosimus said, I know that the Lord can do whatsoever he
 will.  The angel said to him, Know this also, that thou art not worthy
 of one of their delights, but arise and set out.

 II.  And I, Zosimus, issuing from my cave with God leading me, set out
 not knowing which way I went, and after I had travelled forty days my
 spirit grew faint and my body failed, and being exhausted I sat down,
 and continued praying in that place for three days.  And, behold, there
 came a beast from the desert, whose name is the camel, and placing its
 knees on the ground, it received me upon its neck and went into the
 desert and set me down.  There there was much howling of wild beasts,
 and gnashing of teeth, and deadly poison.  And becoming afraid, I
 prayed to the Lord, and there came in that place a great earthquake
 with noise, and a storm of wind blew and lifted me from the earth, and
 exalted me on its wing, and I was praying and journeying till it set me
 upon a place beside a river, and the name of the river is Eumeles.  And
 behold when I desired to cross the river, some one cried as if from the
 water, saying, Zosimus, man of God, thou canst not pass through me, for
 no man can divide my waters:  but look up from the waters to the
 heaven.  And looking up I saw a wall of cloud stretching from the
 waters to the heaven, and the cloud said, Zosimus, man of God, through
 me no bird passes out of this world, nor breath of wind, nor the sun
 itself, nor can the tempter in this world pass through me.

 III.  And I was astonished at these words, and at the voice that spake
 these things to me.  And as I prayed, behold two trees sprang up out of
 the earth, fair and beautiful, laden with fragrant fruits.  And the
 tree on this side bent down and received me on its top, and was lifted
 up exceedingly above the middle of the river, and the other tree met me
 and received me in its branches and bending down set me on the ground;
 and both trees were lifted up and set me away from the river on the
 other side.  In that place I rested three days, and arising again I
 went forward, whither I knew not, and that place was filled with much
 fragrance, and there was no mountain on either hand, but the place was
 level and flowery, all crowned with garlands, and all the land
 beautiful.

 IV.  And I saw there a naked man sitting, and said in myself, Surely
 this is not the tempter.  And I remembered the voice of the cloud that
 it said to me, Not even the tempter in this world passes through me.
 And thus taking courage I said to him, Hail, brother.  And he answering
 said to me, The grace of my God be with thee.  Again I said to him,
 Tell me, man of God, who thou art?  He answered and said to me, Who art
 thou rather?  And I answered and told him all concerning myself, and
 that I had prayed to God and he had brought me into that place.  He
 answered and said to me, I also know that thou art a man of God, for if
 not, thou couldst not have passed through the cloud and the river and
 the air.  For the breadth of the river is about thirty thousand paces,
 and the cloud reaches to heaven, and the depth of the river to the
 abyss.

 V.  And having ended this discourse the man spoke again, Hast thou come
 hither out of the vanity of the world?  I said to him, Wherefore art
 thou naked?  He said, How knowest thou that I am naked?  Thou wearest
 skins of the cattle of the earth, that decay together with thy body,
 but look up to the height of heaven and behold of what nature my
 clothing is.  And looking up into heaven I saw his face as the face of
 an angel, and his clothing as lightning, which passes from the east to
 the west, and I was greatly afraid, thinking that it was the son of
 God, and trembled, falling upon the ground.  And giving me his hand he
 raised me up, saying, Arise, I also am one of the blessed.  Come with
 me, that I may lead thee to the elders.  And laying hold of my hand he
 walked about with me and led me toward a certain crowd, and there were
 in that crowd elders like sons of God, and young men were standing
 beside the elders.  And as I came near to them, they said, This man has
 come hither out of the vanity of the world; come, let us beseech the
 Lord and he will reveal to us this mystery.  Surely the end is not at
 hand, that the man of vanity is come hither?  Then they arose and
 besought the Lord with one accord, and behold two angels came down from
 heaven and said, Fear not the man, for God has sent him, that he may
 remain seven days and learn your ways of life, and then he shall go
 forth and depart to his own place.  The angels of God having said this
 ascended into heaven before our eyes.

 VI.  Then the elders of the blessed gave me over to one of the
 attendants, saying, Keep him for seven days.  So the attendant
 receiving me led me to his cave, and we sat under a tree partaking of
 food.  For from the sixth hour even to the sixth, then we ate, and the
 water came out from the root of the tree sweeter than honey, and we
 drank our fill, and again the water sank down into its place.  And all
 the country of those there heard of me, that there had come thither a
 man out of the vanity of the world, and all the country was stirred up,
 and they came to see me because it seemed strange to them.  Therefore
 they were asking me all things and I was answering them, and I became
 faint in spirit and in body, and besought the man of God that served
 me, and said, I beseech thee, brother, if any come to see me, tell them
 He is not here, so that I may rest a little.  And the man of God cried
 out saying, Woe is me, that the story of Adam is summed up in me, for
 Satan deceived him through Eve, and this man by his flattery desires to
 make me a liar while he is here.  Take me away from hence, for I shall
 flee from the place.  For behold he wishes to sow in me seeds of the
 world of vanity.  And all the multitude and the elders rose up against
 me, and said, Depart from us, man; we know not whence thou art come to
 us.  But I lamented with great lamentation, and my senses left me, and
 I cried out to the elders, saying, Forgive me, my lords, and the elders
 stilled them and made quietness.  Then I related to them all from the
 beginning till that time, and said, I besought the Lord to come to you,
 and he deemed me worthy.  And the elders said, And now what wilt thou
 we should do to thee?  I said to them, I desire to learn of you your
 way of life.

 VII.  And they rejoiced with great joy, and taking up tables of stone
 they wrote on them with their nails, thus, Hear, ye sons of men, hear
 ye us who are become blessed, that we also are of you; for when the
 prophet Jeremiah proclaimed that the city of Jerusalem should be
 delivered into the hands of the destroyers, he rent his garments, and
 put sackcloth upon his loins, and sprinkled dust upon his head, and
 took earth upon his bed, and told all the people to turn from their
 wicked way.  And our father Rechab, the son of Aminadab, heard him and
 said to us, Ye sons and daughters of Rechab, hearken to your father,
 and put off your garments from your body, and drink no vessel of wine,
 and eat no bread from the fire, and drink not strong drink and honey
 until the Lord hear your entreaty.  And we said, All that he has
 commanded us we shall do and hearken.  So we cast away our clothing
 from our bodies, and we ate no bread from the fire, and drank no vessel
 of wine nor honey nor strong drink, and we lamented with a great
 lamentation and besought the Lord, and he heard our prayer and turned
 away his anger from the city of Jerusalem, and there came to the city
 of Jerusalem mercy from the Lord, and he pitied its people, and turned
 away his deadly anger.

 VIII.  And after these things the king of the city of Jerusalem died,
 and there arose another king.  And all the people gathered to him and
 informed him concerning us, and said, There are certain of thy people,
 who have changed their way from us.  Therefore the king summoned them,
 and asked them wherefore they had done this; and he sent for us and
 asked, Who are ye and of what worship and of what country?  And we said
 to him, We are the sons of thy servant, and our father is Rechab the
 son of Jonadab, and when Jeremiah the prophet preached in the days of
 thy father the king, he proclaimed death to the city of Jerusalem,
 saying, Yet three days and all the city shall be put to death.  And the
 king thy father hearing this repented of his sins, and issued a command
 to all to turn aside from their wicked way.  And our father thy servant
 hearing it charged us, saying, Drink no vessel of wine, and eat no
 bread from the fire, until the Lord shall hear your entreaty.  And we
 hearkened to the commandment of our father, and made naked our bodies,
 we drank no wine and ate no bread, and we prayed to the Lord for the
 city of Jerusalem, and the Lord pitied his people and turned away his
 anger, and we saw it and our soul was rejoiced, and we said, It is good
 for us to be so.

 IX.  And the king said to us, Ye have done well.  Now therefore mingle
 with my people, and eat bread and drink wine, and glorify your Lord,
 and ye shall be serving God and the king.  But we said, We will not
 disobey God.  Then the king was enraged and set us in prison, and we
 passed that night there.  And behold a light shone in the building, and
 an angel uncovered the prison and laid hold of the crowns of our heads,
 and took us out of the prison, and set us beside the water of the
 river, and said to us, Whithersoever the water goes, go ye also.  And
 we travelled with the water and with the angel.  When therefore he had
 brought us to this place, the river was dried up and the water was
 swallowed up by the abyss, and he made a wall round this country, and
 there came a wall of cloud, and shadowed above the water; and he did
 not scatter us over all the earth, but gave to us this country.

 X.  Hear, ye sons of men, hear the way of life of the blessed.  For God
 placed us in this land, for we are holy but not immortal.  For the
 earth produces most fragrant fruit, and out of the trunks of the trees
 comes water sweeter than honey, and these are our food and drink.  We
 are also praying night and day, and this is all our occupation.  Hear,
 ye sons of men; with us there is no vine, nor ploughed field, nor works
 of wood or iron, nor have we any house or building, nor fire nor sword,
 nor iron wrought or unwrought, nor silver nor gold, nor air too heavy
 or too keen.  Neither do any of us take to themselves wives, except for
 so long as to beget two children, and after they have produced two
 children they withdraw from each other and continue in chastity, not
 knowing that they were ever in the intercourse of marriage, but being
 in virginity as from the beginning.  And the one child remains for
 marriage, and the other for virginity.

 XI.  And there is no count of time, neither weeks nor months nor years,
 for all our day is one day.  In our caves lie the leaves of trees, and
 this is our couch under the trees.  But we are not naked of body, as ye
 wrongly imagine, for we have the garment of immortality and are not
 ashamed of each other.  At the sixth hour of every day we eat, for the
 fruit of the tree falls of itself at the sixth hour, and we eat and
 drink our fill, and again the water sinks into its place.  We also know
 you who are there in the world, and who are in sins, and your works,
 for every day the angels of the Lord come and tell them to us, and the
 number of your years.  But we pray for you to the Lord, because we also
 are of you and of your race, except that God has chosen us, and has set
 us in this place without sin.  And the angels of God dwell with us
 every day, and tell us all things concerning you, and we rejoice with
 the angels over the works of the just, but over the works of sinners we
 mourn and lament, praying to the Lord that he may cease from his anger
 and spare your offences.

 XII.  But when the time of the forty days comes, all the trees cease
 from their fruits, and the manna that he gave to our fathers rains down
 from heaven, and the manna is sweeter than honey.  Thus we know that
 the season of the year is changed.  But when the time of the holy
 passover comes, then again the trees put forth fragrant fruit, and thus
 we know that it is the beginning of the year.  But the feast of the
 resurrection of the Lord is performed with much watching, for we
 continue watching for three days and three nights.

 XIII.  We know also the time of our end, for we have no torment nor
 disease nor pain in our bodies, nor exhaustion nor weakness, but peace
 and great patience and love.  For our soul is not troubled by the
 angels to go forth, for the angels rejoice when they receive our souls,
 and the souls also rejoice with the angels when they behold them; as a
 bride receives the bridegroom, so our soul receives the announcement of
 the holy angels, saying nothing more than only this, The Lord calls
 thee.  Then the soul quits the body and goes to the angels, and the
 angels seeing the soul coming forth spotless rejoice, and spreading out
 their robes receive it.  Then the angels call it blessed, saying,
 Blessed art then, O soul, because the will of the Lord is fulfilled in
 thee.

 XIV.  The time of our life is this.  If one quits the body in his
 youth, the days of his life here are three hundred and sixty years, and
 he that quits the body in old age, the days of his life here are six
 hundred and eighty-eight years.  And the day of our completion is made
 known to us by the angels, and when the angels of God come to take us,
 we go with them, and the elders, seeing the angels, gather together all
 the people and we depart together with the angels, singing psalms,
 until the angels arrive at the place of our abode.  And because we have
 no tools, the angels of God themselves make the grave for our body, and
 thus he that is called by God goes down, and all salute him from small
 to great, sending him on his way and bidding him farewell.  Then the
 soul quits the body and the angels receive it, but we see the shape of
 the soul as a shape of light, perfect in all the body apart from the
 distinction of male and female.

 XV.  Then the angels taking it up sing a song and hymn, making melody
 to God, and again other troops of angels come in haste to meet them,
 saluting the soul that is coming and entering into the firmaments.  And
 when it has come to the place where it is to worship God, the son of
 God himself, together with the angels, receives the soul of the blessed
 one and bears it to the undefiled father of the ages, and again, when
 the angels sing above, we being below listen to them, and again we sing
 and they listen in heaven above, and thus between us and the angels
 there arises a giving of praise in hymns.  But when the soul of the
 blessed one, falling upon its face, worships the Lord, then we also
 falling down worship the Lord in that same hour, and when the Lord
 raises it up then we also arise; and when it goes to its appointed
 place, we also go into the church, fulfilling the eucharist of the
 Lord.

 Having written these things, and all the life of the blessed, we gave
 them to our brother Zosimus, and escorted him as far as the place of
 trees beside the river Eumeles.

 XVI.  And I, Zosimus, besought again the blessed ones to make entreaty
 for me to the Lord that the trees might receive me to take me across.
 And they all cried to the Lord and said, O God that hast shown us thy
 marvels and hast made thy servant Zosimus to come to us out of the
 world of vanity, set him again in his own place with peace, and command
 these trees to bow down and take up thy servant and set him on the
 further side.  And as they finished their prayer, the trees straightway
 bent down before them, and received me as on the second day before; and
 being set on the other side of the river I cried with a loud voice and
 said, Men of righteousness, who are brothers of the holy angels, grant
 me your prayer in peace, for behold I depart from you.  And making
 prayer they all cried out, saying, Peace, peace be with you, brother.

 XVII.  Then I prayed to the Lord, and there came to me a storm of wind,
 and received me upon its wings, and carried me to the place where it
 found me sitting, and left me there in peace.  And raising its voice
 the wind said to me, Blessed art thou, Zosimus, that thou hast been
 numbered with the blessed.  And the beast from the desert, whose name
 is the camel, came and received me upon its neck and carried me eighty
 and five stations, and set me in the place where it found me praying,
 and left me in peace, crying and saying, Blessed art thou, Zosimus,
 that thou hast been numbered with the blessed.

 XVIII.  But seeing me thus praised, Satan desired to tempt me and throw
 his dart at me from his station, but an angel of God came and said to
 me, Zosimus, behold Satan is coming to tempt thee, but the Lord will
 fight for thee, for the glory of thy faith must bind [3996] Satan.  And
 an angel of God appeared, crying and saying, Welcome, blessed one of
 Christ.  Come and I shall lead thee to the cave that is the
 dwelling-place of thy body, for thy cave shall be a testimony of the
 desert, a healing of the sick that come to it, a place of trial and
 touch-stone of demons.  And laying hold of my hand he strengthened me,
 and led me for forty days to the cave where I had dwelt.  And there was
 there a table of righteousness, and I spent the night with the angels
 of God.  And I placed the tablets that were given me by the holy
 blessed ones on the step of the altar in my cave.

 XIX.  And, behold, when the angels of God ascended, the Devil came,
 having a fierce shape, and possessed with anger and gall, and said to
 me, I knew that God would do with thee as with the blessed ones, and
 that they shall be free from sin and be above the angels, and therefore
 I brought in an evil design, and entered into the vessel of the
 serpent, an evil-doer added to evil-doer.  And by this I made the first
 man Adam to transgress and taste of the tree of life, since God had
 commanded him not to eat of it, that he might remain equal in glory to
 God and the holy angels; and thou again hast gone and brought this
 commandment, but now that they may not be without sin, I shall show
 thee how I shall destroy thee and all those that receive this
 commandment, so that they may not be without sin, and the book that
 thou hast brought.

 XX.  Saying these things the Devil departed from me, and after eight
 days he brought with him one thousand three hundred and sixty demons,
 and dragged me from the cave as I prayed, and they beat me, tossing me
 about between them, for forty days.  And after the forty days the devil
 lamented before me and said, Woe is me that through one man I have lost
 the world, for he has vanquished me by his prayer.  And he began to run
 from me, but I laying hold of him stayed him and said, Thou shalt not
 run away and flee from me until thou swearest to me never again to
 tempt man.  And lamenting with great and violent lamentation he swore
 to me by the firmament of heaven, So long as thy dwelling is here, and
 after thee, I will not come upon this place.  Then I let him go,
 sending him and the demons with him into eternal fire.  Then the angel
 came, who had companied with me at the table, and led me into my cave
 with great glory.

 XXI.  After this I lived thirty-six years, and communicated the way of
 life of the blessed to the fathers in the desert.  But the Devil wept
 because of the tables of the life of the blessed, saying, If this get
 abroad in the world, I shall be mocked, and these will remain without
 sin and I alone in folly.  And after the completion of the thirty-six
 years, the angels of God came to me as to the blessed.

 And all the monks were gathered together and all who heard it, and this
 testament was read to all of them, and in such life he gave up his soul
 to God.

 XXII.  And I, Cryseos, [3997] being one of those in the desert, spread
 it abroad and gave it to all that were willing to learn it and profit
 by it.  Therefore the angels of God helped to bury the body of Zosimus
 as a precious gift, and we saw the soul of the blessed one shining
 seven times brighter than the sun.  And straightway upon that place
 there came up seven palm-trees and overshadowed the cave.  There came
 up also a fountain of water in that place, holy water, and unto this
 day a healing and salvation to all the sick that come to it.  Peace be
 to all that have heard the memorial of the holy Zosimus; the Lord is
 the advocate and helper of all to the endless ages of ages.  Amen.

 [3996] Text corrupt; "bind" is conjectural.

 [3997] The name is corrupt.

  The Epistles of Clement

 The Epistles of Clement.

 Reprinted from the translation given in the 1st vol. of the Ante-Nicene
 Fathers.  Completed and revised from a manuscript discovered after the
 publication of that volume.

 by

 Rev. JOhn Keith, D.D.

 Introductory Notice to 1st Clement.

 ------------------------

 [From Vol. I. of the Ante-Nicene Fathers.]

 The first Epistle, bearing the name of Clement, has been preserved to
 us in a single manuscript only.  Though very frequently referred to by
 ancient Christian writers, it remained unknown to the scholars of
 Western Europe until happily discovered in the Alexandrian manuscript.
 This ms. of the sacred Scriptures (known and generally referred to as
 Codex A) was presented in 1628 by Cyril, Patriarch of Constantinople,
 to Charles I., and is now preserved in the British Museum.  Subjoined
 to the books of the New Testament contained in it, there are two
 writings described as the Epistles of one Clement.  Of these, that now
 before us is the first.  It is tolerably perfect, but there are many
 slight lacunæ, or gaps, in the ms., and one whole leaf is supposed to
 have been lost towards the close.  These lacunæ, however, so numerous
 in some chapters, do not generally extend beyond a word or syllable,
 and can for the most part be easily supplied.

 Who the Clement was to whom these writings are ascribed, cannot with
 absolute certainty be determined.  The general opinion is, that he is
 the same as the person of that name referred to by St. Paul (Phil. iv.
 3).  The writings themselves contain no statement as to their author.
 The first, and by far the longer of them, simply purports to have been
 written in the name of the church at Rome to the church at Corinth.
 But in the catalogue of contents prefixed to the ms. they are both
 plainly attributed to one Clement; and the judgment of most scholars
 is, that, in regard to the first epistle at least, this statement is
 correct, and that it is to be regarded as an authentic production of
 the friend and fellow worker of St. Paul.  This belief may be traced to
 an early period in the history of the church.  It is found in the
 writings of Eusebius (Hist. Eccl., iii. 15), of Origen (Comm. in Joan.,
 i. 29), and others.  The internal evidence also tends to support this
 opinion.  The doctrine, style, and manner of thought are all in
 accordance with it; so that, although, as has been said, positive
 certainty cannot be reached on the subject, we may with great
 probability conclude that we have in this epistle a composition of that
 Clement who is known to us from Scripture as having been an associate
 of the great apostle.

 The date of this epistle has been the subject of considerable
 controversy.  It is clear from the writing itself that it was composed
 soon after some persecution (chap. i.) which the Roman church had
 endured; and the only question is, whether we are to fix upon the
 persecution under Nero or Domitian.  If the former, the date will be
 about the year 68; if the latter, we must place it towards the close of
 the first century or the beginning of the second.  We possess no
 external aid to the settlement of this question.  The lists of early
 Roman bishops are in hopeless confusion, some making Clement the
 immediate successor of St. Peter, others placing Linus, and others
 still Linus and Anacletus, between him and the apostle.  The internal
 evidence, again, leaves the matter doubtful, though it has been
 strongly pressed on both sides.  The probability seems, on the whole,
 to be in favour of the Domitian period, so that the epistle may be
 dated about a.d. 97.

 This epistle was held in very great esteem by the early church.  The
 account given of it by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl., iii. 16) is as follows:
 "There is one acknowledged epistle of this Clement (whom he has just
 identified with the friend of St. Paul), great and admirable, which he
 wrote in the name of the church of Rome to the church at Corinth,
 sedition having then arisen in the latter church.  We are aware that
 this epistle has been publicly read in very many churches, both in old
 times and also in our own day."  The epistle before us thus appears to
 have been read in numerous churches, as being almost on a level with
 the canonical writings.  And its place in the Alexandrian ms.,
 immediately after the inspired books, is in harmony with the position
 thus assigned it in the primitive church.  There does indeed appear a
 great difference between it and the inspired writings in many respects,
 such as the fanciful use sometimes made of Old Testament statements,
 the fabulous stories which are accepted by its author, and the general
 diffuseness and feebleness of style by which it is distinguished.  But
 the high tone of evangelical truth which pervades it, the simple and
 earnest appeals which it makes to the heart and conscience, and the
 anxiety which its writer so constantly shows to promote the best
 interests of the church of Christ, still impart an undying charm to
 this precious relic of later apostolic times.

 Additional Introduction.

 Towards the close of 1875, at Constantinople, Philotheus Bryennius,
 Metropolitan of Serræ, published the first complete edition of the
 epistles ascribed to Clement.  This he was enabled to do by the
 discovery of a ms. in the library of the Holy Sepulchre at Fanari in
 Constantinople.  This ms., of vellum, consists of one hundred and
 twenty leaves in small octavo, nearly seven and a half inches in length
 and six in breadth.  The ms. bears the date 1056, and was written by
 one Leo.  Its contents are:

 1.  Chrysostom's Synopsis of the Old Testament (the New also being
 included in the title).

 2.  Epistle of Barnabas.

 3.  Clement to the Corinthians I.

 4.  Clement to the Corinthians II.

 5.  Teaching of the Twelve Apostles.

 6.  Ignatian Epistles.

 The ms. is written with comparative accuracy and clearness.  Internal
 evidence seems to establish its independent value; e.g., words
 carelessly omitted in the Codex Alexandrinus are found in this ms.  It
 also supplies the lacunæ, notably chapters 57 (concluding sentence)--63
 inclusive of the first Epistle and chapters 12 (concluding
 sentences)--20, being the close of the second Epistle.  Harnack seems
 to prove that the new ms. is as complete as the original Alexandrian.

 The lacuna of the first Epistle consists mainly of a prayer, the writer
 somewhat abruptly passing from the oratio obliqua to the oratio recta.
 The prayer is indicative of intense earnestness and emotion rather than
 official authority.  It is marked by wealth of quotation, especially
 from the Septuagint.  Perhaps, too, the nature of the sufferings
 referred to in the opening chapters may be inferred from the petitions
 of this prayer.

 In the Notes the old ms. is indicated by A, the recently discovered ms.
 by I.

 The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians. [3998]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--The Salutation.  Praise of the Corinthians Before the
 Breaking Forth of Schism Among Them.

 The church of God which sojourns at Rome, to the church of God
 sojourning at Corinth, to them that are called and sanctified by the
 will of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:  Grace unto you, and peace,
 from Almighty God through Jesus Christ, be multiplied.

 Owing, dear brethren, to the sudden and successive calamitous events
 [3999] which have happened to ourselves, we feel that we have been
 somewhat tardy in turning our attention to the points respecting which
 you consulted us; and especially to that shameful and detestable
 sedition, utterly abhorrent to the elect of God, which a few rash and
 self-confident persons have kindled to such a pitch of frenzy, that
 your venerable and illustrious name, worthy to be universally loved,
 has suffered grievous injury. [4000] For who ever dwelt even for a
 short time among you, and did not find your faith to be as fruitful of
 virtue as it was firmly established? [4001] Who did not admire the
 sobriety and moderation of your godliness in Christ?  Who did not
 proclaim the magnificence of your habitual hospitality?  And who did
 not rejoice over your perfect and well-grounded knowledge?  For ye did
 all things without respect of persons, and walked in the commandments
 of God, being obedient to those who had the rule over you, and giving
 all fitting honour to the presbyters among you.  Ye enjoined young men
 to be of a sober and serious mind, ye instructed your wives to do all
 things with a blameless, becoming, and pure conscience, loving their
 husbands as in duty bound; and ye taught them that, living in the rule
 of obedience, they should manage their household affairs becomingly,
 and be in every respect marked by discretion.

 [3998] According to I, the title is "Clement's (Epistle) to the
 Corinthians."  A includes in a Table of Contents of the New Testament
 after the Apocalypse: "Clement's Epistle I." "Clement's Epistle II."
 The space for the title for the 1st Epistle is mutilated, and we find
 only "....Corinthians I.;" the 2d Epistle has no title. On the
 authority of Eusebius, Jerome, Georgius Syncellus, the earlier editions
 give the titles, "First Epistle of Saint Clement, Bishop of Rome, to
 the Corinthians, written in name of the Church of Rome," "Second
 Epistle of Saint Clement, Bishop of Rome, to the Corinthians."

 [3999] I, peristaseis (critical experiences).

 [4000] Literally "is greatly blasphemed."

 [4001] Literally, "did not prove your all-virtuous and firm faith."

 Chapter II.--Praise of the Corinthians Continued.

 Moreover, ye were all distinguished by humility, and were in no respect
 puffed up with pride, but yielded obedience rather than extorted it,
 [4002] and were more willing to give than to receive. [4003] Content
 with the provision which God [4004] had made for you, and carefully
 attending to His words, ye were inwardly filled [4005] with His
 doctrine, and His sufferings were before your eyes.  Thus a profound
 and abundant peace was given to you all, and ye had an insatiable
 desire for doing good, while a full outpouring of the Holy Spirit was
 upon you all.  Full of holy designs, ye did, with true earnestness of
 mind and a godly confidence, stretch forth your hands to God Almighty,
 beseeching Him to be merciful unto you, if ye had been guilty of any
 involuntary transgression.  Day and night ye were anxious for the whole
 brotherhood, [4006] that the number of God's elect might be saved with
 mercy [4007] and a good conscience. [4008] Ye were sincere and
 uncorrupted, and forgetful of injuries between one another.  Every kind
 of faction and schism was abominable in your sight.  Ye mourned over
 the transgressions of your neighbours:  their deficiencies you deemed
 your own.  Ye never grudged any act of kindness, being "ready to every
 good work." [4009] Adorned by a thoroughly virtuous and religious
 life, ye did all things in the fear of God.  The commandments and
 ordinances of the Lord were written upon the tablets of your hearts.
 [4010]

 [4002] Eph. v. 21; 1 Pet. v. 5.

 [4003] Acts xx. 35.

 [4004] I. Christou (Christ).  In the monophysite controversy, the
 theologians of Alexandria preferred to call the Lord "God" rather than
 "Christ."

 [4005] Literally, "ye embraced it in your bowels."

 [4006] 1 Pet. ii. 17.

 [4007] I. deous (fear).

 [4008] So in the ms., but many have suspected that the text is here
 corrupt.  Perhaps the best emendation is that which substitutes
 sunaistheseos "compassion," for suneideseos "conscience."

 [4009] Tit. iii. 1.

 [4010] Prov. vii. 3.

 Chapter III.--The Sad State of the Corinthian Church After Sedition
 Arose in It from Envy and Emulation.

 Every kind of honour and happiness [4011] was bestowed upon you, and
 then was fulfilled that which is written, "My beloved did eat and
 drink, and was enlarged and became fat, and kicked." [4012] Hence
 flowed emulation and envy, strife and sedition, persecution and
 disorder, war and captivity.  So the worthless rose up against the
 honoured, those of no reputation against such as were renowned, the
 foolish against the wise, the young against those advanced in years.
 For this reason righteousness and peace are now far departed from you,
 inasmuch as every one abandons the fear of God, and is become blind in
 His faith, [4013] neither walks in the ordinances of His appointment,
 nor acts a part becoming a Christian, [4014] but walks after his own
 wicked lusts, resuming the practice of an unrighteous and ungodly envy,
 by which death itself entered into the world. [4015]

 [4011] Literally, "enlargement."

 [4012] Deut. xxxii. 15.

 [4013] It seems necessary to refer autou to God, in opposition to the
 translation given by Abp. Wake and others.

 [4014] Literally, "Christ;" comp. 2 Cor. i. 21; Eph. iv. 20.

 [4015] Wisd. ii. 24.

 Chapter IV.--Many Evils Have Already Flowed from This Source in Ancient
 Times.

 For thus it is written:  "And it came to pass after certain days, that
 Cain brought of the fruits of the earth a sacrifice unto God; and Abel
 also brought of the firstlings of his sheep, and of the fat thereof.
 And God had respect to Abel and to his offerings, but Cain and his
 sacrifices He did not regard.  And Cain was deeply grieved, and his
 countenance fell.  And God said to Cain, Why art thou grieved, and why
 is thy countenance fallen?  If thou offerest rightly, but dost not
 divide rightly, hast thou not sinned?  Be at peace:  thine offering
 returns to thyself, and thou shalt again possess it.  And Cain said to
 Abel his brother, Let us go into the field.  And it came to pass, while
 they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and
 slew him." [4016] Ye see, brethren, how envy and jealousy led to the
 murder of a brother.  Through envy, also, our father Jacob fled from
 the face of Esau his brother. [4017] Envy made Joseph be persecuted
 unto death, and to come into bondage. [4018] Envy compelled Moses to
 flee from the face of Pharaoh king of Egypt, when he heard these words
 from his fellow-countryman, "Who made thee a judge or a ruler over us?
 Wilt thou kill me, as thou didst kill the Egyptian yesterday?" [4019]
 On account of envy, Aaron and Miriam had to make their abode without
 the camp. [4020] Envy brought down Dathan and Abiram alive to Hades,
 through the sedition which they excited against God's servant Moses.
 [4021] Through envy, David not only underwent the hatred of
 foreigners, but was also persecuted by Saul king of Israel. [4022]

 [4016] Gen. iv. 3-8.  The writer here, as always, follows the reading
 of the Septuagint, which in this passage both alters and adds to the
 Hebrew text.  We have given the rendering approved by the best critics;
 but some prefer to translate, as in our English version, "unto thee
 shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him."  See, for an
 ancient explanation of the passage, Irenæus, Adv. Hær., iv. 18, 3.

 [4017] Gen. xxvii. 41, etc.

 [4018] Gen. xxxvii.

 [4019] Ex. ii. 14.

 [4020] Num. xii. 14, 15.

 [4021] Num. xvi. 33.

 [4022] 1 Kings xviii. 8, etc.

 Chapter V.--No Less Evils Have Arisen from the Same Source in the Most
 Recent Times.  The Martyrdom of Peter and Paul.

 But not to dwell upon ancient examples, let us come to the most recent
 spiritual heroes. [4023] Let us take the noble examples furnished in
 our own generation.  Through envy [4024] and jealousy the greatest and
 most righteous pillars [of the church] have been persecuted and put to
 death. [4025] Let us set before our eyes the illustrious [4026]
 apostles.  Peter, through unrighteous envy, endured not one or two, but
 numerous labours; and when he had at length suffered martyrdom,
 departed to the place of glory due to him.  Owing to envy, Paul also
 obtained [4027] the reward of patient endurance, after being seven
 times thrown into captivity, [4028] compelled [4029] to flee, and
 stoned.  After preaching both in the east and west, he gained the
 illustrious reputation due to his faith, having taught righteousness
 [4030] to the whole world, and come to the extreme limit of the west,
 [4031] and suffered martyrdom under the prefects. [4032] Thus was he
 removed from the world, and went into the holy place, having proved
 himself a striking example of patience.

 [4023] Literally, "those who have been athletes."

 [4024] I. erin (strife).

 [4025] I. heos thanatou ethlesan (contended unto death).

 [4026] Literally "good."

 [4027] I. edeixen (displayed).

 [4028] Seven imprisonments of St. Paul are not referred to in
 Scripture.

 [4029] I. phugadeutheis (having become a fugitive).  Archbishop Wake
 here reads "scourged."  We have followed the most recent critics in
 filling up the numerous lacunæ in this chapter.

 [4030] I. punctuates elabe dikaiosunen, (received righteousness, having
 taught).

 [4031] Some think Rome, others Spain, and others even Britain, to be
 here referred to.

 [4032] That is, under Tigellinus and Sabinus, in the last year of the
 Emperor Nero; but some think Helius and Polycletus referred to; and
 others, both here and in the preceding sentence, regard the words as
 denoting simply the witness borne by Peter and Paul to the truth of the
 gospel before the rulers of the earth.

 Chapter VI.--Continuation.  Several Other Martyrs.

 To these men who spent their lives in the practice of holiness, there
 is to be added a great multitude of the elect, who, having through envy
 endured many indignities and tortures, furnished us with a most
 excellent example.  Through envy, those women, the Danaids [4033] and
 Dircæ, being persecuted, after they had suffered terrible and
 unspeakable torments, finished the course of their faith with
 stedfastness, [4034] and though weak in body, received a noble reward.
 Envy has alienated wives from their husbands, and changed that saying
 of our father Adam, "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
 flesh." [4035] Envy and strife have overthrown [4036] great cities,
 and rooted up mighty nations.

 [4033] Some suppose these to have been the names of two eminent female
 martyrs under Nero; others regard the clause as an interpolation.

 [4034] Literally, "have reached to the stedfast course of faith."

 [4035] Gen. ii. 23.

 [4036] I. kateskapsen (razed to the ground).

 Chapter VII.--An Exhortation to Repentance.

 These things, beloved, we write unto you, not merely to admonish you of
 your duty, but also to remind ourselves.  For we are struggling on the
 same arena, and the same conflict is assigned to both of us.  Wherefore
 let us give up vain and fruitless cares, and approach to the glorious
 and venerable rule of our holy calling. [4037] Let us attend to what
 is good, pleasing, and acceptable in the sight of Him who formed us.
 Let us look stedfastly to the blood of Christ, and see how precious
 that blood is to God [4038] which, having been shed for our salvation,
 has set the grace of repentance before the whole world. [4039] Let us
 turn to [4040] every age that has passed, and learn that, from
 generation to generation, the Lord has granted a place of repentance to
 all such as would be converted unto Him.  Noah preached repentance, and
 as many as listened to him were saved. [4041] Jonah proclaimed
 destruction to the Ninevites; [4042] but they, repenting of their sins,
 propitiated God by prayer, and obtained salvation, although they were
 aliens [to the covenant] of God.

 [4037] I. tes paradoseos hemon (of our tradition).

 [4038] I. to patri autou to theo (to His Father God).

 [4039] I. epenenken (conferred).

 [4040] I. dielthomen (traverse, trace).

 [4041] Gen. vii; 1 Pet. iii. 20; 2 Pet. ii. 5.

 [4042] Jonah iii.

 Chapter VIII.--Continuation Respecting Repentance.

 The ministers of the grace of God have, by the Holy Spirit, spoken of
 repentance; and the Lord of all things has himself declared with an
 oath regarding it, "As I live, saith the Lord, I desire not the death
 of the sinner, but rather his repentance;" [4043] adding, moreover,
 this gracious declaration, "Repent, O house of Israel, of your
 iniquity." [4044] Say to the children of my people, Though your sins
 reach from earth to heaven, and though they be redder [4045] than
 scarlet, and blacker than sack-cloth, yet if ye turn to me with your
 whole heart, and say, Father! I will listen to you, as to a holy [4046]
 people.  And in another place He speaks thus:  "Wash you and become
 clean; put away the wickedness of your souls from before mine eyes;
 cease from your evil ways, and learn to do well; seek out judgment,
 deliver the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and see that justice is
 done to the widow; and come, and let us reason together.  He declares,
 Though your sins be like crimson, I will make them white as snow;
 though they be like scarlet, I will whiten them like wool.  And if ye
 be willing and obey me, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye
 refuse, and will not hearken unto me, the sword shall devour you, for
 the mouth of the Lord hath spoken these things." [4047] Desiring,
 therefore, that all His beloved should be partakers of repentance, He
 has, by His almighty will, established [these declarations].

 [4043] Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

 [4044] Ezek. xviii. 30.

 [4045] Comp. Isa. i. 18.

 [4046] These words are not found in Scripture, though they are quoted
 again by Clem. Alex. (Pædag. i. 10) as from Ezekiel.

 [4047] Isa. i. 16-20.

 Chapter IX.--Examples of the Saints.

 Wherefore, let us yield obedience to His excellent and glorious will;
 and imploring His mercy and loving-kindness, while we forsake all
 fruitless labours [4048] and strife, and envy, which leads to death,
 let us turn and have recourse to His compassions.  Let us stedfastly
 contemplate those who have perfectly ministered to his excellent
 glory.  Let us take (for instance) Enoch, who, being found righteous in
 obedience, was translated, and death was never known to happen to him.
 [4049] Noah, being found faithful, preached regeneration to the world
 through his ministry; and the Lord saved by him the animals which, with
 one accord, entered into the ark.

 [4048] Some read mataiologian, vain talk.

 [4049] Gen. v. 24; Heb. xi. 5.  Literally, "and his death was not
 found."

 Chapter X.--Continuation of the Above.

 Abraham, styled "the friend," [4050] was found faithful, inasmuch as he
 rendered obedience to the words of God.  He, in the exercise of
 obedience, went out from his own country, and from his kindred, and
 from his father's house, in order that, by forsaking a small territory,
 and a weak family, and an insignificant house, he might inherit the
 promises of God.  For God said to him, "Get thee out from thy country,
 and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, into the land which
 I shall show thee.  And I will make thee a great nation, and will bless
 thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be blessed.  And I will
 bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee
 shall all the families of the earth be blessed." [4051] And again, on
 his departing from Lot, God said to him, "Lift up thine eyes, and look
 from the place where thou now art, northward, and southward, and
 eastward, and westward; for all the land which thou seest, to thee will
 I give it, and to thy seed for ever.  And I will make thy seed as the
 dust of the earth, [so that] if a man can number the dust of the earth,
 then shall thy seed also be numbered." [4052] And again [the
 Scripture] saith, "God brought forth Abram, and spake unto him, Look up
 now to heaven, and count the stars if thou be able to number them; so
 shall thy seed be.  And Abram believed God, and it was counted to him
 for righteousness." [4053] On account of his faith and hospitality, a
 son was given him in his old age; and in the exercise of obedience, he
 offered him as a sacrifice to God on one of the mountains which He
 showed him. [4054]

 [4050] Isa. xli. 8; 2 Chron. xx. 7; Judith viii. 19; James ii. 23.

 [4051] Gen. xii. 1-3.

 [4052] Gen. xiii. 14-16.

 [4053] Gen. xv. 5, 6; Rom. iv. 3.

 [4054] Gen. xii. 22; Heb. xi. 17.

 Chapter XI.--Continuation.  Lot.

 On account of his hospitality and godliness, Lot was saved out of Sodom
 when all the country round was punished by means of fire and brimstone,
 the Lord thus making it manifest that He does not forsake those that
 hope in Him, but gives up such as depart from Him to punishment and
 torture. [4055] For Lot's wife, who went forth with him, being of a
 different mind from himself, and not continuing in agreement with him
 [as to the command which had been given them], was made an example of,
 so as to be a pillar of salt unto this day. [4056] This was done that
 all might know that those who are of a double mind, and who distrust
 the power of God, bring down judgment on themselves [4057] and become a
 sign to all succeeding generations.

 [4055] Gen. xix; comp. 2 Pet. ii. 6-9.

 [4056] So Joseph., Antiq., i. 11. 4; Irenæus, Adv. Hær., iv. 31.

 [4057] Literally, "become a judgment and sign."

 Chapter XII.--The Rewards of Faith and Hospitality.  Rahab.

 On account of her faith and hospitality, Rahab the harlot was saved.
 For when spies were sent by Joshua, the son of Nun, to Jericho, the
 king of the country ascertained that they were come to spy out their
 land, and sent men to seize them, in order that, when taken, they might
 be put to death.  But the hospitable Rahab receiving them, concealed
 them on the roof of her house under some stalks of flax.  And when the
 men sent by the king arrived and said, "There came men unto thee who
 are to spy out our land; bring them forth, for so the king commands,"
 she answered them, "The two men whom ye seek came unto me, but quickly
 departed again and are gone," thus not discovering the spies to them.
 Then she said to the men, "I know assuredly that the Lord your God hath
 given you this city, for the fear and dread of you have fallen on its
 inhabitants.  When therefore ye shall have taken it, keep ye me and the
 house of my father in safety."  And they said to her, "It shall be as
 thou hast spoken to us.  As soon, therefore, as thou knowest that we
 are at hand, thou shalt gather all thy family under thy roof, and they
 shall be preserved, but all that are found outside of thy dwelling
 shall perish." [4058] Moreover, they gave her a sign to this effect,
 that she should hang forth from her house a scarlet thread.  And thus
 they made it manifest that redemption should flow through the blood of
 the Lord to all them that believe and hope in God. [4059] Ye see,
 beloved, that there was not only faith, but prophecy, in this woman.

 [4058] Josh. ii; Heb. xi. 31.

 [4059] Others of the fathers adopt the same allegorical interpretation,
 e. g., Justin Mar., Dial. c. Tryph., n. 111; Irenæus, Adv. Hær., iv.
 20.

 Chapter XIII.--An Exhortation to Humility.

 Let us therefore, brethren, be of humble mind, laying aside all
 haughtiness, and pride, and foolishness, and angry feelings; and let us
 act according to that which is written (for the Holy Spirit saith, "Let
 not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory
 in his might, neither let the rich man glory in his riches; but let him
 that glorieth glory in the Lord, in diligently seeking Him, and doing
 judgment and righteousness" [4060] ), being especially mindful of the
 words of the Lord Jesus which He spake teaching us meekness and
 long-suffering.  For thus He spoke:  "Be ye merciful, that ye may
 obtain mercy; forgive, that it may be forgiven to you; as ye do, so
 shall it be done unto you; as ye judge, so shall ye be judged; as ye
 are kind, so shall kindness be shown to you; with what measure ye mete,
 with the same it shall be measured to you." [4061] By this precept
 and by these rules let us stablish ourselves, that we walk with all
 humility in obedience to His holy words.  For the holy word saith, "On
 whom shall I look, but on him that is meek and peaceable, and that
 trembleth at my words?" [4062]

 [4060] Jer. ix. 23, 24; 1 Cor. i. 31; 2 Cor. x. 17.

 [4061] Comp. Matt. vi. 12-15, vii. 2; Luke vi. 36-38.

 [4062] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 Chapter XIV.--We Should Obey God Rather Than the Authors of Sedition.

 It is right and holy therefore, men and brethren, rather to obey God
 than to follow those who, through pride and sedition, have become the
 leaders of a detestable emulation.  For we shall incur no slight
 injury, but rather great danger, if we rashly yield ourselves to the
 inclinations of men who aim at exciting strife and tumults, [4063] so
 as to draw us away from what is good.  Let us be kind one to another
 after the pattern of the tender mercy and benignity of our Creator.
 For it is written, "The kind-hearted shall inhabit the land, and the
 guiltless shall be left upon it, but transgressors shall be destroyed
 from off the face of it." [4064] And again [the Scripture] saith, "I
 saw the ungodly highly exalted, and lifted up like the cedars of
 Lebanon:  I passed by, and, behold, he was not; and I diligently sought
 his place, and could not find it.  Preserve innocence, and look on
 equity:  for there shall be a remnant to the peaceable man." [4065]

 [4063] I. eis haireseis (sects).

 [4064] Prov. ii. 21, 22.

 [4065] Ps. xxxvii. 35-37.  "Remnant" probably refers either to the
 memory or posterity of the righteous.

 Chapter XV.--We Must Adhere to Those Who Cultivate Peace, Not to Those
 Who Merely Pretend to Do So.

 Let us cleave, therefore, to those who cultivate peace with godliness,
 and not to those who hypocritically profess to desire it.  For [the
 Scripture] saith in a certain place, "This people honoureth me with
 their lips, but their heart is far from me." [4066] And again:  "They
 bless with their mouth, but curse with their heart." [4067] And again
 it saith, "They loved Him with their month, and lied [4068] to Him with
 their tongue; but their heart was not right with Him, neither were they
 faithful in His covenant." [4069] "Let the deceitful lips become
 silent, [4070] [and "let the Lord destroy all the lying lips, [4071] ]
 and the boastful tongue of those who have said, Let us magnify our
 tongue:  our lips are our own; who is lord over us?  For the oppression
 of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, will I now arise, saith
 the Lord:  I will place him in safety; I will deal confidently with
 him." [4072]

 [4066] Isa. xxix. 13; Matt. xv. 8; Mark vii. 6.

 [4067] Ps. lxii. 4.

 [4068] I. epsexan (blamed).

 [4069] Ps. lxxviii. 36, 37.

 [4070] Ps. xxxi. 18.

 [4071] These words within brackets are not found in the ms., but have
 been inserted from the Septuagint by most editors.

 [4072] Ps. xii. 3-5.

 Chapter XVI.--Christ as an Example of Humility.

 For Christ is of those who are humble-minded, and not of those who
 exalt themselves over His flock.  Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Sceptre of
 the majesty of God, did not come in the pomp of pride or arrogance,
 although He might have done so, but in a lowly condition, as the Holy
 Spirit had declared regarding Him.  For He says, "Lord, who hath
 believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?  We
 have declared [our message] in His presence:  He is, as it were, a
 child, and like a root in thirsty ground; He has no form nor glory,
 yea, we saw Him, and He had no form nor comeliness; but His form was
 without eminence, yea, deficient in comparison with the [ordinary] form
 of men.  He is a man exposed to stripes and suffering, and acquainted
 with the endurance of grief:  for His countenance was turned away; He
 was despised, and not esteemed.  He bears our iniquities, and is in
 sorrow for our sakes; yet we supposed that [on His own account] He was
 exposed to labour, and stripes, and affliction.  But He was wounded for
 our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities.  The chastisement
 of our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we were healed.  All we,
 like sheep, have gone astray; [every] man has wandered in his own way;
 and the Lord has delivered Him up for our sins, while He in the midst
 of His sufferings openeth not His mouth.  He was brought as a sheep to
 the slaughter, and as a lamb before her shearer is dumb, so He openeth
 not His mouth.  In His humiliation His judgment was taken away; who
 shall declare His generation? for His life is taken from the earth.
 For the transgressions of my people was He brought down to death.  And
 I will give the wicked for His sepulchre, and the rich for His death,
 [4073] because He did no iniquity, neither was guile found in His
 mouth.  And the Lord is pleased to purify him by stripes. [4074] If
 ye make [4075] an offering for sin, your soul shall see a long-lived
 seed.  And the Lord is pleased to relieve Him of the affliction of His
 soul, to show Him light, and to form Him with understanding, [4076] to
 justify the Just One who ministereth well to many; and He Himself shall
 carry their sins.  On this account He shall inherit many, and shall
 divide the spoil of the strong; because His soul was delivered to
 death, and He was reckoned among the transgressors, and He bare the
 sins of many, and for their sins was He delivered." [4077] And again
 He saith, "I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of
 the people.  All that see me have derided me; they have spoken with
 their lips; they have wagged their head, [saying] He hoped in God, let
 Him deliver Him, let Him save Him, since He delighteth in Him." [4078]
 Ye see, beloved, what is the example which has been given us; for if
 the Lord thus humbled Himself, what shall we do who have through Him
 come under the yoke of His grace?

 [4073] The Latin of Cotelerius, adopted by Hefele and Dressel,
 translates this clause as follows:  "I will set free the wicked on
 account of His sepulchre, and the rich on account of His death."

 [4074] The reading of the ms., is tes pleges, "purify, or free Him,
 from stripes."  We have adopted the emendation of Junius.

 [4075] Wotton reads, "If He make."

 [4076] Or, "fill Him with understanding," if plesai should be read
 instead of plasai as Grabe suggests.

 [4077] Isa. liii.  The reader will observe how often the text of the
 Septuagint, here quoted, differs from the Hebrew as represented by our
 authorized English version.

 [4078] Ps. xxii. 6-8.

 Chapter XVII.--The Saints as Examples of Humility.

 Let us be imitators also of those who in goat-skins and sheep-skins
 [4079] went about proclaiming the coming of Christ; I mean Elijah,
 Elisha, and Ezekiel among the prophets, with those others to whom a
 like testimony is borne [in Scripture].  Abraham was specially
 honoured, and was called the friend of God; yet he, earnestly regarding
 the glory of God, humbly declared, "I am but dust and ashes." [4080]
 Moreover, it is thus written of Job, "Job was a righteous man, and
 blameless, truthful, God-fearing, and one that kept himself from all
 evil." [4081] But bringing an accusation against himself, he said,
 "No man is free from defilement, even if his life be but of one day."
 [4082] Moses was called faithful in all God's house; [4083] and
 through his instrumentality, [4084] God punished Egypt with plagues and
 tortures.  Yet he, though thus greatly honoured, did not adopt lofty
 language, but said, when the divine oracle came to him out of the bush,
 "Who am I, that Thou sendest me?  I am a man of a feeble voice and a
 slow tongue." [4085] And again he said, "I am but as the smoke of a
 pot." [4086]

 [4079] Heb. xi. 37.

 [4080] Gen. xviii. 27.

 [4081] Job i. 1.

 [4082] Job xiv. 4, 5.

 [4083] Num. xii. 7; Heb. iii. 2.

 [4084] I. huperesias (service).

 [4085] Ex. iii. 11, iv. 10.

 [4086] This is not found in Scripture.

 Chapter XVIII.--David as an Example of Humility.

 But what shall we say concerning David, to whom such testimony was
 borne, and of whom [4087] God said, "I have found a man after mine own
 heart, David the son of Jesse; and in everlasting mercy have I anointed
 him?" [4088] Yet this very man saith to God, "Have mercy on me, O
 Lord, according to Thy great mercy; and according to the multitude of
 Thy compassions, blot out my transgression. [4089] Wash me still more
 from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.  For I acknowledge mine
 iniquity, and my sin is ever before me.  Against Thee only have I
 sinned, and done that which is evil in Thy sight; that Thou mayest be
 justified in Thy sayings, and mayest overcome when Thou [4090] art
 judged.  For, behold, I was conceived in transgressions, and in sins
 did my mother conceive me.  For, behold, Thou hast loved truth; the
 secret and hidden things of wisdom hast Thou shown me.  Thou shalt
 sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed; Thou shalt wash me,
 and I shall be whiter than snow.  Thou shalt make me to hear joy and
 gladness; my bones, which have been humbled, shall exult.  Turn away
 Thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.  Create in me
 a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. [4091] Cast
 me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
 Restore to me the joy of Thy salvation, and establish me by Thy
 governing Spirit.  I will teach transgressors Thy ways, and the ungodly
 shall be converted unto Thee.  Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, [4092]
 O God, the God of my salvation:  my tongue shall exult in Thy
 righteousness.  O Lord, Thou shalt open my mouth, and my lips shall
 show forth Thy praise.  For if Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I would
 have given it; Thou wilt not delight in burnt-offerings.  The sacrifice
 [acceptable] to God is a bruised spirit; a broken and a contrite heart
 God will not despise." [4093]

 [4087] Or, as some render "to whom."

 [4088] Ps. lxxxix. 21.

 [4089] "Wash me...." and following verses omitted in I.

 [4090] Or, "when Thou judgest."

 [4091] Literally, "in my inwards."

 [4092] Literally, "bloods."

 [4093] Ps. li. 1-17.

 Chapter XIX.--Imitating These Examples, Let Us Seek After Peace.

 Thus the humility and godly submission of so great and illustrious men
 have rendered not only us, but also all the generations before us,
 better; even as many as have received His oracles in fear and truth.
 Wherefore, having so many great and glorious examples set before us,
 let us turn again to the practice of that peace which from the
 beginning was the mark set before us; [4094] and let us look stedfastly
 to the Father and Creator of the universe, and cleave to His mighty and
 surpassingly great gifts and benefactions of peace.  Let us contemplate
 Him with our understanding, and look with the eyes of our soul to His
 long-suffering will.  Let us reflect how free from the wrath He is
 towards all His creation.

 [4094] Literally, "Becoming partakers of many great and glorious deeds,
 let us return to the aim of peace delivered to me from the beginning."
 Comp. Heb. xii. 1.

 Chapter XX.--The Peace and Harmony of the Universe.

 The heavens, revolving under His government, are subject to Him in
 peace.  Day and night run the course appointed by Him, in no wise
 hindering each other.  The sun and moon, with the companies of the
 stars, roll on in harmony according to His command, within their
 prescribed limits, and without any deviation.  The fruitful earth,
 according to His will, brings forth food in abundance, at the proper
 seasons, for man and beast and all the living beings upon it, never
 hesitating, nor changing any of the ordinances which He has fixed.  The
 unsearchable places of abysses, and the indescribable arrangements of
 the lower world, are restrained by the same laws.  The vast
 unmeasurable sea, gathered together by His working into various basins,
 [4095] never passes beyond the bounds placed around it, but does as He
 has commanded.  For He said, "Thus far shalt thou come, and thy waves
 shall be broken within thee." [4096] The ocean, impassable to man and
 the worlds beyond it, are regulated by the same enactments of the
 Lord.  The seasons of spring, summer, autumn, and winter, peacefully
 give place [4097] to one another.  The winds in their several quarters
 [4098] fulfil, at the proper time, their service without hindrance.
 The ever-flowing fountains, formed both for enjoyment and health,
 furnish without fail their breasts for the life of men.  The very
 smallest of living beings meet together in peace and concord.  All
 these the great Creator and Lord of all has appointed to exist in peace
 and harmony; while He does good to all, but most abundantly to us who
 have fled for refuge to His compassions through Jesus Christ our Lord,
 to whom be glory and majesty for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4095] Or, "collections."

 [4096] Job xxxviii. 11.

 [4097] I. metaprodidoasi (transfer from one to another).

 [4098] Or "stations."

 Chapter XXI.--Let Us Obey God, and Not the Authors of Sedition.

 Take heed, beloved, lest His many kindnesses lead to the condemnation
 of us all.  [For thus it must be] unless we walk worthy of Him, and
 with one mind do those things which are good and well-pleasing in His
 sight.  For [the Scripture] saith in a certain place, "The Spirit of
 the Lord is a candle searching the secret parts of the belly." [4099]
 Let us reflect how near He is, and that none of the thoughts or
 reasonings in which we engage are hid from Him.  It is right,
 therefore, that we should not leave the post which His will has
 assigned us.  Let us rather offend those men who are foolish, and
 inconsiderate, and lifted up, and who glory in the pride of their
 speech, than [offend] God.  Let us reverence the Lord Jesus Christ,
 [4100] whose blood was given for us; let us esteem those who have the
 rule over us; [4101] let us honour the aged [4102] among us; let us
 train up the young men in the fear of God; let us direct our wives to
 that which is good.  Let them exhibit the lovely habit of purity [in
 all their conduct]; let them show forth the sincere disposition of
 meekness; let them make manifest the command which they have of their
 tongue, by their manner [4103] of speaking; let them display their
 love, not by preferring [4104] one to another, but by showing equal
 affection to all that piously fear God.  Let your children be partakers
 of true Christian training; let them learn of how great avail humility
 is with God--how much the spirit of pure affection can prevail with
 Him--how excellent and great His fear is, and how it saves all those
 who walk in [4105] it with a pure mind.  For He is a Searcher of the
 thoughts and desires [of the heart]:  His breath is in us; and when He
 pleases, He will take it away.

 [4099] Prov. xx. 27.

 [4100] I. omits "Christ."

 [4101] Comp. Heb. xiii. 17; 1 Thess. v. 12, 13.

 [4102] Or, "the presbyters."

 [4103] I. siges (silence).

 [4104] I. proskleseis (summonses).  Comp. 1 Tim. v. 21.

 [4105] Some translate, "who turn to Him."

 Chapter XXII.--These Exhortations are Confirmed by the Christian Faith,
 Which Proclaims the Misery of Sinful Conduct.

 Now the faith which is in Christ confirms all these [admonitions].  For
 He Himself by the Holy Ghost thus addresses us:  "Come, ye children,
 hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. [4106] What
 man is he that desireth life, and loveth to see good days?  Keep thy
 tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.  Depart from evil,
 and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.  The eyes of the Lord are upon
 the righteous, and His ears are [open] unto their prayers.  The face of
 the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of
 them from the earth.  The righteous cried, and the Lord heard him, and
 delivered him out of all his troubles." [4107] "Many are the stripes
 [appointed for] the wicked; but mercy shall compass those about who
 hope in the Lord." [4108]

 [4106] I. omits rest of quotation as far us "Many," etc.

 [4107] Ps. xxxiv. 11-17.

 [4108] Ps. xxxii. 10.

 Chapter XXIII.--Be Humble, and Believe that Christ Will Come Again.

 The all-merciful and beneficent Father has bowels [of compassion]
 towards those that fear Him, and kindly and lovingly bestows His
 favours upon those who come to Him with a simple mind.  Wherefore let
 us not be double-minded; neither let our soul be lifted [4109] up on
 account of His exceedingly great and glorious gifts.  Far from us be
 that which is written, "Wretched are they who are of a double mind, and
 of a doubting heart; who say, These things we have heard even in the
 times of our fathers; but, behold, we have grown old, and none of them
 has happened unto us;" [4110] Ye foolish ones! compare yourselves to a
 tree; take [for instance] the vine.  First of all, it sheds its leaves,
 [4111] then it buds, next it puts forth leaves, and then it flowers;
 after that comes the sour grape, and then follows the ripened fruit.
 Ye perceive how in a little time the fruit of a tree comes to
 maturity.  Of a truth, soon and suddenly shall His will be
 accomplished, as the Scripture also bears witness, saying, "Speedily
 will He come, and will not tarry;" [4112] and, "The Lord shall suddenly
 come to His temple, even the Holy One, for whom ye look." [4113]

 [4109] Or, as some render, "neither let us have any doubt of."

 [4110] Some regard these words as taken from an apocryphal book, others
 as derived from a fusion of James i. 8 and 2 Pet. iii. 3, 4.

 [4111] I. omits.

 [4112] Hab. ii. 3; Heb. x. 37.

 [4113] Mal. iii. 1.

 Chapter XXIV.--God Continually Shows Us in Nature that There Will Be a
 Resurrection.

 Let us consider, beloved, how the Lord continually proves to us that
 there shall be a future resurrection, of which He has rendered the Lord
 Jesus Christ [4114] the first-fruits [4115] by raising Him from the
 dead.  Let us contemplate, beloved, the resurrection which is at all
 times [4116] taking place.  Day and night declare to us a
 resurrection.  The night sinks to sleep, and the day arises; the day
 [again] departs, and the night comes on.  Let us behold [4117] the
 fruits [of the earth], how the sowing of grain takes place.  The sower
 [4118] goes forth, and casts it into the ground, [4119] and the seed
 being thus scattered, though dry and naked when it fell upon the earth,
 is gradually dissolved.  Then out of its dissolution the mighty power
 of the providence of the Lord raises it up again, and from one seed
 many arise and bring forth fruit.

 [4114] I. omits "Christ."

 [4115] Comp. 1 Cor. xv. 20; Col. i. 18.

 [4116] I. kata kairon (in due season).

 [4117] I. labomen (let us take).

 [4118] Comp. Luke viii. 5.

 [4119] I. adds hekaston ton spermaton (the seeds severally.)

 Chapter XXV.--The Phoenix an Emblem of Our Resurrection.

 Let us consider that wonderful sign [of the resurrection] which takes
 place in eastern lands, that is, in Arabia and the countries round
 about.  There is a certain bird which is called a phoenix.  This is the
 only one of its kind, and lives five hundred years.  And when the time
 of its dissolution draws near that it must die, it builds itself a nest
 of frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices, into which, when the time
 is fulfilled, it enters and dies.  But as the flesh decays a certain
 kind of worm is produced, which, being nourished by the juices of the
 deed bird, brings forth feathers.  Then, when it has acquired strength,
 it takes up that nest in which are the bones of its parent, and bearing
 these it passes [4120] from the land of Arabia into Egypt, to the city
 called Heliopolis.  And, in open day, flying [4121] in the sight of all
 men, it places them on the altar of the sun, and having done this,
 hastens back to its former abode.  The priests then inspect the
 registers of the dates, and find that it has returned exactly as the
 five hundredth year was completed. [4122]

 [4120] I. dianuei (accomplishes its journey).

 [4121] I. omits epiptas (on the wing, flying).

 [4122] This fable respecting the phoenix is mentioned by Herodotus (ii.
 73), and by Pliny (Nat. Hist., x. 2). and is used as above by
 Tertullian (De Resurr., § 13), and by others of the fathers.

 Chapter XXVI.--We Shall Rise Again, Then, as the Scripture Also
 Testifies.

 Do we then deem it any great and wonderful thing for the Maker of all
 things to raise up again those that have piously served Him in the
 assurance of a good faith, when even by a bird He shows us the
 mightiness of His power to fulfil His promise? [4123] For [the
 Scripture] saith in a certain place, "Thou shalt raise me up, and I
 shall confess unto Thee"; [4124] and again, "I laid me down, and
 slept"; "I awaked, because Thou art with me;" [4125] and again, Job
 says, "Thou shalt raise up this flesh of mine, which has suffered all
 these things." [4126]

 [4123] Literally, "the mightiness of His promise."

 [4124] Ps. xxviii. 7, or from some apocryphal book.

 [4125] Comp. Ps. iii. 6.

 [4126] Job xix. 25, 26.

 Chapter XXVII.--In the Hope of the Resurrection, Let Us Cleave to the
 Omnipotent and Omniscient God.

 Having then this hope, let our souls be bound to Him who is faithful in
 His promises, and just in His judgments.  He who has commanded us not
 to lie, shall much more Himself not lie; for nothing is impossible with
 God, except to lie. [4127] Let His faith therefore be stirred up
 again within us, and let us consider that all things are nigh unto
 Him.  By the word of His might [4128] He established all things, and by
 His word He can overthrow them.  "Who shall say unto Him, What hast
 thou done? or, Who shall resist the power of His strength?" [4129]
 When, and as He pleases, He will do all things, and none of the things
 determined by Him shall pass away. [4130] All things are open before
 Him, and nothing can be hidden from His counsel.  "The heavens [4131]
 declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth His handy-work.
 [4132] Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth
 knowledge.  And there are no words or speeches of which the voices are
 not heard." [4133]

 [4127] Comp. Tit. i. 2; Heb. vi. 18.

 [4128] Or "majesty."

 [4129] Wisd. xii. 12, xi. 21.

 [4130] Comp. Matt. xxiv. 35.

 [4131] Literally, "if the heavens," etc.

 [4132] I. omits.

 [4133] Ps. xix. 1-3.  I. omits Ps. xix. 2-4, with the exception of the
 concluding words, akouontai hai phonai auton (their voices are heard),
 which are connected with the opening words of the following chapter.

 Chapter XXVIII.--God Sees All Things:  Therefore Let Us Avoid
 Transgression.

 Since then all things are seen and heard [by God], let us fear Him, and
 forsake those wicked works which proceed from evil [4134] desires;
 [4135] so that, through His mercy, we may be protected from the
 judgments to come.  For whither can any of us flee from His mighty
 hand?  Or what world will receive any of those who run away from Him?
 For the Scripture saith in a certain place, "Whither shall I go, and
 where shall I be hid from Thy presence?  If I ascend into heaven, Thou
 art there; if I go away even to the uttermost parts of the earth, there
 is Thy right hand; [4136] if I make my bed in the abyss, there is Thy
 Spirit." [4137] Whither, then, shall anyone go, or where shall he
 escape from Him who comprehends all things?

 [4134] I. blaberas (hurtful).

 [4135] Literally, "abominable lusts of evil deeds."

 [4136] I. su ekei ei (Thou art there).

 [4137] Ps. cxxxix. 7-10.

 Chapter XXIX.--Let Us Also Draw Near to God in Purity of Heart.

 Let us then draw near to Him with holiness of spirit, lifting up pure
 and undefiled hands unto Him, loving our gracious and merciful Father,
 who has made us partakers in the blessings of His elect. [4138] For
 thus it is written, "When the Most High divided the nations, when He
 scattered [4139] the sons of Adam, He fixed the bounds of the nations
 according to the number of the angels of God.  His people Jacob became
 the portion of the Lord, and Israel the lot of His inheritance. [4140]
 And in another place [the Scripture] saith, "Behold, the Lord taketh
 unto Himself a nation out of the midst of the nations, as a man takes
 the first-fruits of his threshing-floor; and from that nation shall
 come forth the Most Holy." [4141]

 [4138] Literally, "has made us to Himself a part of election."

 [4139] Literally, "sowed abroad."

 [4140] Deut. xxxii. 8, 9.

 [4141] Formed apparently from Num. xviii. 27 and 2 Chron. xxxi. 14.
 Literally, the closing words are, "the holy of holies."

 Chapter XXX.--Let Us Do Those Things that Please God, and Flee from
 Those He Hates, that We May Be Blessed.

 Seeing, therefore, that we are the portion of the Holy One, [4142] let
 us do all those things which pertain to holiness, avoiding all
 evil-speaking, all abominable and impure embraces, together with all
 drunkenness, seeking after change, [4143] all abominable lusts,
 detestable adultery, and execrable pride.  "For God," [saith the
 Scripture], "resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble."
 [4144] Let us cleave, then, to those to whom grace has been given by
 God.  Let us clothe ourselves with concord and humility, ever
 exercising self-control, standing far off from all whispering and
 evil-speaking, being justified by our works, and not our words.  For
 [the Scripture] saith, "He that speaketh much, shall also hear much in
 answer.  And does he that is ready in speech deem himself righteous?
 Blessed [4145] is he that is born of woman, who liveth but a short
 time:  be not given to much speaking." [4146] Let our praise be in
 God, and not of ourselves; for God hateth those that commend
 themselves.  Let testimony to our good [4147] deeds be borne by others,
 as it was in the case of our righteous forefathers.  Boldness, and
 arrogance, and audacity belong to [4148] those that are accursed of
 God; but moderation, humility, and meekness to such as are blessed by
 Him.

 [4142] I. hagia mere (holy parts.)

 [4143] Some translate, "youthful lusts."

 [4144] Prov. iii. 34; James iv. 6; 1 Pet. v. 5.

 [4145] I. omits.

 [4146] Job xi. 2, 3.  The translation is doubtful.

 [4147] I. omits.

 [4148] I. edothe (was given).

 Chapter XXXI.--Let Us See by What Means We May Obtain the Divine
 Blessing.

 Let us cleave then to His blessing, and consider what are the means
 [4149] of possessing it.  Let us think [4150] over the things which
 have taken place from the beginning.  For what reason was our father
 Abraham blessed?  Was it not because he wrought righteousness and truth
 through faith?  Isaac, [4151] with perfect confidence, as if knowing
 what was to happen, [4152] cheerfully yielded himself as a sacrifice.
 [4153] Jacob, through reason [4154] of his brother, went forth with
 humility from his own land, and came to Laban and served him; and there
 was given to him the sceptre of the twelve tribes of Israel.

 [4149] Literally, "what are the ways of His blessing."

 [4150] Literally, "unroll."

 [4151] Comp. James ii. 21.

 [4152] Some translate, "knowing what was to come."

 [4153] Gen. xxii. 6-10.

 [4154] So Jacobson:  Wotton reads, "fleeing from his brother."

 Chapter XXXII.--We are Justified Not by Our Own Works, But by Faith.

 Whosoever will candidly consider each particular, will recognise the
 greatness of the gifts which were given by him. [4155] For from him
 [4156] have sprung the priests and all the Levites who minister at the
 altar of God.  From him also [was descended] our Lord Jesus Christ
 according to the flesh. [4157] From him [arose] kings, princes, and
 rulers of the race of Judah.  Nor are his other tribes in small glory,
 [4158] inasmuch as God had promised, "Thy seed shall be as the stars of
 heaven." [4159] All these, therefore, were highly honoured, and made
 great, not for their own sake, or for their own works, or for the
 righteousness which they wrought, but through the operation of His
 will.  And we, too, being called by His will [4160] in Christ Jesus,
 are not justified by ourselves, nor by our own wisdom, or
 understanding, or godliness, or works which we have wrought in holiness
 of heart; but by that faith through which, from the beginning, Almighty
 God has justified all men; to whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4155] The meaning here is very doubtful.  Some translate, "the gifts
 which were given to Jacob by Him," i.e. God.

 [4156] ms. auton, referring to the gifts:  we have followed the
 emendation autou, adopted by most editors.  Some refer the word to God,
 and not Jacob.

 [4157] Comp. Rom. ix. 5.

 [4158] I. taxei (rank).

 [4159] Gen. xxii. 17, xxviii. 4.

 [4160] I. omits.

 Chapter XXXIII.--But Let Us Not Give Up the Practice of Good Works and
 Love.  God Himself is an Example to Us of Good Works.

 What shall we do, [4161] then, brethren?  Shall we become slothful in
 well-doing, and cease from the practice of love?  God forbid that any
 such course should be followed by us!  But rather let us hasten with
 all energy and readiness of mind to perform every good work.  For the
 Creator and Lord of all Himself rejoices in His works.  For by His
 infinitely great power He established the heavens, and by His
 incomprehensible wisdom He adorned them.  He also divided the earth
 from the water which surrounds it, and fixed it upon the immovable
 foundation of His own will.  The animals also which are upon it He
 commanded by His own word [4162] into existence.  So likewise, when He
 had formed [4163] the sea, and the living creatures which are in it, He
 enclosed them [within their proper bounds] by His own power.  Above
 all, [4164] with His holy and undefiled hands He formed man, the most
 excellent [of His creatures], and truly great through the understanding
 given him--the express likeness of His own image.  For thus says God:
 "Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness.  So God made
 man; male and female He created them." [4165] Having thus finished
 all these things, He approved them, and blessed them, and said,
 "Increase and multiply." [4166] We see, [4167] then, how all
 righteous men have been adorned with good works, and how the Lord
 Himself, adorning Himself with His works, rejoiced.  Having therefore
 such an example, let us without delay accede to His will, and let us
 work the work of righteousness with our whole strength.

 [4161] I. eroumin (shall we say).

 [4162] Or, "commandment."

 [4163] I. proetoimasas (having previously prepared).

 [4164] Or, "in addition to all."

 [4165] Gen. i. 26, 27.

 [4166] Gen. i. 28.

 [4167] Or, "let us consider."

 Chapter XXXIV.--Great is the Reward of Good Works with God.  Joined
 Together in Harmony, Let Us Implore that Reward from Him.

 The good servant [4168] receives the bread of his labour with
 confidence; the lazy and slothful cannot look his employer in the
 face.  It is requisite, therefore, that we be prompt in the practice of
 well-doing; for of Him are all things.  And thus He forewarns us:
 "Behold, the Lord [cometh], and His reward is before His face, to
 render to every man according to his work." [4169] He exhorts us,
 therefore, [4170] with our whole heart to attend to this, [4171] that
 we be not lazy or slothful in any good work.  Let our boasting and our
 confidence be in Him.  Let us submit ourselves to His will.  Let us
 consider the whole multitude of His angels, how they stand ever ready
 to minister to His will.  For the Scripture saith, "Ten thousand times
 ten thousand stood around Him, and thousands of thousands ministered
 unto Him, [4172] and cried, Holy, holy, holy, [is] the Lord of Sabaoth;
 the whole creation [4173] is full of His glory." [4174] And let us
 therefore, conscientiously gathering together in harmony, cry to Him
 earnestly, as with one mouth, that we may be made partakers of His
 great and glorious promises.  For [the Scripture] saith, "Eye hath not
 seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
 things which He hath prepared for them that wait for [4175] Him."
 [4176]

 [4168] Or, "labourer."

 [4169] Isa. xl. 10, lxii. 11; Rev. xxii. 12.

 [4170] I. pisteuontas (believing).

 [4171] The text here seems to be corrupt.  Some translate, "He warns us
 with all His heart to this end, that," etc.

 [4172] Dan. vii. 10.

 [4173] I. ge (earth).

 [4174] Isa. vi. 3.

 [4175] I. agaposin (love).

 [4176] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 Chapter XXXV.--Immense is This Reward.  How Shall We Obtain It?

 How blessed and wonderful, beloved, are the gifts of God!  Life in
 immortality, splendour in righteousness, truth in perfect confidence,
 [4177] faith in assurance, self-control in holiness!  And all these
 fall under the cognizance of our understandings [now]; what then shall
 those things be which are prepared for such as wait for Him?  The
 Creator and Father of all worlds, [4178] the Most Holy, [4179] alone
 knows their amount and their beauty.  Let us therefore earnestly strive
 to be found in the number of those that wait for Him, in order that we
 may share in His promised gifts.  But how, beloved, shall this be
 done?  If our understanding be fixed by faith towards God; if we
 earnestly seek the things [4180] which are pleasing and acceptable to
 Him; if we do the things which are in harmony with His blameless will;
 and if we follow the way of truth, casting away from us all
 unrighteousness and iniquity, [4181] along with all covetousness,
 [4182] strife, evil practices, deceit, whispering, and evil-speaking,
 all hatred of God, pride and haughtiness, vain glory and ambition.
 [4183] For they that do such things are hateful to God; and not only
 they that do them, but also those that take pleasure in them that do
 them. [4184] For the Scripture saith, "But to the sinner God said,
 Wherefore dost thou declare my statutes, and take my covenant into thy
 mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind
 thee?  When thou sawest a thief, thou consentedst with [4185] him, and
 didst make thy portion with adulterers.  Thy mouth has abounded with
 wickedness, and thy tongue contrived [4186] deceit.  Thou sittest, and
 speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest [4187] thine own mother's
 son.  These things thou hast done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest,
 wicked one, that I should be like to thyself.  But I will reprove thee,
 and set thyself before thee.  Consider now these things, ye that forget
 God, lest He tear you in pieces, like a lion, and there be none to
 deliver. [4188] The sacrifice of praise will glorify me, and a way is
 there by which I will show him the salvation of God." [4189]

 [4177] Some translate, "in liberty."

 [4178] Or, "of the ages."

 [4179] I. ho demiourgos ton aionon kai poter panagios (the Creator
 Eternal and Father All-Holy.)

 [4180] I. ta agatha (good things) added.

 [4181] I. ponerian (wickedness).

 [4182] I. omits pleonexia (covetousness).

 [4183] The reading is doubtful:  some have aphiloxenian, "want of a
 hospitable spirit."

 [4184] Rom. i. 32.

 [4185] Literally, "didst run with."

 [4186] Literally, "did weave."

 [4187] Or, "layest a snare for."

 [4188] I. omit "su de emisesas...ho rhuomenos Ps. l. 17-22, and
 connects by en to telei (in the end).

 [4189] Ps. l. 16-23.  The render will observe how the Septuagint
 followed by Clement differs from the Hebrew.

 Chapter XXXVI.--All Blessings are Given to Us Through Christ.

 This is the way, beloved, in which we find our Saviour, [4190] even
 Jesus Christ, the High Priest of all our offerings, the defender and
 helper of our infirmity.  By Him we look up to the heights of heaven.
 By Him we behold, as in a glass, His immaculate and most excellent
 visage.  By Him are the eyes of our hearts opened.  By Him our foolish
 and darkened understanding blossoms [4191] up anew towards His
 marvellous light.  By Him the Lord has willed that we should taste of
 immortal knowledge, [4192] "who, being the brightness of His majesty,
 is by so much greater than the angels, as He hath by inheritance
 obtained a more excellent name than they." [4193] For it is thus
 written, "Who maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of
 fire." [4194] But concerning His Son [4195] the Lord spoke thus:
 "Thou art my Son, to-day have I begotten Thee.  Ask of me, and I will
 give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
 the earth for Thy possession." [4196] And again He saith to Him, "Sit
 Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool."
 [4197] But who are His enemies?  All the wicked, and those who set
 themselves to oppose the will of God. [4198]

 [4190] Literally, "that which saves us."

 [4191] Or, "rejoices to behold."

 [4192] Or, "knowledge of immortality."

 [4193] Heb. i. 3, 4.

 [4194] Ps. civ. 4; Heb. i. 7.

 [4195] Some render, "to the Son."

 [4196] Ps. ii. 7, 8; Heb. i. 5.

 [4197] Ps. cx. 1; Heb. i. 13.

 [4198] Some read, "who oppose their own will to that of God."

 Chapter XXXVII.--Christ is Our Leader, and We His Soldiers.

 Let us then, men and brethren, with all energy act the part of
 soldiers, in accordance with His holy commandments.  Let us consider
 those who serve under our generals, with what order, obedience, [4199]
 and submissiveness they perform the things which are commanded them.
 All are not prefects, nor commanders of a thousand, nor of a hundred,
 nor of fifty, nor the like, but each one in his own rank performs the
 things commanded by the king and the generals.  The great cannot
 subsist without the small, nor the small without the great.  There is a
 kind of mixture in all things, and thence arises mutual advantage.
 [4200] Let us take our body for an example. [4201] The head is
 nothing without the feet, and the feet are nothing without the head;
 yea, the very smallest members of our body are necessary and useful to
 the whole body.  But all work [4202] harmoniously together, and are
 under one common rule [4203] for the preservation of the whole body.

 [4199] I. hektikos (habitually).

 [4200] Literally, "in these there is use."

 [4201] 1 Cor. xii. 12, etc.

 [4202] Literally, "all breathe together."

 [4203] Literally, "use one subjection."

 Chapter XXXVIII.--Let the Members of the Church Submit Themselves, and
 No One Exalt Himself Above Another.

 Let our whole body, then, be preserved in Christ Jesus; [4204] and let
 every one be subject to his neighbour, according to the special gift
 [4205] bestowed upon him.  Let the strong not despise [4206] the weak,
 and let the weak show respect unto the strong.  Let the rich man
 provide for the wants of the poor; and let the poor man bless God,
 because He hath given him one by whom his need may be supplied.  Let
 the wise man display his wisdom, not by [mere] words, but through good
 deeds.  Let the humble not bear testimony to himself, but leave witness
 to be borne to him by another. [4207] Let him that is pure in the
 flesh not grow proud [4208] of it, and boast, knowing that it was
 another who bestowed on him the gift of continence.  Let us consider,
 then, brethren, of what matter we were made,--who and what manner of
 beings we came into the world, as it were out of a sepulchre, and from
 utter darkness. [4209] He who made us and fashioned us, having
 prepared His bountiful gifts for us before we were born, introduced us
 into His world.  Since, therefore, we receive all these things from
 Him, we ought for everything to give Him thanks; to whom be glory for
 ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4204] I. omits "Jesus."

 [4205] Literally, "according as he has been placed in his charism."

 [4206] I. temeleito (attend to).

 [4207] Comp. Prov. xxvii. 2.

 [4208] The ms. is here slightly torn, and we are left to conjecture.

 [4209] Comp. Ps. cxxxix. 15.

 Chapter XXXIX.--There is No Reason for Self-Conceit.

 Foolish and inconsiderate [4210] men, who have neither wisdom [4211]
 nor instruction, mock and deride us, being eager to exalt themselves in
 their own conceits.  For what can a mortal man do, or what strength is
 there in one made out of the dust?  For it is written, "There was no
 shape before mine eyes, only I heard a sound, [4212] and a voice
 [saying], What then?  Shall a man be pure before the Lord?  Or shall
 such an one be [counted] blameless in his deeds, seeing He does not
 confide in His servants, and has charged [4213] even His angels with
 perversity?  The heaven is not clean in His sight:  how much less they
 that dwell in houses of clay, of which also we ourselves were made!  He
 smote them as a moth; and from morning even until evening they endure
 not.  Because they could furnish no assistance to themselves, they
 perished.  He breathed upon them, and they died, because they had no
 wisdom.  But call now, if any one will answer thee, or if thou wilt
 look to any of the holy angels; for wrath destroys the foolish man, and
 envy killeth him that is in error.  I have seen the foolish taking
 root, but their habitation was presently consumed.  Let their sons be
 far from safety; let them be despised [4214] before the gates of those
 less than themselves, and there shall be none to deliver.  For what was
 prepared for them, the righteous shall eat; and they shall not be
 delivered from evil." [4215]

 [4210] I omits kai asunetoi (and without understanding).

 [4211] Literally, "and silly and uninstructed."

 [4212] Literally, "a breath."

 [4213] Or, "has perceived."

 [4214] Some render, "they perished at the gates."

 [4215] Job iv. 16-18, 19-21, v. 1-5, xv. 15.

 Chapter XL.--Let Us Preserve in the Church the Order Appointed by God.

 These things therefore being manifest to us, and since we look into the
 depths of the divine knowledge, it behoves us to do all things in
 [their proper] order, which the Lord has commanded us to perform at
 stated times. [4216] He has enjoined offerings [to be presented] and
 service to be performed [to Him], and that not thoughtlessly or
 irregularly, but at the appointed times and hours.  Where and by whom
 He desires these things to be done, He Himself has fixed by His own
 supreme will, in order that all things, being piously done according to
 His good pleasure, may be acceptable unto Him. [4217] Those,
 therefore, who present their offerings at the appointed times, are
 accepted and blessed; for inasmuch as they follow the laws of the Lord,
 they sin not.  For his own peculiar services are assigned to the high
 priest, and their own proper place is prescribed to the priests, and
 their own special ministrations devolve on the Levites.  The layman is
 bound by the laws that pertain to laymen.

 [4216] Some join kata kairous tetagmenous, "at stated times," to the
 next sentence.

 [4217] Literally, "to His will."

 Chapter XLI.--Continuation of the Same Subject.

 Let every one of you, brethren, give thanks [4218] to God in his own
 order, living in all good conscience, with becoming gravity, and not
 going beyond the rule of the ministry prescribed to him.  Not in every
 place, brethren, are the daily sacrifices offered, or the
 peace-offerings, or the sin-offerings and the trespass-offerings, but
 in Jerusalem only.  And even there they are not offered in any place,
 but only at the altar before the temple, that which is offered being
 first carefully examined by the high priest and the ministers already
 mentioned.  Those, therefore, who do anything beyond that which is
 agreeable to His will, are punished with death.  Ye see, [4219]
 brethren, that the greater the knowledge that has been vouchsafed to
 us, the greater also is the danger to which we are exposed.

 [4218] I. euaresteito (be well-pleasing).

 [4219] Or, "consider."

 Chapter XLII.--The Order of Ministers in the Church.

 The apostles have preached the gospel to us from [4220] the Lord Jesus
 Christ; Jesus [4221] Christ [has done so] from God.  Christ therefore
 was sent forth by God, [4222] and the apostles by Christ.  Both these
 appointments, [4223] then, were made in an orderly way, according to
 the will of God.  Having therefore received their orders, and being
 fully assured by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
 established [4224] in the word of God, with full assurance of the Holy
 Ghost, they went forth proclaiming that the kingdom of God was at
 hand.  And thus preaching through countries and cities, they appointed
 the first fruits [of their labours], having first proved them by the
 Spirit, [4225] to be bishops and deacons of those who should afterwards
 believe.  Nor was this any new thing, since indeed many ages before it
 was written concerning bishops and deacons.  For thus saith the
 Scripture in a certain place, "I will appoint their bishops [4226] in
 righteousness, and their deacons [4227] in faith." [4228]

 [4220] Or, "by the command of."

 [4221] A. "the Christ," I. "Christ."

 [4222] I. omits.

 [4223] Literally, "both things were done."

 [4224] Or, "confirmed by."

 [4225] Or, "having tested them in spirit."

 [4226] Or, "overseers."

 [4227] Or, "servants."

 [4228] Isa. lx. 17, Sept.; but the text is here altered by Clement.
 The LXX. have, "I will give thy rulers in peace, and thy overseers in
 righteousness."

 Chapter XLIII.--Moses of Old Stilled the Contention Which Arose
 Concerning the Priestly Dignity.

 And what wonder is it if those in Christ who were entrusted with such a
 duty by God, appointed those [ministers] before mentioned, when the
 blessed Moses also, "a faithful servant in all his house," [4229] noted
 down in the sacred books all the injunctions which were given him, and
 when the other prophets also followed him, bearing witness with one
 consent to the ordinances which he had appointed?  For, when rivalry
 arose concerning the priesthood, and the tribes were contending among
 themselves as to which of them should be adorned with that glorious
 title, he commanded the twelve princes of the tribes to bring him their
 rods, each one being inscribed with the name [4230] of the tribe.  And
 he took them and bound them [together], and sealed them with the rings
 of the princes of the tribes, and laid them up in the tabernacle of
 witness on the table of God.  And having shut the doors of the
 tabernacle, he sealed the keys, as he had done the rods, and said to
 them, Men and brethren, the tribe whose rod shall blossom has God
 chosen to fulfil the office of the priesthood, and to minister unto
 Him.  And when the morning was come, he assembled all Israel, six
 hundred thousand men, and showed the seals to the princes of the
 tribes, and opened the tabernacle of witness, and brought forth the
 rods.  And the rod of Aaron was found not only to have blossomed, but
 to bear fruit upon it. [4231] What think ye, beloved?  Did not Moses
 know beforehand that this would happen?  Undoubtedly he knew; but he
 acted thus, that there might be no sedition in Israel, and that the
 name of the true and only God might be glorified; to whom be glory for
 ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4229] Num. xii. 10; Heb. iii. 5.

 [4230] Literally, "every tribe being written according to its name."

 [4231] See Num xvii.

 Chapter XLIV.--The Ordinances of the Apostles, that There Might Be No
 Contention Respecting the Priestly Office.

 Our apostles also knew, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that there would
 be strife on account of the office [4232] of the episcopate.  For this
 reason, therefore, inasmuch as they had obtained a perfect
 fore-knowledge of this, they appointed those [ministers] already
 mentioned, and afterwards gave instructions, [4233] that when these
 should fall asleep, other approved men should succeed them in their
 ministry.  We are of opinion, therefore, that those appointed by them,
 [4234] or afterwards by other eminent men, with the consent of the
 whole church, and who have blamelessly served the flock of Christ, in a
 humble, peaceable, and disinterested spirit, and have for a long time
 possessed the good opinion of all, cannot be justly dismissed from the
 ministry.  For our sin will not be small, if we eject from the
 episcopate [4235] those who have blamelessly and holily fulfilled its
 duties. [4236] Blessed are those presbyters who, having finished
 their course before now, have obtained a fruitful and perfect departure
 [from this world]; for they have no fear lest any one deprive them of
 the place now appointed them.  But we see that ye have removed some men
 of excellent behaviour from the ministry, which they fulfilled
 blamelessly and with honour.

 [4232] Literally, "on account of the title of the oversight "  Some
 understand this to mean, "in regard to the dignity of the episcopate;"
 and others simply, "on account of the oversight."  I. for epinome gives
 epidome Bryennius conjectures epidoche, which perhaps, may be
 rendered "Succession" (diadoche).

 [4233] The meaning of this passage is much controverted.  Some render,
 "left a list of other approved persons;" while others translate the
 unusual word epinome, which causes the difficulty, by "testamentary
 direction," and many others deem the text corrupt.  We have given what
 seems the simplest version of the text as it stands.

 [4234] i.e. the apostles.

 [4235] Or, "oversight."

 [4236] Literally, "presented the offerings."

 Chapter XLV.--It is the Part of the Wicked to Vex the Righteous.

 Ye are fond of contention, brethren, and full of zeal about things
 which do not pertain to salvation.  Look carefully into the Scriptures,
 which are the true utterances of the Holy Spirit.  Observe [4237] that
 nothing of an unjust or counterfeit character is written in them.
 There [4238] you will not find that the righteous were cast off by men
 who themselves were holy.  The righteous were indeed persecuted, but
 only by the wicked.  They were cast into prison, but only by the
 unholy; they were stoned, but only by transgressors; they were slain,
 but only by the accursed, and such as had conceived an unrighteous envy
 against them.  Exposed to such sufferings, they endured them
 gloriously.  For what shall we say, brethren?  Was Daniel [4239] cast
 into the den of lions by such as feared God?  Were Ananias, and
 Azarias, and Michael shut up in a furnace [4240] of fire by those who
 observed [4241] the great and glorious worship of the Most High?  Far
 from us be such a thought!  Who, then, were they that did such things?
 The hateful, and those full of all wickedness, were roused to such a
 pitch of fury, that they inflicted torture on those who served God with
 a holy and blameless purpose [of heart], not knowing that the Most High
 is the Defender and Protector of all such as with a pure conscience
 venerate [4242] His all-excellent name; to whom be glory for ever and
 ever.  Amen.  But they who with confidence endured [these things] are
 now heirs of glory and honour, and have been exalted and made
 illustrious [4243] by God in their memorial for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4237] Or, "Ye perceive."

 [4238] Or, "For."

 [4239] Dan. vi. 16.

 [4240] Dan. iii. 20.

 [4241] Literally, "worshipped."

 [4242] Literally, "serve."

 [4243] Or, "lifted up."  I. engraphoi (inscribed).

 Chapter XLVI.--Let Us Cleave to the Righteous:  Your Strife is
 Pernicious.

 Such examples, therefore, brethren, it is right that we should follow;
 [4244] since it is written, "Cleave to the holy, for those that cleave
 to them shall [themselves] be made holy." [4245] And again, in
 another place, [the Scripture] saith, "With a harmless man thou shalt
 prove [4246] thyself harmless, and with an elect man thou shalt be
 elect, and with a perverse man thou shalt show [4247] thyself
 perverse." [4248] Let us cleave, therefore, to the innocent and
 righteous, since these are the elect of God.  Why are there strifes,
 and tumults, and divisions, and schisms, and wars [4249] among you?
 Have we not [all] one God and one Christ?  Is there not one Spirit of
 grace poured out upon us?  And have we not one calling in Christ?
 [4250] Why do we divide and tear in pieces the members of Christ, and
 raise up strife against our own body, and have reached such a height of
 madness as to forget that "we are members one of another?" [4251]
 Remember the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, how [4252] He said, "Woe
 to that man [by whom [4253] offences come]!  It were better for him
 that he had never been born, than that he should cast a stumbling-block
 before one of my elect.  Yea, it were better for him that a millstone
 should be hung about [his neck], and he should be sunk in the depths of
 the sea, than that he should cast a stumbling-block before one of my
 little ones." [4254] Your schism has subverted [the faith of] many,
 has discouraged many, has given rise to doubt in many, and has caused
 grief to us all.  And still your sedition continueth.

 [4244] Literally, "to such examples it is right that we should cleave."

 [4245] Not found in Scripture.

 [4246] Literally, "be."

 [4247] Or, "thou wilt overthrow."

 [4248] Ps. xviii. 25, 26.

 [4249] Or, "war."  Comp. James iv. 1.

 [4250] Comp. Eph. iv. 4-6.

 [4251] Rom. xii. 5.

 [4252] This clause is wanting in the text.

 [4253] This clause is wanting in the text.

 [4254] Comp. Matt. xviii. 6, xxvi. 24; Mark ix. 42; Luke xvii. 2.

 Chapter XLVII.--Your Recent Discord is Worse Than the Former Which Took
 Place in the Times of Paul.

 Take up the epistle of the blessed Apostle Paul.  What did he write to
 you at the time when the gospel first began to be preached? [4255]
 Truly, under the inspiration [4256] of the Spirit, he wrote to you
 concerning himself, and Cephas, and Apollos, [4257] because even then
 parties [4258] had been formed among you.  But that inclination for one
 above another entailed less guilt upon you, inasmuch as your
 partialities were then shown towards apostles, already of high
 reputation, and towards a man whom they had approved.  But now reflect
 who those are that have perverted you, and lessened the renown of your
 far-famed brotherly love.  It is disgraceful, beloved, yea, highly
 disgraceful, and unworthy of your Christian profession, [4259] that
 such a thing should be heard of as that the most stedfast and ancient
 church of the Corinthians should, on account of one or two persons,
 engage in sedition against its presbyters.  And this rumour has reached
 not only us, but those also who are unconnected [4260] with us; so
 that, through your infatuation, the name of the Lord is blasphemed,
 while danger is also brought upon yourselves.

 [4255] Literally, "in the beginning of the gospel."

 [4256] Or, "spiritually."

 [4257] 1 Cor. iii. 13, etc.

 [4258] Or, "inclinations for one above another."  I. proskleseis
 (summonses) throughout for proskliseis.

 [4259] Literally, "of conduct in Christ."  I. agape (love).

 [4260] Or, "aliens from us," i.e. the Gentiles.

 Chapter XLVIII.--Let Us Return to the Practice of Brotherly Love.

 Let us therefore, with all haste, put an end [4261] to this [state of
 things]; and let us fall down before the Lord, and beseech Him with
 tears, that He would mercifully [4262] be reconciled to us, and restore
 us to our former seemly and holy practice of brotherly love.  For [such
 conduct] is the gate of righteousness, which is set open for the
 attainment of life, as it is written, "Open to me the gates of
 righteousness; I will go in by them, and will praise the Lord:  this is
 the gate of the Lord:  the righteous shall enter in by it." [4263]
 Although, therefore, many gates have been set open, yet this gate of
 righteousness is that gate in Christ by which blessed are all they that
 have entered in and have directed their way in holiness and
 righteousness, doing all things without disorder.  Let a man be
 faithful:  let him be powerful in the utterance of knowledge; let him
 be wise in judging of words; let him be pure in all his deeds; yet the
 more he seems to be superior to others [in these respects], the more
 humble-minded ought he to be, and to seek the common good of all, and
 not merely his own advantage.

 [4261] Literally, "remove."

 [4262] Literally, "becoming merciful."

 [4263] Ps. cxviii. 19, 20.

 Chapter XLIX--The Praise of Love.

 Let him who has love in Christ keep the commandments of Christ.  Who
 can describe the [blessed] bond of the love of God?  What man is able
 to tell the excellence of its beauty, as it ought to be told?  The
 height to which love exalts is unspeakable.  Love unites us to God.
 Love covers a multitude of sins. [4264] Love beareth all things, is
 long-suffering in all things. [4265] There is nothing base, nothing
 arrogant in love.  Love admits of no schisms:  love gives rise to no
 seditions:  love does all things in harmony.  By love have all the
 elect of God been made perfect; without love nothing is well-pleasing
 to God.  In love has the Lord taken us to Himself.  On account of the
 love He bore us, Jesus Christ our Lord gave His blood for us by the
 will of God; His flesh for our flesh, and His soul for our souls.

 [4264] James v. 20; 1 Pet. iv. 8.

 [4265] Comp. 1 Cor. xiii. 4, etc.

 Chapter L.--Let Us Pray to Be Thought Worthy of Love.

 Ye see, beloved, how great and wonderful a thing is love, and that
 there is no declaring its perfection.  Who is fit to be found in it,
 except such as God has vouchsafed to render so?  Let us pray, [4266]
 therefore, and implore of His mercy, that we may live [4267] blameless
 in love, free from all human partialities for one above another.  All
 the generations from Adam even unto this day have passed away; but
 those who, through the grace of God, have been made perfect in love,
 now possess a place among the godly, and shall be made manifest at the
 revelation [4268] of the kingdom of Christ. [4269] For it is written,
 "Enter into thy secret chambers for a little time, until my wrath and
 fury pass away; and I will remember a propitious [4270] day, and will
 raise you up out of your graves." [4271] Blessed are we, beloved, if
 we keep the commandments of God in the harmony of love; that so through
 love our sins may be forgiven us.  For it is written, "Blessed are they
 whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.  Blessed
 is the man whose sin the Lord will not impute to him, and in whose
 mouth there is no guile. [4272] This blessedness cometh upon those
 who have been chosen by God through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom be
 glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [4266] I. gives indicative mood.

 [4267] I. heurethomen (may be found).

 [4268] Literally, "visitation."

 [4269] I. theou (God).

 [4270] Or, "good."

 [4271] Isa. xxvi. 20.

 [4272] Ps. xxxii. 1, 2.

 Chapter LI.--Let the Partakers in Strife Acknowledge Their Sins.

 Let us therefore implore forgiveness for all those transgressions which
 through any [suggestion] of the adversary we have committed.  And these
 who have been the leaders of sedition and disagreement ought to have
 respect [4273] to the common hope.  For such as live in fear and love
 would rather that they themselves than their neighbours should be
 involved in suffering.  And they prefer to bear blame themselves,
 rather than that the concord which has been well and piously [4274]
 handed down to us should suffer.  For it is better that a man should
 acknowledge his transgressions than that he should harden his heart, as
 the hearts of those were hardened who stirred up sedition against Moses
 the servant [4275] of God, and whose condemnation was made manifest
 [unto all].  For they went down alive into Hades, and death swallowed
 them up. [4276] Pharaoh with his army and all the princes of Egypt,
 and the chariots with their riders, were sunk in the depths of the Red
 Sea, and perished, [4277] for no other reason than that their foolish
 hearts were hardened, after so many signs and wonders had been wrought
 in the land of Egypt by Moses the servant of God.

 [4273] Or, "look to."

 [4274] Or, "righteously."

 [4275] I. anthropon (man).

 [4276] Num. xvi.  I thanatos poimanei autous--"Death shall feed on
 them," Ps. xlix. 14 A.V.--should be, "Death shall tend them."

 [4277] Ex. xiv.

 Chapter LII.--Such a Confession is Pleasing to God.

 The Lord, brethren, stands in need of nothing; and He desires nothing
 of any one except that confession be made to Him.  For, says the elect
 David, "I will confess unto the Lord; and that will please Him more
 than a young bullock [4278] that hath horns and hoofs.  Let the poor
 see it, and be glad." [4279] And again he saith, "Offer [4280] unto
 God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows unto the Most High.  And
 call upon me in the day of thy trouble:  I will deliver thee, and thou
 shalt glorify me." [4281] For "the sacrifice of God is a broken
 spirit." [4282]

 [4278] I. omits from Ps. lxix. 31, 32 the word following "bullock."

 [4279] Ps. lxix. 31, 32.

 [4280] Or, "sacrifice."

 [4281] Ps. l. 14, l5.  I. omits Ps. l. 15.

 [4282] Ps. li. 17.

 Chapter LIII.--The Love of Moses Towards His People.

 Ye understand, beloved, ye understand well the sacred Scriptures, and
 ye have looked very earnestly into the oracles of God.  Call then these
 things to your remembrance.  When Moses went up into the mount, and
 abode there, with fasting and humiliation, forty days and forty nights,
 the Lord said unto him, "Moses, Moses, get thee down quickly from
 hence; for thy people whom thou didst bring out of the land of Egypt
 have committed iniquity.  They have speedily departed from the way in
 which I commanded them to walk, and have made to themselves molten
 images." [4283] And the Lord said unto him, "I have spoken to thee
 once and again, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a
 stiff-necked people:  let me destroy them, and blot out their name from
 under heaven; and I will make thee a great and wonderful nation, and
 one much more numerous than this." [4284] But Moses said, "Far be it
 from Thee, Lord:  pardon the sin of this people; else blot me also out
 of the book of the living." [4285] O marvellous [4286] love!  O
 insuperable perfection!  The servant [4287] speaks freely to his Lord,
 and asks forgiveness for the people, or begs that he himself might
 perish [4288] along with them.

 [4283] Ex. xxxii. 7, etc.; Deut. ix. 12, etc.

 [4284] Ex. xxxii. 9, etc.

 [4285] Ex. xxxii. 32.

 [4286] Or, "mighty."

 [4287] I. despotes (master).

 [4288] Literally, "be wiped out."

 Chapter LIV.--He Who is Full of Love Will Incur Every Loss, that Peace
 May Be Restored to the Church.

 Who then among you is noble-minded? who compassionate? who full of
 love?  Let him declare, "If on my account sedition and disagreement and
 schisms have arisen, I will depart, I will go away whithersoever ye
 desire, and I will do whatever the majority [4289] commands; only let
 the flock of Christ live on terms of peace with the presbyters set over
 it."  He that acts thus shall procure to himself great glory in the
 Lord; [4290] and every place will welcome [4291] him.  For "the earth
 is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." [4292] These things they who
 live a godly life that is never to be repented of, both have done and
 always will do.

 [4289] Literally, "the multitude."

 [4290] I. en Christo (in Christ).

 [4291] Or, "receive."

 [4292] Ps. xxiv. 1; 1 Cor. x. 26, 28.

 Chapter LV.--Examples of Such Love.

 To bring forward some examples [4293] from among the heathen:  Many
 kings and princes, in times of pestilence, when they had been
 instructed by an oracle, have given themselves up to death, in order
 that by their own blood they might deliver their fellow-citizens [from
 destruction].  Many have gone forth from their own cities, that so
 sedition might be brought to an end within them.  We know many among
 ourselves who have given themselves up to bonds, in order that they
 might ransom others.  Many, too, have surrendered themselves to
 slavery, that with the price [4294] which they received for themselves,
 they might provide food for others.  Many women also, being
 strengthened by the grace of God, have performed numerous manly
 exploits.  The blessed Judith, when her city was besieged, asked of the
 elders permission to go forth into the camp of the strangers; and,
 exposing herself to danger, she went out for the love which she bare to
 her country and people then besieged; and the Lord delivered Holofernes
 into the hands of a woman. [4295] Esther also, being perfect in
 faith, exposed herself to no less danger, in order to deliver the
 twelve tribes of Israel from impending destruction.  For with fasting
 and humiliation she entreated the everlasting [4296] God, who seeth all
 things; and He, perceiving the humility of her spirit, delivered the
 people for whose sake she had encountered peril. [4297]

 [4293] I. hupomnemata (memorials).

 [4294] Literally, "and having received their prices, fed others."

 [4295] Judith viii. 30.

 [4296] I. omits despoten (Lord).

 [4297] Esther vii., viii.

 Chapter LVI.--Let Us Admonish and Correct One Another.

 Let us then also pray for those who have fallen into any sin, that
 meekness and humility may be given to them, so that they may submit,
 not unto us, but to the will of God.  For in this way they shall secure
 a fruitful and perfect remembrance from us, with sympathy for them,
 both in our prayers to God, and our mention of them to the saints.
 [4298] Let us receive correction, beloved, on account of which no one
 should feel displeased.  Those exhortations by which we admonish one
 another are both good [in themselves], and highly profitable, for they
 tend to unite [4299] us to the will of God.  For thus saith the holy
 Word:  "The Lord hath severely chastened me, yet hath not given me over
 to death." [4300] "For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and
 scourgeth every son whom He receiveth." [4301] "The righteous,"
 [4302] saith it, "shall chasten me in mercy, and reprove me; but let
 not the oil of sinners make fat my head." [4303] And again he saith,
 "Blessed is the man whom the Lord reproveth, and reject not thou the
 warning of the Almighty.  For He causes sorrow, and again restores [to
 gladness]; He woundeth, and His hands make whole.  He shall deliver
 thee in six troubles, yea, in the seventh no evil shall touch thee.  In
 famine He shall rescue thee from death, and in war He shall free thee
 from the power [4304] of the sword.  From the scourge of the tongue
 will He hide thee, and thou shalt not fear when evil cometh.  Thou
 shalt laugh at the unrighteous and the wicked, and shalt not be afraid
 of the beasts of the field.  For the wild beasts shall be at peace with
 thee:  then shalt thou know that thy house shall be in peace, and the
 habitation of thy tabernacle shall not fail. [4305] Thou shalt know
 also that thy seed shall be great, and thy children like the grass of
 the field.  And thou shalt come to the grave like ripened corn which is
 reaped in its season, or like a heap of the threshing-floor which is
 gathered together at the proper time." [4306] Ye see, beloved, that
 [4307] "protection is afforded to those that are chastened of the Lord;
 for since God is good, [4308] He corrects us, that we may be
 admonished" [4309] by His holy chastisement.

 [4298] Literally, "there shall be to them a fruitful and perfect
 remembrance, with compassions both towards God and the saints."

 [4299] Or "they unite."

 [4300] Ps. cxviii. 18.

 [4301] Prov. iii. 12; Heb. xii. 6.

 [4302] I. kurios (Lord).

 [4303] Ps. cxli. 5.

 [4304] Literally, "hand."

 [4305] Literally, "err" or "sin."

 [4306] Job v. 17-26.

 [4307] I. blepete posos (ye see how great).

 [4308] I. (despotou) pater gar agathos on (being a good father).

 [4309] I. eleethenai (be pitied).

 Chapter LVII.--Let the Authors of Sedition Submit Themselves.

 Ye therefore, who laid the foundation of this sedition, submit
 yourselves to the presbyters, and receive correction so as to repent,
 bending the knees of your hearts.  Learn to be subject, laying aside
 the proud and arrogant self-confidence of your tongue.  For it is
 better for you that ye should occupy [4310] a humble but honourable
 place in the flock of Christ, than that, being highly exalted, ye
 should be cast out from the hope of His people. [4311] For thus
 speaketh all-virtuous Wisdom:  "Behold, I will bring forth to you the
 words of my Spirit, and I will teach you my speech.  Since I called,
 and ye did not hear; I held forth my words, and ye regarded not, but
 set at naught my counsels, and yielded not at my reproofs; therefore I
 too will laugh at your destruction; yea, I will rejoice when ruin
 cometh upon you, and when sudden confusion overtakes you, when
 overturning presents itself like a tempest, or when tribulation and
 oppression [4312] fall upon you.  For it shall come to pass, that when
 ye call upon me, I will not hear you; the wicked shall seek me, and
 they shall not find me.  For they hated wisdom, and did not choose the
 fear of the Lord; nor would they listen to my counsels, but despised my
 reproofs.  Wherefore they shall eat the fruits of their own way, and
 they shall be filled [4313] with their own ungodliness. [4314] ...For,
 in punishment for the wrongs which they practised upon babes, shall
 they be slain, and inquiry will be death to the ungodly; but he that
 heareth me shall rest in hope and be undisturbed by the fear of any
 evil."

 [4310] Literally, "to be found small and esteemed."

 [4311] Literally, "His hope."

 [4312] I. adds otenochoria (straits).

 [4313] Here begins the lacuna in the old text referred to in the
 Introduction.  The newly discovered portion of the Epistle extends from
 this point to the end of Chap. lxiii.

 [4314] Prov. i. 22-33.

 Chapter LVIII.--Submission the Precursor of Salvation.

 Let us, therefore, flee from the warning threats pronounced by Wisdom
 on the disobedient, and yield submission to His all-holy and glorious
 name, that we may stay our trust upon the most hallowed name of His
 majesty.  Receive our counsel, and ye shall be without repentance.
 For, as God liveth, and as the Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost
 live,--both the faith and hope of the elect, he who in lowliness of
 mind, with instant gentleness, and without repentance hath observed the
 ordinances and appointments given by God--the same shall obtain a place
 and name in the number of those who are being saved through Jesus
 Christ, through whom is glory to Him for ever and ever.  Amen.

 Chapter LIX.--Warning Against Disobedience.  Prayer.

 If, however, any shall disobey the words spoken by Him through us, let
 them know that they will involve themselves in transgression and
 serious danger; but we shall be innocent of this sin, and, instant in
 prayer and supplication, shall desire that the Creator of all preserve
 unbroken the computed number of His elect in the whole world through
 His beloved Son Jesus Christ, through whom He called us from darkness
 to light, from ignorance to knowledge of the glory of His name, our
 hope resting on Thy name which is primal cause of every
 creature,--having opened the eyes of our heart to the knowledge of
 Thee, who alone "dost rest highest among the highest, holy among the
 holy," [4315] who "layest low the insolence of the haughty," [4316] who
 "destroyest the calculations of the heathen," [4317] who "settest the
 low on high and bringest low the exalted;" [4318] who "makest rich and
 makest poor," [4319] who "killest and makest to live," [4320] only
 Benefactor of spirits and God of all flesh, [4321] who beholdest the
 depths, the eye-witness of human works, the help of those in danger,
 the Saviour of those in despair, the Creator and Guardian of every
 spirit, who multipliest nations upon earth, and from all madest choice
 of those who love Thee through Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, through
 whom Thou didst instruct, sanctify, honour us.  We would have Thee,
 Lord, to prove our help and succour.  Those of us in affliction save,
 on the lowly take pity; the fallen raise; upon those in need arise; the
 sick [4322] heal; the wandering ones of Thy people turn; fill the
 hungry; redeem those of us in bonds; raise up those that are weak;
 comfort the faint-hearted; let all the nations know that Thou art God
 alone and Jesus Christ Thy Son, and we are Thy people and the sheep of
 Thy pasture.

 [4315] Is. lvii. 15.

 [4316] Is. xiii. 11.

 [4317] Ps. xxxiii. 10.

 [4318] Job v. 11; Ezek. xvii. 24.

 [4319] 1 Sam. ii. 7.

 [4320] Deut. xxxii. 39.

 [4321] Numb. xvi. 22, xxvii. 16; Jer. xxxii. 27.

 [4322] I. gives asebeis (ungodly) where astheneis (sick) is
 substituted.

 Chapter LX.--Prayer Continued.

 Thou didst make to appear the enduring fabric of the world by the works
 of Thy hand; Thou, Lord, didst create the earth on which we
 dwell,--Thou, who art faithful in all generations, just in judgments,
 wonderful in strength and majesty, with wisdom creating and with
 understanding fixing the things which were made, who art good among
 them that are being saved [4323] and faithful among them whose trust is
 in Thee; O merciful and Compassionate One, forgive us our iniquities
 and offences and transgressions and trespasses.  Reckon not every sin
 of Thy servants and handmaids, but Thou wilt purify us with the
 purification of Thy truth; and direct our steps that we may walk in
 holiness of heart and do what is good and well-pleasing in Thy sight
 and in the sight of our rulers.  Yea, Lord, make Thy face to shine upon
 us for good in peace, that we may be shielded by Thy mighty hand and
 delivered from every sin by Thine uplifted arm, and deliver us from
 those who hate us wrongfully.  Give concord and peace to us and all who
 dwell upon the earth, even as Thou gavest to our fathers, when they
 called upon Thee in faith and truth, submissive as we are to Thine
 almighty and all-excellent Name.

 [4323] sozomenois is the emendation of Harnack for horomenois (seen).

 Chapter LXI.--Prayer Continued--For Rulers and Governors.  Conclusion.

 To our rulers and governors on the earth--to them Thou, Lord, gavest
 the power of the kingdom by Thy glorious and ineffable might, to the
 end that we may know the glory and honour given to them by Thee and be
 subject to them, in nought resisting Thy will; to them, Lord, give
 health, peace, concord, stability, that they may exercise the authority
 given to them without offence.  For Thou, O heavenly Lord and King
 eternal, givest to the sons of men glory and honour and power over the
 things that are on the earth; do Thou, Lord, direct their counsel
 according to that which is good and well-pleasing in Thy sight, that,
 devoutly in peace and meekness exercising the power given them by Thee,
 they may find Thee propitious.  O Thou, who only hast power to do these
 things and more abundant good with us, we praise Thee through the High
 Priest and Guardian of our souls Jesus Christ, through whom be glory
 and majesty to Thee both now and from generation to generation and for
 evermore.  Amen.

 Chapter LXII.--Summary and Conclusory--Concerning Godliness.

 Concerning the things pertaining to our religious observance which are
 most profitable for a life of goodness to those who would pursue a
 godly and righteous course, we have written to you, men and brethren,
 at sufficient length.  For concerning faith and repentance and true
 love and continence and soberness and patience, we have touched upon
 every passage, putting you in mind that you ought in righteousness and
 truth and long-suffering to be well-pleasing [4324] to Almighty God
 with holiness, being of one mind--not remembering evil--in love and
 peace with instant gentleness, even as also our fathers forementioned
 found favour by the humility of their thoughts towards the Father and
 God and Creator and all mankind.  And of these things we put you in
 mind with the greater pleasure, since we were well assured that we were
 writing to men who were faithful and of highest repute and had peered
 into the oracles of the instruction of God.

 [4324] euaristein is emendation for eucharistein (give thanks).

 Chapter LXIII.--Hortatory, Letter Sent by Special Messengers.

 Right is it, therefore, to approach examples so good and so many, and
 submit the neck and fulfil the part of obedience, in order that,
 undisturbed by vain sedition, we may attain unto the goal set before us
 in truth wholly free from blame.  Joy and gladness will ye afford us,
 if ye become obedient to the words written by us and through the Holy
 Spirit root out the lawless wrath of your jealousy according to the
 intercession which we have made for peace and unity in this letter.  We
 have sent men faithful and discreet, whose conversation from youth to
 old age has been blameless amongst us,--the same shall be witnesses
 between you and us.  This we have done, that ye may know that our whole
 concern has been and is that ye may be speedily at peace.

 Chapter LXIV.--Blessings Sought for All that Call Upon God.

 May God, who seeth all things, and who is the Ruler of all spirits and
 the Lord of all flesh--who chose our Lord Jesus Christ and us through
 Him to be a peculiar [4325] people--grant to every soul that calleth
 upon His glorious and holy name, faith, fear, peace, patience,
 long-suffering, self-control, purity, and sobriety, to the
 well-pleasing of His name, through our High Priest and Protector, Jesus
 Christ, by whom be to Him glory, and majesty, and power, and honour,
 both now and for evermore.  Amen.

 [4325] Comp. Tit. ii. 14.

 Chapter LXV.--The Corinthians are Exhorted Speedily to Send Back Word
 that Peace Has Been Restored.  The Benediction.

 Send back speedily to us in peace and with joy these our messengers to
 you:  Claudius Ephebus and Valerius Bito, with Fortunatus; that they
 may the sooner announce to us the peace and harmony we so earnestly
 desire and long for [among you], and that we may the more quickly
 rejoice over the good order re-established among you.  The grace of our
 Lord Jesus Christ be with you, and with all everywhere that are the
 called of God through Him, by whom be to Him glory, honour, power,
 majesty, and eternal dominion, [4326] from everlasting to everlasting.
 [4327] Amen.

 [4326] Literally, "an eternal throne."

 [4327] Literally, "from the ages to the ages of ages."

 Introductory Notice.

 ------------------------

 [From Vol. VII., p. 515 of the Ante-Nicene Fathers.]

 The first certain reference which is made by any early writer to this
 so-called Epistle of Clement is found in these words of Eusebius (Hist.
 Eccl., iii. 38):  "We must know that there is also a second Epistle of
 Clement.  But we do not regard it as being equally notable with the
 former, since we know of none of the ancients that have made use of
 it."  Several critics in modern times have endeavoured to vindicate the
 authenticity of this epistle.  But it is now generally regarded. as one
 of the many writings which have been falsely ascribed to Clement.
 Besides the want of external evidence, indicated even by Eusebius in
 the above extract, the diversity of style clearly points to a different
 writer from that of the first epistle.  A commonly accepted opinion
 among critics at the present day is, that this is not an epistle at
 all, but a fragment of one of the many homilies falsely ascribed to
 Clement.  There can be no doubt, however, that in the catalogue of
 writings contained in the Alexandrian ms. it is both styled an epistle,
 and, as well as the other which accompanies it, is attributed to
 Clement.  As the ms. is certainly not later than the fifth century, the
 opinion referred to must by that time have taken firm root in the
 Church; but in the face of internal evidence, and in want of all
 earlier testimony, such a fact goes but a small way to establish its
 authenticity.

 ------------------------

 The second epistle differs from the first in several respects.  The
 range of Scriptural quotation is wider, the quotations of the first
 epistle being taken mainly from the Septuagint version of the Old
 Testament.  The attitude of the writer is in accordance with this fact;
 it is distinctively Gentile.  For example, Chapter XII. contains a
 report of words purporting to have been spoken by the Lord; these,
 Clemens Alexandrinus states, are taken from the Apocryphal Gospel
 according to the Egyptians, not now extant.  The reference in Chapter
 XIV. to the spiritual church, recalling Eph. i. 3-5, is parallel to the
 Pastor of Hermas, Vision II. 4.  These passages help to determine the
 date; for the quotation from the Apocryphal Gospel would not have been
 made after the four gospels of the New Testament obtained exclusive
 authority--toward the close of the second century; while similarity of
 idea and exposition would seem to make the second epistle and the
 Pastor of Hermas somewhat contemporaneous.

 The conclusion of the second epistle, as in the recently discovered
 ms., goes to establish the speculation made before this ms. was
 discovered, that it is a homily to be read in churches.
