The Apocalypse of the Virgin (Various)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf09/cache/anf09.txt).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 ------------------------

 Introduction.

 ------------------------

 The present translation of this Apocalypse [3952] is made from the text
 as published by Mr. M. R. James in Texts and Studies, ii., 3, from a
 ms. in the Bodleian Library, which he assigns to the eleventh century.
 The original he conjecturally assigns to the ninth century, and regards
 it as a late and clumsy compilation based on (1) the Assumption Legends
 and (2) the Apocalypse of Paul.  Its main feature, intercession for the
 lost, it has in common with the Testament of Abraham, the Apocalypse of
 Paul, 4 Esdras, the Apocalypse of Baruch, the Apocalypse of Esdras and
 the Apocalypse of Sedrach.  Parallels are pointed out in the notes.

 [3952] In this Apocalypse and that of Sedrach which follows, the text
 is in many places so obviously corrupt that the translator cannot be
 confident that he has given the correct meaning of the original in all
 cases.--A.R.

 The Apocalypse of the Holy Mother of God Concerning the Chastisements.

 ------------------------

 I.  The all-holy mother of God was about to proceed to the Mount of
 Olives to pray; and praying to the Lord our God she said:  In the name
 of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit; let the archangel
 Gabriel descend, that he may tell me concerning the chastisements and
 concerning things in heaven and on the earth and under the earth.  And
 as she said the word the archangel Michael descended with the angels of
 the East and the West and angels of the South and the North, and they
 saluted the highly favoured one and said to her:  Hail, reflection of
 the Father, hail dwelling of the Son, hail command of the Holy Spirit,
 hail firmament of the seven heavens, hail firmament of the eleven
 strongholds, hail worship of the angels, hail loftier than the prophets
 unto the throne of God.  And the holy mother of God said to the angel:
 Hail Michael, commander-in-chief, the minister of the invisible Father,
 hail Michael, commander-in-chief, associate of my Son, hail Michael,
 commander-in-chief, most dread of the six-winged, hail Michael,
 commander-in-chief, who rules through all things and art worthy to
 stand beside the throne of the Lord, hail Michael, commander-in-chief,
 who art about to sound the trumpet and awaken those who have been
 asleep for ages:  hail Michael, commander-in-chief, first of all unto
 the throne of God.

 II.  And having greeted all the angels in like manner, the highly
 favoured one prayed the commander-in-chief regarding the chastisements,
 saying:  Tell to me all things on the earth.  And the
 commander-in-chief said to her:  If thou askest me, highly favoured
 one, I will tell thee.  And the highly favoured one said to him:  How
 many are the chastisements with which the race of man is chastised?
 And the archangel said to her:  The chastisements are innumerable.  And
 the highly favoured one said to him:  Tell me the things in heaven and
 on the earth.

 III.  Then the commander-in-chief, Michael, commanded the Western
 angels that revelation should be made, and Hades opened, and she saw
 those who were chastised [3953] in Hades:  and there lay there a
 multitude of men and women, and there was a great lamentation.  And the
 highly favoured one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who are these and
 what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy,
 are those who did not worship the Father and the Son and the Holy
 Spirit and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

 IV.  And she saw in another place [3954] a great darkness:  and the all
 holy said:  What is this darkness and who are they who are being
 chastised?  And the commander-in-chief said:  Many souls are lying in
 this darkness.  And the all holy one said:  Let this darkness be taken
 away in order that I may see this chastisement also.  And the
 commander-in-chief said to the highly favoured one:  It is not
 possible, all holy, that thou shouldst see this chastisement also.  And
 the angels guarding them answered and said:  We have a command from the
 invisible Father that they shall not see the light till thy blessed Son
 shall shine forth.  And plunged in grief the all holy lifted up her
 eyes to the angels touching the undefiled word of the Father, and
 said:  In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit let
 the darkness be taken away, that I may see this chastisement also.  And
 straightway that darkness was lifted up and covered the seven heavens:
 and there lay a great multitude of both men and women, and there arose
 a great lamentation and a great cry began.  And seeing them the all
 holy wept and said to them:  What are ye doing, wretched ones?  Who are
 ye?  And how are ye found there? and there was no voice or hearkening.
 And the angels guarding them said:  Why do ye not speak to the highly
 favoured one?  And those who were under chastisement said to her:  O
 highly favoured one, from eternity we see not the light, and we are not
 able to keep off that up there.  And splashing pitch flowed down upon
 them:  and seeing them the all holy wept.  And again those who were
 being chastised said to her:  How dost thou ask concerning us, holy
 lady, Mother of God?  Thy blessed Son came to The earth and did not
 make enquiry concerning us, neither Abraham the patriarch, nor John the
 Baptist, nor Moses the great prophet, nor the Apostle Paul, and unto us
 their light shone not:  and now, all holy Mother of God, the armour of
 the Christians, the bringer of great comfort on account of the
 Christians, how dost thou ask concerning us?  Then the all holy Mother
 of God said to Michael, the commander-in-chief:  What is their sin?
 And Michael, the commander-in-chief, said:  These are they who did not
 believe in the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and did not
 confess thee [3955] to be the Mother of God, and that the Lord Jesus
 Christ was born of thee and took flesh, and for this cause they are
 chastised there.  And again weeping, the all holy Mother of God said to
 them:  Why did ye so greatly err, wretched ones?  Did ye not hear that
 the whole creation names my name?  And having said these words the
 darkness fell over them as it was from the beginning.

 V. And the commander-in-chief said:  Whither wouldst thou go, highly
 favoured one? to the West or to the South?  And the highly favoured
 answered:  Let us go to the South.  And immediately there appeared the
 cherubim and the seraphim and four hundred angels, and led out the
 highly favoured one to the South, where came out the river of fire,
 [3956] and there there lay a multitude of men and women, some up to the
 girdle, others up to the neck, and others up to the crown of the head:
 and seeing them the all holy Mother of God cried out with a loud voice
 to the commander-in-chief and said:  Who are these, and what is their
 sin who stand in the fire up to the girdle?  And the commander-in-chief
 said:  These, all holy one, are they who inherited the curse of father
 and mother, and for this cause they are thus chastised here as
 accursed.

 VI.  And the all holy one said:  And who are these standing in the fire
 up to the breasts?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These are
 whosoever cast off their wives and defiled them in adultery, and for
 this cause they are thus chastised here.

 VII.  And the all holy one said to the commander-in-chief:  Who are
 these standing up to the neck in the flame of the fire?  And the
 commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are whosoever ate of the
 flesh of men.  And the all holy one said:  And how is it possible for
 one man to eat of the flesh of another?  And the commander-in-chief
 said:  Listen, all holy one, and I will tell thee:  These are they
 whosoever brought down their own children out of their own wombs and
 cast them out [3957] as food for dogs, and whosoever gave up their
 brothers in the presence of kings and governors, these ate the flesh of
 man, and for this cause they are thus chastised.

 VIII.  And the all holy one said:  Who are these set in the fire up to
 the crown?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are
 whosoever lay hold of the precious cross and swear to a lie:  by the
 power of the cross of the Lord.  The angels tremble and worship with
 fear, and men lay hold of it and swear to a lie and do not know what
 they testify:  and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

 IX.  And in another place the all holy one saw a man hung by the feet,
 [3958] and worms devoured him.  And she asked the commander-in-chief:
 Who is this and what is his sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:
 This is he who took usury [3959] for his gold, and for this cause he is
 thus chastised here.

 X.  And she saw a woman hanging by her two ears, and all the beasts
 [3960] came out of her mouth and gnawed her in pieces:  and the highly
 favoured one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who is she, and what is her
 sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  She is she who turned aside
 into strange houses and those of her neighbours and spoke evil words to
 make strife, and for that cause she is thus chastised here.

 XI.  And seeing these things the all holy Mother of God wept and said
 to the commander-in-chief:  It were well for man that he had not been
 born.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Verily, all holy one, thou
 hast not seen the great chastisements.  And the all holy one said to
 the commander-in-chief:  Come, Michael, great commander-in-chief, and
 lead me that I may see all the chastisements.  And the
 commander-in-chief said:  Where dost thou wish, all holy one, that we
 should go?  And the highly favoured one answered:  To the West:  and
 straightway the cherubim appeared and led the highly favoured to the
 West.

 XII.  And she saw a cloud full of fire and in it there was a [3961]
 multitude of men and women.  And the all holy one said:  What was their
 sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are they
 who on the morning of the Lord's day sleep like the dead, and for that
 reason they are thus chastised here.  And the all holy one said:  If
 anyone cannot rise, what shall he do?  And the commander-in-chief
 said:  Listen, all holy one:  if anyone's house is fastened on the four
 (sides?) and surrounds him and he cannot come out, he has forgiveness.

 XIII.  And she saw in another place burning benches of fire and on them
 sat a multitude of men and women and burned on them.  And the all holy
 one asked:  Who are these and what is their sin?  And the
 commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are they who do not rise
 up to the presbyter when they enter into the church of God, and for
 this cause they are thus chastised here.

 XIV.  And the all holy one saw in another place an iron tree and it had
 branches of iron, and on it there hung a multitude of men and women by
 their tongues. [3962] And seeing them the all holy one wept, and
 asked the commander-in-chief saying:  Who are these and what was their
 sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These are perjurers,
 blasphemers, slanderers, whosoever divided brothers from brothers.  And
 the all holy one said:  How is it possible to divide brothers from
 brothers?  And the commander-in-chief said:  Listen, all holy one, and
 I will tell thee about this:  When some from among the nations desired
 to be baptised, he would say to them one word:  Thou foul-feeding,
 unbelieving Gentile; because he thus blasphemed, he shall receive
 ceaseless retribution.

 XV.  And in another place the all holy one saw a man hanging from his
 four extremities, and from his nails blood gushed vehemently, and his
 tongue [3963] was tied in a flame of fire, and he was unable to groan
 and say the Kyrie eleïson me.  And when she had seen him the all holy
 one wept and herself said the Kyrie eleïson thrice:  and after the
 saying of the prayer, came the angel who had authority over the scourge
 and loosed the man's tongue:  and the all holy one asked the
 commander-in-chief:  Who is this wretched one who has this
 chastisement?  And the commander-in-chief said:  This, all holy one, is
 the steward who did not the will of God, but ate the things of the
 church and said:  "He who ministers to the altar shall be nourished
 from the altar": [3964] and for this cause he is thus chastised
 here.  And the all holy one said:  Let it be unto him according to his
 faith.  And again he tied his tongue.

 XVI.  And Michael, the commander-in-chief said:  Come hither, all holy
 one, and I will show unto thee where the priests are chastised.  And
 the all holy one came out and saw presbyters hanging by their twenty
 nails, and fire came out of their heads.  And seeing them the all holy
 one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who are these and what is their
 sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are they
 who stand beside the throne of God, and when they sang of the body of
 our Lord Jesus Christ, the pearls fell out, and the awful throne of
 heaven shook and the footstool of our Lord Jesus Christ trembled, and
 they did not perceive it:  and for this cause they are thus chastised
 here.

 XVII.  And the all holy one saw a man and a winged beast having three
 heads like flames of fire:  the two heads were towards his eyes and the
 third head towards his mouth.  And seeing him the all holy one asked
 the commander-in-chief:  Who is this, that he cannot save himself from
 the mouth of the dragon?  And the commander-in-chief said to her:
 This, all holy one, is the reader who does not practise in his own
 habits according to what is worthy of the holy Gospel:  and for this
 cause he is thus chastised here.

 XVIII.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Come hither, all holy one,
 and I will show thee where the angelic and archangelic form is
 chastised.  She proceeded and saw [3965] them lying in the fire and the
 sleepless worm gnawed them:  and the all holy one said:  Who are these,
 and what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all
 holy one, are they who possessed the archangelic and apostolic form:
 hearken, all holy one, concerning this:  on earth they were called
 patriarchs and bishops, and they were not worthy of their name:  on
 earth they heard Bless (the Lord) ye saints,' and in heaven they were
 not called saints, because they did not act as bearers of the
 archangelic form:  and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

 XIX.  And she saw women hanging by their nails, and a flame of fire
 came out of their mouth and burned them:  and all the beasts [3966]
 coming out of the fire gnawed them to pieces, and groaning they cried
 out:  Have pity on us, have pity, for we are chastised worse than all
 those who are under chastisement.  And seeing them the all holy one
 wept, and asked the commander-in-chief, Michael:  Who are these and
 what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These are the
 wives of presbyters who did not honour the presbyters, but after the
 death of the presbyter took husbands, and for this cause they are thus
 chastised here.

 XX.  And the all holy one saw after the same manner also a deaconess
 hanging from a crag and a beast with two heads devoured her breasts.
 And the all holy one asked:  What is her sin?  And the
 commander-in-chief said:  She, all holy one, is an archdeaconess who
 defiled her body in fornication, and for this cause she is thus
 chastised here.

 XXI.  And she saw other women hanging over the fire, and all the beasts
 devoured them.  And the all holy one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who
 are these and what is their sin?  And he said:  These are they who did
 not do the will of God, lovers of money and those who took interest
 [3967] on accounts, and the immodest.

 XXII.  And when she had heard these things the all holy one wept and
 said:  Woe unto sinners.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Why dost
 thou lament, all holy one?  Now verily thou hast not seen the great
 chastisements.  And the highly favoured one said:  Come, Michael, the
 great commander-in-chief of the powers above, tell me how I may see all
 the chastisements.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Where dost thou
 wish that we should go, all holy one? to the East or towards the left
 parts of Paradise?  And the all holy one said:  To the left parts of
 Paradise.

 XXIII.  And immediately when she had spoken, the cherubim and seraphim
 stood beside her and led the highly favoured one out to the left parts
 of Paradise.  And behold, there was a great river, and the appearance
 of the river was blacker than pitch, and in it there were a multitude
 [3968] of men and women:  it boiled like a furnace of forges, and its
 waves were like a wild sea over the sinners:  and when the waves rose,
 they sank the sinners ten thousand cubits and they were unable to keep
 it off and say:  Have mercy on us, thou just judge:  for the sleepless
 worm devoured them, and there was no reckoning of the number of those
 who devoured them.  And seeing the all holy Mother of God the angels
 [3969] who chastised them cried out with one voice:  Holy is God who
 has compassion on account of the Mother of God:  we give thee thanks, O
 Son of God, that from eternity we did not see the light, and to-day
 through the Mother of God we have seen the light:  and again they
 shouted with one voice, saying:  Hail, highly favoured Mother of God:
 Hail, lamp of the inaccessible light:  Hail to thee also, Michael, the
 commander-in-chief, thou that art ambassador from the whole creation:
 for we, seeing the chastisement of sinners are greatly grieved.  And
 the all holy one, when she saw the angels humbled on account of the
 sinners, lamented and said:  Woe to sinners and their neighbours.  And
 the all holy one said:  Let us see the sinners.  And the highly
 favoured one, coming with the archangel Michael and all the armies of
 the angels lifted up one voice saying:  Lord have mercy.  And after the
 making of the prayer earnestly, the wave of the river rested and the
 fiery waves grew calm, and the sinners appeared as a grain of
 mustard-seed:  and seeing them the all holy one lamented and said:
 What is this river, and what are its waves?  And the commander-in-chief
 said:  This river is the outer fire, and those who are being tortured
 are the Jews who crucified our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and
 who refused holy baptism, and those who commit fornication and sin
 against the sweet and passionless perfume of marriage, and he who
 debauches mother and daughter, and the poisoners and those who slay
 with the sword, and the women who strangle their offspring.  And the
 all holy one said:  According to their faith so be it unto them.  And
 straightway the waves rose over the sinners and the darkness covered
 them.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Hearken, thou highly favoured
 one:  if anyone shall be cast into this darkness, [3970] his
 remembrance shall never be in the sight of God.  And the all holy
 Mother of God said:  Woe to sinners, because the flame of the fire is
 everlasting.

 XXIV.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Come hither, all holy one, and
 I will show unto thee the lake of fire:  and see thou where the race of
 the Christians is chastised. [3971] And the all holy one proceeded
 and saw:  and some she heard, but others she did not see:  and she
 asked the commander-in-chief:  Who are these, and what is their sin?
 And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are those who
 were baptised and arrayed under the oracle of Christ, but worked the
 works of the devil and wasted the time of their repentance:  and for
 this cause they are thus chastised here.

 XXV.  And she said:  I pray, one request will I make of thee, let me
 also be chastised with the Christians, because they are the children of
 my son.  And the commander-in-chief said:  Rest thou in Paradise, holy
 lady, Mother of God.  And the all holy one said:  I pray thee, move the
 fourteen firmaments and the seven heavens, and let us pray for the
 Christians that the Lord our God may hearken unto us and have mercy on
 them. [3972] And the commander-in-chief said:  As the Lord God
 liveth, the great name, seven times a day and seven times a night, when
 we lead up the hymn of the Lord, we make remembrance for the sake of
 sinners, and the Lord accounts us as naught.

 XXVI.  And the all holy one said:  I pray thee, commander-in-chief,
 command the armies of the angels and let them place me on the height of
 heaven and let me into the presence of the invisible Father.  And
 immediately the commander-in-chief commanded, and the chariot of the
 cherubim and seraphim appeared, and they exalted the highly favoured
 one to the height of heaven and placed her in the presence of the
 invisible Father:  And she stretched forth her hands to the undefiled
 throne of the Father and said:  Have mercy, O Lord, on the Christian
 sinners, for I saw them being chastised and I cannot bear their
 complaint.  Let me go forth and be chastised myself for the
 Christians.  I do not pray, O Lord, for the unbelieving Jews, but for
 the Christians I entreat thy compassion.  And there came a second voice
 from the invisible Father saying:  How can I have mercy on them, when
 they did not have mercy on their own brothers? [3973] And the all
 holy one said:  Lord, have mercy on the sinners:  behold the
 chastisements, for every creature on the earth calls upon my name:  and
 when the soul comes forth out of the body, it cries saying, "Holy Lady,
 Mother of God."  Then the Lord said to her:  Hearken, all holy Mother
 of God, if anyone names and calls upon thy name, I will not forsake
 him, either in heaven or on earth.

 XXVII.  And the all holy one said:  Where is Moses?  Where are all the
 prophets and fathers who never sinned?  Where art thou, holy Paul of
 God? where is the holy Lord's Day, the boast of the Christians? where
 is the power of the precious and life-giving cross, which delivered
 Adam and Eve from the ancient curse?  Then Michael and all the angels
 raised one voice saying:  Lord, have mercy on the sinners.  Then Moses
 also cried:  Have mercy, Lord, on those to whom I gave thy law.  Then
 John also called:  Have mercy, Lord, on those to whom I gave thy
 Gospel.  Then Paul cried:  Have mercy, Lord, on those to whom I brought
 thy epistles in the Church.  And the Lord God said:  Hearken, all ye
 righteous:  if according to the law which Moses gave, and according to
 the Gospel which John gave, and according to the epistles which Paul
 carried, they thus be judged.  And they had nothing to say except, Have
 mercy, O just judge.

 XXVIII.  And the all holy Mother of God said:  Have mercy, Lord, on the
 Christians, because they kept thy law and gave heed to thy gospel, but
 they were simple ones.  Then the Lord said to her:  Hearken, all holy
 one:  if anyone did evil to them and they did not requite him the evil,
 thou sayest well that they attended to both my law and my gospel, but
 if he did not do them wrong and they requited him evil, how may I say
 that these are holy men? now they shall be rewarded according to their
 wrongdoing.  Then all hearing the voice of the Lord had nothing to
 answer; and the all holy one, when she saw that the saints were at a
 loss, and their Lord did not hear, and his mercy was hidden from them,
 then the all holy one said:  Where is Gabriel, who announced unto me
 the "Hail, thou that from eternity shalt conceive him who is without
 beginning like the Father," and now does not look upon sinners?  Where
 is the great commander-in-chief? come hither, all ye saints whom God
 justified, and let us fall down in the presence of the invisible
 Father, in order that the Lord God may hear us, and have mercy on
 sinners.  Then Michael, the commander-in-chief, and all the saints fell
 on their faces in the presence of the invisible Father, saying:  Have
 mercy, Lord, on the Christian sinners.

 XXIX.  Then the Lord, seeing the prayer of the saints, had compassion
 and said:  Go down, my beloved son, and because of the prayer of the
 saints let thy face shine on earth to sinners.  Then the Lord came down
 from his undefiled throne:  and when they saw Him, those who were under
 chastisement raised one voice saying:  Have mercy on us, King of ages.
 Then the Lord of all things said:  Hearken, all ye sinners and
 righteous men:  I made paradise and made man after my image:  but he
 transgressed, and for his own sins was delivered to death:  but I did
 not suffer the works of my hands to be tyrannized over by the serpent:
 wherefore I bowed the heavens and came down and was born of Mary, the
 holy undefiled Mother of God, that I might set you free:  I was
 baptised in Jordan in order that I might save the creature (nature)
 which had grown old under sin:  I was nailed to the cross [3974] to
 free you from the ancient curse:  I asked for water and ye gave me
 vinegar mingled with gall:  I was laid in the grave:  I trampled on the
 enemy:  I raised up mine elect, and even thus ye would not hear me.
 But now, because [3975] of the prayer of my mother Mary, because she
 has wept much for your sake, and because of Michael my archangel, and
 because of the multitude of my saints, I grant you to have rest on the
 day of Pentecost to glorify the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.

 XXX.  Then all the angels and archangels, thrones, lordships,
 authorities, governments, powers, and the many-eyed cherubim and the
 six-winged seraphim and all the apostles and prophets and martyrs and
 all the saints raised one voice, saying:  Glory to thee, O Lord:  glory
 to thee, lover of men:  glory to thee, King of ages:  glory be to thy
 compassion:  glory be to thy long suffering:  glory be to thy
 unspeakable justice of judgment, because thou hast been long-suffering
 with sinners and impious men:  Thine is it to pity and to save.  To him
 be the glory and the power to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy
 Spirit for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [3953] Cf. Vision of Paul, 31.

 [3954] Rev. of Peter, 21.  Paul, 37.

 [3955] Cf. Paul, 41.

 [3956] Cf. Paul, 31.

 [3957] Cf. Peter, Frag.; Paul, 40; Peter, 27.

 [3958] Cf. Peter, 24.

 [3959] Cf. Peter, 31; Paul, 37.

 [3960] Cf. Peter, Frag. 2.

 [3961] Cf. Peter, 25.

 [3962] Cf. Peter, 22.

 [3963] Cf. Peter, 29.

 [3964] Cf. Lev. x. 12 ff.; Num. xviii. 7 ff..

 [3965] Cf. Peter, 27.

 [3966] Cf. Peter fr. ap. Clem. Alex.

 [3967] Cf. Peter, 31.

 [3968] Cf. Paul, 31.

 [3969] Cf. Peter, 23.

 [3970] Cf. Paul, 41.

 [3971] Cf. Esdras.  Ante-Nicene Lib., vol. xvi., p. 473.

 [3972] Cf. Paul, 43.

 [3973] Cf. Esdras, l. c., pp. 469, 470.

 [3974] Cf. Paul, 44; Esdras, l. c., p. 470.

 [3975] Cf. Paul, 44.
