The Gospel of Peter (Various)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf09/cache/anf09.txt).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 This volume consists of two distinct parts.  The first is a collection
 of recently discovered additions to early Christian literature.  The
 period which has elapsed since the last volumes of this series were
 published has been singularly rich in such discoveries.  A portion of a
 gospel has been recovered which was read in the latter part of the
 second century in certain Christian churches and purports to be the
 work of the Apostle Peter.  A harmony of the four canonical gospels has
 also been brought to our knowledge, which was made in the same century,
 and which, in a considerable district of Eastern Christendom,
 supplanted these gospels themselves.  Another work bearing the name of
 the Apostle Peter, his Apocalypse, which once appeared to have some
 claim to a place in the canon, has also been found.  The Epistles of
 Clement, which formerly broke off abruptly, have recovered their
 concluding portions, and the earliest public appeal to the head of the
 state on behalf of Christianity is also now in our possession.  The
 circumstances of these various discoveries, and also of others of a
 similar nature, are stated in the introductions prefixed by the writers
 in this volume to the various pieces, and it will be seen that scholars
 of many lands have taken part in them.  English scholarship, it is well
 known, has distinguished itself highly in this field.  Many of the
 pieces now given first saw the light in the Cambridge Texts and
 Studies, a publication of singular interest and enduring value, without
 which the present volume would not have come into existence.  The
 editor of the Texts and Studies, Professor Armitage Robinson, has taken
 a very kind interest in the present publication and has himself
 contributed translations of two pieces.

 The history of the discussions awakened by these discoveries cannot yet
 be written, but it is not too early to place the English reader in
 possession of the documents thus restored to the Christian community.
 The reader of former volumes of The Ante-Nicene Fathers has already
 become acquainted with a number of uncanonical gospels, of apocalypses,
 and of early Christian apologies.  In each of these classes of
 Christian literature he is now presented with pieces not less
 interesting than any known before.  A glance at the table of contents
 will show the principle according to which the various works have been
 arranged.  It may be stated that the Diatessaron of Tatian is here for
 the first time translated into English from the Arabic.

 The second part of this volume contains portions of two of the most
 important commentaries of Origen.  When The Ante-Nicene Fathers came to
 a close it was felt that more should have been done for a father who
 occupies a position of such singular importance in the history both of
 Scripture exegesis and of Christian thought.  It is believed that the
 present translations will be welcomed by many who feel that growing
 interest in Origen which now appears in many quarters, and that they
 will be acceptable to all who care to know the varieties of treatment
 the Scriptures have met with in the church.

 The Gospel of Peter.

 by

 Professor J. Armitage Robinson.

 Editor of the Cambridge Texts and Studies

 Introduction and Synoptical TAble

 by

 Andrew Rutherfurd, B.D.

 The Gospel of Peter.

 ------------------------

 Introduction.

 ------------------------

 The important fragment of which Mr. J. Armitage Robinson's translation
 here follows was discovered by the French Archæological Mission, Cairo,
 in a grave (supposed to be a monk's) in an ancient cemetery at Akhmîm
 (Panopolis), in Upper Egypt, in 1886.  It was published in 1892 under
 the care of M. Bouriant in vol. ix., fasc. i., of the Memoirs of the
 French Archæological Mission at Cairo.  The same parchment which
 contained this fragment also contained a fragment of the Revelation of
 Peter and a fragment of the Book of Enoch in Greek.  The parchment
 codex is assigned to a date between the eighth and the twelfth century.

 Before this discovery the following is all that was known of the Gospel
 of Peter:  1.  Serapion, Bishop of Antioch 190-203, writing to the
 church at Rhossus, says (Eusebius, H. E., vi., 12, 2):  "We, brethren,
 receive Peter and the other Apostles even as Christ; but the writings
 that go falsely by their names we, in our experience, reject, knowing
 that such things as these we never received.  When I was with you I
 supposed you all to be attached to the right faith; and so without
 going through the gospel put forward under Peter's name, I said, If
 this is all that makes your petty quarrel, [1] why then let it be
 read.'  But now that I have learned from information given me that
 their mind was lurking in some hole of heresy, I will make a point of
 coming to you again:  so, brethren, expect me speedily.  Knowing then,
 brethren, of what kind of heresy was Marcion--[Here follows a sentence
 where the text is faulty.]...From others who used this very gospel--I
 mean from the successors of those who started it, whom we call Docetæ;
 for most of its ideas are of their school--from them, I say, I borrowed
 it, and was able to go through it, and to find that most of it belonged
 to the right teaching of the Saviour, but some things were additions."
 From this we learn that a Gospel of Peter was in use in the church of
 Rhossus in the end of the second century, but that controversy had
 arisen as to its character, which, on a careful examination, Serapion
 condemned.

 2.  Origen ( 253 a.d.), in commenting on Matthew x. 17, says:  "But,
 proceeding on the tradition that is recorded in the Gospel according to
 Peter or in the Book of James, they say that there are certain brothers
 of Jesus, the sons of Joseph by a former wife, who lived with him
 before Mary."

 3.  Eusebius (H. E., iii., 3, 2) says:  "As to that work, however,
 which is ascribed to him, called The Acts,' and The Gospel according to
 Peter,' and that called The Preaching and the Revelations of Peter,'
 we know nothing of their being handed down as Catholic writings; since
 neither among the ancient nor the ecclesiastical writers of our own day
 has there been one that has appealed to testimony taken from them."
 And in H. E., iii., 25, 6 sq., he includes the Gospel of Peter among
 the forged heretical gospels--"those that are adduced by the heretics
 under the name of the apostles,...of which no one of those writers in
 the ecclesiastical succession has condescended to make any mention in
 his works; and, indeed, the character of the style itself is very
 different from that of the apostles; and the sentiments, and the
 purport of those things that are advanced in them, deviating as far as
 possible from sound orthodoxy, evidently proves they are the fictions
 of heretical men; whence they are not only to be ranked among the
 spurious writings, but are to be rejected as altogether absurd and
 impious."  It is, however, uncertain whether Eusebius himself was
 acquainted with the Gospel of Peter.

 4.  Theodoret ( c. 455), in his Religious History, ii., 2, says that
 the Nazarenes used "the gospel called according to Peter.'"  Later
 references in Western literature, e.g., Jerome, De vir. ill., i., and
 the Decretum Gelasianum, condemning the book, are based upon the
 judgement of Eusebius, and not upon direct knowledge (cf. Harnack,
 Geschichte der altchristl. Lit., I. Th., p. 11).

 This was all that was known of the Gospel of Peter till the publication
 of the Akhmîm fragment.  The latter extends to about 174 stichi,
 counting 32 words to the stichus.  It begins in the middle of the
 history of the Passion, just after Pilate has washed his hands of all
 responsibility, and ends in the middle of a sentence, with the
 departure of the disciples into Galilee at the end of the Feast of
 Unleavened Bread, exactly a week after the crucifixion, the ostensible
 author, Peter, and Andrew, his brother, taking their nets and going to
 the sea; "and there was with us Levi the son of Alphæus, whom the
 Lord..."

 The accompanying Synoptical Table shows where the Petrine narrative
 agrees with and where it varies from those supplied by the canonical
 gospels.  Of that part of the Passion history which it narrates, it
 gives an account which follows the main lines of the canonical
 tradition, but with important variations in detail.  Of the events
 between the burial and the resurrection of our Lord, its account is
 much more ample and detailed than anything in the canonical tradition.

 Harnack (Texte und Untersuchungen, ix., 2, 2d ed., p. 76) gives the
 following list of new traits contained in the Petrine account of the
 history of the Passion and burial:

 1.  Herod was the judge who condemned Jesus, and to him application had
 to be made for the body.

 2.  The Jews, Herod, and the judges would not wash their hands, and
 Pilate then raised the sitting.

 3.  Joseph was the friend of Pilate (sec. 2).

 4.  Joseph begged for the body before the crucifixion, and Pilate sent
 for permission from Herod.

 5.  The soldiers "pushed him as they ran," and their speech (sec. 3).

 6.  The mockery of the soldiers.

 7.  Mocking speech.

 8.  "As though having no pain" (sec. 4).

 9.  "Having placed his garments before him."

 10.  One of the malefactors blamed the multitude, and his speech.

 11.  The legs of either the malefactor or Jesus were not broken, in
 order that he might die in torment.

 12.  The gall and vinegar (sec. 5).

 13.  In the darkness many went about with lamps, and fell down.

 14.  The cry, "My power, my power."

 15.  The fact that when he had so cried Christ was taken up.

 16.  Mention of the nails in the hands at the taking down from the
 cross (sec. 6).

 17.  The earthquake when the body touched the ground.

 18.  The joy of the Jews when the sun shone again.

 19.  Joseph "had seen all the good things" that the Lord had done.

 20.  Joseph washed the body.

 21.  The cries of woe of the Jews and their leaders over their sins,
 and their expectation of the judgement on Jerusalem (sec. 7).

 22.  The disciples remained in concealment, full of grief, and fasted
 and wept till the Sabbath.

 23.  They were searched for as malefactors and as anxious to burn the
 temple.

 24.  The name of the centurion of the watch--Petronius (sec. 8).

 25.  The centurion, the soldiers, and the elders rolled up the stone.

 26.  The elders also watched at the grave.

 27.  Seven seals were placed on the stone.

 28.  A tent pitched for the watch.

 29.  The gathering of the multitude on the morning of the Sabbath to
 view the sealed grave (sec. 9).

 The whole narrative of the resurrection is so different from that of
 the canonical gospels that it would be useless to go into details; but
 it is important to notice the prominence assigned to Mary Magdalene,
 and:

 1.  That the women fled from the grave and did not see the Lord (sec.
 12).

 2.  That there is no account of any appearance of Christ for the first
 eight days after his death (sec. 13).

 3.  That the disciples, along with the rest of those who had taken part
 in the feast, returned home to Galilee on the seventh day of unleavened
 bread.

 4.  That they were then sad, and wept.

 5.  That the first appearance of Jesus must have taken place on the
 Lake of Gennesaret, either to Peter alone, or to Peter, Andrew, and
 Levi (Matthew), while fishing.

 Moreover, according to section 13 (see sec. 5), the author puts the
 resurrection and ascension on the same day, or, rather, did not know of
 the latter as a separate event.  He makes the angel say, "He is risen
 and gone away thither whence he was sent."

 Whether the author used any other sources than the canonical gospels is
 a matter still in doubt.  He is certainly influenced by views which are
 foreign to these gospels, and which are known from other quarters in
 early Christian literature.  As between the Synoptists and the Fourth
 Gospel, the narrator is generally more closely akin both in matter and
 in manner to the Synoptists, but he agrees with the author of the
 Fourth Gospel in regard to the chronology of the crucifixion and
 several of the events at the cross, and in his general attitude towards
 the Jews and Pilate.  With regard to the last two points, the Petrine
 Gospel seems to present a later and more exaggerated form of the
 tendency perceptible in the Johannine, and fully worked out in the Acts
 of Pilate, to blame the Jews and exculpate Pilate.

 Of the new features in this fragment some are at least liable to a
 Docetic interpretation, e.g., the silence on the cross "as though he
 had no pain" (sec. 4), the cry, "My power, my power" (sec. 5), and "he
 was taken up" (sec. 5).  This fact was recognised in subsequent times
 and condemned this gospel in the eye of the church.  The date of the
 work is variously fixed by different scholars; Harnack assigns it to
 the first quarter of the second century, while Mr. Armitage Robinson
 and other scholars place it later.

 [1] Parechein mikropsuchian, perhaps "causes you ill-feeling."  The
 translation of Serapion's letter with this note is taken from Mr.
 Armitage Robinson's edition of the gospel.

 The Gospel According to Peter. [2]

 ------------------------

 1  But of the Jews none washed his hands, neither Herod nor any one of
 his judges.  And when they had refused to wash them, Pilate rose up.
 And then Herod the king commandeth that the Lord be taken, [3] saying
 to them, What things soever I commanded you to do unto him, do.

 2  And there was standing there Joseph the friend of Pilate and of the
 Lord; and, knowing that they were about to crucify [4] him, he came to
 Pilate and asked the body of the Lord for burial.  And Pilate sent to
 Herod and asked his body.  And Herod said, Brother Pilate, even if no
 one had asked for him, we purposed to bury him, especially as the
 sabbath draweth on: [5] for it is written in the law, that the sun
 set not upon one that hath been put to death.

 3  And he delivered him to the people on the day before the unleavened
 bread, their feast.  And they took the Lord and pushed him as they ran,
 and said, Let us drag away the Son of God, having obtained power over
 him.  And they clothed him with purple, and set him on the seat of
 judgment, saying, Judge righteously, O king of Israel.  And one of them
 brought a crown of thorns and put it on the head of the Lord.  And
 others stood and spat in his eyes, and others smote his cheeks:  others
 pricked him with a reed; and some scourged him, saying, With this
 honour let us honour the Son of God.

 4  And they brought two malefactors, and they crucified the Lord
 between them.  But he held his peace, as though having no pain.  And
 when they had raised the cross, they wrote the title:  This is the king
 of Israel.  And having set his garments before him they parted them
 among them, and cast lots for them.  And one of those malefactors
 reproached them, saying, We for the evils that we have done have
 suffered thus, but this man, who hath become the Saviour of men, what
 wrong hath he done to you?  And they, being angered at him, commanded
 that his legs should not be broken, that he might die in torment.

 5  And it was noon, and darkness came over all Judæa:  and they were
 troubled and distressed, lest the sun had set, whilst he was yet
 alive:  [for] it is written for them, that the sun set not on him that
 hath been put to death.  And one of them said, Give him to drink gall
 with vinegar.  And they mixed and gave him to drink, and fulfilled all
 things, and accomplished their sins against their own head.  And many
 went about with lamps, supposing that it was night, and fell down. [6]
 And the Lord cried out, saying, My power, my power, thou hast
 forsaken me.  And when he had said it he was taken up.  And in that
 hour the vail of the temple of Jerusalem was rent in twain. [7]

 6  And then they drew out the nails from the hands of the Lord, and
 laid him upon the earth, and the whole earth quaked, and great fear
 arose.  Then the sun shone, and it was found the ninth hour:  and the
 Jews rejoiced, and gave his body to Joseph that he might bury it, since
 he had seen what good things he had done.  And he took the Lord, and
 washed him, and rolled him in a linen cloth, and brought him into his
 own tomb, which was called the Garden of Joseph.

 7  Then the Jews and the elders and the priests, perceiving what evil
 they had done to themselves, began to lament and to say, Woe for our
 sins:  the judgement hath drawn nigh, and the end of Jerusalem.  And I
 with my companions was grieved; and being wounded in mind we hid
 ourselves:  for we were being sought for by them as malefactors, and as
 wishing to set fire to the temple.  And upon all these things we fasted
 and sat mourning and weeping night and day until the sabbath.

 8  But the scribes and Pharisees and elders being gathered together one
 with another, when they heard that all the people murmured and beat
 their breasts saying, If by his death these most mighty signs have come
 to pass, see how righteous he is,--the elders were afraid and came to
 Pilate, beseeching him and saying, Give us soldiers, that we may guard
 his sepulchre for three days, lest his disciples come and steal him
 away, and the people suppose that he is risen from the dead and do us
 evil.  And Pilate gave them Petronius the centurion with soldiers to
 guard the tomb.  And with them came elders and scribes to the
 sepulchre, and having rolled a great stone together with [8] the
 centurion and the soldiers, they all together who were there set it at
 the door of the sepulchre; and they affixed seven seals, and they
 pitched a tent there and guarded it.  And early in the morning as the
 sabbath was drawing on, there came a multitude from Jerusalem and the
 region round about, that they might see the sepulchre that was sealed.

 9  And in the night in which the Lord's day was drawing on, as the
 soldiers kept guard two by two in a watch, there was a great voice in
 the heaven; and they saw the heavens opened, and two men descend from
 thence with great light and approach the tomb.  And that stone which
 was put at the door rolled of itself and made way in part; and the tomb
 was opened, and both the young men entered in.

 10  When therefore those soldiers saw it, they awakened the centurion
 and the elders; for they too were hard by keeping guard.  And, as they
 declared what things they had seen, again they see three men come forth
 from the tomb, and two of them supporting one, and a cross following
 them:  and of the two the head reached unto the heaven, but the head of
 him that was led by them overpassed the heavens.  And they heard a
 voice from the heavens, saying, Thou hast preached to them that sleep.
 And a response was heard from the cross, Yea.

 11  They therefore considered one with another whether to go away and
 shew these things to Pilate.  And while they yet thought thereon, the
 heavens again are seen to open, and a certain man to descend and enter
 into the sepulchre.  When the centurion and they that were with him saw
 these things, they hastened in the night to Pilate, leaving the tomb
 which they were watching, and declared all things which they had seen,
 being greatly distressed and saying, Truly he was the Son of God.
 Pilate answered and said, I am pure from the blood of the Son of God:
 but it was ye who determined this.  Then they all drew near and
 besought him and entreated him to command the centurion and the
 soldiers to say nothing of the things which they had seen:  For it is
 better, say they, for us to be guilty of the greatest sin before God,
 and not to fall into the hands of the people of the Jews and to be
 stoned.  Pilate therefore commanded the centurion and the soldiers to
 say nothing.

 12  And at dawn upon the Lord's day Mary Magdalen, a disciple of the
 Lord, fearing because of the Jews, since they were burning with wrath,
 had not done at the Lord's sepulchre the things which women are wont to
 do for those that die and for those that are beloved by them--she took
 her friends with her and came to the sepulchre where he was laid.  And
 they feared lest the Jews should see them, and they said, Although on
 that day on which he was crucified we could not weep and lament, yet
 now let us do these things at his sepulchre.  But who shall roll away
 for us the stone that was laid at the door of the sepulchre, that we
 may enter in and sit by him and do the things that are due?  For the
 stone was great, and we fear lest some one see us.  And if we cannot,
 yet if we but set at the door the things which we bring for a memorial
 of him, we will weep and lament, until we come unto our home.

 13  And they went and found the tomb opened, and coming near they
 looked in there; and they see there a certain young man sitting in the
 midst of the tomb, beautiful and clothed in a robe exceeding bright:
 who said to them, Wherefore are ye come?  Whom seek ye?  Him that was
 crucified? [9] He is risen and gone.  But if ye believe not, look in
 and see the place where he lay, that he is not [here]; for he is risen
 and gone thither, whence he was sent.  Then the women feared and fled.

 14  Now it was the last day of the unleavened bread, and many were
 going forth, returning to their homes, as the feast was ended.  But we,
 the twelve disciples of the Lord, wept and were grieved:  and each one,
 being grieved for that which was come to pass, departed to his home.
 But I Simon Peter and Andrew my brother took our nets and went to the
 sea; and there was with us Levi the son of Alphæus, whom the Lord...

 [2] This translation is based on that which I published in The Gospel
 and Apocalypse of Peter:  Two Lectures, etc. (Camb., 1892).  It is now
 carefully revised in accordance with the photographic facsimile.  A
 corrected Greek text will be found in Dr. Swete's edition (1893).

 [3] Par[alem]phthenai is perhaps supported by paralabontes, Matt. xxiv.
 27.

 [4] I know no other instance of stauriskein.

 [5] cf. John xix. 31, where Syr. Pesch. reads:  "They say, These bodies
 shall not remain on the cross, because the sabbath dawneth."

 [6] The text here is corrupt:  for epesanto I have provisionally read
 epesan te.

 [7] For autos horas we must read autes horas (cf. Clem., Hom., xx.,
 16); aute is the equivalent in later Greek literature of ekeine, as in
 the modern tongue (cf. Lc. x. 7, 21, and xii. 12; || ekeine, Mt., Mc.)

 [8] I have ventured to substitute meta, "together with" (cf. Matt.
 xxvii. 66), for kata, "down upon."  Dr. Swete, however, keeps kata, and
 interprets it as "against," i.e., to guard the sepulchre against.

 [9] The form of the question in the Greek suggests a negative answer.

 Synoptical Table

 of the

 Four Canonical Gospels

 and

 The Gospel According to Peter

 Matthew xxvii.

 24 ¶  When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
 tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the
 multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person:  see
 ye to it.

 25  Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on
 our children.

 [cf. v. 57.]

 26 ¶  Then released he Barabbas unto them:  and when he had scourged
 Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

 27  Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall,
 and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.

 28  And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

 29 ¶  And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his
 head, and a reed in his right hand:  and they bowed the knee before
 him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!

 30  And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the
 head.

 Mark xv.

 [cf. v. 43.]

 [cf. v. 42.]

 15 ¶  And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas
 unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
 crucified.

 16  And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Prætorium; and
 they call together the whole band.

 17  And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns,
 and put it about his head,

 18  And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews!

 19  And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him,
 and bowing their knees worshipped him.

 Luke xxiii.

 [^2cf. Lk. xxiii. 7.]

 [^3cf. Lk. xxii. 66; Acts iv. 27.]

 [cf. v. 50.]

 [^4cf. Lk. xxiii. 12.]

 24  And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.

 25  And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast
 into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their
 will.

 John xix.

 [^1cf. John passim.]

 [cf. v. 38.]

 [cf. xix. 31.]

 16  Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified.  And
 they took Jesus, and led him away.

 Peter.

 1  But of the Jews [10] none washed his hands, neither Herod [11] nor
 any one of his judges. [12] 2  And when they had refused to wash
 them, Pilate rose up.  And Herod the king commandeth that the Lord be
 taken, saying to them, What things soever I commanded you to do unto
 them, do.

 3  And there was come there Joseph the friend of Pilate and of the
 Lord; and, knowing that they were about to crucify him, he came to
 Pilate and asked the body of the Lord for burial.  4  And Pilate sent
 to Herod and asked his body.  5  And Herod said, Brother [13] Pilate,
 even if no one had asked for him, we purposed to bury him, especially
 as the sabbath draweth on:  for it is written in the law, that the sun
 set not upon one that hath been put to death.  And he delivered him to
 the people on the day before the unleavened bread, their feast.

 6  And they took the Lord and pushed him as they ran, and said, Let us
 drag away the Son of God, having obtained power over him.

 7  And they clothed him with purple, and set him on the seat of
 judgement, saying, Judge righteously, O King of Israel.  8  And one of
 them brought a crown of thorns and put it on the head of the Lord.  9
 And others stood and spat in his eyes, and others smote his cheeks:
 others pricked him with a reed; and some scourged him, saying, With
 this honour let us honour the Son of God.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 31  And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from
 him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

 32  And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name:
 him they compelled to bear his cross.

 33  And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to
 say, a place of a skull,

 Mark.

 20  And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him,
 and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.

 21  And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of
 the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.

 22  And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being
 interpreted, The place of a skull.

 Luke.

 26  And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a
 Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross,
 that he might bear it after Jesus.

 27 ¶  And there followed him a great company of people, and of women,
 which also bewailed and lamented him.

 28  But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
 for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.

 29  For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say,
 Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps
 which never gave suck.

 30  Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to
 the hills, Cover us.

 31  For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in
 the dry?

 32  And there were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put
 to death.

 33  And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary,
 there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand,
 and the other on the left.

 John.

 17  And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place
 of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha:

 Peter.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 34  ¶  They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall:  and when he
 had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

 35  And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots:
 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted
 my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.

 36  And sitting down they watched him there;

 37  And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE
 KING OF THE JEWS.

 38  Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right
 hand, and another on the left.

 39  ¶  And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,

 Mark.

 23  And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh:  but he
 received it not.

 24  And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting
 lots upon them, what every man should take.

 25  And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.

 26  And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING
 OF THE JEWS.

 27  And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand,
 and the other on his left.

 28  And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered
 with the transgressors.

 Luke.

 34  ¶  Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what
 they do.  And they parted his raiment, and cast lots.

 35  And the people stood beholding.  And the rulers also with them
 derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be
 Christ, the chosen of God.

 36  And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him
 vinegar,

 37  And saying, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thyself.

 38  And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek,
 and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

 John.

 18  Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side
 one, and Jesus in the midst.

 [cf. vv. 23, 24.]

 19  ¶  And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross.  And the
 writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.

 20  This title then read many of the Jews:  for the place where Jesus
 was crucified was nigh to the city:  and it was written in Hebrew, and
 Greek, and Latin.

 Peter.

 10  And they brought two malefactors, and they crucified the Lord
 between them.

 But he held his peace, as though having no pain.

 11  And when they had raised the cross, they wrote upon it, This is the
 King of Israel.

 12  And having set his garments before him, they parted them among
 them, and cast lots for them.

 [cf. v. 11.]

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 40  And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in
 three days, save thyself.  If thou be the Son of God, come down from
 the cross.

 41  Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and
 elders, said,

 42  He saved others; himself he cannot save.  If he be the King of
 Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

 43  He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him:
 for he said, I am the Son of God.

 [cf. v. 35.]

 44  The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in
 his teeth.

 Mark.

 29  And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and
 saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
 days,

 30  Save thyself, and come down from the cross.

 31  Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with
 the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.

 32  Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we
 may see and believe.

 [cf. v. 24.]

 And they that were crucified with him reviled him.

 Luke.

 39  ¶  And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him,
 saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

 40  But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear
 God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?

 John.

 21  Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The
 King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.

 22  Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.

 23  ¶  Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
 garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his
 coat:  now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.

 24  They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast
 lots for it, whose it shall be:  that the scripture might be fulfilled,
 which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they
 did cast lots.  These things therefore the soldiers did.

 Peter.

 [cf. v. 12.]

 13  And one of those malefactors reproached him, saying, We for the
 evils that we have done have suffered thus, but this man, who hath
 become the Saviour of men, what wrong hath he done to you?

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 45  Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto
 the ninth hour.

 46  And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
 Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast
 thou forsaken me?

 Mark.

 33  And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole
 land until the ninth hour.

 34  And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi,
 Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God,
 why hast thou forsaken me?

 Luke.

 41  And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds:
 but this man hath done nothing amiss.

 42  And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy
 kingdom.

 43  And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou
 be with me in paradise.

 44  And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all
 the earth until the ninth hour.

 45  And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in
 the midst.

 John.

 25  ¶  Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
 mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.

 26  When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by,
 whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!

 27  Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother!  And from that
 hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

 Peter.

 14  And they, being angered at him, commanded that his legs should not
 be broken, that he might die in torment.

 15  And it was noon, and darkness came over all Judæa:

 and they were troubled and distressed, lest the sun had set, whilst he
 was yet alive:  [for] it is written for them, that the sun set not on
 him that hath been put to death.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 47  Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man
 calleth for Elias.

 48  And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled it
 with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

 49  The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save
 him.

 50  ¶  Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the
 ghost.

 51  And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top
 to the bottom;

 and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;

 52  And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which
 slept arose,

 53  And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
 the holy city, and appeared unto many.

 Mark.

 35  And some of them that stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold,
 he calleth Elias.

 36  And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a
 reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether
 Elias will come to take him down.

 37  And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.

 38  And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the
 bottom.

 Luke.

 46  ¶  And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father,
 into thy hands I commend my spirit:  and having said thus, he gave up
 the ghost.

 John.

 28  ¶  After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished,
 that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.

 29  Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar:  and they filled a
 spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth.

 30  When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is
 finished:  and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

 31  The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies
 should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath
 day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken,
 and that they might be taken away.

 32  Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
 other which was crucified with him.

 33  But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they
 brake not his legs:

 Peter.

 16  And one of them said, Give him to drink gall with vinegar.  And
 they mixed and gave him to drink, 17  and fulfilled all things, and
 accomplished their sins against their own head.

 18  And many went about with lamps, supposing that it was night, and
 fell down.  19  And the Lord cried out, saying, My power, my power,
 thou hast forsaken me.

 And when he had said it he was taken up.

 20  And in that hour the vail of the temple of Jerusalem was rent in
 twain.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 54  Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching
 Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared
 greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

 55  And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus
 from Galilee, ministering unto him:

 56  Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and
 Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children.

 57  When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathæa, named
 Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple:

 Mark.

 39  ¶  And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that
 he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the
 Son of God.

 40  There were also women looking on afar off:  among whom was Mary
 Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and
 Salome;

 41  (Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered
 unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem.

 42  ¶  And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
 that is, the day before the sabbath,

 43  Joseph of Arimathæa, an honourable counsellor, which also waited
 for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and
 craved the body of Jesus.

 Luke.

 47  Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
 Certainly this was a righteous man.

 48  And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the
 things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.

 49  And all his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from
 Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.

 50  ¶  And, behold, there was a man named Joseph, a counsellor; and he
 was a good man, and a just:

 51  (The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them;) he
 was of Arimathæa, a city of the Jews:  who also himself waited for the
 kingdom of God.

 John.

 34  But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and
 forthwith came there out blood and water.

 35  And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true:  and he
 knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.

 36  For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled,
 A bone of him shall not be broken.

 37  And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they
 pierced.

 38  ¶  And after this Joseph of Arimathæa, being a disciple of Jesus,
 but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take
 away the body of Jesus:  and Pilate gave him leave.  He came therefore,
 and took the body of Jesus.

 Peter.

 21  And then they drew out the nails from the hands of the Lord, and
 laid him upon the earth, and the whole earth quaked, and great fear
 arose.  22  Then the sun shone, and it was found the ninth hour:  23
 and the Jews rejoiced, and

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 58  He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.  Then Pilate
 commanded the body to be delivered.

 59  And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen
 cloth,

 60  And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the
 rock:  and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and
 departed.

 61  And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over
 against the sepulchre.

 Mark.

 44  And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead:  and calling unto him
 the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.

 45  And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.

 46  And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the
 linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and
 rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.

 47  And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was
 laid.

 Luke.

 52  This man went unto Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.

 53  And he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a
 sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.

 54  And that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.

 55  And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed
 after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.

 56  And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested
 the sabbath day according to the commandment.

 John.

 39  And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by
 night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
 weight.

 40  Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
 with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.

 41  Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in
 the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.

 42  There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews' preparation
 day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.

 Peter.

 gave his body to Joseph that he might bury it,

 since he had seen what good things he had done.

 24  And he took the Lord, and washed him, and wrapped him in a linen
 cloth, and brought him into his own tomb,

 which was called the Garden of Joseph.

 25  Then the Jews and the elders and the priests, perceiving what evil
 they had done to themselves, began to lament and to say, Woe for our
 sins:  the judgement hath drawn nigh, and the end of Jerusalem.

 26  And I with my companions was grieved; and being wounded in mind we
 hid ourselves:  for we were being sought for by them as malefactors,
 and as wishing to set fire to the temple.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 [^1cf. Mt. ix. 15.]

 62  ¶  Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the
 chief priests and Pharisees

 came together unto Pilate,

 63  Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet
 alive, After three days I will rise again.

 64  Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third
 day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto
 the people, He is risen from the dead:  so the last error shall be
 worse than the first.

 65  Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch:  go your way, make it as
 sure as ye can.

 66  So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and
 setting a watch.

 Mark.

 [^1cf. Mk. ii. 20.]

 [^2cf. Mk. xvi. 10.]

 Luke.

 John.

 Peter.

 27  And upon all these things we fasted [14] and sat mourning [15] and
 weeping [16] night and day until the sabbath.

 28  But the scribes and Pharisees and elders being gathered together
 one with another, when they heard that all the people murmured and beat
 their breasts, saying, If by his death these most mighty signs have
 come to pass, see how just he is,--29  the elders were afraid and

 came to Pilate, beseeching him and saying, 30  Give us soldiers, that
 we may guard his sepulchre for three days, lest his disciples come and
 steal him away, and the people suppose that he is risen from the dead
 and do us evil.

 31  And Pilate gave them Petronius the centurion with soldiers to guard
 the tomb.  And with them came the elders and scribes to the sepulchre,

 32  And having rolled a great stone together with the centurion and the
 soldiers, they all together who were there set it at the door of the
 sepulchre;

 33  And they affixed seven seals, and they pitched a tent there and
 guarded it.

 34  And early in the morning as the sabbath was drawing on, there came
 a multitude from Jerusalem and the region round about, that they might
 see the sepulchre that was sealed.

 35  And in the night in which the Lord's day was drawing on, as the
 soldiers kept guard two by two in a watch, there was a great voice in
 the heaven; 36 and they saw the heavens opened, and two men descend
 from thence with great light and approach the tomb.  37  And that stone
 which was put at the door rolled of itself and made way in part; and
 the tomb was opened, and both the young men entered in.

 38  When therefore those soldiers saw it, they awakened the centurion
 and the elders,--for they too were hard by keeping guard; 39  and, as
 they declared what things they had seen, again they see three men
 coming forth from the tomb, and two of them supporting one, and a cross
 following them.  40  And of the two the head reached unto the heaven,
 but the head of him that was led by them overpassed the heavens.  41
 And they heard a voice from the heavens, saying, Hast thou preached to
 them that sleep?  42  And a response was heard from the cross, Yea.

 43  They therefore considered one with another whether to go away and
 shew these things to Pilate.  44  And while they yet thought thereon,
 the heavens again are seen to open, and a certain man to descend and
 enter into the sepulchre.  45  When the centurion and they that were
 with him saw these things, they hastened in the night to Pilate,
 leaving the tomb which they were watching, and declared all things
 which they had seen, being greatly distressed and saying, Truly he was
 the Son of God.

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 [cf. Mt. xxvii. 24.]

 Chapter XXVIII.

 1  ¶  In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first
 day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
 sepulchre.

 2  And, behold, there was a great earthquake:  for the angel of the
 Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the
 door, and sat upon it.

 3  His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:

 Mark.

 Chapter XVI.

 1  ¶  And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
 mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
 come and anoint him.

 2  And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they came
 unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.

 3  And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone
 from the door of the sepulchre?

 4  And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away:  for
 it was very great.

 5  And entering into the sepulchre,

 they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white
 garment; and they were affrighted.

 Luke.

 Chapter XXIV.

 1  Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they
 came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared,
 and certain others with them.

 2  And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.

 3  And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus.

 4  And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold,
 two men stood by them in shining garments:

 5  And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth,
 they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?

 John.

 Chapter XX.

 1  ¶  The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it
 was yet dark, unto the sepulchre,

 and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.

 Peter.

 46  Pilate answered and said, I am pure from the blood of the Son of
 God:  but ye determined this.

 47  Then they all drew near and besought him and entreated him to
 command the centurion and the soldiers to say nothing of the things
 which they had seen:  48  For it is better, say they, for us to incur
 the greatest sin before God, and not to fall into the hands of the
 people of the Jews and to be stoned.  49  Pilate therefore commanded
 the centurion and the soldiers to say nothing.

 50  And at dawn upon the Lord's day, Mary Magdalen, a disciple of the
 Lord, fearing because of the Jews, since they were burning with wrath,
 had not done at the Lord's sepulchre the things which the women are
 wont to do for those that die and for those that are beloved by them--

 51  she took her friends with her and came to the sepulchre where he
 was laid.

 52  And they feared lest the Jews should see them, and they said,
 Although on the day on which he was crucified we could not weep and
 lament, yet now let us do these things at his sepulchre.

 53  But who shall roll away for us the stone that was laid at the door
 of the sepulchre, that we may enter in and sit by him and do the things
 that are due?  54  For the stone was great, and we fear lest some one
 see us.  And if we cannot, yet if we but set at the door the things
 which we bring for a memorial of him, we will weep and lament, until we
 come unto our home.

 55  And they went away and found the tomb opened,

 and coming near they looked in there;

 and they see there a certain young man sitting in the midst of the
 tomb, beautiful and clothed in a robe exceeding bright;

 ------------------------

 Matthew.

 4  And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

 5  And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye:  for I
 know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.

 6  He is not here:  for he is risen, as he said.  Come, see the place
 where the Lord lay.

 7  And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the
 dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see
 him:  lo, I have told you.

 8  And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great
 joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.

 Mark.

 6  And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted:  ye seek Jesus of
 Nazareth, which was crucified:  he is risen; he is not here:  behold
 the place where they laid him.

 7  But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before
 you into Galilee:  there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

 8  And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
 trembled and were amazed:  neither said they any thing to any man; for
 they were afraid.

 [Levi, etc.; cf. Mk. ii. 14.]

 Luke.

 6  He is not here, but is risen:  remember how he spake unto you when
 he was yet in Galilee,

 7  Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
 men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

 8  And they remembered his words,

 9  And returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the
 eleven, and to all the rest.

 John.

 Peter.

 who said unto them, 56  Wherefore are ye come?  Whom seek ye?  Him that
 was crucified?  He is risen and gone.  But if ye believe not, look in
 and see the place where he lay, that he is not [here]; for he is risen
 and gone away thither, whence he was sent.

 57  Then the women feared and fled.

 58  Now it was the last day of the unleavened bread, and many were
 going forth, returning to their homes, as the feast was ended.  59  But
 we, the twelve disciples of the Lord, mourned and were grieved:  and
 each one, being grieved for that which was come to pass, departed to
 his home.  60  But I, Simon Peter and Andrew my brother, took our nets
 and went to the sea; and there was with us Levi the son of Alphæus,
 whom the Lord...

 [10] [cf. John passim.]

 [11] [cf. Luke xxiii. 7.]

 [12] [cf. Luke xxii. 66; Acts iv. 27.]

 [13] [cf. Luke xxiii. 12.]

 [14] [cf. Matt. ix. 15; Mark ii. 20.]

 [15] [cf. Mark xvi. 10.]

 [16] [cf. Mark xvi. 10.]
