Remains of the Second and Third Centuries (Various)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf08/cache/anf08.txt).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 to

 Remains of the Second and Third Centuries.

 ------------------------

 Under the title of Fragments of the Second and Third Centuries are
 grouped together, in the Edinburgh series, a mass of valuable
 illustrative material, which might have been distributed with great
 advantage through the former volumes, in strict order of chronology.
 Something is due, however, to the unity of authorship, and to the
 marked design of the editors of the original edition to let these
 Fragments stand together, as the work of their accomplished
 collaborator, the Rev. B. P. Pratten, with whose skill and erudition
 our readers are already familiar. [3529]

 I have contented myself, therefore, with giving approximate order and
 continuity, on chronological grounds, to the series of names
 subjoined.  Bardesanes has been eliminated here, and placed more
 appropriately with the Syriac authors.  The reader will find references
 which may aid him in seeking further information.  Some of these names
 are of lasting value and interest in the Church.  I prefer to call
 these "Fragments" their "Remains."

 To each of the following names I have prefixed some details of
 information, with such dates as the learned supply.

 The following is the

 Translator's Introductory Notice

 The fragments that follow are the productions of writers who lived
 during the second century or the beginning of the third.  Little is
 known of the writers, and the statements made in regard to them are
 often very indefinite, and the result of mere conjecture.

 1.  Quadratus was one of the first of the Christian apologists.  He is
 said to have presented his apology to Hadrian while the emperor was in
 Athens attending the celebration of the Eleusinian mysteries.

 2.  Aristo of Pella, a Jew, was the author of a work called The
 Disputation of Jason and Papiscus.  Nothing further is known of him.
 He flourished in the first half of the second century.

 3.  Melito was bishop of Sardis, and flourished in the reign of Marcus
 Aurelius.  He wrote many works, but all of them have perished except a
 few fragments.  The genuineness of the Syriac fragments is open to
 question.

 4.  Hegesippus also flourished in the time of Antoninus Pius and Marcus
 Aurelius.  He is the first ecclesiastical historian; but his book was
 rather notes for an ecclesiastical history, than a history.

 5.  Dionysius was bishop of Corinth in the reign of Marcus Aurelius.
 He wrote letters to various churches.

 6.  Rhodon went from Asia to Rome, and became a pupil of Tatian.  After
 the lapse of his master into heresy he remained true to the faith, and
 wrote against heretics.

 7.  Maximus flourished about the same time as Rhodon, under the
 emperors Commodus and Severus.

 8.  Claudius Apollinaris was bishop of Hierapolis, and presented a
 defense of the Christians to Marcus Aurelius.  He wrote many important
 works, of which we have only a few fragments.

 9.  Polycrates was bishop of Ephesus.  He took part in the controversy
 on the Passover question.  He died about 200 a.d.

 10.  Theophilus was bishop of Cæsarea.  He was a contemporary of
 Polycrates, and, like him, engaged in the Passover controversy.

 11.  Serapion was ordained bishop of Antioch a.d. 190, but almost no
 other fact of his life is known.  He wrote several works.

 12.  Apollonius wrote a work against the Montanists, probably in the
 year a.d. 210.  This is all that is known of him.

 13.  Pantænus, probably a Sicilian by birth, passed from Stoicism to
 Christianity, and went to Judæa to proclaim the truth.  He returned to
 Alexandria, and became president of the catechetical school there, in
 which post he remained till his death, which took place about the year
 212 a.d.

 14.  The Letter of the Churches in Vienne and Lyons was written shortly
 after the persecution in Gaul, which took place in a.d. 177.  It is not
 known who is the author.  Some have supposed that Irenæus wrote it, but
 there is no historical testimony to this effect.

 [3529] See vol. ii. (p. 125), etc.

 Remains of the Second and Third Centuries.

 ------------------------

 Quadratus, Bishop of Athens. [3530]

 [a.d. 126.]  Quadratus [3531] is spoken of by Eusebius as a "man of
 understanding and of Apostolic faith."  And he celebrates Aristides as
 a man of similar character.  These were the earliest apologists; both
 addressed their writings to Hadrian, and they were extant and valued in
 the churches in the time of Eusebius.

 From the Apology for the Christian Religion. [3532]

 Our Saviour's works, moreover, were always present:  for they were
 real, consisting of those who had been healed of their diseases, those
 who had been raised from the dead; who were not only seen whilst they
 were being healed and raised up, but were afterwards constantly
 present.  Nor did they remain only during the sojourn of the Saviour on
 earth, but also a considerable time after His departure; and, indeed,
 some of them have survived even down to our own times. [3533]

 ------------------------

 [3530] But see Lightfoot, A. F., part ii. vol. i. p. 524.

 [3531] On Quadratus and Aristides, consult Routh, R. S., p. 71; also
 Westcott, On the Canon, p. 92.

 [3532] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iv. 3.

 [3533] [Westcott supposes the Diognetus of Mathetes (vol. i. p. 23) may
 be the work of Quadratus; Canon, p. 96.]

 Aristo of Pella.

 [a.d. 140.]  Aristo of Pella [3534] is supposed to have been a Jew,
 whose work was designed to help the failing Judaism of his country.
 Though his work is lost, alike the original and the Latin translation
 of one "Celsus," it seems to have been a popular tract among Christians
 of Cyprian's time, and the Latin preface is often suffixed to editions
 of that Father.

 The work of Aristo is known as the Disputation of Papiscus and Jason,
 and Celsus tells us that Jason was a Hebrew Christian, while his
 opponent was a Jew of Alexandria.  Now, Papiscus owns himself convinced
 by the arguments of Jason, and concludes by a request to be baptized.
 Celsus, who seems to have been a heathen or an Epicurean, derides the
 work with scornful commiseration; but Origen rebukes this, and affirms
 his respect for the work.  All this considered, one must think Aristo
 was "almost persuaded to be a Christian," and deserves a place among
 Christian writers.

 From the Disputation of Jason and Papiscus.

 "I remember," says Jerome (Comm. ad Gal., cap. iii. comm. 13), "in the
 Dispute between Jason and Papiscus, which is composed in Greek, to have
 found it written:  The execration of God is he that is hanged.'"

 From the Same Work.

 Jerome likewise, in his Hebrew Questions on Genesis, says:  "In the
 beginning God made the heaven and the earth.  The majority believe, as
 it is affirmed also in the Dispute between Jason and Papiscus, and as
 Tertullian in his book Against Praxeas contends, and as Hilarius too,
 in his exposition of one of the Psalms, declares, that in the Hebrew it
 is:  In the Son, God made the heaven and the earth.'  But that this is
 false, the nature of the case itself proves."

 Perhaps from the Same Work.

 ...And when the man himself [3535] who had instigated them [3536] to
 this folly had paid the just penalty (says Eusebius, Hist., iv. 6),
 "the whole nation from that time was strictly forbidden to set foot on
 the region about Jerusalem, by the formal decree and enactment of
 Adrian, who commanded that they should not even from a distance look on
 their native soil!"  So writes Aristo of Pella.

 From the Same Work.

 I have found this expression Seven heavens (says Maximus, in Scholia on
 the work concerning the Mystical Theology, ascribed to Dionysius the
 Areopagite, cap. i.) also in the Dispute between Papiscus and Jason,
 written by Aristo of Pella, which Clement of Alexandria, in the sixth
 book of the Outlines, [3537] says was composed by Saint Luke.

 Concerning the Same Work.

 Thus writes Origen: [3538] ...in which book a Christian is represented
 disputing with a Jew from the Jewish Scriptures, and showing that the
 prophecies concerning the Christ apply to Jesus:  although his opponent
 addresses himself to the argument with no common ability, [3539] and in
 a manner not unbefitting his Jewish character.

 ------------------------

 [3534] Routh, R. S., vol. i. p. 93.  Westcott, Canon, p. 106.  Grabe's
 mention.  Routh's discussion, in annotations, is most learned and
 exhaustive.

 [3535] Barchochebas.

 [3536] The Jews.

 [3537] Upotuposos.

 [3538] Contra Celsum, iv. 52.

 [3539] Ouk agennos.

 Melito, the Philosopher.

 [a.d. 160-170-177.]  Melito [3540] may have been the immediate
 successor of the "angel" (or "apostle") of the church of Sardis, to
 whom our Great High Priest addressed one of the apocalyptic messages.
 He was an "Apostolic Father" in point of fact; he very probably knew
 the blessed Polycarp and his disciple Irenæus.  He is justly revered
 for the diligence with which he sought out the evidence which, in his
 day, established the Canon of the Old Testament, then just complete.

 In the following fragments we find him called Bishop of Sardis, Bishop
 of Attica, and Bishop of Ittica.  He is also introduced to us as "the
 Philosopher," and we shall find him styled "the Eunuch" by Polycrates.
 It is supposed that he had made himself a coelebs "for the kingdom of
 heaven's sake," without mistaking our Lord's intent, as did Origen.  He
 was not a monk, but accepted a single estate to be the more free and
 single-eyed in the Master's service.  From the encyclopedic erudition
 of Lightfoot we glean some particulars, as follows:--

 1.  I have adopted his date, as Lightfoot gives it,--that is, the
 period of his writings,--under the Antonines.  The improbability of
 seventy years in the episcopate is reason enough for rejecting the idea
 that he was himself the "angel of the church of Sardis," to whom our
 Lord sent the terrible rebuke.

 2.  His silence concerning persecutions under Vespasian, Trojan, and
 Antoninus Pius cannot be pleaded to exempt them from this stain,
 against positive evidence to the contrary.

 3.  A coincidence with Ignatius to the Ephesians [3541] will be noted
 hereafter.

 4.  Melito, with Claudius Apollinaris and even Polycrates, may have
 been personally acquainted with Ignatius; [3542] of course, one with
 another.  These lived not far from Smyrna; Asia Minor was, in the first
 century, the focus of Christian activity.

 5.  We know of his visit to the East from his own account, preserved by
 Eusebius.  The Christians of proconsular Asia were accustomed to such
 journeys.  Even Clement of Alexandria may have met him, as he seems to
 have met Tatian and Theodotus. [3543]

 6.  Melito vouches for the rescript of Hadrian, [3544] but his supposed
 reference to the edict of Antoninus does not bear close scrutiny as
 warrant for its authenticity. [3545]

 7.  The Apology of our author was addressed to Aurelius in his
 mid-career as a sovereign, about a.d. 170.  Justin, Melito,
 Athenagoras, and Theophilus all tell the same sad story of imperial
 cruelty.  Even when Justin wrote to Antoninus, Marcus was supreme in
 the councils of the elder emperor. [3546]

 8.  He became a martyr, probably under Marcus Aurelius, circa a.d. 177;
 [3547] some eminent critics have even dated his Apology as late as
 this.

 [3540] Routh, R. S., vol. i. p. 113.  And see Westcott, Canon, p. 245.

 [3541] Lightfoot, A. F., vol. ii. p. 48.

 [3542] Ib., vol. i. p. 428.

 [3543] Vol. ii. (Stromata) p. 301, this series.

 [3544] Vol. i. p. 186, this series.

 [3545] Lightfoot, A. F., vol. i. p. 468.

 [3546] Lightfoot, A. F., vol. ii.

 [3547] Ibid., pp. 446, 494.

 I.

 A Discourse Which Was in the Presence of Antoninus Cæsar, and He
 Exhorted [3548] The Said Cæsar to Acquaint Himself with God, and Showed
 to Him the Way of Truth.

 He began to speak as follows:--

 "It is not easy," said Melito, "speedily to bring into the right way
 the man who has a long time previously been held fast by error.  It
 may, however, be effected:  for, when a man turns away ever so little
 from error, the mention of the truth is acceptable to him.  For, just
 as when the cloud breaks ever so little there comes fair weather, even
 so, when a man turns toward God, the thick cloud of error which
 deprived him of true vision is quickly withdrawn from before him.  For
 error, like disease [3549] and sleep, long holds fast those who come
 under its influence; [3550] but truth uses the word as a goad, and
 smites the slumberers, and awakens them; and when they are awake they
 look at the truth, and also understand it:  they hear, and distinguish
 that which is from that which is not.  For there are men who call
 iniquity righteousness:  they think, for example, that it is
 righteousness for a man to err with the many.  But I, for my part,
 affirm that it is not a good excuse for error that a man errs with the
 many.  For, if one man only sin, [3551] his sin is great:  how much
 greater will be the sin when many sin together!

 "Now, the sin of which I speak is this:  when a man abandons that which
 really exists, and serves that which does not really exist.  There is'
 that which really exists, and it is called God.  He, I say, really
 exists, and by His power doth everything subsist.  This being is in no
 sense made, nor did He ever come into being; but He has existed from
 eternity, and will continue to exist for ever and ever.  He changeth
 not, while everything else changes.  No eye [3552] can see Him, nor
 thought apprehend Him, nor language describe Him; and those who love
 Him speak of Him thus:  Father, and God of Truth.'

 "If, therefore, a man forsake the light, and say that there is another
 God, it is plain from what he himself says that it is some created
 thing which he calls God.  For, if a man call fire God, it is not God,
 because it is fire; and, if a man call water God, it is not God,
 because it is water; and, if he so call this earth on which we tread,
 or these heavens which are seen by us, or the sun, or the moon, or some
 one of these stars which run their course without ceasing by Divine
 command, and do not speed along by their own will, neither are these
 gods; and, if a man call gold and silver gods, are not these objects
 things which we use as we please? and, if he so call those pieces of
 wood which we burn, or those stones which we break, how can these
 things be gods?  For, lo! they are for the use of man.  How can they'
 escape the commission of great sin, who in their speech change the
 great God into those things which, so long as they continue, continue
 by Divine command?

 "But, notwithstanding this, I say that so long as a man does not hear,
 and so does not discern or understand that there is a Lord over these
 creatures, he is not perhaps to be blamed:  because no one finds fault
 with a blind man though he walk ever so badly.  For, in the same manner
 as the blind, so men also, when they were seeking after God, stumbled
 upon stones and blocks of wood; and such of them as were rich stumbled
 upon gold and silver, and were prevented by their stumblings from
 finding that which they were seeking after.  But, now that a voice has
 been heard through all the earth, [3553] declaring that there is a God
 of truth, and there has been given to every man an eye wherewith to
 see, those persons are without excuse who are ashamed of incurring the
 censure of their former companions in error, and yet desire to walk in
 the right way.  For those who are ashamed to be saved must of necessity
 perish.  I therefore counsel them to open their eyes and see:  for, lo!
 light is given abundantly [3554] to us all to see thereby; and if, when
 light has arisen upon us, any one close his eyes so as not to see, into
 the ditch he must go. [3555] But why is a man ashamed of the censure
 of those who have been in error along with himself?  Rather does it
 behove him to persuade them to follow in his steps; and, if they should
 not be persuaded by him, then to disengage himself from their society.
 For there are some men who are unable to rise from their mother earth,
 and therefore also do they make them gods from the earth their mother;
 and they are condemned by the judgments of truth, forasmuch as they
 apply the name of Him who is unchangeable to those objects which are
 subject to change, and shrink not from calling those things gods which
 have been made by the hands of man, and dare to make an image of God
 whom they have not seen.

 "But I have to remark further, that the Sibyl [3556] also has said
 concerning them that it is the images of deceased kings that they
 worship.  And this is easy to understand:  for, lo! even now they
 worship and honour the images of those of Cæsarean rank [3557] more
 than their former gods; for from those their former gods both pecuniary
 tribute and produce accrue to Cæsar, as to one who is greater than
 they.  On this account, those who despise them, and so cause Cæsar's
 revenue to fall short, are put to death.  But to the treasury of other
 kings also it is appointed how much the worshippers in various places
 shall pay, and how many vesselfuls [3558] of water from the sea they
 shall supply.  Such is the wickedness of the world--of those who
 worship and fear that which has no sensation.  Many of them, too, who
 are crafty, either for the sake of gain, or for vainglory, or for
 dominion over the multitude, both themselves worship, and incite those
 who are destitute of understanding to worship, that which has no
 sensation.

 "I will further write and show, as far as my ability goes, how and for
 what causes images were made to kings and tyrants, and how they came to
 be regarded [3559] as gods.  The people of Argos made images to
 Hercules, because he belonged to their city, and was strong, and by his
 valour slew noxious beasts, and more especially because they were
 afraid of him.  For he was subject to no control, and carried off the
 wives of many:  for his lust was great, like that of Zuradi the
 Persian, his friend.  Again, the people of Acte worshipped Dionysus,
 [3560] a king, because he had recently [3561] planted the vine in their
 country.  The Egyptians worshipped Joseph the Hebrew, who was called
 Serapis, because he supplied them with corn during the years of
 famine.  The Athenians worshipped Athene, the daughter of Zeus, king of
 the island of Crete, because she built the town of Athens, and made
 Ericthippus her son king there, whom she had by adultery with
 Hephæstus, a blacksmith, son of a wife of her father.  She was, too,
 always courting the society of Hercules, because he was her brother on
 her father's side.  For Zeus the king became enamoured of Alcmene, the
 wife of Electryon, who was from Argos, and committed adultery with her,
 and she gave birth to Hercules.  The people of Phoenicia worshipped
 Balthi, [3562] queen of Cyprus, because she fell in love with Tamuz,
 son of Cuthar king of the Phoenicians, and left her own kingdom and
 came and dwelt in Gebal, a fortress of the Phoenicians, and at the same
 time made all the Cyprians subject to King Cuthar.  Also, before Tamuz
 she had fallen in love with Ares, and committed adultery with him; and
 Hephæstus, her husband, caught her, and his jealousy was roused against
 her, and he came and killed Tamuz in Mount Lebanon, as he was hunting
 [3563] wild boars; and from that time Balthi remained in Gebal, and she
 died in the city of Aphiki, [3564] where Tamuz was buried.  The
 Elamites worshipped Nuh, daughter of the king of Elam:  when the enemy
 had carried her captive, her father made for her an image and a temple
 in Shushan, a royal residence which is in Elam.  The Syrians worshipped
 Athi, a Hadibite, who sent the daughter of Belat, a person skilled in
 medicine, and she healed Simi, the daughter of Hadad king of Syria; and
 some time afterwards, when Hadad himself had the leprosy upon him, Athi
 entreated Elisha the Hebrew, and he came and healed him of his
 leprosy.  The people of Mesopotamia also worshipped Cuthbi, a Hebrew
 woman, because she delivered Bakru, the paternal king [3565] of Edessa,
 from his enemies.  With respect to Nebo, who is worshipped in Mabug,
 why should I write to you?  For, lo! all the priests who are in Mabug
 know that it is the image of Orpheus, a Thracian Magus.  Hadran, again,
 is the image of Zaradusht, a Persian Magus.  For both of these Magi
 practised magic at a well which was in a wood in Mabug, in which was an
 unclean spirit, and it assaulted and disputed the passage of every one
 who passed by in all that country in which the town of Mabug is
 situated; and these Magi, in accordance with what was a mystery in
 their Magian system, bade Simi, the daughter of Hadad, to draw water
 from the sea and pour it into the well, so that the spirit should not
 come up and commit assault.  In like manner, the rest of mankind made
 images to their kings and worshipped them; of which matter I will not
 write further.

 "But thou, a person of liberal mind, and familiar with the truth, if
 thou wilt properly consider these matters, commune with thine own self;
 [3566] and, though they should clothe thee in the garb of a woman,
 remember that thou art a man.  Believe in Him who is in reality God,
 and to Him lay open thy mind, and to Him commit thy soul, and He is
 able to give thee immortal life for ever, for everything is possible to
 Him; [3567] and let all other things be esteemed by thee just as they
 are--images as images, and sculptures as sculptures; and let not that
 which is only made be put by thee in the place of Him who is not made,
 but let Him, the ever-living God, be constantly present to thy mind.
 [3568] For thy mind itself is His likeness:  for it too is invisible
 and impalpable, [3569] and not to be represented by any form, yet by
 its will is the whole bodily frame moved.  Know, therefore, that, if
 thou constantly serve Him who is immoveable, even He exists for ever,
 so thou also, when thou shalt have put off this body, which is visible
 and corruptible, shall stand before Him for ever, endowed with life and
 knowledge, and thy works shall be to thee wealth inexhaustible and
 possessions unfailing.  And know that the chief of thy good works is
 this:  that thou know God, and serve Him.  Know, too, that He asketh
 not anything of thee:  He needeth not anything.

 "Who is this God?  He who is Himself truth, and His word truth.  And
 what is truth?  That which is not fashioned, nor made, nor represented
 by art:  that is, which has never been brought into existence, and is
 on that account called truth. [3570] If, therefore, a man worship
 that which is made with hands, it is not the truth that he worships,
 nor yet the word of truth.

 "I have very much to say on this subject; but I feel ashamed for those
 who do not understand that they are superior to the work of their own
 hands, nor perceive how they give gold to the artists that they may
 make for them gods, and give them silver for their adornment and
 honour, and move their riches about from place to place, and then
 worship them.  And what infamy can be greater than this, that a man
 should worship his riches, and forsake Him who bestowed those riches
 upon him? and that he should revile man, yet worship the image of man;
 and slay a beast, yet worship the likeness of a beast?  This also is
 evident, that it is the workmanship of their fellowmen that they
 worship:  for they do not worship the treasures [3571] while they are
 laid by in the bag, but when the artists have fashioned images out of
 them they worship them; neither do they worship the gold or the silver
 considered as property, [3572] but when the gravers have sculptured
 them then they worship them.  Senseless man! what addition has been
 made to thy gold, that now thou worshippest it?  If it is because it
 has been made to resemble a winged animal, why dost thou not worship
 the winged animal itself?  And if because it has been made like a beast
 of prey, lo! the beast of prey itself is before thee.  And if it is the
 workmanship itself that pleases thee, let the workmanship of God please
 thee, who made all things, and in His own likeness made the workmen,
 who strive to do like Him, but resemble Him not.

 "But perhaps thou wilt say:  How is it that God did not so make me that
 I should serve Him, and not images?  In speaking thus, thou art seeking
 to become an idle instrument, and not a living man.  For God made thee
 as perfect as it seemed good to Him.  He has given thee a mind endowed
 with freedom; He has set before thee objects in great number, that thou
 on thy part mayest distinguish the nature of each thing and choose for
 thyself that which is good; He has set before thee the heavens, and
 placed in them the stars; He has set before thee the sun and the moon,
 and they too every day run their course therein; He has set before thee
 the multitude of waters, and restrained them by His word; He has set
 before thee the wide earth, which remains at rest, and continues before
 thee without variation: [3573] yet, lest thou shouldst suppose that
 of its own nature it so continues, He makes it also to quake when He
 pleaseth; He has set before thee the clouds, which by His command bring
 water from above and satisfy the earth--that from hence thou mayest
 understand that He who puts these things in motion is superior to them
 all, and mayest accept thankfully the goodness of Him who has given
 thee a mind whereby to distinguish these things from one another.

 "Wherefore I counsel thee to know thyself, and to know God.  For
 understand how that there is within thee that which is called the
 soul--by it the eye seeth, by it the ear heareth, by it the mouth
 speaketh; and how it makes use of the whole body; and how, whenever He
 pleaseth to remove the soul from the body, this falleth to decay and
 perisheth.  From this, therefore, which exists within thyself and is
 invisible, understand how God also moveth the whole by His power, like
 the body; and that, whenever it pleases Him to withdraw His power, the
 whole world also, like the body, will fall to decay and perish.

 "But why this world was made, and why it passes away, and why the body
 exists, and why it falls to decay, and why it continues, thou canst not
 know until thou hast raised thy head from this sleep in which thou art
 sunk, and hast opened thine eyes and seen that God is One, the Lord of
 all, and hast come to serve Him with all thy heart.  Then will He grant
 thee to know His will:  for every one that is severed from the
 knowledge of the living God is dead and buried even while in his body.
 Therefore is it that thou dost wallow on the ground before demons and
 shadows, and askest vain petitions from that which has not anything to
 give.  But thou, stand thou up from among those who are lying on the
 earth and caressing stones, and giving their substance as food for the
 fire, and offering their raiment to idols, and, while themselves
 possessed of senses, are bent on serving that which has no sensation;
 and offer thou for thy imperishable soul petitions for that which
 decayeth not, to God who suffers no decay--and thy freedom will be at
 once apparent; and be thou careful of it, [3574] and give thanks to God
 who made thee, and gave thee the mind of the free, that thou mightest
 shape thy conduct even as thou wilt.  He hath set before thee all these
 things, and showeth thee that, if thou follow after evil, thou shalt be
 condemned for thy evil deeds; but that, if after goodness, thou shalt
 receive from Him abundant good, [3575] together with immortal life for
 ever.

 "There is, therefore, nothing to hinder thee from changing thy evil
 manner of life, because thou art a free man; or from seeking and
 finding out who is the Lord of all; or from serving Him with all thy
 heart:  because with Him there is no reluctance to give the knowledge
 of Himself to those that seek it, according to the measure of their
 capacity to know Him.

 "Let it be thy first care not to deceive thyself.  For, if thou sayest
 of that which is not God:  This is God, thou deceivest thyself, and
 sinnest before the God of truth.  Thou fool! is that God which is
 bought and sold?  Is that God which is in want?  Is that God which must
 be watched over?  How buyest thou him as a slave, and servest him as a
 master?  How askest thou of him, as of one that is rich, to give to
 thee, and thyself givest to him as to one that is poor?  How dost thou
 expect of him that he will make thee victorious in battle? for, lo!
 when thy enemies have conquered thee, they strip him likewise.

 "Perhaps one who is a king may say:  I cannot behave myself aright,
 because I am a king; it becomes me to do the will of the many.  He who
 speaks thus really deserves to be laughed at:  for why should not the
 king himself lead the way [3576] to all good things, and persuade the
 people under his rule to behave with purity, and to know God in truth,
 and in his own person set before them the patterns of all things
 excellent--since thus it becomes him to do?  For it is a shameful thing
 that a king, however badly he may conduct himself, should yet judge and
 condemn those who do amiss.

 "My opinion is this:  that in this' way a kingdom may be governed in
 peace--when the sovereign is acquainted with the God of truth, and is
 withheld by fear of Him from doing wrong [3577] to those who are his
 subjects, and judges everything with equity, as one who knows that he
 himself also will be judged before God; while, at the same time, those
 who are under his rule [3578] are withheld by the fear of God from
 doing wrong to their sovereign, and are restrained by the same fear
 from doing wrong to one another.  By this knowledge of God and fear of
 Him all evil may be removed from the realm.  For, if the sovereign
 abstain from doing wrong to those who are under his rule, and they
 abstain from doing wrong to him and to each other, it is evident that
 the whole country will dwell in peace.  Many blessings, too, will be
 enjoyed there, because amongst them all the name of God will be
 glorified.  For what blessing is greater than this, that a sovereign
 should deliver the people that are under his rule from error, and by
 this good deed render himself pleasing to God?  For from error arise
 all those evils from which kingdoms suffer; but the greatest of all
 errors is this:  when a man is ignorant of God, and in God's stead
 worships that which is not God.

 "There are, however, persons who say:  It is for the honour of God that
 we make the image:  in order, that is, that we may worship the God who
 is concealed from our view.  But they are unaware that God is in every
 country, and in every place, and is never absent, and that there is not
 anything done and He knoweth it not.  Yet thou, despicable man! within
 whom He is, and without whom He is, and above whom He is, hast
 nevertheless gone and bought thee wood from the carpenter's, and it is
 carved and made into an image insulting to God. [3579] To this thou
 offerest sacrifice, and knowest not that the all-seeing eye seeth thee,
 and that the word of truth reproves thee, and says to thee:  How can
 the unseen God be sculptured?  Nay, it is the likeness of thyself that
 thou makest and worshippest.  Because the wood has been sculptured,
 hast thou not the insight to perceive that it is still wood, or that
 the stone is still stone?  The gold also the workman [3580] taketh
 according to its weight in the balance.  And when thou hast had it made
 [3581] into an image, why dost thou weigh it?  Therefore thou art a
 lover of gold, and not a lover of God.  And art thou not ashamed,
 perchance it be deficient, to demand of the maker of it why he has
 stolen some of it?  Though thou hast eyes, dose thou not see?  And
 though thou hast intelligence, [3582] dose thou not understand?  Why
 dost thou wallow on the ground, and offer supplication to things which
 are without sense?  Fear Him who shaketh the earth, and maketh the
 heavens to revolve, and smiteth the sea, and removeth the mountain from
 its place--Him who can make Himself like a fire, and consume all
 things; and, if thou be not able to clear thyself of guilt, yet add not
 to thy sins; and, if thou be not able to know God, yet doubt not [3583]
 that He exists.

 "Again, there are persons who say:  Whatsoever our fathers have
 bequeathed to us, that we reverence.  Therefore, of course, it is, that
 those whose fathers have bequeathed them poverty strive to become rich!
 and those whose fathers did not instruct them, desire to be instructed,
 and to learn that which their fathers knew not!  And why, forsooth, do
 the children of the blind see, and the children of the lame walk?  Nay,
 it is not well for a man to follow his predecessors, if they be those
 whose course was evil; but rather that we should turn from that path of
 theirs, lest that which befell our predecessors should bring disaster
 upon us also.  Wherefore, inquire whether thy father's course was
 good:  and, if so, do thou also follow in his steps; but, if thy
 father's course was very evil, let thine be good, and so let it be with
 thy children after thee. [3584] Be grieved also for thy father
 because his course is evil, so long as thy grief may avail to help
 him.  But, as for thy children, speak to them thus:  There is a God,
 the Father of all, who never came into being, neither was ever made,
 and by whose will all things subsist.  He also made the luminaries,
 that His works may see one another; and He conceals Himself in His
 power from all His works:  for it is not permitted to any being subject
 to change to see Him who changes not.  But such as are mindful of His
 words, and are admitted into that covenant which is unchangeable, they'
 see God--so far as it is possible for them to see Him.  These also will
 have power to escape destruction, when the flood of fire comes upon all
 the world.  For there was once a flood and a wind, [3585] and the great
 [3586] men were swept away by a violent blast from the north, but the
 just were left, for a demonstration of the truth.  Again, at another
 time there was a flood of water, and all men and animals perished in
 the multitude of waters, but the just were preserved in an ark of wood
 by the command of God.  So also will it be at the last time:  there
 shall be a flood of fire, and the earth shall be burnt up, together
 with its mountains; and mankind shall be burnt up, along with the idols
 which they have made, and the carved images which they have worshipped;
 and the sea shall be burnt up, together with its islands; but the just
 shall be preserved from wrath, like as were their fellows of the ark
 from the waters of the deluge.  And then shall those who have not known
 God, and those who have made them idols, bemoan themselves, when they
 shall see those idols of theirs being burnt up, together with
 themselves, and nothing shall be found to help them.

 "When thou, Antoninus [3587] Cæsar, shall become acquainted with these
 things, and thy children also with thee, then wilt thou bequeath to
 them an inheritance for ever which fadeth not away, and thou wilt
 deliver thy soul, and the souls of thy children also, from that which
 shall come upon the whole earth in the judgment of truth and of
 righteousness.  For, according as thou hast acknowledged Him here, so
 will He acknowledge thee there; and, if thou account Him here
 superfluous, He will not account thee one of those who have known Him
 and confessed Him.

 "These may suffice thy Majesty; and, if they be too many, yet deign to
 accept them." [3588]

 Here endeth Melito.

 [3548] "Which was delivered in the presence...and in which etc."  This
 appears to be the sense intended, and is that given by M. Renan:
 "Sermo qui factus est."  Cureton renders, "Who was in the presence,
 etc.," and supposes that Melito first saw and conversed with the
 emperor, and afterwards wrote this discourse.  Melito speaks of it more
 than once as written.  This view, however, does not dispose of that
 fact that Melito is here affirmed to have "exhorted (lit., said to)
 Cæsar, etc."  It was clearly meant to be understood that the discourse,
 or speech, was spoken:  the references to writing merely show that it
 was written, either before or after the delivery.

 [3549] Cureton:  "passion."  The word *** takes both meanings.

 [3550] Lit. "sojourn beneath it."

 [3551] Cureton:  "act foolishly."

 [3552] Lit. "sight."

 [3553] Comp. Rom. x. 18.

 [3554] Cureton:  "light without envy."  But the expression resembles
 the Gk. aphthonos, ungrudgingly, without stint.

 [3555] Lit. "to the ditch is his way."  Comp. Matt. xv. 14.

 [3556] See vol. i. p. 280, this series, where the following lines are
 quoted by Justin Martyr from the Sibylline Oracles:-- "But we have
 strayed from the Immortal's ways, And worship with a dull and senseless
 mind Idols, the workmanship of our own hands, And images and figures of
 dead men."

 [3557] Cureton:  "those belonging to the Cæsars."  But the Cæsars
 themselves are clearly meant.

 [3558] Cureton:  "sacks full."  The first word is used of a leathern
 pouch or wallet, as in Luke x. 4 (Peshito) for pera.

 [3559] Lit., "they became."

 [3560] Cureton, without necessity, reads the word "Dionysius."

 [3561] Cureton renders "originally."  But comp. Judith iv. 3, where the
 same word answers to prosphatos.

 [3562] Venus.

 [3563] Cureton's conjecture of *** or *** for *** has been adopted.

 [3564] Some have identified it with Aphek, Josh. xix. 30.  The rites
 observed here were specially abominable.

 [3565] Cureton:  "the patrician."  Dr. Payne Smith, Thes. Syr. s.v.,
 regards the word as equivalent to pater tes poleos, pater civitatis, "a
 title of honour found in the Byzantine writers," and is inclined to
 think it a term belonging to the dialect of Edessa.  A similar use of
 the same adjective is quoted from Buxtorf, Lex. Chald. Talm., p. 12:
 "'vyy cognomen R. Nachmanis, qui a celebritate familiæ sic cognominatus
 est, quasi Patritius."  This view appears to be supported by the
 similar use of an adjective for a substantive above:  "persons of
 Cæsarean rank," or "Cæsars."

 [3566] Lit., "be (or, get to be) with thyself."  Cureton:  "enter into
 thyself."  The meaning appears to be, "think for thyself."

 [3567] Cureton:  "Everything cometh through His hands."  It should
 rather be, "into His hands," i.e., "He has power to do everything."
 See note 7, p. 725.

 [3568] Lit., "be running in thy mind."

 [3569] The text has ***, which M. Renan derives from the root *** and
 translates "commovetur."  This, although correct in grammar, does not
 suit the sense.  The grammars recognise the form as a possible
 Eshtaphel of ***, "tangere," but it is not found in actual use.  Dr.
 Payne Smith thinks the right reading to be ***, which gives the
 required sense.

 [3570] Or, "that which is fixed and invariable."  There seems to be a
 reference to the derivation of *** (truth) from ***, firmus (stabilis)
 fuit.  Cureton has strangely mistranslated ***, by "that which, without
 having been brought into existence, does exist."  The first *** is
 nothing but the sign of emphatic denial which is frequently appended to
 ***, and *** is the infinitive of emphasis belonging to the second ***.

 [3571] Cureton:  "materials."  The printed text has *** "drugs."  The
 correct reading, there can hardly be a doubt, is ***.

 [3572] Lit., "the property of the gold or silver," if the word *** is
 rightly taken.  Although no such derivative of *** is found in the
 lexicons, the form is possible from the Palel of that verb:  e.g. ***
 from ***.  See Hoffmann, Gram. Syr., sec. 87, 19.

 [3573] Lit. "in one fashion."

 [3574] Or, "of what pertains to it."

 [3575] Lit. "many good things."

 [3576] Lit. "be the beginner."

 [3577] Cureton is probably right in so taking the words, although the
 construction is not quite the same as in the similar sentence a little
 below.  If so, for *** we must read ***.

 [3578] Lit. "hand."

 [3579] Lit. "into an insult of God."  So M. Renan, "in opprobrium
 Dei."  Cureton, admitting that this may be the sense, renders, "an
 abomination of God," and refers to the circumstance that in Scripture
 an idol is frequently so spoken of.  But *** is not used in such
 passages (it is either ***, or, less frequently, ***), nor does it
 appear ever to have the meaning which Cureton assigns to it.

 [3580] Lit. "he."

 [3581] Lit. "hast made it."

 [3582] Lit. "heart."

 [3583] Lit. "be of opinion."

 [3584] This seems preferable to Cureton's, "and let thy children also
 follow after thee."  Had this been the meaning, probably the verb ***
 would have been used, as in the preceding sentence, not ***.

 [3585] So the Sibylline oracle, as quoted by Cureton in the Greek:--
 "And, when he would the starry steep of heaven Ascend, the Sire
 Immortal did his works With mighty blasts assail:  forthwith the winds
 Hurled prostrate from its height the towering pile, And bitter strife
 among the builders roused."

 [3586] Lit. "chosen."  The same expression, except that the similar ***
 is used for ***, occurs Sap. Sol. xiv. 6, as a translation of
 huperephanon giganton, gigantes superbi.  See Thes. Syr., s.v. ***.

 [3587] The ms. has "Antonius."

 [3588] Cureton, for the last clause, gives "as thou wilt," remarking
 that the sense is obscure.  The literal rendering is, "if thou wilt,"
 the consequent clause being unexpressed.  "If you please, accept them,"
 seems what is meant.

 II.

 From the Discourse on Soul and Body. [3589]

 For this reason did the Father send His Son from heaven without a
 bodily form, that, when He should put on a body by means of the
 Virgin's womb, and be born man, He might save man, and gather together
 those members of His which death had scattered when he divided man.

 And further on:--The earth shook, and its foundations trembled; the sun
 fled away, and the elements turned back, and the day was changed into
 night:  for they could not endure the sight of their Lord hanging on a
 tree.  The whole creation was amazed, marvelling and saying, "What new
 mystery, then, is this?  The Judge is judged, and holds his peace; the
 Invisible One is seen, and is not ashamed; the Incomprehensible is laid
 hold upon, and is not indignant; the Illimitable is circumscribed, and
 doth not resist; the Impossible suffereth, and doth not avenge; the
 Immortal dieth, and answereth not a word; the Celestial is laid in the
 grave, and endureth!  What new mystery is this?"  The whole creation, I
 say, was astonished; but, when our Lord arose from the place of the
 dead, and trampled death under foot, and bound the strong one, and set
 man free, then did the whole creation see clearly that for man's sake
 the Judge was condemned, and the Invisible was seen, and the
 Illimitable was circumscribed, and the Impassible suffered, and the
 Immortal died, and the Celestial was laid in the gave.  For our Lord,
 when He was born man, was condemned in order that He might show mercy,
 was bound in order that He might loose, was seized in order that He
 might release, suffered in order that He might feel compassion, [3590]
 died in order that He might give life, was laid in the grave that He
 might raise from the dead. [3591]

 [3589] By Melito, bishop of Sardis.

 [3590] *** seems to be the true reading, not the *** of the printed ms.

 [3591] [Such passages sustain the testimony of Jerome and others, that
 this venerable and learned Father was an eloquent preacher.]

 III.

 From the Discourse on the Cross. [3592]

 On these accounts He came to us; on these accounts, though He was
 incorporeal, He formed for Himself a body after our fashion, [3593]
 --appearing as a sheep, yet still remaining the Shepherd; being
 esteemed a servant, yet not renouncing the Sonship; being carried in
 the womb of Mary, yet arrayed in the nature of His Father; treading
 upon the earth, yet filling heaven; appearing as an infant, yet not
 discarding the eternity of His nature; being invested with a body, yet
 not circumscribing the unmixed simplicity of His Godhead; being
 esteemed poor, yet not divested of His riches; needing sustenance
 inasmuch as He was man, yet not ceasing to feed the entire world
 inasmuch as He is God; putting on the likeness of a servant, yet not
 impairing [3594] the likeness of His Father.  He sustained every
 character [3595] belonging to Him in an immutable nature:  He was
 standing before Pilate, and at the same time was sitting with His
 Father; He was nailed upon the tree, and yet was the Lord of all
 things.

 [3592] By the same.

 [3593] Or "wove--a body from our material."

 [3594] Lit. "changing."

 [3595] Lit. "He was everything."

 IV.

 On Faith. [3596]

 We have collected together extracts from the Law and the Prophets
 relating to those things which have been declared concerning our Lord
 Jesus Christ, that we may prove to your love that this Being is perfect
 reason, the Word of God; He who was begotten before the light; He who
 is Creator together with the Father; He who is the Fashioner of man; He
 who is all in all; He who among the patriarchs is Patriarch; He who in
 the law is the Law; among the priests, Chief Priest; among kings, the
 Ruler; among prophets, the Prophet; among the angels, Archangel; in the
 voice of the preacher, the Word; among spirits, the Spirit; in the
 Father, the Son; in God, God; King for ever and ever.  For this is He
 who was pilot to Noah; He who was guide to Abraham; He who was bound
 with Isaac; He who was in exile with Jacob; He who was sold with
 Joseph; He who was captain of the host with Moses; He who was the
 divider of the inheritance with Jesus the son of Nun; He who in David
 and the prophets announced His own sufferings; He who put on a bodily
 form in the Virgin; He who was born in Bethlehem; He who was wrapped in
 swaddling-clothes in the manger; He who was seen by the shepherds; He
 who was glorified by the angels; He who was worshipped by the Magi; He
 who was pointed out by John; He who gathered together the apostles; He
 who preached the kingdom; He who cured the lame; He who gave light to
 the blind; He who raised the dead; He who appeared in the temple; He
 who was not believed on by the people; He who was betrayed by Judas; He
 who was apprehended by the priests; He who was condemned by Pilate; He
 who was pierced in the flesh; He who was hanged on the tree; He who was
 buried in the earth; He who rose from the place of the dead; He who
 appeared to the apostles; He who was carried up to heaven; He who is
 seated at the right hand of the Father; He who is the repose of those
 that are departed; the recoverer of those that are lost; the light of
 those that are in darkness; the deliverer of those that are captive;
 the guide of those that go astray; the asylum of the afflicted; the
 bridegroom of the Church; the charioteer of the cherubim; the captain
 of the angels; God who is from God; the Son who is from the Father;
 Jesus Christ the King for evermore.  Amen.

 [3596] Of Melito the bishop.

 V. [3597]

 This is He who took a bodily form in the Virgin, and was hanged upon
 the tree, and was buried within the earth, and suffered not
 dissolution; He who rose from the place of the dead, and raised up men
 from the earth--from the grave below to the height of heaven.  This is
 the Lamb that was slain; this is the Lamb that opened not His mouth.
 [3598] This is He who was born of Mary, fair sheep of the fold.  This
 is He that was taken from the flock, and was led to the slaughter, and
 was slain in the evening, and was buried at night; He who had no bone
 of Him broken on the tree; He who suffered not dissolution within the
 earth; He who rose from the place of the dead, and raised up the race
 of Adam from the grave below, This is He who was put to death.  And
 where was He put to death?  In the midst of Jerusalem.  By whom?  By
 Israel:  because He cured their lame, and cleansed their lepers, and
 gave light to their blind, and raised their dead!  This was the cause
 of His death.  Thou, O Israel, wast giving commands, and He was being
 crucified; thou wast rejoicing, and He was being buried; thou wast
 reclining on a soft couch, and He was watching in the grave and the
 shroud. [3599] O Israel, transgressor of the law, why hast thou
 committed this new iniquity, subjecting the Lord to new
 sufferings--thine own Lord, Him who fashioned thee, Him who made thee,
 Him who honoured thee, who called thee Israel?  But thou hast not been
 found to be Israel:  for thou hast not seen God, nor understood the
 Lord.  Thou hast not known, O Israel, that this was the first-born of
 God, who was begotten before the sun, who made the light to shine
 forth, who lighted up the day, who separated the darkness, who fixed
 the first foundations, who poised the earth, who collected the ocean,
 who stretched out the firmament, who adorned the world.  Bitter were
 thy nails, and sharp; bitter thy tongue, which thou didst whet; bitter
 was Judas, to whom thou gavest hire; bitter thy false witnesses, whom
 thou stirredst up; bitter thy gall, which thou preparedst; bitter thy
 vinegar, which thou madest; bitter thy hands, filled with blood.  Thou
 slewest thy Lord, and He was lifted up upon the tree; and an
 inscription was fixed above, to show who He was that was slain.  And
 who was this? (that which we shall not say is too shocking to hear, and
 that which we shall say is very dreadful:  nevertheless hearken, and
 tremble.)  It was He because of whom the earth quaked.  He that hung up
 the earth in space was Himself hanged up; He that fixed the heavens was
 fixed with nails; He that bore up the earth was borne up on a tree; the
 Lord of all was subjected to ignominy in a naked body--God put to
 death! the King of Israel slain with Israel's right hand!  Alas for the
 new wickedness of the new murder!  The Lord was exposed with naked
 body:  He was not deemed worthy even of covering; and, in order that He
 might not be seen, the luminaries turned away, and the day became
 darkened [3600] because they slew God, who hung naked on the tree.  It
 was not the body of our Lord that the luminaries covered with darkness
 when they set, [3601] but the eyes of men.  For, because the people
 quaked not, the earth quaked; because they were not affrighted, the
 earth was affrighted.  Thou smotest thy Lord:  thou also hast been
 smitten upon the earth.  And thou indeed liest dead; but He is risen
 from the place of the dead, and ascended to the height of heaven,
 having suffered for the sake of those who suffer, and having been bound
 for the sake of Adam's race which was imprisoned, and having been
 judged for the sake of him who was condemned, and having been buried
 for the sake of him who was buried.

 And further on:--This is He who made the heaven and the earth, and in
 the beginning, together with the Father, fashioned man; who was
 announced by means of the law and the prophets; who put on a bodily
 form in the Virgin; who was hanged upon the tree; who was buried in the
 earth; who rose from the place of the dead, and ascended to the height
 of heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of the Father.

 [3597] By Melito, bishop of Attica.  [Of this epigraph, which becomes
 Ittica below, I have never seen a sufficient explanation.]

 [3598] Lit. "the Lamb without voice."

 [3599] The Greek glossokomon.

 [3600] [For Phlegon's testimony, see references, vol. vii. p. 257.  But
 note Lightfoot, Ap. F., part ii. vol. i. p. 512; his remark on Origen,
 Celsus, vol. iv. p. 437, this series.]

 [3601] This is the rendering of ***; but Cureton has "fled," as though
 he read ***.

 VI. [3602]

 He that bore up the earth was borne up on a tree.  The Lord was
 subjected to ignominy with naked body--God put to death, the King of
 Israel slain!

 [3602] By the holy Melito, bishop of the city of Ittica.  [For Melito,
 in Lightfoot's Apost. Fathers, consult part ii. vol. i. pp. 133, 328,
 428, 443-446, 468-469, 494.  See Lardner, Credib., vol. ii. 157, etc.;
 Westcott, Canon, p. 246.  See Polycrates, infra; on which consult
 Schaff, History, etc., vol. ii. p. 736.  Above all, see Routh, R. S.,
 tom. i. pp. 113-153.]

 Fragments. [3603]

 I.

 From the Work on the Passover. [3604]

 When Servilius Paulus was proconsul of Asia, at the time that Sagaris
 [3605] suffered martyrdom, there arose a great controversy at Laodicea
 concerning the time of the celebration of the Passover, which on that
 occasion had happened to fall at the proper season; [3606] and this
 treatise was then written. [3607]

 [3603] The following Fragments of Melito are translated from the Greek,
 except No. IX., which is taken from the Latin.

 [3604] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iv. 26.  [Melito wrote two books on
 the Paschal and one On the Lord's Day (ho peri kuriakes logos),
 according to Eusebius.  But is this On the Lord's Day other than one of
 the books on the Paschal?  It may be doubted.  Routh refers us to
 Barnabas.  See vol. i. cap. 15, note 7, p. 147, this series.  See also
 Dionysius of Corinth, infra.]

 [3605] He was bishop of Laodicea, and suffered martyrdom during the
 persecution under M. Aurelius Antonius.--Migne.

 [3606] The churches of Asia Minor kept Easter on the fourteenth day
 from the new moon, whatever day of the week that might be; and hence
 were called Quartodecimans.  Other churches, chiefly those of the West,
 kept it on the Sunday following the day of the Jewish passover.  In the
 case here referred to, the 14th of the month occurred on the Sunday in
 question.

 [3607] Migne, not so naturally, punctuates otherwise, and renders,
 "which had happened then to fall at the proper season, and on that
 occasion this treatise was written."

 II.

 From the Apology Addressed to Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. [3608]

 For the race of the pious is now persecuted in a way contrary to all
 precedent, being harassed by a new kind of edicts [3609] everywhere in
 Asia.  For unblushing informers, and such as are greedy of other men's
 goods, taking occasion from the orders issued, carry on their robbery
 without any disguise, plundering of their property night and day those
 who are guilty of no wrong.

 If these proceedings take place at thy bidding, [3610] well and good.
 [3611] For a just sovereign will never take unjust measures; and we,
 on our part, gladly accept the honour of such a death.  This request
 only we present to thee, that thou wouldst first of all examine for
 thyself into the behaviour of these reputed agents of so much strife,
 and then come to a just decision as to whether they merit death and
 punishment, or deserve to live in safety and quiet.  But if, on the
 contrary, it shall turn out that this measure, and this new sort of
 command, which it would be unbecoming to employ even against barbarian
 foemen, do not proceed from thee, then all the more do we entreat thee
 not to leave us thus exposed to the spoliation of the populace.

 For the philosophy current with us flourished in the first instance
 among barbarians; [3612] and, when it afterwards sprang up among the
 nations under thy rule, during the distinguished reign of thy ancestor
 Augustus, it proved to be a blessing of most happy omen to thy empire.
 For from that time the Roman power has risen to greatness and
 splendour.  To this power thou hast succeeded as the much desired
 [3613] possessor; and such shalt thou continue, together with thy son,
 [3614] if thou protect that philosophy which has grown up with thy
 empire, and which took its rise with Augustus; to which also thy more
 recent ancestors paid honour, along with the other religions prevailing
 in the empire.  A very strong proof, moreover, that it was for good
 that the system we profess came to prevail at the same time that the
 empire of such happy commencement was established, is this--that ever
 since the reign of Augustus nothing untoward has happened; but, on the
 contrary, everything has contributed to the splendour and renown of the
 empire, in accordance with the devout wishes [3615] of all.  Nero and
 Domitian alone of all the emperors, imposed upon by certain
 calumniators, have cared to bring any impeachment against our
 doctrines.  They, too, are the source from which it has happened that
 the lying slanders on those who profess them have, in consequence of
 the senseless habit which prevails of taking things on hearsay, flowed
 down to our own times. [3616] But the course which they in their
 ignorance pursued was set aside by thy pious progenitors, who
 frequently and in many instances rebuked by their rescripts [3617]
 those who dared to set on foot any hostilities against them.  It
 appears, for example, that thy grandfather Adrian wrote, among others,
 to Fundanus, the proconsul then in charge of the government of Asia.
 Thy father, too, when thou thyself wast associated with him [3618] in
 the administration of the empire, wrote to the cities, forbidding them
 to take any measures adverse to us:  among the rest to the people of
 Larissa, and of Thessalonica, and of Athens, and, in short, to all the
 Greeks.  And as regards thyself, seeing that thy sentiments respecting
 the Christians [3619] are not only the same as theirs, but even much
 more generous and wise, we are the more persuaded that thou wilt do all
 that we ask of thee.

 [3608] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., l. c.

 [3609] Migne thinks that by these are meant the orders given by
 magistrates of cities on their own authority, in distinction from those
 which issued from emperors or governors of provinces.

 [3610] The reference must be to private letters:  for in any of the
 leading cities of Asia a mandate of the emperor would have been made
 public before the proconsul proceeded to execute it.--Migne.

 [3611] Esto kalos genomenon seems to be here used in the sense of kalos
 alone.  The correctness of Migne's translation, recte atque ordine
 facta sunto, is open to doubt.

 [3612] The Jews.  Porphyry calls the doctrines of the Christians
 barbaron tolmema.  See Euseb., Hist. Eccl., vi. 19.--Migne.

 [3613] Euktaios.

 [3614] Commodus, who hence appears to have been not yet associated with
 his father in the empire.--Migne.

 [3615] Euchas.

 [3616] 'Aph' hon kai to tes sukophantias alogo sunetheia peri tous
 toioutous rhuenai sumbebeke pseudos.

 [3617] 'Engraphos.

 [3618] The reading of Valesius, sou ta panta sundioikountos auto, is
 here adopted.

 [3619] Peri touton.

 III.

 From the Same Apology. [3620]

 We are not those who pay homage to stones, that are without sensation;
 but of the only God, who is before all and over all, and, moreover, we
 are worshippers of His Christ, who is veritably God the Word [3621]
 existing before all time.

 [3620] In the Chronicon Alexandrinum.

 [3621] Ontos Theou Logou.

 IV.

 From the Book of Extracts. [3622]

 Melito to his brother Onesimus, greeting:--

 As you have often, prompted by your regard for the word of God,
 expressed a wish to have some extracts made from the Law and the
 Prophets concerning the Saviour, and concerning our faith in general,
 and have desired, moreover, to obtain an accurate account of the
 Ancient Books, as regards their number and their arrangement, I have
 striven to the best of my ability to perform this task:  well knowing
 your zeal for the faith, and your eagerness to become acquainted with
 the Word, and especially because I am assured that, through your
 yearning after God, you esteem these things beyond all things else,
 engaged as you are in a struggle for eternal salvation.

 I accordingly proceeded to the East, and went to the very spot where
 the things in question were preached and took place; and, having made
 myself accurately acquainted with the books of the Old Testament, I
 have set them down below, and herewith send you the list.  Their names
 are as follows:--

 The five books of Moses--Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
 Deuteronomy; Joshua, [3623] Judges, Ruth, the four books of Kings, the
 two of Chronicles, the book of the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of
 Solomon, also called the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiastes, the Song of
 Songs, Job, the books of the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, of the twelve
 contained in a single book, Daniel, Ezekiel, Esdras.  From these I have
 made my extracts, dividing them into six books.

 [3622] In Eusebius, l. c.

 [3623] 'Iesous Naue.

 V.

 From the Catena on Genesis. [3624]

 In place of Isaac the just, a ram appeared for slaughter, in order that
 Isaac might be liberated from his bonds.  The slaughter of this animal
 redeemed Isaac from death.  In like manner, the Lord, being slain,
 saved us; being bound, He loosed us; being sacrificed, He redeemed
 us...

 For the Lord was a lamb, like the ram which Abraham saw caught in the
 bush Sabec. [3625] But this bush represented the cross, and that
 place Jerusalem, and the lamb the Lord bound for slaughter.

 For as a ram was He bound, says he concerning our Lord Jesus Christ,
 and as a lamb was He shorn, and as a sheep was He led to the slaughter,
 and as a lamb was He crucified; and He carried the cross [3626] on His
 shoulders when He was led up to the hill to be slain, as was Isaac by
 his father.  But Christ suffered, and Isaac did not suffer:  for he was
 but a type of Him who should suffer.  Yet, even when serving only for a
 type of Christ, he smote men with astonishment and fear.

 For a new mystery was presented to view,--a son led by his father to a
 mountain to be slain, whose feet he bound together, and laid him on the
 wood of the sacrifice, preparing with care [3627] whatever was
 necessary to his immolation.  Isaac on his part is silent, bound like a
 ram, not opening his mouth, nor uttering a sound with his voice.  For,
 not fearing the knife, nor quailing before the fire, nor troubled by
 the prospect of suffering, he sustained bravely the character of the
 type of the Lord.  Accordingly there lies Isaac before us, with his
 feet bound like a ram, his father standing by, with the knife all bare
 in his hand, not shrinking from shedding the blood of his son.

 [3624] From Melito of Sardis.

 [3625] The Hebrew word svk thicket, is not found as a proper name.

 [3626] To xulon.

 [3627] Meta spoudes.  Migne:  Cum festinatione.

 VI.

 Two Scholia on Genesis XXII. 13. [3628]

 The Syriac and the Hebrew use the word "suspended," [3629] as more
 clearly typifying the cross.

 The word Sabek [3630] some have rendered remission, [3631] others
 upright, [3632] as if the meaning, agreeing with the popular belief,
 were--a goat walking erect up to a bush, and there standing erect
 caught by his horns, so as to be a plain type of the cross.  For this
 reason it is not translated, because the single Hebrew word signifies
 in other languages [3633] many things.  To those, however, who ask it
 is proper to give an answer, and to say that Sabek denotes lifted up.
 [3634]

 [3628] In the edition of the LXX. published by Card. Caraffe, 1581.

 [3629] kremamenos.  The Hebrew is n'chz, the Syriac ***, both meaning
 simply "caught."

 [3630] See note on the fragment just before.

 [3631] aphesis.

 [3632] orthios.

 [3633] Lit. "when translated."

 [3634] epermenos.

 VII.

 On the Nature of Christ. [3635]

 For there is no need, to persons of intelligence, to attempt to prove,
 from the deeds of Christ subsequent to His baptism, that His soul and
 His body, His human nature [3636] like ours, were real, and no phantom
 of the imagination.  For the deeds done by Christ after His baptism,
 and especially His miracles, gave indication and assurance to the world
 of the Deity hidden in His flesh.  For, being at once both God and
 perfect man likewise, He gave us sure indications of His two natures:
 [3637] of His Deity, by His miracles during the three years that
 elapsed after His baptism; of His humanity, during the thirty similar
 periods which preceded His baptism, in which, by reason of His low
 estate [3638] as regards the flesh, He concealed the signs of His
 Deity, although He was the true God existing before all ages.

 [3635] In Anastasius of Sinai, The Guide, ch. 13.

 [3636] Or, according to Migne's punctuation, "His soul, and the body of
 His human nature."  The words are, to alethes kai aphantaston tes
 psuches autou kai tou somatos tes kath' hemas anthropines phuseos.

 [3637] Ousias.  [Comp. note 13, infra.]

 [3638] To ateles.

 VIII.

 From the Oration on Our Lord's Passion. [3639]

 God has suffered from the right hand of Israel. [3640]

 [3639] Anastasius, Guide, ch. 12.

 [3640] [O Theos peponthen hupo dexias 'Israelitidos.  Compare Tatian,
 vol. ii. p. 71, note 2; also Origen, vol. iv. p. 480, note 4, this
 series.  And see Routh, R. S., i. p. 148.  So "God put to death," p.
 757, supra.]

 IX. [3641]

 Head of the Lord--His simple Divinity; because He is the Beginning and
 Creator of all things:  in Daniel. [3642]

 The white hair of the Lord, because He is "the Ancient of Days:"  as
 above.

 The eyes of the Lord--the Divine inspection:  because He sees all
 things.  Like that in the apostle:  For all things are naked and open
 in His eyes." [3643]

 The eyelids of the Lord--hidden spiritual mysteries in the Divine
 precepts.  In the Psalm:  "His eyelids question, that is prove, the
 children of men." [3644]

 The smelling of the Lord--His delight in the prayers or works of the
 saints.  In Genesis:  "And the Lord smelled an odour of sweetness."
 [3645]

 The mouth of the Lord--His Son, or word addressed to men.  In the
 prophet, "The mouth of the Lord hath spoken;" [3646] and elsewhere,
 "They provoked His mouth to anger." [3647]

 The tongue of the Lord--His Holy Spirit.  In the Psalm:  "My tongue is
 a pen." [3648]

 The face of the Lord--His manifestation.  In Exodus, "My face shall go
 before thee;" [3649] and in the prophet, "The face of the Lord divided
 them." [3650]

 The word of the Lord--His Son.  In the Psalm:  "My heart hath uttered a
 good word." [3651]

 The arm of the Lord--His Son, by whom He hath wrought all His works.
 In the prophet Isaiah:  "And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?"
 [3652]

 The right hand of the Lord--that is, His Son; as also above in the
 Psalm:  "The right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly." [3653]

 The right hand of the Lord--electio omnis.  As in Deuteronomy:  "In His
 right hand is a fiery law." [3654]

 The wings of the Lord--Divine protection.  In the Psalm:  "In the
 shadow of Thy wings will I hope." [3655]

 The shoulder of the Lord--the Divine power, by which He condescends to
 carry the feeble.  In Deuteronomy:  "He took them up, and put them on
 His shoulders." [3656]

 The hand of the Lord--Divine operation.  In the prophet:  "Have not my
 hands made all these things?" [3657]

 The finger of the Lord--the Holy Spirit, by whose operation the tables
 of the law in Exodus are said to have been written; [3658] and in the
 Gospel:  "If I by the finger of God cast out demons" [3659]

 The fingers of the Lord--The lawgiver Moses, or the prophets.  In the
 Psalm:  "I will regard the heavens," that is, the books of the Law and
 the Prophets, "the works of Thy fingers." [3660]

 The wisdom of the Lord--His Son.  In the apostle:  "Christ the power of
 God, and the wisdom of God;" [3661] and in Solomon:  "The wisdom of the
 Lord reacheth from one end to the other mightily." [3662]

 The womb of the Lord--the hidden recess of Deity out of which He
 brought forth His Son.  In the Psalm:  "Out of the womb, before
 Lucifer, have I borne Thee." [3663]

 The feet of the Lord--His immoveableness and eternity.  In the Psalm:
 "And thick darkness was under His feet." [3664]

 The throne of the Lord--angels, or saints, or simply sovereign
 dominion. [3665] In the Psalm:  "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
 ever." [3666]

 Seat--the same as above, angels or saints, because the Lord sits upon
 these.  In the Psalm:  "The Lord sat upon His holy seat." [3667]

 The descent of the Lord--His visitation of men.  As in Micah:  "Behold,
 the Lord shall come forth from His place; He shall come down trampling
 under foot the ends of the earth." [3668] Likewise in a bad sense.
 In Genesis:  "The Lord came down to see the tower." [3669]

 The ascent of the Lord--the raising up of man, who is taken from earth
 to heaven.  In the Psalm:  "Who ascendeth above the heaven of heavens
 to the east." [3670]

 The standing of the Lord--the patience of the Deity, by which He bears
 with sinners that they may come to repentance.  As in Habakkuk:  "He
 stood and measured the earth; [3671] and in the Gospel:  "Jesus stood,
 and bade him be called," [3672] that is, the blind man.

 The transition of the Lord--His assumption of our flesh, through which
 by His birth, His death, His resurrection, His ascent into heaven, He
 made transitions, so to say.  In the Song of Songs:  "Behold, He
 cometh, leaping upon the mountains, bounding over the hills." [3673]

 The going [3674] of the Lord--His coming or visitation.  In the Psalm.

 The way of the Lord--the operation of the Deity.  As in Job, in
 speaking of the devil:  "He is the beginning of the ways of the Lord."
 [3675]

 Again:  The ways of the Lord--His precepts.  In Hosea:  "For the ways
 of the Lord are straight, and the just shall walk in them." [3676]

 The footsteps of the Lord--the signs of His secret operations.  As in
 the Psalm:  "And Thy footsteps shall not be known." [3677]

 The knowledge of the Lord--that which makes men to know Him.  To
 Abraham He says:  "Now I know that thou fearest the Lord;" [3678] that
 is, I have made thee to know.

 The ignorance of God [3679] is His disapproval.  In the Gospel:  "I
 know you not." [3680]

 The remembrance of God--His mercy, by which He rejects and has mercy on
 whom He will.  So in Genesis:  "The Lord remembered Noah;" [3681] and
 in another passage:  "The Lord hath remembered His people." [3682]

 The repentance of the Lord--His change of procedure. [3683] As in the
 book of Kings:  "It repented me that I have made Saul king." [3684]

 The anger and wrath of the Lord--the vengeance of the Deity upon
 sinners, when He bears with them with a view to punishment, does not at
 once judge them according to strict equity.  As in the Psalm:  "In His
 anger and in His wrath will He trouble them." [3685]

 The sleeping of the Lord--when, in the thoughts of some, His
 faithfulness is not sufficiently wakeful.  In the Psalm:  "Awake, why
 sleepest Thou, O Lord?" [3686]

 The watches of the Lord--in the guardianship of His elect He is always
 at hand by the presence of His Deity.  In the Psalm:  "Lo! He will not
 slumber nor sleep." [3687]

 The sitting of the Lord--His ruling.  In the Psalm:  "The Lord sitteth
 upon His holy seat." [3688]

 The footstool of the Lord--man assumed by the Word; or His saints, as
 some think.  In the Psalm:  "Worship ye His footstool, for it is holy."

 The walking of the Lord--the delight of the Deity in the walks of His
 elect.  In the prophet:  "I will walk in them, and will be their Lord."
 [3689]

 The trumpet of the Lord--His mighty voice.  In the apostle:  "At the
 command, and at the voice of the archangel, and at the trumpet of God,
 shall He descend from heaven." [3690]

 ------------------------

 [3641] From The Key.

 [3642] Dan. vii. 9, 13, 22.

 [3643] Heb. iv. 13.

 [3644] Ps. xi. 4.

 [3645] Gen. viii. 21.

 [3646] Isa. i. 20.

 [3647] Lam. i. 18.

 [3648] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [3649] Ex. xxxiii. 14.

 [3650] Lam. iv. 16.

 [3651] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [3652] Isa. liii. 1.

 [3653] Ps. cxviii. 16.

 [3654] Deut. xxxiii. 2.

 [3655] Ps. lvii. 1.

 [3656] Deut. xxxiii. 12.

 [3657] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 [3658] Ex. xxxiv. 1.

 [3659] Luke xi. 20.

 [3660] Ps. viii. 3.

 [3661] 1 Cor. i. 24.

 [3662] Sap. viii. 1.

 [3663] Ps. cx. 3.

 [3664] Ps. xviii. 9.

 [3665] Ipsa regnandi potestas.

 [3666] Ps. xlv. 6; comp. Ps. v., xxix.

 [3667] Ps. xlvii. 8.

 [3668] Mic. i. 3.

 [3669] Gen. xi. 3.

 [3670] Ps. lxviii. 33.

 [3671] Hab. iii. 6.

 [3672] Mark x. 49.

 [3673] Cant. Cant. ii. 8.

 [3674] Gressus.

 [3675] Job xl. 19.

 [3676] Hos. xiv. 10.

 [3677] Ps. lxxvii. 19.

 [3678] Gen. xxii. 12.

 [3679] Nescire Dei.

 [3680] Luke xiii. 25.

 [3681] Gen. viii. 1.

 [3682] Esther x. 12.

 [3683] Rerum mutatio.

 [3684] 1 Sam. xv. 11.

 [3685] Ps. ii. 5.

 [3686] Ps. xliv. 23.

 [3687] Ps. cxxi. 4.

 [3688] Ps. xlvii. 8.

 [3689] Ezek. xxxvii. 27.

 [3690] 1 Thess. iv. 15.  [The above has been shown to have no claim to
 be the work of Melito.  It is a compilation of the sixth century, in
 all probability.]

 Hegesippus. [3691]

 [a.d. 170.]  One of the sub-Apostolic age, a contemporary of Justin and
 of the martyrs of "the good Aurelius," we must yet distinguish
 Hegesippus [3692] from the apologists.  He is the earliest of the
 Church's chroniclers--we can hardly call him a historian.  His aims
 were noble and his character was pure; nor can we refuse him the credit
 due to a foresight of the Church's ultimate want of historical
 material, which he endeavoured to supply.

 What is commonly regarded as his defect is in reality one of his
 greatest merits as a witness:  he was a Hebrew, and looks at the Church
 from the stand-point of "James the Lord's brother."  When we observe
 his Catholic spirit, therefore, as well as his Catholic orthodoxy; his
 sympathy with the Gentile Church and Pauline faith of the Corinthians;
 his abhorrence of "the Circumcision" so far as it bred sects and
 heresies against Christ; and when we find him confirming the testimony
 of the Apostolic Fathers, and sustaining the traditions of Antioch by
 those of Jerusalem,--we have double reason to cherish his name, and to
 treasure up "the fragments that remain" of his works.  That touching
 episode of the kindred of Christ, as they appeared before Domitian, has
 always impressed my imagination as worthy to be classed with the story
 of St. John and the robber, as one of the most suggestive incidents of
 early Christian history.  We must lament the loss of other portions of
 the Memoirs which were known to exist in the seventeenth century.  He
 was a traveller, and must have seen much of the Apostolic churches in
 the East and West; and the mere scraps we have of his narrative
 concerning Corinth and Rome excite a natural curiosity as to the rest,
 which may lead to gratifying discoveries.

 [3691] Westcott, Canon, p. 228.

 [3692] Routh, Rel. Sac., vol. i. pp. 205-219.  Lightfoot is culpably
 lax in calling Rome "the Papal throne" (temp. Anicet.), and mistaking
 alike the testimony of Irenæus and of our author.  Ap. F., part ii.
 vol. i. p. 435.

 Fragments from His Five Books of Commentaries on the Acts of the
 Church.

 I.

 Concerning the Martyrdom of James, the Brother of the Lord, from Book
 V. [3693]

 James, the Lord's brother, succeeds to the government of the Church, in
 conjunction with the apostles.  He has been universally called the
 Just, from the days of the Lord down to the present time.  For many
 bore the name of James; but this one was holy from his mother's womb.
 He drank no wine or other intoxicating liquor, [3694] nor did he eat
 flesh; no razor came upon his head; he did not anoint himself with oil,
 nor make use of the bath.  He alone was permitted to enter the holy
 place: [3695] for he did not wear any woollen garment, but fine linen
 only.  He alone, I say, was wont to go into the temple:  and he used to
 be found kneeling on his knees, begging forgiveness for the people--so
 that the skin of his knees became horny like that of a camel's, by
 reason of his constantly bending the knee in adoration to God, and
 begging forgiveness for the people.  Therefore, in consequence of his
 pre-eminent justice, he was called the Just, and Oblias, [3696] which
 signifies in Greek Defence of the People, and Justice, in accordance
 with what the prophets declare concerning him.

 Now some persons belonging to the seven sects existing among the
 people, which have been before described by me in the Notes, asked
 him:  "What is the door of Jesus?"  And he replied that He was the
 Saviour.  In consequence of this answer, some believed that Jesus is
 the Christ.  But the sects before mentioned did not believe, either in
 a resurrection or in the coming of One to requite every man according
 to his works; but those who did believe, believed because of James.
 So, when many even of the ruling class believed, there was a commotion
 among the Jews, and scribes, and Pharisees, who said:  "A little more,
 and we shall have all the people looking for Jesus as the Christ.

 They came, therefore, in a body to James, and said:  "We entreat thee,
 restrain the people:  for they are gone astray in their opinions about
 Jesus, as if he were the Christ.  We entreat thee to persuade all who
 have come hither for the day of the passover, concerning Jesus.  For we
 all listen to thy persuasion; since we, as well as all the people, bear
 thee testimony that thou art just, and showest partiality to none.  Do
 thou, therefore, persuade the people not to entertain erroneous
 opinions concerning Jesus:  for all the people, and we also, listen to
 thy persuasion.  Take thy stand, then, upon the summit [3697] of the
 temple, that from that elevated spot thou mayest be clearly seen, and
 thy words may be plainly audible to all the people.  For, in order to
 attend the passover, all the tribes have congregated hither, and some
 of the Gentiles also."

 The aforesaid scribes and Pharisees accordingly set James on the summit
 of the temple, and cried aloud to him, and said:  "O just one, whom we
 are all bound to obey, forasmuch as the people is in error, and follows
 Jesus the crucified, do thou tell us what is the door of Jesus, the
 crucified."  And he answered with a loud voice:  "Why ask ye me
 concerning Jesus the Son of man?  He Himself sitteth in heaven, at the
 right hand of the Great Power, and shall come on the clouds of heaven."

 And, when many were fully convinced by these words, and offered praise
 for the testimony of James, and said, "Hosanna to the son of David,"
 then again the said Pharisees and scribes said to one another, "We have
 not done well in procuring this testimony to Jesus.  But let us go up
 and throw him down, that they may be afraid, and not believe him."  And
 they cried aloud, and said:  "Oh! oh! the just man himself is in
 error."  Thus they fulfilled the Scripture written in Isaiah:  "Let us
 away with the just man, because he is troublesome to us:  therefore
 shall they eat the fruit of their doings."  So they went up and threw
 down the just man, and said to one another:  "Let us stone James the
 Just."  And they began to stone him:  for he was not killed by the
 fall; but he turned, and kneeled down, and said:  "I beseech Thee, Lord
 God our Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

 And, while they were thus stoning him to death, one of the priests, the
 sons of Rechab, the son of Rechabim, to whom testimony is borne by
 Jeremiah the prophet, began to cry aloud, saying:  "Cease, what do ye?
 The just man is praying for us."  But one among them, one of the
 fullers, took the staff with which he was accustomed to wring out the
 garments he dyed, and hurled it at the head of the just man.

 And so he suffered martyrdom; and they buried him on the spot, and the
 pillar erected to his memory still remains, close by the temple.  This
 man was a true witness to both Jews and Greeks that Jesus is the
 Christ.

 And shortly after Vespasian besieged Judæa, taking them captive.

 [3693] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., ii. 23.  [Comp. Isa. iii. 10, Sept.]

 [3694] Sikera.

 [3695] Ta hagia.

 [3696] The reference appears to be to the Hebrew word phl, a rising
 ground, which was applied as a proper name to a fortified ridge of
 Mount Zion.  See 2 Chron. xxvii. 3.  It has been proposed to read
 ekaleito Saddik kai 'Ozliam, ho estin dikaios kai perioche tou laou.
 The text, in which not only a Hebrew word but also a Greek (Dikaios) is
 explained in Greek, can hardly give the correct reading.  [The
 translator suggests 'Oblias as the probable reading of the LXX., though
 it is corrupted as above.]

 [3697] Pterugion.  [Matt. iv. 5.]

 Concerning the Relatives of Our Saviour. [3698]

 There still survived of the kindred of the Lord the grandsons of Judas,
 who according to the flesh was called his brother.  These were informed
 against, as belonging to the family of David, and Evocatus brought them
 before Domitian Cæsar:  for that emperor dreaded the advent of Christ,
 as Herod had done.

 So he asked them whether they were of the family of David; and they
 confessed they were.  Next he asked them what property they had, or how
 much money they possessed.  They both replied that they had only 9000
 denaria between them, each of them owning half that sum; but even this
 they said they did not possess in cash, but as the estimated value of
 some land, consisting of thirty-nine plethra only, out of which they
 had to pay the dues, and that they supported themselves by their own
 labour.  And then they began to hold out their hands, exhibiting, as
 proof of their manual labour, the roughness of their skin, and the
 corns raised on their hands by constant work.

 Being then asked concerning Christ and His kingdom, what was its
 nature, and when and where it was to appear, they returned answer that
 it was not of this world, nor of the earth, but belonging to the sphere
 of heaven and angels, and would make its appearance at the end of time,
 when He shall come in glory, and judge living and dead, and render to
 every one according to the course of his life. [3699]

 Thereupon Domitian passed no condemnation upon them, but treated them
 with contempt, as too mean for notice, and let them go free.  At the
 same time he issued a command, and put a stop to the persecution
 against the Church.

 When they were released they became leaders [3700] of the churches, as
 was natural in the case of those who were at once martyrs and of the
 kindred of the Lord.  And, after the establishment of peace to the
 Church, their lives were prolonged to the reign of Trajan.

 [3698] Also in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iii. 20.

 [3699] Ta epitedeumata autou.

 [3700] Egesasthai.

 Concerning the Martyrdom of Symeon the son of Clopas, Bishop of
 Jerusalem. [3701]

 Some of these heretics, forsooth, laid an information against Symeon
 the son of Clopas, as being of the family of David, and a Christian.
 And on these charges he suffered martyrdom when he was 120 years old,
 in the reign of Trajan Cæsar, when Atticus was consular legate [3702]
 in Syria.  And it so happened, says the same writer, that, while
 inquiry was then being made for those belonging to the royal tribe of
 the Jews, the accusers themselves were convicted of belonging to it.
 With show of reason could it be said that Symeon was one of those who
 actually saw and heard the Lord, on the ground of his great age, and
 also because the Scripture of the Gospels makes mention of Mary the
 daughter of Clopas, who, as our narrative has shown already, was his
 father.

 The same historian mentions others also, of the family of one of the
 reputed brothers of the Saviour, named Judas, as having survived until
 this same reign, after the testimony they bore for the faith of Christ
 in the time of Domitian, as already recorded.

 He writes as follows:  They came, then, and took the presidency of
 every church, as witnesses for Christ, and as being of the kindred of
 the Lord.  And, after profound peace had been established in every
 church, they remained down to the reign of Trajan Cæsar:  that is,
 until the time when he who was sprung from an uncle of the Lord, the
 aforementioned Symeon son of Clopas, was informed against by the
 various heresies, and subjected to an accusation like the rest, and for
 the same cause, before the legate Atticus; and, while suffering outrage
 during many days, he bore testimony for Christ:  so that all, including
 the legate himself, were astonished above measure that a man 120 years
 old should have been able to endure such torments.  He was finally
 condemned to be crucified.

 ...Up to that period the Church had remained like a virgin pure and
 uncorrupted:  for, if there were any persons who were disposed to
 tamper with the wholesome rule of the preaching of salvation, [3703]
 they still lurked in some dark place of concealment or other.  But,
 when the sacred band of apostles had in various ways closed their
 lives, and that generation of men to whom it had been vouchsafed to
 listen to the Godlike Wisdom with their own ears had passed away, then
 did the confederacy of godless error take its rise through the
 treachery of false teachers, who, seeing that none of the apostles any
 longer survived, at length attempted with bare and uplifted head to
 oppose the preaching of the truth by preaching "knowledge falsely so
 called."

 [3701] Also in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iii. 32.

 [3702] Upatikou.  [St. John died a few years before.]

 [3703] Tou soteriou kerugmatos.

 Concerning His Journey to Rome, and the Jewish Sects. [3704]

 And the church of the Corinthians continued in the orthodox faith
 [3705] up to the time when Primus was bishop in Corinth.  I had some
 intercourse with these brethren on my voyage to Rome, when I spent
 several days with the Corinthians, during which we were mutually
 refreshed by the orthodox faith.

 On my arrival at Rome, I drew up a list of the succession of bishops
 down to Anicetus, whose deacon was Eleutherus.  To Anicetus succeeded
 Soter, and after him came Eleutherus.  But in the case of every
 succession, [3706] and in every city, the state of affairs is in
 accordance with the teaching of the Law and of the Prophets and of the
 Lord....

 And after James the Just had suffered martyrdom, as had the Lord also
 and on the same account, again Symeon the son of Clopas, descended from
 the Lord's uncle, is made bishop, his election being promoted by all as
 being a kinsman of the Lord.

 Therefore was the Church called a virgin, for she was not as yet
 corrupted by worthless teaching. [3707] Thebulis it was who,
 displeased because he was not made bishop, first began to corrupt her
 by stealth.  He too was connected with the seven sects which existed
 among the people, like Simon, from whom come the Simoniani; and
 Cleobius, from whom come the Cleobiani; and Doritheus, from whom come
 the Dorithiani; and Gorthæus, from whom come the Gortheani; Masbothæus,
 from whom come the Masbothæi.  From these men also come the
 Menandrianists, and the Marcionists, and the Carpocratians, and the
 Valentinians, and the Basilidians, and the Saturnilians.  Each of these
 leaders in his own private and distinct capacity brought in his own
 private opinion.  From these have come false Christs, false prophets,
 false apostles--men who have split up the one Church into parts [3708]
 through their corrupting doctrines, uttered in disparagement of God and
 of His Christ....

 There were, moreover, various opinions in the matter of circumcision
 among the children of Israel, held by those who were opposed to the
 tribe of Judah and to Christ:  such as the Essenes, the Galileans, the
 Hemerobaptists, the Masbothæi, the Samaritans, the Sadducees, the
 Pharisees.

 ------------------------

 [3704] Also in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iv. 22.

 [3705] 'En to ortho logo.

 [3706] [Elucidation, p. 785.]

 [3707] 'Akoais mataiais.

 [3708] 'Emerisan ten enosin tes ekklesias.  [Acts xx. 29-31.]

 Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth.

 [a.d. 170.]  Eusebius is almost diffuse in what he tells us of this
 Dionysius, [3709] "who was appointed over the church at Corinth, and
 imparted freely, not only to his own people, but to others, and those
 abroad also, the blessings of his divine labours."  He wrote "Catholic
 Epistles;" he addressed an epistle to the Spartans and the Athenians;
 and, as Eusebius says, Dionysius the Areopagite, the convert of St.
 Paul, was the first bishop of Athens. [3710] He wrote to the
 Nicomedians, refuting Marcion, and closely adhering to "the rule of
 faith."  In an epistle to the Gortynians and others in Crete, he
 praises Philip for his courageous ministry, and warns them against the
 heretics.  He seems to recognise Palmas as bishop of Amastris and
 Pontus, and adds expositions of Scripture, and rules regarding
 marriage, its purity and sanctity.  He also inculcates tenderness to
 penitent lapsers and backsliders.  With Pinytus, bishop of the
 Gnossians, he corresponds on similar subjects; but Pinytus, while he
 thanks him and commends his clemency, evidently regards him as too much
 inclined to furnish "food for babes," and counsels him to add "strong
 meat for those of full age."  He also writes to Chrysophora, his most
 faithful sister, imparting spiritual instruction.

 Fragments from a Letter to the Roman Church.

 I.

 For this has been your custom from the beginning, to do good to all the
 brethren in various ways, and to send resources to many churches which
 are in every city, thus refreshing the poverty of the needy, and
 granting subsidies to the brethren who are in the mines. [3711]
 Through the resources which ye have sent from the beginning, ye Romans,
 keep up the custom of the Romans handed down by the fathers, which your
 blessed Bishop Soter has not only preserved, but added to, sending a
 splendid gift to the saints, and exhorting with blessed words those
 brethren who go up to Rome, as an affectionate father his children.

 II.

 From the Same Epistle. [3712]

 We passed this holy Lord's day, in which we read your letter, from the
 constant reading of which we shall be able to draw admonition, even as
 from the reading of the former one you sent us written through Clement.

 III.

 From the Same.

 Therefore you also have by such admonition joined in close union the
 churches that were planted by Peter and Paul, that of the Romans and
 that of the Corinthians:  for both of them went [3713] to our Corinth,
 and taught us in the same way as they taught you when they went to
 Italy; and having taught you, they suffered martyrdom at the same time.
 [3714]

 IV.

 From the Same. [3715]

 For I wrote letters when the brethren requested me to write.  And these
 letters the apostles of the devil have filled with tares, taking away
 some things and adding others, for whom a woe is in store.  It is not
 wonderful, then, if some have attempted to adulterate the Lord's
 writings, when they have formed designs against those which are not
 such. [3716]

 ------------------------

 [3709] Book iv. cap. 24, from which these Fragments are collected.  See
 Westcott, On the Canon, p. 206.

 [3710] See Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers, part ii. vol. i. p. 555, where he
 corrects the reading kai Polukarpos.

 [3711] [Routh (also on Pinytus and Soter), R. S., p. 177.  This series,
 vol. vi. p. 102, note 3.  Note also Lightfoot, A. F., part ii. vol. ii.
 p. 192, note 1; and Westcott, Canon, p. 206.]

 [3712] [Comp. p. 758, note 8, supra.  Also Ignatius, vol. i. p. 63, at
 note 2, this series.]

 [3713] mss. "planted."

 [3714] The text is evidently corrupt.

 [3715] [For the reply of Pinytus, and what is said by Eusebius of seven
 other epistles, see Routh, R. S., vol. i. pp. 181-184.]

 [3716] i.e., of such importance or of such a character.

 Rhodon. [3717]

 [a.d. 180.]  This Rhodon [3718] was supposed by St. Jerome to have been
 the author of the work against the Cataphrygians, ascribed to Asterius
 Urbanus more probably. [3719] Eusebius [3720] gives us the fragment
 from his work against Marcion, addressed to Callistion, which is here
 translated.  He tells us that he was a pupil of Tatian, and expresses
 an intention of furnishing original solutions of Scriptural problems
 stated by Tatian, [3721] and by that author explained in a manner
 apparently unsatisfactory.  He also appears to have written against the
 blasphemous Apelles, [3722] whose Hexaëmeron was an attempt to refute
 Moses; but whether he also fulfilled his promise concerning an
 'Epilusis of Tatian's Problems (or Questions), seems doubtful.  Routh
 has devoted to the fragment here translated six pages of notes, [3723]
 which he subjoins to the Greek text (of Eusebius) and a Latin version
 of the same.

 Wherefore also they [3724] disagree among themselves, maintaining as
 they do an opinion which has no consistency with itself.  For one of
 their herd, Apelles, who prides himself on the strictness of his life,
 [3725] and on his age, admits that there is only one first principle,
 [3726] yet says that the prophecies have come from an opposing spirit,
 in which opinion he is influenced by the responses of a soothsaying
 [3727] maid named Philumene.  But others, among whom are Potitus and
 Basilicus, like Marcion [3728] himself, introduce two first
 principles.  These men, following the Pontic wolf, and not being able
 to discover any more than he the division of things, have had to
 recourse to rash assertion, and declared the existence of two first
 principles simply and without proof.  Others of them, again, drifting
 from bad to worse, assume not two only, but even three natures.  Of
 these men the leader and champion is Syneros, as those who adopt his
 teaching say....

 For the old man Apelles entered into conversation with us, and was
 convicted of uttering many false opinions.  For example, he asserted
 that men should on no account examine into their creed, [3729] but that
 every one ought to continue to the last in the belief he has once
 adopted.  For he declared that those who had rested their hope on the
 Crucified One would be saved, provided only they were found living in
 the practice of good works.  But the most perplexing of all the
 doctrines laid down by him was, as we have remarked before, what he
 said concerning God:  for he affirmed that there was only one first
 principle, precisely as our own faith teaches....

 On asking him, "Where do you get proof of this? or how are you able to
 assert that there is only one first principle? tell us,"--he said that
 the prophecies refuted themselves, because they had uttered nothing at
 all that was true:  for that they were discordant and false, and
 self-contradictory.  As to the question, "How does it appear that there
 is only one first principle?" he said he could not tell, only he was
 impelled to that belief.  On my thereupon conjuring him to speak the
 truth, he solemnly declared that he was expressing his real sentiments;
 and that he did not know "how" there could be one uncreated God, but
 that he believed the fact.  Here I burst into laughter and rebuked him,
 because he professed to be a teacher, and yet was unable to confirm by
 arguments what he taught.

 ------------------------

 [3717] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 13.

 [3718] Or Rhodo.

 [3719] Vol. vii. pp. 333-338, this series, where I neglected to insert
 a reference to Routh, Rel. Sac., vol. ii. pp. 183-217.

 [3720] H. E., book v. cap. 13.

 [3721] Vol. ii. p. 62, this series.

 [3722] See Origen, vol. iv. p. 567, this series.

 [3723] Rel. Sac., vol. i. pp. 437-446.

 [3724] The Marcionites.

 [3725] Politeia.  See Migne's note.

 [3726] 'Archen.  [See vol. vii. p. 365, this series.]

 [3727] Daimonoses.

 [3728] Some copies have "Marcion the sailor," and so Tertullian (de
 Præscriptionibus) speaks of him.  [Vol. iii. cap. 30, p. 257, this
 series.]

 [3729] Ton logon.

 Maximus, Bishop of Jerusalem.

 [a.d. 185-196.]  He was a noted character among Christians, according
 to Eusebius; living, according to Jerome, under Commodus and Severus.
 He wrote on the inveterate question concerning the Origin of Evil; and
 the fragment here translated, as given by Eusebius, is also textually
 cited by Origen against the Marcionites, [3730] if that Dialogue be
 his.  The reader will not fail to recollect that liberal citations out
 of this work are also to be found in Methodius, On Free-Will. [3731]
 But all who desire fuller information on the subject will be gratified
 by the learned prolegomena and notes of Routh, to which I refer them.
 [3732] Whether Maximus was the bishop of Jerusalem (a.d. 185)
 mentioned by Eusebius as presiding in that See in the sixth year of
 Commodus, seems to be uncertain.

 From the Book Concerning Matter, or in Defence of the Proposition that
 Matter is Created, and is Not the Cause of Evil. [3733]

 "That there cannot exist two uncreated substances at one and the same
 time, I presume that you hold equally with myself.  You appear,
 however, very decidedly to have assumed, and to have introduced into
 the argument, this principle, that we must of unavoidable necessity
 maintain one of two things:  either that God is separate from matter;
 or else, on the contrary, that He is indissolubly connected with it.

 "If, then, any one should choose to assert that He exists in union with
 matter, that would be saying that there is only one uncreated
 substance.  For either of the two must constitute a part of the other;
 and, since they form parts of each other, they cannot be two uncreated
 substances.  Just as, in speaking of man, we do not describe him as
 subdivided into a number of distinct parts, each forming a separate
 created substance, but, as reason requires us to do, assert that he was
 made by God a single created substance consisting of many parts,--so,
 in like manner, if God is not separate from matter, we are driven to
 the conclusion that there is only one uncreated substance.

 "If, on the other hand, it be affirmed that He is separate from matter,
 it necessarily follows that there is some other substance intermediate
 between the two, by which their separation is made apparent.  For it is
 impossible that one thing should be shown to be severed by an interval
 from another, unless there be something else by which the interval
 between the two is produced.  This principle, too, holds good not only
 with regard to this or any other single case, but in any number of
 cases you please.  For the same argument which we have employed in
 dealing with the two uncreated substances must in like manner be valid
 if the substances in question be given as three.  For in regard to
 these also I should have to inquire whether they are separate from one
 another, or whether, on the contrary, each of them is united to its
 fellow.  For, if you should say that they are united, you would hear
 from me the same argument as before; but if, on the contrary, you
 should say that they are separate, you could not escape the unavoidable
 assumption of a separating medium.

 "If, again, perchance any one should think that there is a third view
 which may be consistently maintained with regard to uncreated
 substances,--namely, that God is not separate from matter, nor yet, on
 the other hand, united to it as a part, but that God exists in matter
 as in a place, or possibly matter exists in God,--let such a person
 observe the consequence:--

 "That, if we make matter God's place, we must of necessity admit that
 He can be contained, [3734] and that He is circumscribed by matter.
 Nay, further, he must grant that He is, in the same way as matter,
 driven about hither and thither, unable to maintain His place and to
 stay where He is, since that in which He exists is perpetually being
 driven about in one direction or another.  Beside this, he must also
 admit that God has had His place among the worst kind of elements.  For
 if matter was once in disorder, and if he reduced it to order for the
 purpose of rendering it better, there was a time when God existed among
 the disordered elements of matter.

 "I might also fairly put this question:  whether God filled the whole
 of matter, or was in some part of it.  If any one should choose to say
 that God was in some part of matter, he would be making Him
 indefinitely smaller than matter, inasmuch as a part of it contained
 the whole of Him; [3735] but, if he maintained that He pervaded the
 whole of matter, I need to be informed how He became the Fashioner of
 this matter.  For we must necessarily assume, either that there was on
 the part of God a contraction, [3736] so to speak, of Himself, and a
 withdrawal from matter, whereupon He proceeded to fashion that from
 which He had retired; or else that He fashioned Himself in conjunction
 with matter, in consequence of having no place to retire to.

 "But suppose it to be maintained, on the other hand, that matter is in
 God, it will behove us similarly to inquire, whether we are to
 understand by this that He is sundered from Himself, and that, just
 like the air, which contains various kinds of animals, so is He
 sundered and divided into parts for the reception of those creatures
 which from time to time exist in [3737] Him; or whether matter is in
 God as in a place,--for instance, as water is contained in earth.  For
 should we say as in air,' we should perforce be speaking of God as
 divisible into parts; but if as water in earth,' and if matter was, as
 is admitted, in confusion and disorder, and moreover also contained
 what was evil, we should have to admit that God is the place of
 disorder and evil.  But this it does not seem to me consistent with
 reverence to say, but hazardous rather.  For you contend that matter is
 uncreated, [3738] that you may not have to admit that God is the author
 of evil; and yet, while aiming to escape this difficulty, you make Him
 the receptacle of evil.

 "If you had stated that your suspicion that matter was uncreated arose
 from the nature of created things as we find them, [3739] I should have
 employed abundant argument in proof that it cannot be so.  But, since
 you have spoken of the existence of evil as the cause of such
 suspicion, I am disposed to enter upon a separate examination of this
 point.  For, when once it has been made clear how it is that evil
 exists, and when it is seen to be impossible to deny that God is the
 author of evil, in consequence of His having had recourse to matter for
 His materials, [3740] it seems to me that a suspicion of this kind
 disappears.

 "You assert, then, that matter, destitute of all qualities good or bad,
 co-existed at the outset with God, and that out of it He fashioned the
 world as we now find it."

 "Such is my opinion."

 "Well, then, if matter was without any qualities, and the world has
 come into existence from God, and if the world possesses qualities, the
 author of those qualities must be God."

 "Exactly so."

 "Since, too, I heard you say yourself just now that out of nothing
 [3741] nothing can possibly come, give me an answer to the question I
 am about to ask you.  You seem to me to think that the qualities of the
 world have not sprung from pre-existing [3742] qualities, and moreover
 that they are something different from the substances themselves."

 "I do."

 "If, therefore, God did not produce the qualities in question from
 qualities already existing, nor yet from substances, by reason that
 they are not substances, the conclusion is inevitable, that they were
 made by God out of nothing.  So that you seemed to me to affirm more
 than you were warranted to do, when you said that it had been proved
 impossible to hold the opinion [3743] that anything was made by God out
 of nothing.

 "But let us put the matter thus.  We see persons among ourselves making
 certain things out of nothing, however true it may be that they make
 them by means of something. [3744] Let us take our illustration, say,
 from builders.  These men do not make cities out of cities; nor,
 similarly, temples out of temples.  Nay, if you suppose that, because
 the substances necessary for these constructions are already provided,
 therefore they make them out of that which already exists, your
 reasoning is fallacious.  For it is not the substance that makes the
 city or the temples, but the art which is employed about the
 substance.  Neither, again, does the art proceed from any art inhering
 in the substances, but it arises independently of any such art in them.

 "But I fancy you will meet the argument by saying that the artist
 produces the art which is manifest in the substance he has fashioned
 out of the art which he himself already has.  In reply to this,
 however, I think it may be fairly said, that neither in man does art
 spring from any already existing art.  For we cannot possibly allow
 that art exists by itself, since it belongs to the class of things
 which are accidentals, and which receive their existence only when they
 appear in connection with substance.  For man will exist though there
 should be no architecture, but the latter will have no existence unless
 there be first of all man.  Thus we cannot avoid the conclusion, that
 it is the nature of art to spring up in man out of nothing.  If, then,
 we have shown that this is the case with man, we surely must allow that
 God can make not only the qualities of substances out of nothing, but
 also the substances themselves.  For, if it appears possible that
 anything whatever can be made out of nothing, it is proved that this
 may be the case with substances also.

 "But, since you are specially desirous of inquiring about the origin of
 evil, I will proceed to the discussion of this topic.  And I should
 like to ask you a few questions.  Is it your opinion that things evil
 are substances, or that they are qualities of substances?"

 "Qualities of substances, I am disposed to say."

 "But matter was destitute of qualities and of form:  this I assumed at
 the outset of the discussion.  Therefore, if things evil are qualities
 of substances, and matter was destitute of qualities, and you have
 called God the author of qualities, God will also be the former of that
 which is evil.  Since, then, it is not possible, on this supposition
 any more than on the other, to speak of God as not the cause of evil,
 it seems to me superfluous to add matter to Him, as if that were the
 cause of evil.  If you have any reply to make to this, begin your
 argument."

 "If, indeed, our discussion had arisen from a love of contention, I
 should not be willing to have the inquiry raised a second time about
 the origin of evil; but, since we are prompted rather by friendship and
 the good of our neighbour to engage in controversy, I readily consent
 to have the question raised afresh on this subject.  You have no doubt
 long been aware of the character of my mind, and of the object at which
 I aim in dispute:  that I have no wish to vanquish falsehood by
 plausible reasoning, but rather that truth should be established in
 connection with thorough investigation.  You yourself, too, are of the
 same mind, I am well assured.  Whatever method, therefore, you deem
 successful for the discovery of truth, do not shrink from using it.
 For, by following a better course of argument, you will not only confer
 a benefit on yourself, but most assuredly on me also, instructing me
 concerning matters of which I am ignorant."

 "You seem clearly to agree with [3745] me, that things evil are in some
 sort substances: [3746] for, apart from substances, I do not see them
 to have any existence.  Since, then, my good friend, you say that
 things evil are substances, it is necessary to inquire into the nature
 of substance.  Is it your opinion that substance is a kind of bodily
 structure?" [3747]

 "It is."

 "And does that bodily structure exist by itself, without the need of
 any one to come and give it existence?"

 "Yes."

 "And does it seem to you that things evil are connected with certain
 courses of action?"

 "That is my belief."

 "And do actions come into existence only when an actor is there?"

 "Yes."

 "And, when there is no actor, neither will his action ever take place?"

 "It will not."

 "If, therefore, substance is a kind of bodily structure, and this does
 not stand in need of some one in and through whom it may receive its
 existence, and if things evil are actions of some one, and actions
 require some one in and through whom they receive their
 existence,--things evil will not' be substances.  And if things evil
 are not substances, and murder is an evil, and is the action of some
 one, it follows that murder is not a substance.  But, if you insist
 that agents are substance, then I myself agree with you.  A man, for
 instance, who is a murderer, is, in so far as he is a man, a substance;
 but the murder which he commits is not a substance, but a work of the
 substance.  Moreover, we speak of a man sometimes as bad because he
 commits murder; and sometimes, again, because he performs acts of
 beneficence, as good:  and these names adhere to the substance, in
 consequence of the things which are accidents of it, which, however,
 are not the substance itself.  For neither is the substance murder,
 nor, again, is it adultery, nor is it any other similar evil.  But,
 just as the grammarian derives his name from grammar, and the orator
 from oratory, and the physician from physic, though the substance is
 not physic, nor yet oratory, nor grammar, but receives its appellation
 from the things which are accidents of it, from which it popularly
 receives its name, though it is not any one of them,--so in like manner
 it appears to me that the substance receives name from things regarded
 as evil, though it is not itself any one of them.

 "I must beg you also to consider that, if you represent some other
 being as the cause of evil to men, he also, in so far as he acts in
 them, and incites them to do evil, is himself evil, by reason of the
 things he does.  For he too is said to be evil, for the simple reason
 that he is the doer of evil things; but the things which a being does
 are not the being himself, but his actions, from which he receives his
 appellation, and is called evil.  For if we should say that the things
 he does are himself, and these consist in murder, and adultery, and
 theft, and such-like, these things will be himself.  And if these
 things are himself, and if when they take place they get to have a
 substantial existence, [3748] but by not taking place they also cease
 to exist, and if these things are done by men,--men will be the doers
 of these things, and the causes of existing and of no longer existing.
 But, if you affirm that these things are his actions, he gets to be
 evil from the things he does, not from those things of which the
 substance of him consists.

 "Moreover, we have said that he is called evil from those things which
 are accidents of the substance, which are not themselves the
 substance:  as a physician from the art of physic.  But, if he receives
 the beginning of his existence from the actions he performs, he too
 began to be evil, and these evil things likewise began to exist.  And,
 if so, an evil being will not be without a beginning, nor will evil
 things be unoriginated, since we have said that they are originated by
 him."

 "The argument relating to the opinion I before expressed, you seem to
 me, my friend, to have handled satisfactorily:  for, from the premises
 you assumed in the discussion, I think you have drawn a fair
 conclusion.  For, beyond doubt, if matter was at first destitute of
 qualities, and if God is the fashioner of the qualities it now has, and
 if evil things are qualities, God is the author of those evil things.
 The argument, then, relating to that opinion we may consider as well
 discussed, and to me it now seems false to speak of matter as destitute
 of qualities.  For it is not possible to say of any substance [3749]
 whatsoever that it is without qualities.  For, in the very act of
 saying that it is destitute of qualities, you do in fact indicate its
 quality, representing of what kind matter is, which of course is
 ascribing to it a species of quality.  Wherefore, if it is agreeable to
 you, rehearse the argument to me from the beginning:  for, to me,
 matter seems to have had qualifies from all eternity. [3750] For in
 this way I can affirm that evil things also come from it in the way of
 emanation, so that the cause of evil things may not be ascribed to God,
 but that matter may be regarded as the cause of all such things."

 "I approve your desire, my friend, and praise the zeal you manifest in
 the discussion of opinions.  For it assuredly becomes every one who is
 desirous of knowledge, not simply and out of hand to agree with what is
 said, but to make a careful examination of the arguments adduced.  For,
 though a disputant, by laying down false premises, may make his
 opponent draw the conclusion he wishes, yet he will not convince a
 hearer of this; but only when he says that which [3751] it seems
 possible to say with fairness.  So that one of two things will happen:
 either he will, as he listens, be decisively helped to reach that
 conclusion towards which he already feels himself impelled, or he will
 convict his adversary of not speaking the truth.

 "Now, it seems to me that you have not sufficiently discussed the
 statement that matter has qualities from the first.  For, if this is
 the case, what will God be the maker of?  For, if we speak of
 substances, we affirm these to exist beforehand; or if again of
 qualities, we declare these also to exist already.  Since, therefore
 both substance and qualities exist, it seems to me unreasonable to call
 God a creator.

 "But, lest I should seem to be constructing an argument to suit my
 purpose, be so good as to answer the question:  In what way do you
 assert God to be a creator?  Is He such because He changed the
 substances, so that they should no longer be the same as they had once
 been but become different from what they were; or because, while He
 kept the substances the same as they were before that period, He
 changed their qualities?"

 "I do not at all think that any alteration took place in substances:
 for it appears to me absurd to say this.  But I affirm that a certain
 change was made in their qualities; and it is in respect of these that
 I speak of God as a creator.  Just as we might happen to speak of a
 house as made out of stones, in which case we could not say that the
 stones no longer continue to be stones as regards their substance, now
 that they are made into a house (for I affirm that the house owes its
 existence to the quality of its construction, forasmuch as the previous
 quality of the stones has been changed),--so does it seem to me that
 God, while the substance remains the same, has made a certain change in
 its qualities; and it is in respect of such change that I speak of the
 origin of this world as having come from God."

 "Since, then, you maintain that a certain change--namely, of
 qualities--has been produced by God, answer me briefly what I am
 desirous to ask you."

 "Proceed, pray, with your question."

 "Do you agree in the opinion that evil things are qualities of
 substances?"

 "I do."

 "Were these qualities in matter from the first, or did they begin to
 be?"

 "I hold that these qualifies existed in combination with matter,
 without being originated."

 "But do you not affirm that God has made a certain change in the
 qualities?"

 "That is what I affirm."

 "For the better, or for the worse?"

 "For the better, I should say."

 "Well, then, if evil things are qualities of matter, and if the Lord of
 all changed its qualities for the better, whence, it behoves us to ask,
 come evil things?  For either the qualities remained the same in their
 nature as they previously were, or, if they were not evil before, but
 you assert that, in consequence of a change wrought on them by God, the
 first qualities of this kind came into existence in connection with
 matter,--God will be the author of evil, inasmuch as He changed the
 qualities which were not evil, so as to make them evil.

 "Possibly, however, it is not your view that God changed evil qualities
 for the better; but you mean that all those other qualities which
 happened to be neither good nor bad, [3752] were changed by God with a
 view to the adornment of the creation."

 "That has been my opinion from the outset."

 "How, then, can you say that He has left the qualities of bad things
 just as they were?  Is it that, although He was able to destroy those
 qualities as well as the others, He was not willing; or did He refrain
 because He had not the power?  For, if you say He had the power, but
 not the will, you must admit Him to be the cause of these qualities:
 since, when He could have put a stop to the existence of evil, He chose
 to let it remain as it was, and that, too, at the very time when He
 began to fashion matter.  For, if He had not concerned Himself at all
 with matter, He would not have been the cause of those things which He
 allowed to remain.  But, seeing that He fashioned a certain part of it,
 and left a certain part as we have described it, although He could have
 changed that also for the better, it seems to me that He deserves to
 have the blame cast on Him, for having permitted a part of matter to be
 evil, to the ruin of that other part which He fashioned.

 "Nay, more, it seems to me that the most serious wrong has been
 committed as regards this part, in that He constituted this part of
 matter so as to be now affected by evil.  For, if we were to examine
 carefully into things, we should find that the condition of matter is
 worse now than in its former state, before it was reduced to order.
 For, before it was separated into parts, it had no sense of evil; but
 now every one of its parts is afflicted with a sense of evil.

 "Take an illustration from man.  Before he was fashioned, and became a
 living being through the art of the Creator, he was by nature exempt
 from any contact whatever with evil; but, as soon as ever he was made
 by God a man, he became liable to the sense of even approaching evil:
 and thus that very thing which you say was brought about by God for the
 benefit of matter, [3753] is found to have turned out rather to its
 detriment.

 "But, if you say that evil has not been put a stop to, because God was
 unable to do away with it, you will be making God powerless.  But, if
 He is powerless, it will be either because He is weak by nature, or
 because He is overcome by fear, and reduced to subjection by a
 stronger.  If, then, you go so far as to say that God is weak by
 nature, it seems to me that you imperil your salvation itself; but, if
 you say that He is weak through being overcome by fear of a greater,
 things evil will be greater than God, since they frustrate the carrying
 out of His purpose.  But this, as it seems to me, it would be absurd to
 say of God.  For why should not they' rather be considered gods, since
 according to your account they are able to overcome God:  if, that is
 to say, we mean by God that which has a controlling power over all
 things?

 "But I wish to ask you a few questions concerning matter itself.  Pray
 tell me, therefore, whether matter was something simple or compound.  I
 am induced to adopt this method of investigating the subject before us
 by considering the diversity that obtains in existing things.  For, if
 perchance matter was something simple and uniform, how comes it that
 the world is compound, [3754] and consists of divers substances and
 combinations?  For by compound' we denote a mixture of certain simple
 elements.  But if, on the contrary, you prefer to call matter compound,
 you will, of course, be asserting that it is compounded of certain
 simple elements.  And, if it was compounded of simple elements, these
 simple elements must have existed at some time or other separately by
 themselves, and when they were compounded together matter came into
 being:  from which it of course follows that matter is created.  For,
 if matter is compound, and compound things are constituted from simple,
 there was once a time when matter had no existence,--namely, before the
 simple elements came together.  And, if there was once a time when
 matter was not, and there was never a time when the uncreated was not,
 matter cannot be uncreated.  And hence there will be many uncreated
 substances.  For, if God was uncreated, and the simple elements out of
 which matter was compounded were also uncreated, there will not be two
 uncreated things only,--not to discuss the question what it is which
 constitutes objects simple, whether matter or form.

 "Is it, further, your opinion that nothing in existence is opposed to
 itself?"

 "It is."

 "Is water, then, opposed to fire?"

 "So it appears to me."

 "Similarly, is darkness opposed to light, and warm to cold, and
 moreover moist to dry?"

 "It seems to me to be so."

 "Well, then, if nothing in existence is opposed to itself, and these
 things are opposed to each other, they cannot be one and the same
 matter; no, nor yet be made out of one and the same matter.

 "I wish further to ask your opinion on a matter kindred to that of
 which we have been speaking.  Do you believe that the parts of a thing
 are not mutually destructive?"

 "I do."

 "And you believe that fire and water, and so on, are parts of matter?"

 "Quite so."

 "Do you not also believe that water is subversive of fire, and light of
 darkness, and so of all similar things?"

 "Yes."

 "Well, then, if the parts of a whole are not mutually destructive, and
 yet the parts of matter are mutually destructive, they cannot be parts
 of one matter.  And, if they are not parts of one another, they cannot
 be composed of one and the same matter; nay, they cannot be matter at
 all, since nothing in existence is destructive of itself, as we learn
 from the doctrine of opposites:  for nothing is opposed to itself--an
 opposite being by nature opposed to something else.  White, for
 example, is not opposed to itself, but is said to be the opposite of
 black; and, similarly, light is shown not to be opposed to itself, but
 is considered an opposite in relation to darkness; and so of a very
 great number of things besides.  If, then, matter were some one thing,
 it could not be opposed to itself.  This, then, being the nature of
 opposites, it is proved that matter has no existence."'

 ------------------------

 [3730] A fact which gave rise to a controversy, on which consult Routh,
 Rel. Sac., vol. ii. p. 78.

 [3731] See vol. vi. p. 358, etc., this series, where I have spoken of
 Maximus as the original of the Dialogue ascribed to Methodius.

 [3732] Routh, Rel. Sac., vol. ii. p. 85.  See pp. 77-121, devoted to
 this author.

 [3733] In Eusebius, Præp. Evang., vii. 22.

 [3734] Choreton, the reading of onems., instead of choretikon.

 [3735] For ei de meros autes, holon echoresen auton, Migne reads, ei ge
 (or ei de) meros autes holon, k.t.l.

 [3736] Sustolen tina.

 [3737] Ton ginomenon (en) auto, Migne.

 [3738] This word, agenneton, is added from Migne's conjecture.

 [3739] 'Ek ton hupostanton geneton.

 [3740] 'Ek tou hulen auton hupotithenai.

 [3741] 'Ex ouk onton.  [Note this phrase.  Comp. vol. vi. p. 292, n.
 3.]

 [3742] Upokeimenon.

 [3743] For sullelogistai hos ouk adunaton einai doxazein, Migne reads,
 hos sullelogistai adunaton einai doxazein.

 [3744] Lit. "in something."  Whether the materials or the art is meant
 is not very clear.  Possibly there is a play of words in the use of the
 two prepositions, ek and en.

 [3745] Migne, instead of parastenai, conjectures parastesai, which,
 however, would not suit what appears to be the meaning.

 [3746] Ousias tinas.

 [3747] Somatiken tina sustasin.

 [3748] Ten sustasin echei.

 [3749] Migne reads ousias for aitias.

 [3750] 'Anarchos.

 [3751] Reading, with Migne, ei ho ti for ei ti.

 [3752] Or "indifferent:"  adiaphoroi.

 [3753] Migne reads ep' euergesia for estin euergesia.

 [3754] The text has, sunthetos de ho kosmos; which Migne changes to,
 pos de sunthetos estin ho kosmos;

 Claudius Apollinaris, [3755] Bishop of Hierapolis, and Apologist.

 [a.d. 160-180.]  This author, an early apologist, is chiefly
 interesting as a competent witness, who tells the story of the
 Thundering Legion [3756] in an artless manner, and gives it the simple
 character of an answer to prayer.  This subject is treated by
 Lightfoot, in his recent work on the Apostolic Fathers, [3757] in an
 exhaustive manner; and the story, reduced to the simple narrative as
 Apollinaris gives it, receives from him a just and discriminating
 approval.

 Apollinaris, as well as Rhodon, has been imagined the author of the
 work (ascribed to Asterius Urbanus) against Montanism, dedicated to
 Abiricius Marcellus. [3758] This is sufficiently refuted by Routh,
 [3759] whose Greek text, with notes, must be consulted by the studious.
 [3760]

 Apollinaris was bishop of Hierapolis on the Mæander, and, Lightfoot
 thinks, was probably with Melito and Polycrates, known to Polycarp, and
 influenced by his example and doctrine. [3761] He addressed his
 Apology, which is honourably mentioned by Jerome, to M. Antoninus, the
 emperor.  He also wrote Adversus Gentes and De Veritate; also against
 the Jews.  Serapion calls him [3762] "most blessed."

 From an Unknown Book. [3763]

 "This narration (says Eusebius, Hist., v. 5) is given" (it relates to
 that storm of rain which was sent to the army of the Emperor M.
 Antoninus, to allay the thirst of the soldiers, whilst the enemy was
 discomfited by thunderbolts hurled upon them) "even by those historians
 who are at a wide remove from the doctrines that prevail among us, and
 who have been simply concerned to describe what related to the emperors
 who are the subjects of their history; and it has been recorded also by
 our own writers.  But historians without the pale of the Church, as
 being unfriendly to the faith, while they have recorded the prodigy,
 have refrained from acknowledging that it was sent in answer to our
 prayers.  On the other hand, our writers, as lovers of truth, have
 reported the matter in a simple and artless way.  To this number
 Apollinaris must be considered as belonging.  Thereupon,' he says, the
 legion which had by its prayer caused the prodigy received from the
 emperor a title suitable to the occurrence, and was called in the Roman
 language the Thunder-hurling Legion.'"

 From the Book Concerning the Passover. [3764]

 There are, then, some who through ignorance raise disputes about these
 things (though their conduct is pardonable:  for ignorance is no
 subject for blame--it rather needs further instruction), and say that
 on the fourteenth day the Lord ate the lamb with the disciples, and
 that on the great day of the feast of unleavened bread He Himself
 suffered; and they quote Matthew as speaking in accordance with their
 view.  Wherefore their opinion is contrary to the law, and the Gospels
 seem to be at variance with them. [3765]

 From the Same Book.

 The fourteenth day, the true Passover of the Lord; the great sacrifice,
 the Son of God instead of the lamb, who was bound, who bound the
 strong, and who was judged, though Judge of living and dead, and who
 was delivered into the hands of sinners to be crucified, who was lifted
 up on the horns of the unicorn, and who was pierced in His holy side,
 who poured forth from His side the two purifying elements, [3766] water
 and blood, word and spirit, and who was buried on the day of the
 passover, the stone being placed upon the tomb.

 ------------------------

 [3755] Westcott, Canon, p. 248.

 [3756] See vol. i. p. 187, this series, and references in my note (II.)
 on same page.  The incident occurred during the war against the Quadi,
 a.d. 174.

 [3757] Part ii. vol. i. pp. 469-476.

 [3758] See p. 766, note 3, supra; also vol. vii., this series, p. 338.

 [3759] Rel. Sac., tom. ii. p. 196; and Ibid., tom. i. pp. 157-174.

 [3760] Rel. Sac., tom. i. p. 173.

 [3761] Ap. Fathers, part ii. vol. i. p. 428.

 [3762] See p. 775, infra.

 [3763] [See vol. i. p. 187, note 2.]

 [3764] This extract and the following are taken from the preface to the
 Chronicon Paschale.

 [3765] [Routh, R. S., vol. i. p. 160.]

 [3766] Palin katharsia, qu. palinkatharsia ="re-purifiers."

 Polycrates, [3767] Bishop of Ephesus.

 [a.d. 130-196.]  This author [3768] comes in as an appendix to the
 stories of Polycarp and Irenæus and good Anicetus, and his writings
 also bear upon the contrast presented by the less creditable history of
 Victor.  If, as I suppose, the appearance of our Lord to St. John on
 "the Lord's day" was on the Paschal Sunday, it may at first seem
 surprising that this Apostle can be claimed by Polycrates in behalf of
 the Eastern custom to keep Easter, with the Jews, on the fourteenth day
 of the moon.  But to the Jews the Apostles became "as Jews" in all
 things tolerable, so long as the Temple stood, and while the bishops of
 Jerusalem were labouring to identify the Paschal Lamb with their
 Passover.  The long survival of St. John among Jewish Christians led
 them to prolong this usage, no doubt, as sanctioned by his example.  He
 foreknew it would quietly pass away.  The wise and truly Christian
 spirit of Irenæus prepared the way for the ultimate unanimity of the
 Church in a matter which lies at the base of "the Christian Sabbath,"
 and of our own observance of the first day of the week as a weekly
 Easter.  Those who in our own times have revived the observance of the
 Jewish Sabbath, show us how much may be said on their side, [3769] and
 elucidate the tenacity of the Easterns in resisting the abolition of
 the Mosaic ordinance as to the Paschal, although they agreed to keep it
 "not with the old leaven."

 Our author belonged to a family in which he was the eighth Christian
 bishop; and he presided over the church of Ephesus, in which the
 traditions of St. John were yet fresh in men's minds at the date of his
 birth.  He had doubtless known Polycarp, and Irenæus also.  He seems to
 have presided over a synod of Asiatic bishops (a.d. 196) which came
 together to consider this matter of the Paschal feast.  It is surely
 noteworthy that nobody doubted that it was kept by a Christian and
 Apostolic ordinance.  So St. Paul argues from its Christian observance,
 in his rebuke of the Corinthians. [3770] They were keeping it
 "unleavened" ceremonially, and he urges a spiritual unleavening as more
 important.  The Christian hallowing of Pentecost connects with the
 Paschal argument. [3771] The Christian Sabbath hinges on these
 points.

 From His Epistle to Victor and the Roman Church Concerning the Day of
 Keeping the Passover. [3772]

 As for us, then, we scrupulously observe the exact day, [3773] neither
 adding nor taking away.  For in Asia great luminaries [3774] have gone
 to their rest, who shall rise again in the day of the coming of the
 Lord, when He cometh with glory from heaven and shall raise again all
 the saints.  I speak of Philip, one of the twelve apostles, [3775] who
 is laid to rest at Hierapolis; and his two daughters, who arrived at
 old age unmarried; [3776] his other daughter also, who passed her life
 [3777] under the influence of the Holy Spirit, and reposes at Ephesus;
 John, moreover, who reclined on the Lord's bosom, and who became a
 priest wearing the mitre, [3778] and a witness and a teacher--he rests
 at Ephesus.  Then there is Polycarp, both bishop and martyr at Smyrna;
 and Thraseas from Eumenia, both bishop and martyr, who rests at
 Smyrna.  Why should I speak of Sagaris, bishop and martyr, who rests at
 Laodicea? of the blessed Papirius, moreover? and of Melito the eunuch,
 [3779] who performed all his actions under the influence of the Holy
 Spirit, and lies at Sardis, awaiting the visitation [3780] from heaven,
 when he shall rise again from the dead?  These all kept the passover on
 the fourteenth. day of the month, in accordance with the Gospel,
 without ever deviating from it, but keeping to the rule of faith.

 Moreover I also, Polycrates, who am the least of you all, in accordance
 with the tradition of my relatives, some of whom I have
 succeeded--seven of my relatives were bishops, and I am the eighth, and
 my relatives always observed the day when the people put away [3781]
 the leaven--I myself, brethren, I say, who am sixty-five years old in
 the Lord, and have fallen in with the brethren in all parts of the
 world, and have read through all Holy Scripture, am not frightened at
 the things which are said to terrify us.  For those who are greater
 than I have said, "We ought to obey God rather than men." [3782] ...

 I might also have made mention of the bishops associated with me, whom
 it was your own desire to have called together by me, and I called them
 together:  whose names, if I were to write them down, would amount to a
 great number.  These bishops, on coming to see me, unworthy as I am,
 [3783] signified their united approval of the letter, knowing that I
 wore these grey hairs not in vain, but have always regulated my conduct
 in obedience to the Lord Jesus.

 ------------------------

 [3767] Westcott, Canon, p. 432, note 1; Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers, pp.
 379, etc., 494.

 [3768] See Lardner, Credib., vol. ii. cap. 23, p. 259.

 [3769] They cannot be satisfactorily answered, it seems to me, save by
 the appeal to John xx. 19, 26, Acts xx. 7, 1 Cor. xvi. 2, and Rev. i.
 10, for "the Lord's day," and to the Council of Jerusalem (Acts xv. 28;
 Col. ii. 16) for the repeal of Sabbatical ordinances; and to the great
 laws (Matt. xvi. 19; John xiv. 26; Matt. xxviii. 20) of plenary
 authority given by Christ Himself to His Apostles.

 [3770] 1 Cor. v. 7, 8, and margin of Revised Version; also Acts xii. 4
 and 12.

 [3771] Acts ii. 1, xx. 16; 1 Cor. xvi. 8.

 [3772] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 24.

 [3773] 'Arrhadiourgeton agomen ten hemeran.

 [3774] Stoicheia.

 [3775] [See vol. vii. p. 500, n. 6.  Great confusions adhere to this
 name.]

 [3776] Duo thugateres autou gegerakuiai parthenoi.

 [3777] Politeusamene.  [Phil. iii. 20, Greek.]

 [3778] Petalon.  [Probably the ornament of the high priest; Exod.
 xxviii. 35, 36.]

 [3779] [i.e., spiritually; embracing a chaste celibacy in deference to
 Christ.  Matt. xix. 12.]

 [3780] 'Episkopen.

 [3781] 'Ernue.  Some read ertue.

 [3782] Acts v. 29.

 [3783] Ton mikron.

 Theophilus, Bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine.

 [a.d. 180.]  When Eusebius says that the churches of "all Asia"
 concurred in the Ephesine use concerning the Paschal, he evidently
 means Asia Minor, as in the Scriptures and elsewhere. [3784]
 Throughout "the rest of the world," he testifies, however, that such
 was not the use.  The Palestinian bishops, after the Jewish downfall,
 seem to have been the first to comprehend the propriety of adopting the
 more Catholic usage; and our author presided over a council in Cæsarea,
 of which he was bishop, assisted by Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem,
 with Cassius of Tyre and Clarus of Ptolemais, which confirmed it.  It
 is to be noted, that Alexandria is cited by Theophilus as authority for
 this custom; and it is not quite correct to say that the Western usage
 prevailed at Nicæa, for it was the general use, save only in Asia Minor
 and churches which were colonies of the same.  This fact has been
 overlooked, and is very important, in history.

 From His Epistle on the Question of the Passover, Written in the Name
 of the Synod of Cæsarea. [3785]

 Endeavour also to send abroad copies of our epistle among all the
 churches, so that those who easily deceive their own souls may not be
 able to lay the blame on us.  We would have you know, too, that in
 Alexandria [3786] also they observe the festival on the same day as
 ourselves.  For the Paschal letters are sent from us to them, and from
 them to us:  so that we observe the holy day in unison and together.

 ------------------------

 [3784] See (Polycrates) p. 773, supra, and Eusebius, H. E., book v.
 cap. xxiii., etc., pp. 222-226.

 [3785] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 25.

 [3786] [Note, the authority of Alexandria is quoted, not that of Rome.]

 Serapion, [3787] Bishop of Antioch.

 [a.d. circa 190-200-211.]  He was the eighth bishop of Antioch, a
 diligent writer and exemplary pastor.  Little as we have of his
 remains, Lardner shows how very useful is that little.  (1) He
 testifies to the Apostles as delivering the words of Christ Himself;
 (2) to the jealousy of the early Christians in sifting inspired
 writings from those of no authority as Scriptures; (3) to their
 methods, as in the case of the pseudo-gospel of Peter; and (4) to the
 utterly apocryphal character of that book, which Grabe and others
 suppose to be the work of Leucius, a noted forger and falsifier.  It
 had never been heard of in the great See of Antioch, and this famous
 bishop could only get sight of it by fishing it out of the dirty pool
 of the Docetæ.

 I.

 From the Epistle to Caricus and Ponticus. [3788]

 That ye may see also that the proceedings of this lying confederacy,
 [3789] to which is given the name of New Prophecy, is abominated among
 the whole brotherhood throughout the world, I have sent you letters of
 the most blessed Claudius Apollinarius, who was made bishop of
 Hierapolis in Asia.

 II.

 From the Book Concerning the Gospel of Peter. [3790]

 For we, brethren, receive both Peter and the rest of the apostles as
 Christ Himself.  But those writings which are falsely inscribed with
 their name, [3791] we as experienced persons reject, knowing that no
 such writings have been handed down to us. [3792] When, indeed, I
 came to see you, I supposed that all were in accord with the orthodox
 faith; and, although I had not read through the Gospel inscribed with
 the name of Peter which was brought forward by them, I said:  If this
 is the only thing which threatens [3793] to produce ill-feeling among
 you, let it be read.  But, now that I have learnt from what has been
 told me that their mind was secretly cherishing some heresy, [3794] I
 will make all haste to come to you again.  Expect me therefore,
 brethren, shortly.  Moreover, brethren, we, having discovered to what
 kind of heresy Marcion adhered, and seen how he contradicted himself,
 not understanding of what he was speaking, as you will gather from what
 has been written to you [3795] --for, having borrowed this said Gospel
 from those who were familiar with it from constant perusal, namely from
 the successors of those who were his leaders in the heresy, whom we
 call Docetæ (for most of the opinions held by him are derived from
 their teaching), we were able to read it through; and while we found
 most of its contents to agree with the orthodox account of the Saviour,
 we found some things inconsistent with that, and these we have set down
 below for your inspection.

 ------------------------

 [3787] Westcott, Canon, p. 444.  Lardner, Credib., ii. 264, 417.

 [3788] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 19.

 [3789] Pseudous taxeos.

 [3790] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 12.

 [3791] The reading of Migne, onomati, is adopted instead of honomata.

 [3792] Ta toiauta ou parelabomen.

 [3793] Dokoun.

 [3794] Hairesei tini ho nous auton enepholeuen.

 [3795] The construction is not again resumed.

 Apollonius. [3796]

 [a.d. 211.]  He was a most eloquent man, according to St. Jerome; and
 his writings against Montanism were so forcible as to call forth
 Tertullian himself, to confute him, if possible.  He flourished under
 Commodus and Severus, and probably until the times of Caracalla.  He
 bears testimony to the existence of a canon of Scripture, [3797] and to
 its inspired authority as the rule of faith and practice; and he
 witnesses, by citation, to the Gospel of St. Matthew.  The Revelation
 of St. John also, according to Eusebius, was employed by him in his
 works; and he preserves a tradition that our Lord bade the Apostles
 continue in Jerusalem for the space of twelve years.  We cannot affirm
 that he was invested with any office in the Church.

 Concerning Montanism. [3798]

 I.

 But who is this new teacher?  His works and teaching inform us.  This
 is he who taught the dissolution of marriage; who inculcated fasting;
 who called Peruga and Tymius, small towns of Phrygia, Jerusalem,
 because he wished to collect thither people from all parts; who set up
 exactors of money; who craftily contrives the taking of gifts under the
 name of voluntary offerings; who grants stipends to those who publish
 abroad his doctrine, that by means of gluttony the teaching of the
 doctrine may prevail.

 II.

 We declare to you, then, that these first prophetesses, as soon as they
 were filled with the spirit, left their husbands.  Of what falsehood,
 then, were they guilty in calling Prisca a maiden!  Do you not think
 that all Scripture forbids a prophet to receive gifts and money?  When,
 therefore, I see that the prophetess has received gold and silver and
 expensive articles of dress, how can I avoid treating her with
 disapproval?

 III.

 Moreover, Themison also, who was clothed in a garb of plausible [3799]
 covetousness, who declined to bear the sign of confessorship, but by a
 large sum of money put away from him the chains of martyrdom, although
 after such conduct it was his duty to conduct himself with humility,
 yet had the hardihood to boast that he was a martyr, and, in imitation
 of the apostle, to compose a general epistle, in which he attempted to
 instruct [3800] in the elements of the faith those who had believed to
 better purpose than he, and defended the doctrines of the new-fangled
 teaching, [3801] and moreover uttered blasphemy against the Lord and
 the apostles and the holy Church.

 IV.

 But, not to dwell further on these matters, let the prophetess tell us
 concerning Alexander, who calls himself a martyr, with whom she joins
 in banqueting; who himself also is worshipped by many; [3802] whose
 robberies and other deeds of daring, for which he has been punished, it
 is not necessary for us to speak of, since the treasury [3803] has him
 in keeping.  Which of them, then, condones the sins of the other?  The
 prophet the robberies of the martyr, or the martyr the covetousness of
 the prophet?  For whereas the Lord has said, "Provide not gold, nor
 silver, nor two coats a-piece," [3804] these men have, on the flat
 contrary, transgressed the command by the acquisition of these
 forbidden things.  For we shall show that those who are called among
 them prophets and martyrs obtain money not only from the rich, but also
 from the poor, from orphans and widows.  And if they are confident that
 they are right in so doing, let them stand forward and discuss the
 point, in order that, if they be refuted, they may cease for the future
 so to transgress.  For the fruits of the prophet must needs be brought
 to the test:  for "from its fruit is the tree known." [3805] But that
 those that desire it may become acquainted with what relates to
 Alexander, he was condemned by Æmilius Frontinus, proconsul at Ephesus,
 not on account of the name of Christ, but for the daring robberies he
 committed when he was already a transgressor. [3806] Afterwards, when
 he had spoken falsely of the name of the Lord, he was released, having
 deceived the faithful there; [3807] and even the brethren of his own
 district, [3808] from which he came, did not receive him, because he
 was a robber.  Thus, those who wish to learn what he is, have the
 public treasury of Asia to go to.  And yet the prophet, although he
 spent many years with him, knows forsooth nothing about him!  By
 convicting "him," we by his means clearly convict of misrepresentation
 [3809] the prophet likewise.  We are able to prove the like in the case
 of many others besides.  And if they are confident of their innocence,
 let them abide the test.

 V.

 If they deny that their prophets have taken gifts, let them confess
 thus much, that if they be convicted of having taken them, they are not
 prophets; and we will adduce ten thousand proofs that they have.  It is
 proper, too, that all the fruits of a prophet should be examined.  Tell
 me:  does a prophet dye his hair?  Does a prophet use stibium on his
 eyes?  Is a prophet fond of dress?  Does a prophet play at
 gaming-tables and dice?  Does a prophet lend money on interest? [3810]
 Let them confess whether these things are allowable or not.  For my
 part, I will prove that these practices have occurred among them.

 ------------------------

 [3796] Routh, Rel. Sac., vol. i. pp. 465-485.

 [3797] Westcott, Canon, p. 433.

 [3798] In Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., v. 18.

 [3799] axiopiston.

 [3800] katechein.

 [3801] sunagonizesthai tois tes kainophonias logois.

 [3802] Or, "whom many of them (the Montanists--reading auton for auto,
 worship."

 [3803] opisthodomos, a chamber at the back of the temple of Minerva, in
 which public money was kept.

 [3804] Matt. x. 9.

 [3805] Matt. xii. 33.

 [3806] parabates, here meaning an apostate.

 [3807] This is explained by Rufinus to mean:  "When certain brethren
 who had influence with the judge interceded for him, he pretended that
 he was suffering for the name of Christ, and by this means he was
 released."

 [3808] paroikia.

 [3809] upostasin, from uphistemi, probably in the sense of substituting
 one thing for another.

 [3810] tablais kai kubois.

 Pantænus, [3811] the Alexandrian Philosopher.

 [a.d. 182-192-212.]  The world owes more to Pantænus than to all the
 other Stoics put together.  His mind discovered that true philosophy is
 found, not in the Porch, but in Nazareth, in Gethsemane, in Gabbatha,
 in Golgotha; and he set himself to make it known to the world.  We are
 already acquainted with the great master of Clement, [3812] "the
 Sicilian bee," that forsook the flowers of Enna, to enrich Alexandria
 with what is "sweeter than honey and the honey-comb;" and we remember
 that he became a zealous missionary to the Oriental Ethiopia, and found
 there the traces of St. Matthias' labours, and those also of St.
 Bartholomew.  From this mission he seems to have returned about a.d.
 192.  Possibly he was master of the Alexandrian school before he went
 to India, and came back to his chair when that mission was finished.
 There he sat till about a.d. 212, and under him this Christian academy
 became famous.  It had existed as a catechetical school from the
 Apostles' time, according to St. Jerome.  I have elsewhere noted some
 reasons for supposing that its founder may have been Apollos. [3813]
 All the learning of Christendom may be traced to this source; and
 blessed be the name of one of whom all we know is ennobling to the
 Church, and whose unselfish career was a track of light "shining more
 and more unto the perfect day."

 I. [3814]

 "In the sun hath He set His tent." [3815] Some affirm that the
 reference is to the Lord's body, which He Himself places in the sun;
 [3816] Hermogenes, for instance.  As to His body, some say it is His
 tent, others the Church of the faithful.  But our Pantænus said:  "The
 language employed by prophecy is for the most part indefinite, the
 present tense being used for the future, and again the present for the
 past."

 II. [3817]

 This mode of speaking Saint Dionysius the Areopagite declares to be
 used in Scripture to denote predeterminations and expressions of the
 divine will. [3818] In like manner also the followers of Pantænus,
 [3819] who became the preceptor of the great Clement the Stromatist,
 affirm that they are commonly used in Scripture for expressions of the
 divine will.  Accordingly, when asked by some who prided themselves on
 the outside learning, [3820] in what way the Christians supposed God to
 become acquainted with the universe, [3821] their own opinion being
 that He obtains His knowledge of it in different ways,--of things
 falling within the province of the understanding by means of the
 understanding, and of those within the region of the senses by means of
 the senses,--they replied:  "Neither does He gain acquaintance with
 sensible things by the senses, nor with things within the sphere of the
 understanding by the understanding:  for it is not possible that He who
 is above all existing things should apprehend them by means of existing
 things.  We assert, on the contrary, that He is acquainted with
 existing things as the products of His own volition." [3822] They
 added, by way of showing the reasonableness of their view:  "If He has
 made all things by an act of His will (and no argument will be adduced
 to gainsay this), and if it is ever a matter of piety and rectitude to
 say that God is acquainted with His own will, and if He has voluntarily
 made every several thing that has come into existence, then surely God
 must be acquainted with all existing things as the products of His own
 will, seeing that it was in the exercise of that will that He made
 them."

 ------------------------

 [3811] Vol. ii. p. 342; Westcott, Canon, pp. 90, 381; Routh, R. S.,
 vol. i. pp. 375-379.

 [3812] Vol. ii. pp. 165, etc., and p. 301, note 9; also p. 342, Elucid.
 II., this series.

 [3813] Vol. vi. p. 236.  St. Luke, in the company of Apollos, may have
 met a catechumen of his in that "excellent Theophilus" of his writings
 (St. Luke i. 4, Greek), whose history shows that catechetical teaching
 was already part of the Christian system.

 [3814] In Extracts from the Prophets, written probably by Theodotus,
 and collected by Clement of Alexandria or some other writer.

 [3815] Ps. xix. 4.

 [3816] Phasi to soma tou Kuriou en to helio auton apotithesthai.

 [3817] In the Scholia of Maximus on St. Gregory the Divine.

 [3818] Thelemata.

 [3819] Hoi peri Pantainon.  [Vol. ii. pp. 165-167, this series.]

 [3820] Ten exo paideusin.

 [3821] Ta onta.

 [3822] Os idia thelemata.

 Pseud-Irenæus.

 [a.d. 177.]  This letter should have been made a preface to the works
 of Irenæus, or at least an appendix.  It is worthy of his great name;
 "the finest thing of the kind in all antiquity," says Lardner.  Critics
 of no mean name have credited it to Irenæus; but, as this cannot be
 proved, I have accordingly marked it as a pseudonym.  The same writer
 condenses the arguments of others, on which he decides to adhere to the
 later chronology of Eusebius, assigning its date to the seventeenth
 year of Marcus Aurelius. [3823] Naturally humane and comparatively
 gentle in other respects he was; but Stoicism, as well as heathenism,
 showed what it could exact of such a character in maintenance of the
 popular and imperial superstitions.  Terrible is the summary of
 Lightfoot concerning the barbarities of this darling of the
 "philosophers:"  "It is a plain fact, that Christian blood flowed more
 freely under M. Aurelius than at any time previously during the half
 century since the Bithynian martyrdoms under Trajan, or was yet to flow
 at any time during the decades which would elapse before the Severian
 persecution.  These persecutions extend throughout his reign:  they
 were fierce and deliberate; aggravated, at least in some cases, by
 cruel tortures.  They had the emperor's direct personal sanction.  They
 break out in all parts of the empire,--in Rome, in Asia Minor, in Gaul,
 in Africa, possibly also in Byzantium."

 Bishop Lightfoot accounts for the fact, that, in spite of this
 sanguinary character of the period, little complaint is heard from the
 suffering Church, by a simple statement which is honourable to Aurelius
 as a Roman and an emperor.  He was such a contrast to the Neros and
 Caligulas, that the wretched Romans loved him as a father; to reproach
 him was, therefore, poor policy for Christians.  They would have been
 answered, practically:  "If so good a sovereign finds it necessary to
 punish you, the fault is your own; you have only to be as we are, and
 he will treat you as well as he does us."

 Of this awful outbreak in Lyons and Vienne, says Lightfoot: [3824]
 "The persecution was wholesale, so that it was not safe for any
 Christian to appear out of doors.  No difference of age or sex was
 made.  The prisoners were put to the most cruel tortures.  All the
 elements of power combined to crush the brethren."

 To forbear threatenings, to revile not again, to conquer through
 patient suffering, to persevere, "looking unto Jesus," and to be
 silent, like Him, before their murderers, was therefore the world-wide
 conduct of the saints.  This golden letter shows what they were called
 to endure, and how they glorified Christ by their deaths, from the
 utmost Orient to the extreme limits of the West.

 The Letter of the Churches of Vienna and Lugdunum to the Churches of
 Asia and Phrygia. [3825]

 It began thus:--"The servants of Christ who sojourn in Vienna and
 Lugdunum of Gaul to the brethren throughout Asia and Phrygia, who have
 the same faith and hope of redemption as ourselves, peace, grace, and
 glory from God the Father, and from Christ Jesus our Lord."

 After some further preliminary remarks the letter proceeds:--"The
 greatness of the tribulation in this region, and the exceeding anger of
 the heathen nations against the saints, and the sufferings which the
 blessed Witnesses [3826] endured, neither are we competent to describe
 accurately, nor indeed is it possible to detail them in writing.  For
 with all his strength did the adversary assail us, even then giving a
 foretaste of his activity among us which is to be without restraint;
 and he had recourse to every means, accustoming his own subjects and
 exercising them beforehand against the servants of God, so that not
 only were we excluded from houses, [3827] baths, and the forum, but a
 universal prohibition was laid against any one of us appearing in any
 place whatsoever.  But the grace of God acted as our general against
 him.  It rescued the weak; it arrayed against him men like firm
 pillars, who could through patience bear up against the whole force of
 the assaults of the wicked one.  These came to close quarters with him,
 enduring every form of reproach and torture; and, making light of
 grievous trials, they hastened on to Christ, showing in reality that
 the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with
 the glory that is to be revealed in us.' [3828] And first they nobly
 endured the evils which were heaped on them by the populace,--namely,
 hootings and blows, draggings, plunderings, stonings, and confinements,
 [3829] and everything that an infuriated mob is wont to perpetrate
 against those whom they deem bitter enemies.  And at length, being
 brought to the forum by the tribune of the soldiers, and the
 magistrates that had charge of the city, they were examined in presence
 of the whole multitude; and having confessed, they were shut up in
 prison until the arrival of the governor.

 "After this, when they were brought before the governor, and when he
 displayed a spirit of savage hostility to us, Vettius Epagathus, one of
 the brethren, interposed.  For he was a man who had contained the full
 measure of love towards God and his neighbours.  His mode of life had
 been so strict, that though he was a young man, he deserved to be
 described in the words used in regard to the elderly Zacharias:  He had
 walked therefore in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
 blameless.' [3830] He was also eager to serve his neighbour in any
 way, he was very zealous for God, and he was fervent in spirit.  Such
 being the character of the man, he could not bear that judgment should
 be thus unreasonably passed against us, but was moved with indignation,
 and requested that he himself should be heard in defence of his
 brethren, undertaking to prove that there is nothing ungodly or impious
 amongst us.  On this, those who were round the judgment-seat cried out
 against him, for he was a man of distinction; and the governor, not for
 a moment listening to the just request thus made to him, merely asked
 him if he himself were a Christian.  And on his confessing in the
 clearest voice that he was, he also was taken up into the number of the
 Witnesses, receiving the appellation of the Advocate of the Christians,
 [3831] and having himself the Advocate, the Spirit, [3832] more
 abundantly than Zacharias; which he showed in the fulness [3833] of his
 love, in that he had of his own good-will offered to lay down his own
 life in defence of the brethren.  For he was and is a genuine disciple
 of Christ, following the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.' [3834]

 "After this the rest began to be distinguished, [3835] for the
 proto-martyrs were decided and ready, and accomplished the confession
 of their testimony with all alacrity.  But there appeared also those
 who were unprepared and unpractised, and who were still feeble, and
 unable to bear the tension of a great contest.  Of these about ten in
 number proved abortions; causing great grief and immeasurable sorrow
 amongst us, and damping the ardour of the rest who had not yet been
 apprehended.  For these, although they suffered every kind of cruelty,
 remained nevertheless in the company of the Witnesses, and did not
 forsake them.  But then the whole of us were greatly alarmed on account
 of our uncertainty as to confession, not because we feared the tortures
 inflicted, but because we looked to the end, and dreaded lest any one
 should fall away.  Those who were worthy, however, were daily
 apprehended, filling up the number of the others:  so that out of the
 two churches all the excellent, and those to whom the churches owed
 most of all their establishment and prosperity, were collected together
 in prison.  Some heathen household slaves belonging to our people were
 also apprehended, since the governor had given orders publicly that all
 of us should be sought out.  These, through the instigation of Satan,
 and through fear of the tortures which they saw the saints enduring,
 urged on also by the soldiers, falsely accused us of Thyestean banquets
 and OEdipodean connections, and other crimes which it is lawful for us
 neither to mention nor think of; and, indeed, we shrink from believing
 that any such crimes have ever taken place among men.  When the rumour
 of these accusations was spread abroad, all raged against us like wild
 beasts; so that if any formerly were temperate in their conduct to us
 on account of relationship, they then became exceedingly indignant and
 exasperated against us.  And thus was fulfilled that which was spoken
 by our Lord:  The time shall come when every one who slayeth you shall
 think that he offereth service to God.' [3836]

 "Then at last the holy Witnesses suffered tortures beyond all
 description, Satan striving eagerly that some of the evil reports might
 be acknowledged by them. [3837] But in an exceeding degree did the
 whole wrath of mob, general, and soldiers fall on Sanctus, a deacon
 from Vienna, and on Maturus, a newly-enlightened but noble combatant,
 and on Attalus, a native of Pergamus, who had always been the Pillar
 [3838] and foundation of the church there, and on Blandina, through
 whom Christ showed that the things that to men appear mean and deformed
 and contemptible, are with God deemed worthy of great glory, on account
 of love to Him,--a love which is not a mere boastful appearance, but
 shows itself in the power which it exercises over the life.  For while
 we were all afraid, and especially her mistress in the flesh, who was
 herself one of the combatants among the Witnesses, that she would not
 be able to make a bold confession on account of the weakness of her
 body, Blandina was filled with such power, that those who tortured her
 one after the other in every way from morning till evening were wearied
 and tired, confessing that they had been baffled, for they had no other
 torture they could apply to her; and they were astonished that she
 remained in life, when her whole body was torn and opened up, and they
 gave their testimony [3839] that one only of the modes of torture
 employed was sufficient to have deprived her of life, not to speak of
 so many excruciating inflictions.  But the blessed woman, like a noble
 athlete, recovered her strength in the midst of the confession; and her
 declaration, I am a Christian, and there is no evil done amongst us,'
 brought her refreshment, and rest, and insensibility to all the
 sufferings inflicted on her.

 "Sanctus also nobly endured all the excessive and superhuman [3840]
 tortures which man could possibly devise against him; for the wicked
 hoped, on account of the continuance and greatness of the tortures, to
 hear him confess some of the unlawful practices.  But he opposed them
 with such firmness that he did not tell them even his own name, nor
 that of his nation or city, nor if he were slave or free; but in answer
 to all these questions, he said in Latin, I am a Christian.'  This was
 the confession he made repeatedly, instead of giving his name, his
 city, his race, and indeed in reply to every question that was put to
 him; and other language the heathens heard not from him.  Hence arose
 in the minds of the governor and the torturers a determined resolution
 to subdue him; so that, when every other means failed, they at last
 fixed red-hot plates of brass to the most delicate parts of his body.
 And these indeed were burned, but he himself remained inflexible and
 unyielding, firm in his confession, being bedewed and strengthened by
 the heavenly fountain of the water of life which issues from the belly
 of Christ. [3841] But his body bore witness to what had happened:
 for it was all wounds and weals, shrunk and torn up, and had lost
 externally the human shape.  In him Christ suffering wrought great
 wonders, destroying the adversary, and showing for an example to the
 rest that there is nothing fearful where there is the Father's love,
 and nothing painful where there is Christ's glory.  For the wicked
 after some days again tortured the Witness, thinking that, since his
 body was swollen and inflamed, if they were to apply the same tortures
 they would gain the victory over him, especially since the parts of his
 body could not bear to be touched by the hand, or that he would die in
 consequence of the tortures, and thus inspire the rest with fear.  Yet
 not only did no such occurrence take place in regard to him, but even,
 contrary to every expectation of man, his body unbent itself and became
 erect in the midst of the subsequent tortures, and resumed its former
 appearance and the use of its limbs, so that the second torture turned
 out through the grace of Christ a cure, not an affliction.

 "Among those who had denied was a woman of the name of Biblias.  The
 devil, thinking that he had already swallowed her, and wishing to damn
 her still more by making her accuse falsely, brought her forth to
 punishment, and employed force to constrain her, already feeble and
 spiritless, to utter accusations of atheism against us.  But she, in
 the midst of the tortures, came again to a sound state of mind, and
 awoke as it were out of a deep sleep; for the temporary suffering
 reminded her of the eternal punishment in Gehenna, and she contradicted
 the accusers of Christians, saying, How can children be eaten by those
 who do not think it lawful to partake of the blood of even brute
 beasts?'  And after this she confessed herself a Christian, and was
 added to the number of Witnesses.

 "But when the tyrannical tortures were rendered by Christ of no avail
 through the patience of the blessed, the devil devised other
 contrivances--confinement in the darkest and most noisome cells of the
 prison, the stretching of the feet on the stocks, [3842] even up to the
 fifth hole, and the other indignities which attendants stirred up by
 wrath and full of the devil are wont to inflict on the imprisoned.  The
 consequence was, that very many were suffocated in prison, as many at
 least as the Lord, showing His glory, wished to depart in this way.
 For there were others who were tortured so bitterly, that it seemed
 impossible for them to survive even though they were to obtain every
 kind of attention; and yet they remained alive in prison, destitute
 indeed of care from man, but strengthened by the Lord, and invigorated
 both in body and soul, and they animated and consoled the rest.  But
 the new converts who had been recently apprehended, and whose bodies
 had not previously been tortured, could not indure the confinement, but
 died in the prison.

 "Now the blessed Pothinus, who had been entrusted with the service of
 the bishopric in Lugdunum, was also dragged before the judgment-seat.
 He was now upwards of ninety years of age, and exceedingly weak in
 body.  Though he breathed with difficulty on account of the feebleness
 of the body, yet he was strengthened by the eagerness of his spirit, on
 account of his earnest desire to bear his testimony.  His body, indeed,
 was already dissolved through old age and disease, yet the life was
 preserved in him, that Christ might triumph through him.  When he was
 brought by the soldiers to the judgment-seat, under a convoy of the
 magistrates of the city, and amid exclamations of every kind from the
 whole population, as if he himself were the Christ, he gave the good
 testimony.  Being asked by the governor who was the God of the
 Christians, he said, If thou art worthy, thou shalt know.'  Thereupon
 he was unmercifully dragged about, and endured many blows; for those
 who were near maltreated him in every way with their hands and feet,
 showing no respect for his age, while those at a distance hurled
 against him each one whatever came to hand, all of them believing that
 they would sin greatly and act impiously if they in any respect fell
 short in their insulting treatment of him.  For they thought that in
 this way they would avenge their gods.  And Pothinus, breathing with
 difficulty, was cast into prison, and two days after he expired.

 "Upon this a grand dispensation [3843] of God's providence took place,
 and the immeasurable mercy of Jesus was made manifest,--such an
 occurrence as but rarely happens among the brotherhood, yet one that
 does not fall short of the art of Christ.  For those who in the first
 apprehension had denied, were imprisoned along with the others, and
 shared their hardships.  Their denial, in fact, turned out at this time
 to be of no advantage to them.  For while those who confessed what they
 really were, were imprisoned simply as Christians, no other accusation
 being brought against them, those who denied were detained as murderers
 and profligates.  They, moreover, were doubly punished.  For the
 confessors were lightened by the joy of their testimony and their hope
 in the promises, and by their love to Christ, and by the Father's
 Spirit.  But the deniers were tormented greatly by their own
 consciences, so that when they were led forth their countenances could
 be distinguished among all the rest.  For the confessors went forth
 joyous, with a mingling of glory and abundant grace in their looks, so
 that their chains lay like becoming ornaments around them, as around a
 bride adorned with golden fringes wrought with divers colours. [3844]
 And they breathed at the same time the fragrance of Christ, [3845] so
 that some even thought that they were anointed with this world's
 perfume.  But the deniers were downcast, humbled, sad-looking, and
 weighed down with every kind of disgrace.  They were, moreover,
 reproached even by the heathens with being base and cowardly, and
 charged with the crime of murder; they had lost the altogether
 honourable, glorious, and life-giving appellation. [3846] When the
 rest saw this, they were strengthened, and those who were apprehended
 confessed unhesitatingly, not allowing the reasoning of the devil to
 have even a place in their thoughts."

 Eusebius omits something, saying that after a little the letter
 proceeded as follows:--

 "After these things, then, their testimonies took every shape through
 the different ways in which they departed. [3847] For, plaiting a
 crown from different colours and flowers of every kind, they presented
 it to the Father.  It was right therefore that the noble athletes,
 after having endured divers contests and gained grand victories, should
 receive the great crown of incorruption.

 "Maturus, therefore, and Sanctus, and Blandina, and Attalus were
 publicly [3848] exposed to the wild beasts--that common spectacle of
 heathen barbarity; for a day was expressly assigned to fights with wild
 beasts on account of our people.  And Maturus and Sanctus again endured
 every form of torture in the amphitheatre, as if they had had no
 suffering at all before.  Or rather, like athletes who had overthrown
 their adversary several times, [3849] and were now contending for the
 crown itself, again they endured the lashes [3850] which were usual
 there; and they were dragged about by the wild beasts, and suffered
 every indignity which the maddened populace demanded in cries and
 exhortations proceeding from various parts of the amphitheatre.  And
 last of all they were placed in the iron chair, on which their bodies
 were roasted, and they themselves were filled with the fumes of their
 own flesh.  But the heathens did not stop even here, but became still
 more frantic in their desire to overcome the endurance of the
 Christians.  But not even thus did they hear anything else from Sanctus
 than the utterance of the confession which he had been accustomed to
 make from the beginning.  These, then, after life had lasted a long
 time throughout the great contest, were at last sacrificed, [3851]
 after they alone had formed a spectacle to the world, throughout that
 day, instead of all the diversity which usually takes place in
 gladiatorial shows.

 "Blandina [3852] was hung up fastened to a stake, and exposed, as food
 to the wild beasts that were let loose against her; and through her
 presenting the spectacle of one suspended on something like a cross,
 and through her earnest prayers, she inspired the combatants with great
 eagerness:  for in the combat they saw, by means of their sister, with
 their bodily eyes, Him who was crucified for them, that He might
 persuade those who trust in Him that every one that has suffered for
 the glory of Christ has eternal communion with the living God.  When
 none of the wild beasts at that time touched her, she was taken down
 from the stake and conveyed back to prison.  She was thus reserved for
 another contest, in order that, gaining the victory in many preparative
 conflicts, she might make the condemnation of the Crooked Serpent
 [3853] unquestionable, and that she might encourage the brethren.  For
 though she was an insignificant, weak, and despised woman, yet she was
 clothed with the great and invincible athlete Christ.  On many
 occasions she had overpowered the adversary, and in the course of the
 contest had woven for herself the crown of incorruption.

 "Attalus also was vehemently demanded by the mob; for he was a man of
 mark.  He entered the lists a ready combatant on account of his good
 conscience, since he had been truly practised in the Christian
 discipline, and had always been a Witness of the truth among us.  He
 was led round the amphitheatre, a tablet going before him, on which was
 written in Latin, This is Attalus the Christian;' and the people
 swelled with indignation against him.  But the governor, learning that
 he was a Roman, ordered him to be taken back to prison and kept with
 the rest who were there, with regard to whom he had written to the
 Cæsar, and was now awaiting his determination.

 "The intervening time did not prove barren or unfruitful to the
 Witnesses, but through their patient endurance the immeasurable love of
 Christ was made manifest.  For through the living the dead were made
 alive; and the Witnesses conferred favours on those who were not
 Witnesses, and the Virgin Mother had much joy in receiving back alive
 those whom she had given up as dead abortions.  For through the
 Witnesses the greater number of those who had denied returned, as it
 were, into their mother's womb, and were conceived again and
 re-quickened; and they learned to confess.  And being now restored to
 life, and having their spirits braced, they went up to the
 judgment-seat to be again questioned by the governor, while that God
 who wishes not the death of the sinner, [3854] but mercifully calls to
 repentance, put sweetness into their souls.  This new examination took
 place because the Cæsar had given orders that the Witnesses should be
 punished, but that if any denied they should be set free.  And as now
 was commencing here the fair, which is attendee by vast numbers of men
 assembling from all nations, he brought the blessed up to the
 judgment-seat, exhibiting them as a theatrical show and spectacle to
 the mobs.  Wherefore also he again questioned them, and whoever
 appeared to have had the rights of Roman citizenship he beheaded, and
 the rest he sent to the wild beasts.

 "Now Christ was greatly glorified in those who formerly denied; for,
 contrary to every expectation of the heathen, they confessed.  For
 these were examined separately, under the belief that they were to be
 set free; but confessing, they were added to the number of the
 Witnesses.  But there were also some who remained without; namely,
 those who had no trace of faith, and no perception of the marriage
 garment, [3855] nor notion of the fear of God, but through their
 conduct caused evil reports of our way of life, that is, sons of
 perdition.  But all the rest were added to the Church.

 "Present at the examination of these was one Alexander, a native of
 Phrygia, a physician by profession.  He had lived for many years in
 Gaul, and had become well known to all for his love to God and his
 boldness in proclaiming the truth, for he was not without a share of
 apostolic grace.  He stood near the judgment-seat, and, urging by signs
 those who had denied to confess, he looked to those who stood round the
 judgment-seat like one in travail.  But the mobs, enraged that those
 who had formerly denied should now confess, cried out against Alexander
 as if he were the cause of this change.  Then the governor summoned him
 before him, and inquired of him who he was; and when Alexander said he
 was a Christian, the governor burst into a passion, and condemned him
 to the wild beasts.  And on the next day he entered the amphitheatre
 along with Attalus; for the governor, wishing to gratify the mob, again
 exposed Attalus to the wild beasts.  These two, after being tortured in
 the amphitheatre with all the instruments devised for that purpose, and
 having undergone an exceedingly severe contest, at last were themselves
 sacrificed.  Alexander uttered no groan or murmur of any kind, but
 conversed in his heart with God; but Attalus, when he was placed on the
 iron chair, and all the parts of his body were burning, and when the
 fumes from his body were borne aloft, said to the multitude in Latin,
 Lo! this which ye do is eating men.  But as for us, we neither eat men
 nor practise any other wickedness.'  And being asked what name God has,
 he answered, God has not a name as men have.'

 "After all these, on the last day of the gladiatorial shows, Blandina
 was again brought in along with Ponticus, a boy of about fifteen years
 of age.  These two had been taken daily to the amphitheatre to see the
 tortures which the rest endured, and force was used to compel them to
 swear by the idols of the heathen; but on account of their remaining
 stedfast, and setting all their devices at nought, the multitude were
 furious against them, so as neither to pity the tender years of the boy
 nor to respect the sex of the woman.  Accordingly they exposed them to
 every terror, and inflicted on them every torture, repeatedly trying to
 compel them to swear.  But they failed in effecting this; for Ponticus,
 encouraged by his sister, [3856] so plainly indeed that even the
 heathens saw that it was she that encouraged and confirmed him, after
 enduring nobly every kind of torture, gave up the ghost; while the
 blessed Blandina, last of all, after having like a noble mother
 encouraged her children, and sent them on before her victorious to the
 King, trod the same path of conflict which her children had trod,
 hastening on to them with joy and exultation at her departure, not as
 one thrown to the wild beasts, but as one invited to a marriage
 supper.  And after she had been scourged and exposed to the wild
 beasts, and roasted in the iron chair, she was at last enclosed in a
 net and cast before a bull.  And after having been well tossed by the
 bull, though without having any feeling of what was happening to her,
 through her hope and firm hold of what had been entrusted to her and
 her converse with Christ, she also was sacrificed, the heathens
 themselves acknowledging that never among them did woman endure so many
 and such fearful tortures.

 "Yet not even thus was their madness and their savage hatred to the
 saints satiated.  For wild and barbarous tribes, when excited by the
 Wild Beast, with difficulty ceased from their rage, and their insulting
 conduct found another and peculiar subject in the bodies of the
 Witnesses.  For they felt no shame that they had been overcome, for
 they were not possessed of human reason; but their defeat only the more
 inflamed their rage, and governor and people, like a wild beast, showed
 a like unjust hatred of us, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, He
 that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is righteous, let
 him be righteous still.' [3857] For they threw to the dogs those who
 had been suffocated in prison, carefully watching them day and night,
 lest any one should receive burial from us.  They then laid out the
 mangled remains left by the wild beasts, and the scorched remains left
 by the fire, and the heads of the rest along with their trunks, and in
 like manner for many days watched them lying unburied with a military
 guard.  There were some who raged and gnashed their teeth at them,
 seeking to get from them further vengeance.  Others derided and
 insulted them, at the same time magnifying their own idols, and
 ascribing to them the punishment inflicted on the Christians.  There
 were persons also of a milder disposition, who to some extent seemed to
 sympathize; yet they also frequently upbraided, saying, Where now is
 their God, and what good have they got from that religion which they
 chose in preference to their life?'  Such was the diversity which
 characterized the conduct of the heathens.  But our state was one of
 deep sorrow that we could not bury the bodies.  For night aided us not
 in this matter; money failed to persuade, and entreaty did not shame
 them into compliance; but they kept up the watch in every way, as if
 they were to gain some great advantage from the bodies of the
 Christians not obtaining burial.

 Something is omitted.  The letter then goes on:--

 "The bodies of the Witnesses, after having been maltreated in every
 way, and exposed in the open air for six days, were burned, reduced to
 ashes, and swept by the wicked into the river Rhone, which flows past,
 in order that not even a vestige of them might be visible on earth.
 And these things they did, as if they had been able to overcome God,
 and deprive them of their second birth, [3858] in order, as they said,
 that they may not have hope in a resurrection, trusting to which they
 introduce some strange and new mode of worship, and despise dangers,
 and go readily and with joy to death.  Now let us see if they will rise
 again, and if their God can help them, and rescue them out of our
 hands.'"

 Eusebius here breaks off his series of continuous extracts, but he
 makes a few more for special purposes.  The first is the account which
 the churches gave of the character of the Witnesses:--

 "Who also were to such an extent zealous followers and imitators of
 Christ, who, being in the shape of God, thought it not an object of
 desire to be treated like God; [3859] that though they were in such
 glory, and had borne their testimony not once, nor twice, but often,
 and had been again taken back to prison after exposure to the wild
 beasts, and bore about with them the marks of the burnings and bruises
 and wounds all over their bodies, yet did they neither proclaim
 themselves Witnesses, nor indeed did they permit us to address them by
 this name; but if any one of us on any occasion, either by letter or in
 conversation, called them Witnesses, they rebuked him sharply.  For
 they willingly gave the title of Witness to Christ, the faithful and
 true Witness,' [3860] and first-born from the dead, and the leader to
 the divine life.  And they reminded us of those Witnesses who had
 already departed, and said:  These indeed are now Witnesses, whom
 Christ has vouchsafed to take up to Himself in the very act of
 confession, thus putting His seal upon their testimony through their
 departure.  But we are mean and humble confessors.'  And with tears
 they besought the brethren that earnest prayers might be made for their
 being perfected.  They in reality did all that is implied in the term
 testimony,' acting with great boldness towards all the heathen; and
 their nobleness they made manifest through their patience, and
 fearlessness, and intrepidity.  But the title of Witness, as implying
 some superiority to their brethren, [3861] they refused, being filled
 with the fear of God."

 After a little they say:--

 "They humbled themselves [3862] under the powerful hand by which they
 are now highly exalted.  Then they pleaded for all, [3863] but accused
 none; they absolved all, they bound none; and they prayed for those who
 inflicted the tortures, even as Stephen the perfect Witness, Lord, lay
 not this sin to their charge.' [3864] But if he prayed for those who
 stoned him, how much more for the brethren!"

 After other things, again they say:--

 "For they had this very great conflict with him, the devil, on account
 of their genuine love, in order that the Beast being choked, might
 vomit forth those whom he thought he had already swallowed.  For they
 assumed no airs of superiority over the fallen, but with those things
 in which they themselves abounded they aided the needy, displaying
 towards them the compassion of a mother.  And pouring out many tears
 for them to the Father, they begged life; [3865] and He gave it to
 them, and they shared it with their neighbours.  And departing
 victorious over all to God, having always loved peace, and having
 recommended peace to us, in peace they went to God, leaving no sorrow
 to their Mother, nor division and dissension to their brethren, but joy
 and peace, and concord and love."

 "The same writing of the fore-mentioned martyrs," says Eusebius,
 "contains a story worth remembrance.

 "For there was one of them of the name of Alcibiades, who lived an
 exceedingly austere life, confining his diet to bread and water, and
 partaking of nothing else whatsoever.  He tried to continue this mode
 of life in prison; but it was revealed to Attalus after the first
 conflict which he underwent in the amphitheatre that Alcibiades was not
 pursuing the right course in refusing to use the creatures of God, and
 in leaving an example which might be a stumbling-block to others.  And
 Alcibiades was persuaded, and partook freely of all kinds of food, and
 thanked God.  For they were not without the oversight of the grace of
 God, but the Holy Spirit was their counsellor."

 ------------------------

 [3823] Vol. iv. p. 125, this series.  Compare Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers,
 part ii. vol. i. pp. 499, etc., 510, etc.

 [3824] Ap. Fathers, part ii. vol. i. p. 499.

 [3825] This letter has come down to us in fragments quoted by
 Eusebius.  We have used the translation of Lord Hailes as the basis of
 ours.  [Compare Vol. i. p. 309, this series, and note the adhesion of
 the primitive Gallican Church to the East,--to the land of Polycarp and
 Pothinus.  Concerning Pothinus, see Routh, Rel. Sac., i. p. 328, and
 the correction by Lightfoot, Ap. F., part ii. vol. i. p. 430, etc.  The
 Gallican Church may yet arise from the dust, and restore the primitive
 primacy of Lyons.  God grant it!]

 [3826] We have translated martures "witnesses" and marturia "testimony"
 throughout.

 [3827] Houses of friends and relatives.  Olshausen takes them to be
 public buildings.

 [3828] Rom. viii. 18.  [On quotations from Scripture, etc., see
 Westcott, Canon, p. 378, ed. 1855.]

 [3829] By "confinements" in this passage evidently is meant that the
 populace prevented them from resorting to public places, and thus shut
 them up in their own houses.

 [3830] Luke i. 6.

 [3831] From the heathen judge.

 [3832] Luke i. 67.

 [3833] The writer refers to St. John's Gospel (xv. 13):  "Greater love
 hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends."

 [3834] Rev. xiv. 4.

 [3835] This expression seems to refer to what took place in athletic
 combats.  The athletes were tested before fighting, and those in every
 way qualified were permitted to fight, while the others were rejected.
 This testing, Valesius supposes, was called diakrisis.

 [3836] John xvi. 2.

 [3837] The words here admit of two meanings:  that something
 blasphemous might be uttered by them--such as speaking against Christ
 and swearing by Cæsar:  or that some accusation against the Christians
 might be uttered by them--confirming, for instance, the reports of
 infanticide and incest prevalent against the Christians.  The latter in
 this passage seems unquestionably to be the meaning.

 [3838] 1 Tim. iii. 15.

 [3839] Heinichen construes differently.  He makes the "torturers
 astonished that Blandina gave her testimony that one kind of torture
 was sufficient to deprive her of life."  Perhaps the right construction
 is to make hoti mean "because" or "for:"  "They were astonished as
 Blandina bearing her testimony, for one kind of torture was sufficient
 to have killed her."

 [3840] The words huperbeblemenos kai huper panta anthropon naturally go
 with hupomenon, and therefore intimate that Sanctus' endurance was
 greater than human; but we doubt if this is intended by the writer.

 [3841] John vii. 38:  "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath
 said, out of his bosom shall flow rivers of living water."

 [3842] The holes were placed in a line, so that the further the hole in
 which one leg was put from the hole in which the other leg was put, the
 more nearly would the two legs form a straight line, and the greater
 would be the pain.

 [3843] The dispensation is, that those who denied were not set free,
 but confined with the others; and that this harsh treatment and sad
 state of mind confirmed the resolution of those not yet apprehended to
 confess Christ.  Various other explanations have been given, but this
 seems the most reasonable.

 [3844] Ps. xlv. 13.

 [3845] 2 Cor. ii. 15.

 [3846] Of Christian.

 [3847] We have adopted here an emendation of Routh's.  The literal
 version of the common text is:  "The testimonies of their departure
 were divided into every form."

 [3848] The Greek is eis to demosion, was led "to the public building"
 to the wild beasts.  The public building is taken to be the
 amphitheatre.

 [3849] The words "several times" are represented in Greek by dia
 pleionon kleron, lit. "through several lots."  When there were several
 athletes to contend, the pairs were determined by lot.  After the first
 contest the victors were again formed into pairs by lot, until finally
 there should be but one pair left.  See the process at the Olympic
 games described in Lucian Hermotimus, c. xl. p. 782.

 [3850] The bestiarii, before fighting with wild beasts, had to run the
 gauntlet.

 [3851] Rufinus translates jugulati sunt.  Probably, "killed with the
 sword."  The term may have been a technical one, being applied to the
 gladiators or bestiarii, whose death may have been looked on as a
 sacrifice to a god or a dead-hero.

 [3852] Blandina was a slave:  hence the mode of punishment.  On this
 matter see Lipsius, De Cruce.  [And my note, p. 784.]

 [3853] Lord Hailes remarks that this alludes to Isa. xxvii. 1.

 [3854] Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

 [3855] Heinichen renders "the bride's garment," and explains in the
 following manner.  The bride is the Church, the garment Christ, and the
 sons of perdition had no ideas what garment the Church of Christ should
 wear, had no idea that they should be clothed with Christ, and be
 filled with His Spirit.  It is generally taken to be the marriage
 garment of Matt. xxii. 12.

 [3856] She may have been his sister by birth, as some have supposed,
 but the term "sister" would have been applied had she been connected by
 no other tie than that of a common faith.

 [3857] Rev. xxii. 11.  Lardner thinks the passage is quoted from Dan.
 xii. 10.  Credib., part ii. c. 16.

 [3858] palingenesia.  The term refers here to the new state of affairs
 at the end of the world.

 [3859] Phil. ii. 6.

 [3860] Rev. i. 5 and iii. 14.

 [3861] The Greek is ten pros tous adelphous ton marturon prosegorian,
 generally translated, "offered to them by their brethren."

 [3862] 1 Pet. v. 6.

 [3863] The Greek is, pasi men apelogounto.  Rufinus translated,
 "Placabant omnes, neminem accusabant."  Valesius thought that the words
 ought to be translated, "They rendered an account of their faith to
 all;" or, "They defended themselves before all."  Heinichen has
 justified the translation in the text by an appeal to a passage in
 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., iv. 15.

 [3864] Acts vii. 60.

 [3865] Ps. xx. 4.

 Note by the American Editor.

 A French writer has remarked, "Ce n'est pas Spartacus qui a supprimé
 l'esclavage; c'est bien plutôt Blandine."

 ------------------------

 Elucidation.

 (In every succession, p. 764.)

 Here our author mentions that he noted the succession of Bishops at
 Rome, but he gives his list with no remark about Rome in particular.
 He adds that "in every succession and in every city (i.e., in every
 See) a primitive accordance with the law and the Gospel is
 maintained."  How can our excellent Lightfoot [3866] give it a colour
 wholly gratuitous in these words:  "He interested himself in the
 succession of the Roman See, intent, like Irenæus in the next
 generation, on showing the permanence of the orthodox tradition,
 through the continuity of the Roman episcopate."  Irenæus, who, above
 all the Westerns, is identified with the Orient!

 Where is the evidence of any such idea or "intent"?  As for Irenæus,
 his testimony has been sufficiently illustrated before, with proof that
 his words have not the slightest reference to the continuity of the
 Roman more than any other See, save only as the influx of visitors from
 other Sees helped to give it orthodoxy by their concurrent testimony.
 [3867]

 ------------------------

 [3866] Ap. Fathers, part ii. vol. i. p. 435; and the same laxity, p.
 384, coincident with his theory as to a virtual post-Apostolic
 development of episcopacy.

 [3867] Compare vol. i. pp. 415, 460, and vol. v. Elucid. VI.; also
 Elucid. XI. pp. 157-159, this series.

 Note.

 It may be worth while to state here, that I have uniformly (mistakes
 excepted) put my chronological statements, at the head of
 introductions, into brackets, so as to make the reader sure that the
 Edinburgh edition is not to be responsible for them.  Some have
 inferred, therefore, that what follows is from the Edinburgh; but I
 think my modes of expression sufficient, generally, to guard against
 misconception.  Notes (like this) are sometimes marked, "By the
 American Editor," when I have feared a misleading ambiguity.
 Otherwise, I have been unguarded.  All the introductions in these
 "Remains" are mine, save the prefatory paragraphs of the translator on
 pp. 747, 748.  Annotations on my own material are not bracketed.  The
 very large amount of work bestowed upon this edition can only be known
 by comparison with the Edinburgh.  In several instances of delicate
 criticism I have obtained valuable aid from my beloved friend, F. P.
 Nash, Esq., of Hobart College, especially in questions of the low Latin
 or ambiguous Greek.

 A.C.C.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1:1 [2]1:1 [3]1:1 [4]1:1-2 [5]1:2 [6]1:3 [7]1:5
 [8]1:16 [9]1:18 [10]1:26 [11]1:26 [12]1:26 [13]1:27
 [14]1:28 [15]1:31 [16]2:7 [17]2:10 [18]2:16-17 [19]2:20
 [20]3 [21]3:5 [22]3:5 [23]3:6 [24]3:15 [25]3:19 [26]3:22
 [27]3:22 [28]3:22 [29]3:22 [30]4:12 [31]4:26 [32]5:24
 [33]5:24 [34]6:2 [35]6:2 [36]6:3 [37]6:4 [38]6:6 [39]6:9
 [40]7:1 [41]8:1 [42]8:21 [43]8:21 [44]9:1 [45]9:11
 [46]11:3 [47]11:7 [48]11:28 [49]12:3 [50]12:3 [51]15
 [52]15:13-16 [53]17:5 [54]17:17 [55]18:3 [56]18:4 [57]18:21
 [58]19:11 [59]20:3 [60]22:1 [61]22:12 [62]22:13 [63]22:17
 [64]23:9 [65]23:9 [66]23:17 [67]25:34 [68]27:25 [69]29:33
 [70]29:35 [71]30:8 [72]30:14 [73]30:20 [74]32:24 [75]34:7
 [76]35:18 [77]35:21 [78]35:22 [79]37:2 [80]37:19 [81]37:22
 [82]37:28 [83]37:28 [84]37:29 [85]38:1 [86]38:5 [87]38:6
 [88]38:12 [89]39:1 [90]41:5 [91]41:25 [92]41:45
 [93]42:21-24 [94]42:22 [95]42:24 [96]45:2 [97]48:7
 [98]48:16 [99]49:3 [100]49:7 [101]49:10 [102]49:10
 [103]49:10 [104]49:21 [105]49:27 [106]50:26

 Exodus

 [107]3 [108]4:3-4 [109]7:1 [110]7:9 [111]7:10-14
 [112]7:19-20 [113]8:19 [114]12 [115]13:2 [116]14:31
 [117]15:1 [118]15:4 [119]19:9 [120]22:28 [121]22:28
 [122]22:28 [123]22:28 [124]23:20-21 [125]24:18 [126]25:4
 [127]25:10 [128]28:27 [129]28:28 [130]28:35-36 [131]28:36-38
 [132]29 [133]29:5-6 [134]30:23 [135]30:23 [136]33:11
 [137]33:14 [138]33:19 [139]33:20 [140]33:21 [141]33:23
 [142]34:1 [143]34:28 [144]34:29 [145]35:3

 Leviticus

 [146]2:13 [147]8 [148]11:5 [149]11:7 [150]11:44 [151]12:4
 [152]12:8 [153]24:16 [154]24:16

 Numbers

 [155]1:51 [156]3:32 [157]3:45 [158]5:11 [159]11:16
 [160]11:34 [161]12:3 [162]12:6-7 [163]12:7 [164]15:25
 [165]16:31-33

 Deuteronomy

 [166]2:23 [167]4:34 [168]4:39 [169]4:39 [170]6:4 [171]6:4
 [172]6:4 [173]6:13 [174]6:13 [175]6:13 [176]6:13 [177]8:11
 [178]9:9 [179]10:14 [180]10:14-15 [181]10:17 [182]10:17
 [183]10:17 [184]10:17 [185]10:17 [186]10:20 [187]12:11
 [188]13:1 [189]13:1-3 [190]13:6 [191]17 [192]17:6 [193]17:6
 [194]17:15 [195]18:15 [196]18:15-19 [197]19:15 [198]21:23
 [199]25:3 [200]25:3 [201]25:7-9 [202]27:15 [203]27:17
 [204]30:15 [205]31 [206]32:7 [207]32:8 [208]32:8 [209]32:12
 [210]32:17 [211]32:35 [212]32:39 [213]32:39 [214]33:2
 [215]33:12 [216]34:5-6 [217]34:6 [218]34:10

 Joshua

 [219]3:16 [220]7:19-20 [221]15:34 [222]15:44 [223]16:8
 [224]17:8 [225]19:30 [226]19:43 [227]23:7 [228]23:7
 [229]23:7 [230]24:30

 Judges

 [231]2:9 [232]9:46 [233]13:16 [234]13:20 [235]13:25 [236]14:1

 1 Samuel

 [237]1:6-7 [238]1:9-18 [239]1:11 [240]2:3 [241]5:3
 [242]9:23 [243]12:22 [244]15:11 [245]16:13 [246]16:14
 [247]17:44

 2 Samuel

 [248]19:21 [249]20:1 [250]23:30

 1 Kings

 [251]2:11 [252]8:56-58 [253]11:1 [254]11:11 [255]17 [256]18
 [257]19:8 [258]21:10 [259]21:13

 2 Kings

 [260]2:8 [261]2:11 [262]2:12-18 [263]4:27 [264]23:13

 1 Chronicles

 [265]2:43 [266]4:22 [267]11:36

 2 Chronicles

 [268]7:12 [269]24:20-22 [270]27:3

 Esther

 [271]10:12

 Job

 [272]3 [273]5:12-13 [274]29:13-17 [275]29:15 [276]40:19

 Psalms

 [277]1:1 [278]1:20 [279]2:5 [280]2:9 [281]3:5 [282]5
 [283]7:15 [284]8:3 [285]9:17 [286]9:18 [287]10:5 [288]11:4
 [289]12:2-4 [290]16:5 [291]18:1 [292]18:9 [293]18:11
 [294]18:25-26 [295]18:26 [296]18:31 [297]18:41 [298]18:43
 [299]18:50 [300]18:50 [301]19:1 [302]19:1 [303]19:4
 [304]19:8 [305]19:12 [306]20:4 [307]24:3 [308]24:4
 [309]24:7 [310]24:7 [311]24:7 [312]24:7-8 [313]24:8
 [314]24:10 [315]27:10 [316]29 [317]30:1-6 [318]31:5
 [319]32:1 [320]33:22 [321]34:1 [322]34:13 [323]35:10
 [324]37:29 [325]39:1 [326]39:12 [327]44:21 [328]44:21
 [329]44:23 [330]45:1 [331]45:1 [332]45:6 [333]45:11
 [334]45:13 [335]47:8 [336]47:8 [337]48:13-14 [338]48:14
 [339]48:14 [340]49:14 [341]50:1 [342]51:5 [343]51:7
 [344]51:12 [345]51:13 [346]51:17 [347]51:19 [348]57:1
 [349]57:6 [350]65:9 [351]68:18 [352]68:33 [353]71:19
 [354]72:8 [355]72:11 [356]72:17 [357]73:1-3 [358]76:11
 [359]77:19 [360]78:2 [361]82:1 [362]84:10 [363]86:8
 [364]86:8 [365]86:8 [366]86:13 [367]89:20 [368]89:44-45
 [369]92:7 [370]93 [371]94:11 [372]94:11 [373]98:1-2
 [374]98:6 [375]102:19-20 [376]102:26 [377]102:26-27
 [378]103:4 [379]103:14-16 [380]104:4 [381]106:3
 [382]107:15-17 [383]110:1 [384]110:3 [385]110:4 [386]116:15
 [387]116:16 [388]118:16 [389]118:23 [390]118:23 [391]118:25
 [392]118:26 [393]118:26 [394]118:26 [395]118:26-27
 [396]119:107 [397]119:137 [398]119:167 [399]120 [400]120
 [401]121:4 [402]125:3 [403]130:7 [404]132:11 [405]133:1
 [406]133:1 [407]137:4 [408]146:3 [409]146:4 [410]147:5
 [411]148:7

 Proverbs

 [412]3:3-4 [413]4:18 [414]6:25 [415]6:26 [416]6:27
 [417]6:28-29 [418]8:30 [419]8:31 [420]12:15 [421]13:3
 [422]13:24 [423]14:12 [424]14:29 [425]15:19 [426]18:6
 [427]18:19 [428]19:25 [429]19:28 [430]21:1 [431]21:23
 [432]22:28 [433]24:17 [434]25:11 [435]26:4 [436]26:9

 Ecclesiastes

 [437]2:8 [438]3:1 [439]3:2 [440]3:5 [441]3:7 [442]3:20
 [443]7:26 [444]12:4 [445]12:7

 Song of Solomon

 [446]2:2 [447]2:8 [448]4:14 [449]4:14 [450]6:9

 Isaiah

 [451]1:3 [452]1:3 [453]1:3 [454]1:8 [455]1:20 [456]2:3
 [457]3:10 [458]6:3 [459]9:1-2 [460]9:2 [461]9:2 [462]9:6
 [463]11:1-2 [464]11:2 [465]11:6 [466]12:3 [467]19:1
 [468]19:20 [469]22:13 [470]24:20 [471]26:19 [472]26:19
 [473]27:1 [474]28:7 [475]28:16 [476]29:21 [477]33:22
 [478]40:4 [479]40:6 [480]40:12 [481]40:26-27 [482]43:24
 [483]44:6 [484]44:6 [485]45:21 [486]49:15 [487]49:18
 [488]51:7 [489]52:15 [490]52:15 [491]53:1 [492]53:1
 [493]56:4-5 [494]61:1-3 [495]61:9 [496]61:9 [497]64:4
 [498]65:1 [499]65:25 [500]66:2 [501]66:21

 Jeremiah

 [502]1:16 [503]2:9 [504]2:27 [505]6:16 [506]6:20 [507]8:4
 [508]9:23-24 [509]10:11 [510]10:11 [511]10:11 [512]16:16
 [513]16:20 [514]17:5 [515]17:5 [516]17:10 [517]17:14
 [518]18:11 [519]31:19 [520]33:15 [521]33:20-22

 Lamentations

 [522]1:18 [523]3:38 [524]3:41 [525]4:16

 Ezekiel

 [526]2:6 [527]18:21-22 [528]18:32 [529]18:33 [530]21:12
 [531]27:19 [532]27:19 [533]33:7 [534]33:11 [535]33:11
 [536]37:27 [537]48:26-27

 Daniel

 [538]1:15 [539]2:12 [540]2:31 [541]3:25 [542]4:10-23
 [543]4:13 [544]4:35 [545]7:9 [546]7:13 [547]7:22 [548]9:27
 [549]10:3 [550]10:21 [551]12:1 [552]12:10

 Hosea

 [553]1:2 [554]1:7 [555]1:10-11 [556]5:2 [557]5:8 [558]6:6
 [559]6:6 [560]6:6 [561]9:14 [562]11:1 [563]13:14 [564]13:14
 [565]14:10

 Joel

 [566]3:2 [567]3:12

 Amos

 [568]9:7

 Micah

 [569]1:3 [570]1:14 [571]5:2 [572]5:2 [573]7:18-20

 Habakkuk

 [574]1:5 [575]3:2 [576]3:6 [577]3:13

 Zechariah

 [578]2:8 [579]8:1-19 [580]14:9

 Malachi

 [581]3:1 [582]4:2 [583]4:2

 Matthew

 [584]1 [585]1:16 [586]1:18-24 [587]1:19 [588]1:19 [589]1:20
 [590]1:20-24 [591]2:1-12 [592]2:1-12 [593]2:1-12 [594]2:2
 [595]2:11 [596]2:13-14 [597]2:13-15 [598]2:14 [599]2:14-16
 [600]2:15 [601]2:16 [602]2:16 [603]2:16 [604]2:19-23
 [605]2:26 [606]3:3 [607]3:11 [608]3:12 [609]3:12 [610]3:12
 [611]3:13-17 [612]3:17 [613]4 [614]4:2 [615]4:5 [616]4:10
 [617]4:10 [618]4:10 [619]4:16 [620]4:19 [621]4:24 [622]5:3
 [623]5:3 [624]5:5 [625]5:6 [626]5:7 [627]5:7 [628]5:8
 [629]5:8 [630]5:8 [631]5:8 [632]5:8 [633]5:8 [634]5:8
 [635]5:8 [636]5:9 [637]5:9 [638]5:10 [639]5:14 [640]5:14
 [641]5:14-15 [642]5:16 [643]5:17 [644]5:18 [645]5:18
 [646]5:18 [647]5:22 [648]5:28 [649]5:28-29 [650]5:34-35
 [651]5:37 [652]5:37 [653]5:39 [654]5:39-41 [655]5:40
 [656]5:44 [657]5:44-45 [658]5:45 [659]5:45 [660]5:45
 [661]6:6 [662]6:6 [663]6:8 [664]6:9 [665]6:13 [666]6:22
 [667]6:24 [668]6:25 [669]6:27 [670]6:32 [671]6:32 [672]6:33
 [673]6:33 [674]6:33 [675]6:33 [676]6:33 [677]6:33 [678]6:34
 [679]7:2 [680]7:6 [681]7:6 [682]7:6 [683]7:6 [684]7:6
 [685]7:7 [686]7:7 [687]7:7 [688]7:9-11 [689]7:12 [690]7:12
 [691]7:13-14 [692]7:21 [693]8:1-4 [694]8:9 [695]8:11
 [696]8:11 [697]8:11-12 [698]8:24-26 [699]8:26 [700]8:29
 [701]8:31 [702]9 [703]9:13 [704]9:13 [705]9:17 [706]9:20-22
 [707]9:20-26 [708]9:37 [709]9:37-38 [710]9:37-38 [711]10
 [712]10:2-4 [713]10:4 [714]10:5 [715]10:7-10 [716]10:8
 [717]10:9 [718]10:10 [719]10:10 [720]10:11 [721]10:12
 [722]10:12-15 [723]10:16 [724]10:16 [725]10:16 [726]10:23
 [727]10:24 [728]10:25 [729]10:26 [730]10:28 [731]10:28
 [732]10:29-30 [733]10:30 [734]10:33 [735]10:34 [736]10:34
 [737]10:34 [738]10:35-36 [739]10:39 [740]10:42 [741]11:8
 [742]11:8 [743]11:9 [744]11:10 [745]11:11 [746]11:11
 [747]11:23 [748]11:25 [749]11:25 [750]11:25 [751]11:25
 [752]11:25 [753]11:25 [754]11:27 [755]11:27 [756]11:27
 [757]11:28 [758]11:29 [759]11:30 [760]11:30 [761]12:7
 [762]12:7 [763]12:19 [764]12:25 [765]12:26 [766]12:33
 [767]12:33 [768]12:34 [769]12:36 [770]12:41 [771]12:41
 [772]12:42 [773]12:42 [774]12:44 [775]12:45 [776]12:50
 [777]13 [778]13:3 [779]13:11 [780]13:17 [781]13:23
 [782]13:35 [783]13:39 [784]13:39 [785]13:41 [786]13:43
 [787]13:43 [788]13:46 [789]13:52 [790]14:17 [791]14:25
 [792]15:13 [793]15:14 [794]15:14 [795]16:13 [796]16:16
 [797]16:18 [798]16:19 [799]16:19 [800]16:22 [801]16:24
 [802]16:27 [803]17:5 [804]17:20 [805]17:20 [806]17:20
 [807]17:21 [808]18:7 [809]18:7 [810]18:7 [811]18:10
 [812]18:16 [813]18:18 [814]18:18 [815]19:8 [816]19:12
 [817]19:12 [818]19:16 [819]19:16 [820]19:17 [821]19:17
 [822]19:17 [823]19:23 [824]19:24 [825]19:28 [826]19:28
 [827]19:29 [828]20:16 [829]20:28 [830]21:8-9 [831]21:9
 [832]21:9 [833]21:22 [834]21:22 [835]22 [836]22:2-14
 [837]22:3-14 [838]22:11 [839]22:12 [840]22:23 [841]22:29
 [842]22:29 [843]22:30 [844]22:30 [845]22:32 [846]22:39
 [847]22:39 [848]22:42-45 [849]23 [850]23:2-3 [851]23:2-3
 [852]23:3 [853]23:9 [854]23:9 [855]23:23-24 [856]23:25-26
 [857]23:35 [858]23:37 [859]24 [860]24:2 [861]24:2
 [862]24:15 [863]24:24 [864]24:27 [865]24:30 [866]24:30
 [867]24:34 [868]24:35 [869]24:45-50 [870]24:45-51 [871]25:2
 [872]25:27-30 [873]25:33 [874]25:35-36 [875]25:36 [876]25:40
 [877]25:41 [878]25:41 [879]26:21 [880]27:13-14 [881]27:15-18
 [882]27:15-26 [883]27:19 [884]27:19 [885]27:21-23 [886]27:25
 [887]27:25 [888]27:25 [889]27:29 [890]27:34 [891]27:34
 [892]27:40-42 [893]27:45 [894]27:45 [895]27:46 [896]27:48
 [897]27:51 [898]27:51 [899]27:51-53 [900]27:52 [901]27:52
 [902]27:53 [903]27:56 [904]27:60 [905]27:62 [906]27:62-66
 [907]27:63 [908]27:63 [909]28:1-8 [910]28:5-7 [911]28:11-15
 [912]28:13 [913]28:19-20 [914]28:19-20 [915]28:20

 Mark

 [916]1:4 [917]1:13 [918]1:16-17 [919]3:17 [920]4:3 [921]4:8
 [922]4:20 [923]4:34 [924]5:15 [925]6:3 [926]6:9 [927]6:9
 [928]6:11 [929]6:37-44 [930]7:34 [931]9:29 [932]9:49
 [933]10:5-6 [934]10:18 [935]10:44 [936]10:46 [937]10:49
 [938]11:25 [939]12:24 [940]12:24 [941]12:27 [942]12:29
 [943]12:31 [944]12:33 [945]13:31 [946]15:21 [947]15:34
 [948]15:40 [949]16:15-18 [950]16:15-19 [951]16:16 [952]16:16

 Luke

 [953]1:1-4 [954]1:4 [955]1:6 [956]1:14 [957]1:26-38
 [958]1:26-38 [959]1:28 [960]1:28 [961]1:28 [962]1:32-33
 [963]1:33 [964]1:34 [965]1:35 [966]1:36 [967]1:36
 [968]1:39-40 [969]1:43 [970]1:44 [971]1:48 [972]1:48
 [973]1:67 [974]1:79 [975]2:1 [976]2:1-6 [977]2:8-12
 [978]2:14 [979]2:19 [980]2:21-24 [981]2:22-35 [982]2:23
 [983]2:25-35 [984]2:25-38 [985]2:26 [986]2:34 [987]2:35
 [988]2:36-38 [989]2:41-52 [990]2:42-47 [991]2:46-52 [992]2:49
 [993]3:1 [994]3:21-23 [995]3:22 [996]4 [997]4:1-13 [998]4:8
 [999]4:8 [1000]6 [1001]6:20 [1002]6:29 [1003]6:30
 [1004]6:36 [1005]6:38 [1006]6:44 [1007]6:46 [1008]6:46
 [1009]7:8 [1010]7:37-38 [1011]8:5 [1012]8:18 [1013]9:62
 [1014]10 [1015]10:4 [1016]10:5 [1017]10:5-6 [1018]10:16
 [1019]10:18 [1020]10:18-19 [1021]10:21 [1022]10:21
 [1023]10:21 [1024]10:21 [1025]10:21 [1026]10:22 [1027]10:22
 [1028]10:22 [1029]10:24 [1030]11 [1031]11:2 [1032]11:9
 [1033]11:20 [1034]11:22 [1035]11:31 [1036]11:31 [1037]11:32
 [1038]11:32 [1039]11:34 [1040]11:51 [1041]11:52 [1042]11:52
 [1043]11:52 [1044]12:6-7 [1045]12:17 [1046]12:19 [1047]12:20
 [1048]12:24 [1049]12:25 [1050]12:34 [1051]12:35 [1052]12:42
 [1053]12:49 [1054]12:49 [1055]12:51-53 [1056]12:53
 [1057]13:25 [1058]13:29 [1059]13:29 [1060]13:34 [1061]15:6
 [1062]16:8 [1063]17:1 [1064]17:1 [1065]17:6 [1066]17:11-19
 [1067]18:6-8 [1068]18:18 [1069]18:18 [1070]18:19 [1071]19
 [1072]19:5 [1073]19:38 [1074]19:43-44 [1075]19:44 [1076]20:36
 [1077]20:38 [1078]21:11 [1079]22:33 [1080]23:6-11 [1081]23:34
 [1082]23:34 [1083]23:34 [1084]23:34 [1085]23:34
 [1086]23:39-43 [1087]23:42-43 [1088]23:43 [1089]23:44-49
 [1090]23:46 [1091]23:46 [1092]23:48 [1093]24:10 [1094]24:21
 [1095]24:29 [1096]24:34 [1097]24:37 [1098]24:46 [1099]24:49
 [1100]24:50

 John

 [1101]1:1-3 [1102]1:4-9 [1103]1:14 [1104]1:18 [1105]1:29
 [1106]2:20 [1107]2:20 [1108]3:5 [1109]3:5 [1110]3:5
 [1111]3:6 [1112]3:18 [1113]3:31 [1114]4:6 [1115]4:27
 [1116]5:5-9 [1117]5:5-9 [1118]5:23 [1119]6:27 [1120]7
 [1121]7:38 [1122]8:11 [1123]8:12 [1124]8:34 [1125]8:44
 [1126]8:56-58 [1127]9:2-3 [1128]9:5 [1129]9:6-7 [1130]9:39
 [1131]10:3 [1132]10:9 [1133]10:12-13 [1134]10:16 [1135]10:16
 [1136]10:18 [1137]10:22 [1138]11:1-16 [1139]11:43 [1140]12:5
 [1141]12:34 [1142]13:23 [1143]13:35 [1144]13:35 [1145]14:1
 [1146]14:23 [1147]14:26 [1148]14:30 [1149]15:13 [1150]16:2
 [1151]18:17 [1152]18:31 [1153]18:33-38 [1154]18:36
 [1155]19:2-3 [1156]19:6-7 [1157]19:11 [1158]19:11 [1159]19:12
 [1160]19:13 [1161]19:26-27 [1162]19:26-27 [1163]19:26-27
 [1164]19:28 [1165]19:30 [1166]19:31-34 [1167]19:34
 [1168]19:38-42 [1169]20:17 [1170]20:19 [1171]20:19
 [1172]20:22-23 [1173]20:26 [1174]20:29 [1175]20:31
 [1176]21:11 [1177]21:20 [1178]21:22

 Acts

 [1179]1:1 [1180]1:12 [1181]1:23 [1182]2:1 [1183]3:2
 [1184]3:7 [1185]3:17 [1186]3:22 [1187]3:22-23 [1188]3:24
 [1189]4:6 [1190]4:12 [1191]4:32 [1192]4:32-37 [1193]5
 [1194]5:1-11 [1195]5:15 [1196]5:20-25 [1197]5:29
 [1198]5:35-39 [1199]5:38 [1200]5:38 [1201]5:39 [1202]7:37
 [1203]7:60 [1204]7:60 [1205]7:60 [1206]8 [1207]8:9-11
 [1208]8:13 [1209]8:18-24 [1210]8:39 [1211]9:11 [1212]9:36
 [1213]10 [1214]10:4 [1215]10:9-35 [1216]10:9-35 [1217]10:11
 [1218]12:4 [1219]12:12 [1220]13 [1221]13:1 [1222]13:1
 [1223]13:22 [1224]14:12 [1225]15 [1226]15:20 [1227]15:20
 [1228]15:28 [1229]15:39 [1230]16:4 [1231]17:21 [1232]17:30
 [1233]18:9 [1234]20:7 [1235]20:16 [1236]20:29-31
 [1237]21:18-26 [1238]22:5 [1239]23:2 [1240]23:9 [1241]23:11
 [1242]26:7 [1243]27:16 [1244]28 [1245]28:1

 Romans

 [1246]1:5-15 [1247]1:8 [1248]1:20 [1249]1:25 [1250]1:32
 [1251]1:32 [1252]2:11 [1253]2:12 [1254]2:12 [1255]2:28
 [1256]3:3-10 [1257]3:23-26 [1258]5:4 [1259]6:3-4
 [1260]6:12-19 [1261]7:2 [1262]7:9 [1263]7:18 [1264]7:24
 [1265]8:6 [1266]8:7 [1267]8:9 [1268]8:15 [1269]8:18
 [1270]8:18 [1271]8:18 [1272]8:20 [1273]8:29 [1274]8:29
 [1275]8:34 [1276]9:18 [1277]10:18 [1278]11:1 [1279]11:15
 [1280]11:26 [1281]11:34 [1282]12:2 [1283]12:10 [1284]12:17
 [1285]12:19 [1286]12:19 [1287]13:2 [1288]13:10 [1289]13:13
 [1290]13:14 [1291]14:15 [1292]15:4 [1293]15:19 [1294]15:20
 [1295]16 [1296]16:15-17 [1297]16:17-19 [1298]16:18
 [1299]16:20 [1300]16:21

 1 Corinthians

 [1301]1:18 [1302]1:18 [1303]1:18 [1304]1:24 [1305]1:31
 [1306]2:9 [1307]2:9 [1308]2:13-14 [1309]2:14 [1310]3:19
 [1311]5:5 [1312]5:7-8 [1313]5:9 [1314]5:11 [1315]5:11
 [1316]5:11 [1317]6:7 [1318]6:9 [1319]6:18-19 [1320]6:19
 [1321]7:5 [1322]7:5 [1323]7:29 [1324]7:32 [1325]7:34
 [1326]8:12-13 [1327]9:27 [1328]10:4 [1329]10:12 [1330]10:20
 [1331]10:20-21 [1332]10:21 [1333]10:21 [1334]10:31
 [1335]10:32-33 [1336]11:1 [1337]11:1 [1338]11:10 [1339]12
 [1340]12:8-10 [1341]12:29 [1342]13:1 [1343]13:1 [1344]14:7
 [1345]14:40 [1346]15:6 [1347]15:8 [1348]15:10 [1349]15:19
 [1350]15:32 [1351]15:32 [1352]15:33 [1353]15:41 [1354]15:44
 [1355]15:44 [1356]15:46 [1357]15:49 [1358]15:52 [1359]15:55
 [1360]15:58 [1361]16:2 [1362]16:8 [1363]16:13-14

 2 Corinthians

 [1364]1:22 [1365]2:15 [1366]4:16 [1367]4:17 [1368]4:18
 [1369]5:1 [1370]5:10 [1371]5:11 [1372]6:3 [1373]6:14-15
 [1374]8:12 [1375]8:23 [1376]9:13 [1377]10:13-16 [1378]10:17
 [1379]11:3 [1380]11:13 [1381]11:14 [1382]11:29 [1383]12:2
 [1384]12:4 [1385]12:13 [1386]13:15

 Galatians

 [1387]1:1 [1388]2:9 [1389]2:9 [1390]2:11 [1391]3:13
 [1392]4:6 [1393]4:10 [1394]4:26 [1395]5:7 [1396]5:21
 [1397]5:22 [1398]5:24 [1399]6:1 [1400]6:3-4 [1401]6:4
 [1402]6:17

 Ephesians

 [1403]1:13 [1404]1:18 [1405]1:21 [1406]2:2 [1407]2:14
 [1408]2:14 [1409]3:10 [1410]3:15 [1411]4:19 [1412]4:27
 [1413]4:28 [1414]4:29-32 [1415]4:30 [1416]4:30 [1417]5:1-21
 [1418]5:3 [1419]5:5 [1420]5:6 [1421]5:15 [1422]6:4
 [1423]6:9 [1424]6:10-17

 Philippians

 [1425]2:6 [1426]2:10 [1427]2:11 [1428]2:15 [1429]2:15-16
 [1430]3:5 [1431]3:9 [1432]3:11 [1433]3:14 [1434]3:20
 [1435]4:1 [1436]4:3 [1437]4:6

 Colossians

 [1438]1:5 [1439]2:8 [1440]2:8 [1441]2:16 [1442]2:18
 [1443]3:2 [1444]3:5 [1445]3:5 [1446]3:9 [1447]3:18-22
 [1448]3:25 [1449]4:6 [1450]4:16

 1 Thessalonians

 [1451]2:16 [1452]4:6 [1453]4:15 [1454]4:17 [1455]4:17
 [1456]4:17

 2 Thessalonians

 [1457]2:13 [1458]2:15-17 [1459]3:1-3 [1460]3:4

 1 Timothy

 [1461]2:4 [1462]2:8 [1463]2:24 [1464]3:1-4 [1465]3:3
 [1466]3:15 [1467]5:6 [1468]5:13 [1469]6:5 [1470]6:8
 [1471]6:10 [1472]6:10 [1473]6:11 [1474]6:17 [1475]6:20

 2 Timothy

 [1476]1:14 [1477]1:18 [1478]2:5 [1479]2:7 [1480]2:7
 [1481]2:15 [1482]2:24 [1483]2:24 [1484]2:26 [1485]3:5
 [1486]3:5 [1487]3:8 [1488]3:8-9 [1489]4:1 [1490]4:8 [1491]4:8

 Titus

 [1492]1:7 [1493]2:13

 Hebrews

 [1494]4:13 [1495]5:1 [1496]7:2 [1497]7:21 [1498]10:23
 [1499]10:26 [1500]10:30 [1501]10:33-34 [1502]11:5 [1503]11:35
 [1504]11:37 [1505]11:38 [1506]13:4 [1507]13:7

 James

 [1508]1:5 [1509]1:19 [1510]1:20 [1511]1:27 [1512]2:1
 [1513]2:14 [1514]3:1 [1515]3:1-2 [1516]3:2 [1517]3:13
 [1518]3:15 [1519]4:6 [1520]5:12 [1521]5:17-18 [1522]8

 1 Peter

 [1523]1:15 [1524]2:4 [1525]2:9 [1526]2:12 [1527]3 [1528]3:9
 [1529]3:20 [1530]4:11 [1531]5:1-4 [1532]5:5 [1533]5:6
 [1534]5:8 [1535]5:8

 Jude

 [1536]1:6 [1537]1:7 [1538]1:19

 Revelation

 [1539]1:5 [1540]1:10 [1541]2:7 [1542]2:9 [1543]2:23
 [1544]3:14 [1545]4:4 [1546]4:4 [1547]5:6 [1548]7:4
 [1549]7:8 [1550]7:17 [1551]11:3-12 [1552]11:3-12
 [1553]11:3-12 [1554]11:3-12 [1555]11:5 [1556]12:7 [1557]14:4
 [1558]14:4 [1559]14:13 [1560]19:10 [1561]19:15 [1562]19:16
 [1563]20:4 [1564]20:5-6 [1565]21:2 [1566]21:3 [1567]21:4
 [1568]22:2 [1569]22:11 [1570]22:18-19

 Tobit

 [1571]1:7 [1572]1:17-18 [1573]2:10 [1574]2:10 [1575]4:15
 [1576]8:7-8

 Judith

 [1577]4:3

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [1578]1 [1579]1:4 [1580]2:1-5 [1581]3:7 [1582]5:14
 [1583]11:16 [1584]11:20 [1585]12:1 [1586]12:2 [1587]15:1-2
 [1588]19:17 [1589]31

 Baruch

 [1590]6:43

 Susanna

 [1591]1:4

 Bel and the Dragon

 [1592]1:33-39

 1 Maccabees

 [1593]4:52-59

 2 Maccabees

 [1594]7:9-36 [1595]10:1-8 [1596]12:44

 Sirach

 [1597]3:24 [1598]5:7-18 [1599]5:14 [1600]6:1-4 [1601]7:29-32
 [1602]9:4 [1603]9:4 [1604]9:5 [1605]9:8-9 [1606]9:12
 [1607]10:7 [1608]11:7-8 [1609]16:23 [1610]18:30 [1611]22:15
 [1612]27:17-30 [1613]27:17-30 [1614]28 [1615]28 [1616]32:1-3
 [1617]34:13-14 [1618]35:1-3 [1619]42:7 [1620]42:24 [1621]45:9
 [1622]48:9

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * 'Ernue: [1623]1
 * aekrupsas: [1624]1
 * aidios: [1625]1
 * ablabes: [1626]1
 * ablabe: [1627]1
 * agenetos: [1628]1 [1629]2
 * agenneton: [1630]1
 * agennetos: [1631]1
 * agathos: [1632]1 [1633]2
 * agathois: [1634]1
 * anchonimaio moro: [1635]1
 * adiaphoroi: [1636]1
 * adiaphorois: [1637]1
 * adikein: [1638]1
 * athetein, nouthetein: [1639]1
 * akatonomaston: [1640]1
 * akolastos: [1641]1
 * akolastos zosan: [1642]1
 * akribos: [1643]1
 * akribous: [1644]1
 * aletheuein: [1645]1
 * amere: [1646]1
 * anaperos: [1647]1
 * anablepsai: [1648]1
 * anadexei: [1649]1
 * anadeixei: [1650]1
 * anamartetos: [1651]1
 * andreioi: [1652]1
 * antigraphenta: [1653]1
 * axiopiston: [1654]1
 * apechthen: [1655]1
 * apo: [1656]1
 * apophasis: [1657]1
 * apekeruxas: [1658]1
 * apeklino: [1659]1
 * apekrino: [1660]1
 * apokrinomai: [1661]1
 * apostesei: [1662]1
 * aprasiai: [1663]1
 * arche: [1664]1 [1665]2 [1666]3
 * archen: [1667]1
 * arche: [1668]1
 * archai: [1669]1
 * aspis: [1670]1 [1671]2
 * asteros: [1672]1
 * aphesis: [1673]1
 * aphthonos: [1674]1
 * hagiasmos: [1675]1
 * adikon: [1676]1
 * azumon: [1677]1
 * an: [1678]1 [1679]2
 * anandroi: [1680]1
 * anthropon: [1681]1
 * apeiros: [1682]1
 * apeche: [1683]1
 * aristos: [1684]1
 * ean: [1685]1
 * enkopto: [1686]1
 * egregoros: [1687]1
 * ek: [1688]1
 * ekoptonto: [1689]1
 * ekaleito Saddik kai 'Ozliam, ho estin dikaios kai perioche tou
 laou: [1690]1
 * ekbakcheuomenoi: [1691]1
 * ekeinos ho planos: [1692]1
 * ekkaloumenoi pros oistrodeis kineseis: [1693]1
 * ekklepton: [1694]1
 * ekleipo: [1695]1
 * ekplokon: [1696]1
 * ekporneuontes: [1697]1
 * emphutou: [1698]1
 * empsuchous: [1699]1
 * en: [1700]1 [1701]2 [1702]3
 * en 'Anoniram: [1703]1
 * en taxei, atakton: [1704]1
 * en te geitonia: [1705]1
 * en te gonia: [1706]1
 * en te euphrosune he methe, en to geloti to penthos, en to gamo he
 akrasia: [1707]1
 * enargeian: [1708]1
 * energeian: [1709]1
 * enupnion: [1710]1 [1711]2
 * enargos: [1712]1
 * enargeia: [1713]1
 * energeia: [1714]1
 * entolikos: [1715]1
 * ex akoustou: [1716]1
 * exakontiston: [1717]1
 * exetaseos: [1718]1
 * epano 'Iram: [1719]1
 * epi pollen oran: [1720]1
 * epi to pathei tou Upsisou: [1721]1
 * epi to baptismati: [1722]1
 * episkopos: [1723]1 [1724]2
 * epitropos: [1725]1
 * ep' apeirous treis: [1726]1
 * ep' euergesia: [1727]1
 * epei: [1728]1
 * epermenos: [1729]1
 * epibolen: [1730]1
 * epiboulen: [1731]1
 * epithumeta: [1732]1
 * epitedeiotata: [1733]1
 * eronton: [1734]1
 * esekosan: [1735]1
 * esikosan: [1736]1
 * estin euergesia: [1737]1
 * eph': [1738]1
 * hepta: [1739]1
 * heptakosiois etesin: [1740]1
 * heteran: [1741]1
 * hetairon: [1742]1
 * hen dia duoin: [1743]1
 * ethei: [1744]1
 * ethne: [1745]1
 * ekaion: [1746]1
 * ekamnon: [1747]1
 * eparchos: [1748]1
 * heteron: [1749]1
 * heos tou sommou: [1750]1
 * epeichthen: [1751]1
 * ertue: [1752]1
 * he men horasis esti pneuma diateinon apo tou hegemonikou mechris
 ophthalmon: [1753]1
 * hegemon: [1754]1
 * hem: [1755]1
 * e m: [1756]1
 * e: [1757]1 [1758]2
 * e, e,: [1759]1
 * ideas: [1760]1
 * ideon: [1761]1
 * idiotes: [1762]1
 * ison: [1763]1
 * oligopsuchia: [1764]1
 * onomati: [1765]1
 * opisthodomos: [1766]1
 * optasia: [1767]1 [1768]2
 * ho peri kuriakes logos: [1769]1
 * homonoiai: [1770]1
 * homoios: [1771]1
 * honomata: [1772]1
 * hormemati: [1773]1
 * hos kai autos proselthon hupo tous podas autou epesen: [1774]1
 * onkoi: [1775]1
 * orthios: [1776]1
 * homos: [1777]1
 * horama: [1778]1 [1779]2
 * hotan oun pistou somatos e: [1780]1
 * hoti: [1781]1 [1782]2 [1783]3
 * ho, ti: [1784]1
 * upostasin: [1785]1 [1786]2
 * uton: [1787]1
 * uphistemi: [1788]1
 * huper: [1789]1
 * hupo therapeias: [1790]1
 * hupo: [1791]1
 * huperballo: [1792]1
 * huperbeblemenos kai huper panta anthropon: [1793]1
 * huperephanon giganton: [1794]1
 * hupodiakonoi: [1795]1
 * hupomenon: [1796]1
 * hupomnemata: [1797]1 [1798]2 [1799]3
 * hupomnematographoi: [1800]1
 * hupopteuei: [1801]1
 * hule: [1802]1
 * hos: [1803]1
 * hos sullelogistai adunaton einai doxazein: [1804]1
 * e: [1805]1
 * 'Arrhadiourgeton agomen ten hemeran: [1806]1
 * 'Adam: [1807]1
 * 'Athene: [1808]1
 * 'Akoais mataiais: [1809]1
 * 'Anarchos: [1810]1
 * 'Anagnoseis: [1811]1
 * 'Ananias: [1812]1
 * 'Anastrephei epi monous tous en sarki: [1813]1
 * 'Archen: [1814]1
 * 'Engraphos: [1815]1
 * 'Ek ton hupostanton geneton: [1816]1
 * 'Ek tou hulen auton hupotithenai: [1817]1
 * 'Ekporeuontes: [1818]1
 * 'Emerisan ten enosin tes ekklesias: [1819]1
 * 'En te akre apokatastasei: [1820]1
 * 'En to ortho logo: [1821]1
 * 'Enargeia: [1822]1
 * 'Ex ouk onton: [1823]1
 * 'Epilusis: [1824]1
 * 'Episkopen: [1825]1
 * 'Iakob: [1826]1 [1827]2
 * 'Iesous Naue: [1828]1
 * 'Roubem: [1829]1
 * 'Oblias: [1830]1
 * Esto kalos genomenon: [1831]1
 * Ontos Theou Logou: [1832]1
 * Elios: [1833]1
 * rhema: [1834]1
 * rhetou dogmatos: [1835]1
 * Egesasthai: [1836]1
 * O peri heimarmenes dialogos: [1837]1
 * Upatikou: [1838]1
 * Upokeimenon: [1839]1
 * Upotuposos: [1840]1
 * Os idia thelemata: [1841]1
 * 'Aph' hon kai to tes sukophantias alogo sunetheia peri tous
 toioutous rhuenai sumbebeke pseudos: [1842]1
 * Hairesei tini ho nous auton enepholeuen: [1843]1
 * Autokrator: [1844]1
 * Gaas polis basileon: [1845]1
 * De: [1846]1
 * Dikaios: [1847]1
 * Duo thugateres autou gegerakuiai parthenoi: [1848]1
 * Daimonoses: [1849]1
 * Dokoun: [1850]1
 * Draken: [1851]1
 * Euktaios: [1852]1
 * Euchas: [1853]1
 * Zeus: [1854]1
 * Thelemata: [1855]1
 * Theotokos: [1856]1 [1857]2
 * Kerugma Petrou: [1858]1 [1859]2
 * Kathartheison: [1860]1
 * Kappadokia: [1861]1
 * Kronos, k.t.l: [1862]1
 * Kuria: [1863]1
 * Logos pros Ellenas: [1864]1
 * Meta spoudes: [1865]1
 * Hoi peri Pantainon: [1866]1
 * Ouk agennos: [1867]1
 * Ousias: [1868]1
 * Ousias tinas: [1869]1
 * Palin katharsia: [1870]1
 * Petalon: [1871]1
 * Par' Ellesi de kai hoi sophoi eromenous echontes ou psegontai:
 [1872]1
 * Pentephres: [1873]1
 * Peri touton: [1874]1
 * Petephris: [1875]1
 * Petephres: [1876]1
 * Politeia: [1877]1
 * Politeusamene: [1878]1
 * Pterugion: [1879]1
 * Sikera: [1880]1
 * Salampsio: [1881]1
 * Stoicheia: [1882]1
 * Strategoi: [1883]1
 * Sustolen tina: [1884]1
 * Somatiken tina sustasin: [1885]1
 * Ta hagia: [1886]1
 * Ta epitedeumata autou: [1887]1
 * Ta onta: [1888]1
 * Ta toiauta ou parelabomen: [1889]1
 * Ten exo paideusin: [1890]1
 * Ten sustasin echei: [1891]1
 * To ateles: [1892]1
 * To xulon: [1893]1
 * Ton logon: [1894]1
 * Ton ginomenon: [1895]1
 * Tou soteriou kerugmatos: [1896]1
 * Ton mikron: [1897]1
 * Phusis: [1898]1
 * Phasi to soma tou Kuriou en to helio auton apotithesthai: [1899]1
 * Philotas: [1900]1
 * Photimar: [1901]1
 * Christianoi: [1902]1
 * Choreton: [1903]1
 * Pseudous taxeos: [1904]1
 * aideisthai: [1905]1
 * aitias: [1906]1
 * hai toiautai epithumiai: [1907]1
 * haireseis: [1908]1
 * autos: [1909]1
 * auton: [1910]1
 * auto: [1911]1 [1912]2
 * autois sophronousi: [1913]1
 * autou: [1914]1 [1915]2
 * autokrator: [1916]1
 * barbaron tolmema: [1917]1
 * biou: [1918]1
 * basileia: [1919]1
 * basanizomenon: [1920]1
 * bsib: [1921]1
 * bsob: [1922]1
 * g: [1923]1
 * genesis: [1924]1 [1925]2
 * gennesis: [1926]1
 * ge: [1927]1
 * gastron pneumata: [1928]1
 * genetos: [1929]1 [1930]2
 * gennetos: [1931]1
 * glossokomon: [1932]1
 * gnosis: [1933]1 [1934]2
 * de: [1935]1
 * dedeiche haden: [1936]1
 * dedeche haden: [1937]1
 * dogma: [1938]1
 * dunamis: [1939]1
 * dora: [1940]1
 * daimones: [1941]1
 * daimonia: [1942]1
 * dakruontas: [1943]1
 * dei: [1944]1
 * dexion: [1945]1
 * dia pleionon kleron: [1946]1
 * dia to: [1947]1
 * dia traglokolpeton: [1948]1
 * dia trogloduton: [1949]1
 * diathesis, aisthesis, phusis, telos: [1950]1
 * diakrisis: [1951]1
 * diephtheire de to sperma epi ten gen: [1952]1
 * di' epistolephorou: [1953]1
 * diazostra: [1954]1
 * diatheke: [1955]1
 * diaparatribai: [1956]1
 * diaphorois: [1957]1
 * diaphutor: [1958]1
 * diaphuteutes: [1959]1
 * digrosio: [1960]1
 * dikaios: [1961]1
 * dikaiois: [1962]1
 * diploes: [1963]1
 * dolophonesei: [1964]1
 * dolophonesei: [1965]1
 * dolophonesai: [1966]1
 * draka: [1967]1
 * dunasteia: [1968]1
 * ei: [1969]1 [1970]2 [1971]3 [1972]4 [1973]5 [1974]6
 * ei ho ti: [1975]1
 * ei de meros autes, holon echoresen auton: [1976]1
 * ei de me: [1977]1
 * ei de: [1978]1
 * ei me: [1979]1
 * ei me paresei pros to oikeion telos: [1980]1
 * eidenai: [1981]1
 * eidolon: [1982]1
 * eis: [1983]1
 * eis aedian: [1984]1
 * eis hena topon dexion: [1985]1
 * eis ten heirkten tou Pharao: [1986]1
 * eis to demosion: [1987]1
 * ei ge: [1988]1
 * ei ti: [1989]1
 * eia: [1990]1
 * eiase: [1991]1
 * eiso: [1992]1
 * eide: [1993]1
 * eike: [1994]1
 * euschemonos: [1995]1
 * eiletarion: [1996]1
 * eis eidean: [1997]1
 * zosan: [1998]1
 * zemioumenos ouk aisthanetai kai adoxon ouk aischunetai.  Kan gar
 tis basileuse, porneuon: [1999]1
 * zizania: [2000]1
 * theious: [2001]1
 * theous: [2002]1 [2003]2
 * theotokos: [2004]1
 * threskeia: [2005]1
 * kalamos: [2006]1
 * kosmo: [2007]1
 * kai eipe: [2008]1
 * kai stesei: [2009]1
 * kai tote ten: [2010]1
 * kai triten: [2011]1
 * kai: [2012]1
 * kath': [2013]1
 * kathairetheison: [2014]1
 * kai Polukarpos: [2015]1
 * kakon: [2016]1
 * kalos: [2017]1
 * kamatois: [2018]1
 * kata to genos: [2019]1
 * kata tou genous: [2020]1
 * katechein: [2021]1
 * kinaras: [2022]1
 * klima: [2023]1
 * kledosi kai daimosi planes: [2024]1
 * koimeterion: [2025]1
 * korunas: [2026]1
 * kosmousai pollo chruso kai lithois barutimois tous hippous: [2027]1
 * kratistos: [2028]1
 * krisei: [2029]1
 * kremamenos: [2030]1
 * kteseos: [2031]1
 * ktiseos: [2032]1
 * ktisin: [2033]1
 * ktesin: [2034]1
 * lambanetai: [2035]1
 * leprou: [2036]1
 * limos, loimos: [2037]1
 * liparou: [2038]1
 * logion: [2039]1
 * logeion: [2040]1
 * mathema: [2041]1
 * martures: [2042]1
 * mellein: [2043]1
 * men: [2044]1
 * meros autes holon, k.t.l: [2045]1
 * me: [2046]1 [2047]2
 * me hiereis: [2048]1
 * me: [2049]1 [2050]2 [2051]3 [2052]4
 * meter: [2053]1
 * metra: [2054]1
 * monon: [2055]1
 * mochthois: [2056]1
 * me kineisthe: [2057]1
 * muthon tina pseude: [2058]1
 * mageiron ho basileus: [2059]1
 * makrothumia: [2060]1
 * marturia: [2061]1
 * mataiois: [2062]1
 * maphorion: [2063]1 [2064]2
 * megalos: [2065]1
 * meth': [2066]1
 * memiseto: [2067]1
 * met' auton: [2068]1
 * metasunkritheis: [2069]1
 * med' holos pinete: [2070]1
 * melatas: [2071]1
 * melobotes: [2072]1
 * meteron e: [2073]1
 * miereis: [2074]1
 * mnon eikosin: [2075]1
 * moiras: [2076]1
 * morphes: [2077]1
 * muthologousan: [2078]1
 * nomo: [2079]1
 * nomon: [2080]1
 * naon: [2081]1
 * nenikemenen: [2082]1
 * nenikemenos: [2083]1
 * nous: [2084]1
 * x: [2085]1
 * xulon: [2086]1
 * hoi gigantes hoi ap' aionos hoi anthropoi hoi onomastoi: [2087]1
 * ou tes: [2088]1
 * oudenos: [2089]1
 * ouk estin eipein hoti en to heni tois prosopois e ton homoion:
 [2090]1
 * ousias: [2091]1
 * ouch hos echon: [2092]1
 * ouses: [2093]1
 * houtos: [2094]1
 * houtos echein: [2095]1
 * oun henos: [2096]1
 * optasia: [2097]1
 * panta: [2098]1
 * pantos: [2099]1
 * petalon: [2100]1
 * pera: [2101]1
 * ponton: [2102]1
 * pasi men apelogounto: [2103]1
 * pos de sunthetos estin ho kosmos: [2104]1
 * pause: [2105]1
 * pausei: [2106]1
 * palingenesia: [2107]1
 * palinkatharsia: [2108]1
 * pammiouson: [2109]1
 * pamplousion: [2110]1
 * panepiskopos: [2111]1
 * pantos: [2112]1
 * pantapoles: [2113]1
 * paraklesis: [2114]1
 * paronton kai hestoton: [2115]1
 * parabates: [2116]1
 * paradeiso: [2117]1
 * paraskeue: [2118]1
 * parastenai: [2119]1
 * parastesai: [2120]1
 * parthenos: [2121]1
 * parousan: [2122]1
 * paroikia: [2123]1
 * parousian, katastasin: [2124]1
 * pater tes poleos: [2125]1
 * patriarchai: [2126]1
 * pachunthesei: [2127]1
 * peiras: [2128]1
 * pepistomenon: [2129]1
 * peri: [2130]1
 * periodoi: [2131]1
 * peritetmemenos: [2132]1
 * pisteusas: [2133]1
 * pleonxia: [2134]1
 * pneumata: [2135]1
 * pneumatos .: [2136]1
 * poderes: [2137]1
 * poiesanta .: [2138]1
 * ponesanta: [2139]1
 * pros bolen: [2140]1
 * prosopa: [2141]1
 * prasis: [2142]1
 * protos naos: [2143]1
 * presbuteroi .: [2144]1
 * probole: [2145]1
 * prosbolen: [2146]1
 * prosbole: [2147]1
 * prosekunese: [2148]1
 * prosphatos: [2149]1
 * protomai: [2150]1
 * proreus: [2151]1
 * protogenes: [2152]1
 * rid', b': [2153]1
 * sunthetos de ho kosmos: [2154]1
 * sunodoi: [2155]1
 * soma: [2156]1 [2157]2
 * sampsera: [2158]1
 * sebasmata: [2159]1
 * sebasmati: [2160]1 [2161]2
 * sekono: [2162]1
 * skopos: [2163]1
 * sou ta panta sundioikountos auto: [2164]1
 * sou: [2165]1
 * sophia: [2166]1
 * spathe: [2167]1
 * spatalous: [2168]1
 * stesei: [2169]1
 * stereoma .: [2170]1 [2171]2
 * stoicheia: [2172]1
 * stomachou kal: [2173]1
 * strategia: [2174]1
 * sungnonai: [2175]1
 * sullelogistai hos ouk adunaton einai doxazein: [2176]1
 * sumpsellion: [2177]1
 * sunagonizesthai tois tes kainophonias logois: [2178]1
 * sphagenta: [2179]1
 * sphalenta: [2180]1
 * sphragis: [2181]1
 * schemata: [2182]1
 * schema: [2183]1
 * soterian: [2184]1
 * ta: [2185]1
 * tablais kai kubois: [2186]1
 * taxis: [2187]1
 * taxis: [2188]1
 * taxis, ataxia: [2189]1
 * taphon: [2190]1
 * tekton: [2191]1
 * ten pros tous adelphous ton marturon prosegorian: [2192]1
 * teganon: [2193]1 [2194]2
 * ti de lego: [2195]1
 * tis: [2196]1
 * to alethes kai aphantaston tes psuches autou kai tou somatos tes
 kath' hemas anthropines phuseos: [2197]1
 * to kalon: [2198]1
 * ton prodiorismenon: [2199]1
 * toparchos: [2200]1
 * topon: [2201]1
 * tuches: [2202]1
 * tes: [2203]1
 * tes kaines autou keruxeos: [2204]1
 * ton para 'Ioudaiois demosia pepisteumenon biblon: [2205]1
 * ton prosekonton: [2206]1
 * ton trion Patriarchon: [2207]1
 * taute: [2208]1
 * tach an theasesthe: [2209]1
 * tachugraphoi: [2210]1
 * tachudromou: [2211]1 [2212]2
 * tachunthesei: [2213]1
 * ti menontas en sarki: [2214]1
 * tis: [2215]1
 * tois ethnesi Soter: [2216]1
 * tois auton bomois prosphtharentes kai auton ekplerothentes: [2217]1
 * tois sophronousi: [2218]1
 * tou prodiorismenou: [2219]1
 * toiauten: [2220]1
 * toiouton: [2221]1
 * tolmemati: [2222]1
 * trepei: [2223]1
 * traktaizein: [2224]1
 * traktaisantes: [2225]1
 * tritogenes: [2226]1
 * phonou: [2227]1
 * photes: [2228]1
 * phairesis, anairesis: [2229]1
 * pheronton: [2230]1
 * phthonou: [2231]1
 * philanthropos: [2232]1
 * philologoi, ou philosophoi: [2233]1
 * phronema: [2234]1
 * phronesei: [2235]1
 * photos: [2236]1
 * charisma: [2237]1
 * chalinon embalein: [2238]1
 * chalken: [2239]1
 * chitona: [2240]1 [2241]2
 * christemporos: [2242]1
 * choretikon: [2243]1
 * choroumenos: [2244]1
 * pseusma: [2245]1
 * psuche: [2246]1
 * psuchikos: [2247]1
 * psuchikoi: [2248]1
 * [O Theos peponthen hupo dexias 'Israelitidos: [2249]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * : [2250]1
 * 'lvl: [2251]1
 * 'ly: [2252]1
 * 'vyy: [2253]1
 * vtsls 'lhys: [2254]1
 * vl': [2255]1
 * vlv: [2256]1
 * zvl: [2257]1
 * zvr: [2258]1
 * cht': [2259]1
 * tvch: [2260]1
 * k: [2261]1
 * n'chz: [2262]1
 * svk: [2263]1
 * : [2264]1
 * yr: [2265]1 [2266]2
 * phl: [2267]1
 * tsyts: [2268]1
 * q: [2269]1
 * snym tyyv: [2270]1
 * tkn: [2271]1 [2272]2
 * is used, corresponding to the Aphel of the same root, from which
 the present word is derived.: [2273]1

Index of German Words and Phrases

 * Aus dem heiligen Lande: [2274]1
 * Bardesanes von Edessa: [2275]1
 * Beiträge zu den theol. Wissenschaften: [2276]1
 * Die Clementinen nebst den verwandten Schriften, und der
 Ebionitismus: [2277]1
 * Die Clementinischen Rekognitionen und Homilien, nach ihrem Ursprung
 und Inhalt dargestellt: [2278]1 [2279]2
 * Die Clementinischen Schriften: [2280]1
 * Die Entstehung der altkatholischen Kirche: [2281]1
 * Die Homilien und Rekognitionen des Clemens Romanus: [2282]1
 * Die Homilien und Rekognitionen des Clemens Romanus, nach ihrem
 Ursprung und Inhalt dargestellt: [2283]1
 * Die Quellen der römischen Petrussage: [2284]1
 * Lücke,Einleitung in die Offenbarung des Joh: [2285]1
 * Zeitschrift: [2286]1
 * durch das mündliche Bekenntniss: [2287]1
 * zur Unterstützung des Dinges, welches...unterstützt worden ist und
 unterstützt bleibt bis zur Vernichtung des Weltalls: [2288]1

Index of French Words and Phrases

 * Études d'Hist. Relig: [2289]1
 * Ce n'est pas Spartacus qui a supprimé l'esclavage; c'est bien
 plutôt Blandine.: [2290]1
 * Croyances et Légendes de l'Antiquité: [2291]1
 * L'Art de vérifier les dates:: [2292]1
 * Mém. de la Société des Antiq. de France,: [2293]1
 * vraisemblance: [2294]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [2295]i  [2296]iii  [2297]v  [2298]vi  [2299]1  [2300]3  [2301]4
 [2302]5  [2303]6  [2304]7  [2305]8  [2306]9  [2307]10  [2308]11
 [2309]12  [2310]13  [2311]14  [2312]15  [2313]16  [2314]17  [2315]18
 [2316]19  [2317]20  [2318]21  [2319]22  [2320]23  [2321]24  [2322]25
 [2323]26  [2324]27  [2325]28  [2326]29  [2327]30  [2328]31  [2329]32
 [2330]33  [2331]34  [2332]35  [2333]36  [2334]37  [2335]38  [2336]39
 [2337]41  [2338]43  [2339]44  [2340]45  [2341]46  [2342]47  [2343]48
 [2344]49  [2345]50  [2346]51  [2347]53  [2348]54  [2349]55  [2350]56
 [2351]57  [2352]58  [2353]59  [2354]60  [2355]61  [2356]62  [2357]63
 [2358]64  [2359]65  [2360]66  [2361]67  [2362]69  [2363]70  [2364]71
 [2365]73  [2366]74  [2367]75  [2368]76  [2369]77  [2370]78  [2371]79
 [2372]80  [2373]81  [2374]82  [2375]83  [2376]84  [2377]85  [2378]86
 [2379]87  [2380]88  [2381]89  [2382]90  [2383]91  [2384]92  [2385]93
 [2386]94  [2387]95  [2388]96  [2389]97  [2390]98  [2391]99  [2392]100
 [2393]101  [2394]102  [2395]103  [2396]104  [2397]105  [2398]106
 [2399]107  [2400]108  [2401]109  [2402]110  [2403]111  [2404]112
 [2405]113  [2406]114  [2407]115  [2408]116  [2409]117  [2410]118
 [2411]119  [2412]120  [2413]121  [2414]122  [2415]123  [2416]124
 [2417]125  [2418]126  [2419]127  [2420]128  [2421]129  [2422]130
 [2423]131  [2424]132  [2425]133  [2426]134  [2427]135  [2428]136
 [2429]137  [2430]138  [2431]139  [2432]140  [2433]141  [2434]142
 [2435]143  [2436]144  [2437]145  [2438]146  [2439]147  [2440]148
 [2441]149  [2442]150  [2443]151  [2444]152  [2445]153  [2446]154
 [2447]155  [2448]156  [2449]157  [2450]158  [2451]159  [2452]160
 [2453]161  [2454]162  [2455]163  [2456]164  [2457]165  [2458]166
 [2459]167  [2460]168  [2461]169  [2462]170  [2463]171  [2464]172
 [2465]173  [2466]174  [2467]175  [2468]176  [2469]177  [2470]178
 [2471]179  [2472]180  [2473]181  [2474]182  [2475]183  [2476]184
 [2477]185  [2478]186  [2479]187  [2480]188  [2481]189  [2482]190
 [2483]191  [2484]192  [2485]193  [2486]194  [2487]195  [2488]196
 [2489]197  [2490]198  [2491]199  [2492]200  [2493]201  [2494]202
 [2495]203  [2496]204  [2497]205  [2498]206  [2499]207  [2500]208
 [2501]209  [2502]210  [2503]211  [2504]213  [2505]215  [2506]216
 [2507]217  [2508]218  [2509]219  [2510]220  [2511]221  [2512]222
 [2513]223  [2514]224  [2515]225  [2516]226  [2517]227  [2518]228
 [2519]229  [2520]230  [2521]231  [2522]232  [2523]233  [2524]234
 [2525]235  [2526]236  [2527]237  [2528]238  [2529]239  [2530]240
 [2531]241  [2532]242  [2533]243  [2534]244  [2535]245  [2536]246
 [2537]247  [2538]248  [2539]249  [2540]250  [2541]251  [2542]252
 [2543]253  [2544]254  [2545]255  [2546]256  [2547]257  [2548]258
 [2549]259  [2550]260  [2551]261  [2552]262  [2553]263  [2554]264
 [2555]265  [2556]266  [2557]267  [2558]268  [2559]269  [2560]270
 [2561]271  [2562]272  [2563]273  [2564]274  [2565]275  [2566]276
 [2567]277  [2568]278  [2569]279  [2570]280  [2571]281  [2572]282
 [2573]283  [2574]284  [2575]285  [2576]286  [2577]287  [2578]288
 [2579]289  [2580]290  [2581]291  [2582]292  [2583]293  [2584]294
 [2585]295  [2586]296  [2587]297  [2588]298  [2589]299  [2590]300
 [2591]301  [2592]302  [2593]303  [2594]304  [2595]305  [2596]306
 [2597]307  [2598]308  [2599]309  [2600]310  [2601]311  [2602]312
 [2603]313  [2604]314  [2605]315  [2606]316  [2607]317  [2608]318
 [2609]319  [2610]320  [2611]321  [2612]322  [2613]323  [2614]324
 [2615]325  [2616]326  [2617]327  [2618]328  [2619]329  [2620]330
 [2621]331  [2622]332  [2623]333  [2624]334  [2625]335  [2626]336
 [2627]337  [2628]338  [2629]339  [2630]340  [2631]341  [2632]342
 [2633]343  [2634]344  [2635]345  [2636]346  [2637]347  [2638]349
 [2639]350  [2640]351  [2641]352  [2642]353  [2643]354  [2644]355
 [2645]356  [2646]357  [2647]358  [2648]359  [2649]360  [2650]361
 [2651]362  [2652]363  [2653]364  [2654]365  [2655]366  [2656]367
 [2657]368  [2658]369  [2659]370  [2660]371  [2661]372  [2662]373
 [2663]374  [2664]375  [2665]376  [2666]377  [2667]378  [2668]379
 [2669]380  [2670]381  [2671]382  [2672]383  [2673]384  [2674]385
 [2675]386  [2676]387  [2677]388  [2678]389  [2679]390  [2680]391
 [2681]392  [2682]393  [2683]394  [2684]395  [2685]396  [2686]397
 [2687]398  [2688]399  [2689]400  [2690]401  [2691]402  [2692]403
 [2693]404  [2694]405  [2695]406  [2696]407  [2697]408  [2698]409
 [2699]410  [2700]411  [2701]412  [2702]413  [2703]414  [2704]415
 [2705]416  [2706]417  [2707]418  [2708]419  [2709]420  [2710]421
 [2711]422  [2712]423  [2713]424  [2714]425  [2715]426  [2716]427
 [2717]428  [2718]429  [2719]430  [2720]431  [2721]432  [2722]433
 [2723]434  [2724]435  [2725]436  [2726]437  [2727]438  [2728]439
 [2729]440  [2730]441  [2731]442  [2732]443  [2733]444  [2734]445
 [2735]446  [2736]447  [2737]448  [2738]449  [2739]450  [2740]451
 [2741]452  [2742]453  [2743]454  [2744]455  [2745]456  [2746]457
 [2747]458  [2748]459  [2749]460  [2750]461  [2751]462  [2752]463
 [2753]464  [2754]465  [2755]466  [2756]467  [2757]468  [2758]469
 [2759]470  [2760]471  [2761]472  [2762]473  [2763]474  [2764]475
 [2765]476  [2766]477  [2767]478  [2768]479  [2769]480  [2770]481
 [2771]482  [2772]483  [2773]484  [2774]485  [2775]486  [2776]487
 [2777]488  [2778]489  [2779]490  [2780]491  [2781]492  [2782]493
 [2783]494  [2784]495  [2785]496  [2786]497  [2787]498  [2788]499
 [2789]500  [2790]501  [2791]502  [2792]503  [2793]504  [2794]505
 [2795]506  [2796]507  [2797]508  [2798]509  [2799]510  [2800]511
 [2801]512  [2802]513  [2803]514  [2804]515  [2805]516  [2806]517
 [2807]518  [2808]519  [2809]520  [2810]521  [2811]522  [2812]523
 [2813]524  [2814]525  [2815]526  [2816]527  [2817]528  [2818]529
 [2819]530  [2820]531  [2821]532  [2822]533  [2823]534  [2824]535
 [2825]536  [2826]537  [2827]538  [2828]539  [2829]540  [2830]541
 [2831]542  [2832]543  [2833]544  [2834]545  [2835]546  [2836]547
 [2837]548  [2838]549  [2839]550  [2840]551  [2841]552  [2842]553
 [2843]554  [2844]555  [2845]556  [2846]557  [2847]558  [2848]559
 [2849]560  [2850]561  [2851]562  [2852]563  [2853]564  [2854]565
 [2855]566  [2856]567  [2857]568  [2858]569  [2859]570  [2860]571
 [2861]572  [2862]573  [2863]574  [2864]575  [2865]576  [2866]577
 [2867]578  [2868]579  [2869]580  [2870]581  [2871]582  [2872]583
 [2873]584  [2874]585  [2875]586  [2876]587  [2877]588  [2878]589
 [2879]590  [2880]591  [2881]592  [2882]593  [2883]594  [2884]595
 [2885]596  [2886]597  [2887]598  [2888]599  [2889]601  [2890]602
 [2891]603  [2892]604  [2893]605  [2894]606  [2895]607  [2896]609
 [2897]610  [2898]611  [2899]612  [2900]613  [2901]614  [2902]615
 [2903]616  [2904]617  [2905]618  [2906]619  [2907]620  [2908]621
 [2909]622  [2910]623  [2911]624  [2912]625  [2913]626  [2914]627
 [2915]628  [2916]629  [2917]630  [2918]631  [2919]632  [2920]633
 [2921]634  [2922]635  [2923]636  [2924]637  [2925]638  [2926]639
 [2927]640  [2928]641  [2929]642  [2930]643  [2931]644  [2932]645
 [2933]647  [2934]648  [2935]649  [2936]651  [2937]652  [2938]653
 [2939]654  [2940]655  [2941]656  [2942]657  [2943]658  [2944]659
 [2945]660  [2946]661  [2947]662  [2948]663  [2949]664  [2950]665
 [2951]666  [2952]667  [2953]668  [2954]669  [2955]670  [2956]671
 [2957]672  [2958]673  [2959]674  [2960]675  [2961]676  [2962]677
 [2963]678  [2964]679  [2965]680  [2966]681  [2967]682  [2968]683
 [2969]684  [2970]685  [2971]686  [2972]687  [2973]688  [2974]689
 [2975]690  [2976]691  [2977]692  [2978]693  [2979]694  [2980]695
 [2981]696  [2982]697  [2983]698  [2984]699  [2985]700  [2986]701
 [2987]702  [2988]703  [2989]704  [2990]705  [2991]706  [2992]707
 [2993]708  [2994]709  [2995]710  [2996]711  [2997]712  [2998]713
 [2999]714  [3000]715  [3001]716  [3002]717  [3003]718  [3004]719
 [3005]720  [3006]721  [3007]722  [3008]723  [3009]724  [3010]725
 [3011]726  [3012]727  [3013]728  [3014]729  [3015]730  [3016]731
 [3017]732  [3018]733  [3019]734  [3020]735  [3021]736  [3022]737
 [3023]738  [3024]739  [3025]740  [3026]741  [3027]742  [3028]743
 [3029]745  [3030]747  [3031]748  [3032]749  [3033]750  [3034]751
 [3035]752  [3036]753  [3037]754  [3038]755  [3039]756  [3040]757
 [3041]758  [3042]759  [3043]760  [3044]761  [3045]762  [3046]763
 [3047]764  [3048]765  [3049]766  [3050]767  [3051]768  [3052]769
 [3053]770  [3054]771  [3055]772  [3056]773  [3057]774  [3058]775
 [3059]776  [3060]777  [3061]778  [3062]779  [3063]780  [3064]781
 [3065]782  [3066]783  [3067]784  [3068]785

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
