Varro on Farming (De Re Rustica)
================================
Marcus Terentius Varro — De Re Rustica (On Farming), translated by Lloyd Storr-Best (London: G. Bell and Sons, 1912), public domain. Storr-Best's English rendering of the foundational Roman treatise on agriculture. Scan via Internet Archive.

IJRRARY


James  Houston


Thornton  &  Son,
Bookselleri,

..      TK.      UrniiA


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive

in  2010  with  funding  from

University  of  British  Columbia  Library


BOHN'S  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY


VARRO
ON  FARMING


PLAN  OF  THE
BIRD-HOUSE
^  AT

CASINUM


^  Island

B  Staging

C  Duck-Houses

Z»  Ponds

£  Aviaries

F  Netting


See  Book  III,  pp.  269-276


VARRO
ON  FARMING

M.  TERENTI  VARRONIS  RERUM

RUSTICARUM  LIBRI

TRES

TRANSLATED,   WITH   INTRODUCTION,

COMMENTARY,  AND

EXCURSUS

BY

LLOYD  STORR-BEST  M.A.  Lond.


LONDON
G.  BELL  AND  SONS,  LTD.

1912


UXORI


PREFACE

This  translation  of  Varro's  *  Rerum  Rusticarum  '
is  based  on  the  '  Editio  Minor'  of  Keil,  which  is
the  best  text  that  we  at  present  possess,  and  the  most
accessible  to  students.  The  numerous  passages
where  I  have  ventured  to  adopt  or  propose  a  reading
differing  from  that  given  by  the  great  scholar  are
indicated  and  fully  discussed  either  in  the  Com-
mentary or  Excursus.  In  excuse  for  the  many
alterations  of  his  text  which  I  have  proposed,  I
would  point  out  that  Keil  himself  professes  only  to
have  restored  the  text  of  the  Archetype,  which  is
avowedly  corrupt,  to  have  made  certain  indubitable
corrections,  and  to  have  cleared  the  ground  for
further  emendation.

In  rendering  the  Latin,  I  have  aimed,  above  all
things,  at  accuracy,  and  have  tried  to  say  in  English
what  Varro  actually  said  in  Latin,  not  what  I
imagine  he  ought  to  have  said,  or  might  have  said,
had  he  written  in  English.  Graceful  paraphrase
would  have  been  quite  out  of  place  in  the  case  of  an
author  who  has  no  graces  of  style,  is  valuable
principally  for  his  matter,  and  is  very  difficult  to
understand.

To  other  translations  I  am  not  at  all  indebted.
Those  with  which  I  am  acquainted — the  French  of
Nisard,  the  Italian  of  Pagani,  and  the  English  of
Clarke  (1800) — are  not  good,  and  were  made  by  men
evidently  unaccustomed  to  Varro's  peculiar  and
archaic  diction.


vi  PREFACE

The  Commentary  proceeds  from  an  independent
examination  of  the  original  sources  used  by  Varro,
and  of  those  authors  who  borrowed  from  him,
though,  as  will  be  seen,  I  have  made  free  use  of
both  ancient  and  modern  commentators.  When  I
have  borrowed  I  have — in  all  cases,  I  hope —
acknowledged  the  debt.

The  apparent  superfluity  of  illustrative  matter
will  be  forgiven  if  it  be  remembered  that  the  book
is  not  only  submitted  to  the  criticism  of  the  scholar,
but  directed  to  the  general  reader,  and  even  the
practical  farmer.  For  the  sake  of  those  who  possess
"small  Latin  and  less  Greek,"  I  have  translated
passages  of  general  interest  from  Cato,  Columella,
the  Geoponica,  etc.

In  the  Introduction  and  the  first  two  Excursus  I
have  treated  at  length  of  the  Tnise  en  scene  of  the
imaginary  conversations  in  each  of  the  three  books,
and  of  the  date  at  which  they  are  supposed  by
Varro  to  have  taken  place — matters  which  have
been  undeservedly  neglected,  and  have  important
bearing  on  the  text.  In  Excursus  III  certain  con-
jectural emendations  are  proposed  and  discussed.

A  plan  is  given  of  Varro's  famous  aviary,  described
by  him  in  the  third  book.  In  1794  the  Prince  de
Segur  published  one,  together  with  a  voluminous
commentary  on  Varro,  iii,  5,  9,  but  he  introduced
many  violent  and  arbitrary  alterations  into  the
text,  and  his  plan  is  demonstrably  wrong  in  many
important  particulars.

My  thanks  are  due  and  are  gratefully  paid  to  the
Lord  Abbot  of  Monte  Cassino  for  his  hospitality
and  gracious  permission  to  use  the  magnificent
library  of  the  Badia;  to  the  Signore  Padre  Bene-
detto del  Greco  for  his  kindness  in  showing  me  the


PREFACE  vii

remains  of  Varro's  villa  and  aviary  at  Cassino,  and
for  his  valuable  explanations  of  many  topographical
difficulties;  to  the  University  Library  of  Aberdeen
for  allowing  me  the  use  of  books  which  I  could
with  difficulty  or  not  at  all  procure  elsewhere ;  and,
finally,  to  Messrs.  G.  Bell  and  Sons  for  everything
for  which  a  generous  and  public-spirited  publisher
may  be  thanked.


CONTENTS


BOOK  I

Agriculture

CHAP.

I.  Introductory      ....

II.  The  Aim  and  Scope  of  Agriculture

III.  Agriculture  an  Art   .

IV.  The  Four  Departments
V.  Branches    of   the   Science   of   Agri

CULTURE .

VI.  The  Soil      .

VII.  The  Site

VIII.  On  Vine-training

IX.  Farm  Land  .

X.  Measures  of  Land

XI.  Farm  Buildings  .

XII.  The  Site  of  the  Farm  House

XIII.  The  Farm  Yard  and  House

XIV.  Fences  and  Walls
XV.  Trees  as  Boundaries

XVI.  On  the  Neighbourhood  of  a  Farm

XVII.  Farm  Equipment — Slaves  .

XVIII.  Size  of  the  Staff

XIX.  Of  Instruments  of  Production  (Semi

Vocal)    .....

XX.  Of  Oxen  and  Draught  Animals

XXI.  Of  Dogs  and  Four-Footed  Stock

XXII.  Of  Instruments  of  Production  (Mute


PAGE
I

6
20
21

23
24
27
30
33
36
38
38
40

44

45
46

49
52

55
57
59
60


X

CONTENTS

CHAP.

XXIII.

Of  Crops  ......

XXIV.

Of  Olives,  and  Tree  Planting

XXV.

Of  Vines

XXVI.

Of  Vineyards  .         .         .         .         .

XXVII.

Of  Times  and  Seasons

XXVIII.

Of  Divisions  of  the  Year

XXIX.

Of  the  First  Division

XXX.

The  Second  Period  .         .         .         .

XXXI.

The  Third  Period    .         .         .         .

XXXII.

The  Fourth  Period

XXXIII.

The  Fifth  Period     ,         .         .         .

XXXIV.

The  Sixth  Period     .         .         .         .

XXXV.

The  Seventh  Period

XXXVI.

The  Eighth  Period

XXXVII.

The   Moon  and  the  Sixfold   Divi-

sion OF  THE  Year

XXXVIII.

Of  Manuring    .         .         .         .         .

XXXIX.

Of  Modes  of  Propagation

XL.

Sowing,  Planting,  and  Grafting     .

XLI.

Grafts  and  Cuttings

XLII.

On  Sowing  Lucerne

XLIII.

Cytisus

XLIV.

Of  Crops

XLV.

Of  the  Growth  of  Plants

XLVI.

Of  the  Habits  of  Plants

XLVII.

Of  the  Care  of  Crops

XLVIII.

Of  Grain

XLIX.

The  Hay  Harvest    .

L.

Of  Reaping

LI.

The  Threshing-Floor

LII.

Of  Threshing  .

LIII.

The  Gleaning  .

CONTENTS

xi

CHAP.

PAGE

LIV.

Of  Wine-Making      ....     106

LV.

Olive  Products        ....

107

LVI.

Of  Storing  Hay        ....

109

LVII.

Granaries         .....

109

LVIII.

Of  Storing  Beans  and  Grapes

11 1

LIX.

Of  Storing  Apples  ....

112

LX.

Olives  for  Eating   ....

114

LXI.

Of  Amurca

"5

LXII.

Keeping  and  Consuming   .

115

LXIII.

On  Bringing  Corn  out  of  Store

116

LXIV.

Preparation  of  Amurca  .

116

LXV.

Of  Wine

117

LXVI.

Of  White  Olives     ....

117

LXVIL

Walnuts,  Dates,  and  Figs

1x8

.XVIII.

Hung  Fruit      ....

118

LXIX.

On  Produce  for  Market

119

BOOK  II

Concerning  Cattle

Introduction 121

I.

Cattle-Farming:  its  Origin,  Repute,

and  Practice 125

II.

Of  Sheep

.     144

III.

Of  Goats

.     156

IV.

Of  Pigs

.     163

V.

Of  Cows  and  Oxen

.     180

VI.

Of  Asses

.     195

VII.

Of  Horses  and  Mares

.     200

VIII.

Of  Mules  and  Hinnies

210

IX.

Of  Dogs

.     214

XI 1


CONTENTS


CHAP.

X.

XI.


Of  Shepherds

Of  Milk  and  Wool


PAGE

225
231


BOOK  III

Of  Smaller  Stock

I.  Introduction  and  Dedication     .

II.  On  Various  Kinds  of  Villas

III.  Of  Animals  fed  within  the  Villa

IV.  Of  Birds  in  General
V.  Of  Fieldfares

VI.  Of  Peacocks

VII.  Of  Pigeons

VIII.  Of  Turtle-doves

IX.  Of  Poultry

X.  Of  Geese

XI.  Of  Ducks     .

XII.  Of  Warrens

XIII.  Of   Wild    Boars    and    other    Quad

RUPEDS      .

XIV.  Of  Snails    .
XV.     Of  Dormice

XVI.     Of  Bees  and  Apiaries
XVII,     Of  Fish-ponds

Excursus   I.     On  the  Time  and  Place  of  the
Dialogue  in  Book  II
II.     The  Text  of  the  Rerum  Rustic-
arum         .....
III.     Critical  Notes  and  Suggestions  .


239

245
257
263
264

277
281
287
289
304
309
312

316
318

321
322
345

355

360
364


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Editio  Princeps.     Venetiis  apud  Nicolaum  Jensonum.

1472.

Petri  Victorii  explicationes  suarum  in  Catonem  Varro-

nem,  Columellam  castigationum.  1542.

ScALiGER,  M.     Terentii  Varronis  opera  quae  supersunt,

1573-
J.  G.  Schneider.     Scriptorum  Rei  Rusticae.    6  vols.

Leipzig-,  1794-1797.

Opere  di  M.   Porcio  Catone  e  di  M.  Terenzio  Varrone

con  traduzione  e  note.  Venezia,  1846.

Les  Agronomes  Latins.     Nisard.  Paris,  1864.

H.  Keil.     M.    Porci    Catonis    de   Agri    Cultura    liber.

M.  Terenti  Varronis  Rerum  Rusticarum  libri  tres.

Editio  maior.  1884.

H.  Keil.     M.    T.    Varronis    R.   R.    libri    tres.     Editio

minor.  1889.

Reiter.     Quaestiones  Varronianae  Grammaticae.

Regimontii,  1882.
G.  Heidrich.     Der  Stil  des  Varro.  Melk,  1892.

G.  Heidrich.     Varroniana  L  Melk,  1891.

G.  Heidrich.     Varroniana  11.  Melk,  1892.

Zahlfeldt.     Quaestiones  Criticae  in  Varronis  Rerum

Rusticarum  libros  tres.  1881.

Krumbiegel.     De  Varroniano  scribendi  genere  quaes-
tiones. Leipzig,  1892.
Durand   de   la    Malle.     Agriculture    romaine   depuis

Caton  jusqu'i  Columelle.  1838.

Dickson,  Adam.     Husbandry  of  the  Ancients.

Edinburgh,  1788.


xiv  BIBLIOGRAPHY

BoissiER,  Gaston.     Etude  sur  Varron.  1861.

BoissiER,  Gaston.     Cic^ron  et  ses  amis.  1895.

Spexgel,  L.     Varro,  de  Lingua  Latina.  1826.

Agahd.     Antiquitatum  R.  D.       Teubner,  Leipzig,  1898.
German.     Die  sogenannten  sententiae  Varronis.

Paderborn,  1910.
GoDEFROY.     Auctores     Latinae     Linguae,     containing

Verrius     Flaccus,     Festus,     Nonius,     Fulgentius,

Isidore  of  Seville,  etc.  G^n^ve,  1595.

(This  book  contains  an   excellent  and  generally

accurate  index  verborum.)
J.    H.    Onions.     Nonius   Marcellus.     De   Compendiora

doctrina.  1895.

Ernesti.     Clavis  Ciceroniana.  1776.

SOURCES  USED  BY  VARRO

Hesiod.       Fjpyujv  Kai  ijfiepuiv.

Xenophon.     Oeconomicus,  etc.

Aristotle.     De  animalibus,  de  generatione  animalium.

Op.  omnia.      Firmin  Didot.  1854.

Theophrastus.      De    hist,     plant.,  De    causis    plant.,

Schneider.  Leipzig,  1818.

Cato.     De  Re  Rustica  in  the  Scrip.  R.  R.     Schneider.

WRITERS  WHO  BORROWED  FROM  VARRO

Vergil.

Columella,     Palladius,    Vegetius ;     Scriptores     R.  R.

Schneider.
Pliny.     Historia    Naturalis    cum  notis   variorum.   Pin-

tiani,  Dalechampii,  Scaligeri,  Salmasii,  Gronovii.

Rotterdam,  1669.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  xv

Servixjs  and  Pseudo-Servius,  Philargyrius,  Probus.

Comment,  in  Virgilium.  Gottingen,  1826.

Macrobius,    cum   notis    I.    Pontani,    lo.    Meursii,  Jac.

Gronovii  et  To.  Car.  Zeunii,  1774.

Augustine.     De  Civ.  Dei.  Frankfort,  1661.

Isidore,  in  Auctores  L.  L.  Godefroy.
Geoponica.  Cambridge,  1904.

Petrus  Crescentius  in  Schneider's  Scrip.  R.  R.
Julius  Obsequens.  1772.

AuLUS  Gellius.     Cura  et  sumptibus  Philippi  de  Giunta

Florentini.  Florence,  1513.

Plutarch.     Opera  quae  extant  omnia.

Frankfort.    2  vols.     1599.
(Has  a  good  index  rerum.)
Censorinus  DE  die  Natali.     Lugd.  Bat.  1743»


Shipley.     Sources   of  corruption  in   Latin  MSS.      (In
"  American  Journal  of  Archaeology.")  1903-

Prou.      Manuel  de  Pal^ographie  Latine.  1892.

Lindsay.     Contractions  in  Minuscule  MSS.  1908.

Thompson  and  Fumagalli.    Paleografia  G.  e  L.  Milano.

1911.
Kempf.     Rom.  castrensis  sermonis  reliq.  1901.

Lindsay.     The  Latin  Language.
Alexander  ab  Alexandro.     Gen.  Dierum.

Lugd.  Bat.,  1673.
Leo  F.     Der  Saturn.  Vers.  Berlin,  1905.

Lindsay.     Syntax  of  Plautus.  1907«

Historische  Grammatik  der  L.  Sprache.

Leipzig,  1903.
Grandgent.     Intro,  to  Vulgar  Latin,  1908.


PASSAGES  IN  WHICH  VARRO  PROBABLY
FOLLOWED  THEOPHRASTUS


VARRO  R.  R.

THEOPHRASTUS

VARRO  R.  R.

THEOPHRASTUS

I,

7»  6

H.  P.  I,  9,  5
H.  P.  I,  3,  5

I,  40.  3

C.  P.  I,  6,  3
C.  P.  I,  6,  9

C.  P.  I,  13.  9

I,   40,    4

C.  P.  3.  5.  3

I,

7»  7

H.  P.  I,  4,  2

I,  40,  6

C.  P.  I,  6,  10

H.  P.  1,4,4

I,  41,   2

C.  P.  I,  6,  6

I,

8,6

C.  P.  3,  14,  8

I.  41.  4

H.  P.  6,  6,  6

I,

9,  2

C.  P.  2,  4,  I

fC.  P.  I,  8,  I

I,

9.  4

H.  P.  8,  6,  I

cf.

\  C.  P.  2,  13,  4

I,

9,6

C.  P.  2,  4,  9

Ih.  p.  7, 5.  3

I,

i6,  6

H.  P.  4,  16,  6

I,  41,  4 (end)

C.  p.  I,  8,  2

C.  P.  2,  18,  4

I,  41,  6  (end)

C.  p.  I,  20,  3

I,

23,  2

H.  P.  8,  7,  2

1,44.  2

H.  P.  8,  7,  6

C.  P.  3,  21,  3

I.  44.  3

C.  P.  I,  20,  4

H.  P.  8,  9,  I

H.   P.   7,   ID,   I

C.  P.  3,  21,  2

I.  45.  I

H.  P.  8,  I,  5

I

23.  3

H.  P.  8,  9,  I

I.  45.  3

C.  P.  I,  12,  I

I

24,  2

C.  P.  5,  11,2

H.  P.  I,  7,  I

I

26,  I

H.  P.  4,  16,  6
C.  P.  2,  18,  4

C.  P.  I,  12,  7
C.  P.  3,  3,  I

C.  P.  3,  10,  4

I,  46,  I

H.  P.  I,  10,  I

I

31»  2

C.  P.  3,  14,  I,  etc.

C.  P.  2,  19,  2

I

35.  I

H.  P.  2,  2,  I
H.  P.  6,  6,  6

I.  55.  I

C.  P.  I,  19,  4
C.  P.  I,  20,  3

I

37.  5

H.  P.  I,  7,  I

C.  P.  5.  4.  2

1

38,  2

H.  P.  2,  7,  4
H.  P.  7,  5.  I

J.  55.  7

H.  P.  4,  16,  5
C.  P.  5,  15,  6

I

I

.39.  3
,  40,  I

H.  P.  2,  I,  I
H.  P.  3,  I,  4

For  Amurca
cf.

rc.  P.  1, 19, 2

\  C.  P.  6,  8,  3

C.  P.  I,  5,  2

(Fr.  20,  3^

I

40,  2

C.  P.  3.  I,  I
H.  P.  2,  4,  I

I.  59.  3

C.   P.    I,   12,  9

C.  P.  5,  6,  I

rH.  p.  3,  1,4

2,  I,  27

H.  P.  3,  3,  5

C.  P.  I,  5,  I

3,  2,  12             cf.  H.  P.  3,  15,  5

cf.

-  C.  p.  I,  10,  s

C.    p.    2,    I,    l'

IC.  p.  5,  I,  I

3.  «6,  6

C.  P.  6,  5,  I

INTRODUCTION

It  is  most  singular  that  out  of  the  enormous  mass
of  writings  which  Varro  left  behind  him — in  the
preface  to  the  Hebdomades  he  tells  us  that  he  was
eighty-four  years  old  and  had  then  written  four
hundred  and  ninety  books — this  treatise  on  farming
is  the  only  one  which  remains  to  us  in  anything
approaching  completeness.  Of  the  De  Lingua
Latina,  which  consisted  of  twenty-five  books,  we
have  nov/  only  six,  and  these  terribly  lacerated,
while  all  his  other  works — poetry,  satire,  literary
criticism,  grammar,  philology,  science,  history,
education,  philosophy,  law,  theology,  geography,
antiquarian  research — have  perished  except  for  a
few  disjected  fragments  salvaged  by  Dionysius,
Pliny,  Gellius,  Macrobius,  and  the  Christian  apolo-
gists. There  would  be  little  cause  for  wonder  had
his  work  been  poor  in  quality,  but  all  antiquity  is
unanimous  as  to  its  incomparable  value;  in  many
branches  of  science  and  literature  he  was  during  his
life-time  and  for  many  hundreds  of  years  after  his
death  the  supreme  authority.    The  great  men  who

xvii  h


xviii  INTRODUCTION

instructed  him  in  grammar,  archaeology,  and  theo-
logy, Aelius  Stilo  and  Nigidius  Figulus,  became
pigmies  beside  the  vast  bulk  of  him  alive,  and  when
he  died  his  reputation  grew  greater  from  century  to
century  and  he  was  regarded  "  by  the  common  con-
sent of  all  the  learned  as  the  most  learned  of  all
men."  In  the  dark  ages  his  great  figure  is  seen
among  the  shadows,  and  at  the  dawn  of  the  Re-
naissance Petrarch  sings  of  him  as  the  third  great
light  of  Rome,   placing  him  between  Cicero  and

Vergil:

Varrone  il  terso  gran  lume  Romano.

It  is,  indeed,  hard  to  understand  why  so  small  a
part  of  him  should  have  escaped  the  Venus  of  Death,
who  has  spared  only  one  comparatively  small  treat-
ise, produced  when  Varro  was  a  very  old  man  ' '  pack-
ing up  his  luggage  in  readiness  for  a  journey  out
of  this  life."  One  great  work,  perhaps  his  greatest,
certainly  that  which  the  moderns  would  choose  of
all  others  to  possess — the  Antiquities  Human  and
Divine,  in  forty-one  books — survived  for  nearly
1,400  years,  then  vanished  into  a  pawnbroker's  shop,
never  to  re-appear.  Petrarch,  in  one  of  his  "  letters
to  the  illustrious  dead,"  which  was  addressed  to
Varro,  says  that  he  had  once  had  these  books  in  his
possession,  and  that  he  was  tortured  with  eternal
longing  and  regret  for  their  loss.   He  had  lent  thern


INTRODUCTION  xix

to  his  old  master,  who  under  stress  of  poverty  had
pawned  them,  and  died  before  they  could  be  found
and  redeemed.  They  were  never  heard  of  again.  And
our  text  narrowly  escaped  a  similar  fate,  for  although
in  the  sixteenth  century  there  existed  several  MSS.
and  printed  editions  of  the  Rerum  Rusticarum — so
corrupt  as  to  be  frequently  unintelligible — they  all
descended  from  a  very  ancient  manuscript  then
lying  in  the  library  of  St.  Mark  at  Florence,  which
was  lost  in  the  seventeenth  century.  Fortunately
Angelo  Politian  (1482)  and  Petrus  Victorius  (1541)
had  preserved  the  reading  of  the  archetype,  so  that
the  great  German  scholar  Keil  has  of  late  years
been  able  to  give  us  a  respectable  text — which,
however,  it  seems  possible  to  improve  greatly  by
conjectural  emendation.

As  the  Rerum  Rusticarum  is  thus  the  sole  treatise
of  the  most  industrious,  the  most  learned,  and,  with
two  exceptions,  the  most  famous  of  all  Latin  writers,
which  has  come  down  to  us  practically  entire,  it  is
worth  while,  perhaps,  to  examine  in  detail  the  con-
ditions of  its  production.  In  46  B.C.  Varro,  who
was  then  seventy  years  old,  ceased  from  political
activity  and,  after  making  his  peace  with  Caesar,
who  treated  him  with  great  kindness  and  gave  him
congenial  work  to  do,  devoted  himself  entirely  to
literature.    He  lived  for  nearly  twenty  years  after


XX  INTRODUCTION

this  and  published  during  that  time  one  of  his  great
theoretical  works,  the  De  Lingua  Latina  (probably
in  45  B.C.),  which  was  addressed  to  Cicero,  and  many
smaller  ones  such  as  the  Hebdomades  (32  B.C.),  the
Disciplinae,  De  Vita  Sua,  De  Vita  Populi  Romani,
etc.,  which  were  practical  inaimand  intended  topopu-
larize  science  or  to  stimulate  the  patriotism  of  the
rising  generation.  The  treatise  on  farming  (Rerum
Rusticarum)  was  of  the  second  kind.  It  is  a  practical
handbook  written  especially  for  his  wife  Fundania,
who  had  just  bought  a  farm,  and  generally  in  the
interest  of  posterity,  with  the  hope,  possibly,  of
persuading  his  fellow  countrymen  back  to  the
'Mivine  country,"  and  to  that  life  "which  is  not
only  the  most  ancient,  but  the  best  of  all  "  (iii,  1,4).
But  though  the  object  may  have  been  one  with  that
of  most  of  the  great  writers  of  the  early  Augustan
age,  there  seems  no  evidence  to  support  the  frequent
statement  that  Varro's  work  was  written  at  the
command  of  Octavius,  nor  does  it  seem  at  all  likely
that  the  latter  in  36 B.C.,  when  the  Rerum  Rusticarum
was  written  (Euseb.  Chron.,  Varro,  R.R.,  i,  i,  i),
should  have  yet  thought  much  about  regenerating
by  the  arts  of  peace  a  country  which  he  had  first  to
win  by  arms.

The  books  on  farming  were  composed  when  Varro
was  eighty  years  old  and  were  written  most  likely


INTRODUCTION  xxi

in  the  same  place  as  his  former  works  (Cic.  Phil.,
ii,  40),  at  his  villa  at  Casinum,  in  the  "  Museum  "
which  he  mentions  in  book  iii,  and  close  to  the
famous  aviary  which  he  there  describes  at  length
(iii,  5,  9,  etc.)-  Remains  of  the  villa  are  still  to  be
seen  extending  along  the  bank  of  the  Rapido  for
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and  the  inhabitants
of  Cassino  point  to  a  piece  of  gray  and  crumbling
masonry  which  faces  a  little  island  in  the  Rapido
as  being  lo  studio  di  Marco  Varrone.  Here,  too,
he  probably  died,  for  according  to  Valerius  Maximus
(viii,  7),  "the  same  couch  witnessed  at  once  the
death  of  M.  Varro  and  the  conclusion  of  his  noble
works."

The  work  then  was  practical  in  its  aim,  but  much
care  was  taken  in  its  literary  presentation,  for  the
time  had  long  gone  by  when  such  an  amorphous
mass  of  often  unrelated  facts  as  Cato's  treatise  on
the  same  subject  could  hope  to  be  read.  Varro,
therefore,  adopts  the  mode  of  the  day  made  fashion-
able by  Cicero  in  his  rhetorical  and  philosophical
writings,  and  develops  the  argument  by  means  of
imaginary  conversations  between  real  people,  taking
care,  as  Cicero  did,  to  avoid  anachronisms  and  im-
probabilities. The  dialogue  of  each  book  is  provided
with  an  appropriate  background,  a  separate  intro-
duction, a  dedication,  and  its  own  little  drama.   The


xxii  INTRODUCTION

time  and  place  are  chosen  with  care,  and  in  most
cases  the  names  of  the  interlocutors  are  suggestive
of  the  subject  treated.  As  a  work  of  art  it  is  not,
one  must  confess,  entirely  successful;  the  language
is  at  times  slovenly  and  slip-shod,  now  jolting  along
in  short  and  jerky  sentences,  now  trailing  through
cumbrous  and  often  ungrammatical  periods;  the
conversations  degenerate  into  lectures,  and  we  may
look  in  vain  for  the  graceful  ease  and  urbanity  of
Cicero  or  the  beautiful  lucidity  of  Columella.  Yet
there  is  so  much  dry  and  sly  humour,  such  sturdy
patriotism,  such  vigorous  sense  and  here  and  there
such  real  poetry — in  the  ore  at  least  (as  for  instance
in  the  description  of  the  life  of  the  bees  in  book  iii)
— the  little  pictures  of  urban  and  rustic  life  are  so
vivid,  that  one  feels  that  a  better  written  book  might
perhaps  be  better  spared.  Varro's  style  has  besides
a  certain  flavour  and  raciness  of  its  own  which  one
learns  to  like,  and  the  study  of  it,  beginning  with
amazement,  ends  in  a  sort  of  love  even  for  its  rough-
ness and  difficulty,  so  different  from  the  easy  fluency
of  his  great  friend  and  rival.

As  a  work  of  science  the  Rerum  Rusticarum  is
admittedly  of  distinguished  merit.  To  its  composi-
tion Varro  brought  great  erudition,  practical  experi-
ence, and  much  knowledge  of  the  subject  gained  at
first  hand  from  travel  in  many  countries — and  used


INTRODUCTION  xxiii

all  three  with  restraint  and  judgement.  But  what
is  most  striking  is  the  perfection  of  the  method
adopted,  which  it  would  be  difficult  even  now  to
surpass  for  precision  and  clearness  of  arrangement.
The  divisions  which  Varro  made  of  his  complex
and  unwieldy  subject  are  natural,  classifications  are
scientific,  the  plan  of  treatment  is  logical  and  con-
sistent throughout.  Whether  the  modern  farmer
may  learn  anything  of  profit  from  Varro's  treatise
or  not  is  a  question  for  the  agricultural  expert,  but
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  methods  slowly
elaborated  through  many  hundreds  of  years  by  the
most  practical  of  all  peoples,  and  used  with  com-
plete success  until  the  time  when  Italian  agriculture
was  ruined  by  foreign  competition  (amongst  other
causes),  must  be  worth  knowing.  These  methods
Varro  is  at  great  pains  to  describe,  so  that  we  get
from  him  a  brilliantly  clear  picture  of  a  Roman
farm  as  it  existed  in  the  first  century  before  Christ.
And  many  are  the  interesting  facts  to  be  noted  by
the  way — the  use  of  marne  as  manure  in  Gaul  and
of  vegetable  charcoal  instead  of  salt,  the  employment
of  silos,  the  imperfect  domestication  of  geese  other
than  white,  the  distribution  in  the  wild  state  of  bulls,
horses,  goats,  sheep,  and  hens,  the  difference  be-
tween the  type  of  indigenous  cattle  found  in  Italy
then  and  that  which  now  exists  there — all  of  which,


xxiv  INTRODUCTION

with  many  more,  seem  to  deserve  more  attention
from  naturalists  than  they  have  yet  received.

Incidentally,  too,  the  enormous  wealth  and  the
incredible  luxury  of  the  few  at  Rome,  the  turbu-
lence and  corruption  of  elections,  the  frequency  of
assassination,  the  price  of  provisions,  the  market
gardens,  the  average  profits  made  by  farms,  the
occasional  employment  of  hired  labourers  in  prefer-
ence to  slaves — all  these  and  a  host  of  other  curious
facts  are  vividly  described  or  illustrated  in  these
books  on  farming.

The  first  book,  on  agriculture  proper,  begins  with
a  general  introduction  to  the  whole  work,  and  a
statement  of  the  method  which  is  to  be  used  in  the
treatment  of  the  subject.  The  treatise  as  a  whole
is  dedicated  to  his  wife  Fundania.  And  here  we
may  observe  the  elaborate  care  given  to  the  mise-
en-scene  by  Varro.  As  the  first  book  is  concerned
with  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  the  scene  is  laid  in
the  Temple  of  Tellus  (earth),  and  the  time  is  the
Sementivae  (Festival  of  Sowing).  The  name  Fun-
dania suggests  the  fundus,  or  farm,  as  do  those  of
the  aeditumus  Fundilius,  and  one  of  the  interlocu-
tors, Fundanius,  Varro's  father-in-law.  Agrius  and
Agrasius — connected  with fl'^^d'r  (the  land) — and  Stolo
(sucker),  are  names  of  other  speakers.

The  second  book  treats  of  cattle,  horses,   pigs,


INTRODUCTION  xxv

sheep,  etc. ;  it  is  accordingly  dedicated  to  Turranius
Niger — tiiru  being  Umbrian  for  taurus — and  the
speakers  are  Vaccius  (t;«cc«  =  co\v),  whose  subject
is  cattle,  Atticus  who  treats  of  sheep  (the  Attic
sheep  was  a  celebrated  kind),  while  Scrofa  (sow)
discusses  pigs.  The  place  is  possibly  Epirus,  where
the  best  cattle  were  bred,  and  the  time  the  Palilia,
the  great  shepherd  festival  and  the  birthday  of
Rome,  which  was  founded  by  shepherds.

The  third  book  is  concerned  with  what  the
Romans  called  villatica  pastio^  the  feeding  about
the  villa  of  such  stock  as  fieldfares,  blackbirds,  hens,
peacocks,  guinea-fowls,  hares,  snails,  dormice,  fish,
and  bees ;  so  it  is  dedicated  to  Quintus  Pinnius  {pinna
=  wing-feather),  and  Merula  (blackbird)  discourses
on  fieldfares  and  blackbirds,  Appius  (connected  by
Varro  with  apis)  on  bees.  Other  names  occurring
in  the  book  are  Fircellius  Pavo  (peacock),  Minucius
Pica  (jay),  and  Petronius  Passer  (sparrow).  One
is  tempted  to  believe  also  that  the  harsh  style,  as
well  as  a  rustic  vocabulary — with  words  like  tabani
and  diminutives  such  as  satulli,  etc.,  was  de-
liberately assumed  in  order  to  be  in  keeping  with
the  subject,  and  that  Varro  wished  to  represent  in
a  realistic  fashion  the  ordinary  speech  of  the  Roman
gentleman-farmer.  Unfortunately  for  this  hypo-
thesis we  find  the  same  crudeness,  confusion,  and


xxvi  INTRODUCTION

ugliness  in  everything  of  his  which  remains  with
perhaps  the  exception  of  such  earlier  works  as  the
Menippeae.  The  truth  is  probably  that  Varro  ad-
mired too  greatly  the  "adorable  rust"  of  antiquity,
and  ruined  his  style  by  pondering  over  and  making
excerpts  from  pre-Ennian  writers  who  cared  nothing
for  form  in  prose  expression,  and  that  while  many
current  country  words  and  homely  proverbs  are
preserved  in  the  Rerum  Rusticarum,  its  stiffness
and  dryness  are  transmitted  through  Varro  from  a
time  when  no  prose  literature  in  Latin  existed.  This
harshness  of  style  is  frequently  noticed  by  the
ancients.  Quintilian  mentions  it,  and  Augustine
(De  Civ.  Dei,  vi,  2)  writes  about  Varro,  "al-
though he  has  no  sweetness  of  utterance,  he  is  yet
so  full  of  learning  and  of  wise  precepts  that  in  the
whole  field  of  knowledge  which  we  call  secular,  and
pagans  liberal,  he  is  as  full  of  information  for  the
student  of  facts  as  Cicero  is  of  charm  for  the  lover
of  style."  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  difficulty  of
reading  Varro's  work— St.  Augustine  (xix,  i)  is
obliged  frequently  to  paraphrase — goes  far  to  ex-
plain why  so  little  of  it  remains  to  us,  as  people
naturally  preferred  the  writings  of  those  who,  using
his  facts,  presented  them  more  gracefully,  and  we
need  not  have  recourse  to  the  story,  probably  in-
vented by  Machiavelli  or  Cardan,  that  Gregory  the


INTRODUCTION  xxvii

Great  caused  Varro's  writings  to  be  burnt  in  order
to  conceal  Augustine's  plagiarisms  from  them !

It  is  clear  from  Cicero's  letters  (Ad  Att.,  iv,  i6,
etc.)  that  in  those  of  his  treatises  which  are  cast
in  the  form  of  dialogues  he  was  careful  to  avoid
anachronisms  and  the  introduction  of  anything
which  might  shock  the  reader  by  its  inherent  im-
probability. Those  who  take  part  in  the  dialogue
are  real  people,  not  unknown  to  the  public,  and
speak  each  in  accordance  with  his  known  character.
We  find  no  fictitious  personages,  and  no  violation
of  history.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  the  more
accurate  and  less  imaginative  Varro  has  been
equally  careful,  and  that  in  the  Rerum  Rusticarum
we  are  introduced  to  a  circle  of  people,  all  of  whom
once  lived,  and  were  his  acquaintances  or  friends,
and  that  they  are  portrayed  in  their  real  characters.
Many  of  them,  indeed,  Cicero's  letters  have  made
familiar  to  us;  Atticus,  for  instance,  and  Agrius,
Appius,  C.  Fundanius,  Cossinius,  Axius — and  often
they  form  an  illuminating  commentary  on  Varro's
text.  As  examples:  Axius  the  senator  is  humor-
ously represented  by  Varro  as  a  man  whose  whole
heart  is  set  on  gain:  in  Cicero  he  appears  as
an  avaricious  moneylender;  in  book  ii,  2,  11,  Varro
writes  of  Atticus,  "who  was  then  (58  B.C.)  Pom-
ponius,  and  now  (36  B.C.)  is  called  Q.  Caecilius":


xxviii  INTRODUCTION

there  is  extant  a  letter  (Ad  Att.,  iii,  20)  of  Cicero's
congratulating  Atticus  on  his  adoption  and  inherit-
ance; in  book  iii,  2,  3,  Appius  reminds  Axius  that
a  few  days  before  he  had  stayed  at  Axius's  house  in
Reate,  and  that  his  visit  was  connected  with  a  dis-
pute between  the  Interamnates  and  Reatini:  Cicero
(Ad  Att.  iv,  15),  who  tells  the  whole  story  at
length,  was  counsel  for  the  Reatini,  and  stayed
with  Axius  i^ixi  cum  Axt'o),  so  that  on  this  occasion
Cicero  and  Axius  were  guests  at  the  same  house.
This  letter  incidentally  fixes  the  date  assigned  to
the  imaginary  conversations  of  this  book,  and  of
the  election  of  aediles  described  in  it,  which  must
have  taken  place  in  July  54  B.C.  Varro  and  Axius
(iii,  2,  i)  are  represented  as  taking  shelter  from
the  blazing  sun  in  the  Villa  Publica  during  this
election:  Cicero  (Ad  O.  F.,  iii,  i)  says  that  he
does  not  remember  ever  to  have  known  a  hotter
summer  than  this  of  54.  A  little  further  on  in  the
book  Varro  tells  a  '  fish-story  '  about  Ummidius  and
Philippus  which  vividly  illustrates  the  character  of
Philippus  as  described  by  Cicero,  and  of  Ummidius,
the  miser  mentioned  by  Horace.  The  latter  or  his
children  Varro  probably  knew  personally,  for  Um-
midius lived  at  Casinum,  where  stood  Varro's  villa,
and  it  was  an  Ummidia  who  built  the  theatre,  still
standing,  for  the  Casinates,  as  is  proved  by  an  in-


INTRODUCTION  xxix

scription  now  preserved  in  the  Badia  of  Monte
Cassino.

These  examples  illustrate  the  meticulous  accuracy
shown  by  Varro  in  arranging  the  background  for
these  dialogues.  He  probably  fixed  upon  some  one
year  for  the  conversation  of  each  book,  and  then
consulted  his  notes  for  the  events  and  people  of
that  year,  choosing  of  the  latter  those  whose  cir-
cumstances and  names  associated  them  with  agri-
culture— for  there  were  few  things  which  Varro
liked  better  than  a  pun.  One  need  not  wonder  at
his  success  in  finding  characters  whose  names  came
so  pat  to  his  purpose,  for  a  large  proportion  of
Roman  names  are  connected  with  the  animals  and
plants  found  on  a  farm.

The  place  and  occasion  of  the  conversations  in
the  first  book  is,  as  I  have  said,  made  clear  by
Varro,  but  there  is  no  internal  evidence  to  fix  the
year.  From  the  allusion,  however,  to  Corcyra,  and
the  fleet  being  there,  if  the  reference  is,  as  most
commentators  suppose,  to  the  great  civil  war  of
49-48,  we  may  conclude  that  it  was  after  this  date.
I  am  inclined  to  think,  however,  that  the  time  re-
ferred to  is  when  Varro  served  under  Pompey  in
the  war  against  the  pirates.  In  book  ii  the  time  of
the  conversation  is  precisely  fixed,  for  Varro  says
that  they  took  place  when  he  was  in  command  of


XXX  INTRODUCTION

the  fleets  between  Delos  and  Sicily  during  the  wars
of  the  pirates  (67-66  B.C.).  That  the  supposed  occa-
sion was  the  Parilia  (20th  April)  I  hope  I  have
established  conclusively  in  the  note  to  ch.  viii,  §  i.
But  the  place  is  not  certain.  In  the  note  to  5,  i,
I  suggested  Sicily  and  proposed  "Palicis,"  as  an
alternative  to  Keil's  emendation  "Laribus,"  for
the  ''Palibus,"  of  the  archetype  {diim  asses  solvo
Palibiis  ^  si  postea  a  me  repetant  ut  testitnmiium  per-
hihere  possis).  I  now  think  that  it  was  somewhere
in  Epirus,  for  Varro  (Introduction,  §  6)  says  that
he  is  giving  the  substance  of  conversations  which
he  had  had  with  people  who  possessed  large  cattle
farms  in  EpirOy  and  Epirus  was  celebrated  for  its
cattle.

The  conversations  of  the  third  book  took  place,
as  is  said  above,  at  the  Villa  Publica  in  the  Campus
during  the  election  of  aediles  in  54  B.C.

The  sources  consulted  by  Varro  are  many.  In  the
introduction  to  book  i  he  recommends  to  his  wife
as  a  reference  library  the  works  of  fifty  Greek
authors!  The  authorities  mostly  used  by  him  for

'  For  the  impossible  "  Palibus  "  of  the  archetj'pe  I  would
suggest  Pali  bis,  with  repetat  instead  of  repetant,  when  the
translation  would  run  "Come  along,  Murrius,  and  support
me  with  your  presence  while  I  pay  my  pence  to  Pales,  so  that
if  she  (or  he)  tries  to  make  me  pay  them  twice  over  (bis)  you
can  give  evidence."


INTRODUCTION  xxxi

book  i  are  Cato,  the  Sasernae  and  Theophrastus,
for  book  ii  Xenophon,  Aristotle,  Mago,  and  his
own  contemporary  Tremellius  Scrofa ;  and  for
book  iii  Aristotle.  Varro's  own  treatise  soon
afterwards  became  the  standard  authority  on  the
subject,  and  is  the  chief  source  used  by  the  later
writers  on  agriculture — Vergil,  Columella,  Pliny,
Palladius — while  much  of  it  is  paraphrased  or
translated  by  the  compiler  of  the  Geoponica,  and
by  Petrus  Crcscentius  as  late  as  the  thirteenth
century.


MARCUS  TERENTIUS  VARRO
ON  FARMING

BOOK  I
AGRICULTURE

CHAPTER  I

INTRODUCTORY

1  My  dear  Fundania/  if  I  had  leisure  I  would  give
a  better  form  to  this  treatise.  As  I  have  not,  I
will  do  what  a  man  may  who  has  to  bear  in  mind
the  need  of  haste.  Man  is  a  bubble,  they  say;  in
which  case  the  proverb  must  be  the  more  true  of  an
old  man.  And  I  am  in  my  eightieth  year,  which
warns  me  to  pack  up  my  baggage  in  readiness  to
journey  out  of  this  world.

2  Well,  as  you  have  bought  an  estate,  and  want
to  farm  it  to  advantage,  and  as  you  ask  me  to  give
the  matter  my  attention,  I  will  try  what  I  can  do,

'  Fundania,  Varro's  wife.  She  is  mentioned  again  in  the
preface  to  the  second  book,  §  6.  Her  father,  C.  Fundanius,
one  of  the  interlocutors  in  this  book — like  Varro,  of  plebeian
family — was  a  tribune  of  the  people  and  curator  viarum  in
72  B.C.  Possibly  Cicero's  friend,  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  his
brother  (Ad  Q.  Cic,  i,  3,  10),  is  this  same  Fundanius.

B


2  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

in  the  hope  that  my  instructions  may  serve  you  not
only  during  my  life,  but  after  my  death  as  well.

3  The  Sibyl's  oracles  helped  not  only  her  contem-
poraries, but  also  generations  of  men  to  whom  she
had  never  even  given  a  thought;  her  books,  after
so  many  centuries,  are  still  consulted  officially,  when
some  portent  occurs  and  we  need  to  know  the  proper
way  to  deal  with  it — so  it  shall  not  be  said  that  I,
even  during  my  lifetime,  could  do  nothing  to  help
those  near  and  dear  to  me.

4  I  am,  accordingly,  about  to  write  three  books  for
your  guidance,  to  which  you  can  refer  whenever,  in
any  particular  case,  you  need  a  detailed  knowledge
of  the  practice  of  farming.  And  since  the  gods,  they
say,  help  those  who  pay  them  due  observance,  I
will  begin  by  invoking  not  the  Muses,  as  Ennius
and  Homer  did,  but  the  twelve  great  gods  who  form
the  Senate  of  Heaven.  I  do  not  mean  those  fine
city  gods,  six  of  either  sex,  whose  statues  stand  in
the  Forum,'  all  dressed  in  gold,  but  those  twelve
deities  who  are  the  special  guides  of  the  farmer.

5  First  in  order,  then,  I  call  upon  Jupiter  and  Tellus,
who  by  means  of  the  sky  and  land  maintain  the
various  fruits  of  farming,  and  this  is  the  reason

'  Deos  Consentis.  Their  names  are  given  in  two  well-known
hexameters  of  Ennius,  "Juno,  Vesta,  Minerva,  Ceres,  Deiana,
Venus,  Mars,  ||  Mercurius,  Jovi',  Neptunus,  Volcanus,  Apollo."
The  court  in  which  their  statues  stood,  in  the  north-west
corner  of  the  Forum,  at  the  foot  of  the  Capitoline  Hill,  was
discovered  in  1834.  In  a.d.  367  Agorius  Praetextatus,  prefect
of  Rome,  restored  these  sacro-sancta  simulacra  to  their  ancient
state,  as  the  inscription,  still  to  be  read  there,  declares.


I]  INTRODUCTORY  3

why — as  they  are  said  to  be  the  universal  parents —
Jupiter  is  addressed  as  "  Father  Jove,"  and  Tellus
as  "Mother  Earth."  Next  the  Sun  and  Moon,
whose  seasons  are  observed  for  the  sowing  and
garnering  of  the  crops.  Thirdly  Ceres  and  Liber,
as  the  fruits  they  send  are  specially  necessary  for
subsistence:  for  it  is  through  them  that  food  and
6  drink  come  from  the  farm.  Fourthly  Robigus^  and
Flora,  for  by  their  grace  blight  does  not  ruin  the
various  grains  and  trees,  and  these  flourish  in  due
season.  For  which  cause  the  State  appointed  the
festival  of  the  Robigalia,-  in  honour  of  Robigus,
and  for  Flora  the  games  known  as  Floralia.'  And
likewise  I  pay  my  respects  to  Minerva  and  Venus,
the  one  of  whom  watches  over  the  olive  orchards,
the  other  over  gardens.  It  is  in  honour  of  the  latter
that  the  festival  of  the  **  Country  Vinalia  "  ^  was  in-
stituted. And  finally  I  pray  to  Lympha  and  Good
Speed,"  since  without  water  all  husbandry  is  dry

'  Robigtis,  the  god,  and  Rohigo  the  goddess,  of  blight  or
mildew  {robigo).  "  They  were  implored  not  to  come  near  "  the
crops.    Cf.  Aug.,  C.  D.,  iv,  21.

'^  Robigalia.  ' '  A  festival  called  after  Robigus.  Sacrifice  is
made  to  this  god  near  the  corn-fields  that  mildew  may  not
attack  the  crops"  (Varro,  L.  L.,  vi,  16).  Its  date  was  25th
April,  "just  before  the  ear  leaves  its  sheath  (Pliny,  N.  H.,
xviii,  14).    Red  puppies  were  sacrificed.

'  Floralia.    28th  iVpril  to  2nd  May.

*  Rustica  vinalia.  19th  August.  "Then  Venus's  temple
was  dedicated — and  on  that  day  gardens  are  placed  under  the
protection  of  this  goddess,  and  market-gardeners  make  holi-
day" (Varro,  L.  L.,  loc.  cit.).

=  Bonus Eventus.    According  to  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xxxiv,  8)  there


4  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

and  stingy  work,  and  without  good  luck  and  good
speed  it  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare.

7  And  now  that  I  have  invoked  all  these  deities,
I  will  reproduce  those  conversations  in  which  I  and
others  lately  discussed  the  practice  of  farming.  You
will  find  in  them  the  practical  information  you
need;  but  lest  you  should  in  the  future  require
guidance  upon  matters  not  contained  in  them,  I  will
mention  those  authors,  Greek  as  well  as  Latin,
from  whom  you  may  get  it.

8  Of  those  who  have  written  monographs  in  Greek
on  different  branches  of  the  subject  there  are  more
than  fifty.  These  you  will  be  able  to  summon
whenever  you  want  a  consultation  on  any  point:
Hiero  of  Sicily  and  Attalus  Philometer;  amongst
the  philosophers,  Democritus,  the  natural  philo-
sopher, and'Xenophon,  Socrates'  disciple;  of  the
Peripatetics,  Aristotle  and  Theophrastus;  Archy-
tas  the  Pythagorean,  and  also  Amphilochus  of
Athens,  Anaxipolis  of  Thasos,  Apollodorus  of
Lemnos,  Aristophanes  of  Mallus,  Antigonus  of
Cumae,  Agathocles  of  Chios,  Apollonius  of  Per-
gamus,  Aristandrus  the  Athenian,  Bacchius  of
Miletus,  Bion  of  Solos,  Chaeresteus  and  Chaereas
of  Athens,  Diodorus  of  Priene,  Dion  of  Colophon,
Diophanes  of  Nicaea,  Epigenesof  Rhodes,  Euagon
of  Thasos,  the  two  Euphronii — the  one  of  Athens,
the  other  of  Amphipolis — Hegesias  of  Maronea,
the  two    Menanders — one    from    Priene,  the  other

was  a  statue  of  this  j^od  in  Rome,  in  the  right  hand  of  which
was  a  patera,  while  the  left  held  an  ear  of  corn  and  a  poppy.


I]  INTRODUCTORY  5

from  Heraclea,  Nicesius  of  Maronea,  and  Pythion
of  Rhodes.
9  Amongst  the  others,  whose  place  of  birth  is
unknown  to  me,  are  Androtion,  Aeschrion,  Aris-
tomenes,  Athenagoras,  Crates,  Dadis,  Dionysios,
Euphiton,  Euphorion,  Eubulus,  Lysimachus,  Mna-
seas,  Menestratus,  Plentiphanes,  Persis,Theophilus.
All  the  above-mentioned  wrote  in  prose.  Some  have
treated  the  same  subject  in  verse,  as  for  example
Hesiod  of  Ascra,  and  Menecrates  of  Ephesus.

10  More  famous  than  all  these  writers  is  Mago  the
Carthaginian,  who,  writing  in  Punic,  embodied
in  twenty-eight  books  matter  that  was  previously
scattered  here  and  there  in  different  monographs.
Of  these  twenty-eight  books,  Cassius  Dionysius  of
Utica  made  a  Greek  translation  in  twenty  books
which  he  dedicated  to  Sextilius  the  praetor,  and  in
these  twenty  volumes  he  introduced  much  matter
taken  from  the  Greek  writings  of  those  whom  I
have  mentioned  above,  shortening  at  the  same  time
Mago's  work  by  eight  books.  Of  these  twenty
books  a  useful  abridgement  to  six  books  was  made
by  Diogenes  in  Bithynia,  and  presented  by  him  to

11  King  Deiotarus.  I  mean  to  be  briefer  still  than  he,
treating  the  same  subject  in  three  books — the  first
on  agriculture  proper,  the  second  on  cattle,  and  the
third  on  the  fattening  of  farmyard  stock,  for  I  shall
eliminate  from  this  treatise  such  matters  as  I  think
do  not  come  within  the  province  of  farming.  And
so  I  shall  begin  by  showing  what  ought  to  be  elimin-
ated, and  then  proceed  with  the  subject,  following


6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

its  natural  divisions.  My  observations  will  be
drawn  from  a  threefold  source  ;  from  personal  ex-
perience on  my  own  farms,  from  my  own  reading,
and  from  what  I  have  heard  from  experts.


CHAPTER  II

THE  AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE

I  At  the  Sementivae  (Festival  of  Sowing) '  I  was
in  the  temple  of  Tellus,  on  the  invitation  of  the
Aeditumus  (guardian  of  the  temple),  as  our  ances-
tors taught  us  to  call  him,  though  now  our  modern
men-about-town  correct  us,  and  would  have  us  say
Aedituus.'^  There  I  fell  in  with  Caius  Fundanius,
my  father-in-law,  C.  Agrius,  a  Roman  equesof  the
Socratic  school,  and  P.  Agrasius  the  tax-farmer.
They  were  looking  at  a  map  of  Italy  traced  on  the
wall.  What  are  you  doing  here?  I  said  to  them,
surely  the  "Sementivae"  haven't  brought  you
gentlemen  of  leisure  here  as  they  used  to  do  our
fathers  and  grandfathers!

^  Sementivae  feriac.  A  village  festhal  wliich  took  place
after  the  seed  had  been  sown.  Its  date  was  announced  by  the
Pontifices.  Sacrifice  was  made  to  Ceres  and  Tellus,  and
prayers  were  offered  for  a  good  harvest  (cf.  Ovid,  Fasti,  i,  658).

^  Aeditumus,  the  correct  form,  for  which  compare  //w ///';;; wj,
le^itiimts,  etc.  The  form  Aedituns  rests  on  a  false  deri\ation
from  acdcs  and  tueri.


I]     AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE     7

2  Our  presence  has,  I  imagine,  the  same  cause
as  yours,  said  Agrius,  an  invitation  from  the  Aedi-
tumus,  and  if  I  am  right — as  your  nod  would  in-
dicate— you  must  wait  with  us  until  he  returns,
for  the  aedile  who  has  charge  of  this  temple  sent
for  him  and  he  hasn't  yet  come  back,  but  he  left  a
request  that  we  should  wait  for  him.  So,  in  the
meantime,  while  he  is  on  the  way,  suppose  we
apply  the  ancient  proverb — "The  Roman  wins  by
sitting  still."  '

A  good  idea,  said  Agrius,  and  thinking  that
the  longest  part  of  a  journey  is,  according  to  the
proverb,  the  getting  to  the  gate,  at  once  moved
forward  to  the  benches ;  and  we  followed.

3  When  we  were  seated  Agrasius  said:  You  men
who  have  travelled  over  many  lands,  have  you  ever
seen  any  which  was  better  cultivated  than  Italy?
My  opinion  is,  said  Agrius,  that  there  is  none
that  has  so  little  of  its  land  uncultivated.  In  the
first  place,  as  Eratosthenes  '  divided  the  earth  into

^  Romanus  sedendo  vincit.  A  saying,  no  doubt  of  Fabius
Cunctator.  Cf.  his  advice  to  Paullus  (Livy,  xxii,  39) :  Duhitas
ergo  quin  sedendo  superaturi  sivius?  His  colleague,  Minucius,
was  of  the  opposite  opinion  (cf.  Livy,  xxii,  14) :  Shiltitia  est,
sedendo  aut  votis  debellari  credere  posse.  .  .  .  Audendo  atque
agendo  res  Roniana  crevit.

*  Eratosthenes,  the  founder  of  scientific  geography,  born
about  275  B.C.,  died  195  B.C.,  who  was  made  keeper  of  the
great  library  at  Alexandria  in  247  B.C.  by  Ptolemy  III.  Of
his  genuine  writings  only  a  few  fragments  remain.  In  one  of
them,  the  "Hermes,"  in  which  the  celebrated  description  of
the  Five  Zones,  imitated  by  Vergil  (Georgics,  i,  233)  occurs,


8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

two  halves,  the  northern  and  the  southern  (the  most

4  natural  division);  and  since  the  northern  part  is
incontestably  healthier  than  the  southern,  and  the
healthier  a  place  is  the  more  productive  it  is,  we
must  conclude  that  Italy,  being  in  the  northern
half,  was  originally  more  suitable  for  cultivation
than  Asia.  For  in  the  first  place  Italy  is  in  Europe;
secondly,  this  part  of  Europe  is  more  temperate
than  the  inner  part,  where  almost  perpetual  winters
reign.  And  no  wonder,  since  there  are  districts
between  the  Arctic  Circle  and  the  North  Pole — the
axis  of  the  heavens — where  the  sun  is  invisible  for
six  months  together.  They  say,  too,  that  in  conse-
quence of  this,  sailing  even  is  impossible  in  the
Ocean,  owing  to  the  sea  being  frozen.

5  I  say,  said  Fundanius,  you  don't  suppose,  do
you,  that  anything  can  grow  there,  or  be  cul-
tivated if  it  does?  For  Pacuvius's  saying  is  true,
"If  there  be  perpetual  sunlight  or  night,  all   the

there  are  these  Hnes  (v.  i8;,  which  Varro  may  have  had  in

mind :

aiirrtv  fiiv  fiiv  tTtriii  fxeaiipca  navTixj  OXvfiTrov
Kevrpov  «TTt  a<}>aiptie  Sid  S'  a^ovog  ripijpHaTO.

But  the  division  of  the  earth  into  two  parts,  Asia  and  Europe,
Africa  being  considered  as  a  part  of  Europe,  was  adopted  by
many  of  the  ancients.  Lucan,  in  speaking  of  Africa  (Phar-
salia,  Bk.  ix),  says:  Si  ventos  caelumque  sequaris  \\  pars-
erit  Europae.  Cf  also  ''  JPAhxci  Cosmographia,"  p.  i,  and
Varro  himself  (L.  L.,  v,  cap.  4):  Ut  oiiinis  nahira  in  caelum
et  terrain  divisa  est,  sic  caeli  regionibus  terra  in  Asiam  et
Europam.  Asia  enim  iacct  ad  meridiem  et  Austnim,  Europa
ad  Septemtriones  et  aquilonem.


I]     AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE     9

fruits  of  the  earth  perish  through  fiery  glow  "  or
cold !  For  myself,  even  in  this  part  of  the  world
where  night  and  day  follow  each  other  at  reason-
able intervals,  life  would  be  impossible,  did  I  not

6  in  summer  time  break  the  day  by  a  siesta.  How
then  could  sowing,  growing,  or  mowing  be  possible
in  that  part  of  the  world  where  there  is  a  six-months
night  or  day?

Contrast  with  this  Italy,  where  every  useful  pro-
duct not  merely  grows,  but  grows  to  perfection.
What  spelt  is  comparable  with  that  of  Campania,
what  wheat  with  the  Apulian,  what  wine  with  the
Falernian,  what  oil  with  the  Venafrian?  Is  not
Italy  so  stocked  with  fruit-trees  as  to  seem  one  great

7  orchard?  Is  Phrygia,  which  Homer  calls  ajWTrE^oEo-^-ai,
more  thickly  covered  with  vines  than  our  country?
Or  is  Argos  more  fruitful,  which  the  same  poet  calls
Tto-hvitu^ovi  In  what  other  land  does  the  mgerum'
produce  fifteen  cullei'  of  wine,  which  is  the  case  in
some  districts  of  Italy?  Does  not  M.  Cato  write  in
his  book  "  Of  Origins  "  as  follows:  "  That  part  of
the  Ager  Gallicus '  is  called  Roman  which,  lying

'  2  actus  quadrati=  2^,^00  Roman  square  feet  =  28,000  Eng-
lihh  square  feet  (approximately),  i.e.,  nearly  5  acre.

■  A  culleus  =  20  amphorae.  The  avipJwra,  as  a  measure  of
capacity  =  6  gallons,  7  pints.  The  yield  of  15  aiUei  to  the
iugerum  amounts  to  about  3,000  gallons  (18,000  bottles)  to  the
acre.

^  Ager  Gallicus.  r\.  strip  of  coast  between  the  river  Axis —
the  ancient  northern  frontier  of  Italy— and  the  Rubicon,  the
later  northern  frontier.  It  was  possessed  successively  by
Umbrians,  Gauls,  and  Senones,  until  in  285  B.C.  it  was  con-


lo  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

beyond  the  Picentine  country  on  this  side  of  Ari-
minum,  was  portioned  out  to  settlers.  In  that  land
occasionally  ten  cullei  of  wine  are  made  to  the
iiigeriwi.'''  And  the  same  remarkable  yield  is  ob-
served in  the  country  about  Faventia,  for  there  the
vines  are  called  trecenariae,  on  the  ground  that
the  iugeriim  is  reported  to  yield  300  amphorae.  ^
At  this  point,  with  a  glance  at  me,  he  said,  At  any
rate,  your  head  engineer,  Libo  Marcius,  used  to
assert  that  the  vines  on  his  farm  at  Faenza  pro-
duced this  quantity.

i  Two  points  above  all  others  the  inhabitants  of
Italy  seem  to  have  considered  in  farming:  Could
they  get  back  a  return  proportionate  to  the  labour
and  expense?  And  was  the  situation  healthy?  If
either  question  has  to  be  answered  in  the  negative,
and  a  man  still  wishes  to  farm,  he  is  mentally  de-
fective, and  had  better  be  put  in  charge  of  his  legal
guardians.^    For  no  sane  man  should  be  willing  to

quered  by  Curius  Dentatus.  In  283  B.C.  the  Roman  colony  of
Sena  Gallica  was  founded,  and  in  268  the  Latin  colony  of
Ariminum.  The  Ager  Gallicus  remained  ager  puhlicus  until
232,  when,  on  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Flaminia,  proposed  by
G.  Flaminlus  in  order  to  relieve  over-crowding  and  distress  at
Rome,  it  was  portioned  out  to  Roman  colonists.

'  See  note  2,  p.  9.

2  Ad agnatos  et gentiles.  Gefitiles  were  members  of  the  same
gens  who  bore  the  same  nomen  and  were  supposed  to  be
descended  from  a  common  ancestor.  Agnati  were  gentiles
on  the  male  side  who  could  prove  their  relationship.  When  a
man  died  without  heirs  of  his  body,  his  properly  devolved  on
the  agnati — failing  these  the  gentiles  divided  it.

If  a   man    were    mad,    tiie   agnati,   or,    failing   them,    the


i]    AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE    ii

go  to  the  trouble  and  expense  of  farming  if  he  sees
that  no  return  is  possible,  or  that,  while  he  may
get  a  return  in  crops,  they  will  be  destroyed  by
disease.
9  But  here  we  have  men  better  qualified  than  I  am
to  deal  with  these  matters;  for  I  see  coming  C.  Li-
cinius  Stolo  and  Cn.  Tremelius  Scrofa.  Itwas  Stolo's
ancestors  who  proposed  the  law  limiting  the  land
held  by  one  person  (for  a  Stolo  originated  the  well-
known  law  which  forbids  a  Roman  citizen  to  hold
more  than  500  tugera),  and  Stolo  himself  through
admirable  farming  made  good  his  right  to  the  Cog-
nomen Stolo,  for  not  a  single  **  sucker"  could  be
found  on  his  estate  since  he  went  round  his  trees
digging  up  such  offshoots  from  the  root  as  sprouted
above  the  soil — and  these  were  called  "stolos."
C.  Licinius  '  of  the  ssixnQ.ge7is,  when  he  was  Tribune

gentiles,  took  charge  of  him  and  his  property.  Cf.  the  laws  of
twelve  tables  (Cic.  De  Invent.,  ii,  148):  Si furiosus  escit,  ast  ei
custos  nee  escit,  adgnatuni  gentiliumque  itt  eo  pecuniaque  eius
potestas  esto.  Persistent  senseless  extravagance  was  treated  as
madness  (cf.  Ulpian,  Reg.,  12,  2).

'  Caius  Licinius  Crassus  was  a  Tribune  of  the  Plebs  in
145  B.C.,  and,  according  to  Cicero  (De  Amicitia,  xxv),  he,
when  addressing  the  people  from  the  Rostra  in  support  of  a
popular  measure,  was  the  first  to  adopt  the  custom  of  speak-
ing with  his  face  turned  towards  the  Forum,  not  towards  the
Comitium — by  this  implying  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,
and  denying  that  of  the  patricians.  The  Comitium  was  an
enclosure  (unroofed)  extending  in  a  north-easterly  direction
from  the  ancient  Rostra.  To  face  the  Forum  the  orator  would
have  to  turn  right  round,  looking  south.  On  its  northern  side
was  the  Curia  Hostilia,   the  ancient  senate    house.      In  the


12  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

of  the  Plebs,  365  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the
kings,  was  the  first  to  lead  the  people,  to  hear  the
laws  announced,  from  the  Comitium  to  the  Forum,
their  seven  iugera  of  land.'
10  The  other  whom  I  see  approaching  is  a  col-
league of  yours,  one  of  the  twenty  commissioners
appointed  to  apportion  the  Campanian  lands,  Cn.
Tremelius  Scrofa.  Universally  accomplished,  he
is  also  considered  the  greatest  Roman  authority  on
farming.  And  is  he  not  rightly  so  considered?
said  I ;  for  his  farms,  owing  to  their  fine  cultiva-
tion, are  a  pleasanter  sight  to  many  than  the  palatial
buildings  of  others,  since  people  come  in  his  case
to  see  farmhouses,  not  picture-galleries  as  at  Lu-

Comitium  the  ancient  comitia  had  been  held,  and  in  the  time
of  the  kings  and  during  the  early  republic  it  was  the  centre
of  government  and  the  stronghold  of  the  patricians.  The
Rostra,  a  raised  semicircular  stone  platform  on  the  confines
of  the  Comitium  and  the  Forum — so  situated  that  a  speaker
could  be  heard  both  by  patricians  and  plebeians.

^  In  septem  iugera  foreiisia.  According  to  Pliny  (N.  H.,
xviii,  3),  haec  meiisura  \i.e.,  seven  iugera\  pJehei  post  exactos
reges  assignata  est.  Columella  also  speaks  of  post  reges
exactos  Liciniana  ilia  septcna  iugera  quae  plebi  tribunus  viritim
diviserat.     Romulus  had  assigned  two  iugera  to  each  man.

Varro  here  speaks  of  the  populus  as  one  person,  and  the
Forum  Romanum  as  its  allotment  of  seven  iugera.

The  meaning,  then,  of  this  difficult  passage  would  seem  to
be  that  C.  Licinius  Crassus  when  proposing  a  democratic
measure  (that  election  to  the  priestly  colleges  should  be  by
the  people,  not  co-optative)  addressed  himself  to  the  j-H?ople  in
the  Forum.  Those  who  were  then  in  the  Comitium  naturally
quitted  it  for  the  Forum  in  order  to  hear  him.


I]    AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE    13

cullus's,  but  store-houses  stocked  with  fruit.  There
is  a  picture  of  our  friend's  orchard,  said  I,  at  the
top  of  the  Sacra  Via/  where  fruit  is  being  sold  for
gold.

11  Meanwhile,  the  two  of  whom  I  was  speaking
join  us.  We  have  not  come  too  late  for  the
dinner,  have  we?  said  Stolo,  for  I  don't  see
L.  Fundilius,  who  invited  us  to  it.  Don't  be
uneasy,  said  Agrius,  for  the  egg'  which  marks
the  last  course  in  the  four-horse  chariot-races  at  the
games  of  the  Circus  has  not  yet  been  removed;  we
have  not  even  seen  the  egg  which  usually  begins

12  the  solemn  function  of  dinner."  And  so,  until  we
can  see  the  latter  together,  and  while  the  Aeditumus
is  on  his  way,  tell  us  what  is  the  chief  end  of  farm-
ing— utility,  or  pleasure,  or  both;  for  they  tell  me

'  Sunima  Sacra  Via.  The  end  of  the  first  stage  of  the  Sacra
Via,  which  went  from  the  Sacellum  Streniae  (where  the
Colosseum  now  stands)  to  the  VeUa.  There,  where  Is  now
the  Arch  of  Titus,  it  was  called  Summa  Sacra  Via.  From
here  the  Sacra  Via  proceeded  by  the  Arch  of  Fabius,  the
temple  of  Castor,  and  the  Basilica  lulia  to  the  Capitol.

^  Ovum  illud.  An  allusion  to  the  egg-shaped  objects  (usually
seven)  on  the  spina  (a  low  wall  which  passed  down  the  middle
of  the  course)  of  the  circus  which  served  to  indicate  to  the
spectators  how  many  heats  remained  to  be  run.  As  each  heat
was  concluded  one  of  these  "  eggs  "  was  removed.

^  Cenali  povipa.  A  Roman  dinner  usually  began  with  eggs,
salad,  etc.  Compare  Horace's  phrase  ab  ovo  usque  ad  mala —
"  from  hors  d'ceuvres  to  dessert."  Martial  (Epig,,  x,  31,  4)  calls
a  mullet  cenae  pompa  :

Nee  bene  cenasti :  mullus  tibi  quattuor  emptus
Librarian  cenae  pompa  caputque  fuit.


14  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

that  you  are  now  the  great  agricultural '  expert,  as
was  Stole  before  you.

We  must  first  decide,  said  Scrofa,  whether  farm-
ing is  concerned  only  with  the  sowing  of  land,
or  with  such  things  also  as  are  brought  on  to  the

13  land,  such  as  sheep  and  cattle;  for  I  find  that  those
who  have  written  on  agriculture  in  Phoenician,
Greek  and  Latin,  have  travelled  too  far  afield.

It  is  my  opinion,  answered  Stolo,  that  we  are
not  bound  to  imitate  them  in  every  particular,
and  that  certain  writers  have  done  better  who  have
kept  within  a  narrower  boundary  and  excluded  from
it  everything  irrelevant  to  the  subject.  Thus  the
feeding  of  stock  in  general,  which  most  people
make  a  branch  of  farming,  seems  more  the  province

14  of  the  shepherd  than  of  the  farmer;  and  so  the
headmen  in  each  case  are  distinguished  by  different
names,  the  one  being  called  the  bailiff  {viliciis),  the
other  the  flock-master.  The  vilicus  was  appointed
to  cultivate  the  ground  and  was  named  after  the
villa,  as  he  conveys  the  produce  into  the  farmhouse,
and  out  of  it  when  it  is  being  sold.  Hence  the
country-folk   even    to-day  say  vea  for  via  (road)^

'  Ad  te  enim  nideni  esse,  /vndis  was  tlie  wooden  foil  given
to  a  distinguished  gladiator  in  token  of  his  discharge.  Sucli
a  gladiator  frequently  became  a  lanista  (fencing-master).  Ad
te  is  perhaps  an  archaism  for  apud  te,  of  which  I  can  find  no  ex-
ample. The  quotation  given  by  Victorius  from  Cicero,  quod  ad
fratrem  promiserat,  has,  of  course,  no  bearing  on  the  question.

^  Vea.  The  use  of  e  for  i  (in  hiatus)  in  rustic  Latin  was
common,  l^ea  is  found  for  via  in  Umbrian.  C^.  Lindsay,
"The  Latin  Language,"  p.  22.


i]    AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE    15

owing  to  the  conveyance  {vectura)  over  it,  and
vella,  not  villa^  for  the  place  to  and  from  which
produce  is  conveyed  {vehit).  Carriers  likewise  are
said  to  follow  the  trade  of  conveying  {velatiira).

15  Certainly,  said  Fundanius,  the  feeding  of  stock
is  one  thing,  tilling  the  land  is  another,  yet  they
are  related,  just  as  the  right-hand  flute,  though
different  from  the  left-hand  one,  is  yet  in  a  sense
united  to  it  since  the  song  is  the  same,  of  which  the
one   leads   and    the  other   accompanies  the    tune.

16  Yes,  and  you  may  add,  said  I,  that  the  shep-
herd's life  is  the  leading  part,  the  farmer's  takes  the
second — on  the  authority  of  the  learned  Dicae-
archus,'  who,  in  the  picture  he  has  drawn  for  us  of
primitive  Greek  life,  shows  that  in  former  ages
there  was  a  time  when  men  led  a  pastoral  life,  with
no  knowledge  of  ploughing,  sowing,  or  pruning,
and  that  they  took  up  agriculture  a  degree  later  in
point  of  time.  Agriculture,  therefore,  plays  second
to  the  pastoral  life,  in  that  it  is  lower,  like  a  left-
hand  flute  in  relation  to  the  stops  of  the  right-hand
one.

17  Then  said  Agrius,  You  and  your  piping  not
only  rob  the  farmer  of  his  flock,  but  the  slave,  too,
of  his  peculium — the  ox  which  his  master  allows
him  to  grsLze,  and  you  do  away  with  the  laws  for
settlers,  in  which  it  is  written:  On  land  planted
with  young  trees  let  not  the  settler  pasture  the  off-

'  Dicaearchus.  A  Greek  philosopher,  disciple  of  Aristotle.
His  most  important  work  was  that  referred  to  here,  the
Life  of  Hellas.


i6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

spring  of  the  she-goat — creatures  which  even
astronomy  has  removed  to  a  place  in  the  sky  not
far  from  the  bull.
i8  I  am  afraid,  Agrius,  said  Fundanius  to  him,
that  what  you  quote  is  wide  of  the  mark,  for  in
the  laws  it  is  also  written  '*  certain  cattle,"  and  the
reason  of  this  is  that  certain  animals,  such  as  the
she-goats  you  mention,  are  hostile  to  cultivation
and  poisonous  to  plants,  for  by  nibbling  at  them
they  ruin  all  young  plants,  and  not  the  least,  vines

19  and  olive  trees.  And  so  on  this  ground,  though  from
different  motives,  it  was  ordained  that  a  victim  of
the  goat  kind  should  be  led  to  the  altar  of  one  god,
but  that  at  another's  no  such  sacrifice  should  be
performed.  The  loathing  in  each  case  was  the  same
— the  one  god  wishing  to  see  the  goat  dying,  the
other  not  wanting  to  see  him  at  all.  Hence  to
Father  Liber — discoverer  of  the  vine — he-goats  were
sacrificed  to  the  end  that  they  might  suffer  death
for  their  misdeeds,  but  to  Minerva  they  sacrificed
nothing  of  the  goat  kind  because  of  the  olive  tree,
which  is  said  to  become  barren  if  bruised  by  it,  for

20  the  goat's  saliva  is  poisonous  to  vegetation.  At
Athens,  too,  we  are  told  that  on  this  account  goats
are  not  allowed  to  enter  the  Acropolis,  save  once  a
year  for  the  necessary  sacrifice,^  lest  the  olive  tree,
which  they  say  first  sprang  up  there,  be  touched  by
a  she-goat.

No    animals,    said     I,     come     within    the    pro-
'  Ncccssarium  sacrijicimti.     Probably  the  yearly  sacrifice  of
300  goats  to  Artemis  in  fultilnient  of  the  vow  of  Milliadcs.


i]    AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE    17

vince  of  agriculture  save  those  which  can  help  the
soil  to  greater  fertility  by  their  labour,  as  for  ex-
ample   those    which   yoked    together   can    plough

21  the  land.  If  what  you  say  is  true,  said  Agrasius,
how  are  you  to  disconnect  cattle  from  the  land,
seeing  that  dung,  which  is  of  the  greatest  use  to
it,  is  furnished  by  herds  of  cattle?  Then,  replied
Agrius,  we  must  say  that  a  troop  of  slaves  belongs
to  agriculture,  if  we  decide  to  keep  one  for  that
purpose.  No,  the  mistake  arises  from  the  fact  that
cattle  may  be  on  the  land  and  be  productive  of
revenue  on  that  land;  but  you  must  not  make  this
fact  an  argument  [for  connecting  them  with  agricul-
ture] ;  for  if  you  do,  other  things  as  well  which  have
nothing  to  do  with  land  will  have  to  be  admitted —
as  when  a  farmer  has  several  weavers  on  a  farm
with  buildings  set  apart  for  weaving,  and  so  on  for
other  craftsmen.

22  Well,  said  Scrofa,  let  us  separate  stock-raising
from  farming,  and  all  the  other  things  to  which
objection  may  be  taken  on  this  ground.  Or,  said
I,  am  I  to  follow  the  books  of  the  Sasernae,
father  and  son,  in  thinking  that  the  proper  work-
ing of  potteries  has  more  to  do  with  agriculture
than  the  working  of  silver  and  other  mines  which
are  doubtless  to  be  met  with  on  some  land?    Pot-

23  teries  however  have  nothing  to  do  with  farming,
any  more  than  stone  or  sand  quarries,  though
we  need  not  on  that  account  neglect  to  work  them
and  reap  profit  from  them  on  land  where  they  can
be  conveniently  worked.     Just  as,  to  take  another

c  ^


i8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

instance,  if  a  piece  of  land  borders  on  a  highway,
and  the  spot  suits  travellers,  it  is  advisable  to  build
inns,  though  they,  however  profitable,  do  not  any
the  more  belong  to  agriculture.  For  all  produce
that  an  owner  gets  directly  or  indirectly  from  his
land,  ought  not  to  be  credited  to  agriculture,  but
only  such  things  as  have  grown  from  the  ground
for  human  consumption  after  having  been  sown.

24  Then  Stolo  took  him  up,  saying:  You  are  jeal-
ous of  the  illustrious  author,  and  your  criticism
of  his  potteries  is  mere  carping,  while  you  say
nothing  about  many  excellent  passages,  for  fear  of
having  to  praise  them,  though  they  are  closely  con-

25  nected  with  agriculture.  Scrofa  smiled,  for  he
knew  the  books  and  thought  little  of  them.  Agra-
sius,  thinking  himself  to  be  the  only  one  who  knew
them,  asked  Scrofa  to  mention  the  passages.  So
Scrofa  began.  It  describes  in  these  words  how
bugs  should  be  destroyed:  "  Put  a  wild  cucumber
in  water,  pour  the  water  where  you  want  the  result,
no  bugs  will  come  near.     Or,  take  ox-gall  mixed

26  with  vinegar;  smear  your  bed  with  it,"  Fundanius
looked  towards  Scrofa  and  said:  And  yet  he
speaks  the  truth,  though  the  statement  does  occur
in  a  treatise  on  agriculture.  It  is  as  true,  I  war-
rant, said  Scrofa,  as  his  recipe  for  a  depilatory
— he  bids  you  throw  a  yellow  frog  into  water,
which  you  are  to  boil  until  two-thirds  are  gone,
and  to  anoint  your  body  with  what  remains.  You
had  better  quote,  said  I,  from  that  book  what
more  nearly  concerns  Fundanius's  healtli,  for  our


I]    AIM  AND  SCOPE  OF  AGRICULTURE    19

friend's  feet  often  ache,   and  pucker  his  forehead

27  with  frowns.  Please  do,  said  Fundanius,  for  I  had
rather  hear  about  my  feet  than  about  the  proper
way  of  sowing  beetroot,'

I  will  quote,  said  Stolo  with  a  smile,  the  very
words  he  wrote:  ''Thus  have  I  heard  Tarquenna
say,'  that  when  a  man's  feet  began  to  ache,  by
remembering  you  he  could  be  cured.  I  remember
you,  cure  my  feet.  *  O  Earth,  keep  thou  the  pain,
and  health  with  me  remain  in  my  feet.'"  He  bids
one  sing  this  thrice  nine  times,  touch  the  earth,

28  spit  downwards,  and  sing  it  fasting.  Said  I,  You
will  find  many  other  marvels  in  the  book  of  the
Sasernae,  all  of  which  have  nothing  to  do  with

^  Pedibus  meis  .  .  .  pedes  betaceos.  A  pun  quite  in  Varro's
manner.  Cf.  iii,  17,  4:  Hos  pisces  nemo  in  ius  vocare  audef,
ius  having  the  double  meaning  of  (i)  sauce,  (2)  trial.

^  Vel  Tarquennam  audivi,  etc.  Victorius  supposes  Tar-
quenna to  have  been  the  name  of  an  anagnostes,  a  slave
whose  office  it  was  to  read  aloud.  In  this  case  the  translation
would  run,  "or  as  I  have  heard  T.  read  .  .  ."

But  "Tarquenna"  ("Tarchna"  in  Etruscan) — the  name  of
the  mythical  founder  of  Tarquinii,  the  ecclesiastical  metropolis
of  Etruria — Is  a  name  not  likely  to  have  been  borne  by  a  slave.
The  whole  passage  from  vel  (or  better  velut,  the  contraction
for  both  words  being  the  same  in  Minuscule  MSS.)  to  maneto
seems  to  be  in  rough  Saturnian  verse.  It  may  be  that  the
Incantation  begins  with  velut  Tarquenna,  and  that  it  may
have  been  addressed  to  the  mythical  hero  Tarquenna.  We
should  then  have  to  read  "Tarquenna,"  not  "Tarquennam  "
(which  In  MSS.  would  be  Tarquennfi).  The  translation  would
then  be:  "As  I  heard,  O  Tarquenna,  that  when  a  mortal's
feet  began  to  ache  by  thinking  of  you  he  could  be  cured,  I
think  now  of  you,  cure  my  feet,"  etc.


20  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

farming,  and  are  for  that  reason  to  be  rejected.
As  though,  said  he,  you  couldn't  find  in  other
writers,  too,  examples  of  the  same  kind.  Why,  in
the  book  which  the  great  Cato  published  on  agri-
culture, are  there  not  scores,  for  example :  how  to
make  a  placenta^  or  a  libiwi,  or  how  to  salt  hams?
You  don't  give,  said  Agrius,  the  remarkable  pre-
scription, "  If  you  should  wish  to  drink  deep  and
eat  freely  at  a  dinner-party,  you  ought  beforehand
to  have  eaten  raw  cabbage  in  vinegar,  some  five
leaves "!


CHAPTER  III

AGRICULTURE  AN  ART

Well,  said  Agrasius,  seeing  that  we  decided
what  kind  of  things  were  to  be  kept  apart  from
agriculture,  will  you  gentlemen  tell  us  whether  the
knowledge  employed  in  farming  is  an  art  or  other-
wise, and  what  is  its  starting-point,  what  its  goal?

Said  Stolo,  after  looking  at  Scrofa,  It  is  for  you
to  tell  us,  as  you  are  our  superior  in  age,  in  rank,
and  in  knowledge  of  the  subject.  He,  nothing
loth,  began:

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  only  an  art,  but  an
art  as  important  as  it  is  necessary;  it  teaches  us
what  crops  are  to  be  sown  and  what  methods  adopted
on  each  and  every  soil,  and  what  kind  of  land  yields
continuously  the  greatest  increase.


I]  THE  FOUR  DEPARTMENTS  21


CHAPTER  IV

THE  FOUR  DEPARTMENTS

1  Its  elements  are  those  of  which,  according  to
Ennius,  the  universe  is  composed:  water,  earth,
air,  and  sun.  For  before  sowing  one's  seed  one
must  have  gained  understanding  of  these  things,
being,  as  they  are,  the  source  of  all  production.
The  farmer  must  start  from  this  point  and  direct  his
course  towards  two  goals — utility  and  pleasure.
Utility  seeks  profit,  pleasure  what  isagreeable.  What
is  useful  plays  a  more  important  part  than  what  is

2  agreeable.  And  indeed  it  is  also  true  that  the  efforts
which  by  culture  make  land  more  beautiful  not  only
increase  as  a  rule  the  return  from  it — as  for  example
when  vineyards  and  oliveyards  are  planted  in  regular
order — but  also  render  it  more  saleable  and  add  to
the  value  of  the  farm.  For  every  one  prefers  to  buy,
and  will  give  more  for,  a  thing  which  with  the
same  advantages  is  more  beautiful,  than  for  a  farm

3  which,  though  profitable,  is  ugly.^  Now,  that  land
is  the  most  useful  which  is  the  most  healthy,  be-
cause the  return  from  it  is  assured;  and  because,
on  the  other  hand,  on  a  malarious  soil  however
fertile  it  be,  sickness  and  death  prevent  the  settler

^  Nemo  enim,  etc.  The  translation  here  reproduces  the  con-
fusion of  thoug-ht  in  the  original ;  with  fructuostis,  fundus  or
ager  must  be  supplied.


22  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

from  reaping  the  fruits  of  his  labour.  For  in
fact,  when  you  have  to  reckon  perpetually  with
Orcus  (Pluto),  it  is  not  the  profits  from  the  land
only  which  are  uncertain,  but  the  life  of  those  who
farm  it.  So  in  unhealthy  conditions  agriculture  is
mere  gambling  with  the  farmer's  life  and  property.

4  Yet  this  risk  can  be  lessened  by  knowledge.  For
though  healthy  conditions,  depending  as  they  do
upon  soil  and  climate,  are  not  in  our  power  but
in  Nature's,  yet  by  care  we  can  do  much  to  mitigate
the  graver  evils.  For  in  fact,  suppose  that  owing  to
soil  or  water  a  farm  is  ma.de  unwholesome  by  a
stench  which  exhales  from  it,  or  if  owing  to  its
aspect  the  land  should  be  too  hot,  or  a  bad  wind
should  blow,  these  evils  are  generally  remedied  by
the  knowledge  and  efforts  of  the  owner;  for  the
situation  of  the  farm-buildings,  their  size,  and  the
aspect  of  the  colonnades,  doors,  and  windows,  are

5  of  very  great  importance.  Did  not  the  great  physician
Hippocrates  at  the  time  of  a  severe  pestilence  save
by  his  knowledge,  not  a  single  field,  but  many
towns?  But  why  need  I  call  Hippocrates  to  wit-
ness? Did  not  our  friend  Varro  here,  at  a  time  when
the  army  and  fleet  were  at  Corcyra,  and  every
house  was  full  of  sickness  and  death,  let  in  the
north  wind  by  making  new  windows,  shut  off  mal-
arious winds,  change  the  house-door,  and  by  other
precautions  of  the  same  kind  bring  back  his  com-
rades and  household  safe  and  sound?


I]         BRANCHES  OF  AGRICULTURE        23
CHAPTER  V

BRANCHES  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  AGRICULTURE

1  But  now  that  I  have  stated  the  principles  and
end  of  agriculture,  it  remains  for  us  to  determine
the  number  of  departments  into  which  its  practice
should  be  divided.

Why,  to  me  they  seem  countless,  said  Agrius,
when  I  read  the  numerous  books  of  Theophrastus,
which  are  called  (puTuv  laropiai  (researches  on  plants)
and  the  second  series   entitled  <putikuv  mtIuv  (of  the

2  causes  of  plant-life).  The  books  you  mention,
said  Stolo,  though  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that
they  contain  nothing  that  is  of  practical  use  or
general  interest,  are  better  suited  to  the  would-be

3  philosopher  than  to  the  practical  farmer.  So  with-
out troubling  Theophrastus  we  ask  you  to  describe
the  departments  of  agriculture.

There  are,  said  Scrofa,  four  main  branches
of  the  science  of  agriculture;  they  consist  in  the
knowledge  (i)  of  the  farm,  the  nature  of  the  soil
and  its  constituents;  (2)  of  the  things  which  are
needed  on  that  farm,  and  should  be  there  for  the
purpose  of  its  cultivation ;  (3)  of  what  must  be  done
in  the  process  of  its  cultivation,  and  (4)  of  the  times
of  the  year  which  are  suitable  for  the  various  opera-

4  tions  on  it.  Of  these  four  principal  divisions  each  is
subdivided  into  at  least  two  others.    The  first  prin-


24  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

cipal  division  comprises  three  things  which  have  to
do  with  (i)  the  soil  itself,  and  (2)  the  farm-buildings
and  out-houses;  the  second  division,  comprising
things  of  a  movable  nature  which  are  necessary
for  the  purposes  of  cultivation,  is  likewise  twofold,
being  concerned  with  (i)  human  and  (2)  other  in-
struments of  cultivation ;  the  third  is  divided  into
two  parts,  one  of  which  treats  of  the  necessary
operations  in  detail,  and  the  second  the  choice  of
places  where  these  are  to  be  performed.  The  fourth
main  division  relates  to  the  seasons  (i)  as  con-
nected with  the  sun's  yearly  orbit,  and  (2)  as  related
to  the  monthly  course  of  the  moon.  I  shall  first
mention  the  four  principal  divisions,  and  after-
wards the  eight  subdivisions  in  greater  detail.


CHAPTER  VI

THE  SOIL

I  Firstly  then,  in  relation  to  the  soil  of  the  farm,  we
have  to  consider  these  four  points:  its  configura-
tion, the  kind  of  land,  its  extent,  and  how  it  may  be
properly  fenced.

As  to  configuration,  there  are  two  kinds,  the  one
the  gift  of  nature,  the  other  induced  by  human
cultivation — for  example,  in  the  former  case  a  farm
may  be  (i)  naturally  bad  or  good,  and  (2)  in  the
latter,  well-planted  or  otherwise.    Of  the  two  I  will


I]  THE  SOIL  25

first  discuss  the  natural  configuration  of  the  farm.

2  Now  there  are  three  kinds  of  land  which  are
simple  in  character — the  flat,  the  hilly,  the  mount-
ainous, and,  springing  from  these  three,  a  fourth —
the  mixed — as  in  the  case  of  a  farm  where  two  or
three  of  these  kinds  co-exist,  of  which  many  ex-
amples may  be  found.  To  speak  of  these  three
fundamental  degrees  of  elevation,  without  any  doubt
one  method  of  cultivation  is  better  adapted  to  the
lowest  than  to  the  highest  land,  for  the  former  is
hotter  than  the  latter;  and  it  is  the  same  with  hilly
ground,  as  it  has  a  more  temperate  climate  than
either.  And  these  differences  in  lands  belonging
wholly  to  one  or  other  of  the  three  kinds  is  the
more  marked  the  greater  their  extent.

3  Thus  where  there  are  wide  plains,  the  heat  is
more  intense — as  in  Apulia  where  the  air  is  com-
paratively heavy  and  sultry ;  and  where  there  are
mountainous  districts,  as  on  Vesuvius,  the  air  being
lighter  is  consequently  more  wholesome;  and  the
farmers  below  suffer  more  in  summer,  those  above

4  more  in  winter.  In  spring  time  the  same  crops  that
are  sown  on  high  levels  are  sown  earlier  on  the
plains,  and  can  be  garnered  there  with  greater  des-
patch. Moreover,  both  sowing  and  mowing  take
more  time  on  the  high  than  on  low  grounds.  Some
things  grow  more  freely  and  strongly  on  mountain
lands,  owing  to  the  cold — firs  and  pines,  for  in-
stance; on  low  ground,  because  the  climate  is  more
temperate,  poplars  and  willows  flourish;  some
things  are  more  fertile   on    high    ground,   as  the


26  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

arbutus  and  oak,  others  flourish  better  on  low  lands,
as,  for  example,  the  almond  and  the  large  Mariscan
fig.  On  hills  of  no  great  height  the  crops  are  more
akin  to  those  of  the  plain  than  to  those  of  the  moun-
tain, while  with  high  hills  it  is  just  the  reverse.

5  These  three  types  of  land  (marked  by  differences
of  level)  occasion  certain  differences  of  cultivation,
for  corn  crops,  it  is  thought,  do  better  on  the  plains,
vineyards  on  hills,  and  woods  on  mountains.  As  a
general  rule  those  who  cultivate  champaign  lands
do  better  in  winter  time,  because  then  there  is
grass  in  the  meadows  and  the  pruning  of  trees  can
be  done  more  easily.  On  the  other  hand,  summer
is  more  favourable  to  mountainous  districts,  for
then  there  is  plenty  of  green  fodder  there,  which  is
parched  on  the  plain,  and  the  air  is  cool,  which

6  suits  the  cultivation  of  trees.  Champaign  land,  the
whole  of  which  slopes  uniformly  in  one  direction,
is  better  than  that  which  is  absolutely  level,  because
a  plain,  when  it  has  no  fall  for  drainage,  is  apt  to
become  swampy,  and  the  more  uneven  the  surface
the  worse  it  is,  as  it  gets  full  of  water  owing  to  its
hollows.  These  three  and  similar  differences  in
elevation  of  land,  affect  cultivation  in  different
wavs.


I]  THE  SITE  27


CHAPTER  VH

THE  SITE

1  As  to  the  natural  configuration,  says  Stolo,  I
fancy  that  Cato  hits  the  mark  when  he  writes
that  the  best  ground  is  that  which  lies  at  the  base

2  of  a  mountain,  and  faces  South.  Here  Scrofa
breaks  in  with

Concerning  artificial  configuration,  I  have  this
remark  to  make — productiveness  varies  directly
with  pleasing  appearance,  as  in  the  case  of  trees
supporting  vines,  which  give  better  results  if  they
are  planted  in  quincunx  ^  order,  owing  to  their
symmetrical  lines  and  the  reasonable  intervals  be-
tween each  tree.  Thus  our  ancestors,  from  a  given
piece  of  land,  badly  sown,  produced  wine  and  corn
inferior  both  in  quantity  and  quality;  for  plants  ar-
ranged in  proper  order  take  up  less  room,  and  in-
terfere less  with  one  another  in  respect  of  sunlight,

3  moonlight,  and  air.  There  are  several  facts  which
might  lead  us  to  expect  this.  For  instance,  nuts
which  would  go  when  whole  into  a  peck-measure,

'  In  quincuncem.  Like  the  Five  on  a  playing-card.  "  Five
trees  so  set  together,  tliat  a  regular  angularity,  and  through
prospect,  was  left  on  every  side.  Owing  this  name  not  only
unto  the  Quintuple  number  of  Trees,  but  the  figure  declaring
that  number,  which  being  doubled  at  the  angle  makes  up  the
letter  X,  that  is  the  Emphatical  decussation,  or  fundamentall
figure  "  (Sir  Thomas  Browne).


28  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

owing  to  their  shells  being  compactly  arranged
by  nature,  when  once  broken  up  could  scarcely
be  packed  into  a  peck-and-a-half  measure.     More-

4  over,  trees  which  have  been  planted  in  orderly
fashion,  get  the  sun  and  moon  uniformly  from  all
sides;  the  result  being  more  grapes  and  olives  and
earlier  ripening — a  double  result  which  necessarily
leads  to  the  two  others — more  grape-juice  and  oil,
and  more  profit.

5  Now  follows  the  second  point  mentioned :  the
nature  of  the  soil  on  a  farm.  And  it  is  to  this  that
we  generally  allude  when  we  speak  of  a  farm  as
good  or  bad.  For  the  number  and  nature  of  the
things  that  can  be  sown  and  grown  upon  it  is  of
importance,  the  same  soil  not  being  equally  suit-
able for  all  kinds  of  produce,  but  one  for  vines,
another  for  corn,  and  so  forth,  different  soils  suiting

6  different  things.  Thus  in  Crete,  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Gortynia,  there  is,  we  are  told,  a  plane-
tree  which  does  not  shed  its  leaves  in  winter;  one
also  in  Cyprus,  as  Theophrastus  remarks;  and  at
Sybaris,  now  called  Thurii,  there  is  an  oak  within
sight  of  the  town  which  has  the  same  peculiarity.
The  parts  about  Elephantine,  also,  show  a  marked
contrast  with  Italy,  in  that  neither  figs  nor  vines  there
shed  their  leaves  at  all.  Owing  to  the  same  cause
many  trees  bear  twice;  for  example  the  vines  near
the  sea  at  Smyrna,  and  the  apple-trees  in  the  Con-

7  sentine  country.  Another  example  of  the  same
fact  is  that  while  in  unreclaimed  land  trees  bear
more  abundantly,   in   that  which  is  cultivated  the


I]  THE  SITE  29

fruit  is  of  better  quality.  For  the  same  reason  some
plants  can  live  only  in  a  watery  place,  or  even  in
water  itself,  and  this  again  with  a  difference,  for
some  can  grow  in  lakes  only,  as  reeds  in  the  Reatine
country;  others  in  rivers,  as  in  Epirus  alder-trees;
others  in  the  sea,  as  palms  and  squills  do  according

8  to  Theophrastus.  When  I  was  in  command  of  an
army  in  Transalpine  Gaul — in  the  interior  near  the
Rhine — I  came  to  several  districts  where  neither
vine,  olive,  nor  fruit-tree  would  grow,  where  they
manured  the  fields  with  "marne,"'  dug  from  the
ground,  where  they  could  get  salt  neither  by  dig-
ging nor  from  the  sea,  but  used  instead  of  it  salt
charcoal  made  by  the  burning  of  certain  woods.

9  Said  Stolo,  Cato  arranges  the  different  kinds  of
land  in  order  of  merit  and  divides  them  into  nine
classes.  In  the  first  he  places  land  on  which  you
can  have  vineyards  yielding  plenty  of  good  wine;
in  the  second,  well-watered  garden  land;  in  the
third,  that  in  which  willows  can  be  grown;  in  the
fourth,  lands  suitable  for  olive  yards;  in  the  fifth
meadow  lands,  in  the  sixth  corn  lands;  in  the
seventh,  woods  for  timber;  in  the  eighth,  small
trees,  and  in  the  ninth,  land  suitable  for  an  oak-
forest  yielding  acorns.

10  I  am  aware,  said  Scrofa,  that  Cato  wrote  thus;
but    it   is    not    everyone   who    agrees    with    him;

'  Candida  fossicia  Greta  no  doubl  is  "  marne  " — a  natural
mixture  of  lime  and  clay— which  is  still  much  used  in  France
as  manure.  It  is  the  marga  or  Candida  argilla  (Plin)',  N.  H.,
xvii,  7),  called  by  the  Greeks  Xfy^-apytXXoc.


30  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

for  some — and  I  am  of  the  number — put  good
meadow-lands  in  the  first  rank.  Our  ancestors
called  prata,  parata  (ready)  for  this  reason —
Caesar  Vopiscus,  the  ex-aedile,  when  pleading  a
case  before  the  censors,  called  the  plains  of  Rosea
the  nursery  of  Italy,  seeing  that  if  you  left  a  pole
there  overnight  it  could  not  be  seen  next  morning
for  the  grass.


CHAPTER  VIII

ON    VINE-TRAINING

1  An  objection  sometimes  made  to  vineyards  is
that  their  cost  eats  up  the  profit.  It  depends,
said  I,  upon  the  kind  of  vine,  for  there  are  many.
Some  keep  to  the  ground  and  need  no  supports,  as
in  Spain;  others  are  trained  up — the  so-called
"  yoked  vines,"  to  which  class  Italian  vines  mostly
belong.  In  connection  with  the  latter  class,  two
terms  are  used,  viz.,  pedamenta  (props)  and  iitga
(espaliers) ;  the  uprights  which  support  the  vine
are  called  pedamenta^  the  supports  which  are  placed
cross-wise  have  the  name  of  iuga  (yokes).    Hence,

2  too,  the  term  "yoked  vines."  Of  these  iuga  there
are  roughly  four  kinds — the  pole,  the  reed,  cords,
and  withes.  Poles  are  used  in  Falernum,  reeds  in
Arpinum,  cords  in  the  country  about  Brundisium,
and  withes  in  the  district  of  Mediolanum  (Milan).
There  are  two  methods  of  training  vines,  the  one
proceeding  on  lines  at  right  angles  to  the  trees,  the


I]  ON  VINE-TRAINING  31

other  by  slanting  lines,  the  vines  being  trained
lengthways  and  sideways.  ^  The  latter  is  the  usual
way  in  Italy.  If  the  material  needed  for  this  train-
ing grows  on  one's  property,  the  cost  is  not  formid-
able;   if  much  can   be  had  from    a    neighbouring

3  estate,  it  is  but  trifling.  Of  the  four  classes  of  yokes
above  mentioned,  the  first  requires  willow  planta-
tions, the  second  reed-beds,  the  third  rushes,  or
some  similar  plant,  the  fourth  dwarf-trees,  which
are  connected  by  trailing  branches  of  the  vines.  The
Milanese  use  for  this  trees  which  they  call  opuli
(maple  trees) ;  at  Canusium  they  employ  fig  trees,
the  branches  of  which  are  strengthened  by  reeds.^

4  The  prop,  too,  is  of  four  kinds :  one  is  stout — the

^  Compluviata.  In  the  ancient  Italian  house  the  roof  of  the
atrium  sloped  inwards  and  downwards  from  each  of  its  four
sides  towards  the  centre,  where  a  square  aperture  was  left
through  which  the  rain  might  fall  into  the  impluvium,  a  tank
let  into  the  floor  to  receive  It.  The  sloping  sides  of  the  roof,
with  the  aperture  mentioned,  were  called  the  compluvium.
When  a  vine  was  trained  along  four  strings,  which  ran  from
the  iuguin  (horizontal  pole  connecting  two  trees)  to  four  up-
right stakes  (two  on  each  side  of  the  iuginn)  which  did  not
stand  as  high  as  the  iugum,  the  arrangement  was  called  a
compluviwn  from  its  resemblance  to  the  compluvium  of  the
house ;  and  the  vines  were  said  to  be  compluviatae.  Cf.  Pliny,
N.  H.,  xvii,  21:  Compluviata  copiosior  vino  est,  dicta  a  cavis
aedium  compluviis.    Dividitzirin  quaternas  pattes  totidem  iugis.

•^  Hardulatione  (Polltian),  ardulatione  (Jenson),  etc.,  are  both
unintelligible.  Of  the  emendations  hanmdulatione  and  arundi-
Mfl//o«t'(Schneider),  the  former  seems  the  better.  Gesner,  in  sup-
port of  Aar/<«(/M/a//f  «6?,  suggests  the  translation  here  adopted,
and  quotes  Pliny,  N.  H.,  xvii,  22  :  Saluberrima  in  itigo harundu
connexafasciculis.    Pontcdera  suggests  in  harum  iugatione.


32  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

best  that  is  brought  into  the  vineyard — being  of
oak  or  juniper,  and  is  called  ridica;  the  second,  a
bough  made  into  a  stake — the  harder  the  better,  as
it  lasts  longer.  When  the  earth  has  rotted  the
lower  end,  which  crumbles  away,  the  prop  is  turned
round  and  the  bottom  becomes  the  top.  Failing
these  two,  a  third  kind  is  got  from  the  reed  planta-
tion. From  it  some  reeds  are  taken  and  bound
together  by  strips  of  bark.  These  are  then  put  into
earthenware  tubes,  of  which  the  bottom  has  been
knocked  out,  so  that  superfluous  moisture  may  be
able  to  run  through.  These  bundles  of  reeds  are
called  cuspides.  The  fourth  kind  is  a  natural  prop
of  the  same  kind,  when  the  vineyard  consists  of
vines  trained  from  tree  to  tree.    Some  people  call

5  these  traverses  rimipi.  The  vine  ought  to  be  the
height  of  a  man,  and  the  props  should  be  placed  at
such  a  distance  from  one  another  as  to  allow  a  yoke
of  oxen  to  plough  between  them.

The  least  expensive  vineyard  is  that  which,  with-
out supports,  provides  wine  for  the  wine-jar.  There
are  two  varieties  of  this — one  where  the  grapes  rest
on  the  earth,  as  is  the  case  in  many  places  in  Asia,
in  which  foxes  often  share  the  vintage  with  men.
Besides,  if  the  land  breeds  mice,  the  yield  is  less,
unless  you  fill  the  vineyards  with  mouse-traps,  as

6  they  do  in  the  island  of  Pandateria.  There  is
another  kind  of  vine,  of  which  only  that  shoot  which
gives  evidence  of  bearing  grapes  is  raised  above
the  ground;  under  it,  when  the  grape  is  forming,
are  placed  little  forked  sticks  about  two  feet  high,


I]  FARM  LAND  33

lest  the  bunch  be  unable  to  learn  how  to  hang  on
the  twig  until  the  vintage  be  over,  and  then  have  to
be  taught  by  means  of  a  string  or  the  band  which
the  ancients  used  to  call  a  cestus.^

As  soon  as  the  owner  sees  the  back  of  the  grape-
picker,  he  takes  back  home  the  little  forked  sticks  to
spend  the  winter  there,  that  he  may  make  use  of
their  services  without  further  expense  another  year.
7  In  Italy  the  men  of  Reate  adopt  this  practice.  These
differences  in  method  depend  mostly  upon  differ-
ences of  soil,  for  when  the  latter  is  naturally  damp,
the  vine  must  be  grown  high,  for  wine,  when  it  is
being  generated  and  grown,  needs  no  water — as  it
does  afterwards  in  the  wine-cup — but  sun.  And
this  is  the  reason,  I  think,  why  the  vine-shoot  in
the  first  place  climbs  up  from  the  vine  into  trees.


CHAPTER  IX

FARM  LAND

I  It  is  important,  as  I  said  before,  to  know  the
nature  of  the  land  and  for  what  it  is  good,  or  the
reverse.  The  term  "  land  "  is  used  in  three  senses—

1  N'e  vindemia  facta.  Columella,  iv,  26  (end),  remarks  that
if  the  shoot  be  tied  under  the  support  {iugum),  and  is  other-
wise unsupported,  the  weight  of  the  growing  bunch  of  grapes
will  cause  it  to  break.  Varro  jests  here  7nore  suo.  The  educa-
tion of  the  bunch  will  be  neglected ;  it  will  not  learn  to  hang
properly  until  it  is  dead  and  hung  up  in  the  store-room.

P  -


34  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

common,  proper,  or  mixed.  It  is  used  as  a  common
noun  when  we  speak  of  the  land  of  the  terrestrial
globe,  the  land  of  Italy  or  any  other  country,  for  in
the  term  so  used  are  comprised  stone,  sand,  and
other  things  of  that  kind.  The  word  is  taken  in  its
"  proper  "  sense  when  one  speaks  of  land  absolutely
without  the  addition  of  any  other  word  or  qualifica-

2  tion  ;  and  finally  it  has  the  mixed  sense  when  we
describe  agricultural  land  as  clayey,  stony,  etc.,
for  in  this  sense  there  are  as  many  kinds  denoted  as
by  the  common  noun,  and  this  owing  to  the  fact
that  the  whole  comprises  various  substances.  For
in  fact  land  taken  in  this  sense,  as  it  is  of  varying
strength  and  capability,  is  composed  of  very  many
substances,  amongst  which  I  may  mention  stone,
marble,  rubble,  sand,  coarse  sand,  clay,  red  earth,
dust,  chalk,  ash,  burnt  earth  (land  which  is  heated
intensely  by  the  sun,  to  such  a  degree  that  it  burns

3  up  the  roots  of  the  crops).'  From  these  various
substances,  that  which  goes  by  the  general  name
of  "  land,"  takes,  when  mixed  with  any  of  them,
the  names  *' chalky,"  "gravelly,"  etc.,  land,  ac-
cording to  the  type  of  soil  which  predominates  in
it.  And  as  these  types  vary,  so  do  the  classes  into
which  we  divide  land,  though  these  classes  admit
of  more  minute  division,  as  each  may  be  divided

*  Cinis,  carbunculus.  Vitruvius  (quoted  by  Schneider)  says
that  land  scorched  by  the  sun  becomes  in  Campania  cinis  or
tufa — in  Tliuria  carbunculus.  Carbunculus  in  Pliny  seems  to
mean  volcanic  earth,  or  a  disease  in  vines  caused  by  excessive
heat  (N.  H.,  xvii,  24).


I]  FARM  LAND  35

into  at  least  three  sub-classes,  since,  for  example,
some  land  is  very  stony,  some  moderately  so,  and
some  almost  entirely  free  from  stones.  And  the  same
three  degrees  of  comparison  apply  to  soils  in  which
any  of  the  other  substances    mentioned   (marble,

4  rubble,  sand,  etc.)  exists.  Moreover,  each  of  these
three  sub-classes  may  be  divided  into  three  others,
as  each  is  dry,  moderately  dry,  or  wet.  And  these
latter  differences  are  of  the  greatest  importance  with
regard  to  the  crops  to  be  grown.  Thus  experts
would  rather  sow  spelt  than  wheat  on  comparatively
wet  land,  wheat  rather  than  spelt  on  soil  that  is  dry,
and  sow  either  on  soil  that  is  midway  between  the  two

5  extremes.  Again,  all  these  classes  may  be  divided
more  minutely  still.  Take,  for  example,  sandy  soil,
where  it  is  of  importance  whether  the  sand  be  red
or  white,  for  the  whitish  kind  is  ill  adapted  for  a
plantation,  while  reddish  sand  is,  on  the  contrary,
perfectly  suitable.  These  three  differences  in  land
are  important — I  mean  whether  it  be  poor,  rich,  or
between  the  two,  for  rich  land  (as  regards  farming)
is  fertile  in  many  things,  poor  land  not  so.  For  ex-
ample, in  thin  land,  such  as  the  Papinian,  tall
trees,  fruitful  vines,  stout  corn-stalks,  are  nowhere
to  be  seen,  nor  yet  the  large  Mariscan  fig;  and  you
will  find  most  of  the  trees  and  meadows  parched

6  and  infested  with  moss;  while  on  the  other  hand,
in  rich  land  like  Etruria,  you  may  see  fruitful  corn-
lands  which  are  sown  every  year,  and  tall  trees,  and
no  moss  anywhere.  Again,  in  land  of  medium
quality,  as  in  Tibur,  the  nearer  it  comes  to  being


36  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

rich  rather  than  poor,  the  better  it  is  for  all  crops,
better,  I  mean,  than  it  would  be  if  it  erred  in  the
wrong  direction.

Here  Stolo  remarked,  Diophanes  of  Bithynia  is
not  far  wrong  when  he  writes,  with  regard  to  the
kind  of  land  which  will  repay  cultivation  or  not,
that  [favourable]  indications  may  be  had  either
from  the  land  itself  or  from  the  things  that  spring
from  it:  from  the  soil  itself,  if  it  be  white  or  black,
such  as  easily  crumbles  when  dug,  and  if  it  neither
resembles  ashes  in  texture,  nor  is  very  heavy:  from
the  spontaneous  products  of  the  soil  if  they  are  of
good  growth  and  bear  plentifully  fruit  of  their  kind.
But  now  for  that  third  topic  which  follows — please
tell  us  about  the  measures  of  land.


CHAPTER  X

MEASURES  OF  LAND

1  Said  he:  Different  nations  have  adopted  differ-
ent measures  for  measuring  their  fields.  Thus
in  Further  Spain  the  iiigum^  in  Campania  the  ver-
sus^ whilst  with  us  on  Roman  and  Latin  ground,
the  iugenim  is  used.  The  iiigum  is  what  a  yoke  of
oxen  can  plough  up  in  one  day;  the  versus  means

2  a  square  loo  feet  by  loo;  the  higerum  equals  two
square  actus;  the  square  actus  is  120  feet  long  and
the  same  in   breadth.     This  measure  is  called  in


I]  MEASURES  OF  LAND  37

Latin  acnua.^  The  smallest  division  of  a  iugerum  is
called  a  scripuhmi,  that  is,  a  square  10  feet  by  10.
Taking  this  {iugerum)  as  the  unit,  land  surveyors
sometimes  when  speaking  of  a  bit  of  land  which  is
left  over  after  they  have  reached  the  iugerum,'^  call
it  an  ounce,  or  two  ounces,  or  whatever  it  be,  for
the  iugerum  has  288  scripula,  which  is  what  our
ancient  as  weighed  before  the  Punic  war."  A  couple
of  lugera,  an  allotment  said  to  have  been  made  first
by  Romulus  to  each  man  to  descend  to  his  heir,
was  called  a  heritage,  heredium.  Afterwards  these
hundred  "heritages"  (200  iugerd)  were  called  a
centuria.  Kcenturia  (133  acres)  is  a  perfect  square,
each  side  of  which  is  2,400  feet  long.  Four  centuriae,
moreover,  joined  so  that  there  be  two  together  in
every  direction,  are,  in  the  case  of  allotments  to
individuals  by  the  State,  called  a  saltus.

^  Latine  acnua  appellatur.  Columella,  v,  1,5,  mentions  the
Gallic  equivalent  for  actus  (half  a  iugerum)  as  arepennis
(French  arpent),  and  states  that  this  measure  was  called  by
the  farmers  of  Baetica  acnua.  In  the  same  section  he  quotes
Varro  in  relation  to  the  actus  minimus  (480  sq.  ft.).  Probably
some  words  have  dropped  out  of  the  text,  or  Baetice  should
be  read  instead  of  Latine.

'^  In  suhsecivum.  hi  subsecivo  seems  a  probable  emenda-
tion. It  would  mean  "in  the  case  of  a  piece  left  over."  A
copyist  might  easily  take  in  subsecivo  for  in  subsecivo,  stand-
ing for  in  subsecivoin.

^  Unciavi  agri.  The  as — originally  a  measure  of  weight —
was  divided  into  12  ounces  or  288  scripula  (scruples).  The
iugerum  was  also  divided  into  288  scripula.  Hence  fractions
of  the  iugerum  might  be  expressed  by  the  sam  denomination
as  fractions  of  the  as.


38  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XI

FARM     BUILDINGS

1  By  not  paying  attention  to  the  size  of  the  farm
many  people  have  failed,  some  making  the  farm
buildings  smaller,  others  larger  than  the  size  of  the
farm  required,  and  either  mistake  is  bad  economy,
and  bad  for  the  produce  of  the  farm.  For  the  larger
the  buildings,  the  more  they  cost  to  build  and  the
more  to  maintain,  and  when  they  are  too  small  for
the  needs  of  the  farm,  the  produce,  as  a  rule,  is

2  spoilt.  For  instance,  it  is  clear  that  where  there  are
vineyards,  the  wine-store  must  be  made  large,  but
where  the  land  grows  corn,  large  barns  are  required.
The  farmhouse  should  be  built  preferably  where  it
may  have  water,  either  within  its  own  enclosure,
or,  failing  that,  as  near  as  possible;  there  should  be
first  a  natural  spring,  and  secondly  one  that  never
runs  dry.  Where  there  is  no  running  water  at  all,
cisterns  should  be  made  indoors,  and  in  the  open
air  a  pond,  the  former  to  be  used  by  people,  the
latter  by  cattle.

CHAPTER  XII

THE  SITE  OF  THE  FARM  HOUSE

1  You  must  be  careful  to  place  the  farmhouse  at
the  base  of  a  well-wooded  mountain — the  best  situa-
tion— where  there  are  wide  pastures,  and  see  that  it


I]      THE  SITE  OF  THE  FARM  HOUSE     39

face  the  healthiest  winds  which  blow  in  the  district.
The  farmhouse  which  faces  the  equinoctial  East
has  the  best  aspect,  for  it  has  shade  in  summer,  and
in  winter  gets  sunshine.  If  you  should  be  obliged
to  build  close  to  a  river,  you  must  be  careful  not  to
build  your  farmhouse  to  face  it,  for  in  winter  it  will
become  exceedingly  cold,  and  in  summer  unwhole-

2  some.  Note  also  if  there  be  any  swampy  ground,
both  for  the  reasons  given  above,  and  because  certain
minute  animals,  invisible  to  the  eye,  breed  there,
and,  borne  by  the  air,  reach  the  inside  of  the  body
by  way  of  the  mouth  and  nose,  and  cause  diseases
which  are  difficult  to  be  rid  of.^  Said  Fundanius:
What  shall  I  do  to  escape  malaria,  if  I  am  left  an
estate  of  such  a  kind?  Why,  said  Agrius,  even
I  can  answer  that  question.  You  must  sell  it  for
as  many  pence  as  you  can  get,  or  if  you  can't  sell
it  you  must  quit  it.

3  Scrofa  went  on:  You  must  not  allow  your
farmhouse  to  face  a  quarter  from  which  an  un-
wholesome wind  commonly  blows,  nor  must  you
place  it  in  a  basin  surrounded  by  hills,  but  its
situation  should  rather  be  lofty  than  low.  Such  a
place  being  wind-swept,  if  any  evil  thing  should  be

'  Difficilis  morbos.  Columella,  i,  5,  6,  speaks  of  marshes
breeding  infestis  aculeis  armata  animalia,  i.e.,  mosquitoes.
Schneider's  comment  on  this  passage  is  amusing.  "Am  I  to
believe  that  Varro  attributed  lingering  diseases  to  these  small
gnats?  Never  did  any  doctor  ancient  or  modern  make  such
an  assertion."  Varro,  however,  though  he  may  appear  to
speak  of  malarial  microbes,  does  not  connect  them  with
"  small  gnats  "  as  their  carrier.


40  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

carried  thither,  it  is  easily  blown  away.  Moreover,
as  it  gets  the  sun  all  day  long,  it  is  healthier,  for
any  small  insects  which  breed  or  are  carried  there
are  either  blown  away  or  quickly  perish  from
drought.
4  Sudden  rainstorms  and  rivers  in  flood  are  dan-
gerous to  those  who  have  their  dwellings  on  low-
lying  ground  or  in  hollows;  there  is  danger  also
from  sudden  bands  of  robbers  who  can  more  easily
surprise  them.  For  both  these  reasons  high  ground
is  the  safer.


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  FARM  YARD  AND  HOUSE

1  In  the  farmhouse,  stables  and  cowsheds  must  be
made  for  greater  warmth  in  winter.  Produce,  such
as  wine  and  oil,  must  be  kept  in  storehouses  on  the
ground  floor  (you  must  also  make  a  place  for  the
oil  and  wine  vessels); '  dry  produce,  such  as  beans
and  hay,  must  be  stored  in  raised  barns.  You  must
also  provide  a  place  for  the  slaves  to  occupy  when
exhausted  by  work  or  cold  or  heat,  where  they  can
stroll    about  or  refresh    themselves  in  comfort  by

2  sleep.  The  foreman's  room  should  be  close  to  the
door,  and  he  should  know  who  goes  in  or  out  at

*  Item  ut  vasa,  etc.  The  text  as  it  stands  in  Keil  is  unin-
telligible to  me.  I  have  adopted  Pontedera's  conjecture,  liern
ubi  vasa  vinaria  et  olearia  esse  possint.


I]   THE  FARM  YARD  AND  HOUSE   41

night,  and  what  he  is  taking  with  him,  especially  if
there  is  no  door-keeper.  In  particular  you  must  see
to  it  that  there  be  a  kitchen  adjoining  the  farmhouse,
for  in  the  dark  winter  mornings  before  the  sun  is
up  several  things  are  done  there,  and  food  is  cooked
and  eaten  in  it.  Moreover,  for  the  wagons  and  such
implements  as  fear  a  rainy  sky,  roofed  buildings  of
sufficient  size  should  be  made  in  the  farmyard;  for
these,  if  merely  stored  in  the  enclosure  under  the
open  sky,  are  only  safe  from  thieves,  but  cannot
stand  against  bad  weather.

On  a  large  farm  it  is  better  to  have  two  yards:
one  having  in  the  middle  a  place  where  rain-water
may  collect;  or,  in  case  there  is  running  water,  a
place  inside  the  bases  of  the  pillars  that  surround
the  yard,  which  may  be  made,  if  desired, into  a  half-
tank.*  For  cattle  returning  from  the  plough-land  in
summer  drink  and  bathe  here,  as  well  as  geese,  sows,

'  Una  ut  interdius.  The  condition  of  the  text  here  seems
desperate.  Interdius,  despite  the  ingenious  attempts  of
Schneider  and  others  to  explain  it,  gives  no  satisfactory
sense.  Aqua  saliens  must  mean  "running  water,"  i.e.,  a
stream.  Pliny  (Epist.,  ii,  17,  25)  says  that  his  villa  has  no
aqua  saliens,  though  it  has  wells,  or  rather  springs.  I  would
suggest  the  reading :  Una  ut  interius  compluvium  haheat  aut
lacum,  etc.  A  copyist  might  easily  have  omitted  the  aut,
which  1  have  inserted,  through  the  influence  of  the  at  imme-
diately preceding  it.  Cum  venit  (the  reading  of  editions  before
Victorius)  would  make  still  better  sense.

The  pond  is  called  semipiscina,  perhaps  because  it  would
have  masonrj'  (the  stylohates)  on  one  or  two  sides  only,  the
piscina  usually  on  four.


42  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

and  pigs,  when  they  come  back  from  feeding.  In  the
outer  yard  there  should  be  a  pond  for  soaking  vetch
and  other  things  that  are  better  for  consumption  after

4  being  put  into  water.  The  outer  yard,  if  it  be  fre-
quently strewn  with  straw  and  chaff,  and  trampled  by
the  feet  of  cattle,  is  useful  to  the  farm  through  what
is  taken  out  of  it.  Close  to  the  farm  buildings  there
should  be  two  manure  heaps,  or  one  divided  into  two;
for  the  one  part  should  be  made  of  fresh  manure,  while
the  other  should  be  taken  on  to  the  land  only  when
old,  for  manure  that  has  rotted  is  better  than  that
which  is  fresh.  A  manure  heap  is  better,  too,  if  its
sides  and  top  are  protected  from  the  sun  by  twigs  and
leaves,  for  the  sun  must  not  suck  out  beforehand
the  goodness  which  the  earth  requires.  And  ac-
cordingly good  farmers,  if  they  can  manage  to  let
water  flow  into  it,  do  so  on  that  account.  For  thus
the  juice  is  best  kept  in.  In  the  manure-heap  some
place  the  slaves'  privies.

5  A  building  should  be  made  under  the  shelter  of
which  you  can  put  the  whole  of  the  farm's  harvest
— which  some  call  a  niibilariiun.  It  should  be  close
to  the  threshing  floor,  where  your  corn  is  to  be
threshed;  of  a  size  proportionate  to  that  of  the
farm ;  open  on  one  side — the  side  next  the  thresh-
ing-floor— so  that  you  can  both  easily  throw  the
corn  to  be  threshed  into  it,  and,  if  the  sky  begins  to
cloud  over,  you  can  quickly  throw  it  back  again.  It
should  have  windows  on  that  side  where  the  wind
can  best  blow  through  it.

6  Said    Fundanius:     A    farm    is    assuredly    more


i]    THE  FARM  YARD  AND  HOUSE   43

profitable  as  far  as  the  buildings  are  concerned  if  in
building  you  aim  at  the  thrift  of  the  old-time  farmers
rather  than  the  extravagance  of  the  moderns.  For
the  former  built  farmhouses  to  match  the  farm
produce,  the  latter  to  gratify  their  unrestrained  self-
indulgence.  And,  as  we  should  expect,  the  farm-
houses of  the  ancients  cost  more  than  their  suburban
villas,  but  nowadays  they  generally  cost  less.  In
old  times  a  farmhouse  was  praised  if  it  had  a  good
farm-kitchen,  roomy  stables,  wine  and  oil  store-
rooms of  a  size  suitable  to  the  farm,  with  a
paved  runnel  sloping  to  a  vat;  for  often  when  new
wine  is  laid  down,  jars,  as  in  Spain,  and  butts,  as
in  Italy,  are  burst  by  the  fermentation  of  the  must.
And  they  saw  to  it  that  in  a  farm  of  this  kind  there
7  should  be  everything  else  needed  for  working.  But
now  on  the  other  hand  the  size  and  decoration  of  a
man's  country-house  is  his  main  care,  and  he  tries
to  rival  those  country-houses  of  Metellus  or  Lucul-
lus,  the  building  of  which  had  the  worst  conse-
quences for  the  State.  To-day  people  are  anxious
that  their  summer  suite  of  dining-rooms  shall  face
the  coolness  of  the  East,  and  their  winter  suite  the
West,  instead  of  doing  as  the  ancients,  whose  care
was  the  aspect  of  the  windows  in  the  wine  or  oil
store-rooms,  since  the  produce  of  the  grape  seeks
comparatively  cold  air  for  its  casks  while  the  oil
store-room  needs  hotter  air.  Again,  if  there  is  a
hill,  see  that  your  farmhouse  be  placed  near  it —
unless  there  is  something  to  prevent  your  doing  so.


44  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XIV

FENCES    AND    WALLS

1  Now  concerning  the  fences  which  are  to  be  made
to  protect  the  farm  or  part  of  it :  of  these  protections
there  are  four  kinds — one  is  the  natural  fence,  the
second  is  of  timber,  the  third  that  used  for  military-
purposes,  and  the  fourth  of  masonry.  Each  of  these
kinds  has  several  species.  The  first  kind — the
natural  fence — is  a  quick-set  hedge,  to  form  which
brushwood  or  thorn  trees  are  usually  planted.  This
has  roots,  and  need  not  fear  the  lighted  torch  of  a

2  mischievous  passer-by.  The  second  is  of  forest-
timber,  not  live  wood.  It  is  made  of  stakes  set
close  together  and  interwov^en  with  brushwood;  or
of  broad  stakes  through  which  holes  have  been
bored,  while  through  the  holes  in  each  upright  two
or  three  poles  are  passed;  or  it  is  made  of  tree
trunlcs  set  up  in  a  row  and  sunk  into  the  ground.
The  third,  the  military  fence,  is  a  trench-and-ram-
part  arrangement,  but  the  trench  is  suitable  only  if
it  can  hold  all  the  rain-water  that  comes  down,  or
has  a  fall  so  that  the  water  may  run  off  the  farm.

3  That  rampart  is  good  which  is  continuous  on  the
inside  with  a  ditch,  or  is  so  high  that  it  is  not  easy
to  get  over  it.  Fences  of  this  kind  are  usually  made
parallel  with  highways,  or  following  the  course  of
streams.    On  the  Via  Salaria,  in  the  neighbourhood


I]  TREES  AS  BOUNDARIES  45

of  Crustumerium,  you  may  see  in  several  places
embankments  and  ditches  together,  to  prevent  the
river  from  damaging  the  fields.  Embankments
without  trenches  are  made,  which  some  people  call
4  walls  as  in  the  country  about  Reate.  The  fourth,
the  fence  made  by  the  builder,  comes  last — the
wall-fence,  I  mean.  There  are  roughly  four  kinds:
they  are  made  of  stone,  as  in  the  country  round
Tusculum,  of  kiln-baked  bricks  as  in  the  Ager
Gallicus,  of  sun-dried  bricks  as  in  the  Sabine
country,  or  of  earth  and  pebbles  set  in  moulds,  as
in  Spain  and  the  parts  about  Tarentum.^


CHAPTER  XV

TREES  AS  BOUNDARIES

I  MAY  add  that  the  boundaries  of  an  unfenced
farm  are  safer  if  marked  by  trees  planted  along
them,  for  otherwise  your  slaves  brawl  with  their
neighbours  and  your  boundary  lines  may  have  to
be  determined  by  a  law-suit.  Some  people  plant
pines  round  the  farm — my  wife  has  them  in  the

^  Ex  terra  et  lapidihus.  Pliny,  N.  H.,  xxxv,  14,  speaks  of
parietes  formacei,  which  in  forma  circumdatis  utrinque  duabus
tahulis  inferciuntur.  Two  boards  were  set  up  parallel  to  each
other,  and  the  space  between  them  was  filled  with  concrete.
Pliny  says  that  these  walls  were  very  durable.  This  mode  of
construction  is  still  used  in  parts  of  England  where  chalk  and
flint  pebbles  occur.


46  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

Sabine  country;  others  plant  cypresses  as  I  did
near  Vesuvius,  others  elms,  as  many  do  in  the
Crustumerian  country ;  for  where  it  is  possible,  as
it  is  in  that  district,  seeing  that  it  is  a  plain,  no
better  tree  can  be  planted,  for  it  is  extremely  profit-
able, as  it  often  supports  '  and  collects  for  you  many
a  basket  of  grapes,  supplies  to  sheep  and  cattle
leaves  thatthey  greatly  enjoy,  and  furnishes  boughs
for  hedges,  hearth,  and  oven.

Said  Scrofa:  Well,  these  are  the  four  matters
which,  as  I  remarked,  a  farmer  should  first  con-
sider, namely:  the  configuration  of  the  farm,  the
nature  of  its  soil,  the  extent  of  the  land,  and  the
maintenance  of  its  boundaries.


CHAPTER  XVI

ON  THE  NEIGHBOURHOOD  OF  A  FARM

I  There  remains  a  second  department  of  the  sub-
ject, which  has  to  do  with  what  is  outside  the  farm.
Now  a  farm's  immediate  surroundings,  owing  to  its

'  Et  sustinet  saepe.  So  Keil  for  the  MSS.  reading.  Et  sus-
tinet  saepem,  which  would  mean  "  supports  a  fence,"  in  which
Schneider  and  the  rest  see  no  sense.  But  the  elms  might  play
the  part  of  the  pali  statuti  crebri  mentioned  in  the  previous
chapter  (xv).  A  row  of  trees  "supporting  a  fence"  is  com-
mon enough  in  this  country.


I]   THE  NEIGHBOURHOOD  OF  A  FARM   47

close  connection  with  them,  are  of  infinite  import-
ance to  the  farmer.

And  here  there  are  four  points  for  consideration :
Is  the  neighbourhood  unsafe?  Is  there  no  place  to
which  we  can  conveniently  take  our  produce  for
sale  or  from  which  we  can  procure  what  we  need?
Thirdly,  are  roads  or  rivers  to  convey  the  produce
either  absent  or  unsuitable?  And  fourthly,  is  there
any  thing  on  the  adjoining  farms  likely  to  do  good
or  harm  to  our  own?

2  The  first  of  these  questions,  whether  the  district
is  safe  or  unsafe,  is  important,  for  there  is  much
excellent  land  which  it  does  not  pay  to  cultivate,
because  the  neighbours  are  brigands;  some  land  in
Sardinia,  for  example,  near  Oelies,  and  in  Spain
about  Lusitania.  Those  estates  which  have  a  suit-
able market  in  the  neighbourhood  for  the  sale  of
their  produce,  and  can  thence  obtain  what  is  needed
for  the  farm,  are  so  far  profitable.  For  many  people
in  the  case  of  farms  short  of  corn  or  wine  or  any-
thing else,  have  to  send  elsewhere  for  them ;  whilst
on  the  other  hand  there  are  a  good  many  who  have

3  to  send  away  some  of  their  produce.  Thus  close  to
a  city  it  pays  to  cultivate  gardens  on  a  large  scale,
fields  of  violets  and  roses,  for  instance,  and  many
other  things  which  a  city  welcomes,  whereas  it  does
not  pay  to  grow  such  things  on  a  distant  farm  which
has  no  available  market  for  them.  Similarly  if  towns
or  villages  exist  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  even  the
well-stocked  farms  and  country-houses  of  the
wealthy,  from  which  you  can  buy  cheaply  what  your


48  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

farm  requires,  while  selling  to  them  at  the  same
time  your  superfluities — props  for  example,  or  poles
or  reeds — the  farm  is  more  profitable  than  if  these
things  should  have  to  be  brought  from  a  distance,
and   sometimes,    too,    than    if  you  could    produce

4  them  on  your  own  land.  And  so,  for  example,
farmers  prefer  to  employ  the  doctors,  fullers,  car-
penters, etc.,  in  the  neighbourhood,  to  whom  they
can  give  work  year  by  year,  rather  than  have  their
own  on  the  farm ;  for  the  death  of  a  single  one  of
these  craftsmen  is  apt  to  do  away  with  the  farm's
profit.

Rich  men,  with  large  estates,  look  to  the  home
resources  for  the  supply  of  this  branch  of  the  staff.
For  where  towns  or  villages  are  too  far  away  they
procure  smiths  and  all  the  other  skilled  workmen
they  need,  and  keep  them  on  the  farm  so  that
their  gang  of  slaves  may  not  have  to  quit  work
and  walk  about  making  holiday  on  work-days,  in-
stead of  rendering  the  land  more  profitable  by  their

5  labour.  Hence  the  rule  given  in  Saserna's  book,
that  no  one  is  to  leave  the  farm  save  the  bailiff,  the
house-steward,  and  one  other  to  be  appointed  by
the  bailiff;  if  any  one  does  so,  he  is  not  to  go  un-
punished ;  if  he  does  get  off,  the  bailiff  is  to  be
severely  dealt  with.  Better  had  been  the  rule,  that
no  one  should  leave  without  the  bailiff's  permission,
and  that  the  bailiff  should  not  go  without  the
master's  leave  so  far  away  as  to  be  unable  to  return
on  the  same  day,  and  that  no  oftener  than  the  farm
required.


I]  FARM  EQUIPMENT— SLAVES  49

6  The  transport  of  produce  makes  the  farm  all  the
more  profitable  if  there  are  good  wagon-roads  or
navigable  rivers  close  by.  For  by  both  these  many
things  are,  as  we  know,  brought  to  and  from  a
farm.

Again,  the  products  of  the  farm  are  influenced
by  the  way  in  which  your  neighbour's  land  is
planted.  If,  for  instance,  he  has  an  oak-grove  on
the  common  boundary,  you  would  be  wrong  to
plant  olive  trees  on  the  edge  of  such  a  wood,  for
these  have  a  natural  antipathy  to  it  so  great  that,  not
only  do  they  bear  worse,  but  even,  in  their  efforts
to  escape,  bend  away  inwards  towards  the  farm
precisely  as  does  the  vine  if  planted  near  cabbages.
Like  oak-trees,  walnut-trees  near  your  farm,  if  of
large  size  and  standing  at  little  distance  from  one
another,  make  its  margin  totally  unproductive.


CHAPTER  XVII

FARM  EQUIPMENT — SLAVES

I  I  HAVE  treated  thus  far  of  the  four  conditions  of
agriculture  which  are  connected  with  the  soil  of  the
farm,  and  also  of  the  second  four  which  have  to  do
with  its  external  circumstances.  I  shall  now  go  on
to  speak  of  the  instruments  of  agriculture.

These  are  divided  by  some  into  two  parts,  namely
(i)  men  who  work,  and  (2)  men's  tools  without
which  they  cannot  work;   others  divide  them  into

E


50  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

three  classes,  namely,  (i)  the  class  gifted  with
speech,  (2)  that  which  has  inarticulate  voice,  and
(3)  that  which  is  voiceless.  To  the  first  belong
slaves,  to  the  second  oxen,  and  to  the  third  wagons.

2  Now  in  all  agriculture  human  beings  are  used —
either  slaves,  or  freemen,  or  the  two  together.  Free-
men are  employed  either  where  the  farmer  himself,
helped  by  his  family,  tills  the  soil,  as  is  the  case
with  most  peasant  proprietors,  or  where  freemen  are
hired,  as  when  the  more  important  agricultural
operations,  such  as  the  vintage  or  the  hay-cutting,
are  conducted  by  gangs  of  hired  labourers;  and  by
those  whom  our  countrymen  called  obaera  it(dehtors)^
— who  still  exist  in  great  numbers  in  Asia,  Egypt,
and  Illyricum.  About  these  as  a  class  I  have  this
to  say:  It  pays  better  in  an  unhealthy  district  to
use  hired  labourers  than  slaves,  and  in  a  healthy
district,  too,  for  the  more  important  work  of  the
farm,   such  as  the  getting  in   the  vintage  or  the

3  harvest.  Of  the  qualifications  of  these  labourers,
Cassius"  writes  as  follows:  You  are  to  get  labourers

'  Obaeratjis  probably  equals  nexus ^  concerning  whom  Varro,
L.  L.,  vii,  5,  writes:  "The  freeman  who  gave  his  services  as
a  slave  until  he  could  pay  the  money  he  owed  is  called  nextis,
also  obacratus  (from  the  word  aes).^^  He  was  not  a  slave,  but
could  be  imprisoned  and  kept  at  work  by  his  creditor,  from
whom  the  farmer  might  hire  him.  From  the  farmer's  point
of  view  he  would  thus  be  a  vicrccnarius  or  hired  labourer.
Nexum  was  abolished  by  the  Lex  Poetilia,  326  B.C.

'^  Cassius.  The  Cassius  Dionjsius  of  Utica  mentioned  in
the  first  chapter  of  this  book  (i,  i,  i),  who  translated  Mago's
great  treatise  on  agriculture.


I]  FARM  EQUIPMENT— SLAVES  51

who  are  able  to  stand  hard  work,  who  are  not  less
than  twenty-two  years  old,  and  who  will  be  quick
to  learn  the  work  of  a  farm.  You  may  form  an
opinion  about  this  from  the  way  they  have  performed
other  tasks,  or  by  asking  those  of  them  who  are
new  to  farm  work  what  they  have  been  accustomed
to  do  when  with  their  former  master.    The  slaves

4  should  not  be  timid  nor  yet  of  too  high  spirit.  Those
set  over  them  ought  to  know  how  to  read  and  write
and  should  have  received  some  slight  education ;
they  should  be  of  good  character  and  older  than  the
labourers  mentioned  above — for  the  latter  obey  them
more  readily  than  they  do  younger  men.  In  addition
to  this  the  one  quality  necessary  in  an  overseer  is
practical  skill  in  farm  work:  for  his  duty  is  not
merely  to  give  orders,  but  to  set  an  example,  that
those  under  him  may  imitate  him  as  he  works,  and
realize  that  his  superiorposition  is  not  without  cause,

5  but  is  the  result  of  superior  knowledge.  Nor  must
an  overseer  be  allowed  to  enforce  his  orders  by  the
whip  rather  than  by  words,  provided  that  the  same
result  can  be  obtained  equally  well  by  the  latter.  It
is  well,  too,  not  to  have  too  many  slaves  of  the
same  tribe,  for  this  is  a  principal  cause  of  quarrels
in  the  household.

You  should  quicken  the  interest  of  the  over-
seers in  their  work  by  means  of  rewards,  and  should
see  that  they  have  something  of  their  own,  and
women  slaves  to  live  with  them  and  bear  them
children,  for  this  makes  them  steadier  and  more
attached  to  the  estate.    The  slaves  from  Epirus  are


52  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

a  case  in  point,  for  owing  to  these  family  ties  they
are  of  better  repute  and  fetch  a  greater  price  than

6  others.  The  goodwill  of  the  overseers  you  should
win  by  an  occasional  mark  of  esteem,  and  you
ought  to  discuss,  too,  with  the  best  of  the  labourers,
the  farm-work  that  is  to  be  done,  for  where  this  is
the  case  their  sense  of  inferiority  is  lessened,  and
they  feel  that  they  are  held  in  some  account  by  their

7  master.  Their  enthusiasm  for  work  is  increased  by
treatment  more  generous  than  usual,  by  better  food
and  clothing,  by  occasional  exemption  from  work,
or  the  permission  to  graze  a  beast  of  their  own  on
the  farm,  and  by  other  privileges  of  the  same  kind
— so  that  any  who  have  been  given  too  hard  a  task,
or  too  severe  a  punishment,  may  thus  be  consoled,
and  their  goodwill  and  kindly  feeling  towards  the
master  be  restored.


CHAPTER  XVIII

SIZE    OF    THE    STAFF

I  As  regards  the  farm-hands,  Cato  considers  two
factors:  the  quantity  of  land  and  the  kind  of  crop
grown.  Taking  olive  plantations  and  vineyards,
he  describes  what  I  may  call  two  typical  cases.  In
the  one  he  gives  directions  for  the  management
of  an  olive  plantation  of  240  iiigera  (160  acres),
stating  that  on  a  plantation  of  this  extent  you  should


I]  SIZE  OF  THE  STAFF  53

keep  the  following  thirteen  slaves:  a  bailiff,  his
wife,  five  labourers,  three  herdsmen,  one  ass-driver,
one  swineherd,  and  one  shepherd.  The  second
case  with  which  he  deals  has  to  do  with  a  vineyard
of  100  lugera  (67  acres),  for  which  he  considers
necessary  these  fifteen  slaves:  one  bailiff,  his  wife,
ten  labourers,  one  herdsman,  one  ass-driver,  and  one

2  swineherd.  Saserna  states  in  his  book  that  one  man
is  enough  for  eight  iugera,  and  that  he  should  dig
them  over  in  forty-five  days,  thovigh  four  days'  work
should  suffice  for  each  iugerum.  The  thirteen  days
left  over  he  allows  for  cases  of  illness,  bad  weather,

3  unskilfulness,  and  idleness.  Neither  of  these  two
authors  has  left  us  a  very  clear  explanation  of  his
standards,  for  if  Cato  meant  us — as  he  must  have
done — to  add  or  subtract  in  proportion  to  the  greater
or  less  extent  of  the  farm,  he  should  have  said  so,
and  he  ought  to  have  excluded  the  bailiff  and  his
wife  from  the  working-staff  of  slaves,  for  certainly,
if  the  olive  plantation  which  you  are  cultivating
should  be  of  less  than  240  iugera^  you  cannot  have
less  than  one  bailiff,  nor,  should  your  farm  be  twice
as  big  or  more,  are  you  bound  therefore  to  have

4  two  or  three.  Practically,  it  is  only  the  number  of
labourers  or  herdsmen  that  must  be  increased  accord-
ing to  the  size  of  the  farm ;  and  this  rule,  too,  holds
good  only  if  the  land  is  of  uniform  character.  If,
however,  it  is  not  so,  to  the  extent  of  being  un-
ploughable  in  parts,  being  of  a  broken  nature  and
having  stiff  hills,  then  you  need  fewer  oxen  and
fewer  herdsmen.    I  pass  over  the  fact  that  the  stand-


54  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

ard  set  up  by  Cato,  240  iugera^  is  neither  a  received

5  unit  of  measurement  nor  convenient  (a  convenient
one  would  have  been  the  centuria  of  200  iugerd),
though,  seeing  that  the  40  iiigera  subtracted  from  the
240  to  make  the  centuria  are  their  sixth  part,  I  do
not  see  how,  on  his  system,  I  am  to  subtract  a  sixth
from  the  thirteen  slaves  as  well,  nor  is  it  anv  more
clear  to  me  how,  after  deducting  the  bailiff  and  his
wife,  I  am  to  take  away  a  sixth  of  the  remaining
eleven  slaves.

Again,  as  to  the  statement  that  fifteen  slaves  are
needed  in  the  case  of  a  vineyard  consisting  of
100  iugera :  suppose  a  man  has  a  centuria — half
vineyard,  half  olive  plantation — it  will  follow  that
he  must  have  two  bailiffs  with  their  wives,  which  is
absurd.     So  we   must  find   by  some   other  way  a

6  general  rule  to  determine  the  number  of  slaves
required,  and  on  this  head  Saserna  is  better  and
clearer  than  Cato  when  he  states  that  one  labourer
can  get  through  a  iugerum  in  four  days'  work.
Still,  if  one  labourer  was  enough  on  Saserna's  farm
in  Gaul,  it  does  not  at  all  follow  that  such  is  the
case  on  mountainous  land  in  Liguria.

I  conclude  then  that  your  best  way  to  settle  the
question  of  the  size  of  your  staff  of  slaves  and  the
rest  of  the  farm  equipment,  will  be  to  note  with  care

7  three  points:  the  size  and  nature  of  the  neighbour-
ing farms,  the  number  of  hands  with  which  each  is
cultivated,  and  the  number  of  labourers  you  find
may  be  added  to  or  deducted  from  your  staff,  with
better  or  worse  resuhs  in  the  cultivation  of  your  own.


I]       INSTRUMENTS  OF  PRODUCTION      55

For  in  agriculture  nature  has  allowed  us  a  two-
fold method,  that  of  experiment  and  imitation.  The
first  farmers  determined  most  questions  by  experi-
ment, their  descendants,  to  a  large  extent,  by
8  imitation.  We  should  adopt  both  courses — some-
times imitating  others,  sometimes,  as  a  change,
making  certain  experiments  of  our  own — experi-
ments made  not  at  haphazard,  but  in  accordance
with  some  rational  plan.  For  example,  if  we  dig
our  vineyards  over  again  to  a  greater  or  less  depth
than  others,  what  is  the  effect  of  such  a  proceed-
ing? Thus  did  they  who  first  hoed  the  land  two  or
three  times,  thus  those  who  changed  the  time  of
fig-grafting  from  spring-time  to  summer.


CHAPTER  XIX

OF  INSTRUMENTS  OF  PRODUCTION  (SEMI-VOCAL)

I  As  for  the  remaining  part  of  the  farm's  equipment
which  I  have  spoken  of  as  semi-vocal — Saserna
writes  that  for  200  iugera  of  ploughland  two
yokes  of  oxen  are  sufficient,  whereas  Cato  states
that  three  oxen  are  required  for  every  240  iugera
planted  with  olives ;  whence  it  follows  that  if  Saserna
is  right,  a  yoke  of  oxen  is  needed  for  a  hundred
iugera  ;    if  Cato,  one '   for  each  eighty.     It  is  my

'  Trinos  boves.  This  conflicts  with  the  statement  further
on  that  if  Cato  is  right  a  yo^c  of  oxen  is  required  for  eighty
iugera.  Gesner  considers  trinos  boves  to  mean  three  yokes  of
oxen !    Pontedera  inserts  the  numeral  I,  i.e.,  unus  bos.


56  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

opinion,  however,  that  neither  of  these  numbers
suits  every  kind  of  land,  and  either  number  suits
some  land.   For  different  soils  are  more  or  less  easy

2  to  plough.  Some  land  can  be  broken  up  only  by
oxen  of  great  strength,  and  often  the  plough-beam
breaks  and  the  ploughshare  is  left  in  the  land.  So,
in  the  case  of  particular  farms,  we  must  while  yet
without  experience  be  ruled  '  by  three  considera-
tions: the  practice  of  the  former  owner,  that  of  our
neighbours,  and  judicious  experiments  of  our  own.

3  As  to  Cato's  addition  of  three  asses  to  carry
manure  and  an  ass  to  turn  the  mill  (in  the  case  of
a  vineyard  of  a  hundred  acres,  one  yoke  of  oxen,  one
yoke  of  asses,  and  one  ass  to  turn  the  mill),  we  ought
to  include  in  this  category  of  semi-vocal  instru-
ments only  those  sheep  and  swine  which  will  aid
production,  and  the  few  which  are  usually  kept  as
the  slaves'  private  property  in  order  that  the  latter
may  more  easily  maintain  themselves  and  stick  well
to  their  work.  With  regard  to  this  kind  of  stock,
not  only  do  those  who  have  pasture  land  prefer  to
keep  sheep  rather  than  swine,  but  those  also  who
keep  them  not  on  account  of  the  pasturage,  but  for
the  sake  of  their  manure.

Dogs  in  any  case  you  must  have,  as  the  farm  is
not  safe  without  them.

'  Quo  sequetidiim  .  .  .  regula,  etc.  Schneider,  with  no  sup-
port from  MSS.,  reads  regulam,  etc.  Regula  (for  regiilam)
might  easily  be  corrupted  to  regula ;  and  the  reading  of  the
text  is  at  the  least  extremely  harsh.


I]      OXEN  AND  DRAUGHT  ANIMALS       57
CHAPTER  XX

OF  OXEN  AND  DRAUGHT  ANIMALS

1  Of  all  the  quadrupeds,  then,  we  will  consider  first
the  oxen  you  are  buying  for  the  plough,  and  say
what  kind  is  suitable  for  the  purpose.  These  should
be  unbroken  when  you  buy  them,  and  not  less  than
three,  or  more  than  four  years  old ;  they  must  be
strong  and  well-matched,  lest  in  their  work  the
stronger  wear  out  the  weaker;  they  should  have
wide  horns,  be  black  for  choice,  with  broad  fore-
heads, flat  noses,  broad  chests,  and  well-furnished
quarters.

2  Those  which  have  grown  up  in  plains  should
not  be  bought  for  use  in  a  mountainous  and  stiff
country,  and  the  converse  is  equally  to  be  avoided.'
When  you  have  bought  unbroken  heifers,   if  you

^  Nee  non,  contra,  si  incidit,  ut  sit  vitanduvt.  So  Keil,
whose  punctuation  seems  here  to  be  wrong.  Zahlfeldt  ("Quaes-
tiones  Critlcae"  In  Varr.  R.  R.,  Berlin,  1881)  suggests,  no
doubt  rightly,  that  the  comma  should  be  placed  at  sit.  He
was  anticipated,  however,  by  the  Italian  edition  of  1846,
where  this  punctuation  is  adopted.  Victorius,  in  his  "most
faithful  and  ancient  MS.,"  found  nee  non  tra,  and  suggests
nee  contra,  etc.,  the  translation  of  which  would  be  "and  the
converse  need  not  be  avoided";  but  Columella  (vi,  2,  12)  dis-
tinctly states  that  both  changes — from  mountains  to  plains  and
plains  to  mountains — are  bad.  The  order  of  words  in  the
phrase  contra  si  incidit  ut  sit  for  si  incidit  ut  sit  contra  is  quite
Varronian.


58  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

put  their  necks  into  fiiixaey^  which  are  fastened
to  them,  and  then  give  them  food,  in  a  few  days
they  will  become  tame  and  easy  to  break  in.
This  you  may  then  proceed  to  do,  but  gradually,
pairing  the  one  new  to  the  work  with  one  who
knows  it — for  they  learn  to  obey  most  easily
through  imitation.  You  should  begin  on  level
ground,  and  without  a  plough,  then  with  a  light
one,  and  the  first  land  ploughed  should  be  sand  or
3  soft  soil.  Draught  oxen  should  similarly  be  trained
by  making  them  draw  in  the  first  instance  empty
wagons — if  possible  through  a  village  or  a  town
where  the  frequent  creakings  and  variety  of  objects
rapidly  accustom  them  to  these  things,  and  pre-
pare them  for  useful  work.  Again  if  you  put  a
draught  ox  on  the  right  side,  you  must  not  keep
him  persistently  in  that  position,  for  if  he  is  left-
hand  and  right-hand  ox  by  turns,  the  change  is
a  rest  to  him  when  he  is  distressed  by  being  too

'  Furcae.  According  to  Plutarch  (Coriol.,  24,  and  Quaest.
Rom.,  70)  the  furca  was  a  fork-shaped  piece  of  wood  by
which  the  pole  was  supported  {l,v\ov  a\ialr\^  tf  rbv  pvfibv  vinpu-
Sovaiv).  It  was  shaped  like  the  letter  A,  and  was  used  for  the
punishment  of  slaves.  The  neck  was  inserted  at  the  fork  and
the  arms  tied  to  the  instrument.  Nero,  when  in  hiding,  was
told  that  the  Senate  had  ordered  him  to  be  punished  Jiiore
77iaioi-u7n,  which  meant  nudi  hominis  cervicem  inseri  furcae
corpus  vi'j-^is  ad  neccm  cacdi  (Sueton.,  Nero,  49):  "To  be
stripped  naked,  his  neck  put  in  the  furca,  and  to  be  beaten  to
death  with  rods."    He  then  committed  suicide!

Vergil  (Georg.,  iii,  166)  puts  the  necks  of  his  oxen  into
"loose  collars  of  pliant  osier,"  as  a  preliminary  to  breaking
them  in.


I]     DOGS  AND  FOUR-FOOTED  STOCK     59

4  long  on  either  side.  Where  the  soil  is  light,  as
in  Campania — for  there  they  do  not  plough  with
heavy  oxen  but  with  cows  or  asses — you  may  the
more  easily  put  them  to  a  light  plough,  to  the
mills,  or  to  any  carting  there  may  be  on  the  estate
itself.  For  the  latter  purpose  some  people  use
young  asses,  others  cows  and  mules — the  choice  de-
pending on  the  pasturage  available,  for  it  costs  less
to  keep  an  ass  than  a  cow,  though  the  latter  is  more

5  profitable  in  itself.

In  this  matter,  the  farmer  has  to  consider  the
surface  nature  of  his  land.  Where  it  is  hilly  and
stiff,  he  must  get  draught  animals  of  greater
strength,  and  preferably  such  as  may  be  themselves
profitable  while  doing  the  same  amount  of  work.


CHAPTER  XXI

OF  DOGS  AND  FOUR-FOOTED  STOCK

It  is  better  to  keep  a  few  fine  and  active  dogs  than
many.  These  should  be  trained  to  watch  by  night
and  to  sleep  shut  up  during  the  day.  What  is  to
be  done '  with  four-footed  stock  not  broken  to  harness

^  De  indomitis  .  .  .faciundum.  This  looks  like  the  heading
of  a  section  which  has  strayed.  In  the  Latin  "  table  of  con-
tents "  (certainly  not  by  Varro  as  it  stands,  for  Idus  Augustae
are  there  mentioned,  and  the  month  Sextilis  was  not  called


6o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

and  with  cattle?  If  meadow-land  form  part  of  the
farm  and  a  farmer  owns  no  cattle  of  his  own,  he
must  dispose  of  the  pasturage,  and  graze  and  stable
other  people's  cattle  on  his  farm.


CHAPTER  XXII

OF  INSTRUMENTS  OF  PRODUCTION  (MUTE)

1  Concerning  the  other  mute  instruments  of  produc-
tion— baskets,  casks,  etc.,  the  following  rules  are
to  be  laid  down :  nothing  should  be  bought  which
can  be  grown  on  the  farm  and  made  by  the  house-
hold. Under  this  head  come  mainly  things  made  of
osiers  and  the  wood  the  country  supplies.  Such  as
baskets,  frails,  threshing  sleighs,  stakes,'  and  rakes,
as  well  as  things  madeof  hemp,  flax,  reeds,  palm  "and
bull-rushes,  such  as  wagon  ropes,  bands,  and  mats.

2  Things  which  cannot  be  got  from  the  farm  will
not  diminish  your  profit  much  by  their  cost  if  in

Augustus  before  27  B.C.,  whilst  this  book  was  written  36  B.C.)
after  De  Canibus  comes  Si  prata  sunt  in  /undo,  pecus  non  est,
quid  sitfaciendtim.

^  Valli.  I  have  translated  ' '  stakes  " — the  usual  meaning
of  the  word — though  one  suspects  that  Pontedera  is  right  in
making  it  a  diminutive  of  vannus  (a  winnowing  fan)  on  the
analogy  of  catella  from  catena,  homuUus  from  homo  {homon-
lus),  villum  from  vinum,  etc.  Diminutives  were  a  marked
feature  of  Vulgar  Latin.

*  Palms.  Columella  (v,  5,  15)  speaks  of  palmeae  tegetes
used  for  sheltering  the  vines.  These  "  mats  "  were  probably
made  of  vine  stalks.


I]       INSTRUMENTS  OF  PRODUCTION     61

buying"  you  consider  usefulness  more  than  beauty,
especially  if  you  are  careful  to  choose  a  market  near
at  hand  where  they  can  be  had  both  good  and
cheap.  Of  these  different  implements  the  choice
and  number  depend  on  the  size  of  the  farm,  for

3  more  are  needed  if  it  be  of  wide  extent.  Thus  Cato,
said  Stolo,  first  takes  as  an  example  a  farm  of  a
certain  size,  and  then  writes  about  such  a  one:
that  the  man  who  cultivates  an  olive  plantation  of
240  iugera  should  equip  it  with  five  complete  sets
of  apparatus  for  making  oil,'  which  he  enumerates
in  detail.  Thus:  coppers,  pitchers,  a  pot  with  three
spouts,"^  etc.,  all  of  bronze:  next,  implements  of  wood
and  iron,  such  as  three  large  wagons,  six  ploughs
with  their  ploughshares,  four  crates  for  manure,  etc.
He  mentions,  too,  the  kind  and  number  of  iron  tools
needed,  as  eight  iron  forks,  the  same  number  of
hoes,  half  as  many  shovels,  etc.

4  He  also  gives  another  prescription  for  the  equip-
ment of  a  vineyard,  stating  that  if  it  consists  of  100
iiigera  it  should  have  three  wine  presses  with  all

'  Vasa  olearla,  etc.  From  a  comparison  with  Cato  (De
R.  R.,  10  and  12)  it  seems  clear  that  five  "vessels"  of  each
kind  are  here  meant,  for  Cato  (12,  i)  mentions  five  presses,
five  suculae,  ^vefunes  lorei,  and  so  on.

"  Nassiterna.  Usually  derived  from  nasum  and  ter,  a  vessel
with  three  noses  (spouts  or  handles).  Juvenal,  v,  47,  speaks
of  a  cup  with  four  "noses,"  most  probably  handles.  It  may
be  that  the  word  has  no  connection  either  with  nasum  or  ter.
A  gloss  of  Festus  has  nassiterna  est  genus  vasts  aguarii  aiisati
et  patentis,  a  wide  vessel  for  carrying  water  having  a  handle
(or  handles).


62  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

accessories,  casks  with  their  lids  to  hold  800
cullei,  twenty  tubs  to  hold  grapes,  twenty  to  hold
corn,  and  other  things  of  the  same  kind.  Fewer  of
these  are  certainly  recommended  by  other  writers,
but  I  think  that  Cato  set  down  so  large  a  number  of
cullei  that  the  farmer  might  not  be  compelled  to  sell
his  wine  every  year.  For  old  wines  fetch  more  than
new,  and  the  same  wine   more  at  one  time  than

5  another.  He  also  writes  at  great  length  about  the
different  kinds  of  tools,  their  nature  and  number,
mentioning  knives,  shovels,  harrows,  etc.,  of  which
some  kinds  include  several  sorts.  For  example,
knives:  we  are  told  by  the  same  author  that  forty
pruning  knives  are  needed  for  the  vines,  five  small
knives  for  cutting  string,  etc. ,  three  for  pruning  trees
and  ten  for  clearing  brambles.  So  much  for  this
point.

6  Said  Scrofa:  The  owner  should  have  an  invent-
ory of  all  the  implements  and  furniture  of  the  farm
— one  cop)'^  at  the  farm,  the  other  in  town;  while
the  bailiff  should  keep  all  the  things  mentioned  in
the  inventory  each  in  its  proper  place  at  the  farm-
house. Those  which  cannot  be  kept  under  lock
and  key  should  be  placed  in  as  conspicuous  a  posi-
tion as  possible — more  especially  those  which  are
employed  only  occasionally,  such  as  the  baskets,
etc.,  used  at  the  vintage.  For  what  is  seen  everv
day  runs  less  risk  from  the  thief.


ON  CROPS  63


CHAPTER  XXIII

ON  CROPS

1  Agrasius  went  on :  Since  we  now  have  discussed
the  first  two  sections  of  our  four-fold  division,  that,
namely  (i)  which  concerns  the  farm  itself,  and  (2)
the  instruments  of  its  cultivation,  I  am  now  waiting
for  the  third  section.

Well,  answered  vScrofa,  as  I  conceive  the  pro-
duce of  the  farm  to  mean  useful  products  sown
and  grown  on  it,  two  matters  remain  for  considera-
tion— what  are  the  best  things  to  sow,  and  which
are  the  best  places  to  sow  them  in.  For  one  soil  is
suitable  for  grass,  another  for  corn,  another  for  wine
or  for  oil.  The  same  may  be  said  of  crops  which
serve  as  fodder,  which  includes  ocimimi^  mixed
grain    (cut    when    green),    vetch,    lucerne,    clover

2  (snail-clover)  and  lupins.  For  it  is  not  everything
that  can  properly  be  sown  on  rich  land,  nor  is
nothing  to  be  sown  on  poor  land,  for  it  is  better  to
plant  crops  that  do  not  need  much  nutriment  on  the
thinner  soil;  such  are  clover  and  all  leguminous
plants  with  the  exception  of  chick  peas — for  they,
too,  come  under  the  heading  of  leguminous  plants,
being  plucked  from  the  ground,  not  cut.  And  these
plants  are  called  leguminay  because  leguntur — they

3  are  plucked.    In  rich  land  it  is  better  to  sow  what

'  Ocimum,  farrago.  For  Varro's  definition  of  these  words,
cf.  cap.  xxxi,  §§  4  and  5,  of  this  book.


64  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

needs  more  nourishment,  cabbage,  for  instance,  or
wheat,  rye,  or  flax.  Some  things  should  be  sown
with  a  view  ^  not  so  much  to  present  profit  as  to
next  year's  crop,  because  when  cut  down  and  left
there  they  improve  the  soil.  Thus  lupins,  before
they  produce  many  pods — and  sometimes  bean-
stalks, if  the  podding  stage  be  not  so  far  advanced
that  it  is  profitable  to  pull  the  beans — are  usually
ploughed  into  poor  land  for  manure.

4  We  must  not  either,  when  we  come  to  plant,
neglect  the  claims  of  those  things  which  bring  profit
through  the  pleasure  they  afford,  as,  for  example,
what  are  called  "orchards  "  and  "  flower  gardens";
or  again  of  those  things  which,  without  contribut-
ing to  man's  food  or  appealing  to  his  perception  of,
and  pleasure  in  the  beautiful  are  yet  inseparable  from
the  productiveness  of  the  farm.  So  you  must  choose

5  a  place  suitable  for  beds  of  willows  and  reeds  and
other  plants  which  require  moisture,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  a  place  for  corn  crops,  and  especially  for
beans  and  other  things  also  which  suit  a  dry  dis-
trict. In  the  same  way  you  must  sow  some  things
where  there  is  shade,  as,  for  instance,  wild  aspara-
gus," because  the  cultivated  variety  (which  the  wild

1  Prospicientem .  In  imitation  of  the  common  Greei<  con-
struction, OTraprsov  ian  .  .  .  cnroiTKo-jrovvTa.

-  Cornida  seems  to  be  wild  asparagus.  Cf.  Cato,  R.  R.,
vi,  3:  Ibi  corrudam  scrito  nude  asparagi  Jiant\  and  Plin\-,
N.  H.,  xix,  8:  Indicavimus  et  corrudam.  Hunc  enim  iutcUcgo
sihestrcm  asparagum.  Pliny  also  states  that  cornida  becomes
asparagus.


I]  ON  CROPS  65

sort  becomes)  loves  shade,  and  in  sunny  places  you
must  sow  violets  and  make  gardens,  for  their  growth
depends  on  sunlight.  And  so  for  other  things.  And
in  one  place  you  must  plant  a  shrubbery,  so  as
to  have  osiers  for  plaiting  such  things  as  wicker
baskets,  winnowing  fans,'  and  hurdles;  in  another
you   may   plant  and  grow  a  wood  for  timber,   [in

6  another]  a  wood  where  you  may  catch  birds ;  in
another  you  should  grow  hemp,  flax,  rushes,  es-
parto grass — for  weaving  shoes  for  the  oxen  and
making  string,  cords,  and  ropes.  Some  places,  in-
deed, are  suitable  for  sowing  more  than  one  thing
at  once.  Thus,  in  newly  planted  orchards,  when
the  seeds  have  been  sown  at  proper  intervals  and
the  saplings  planted  in  rows,  in  the  first  years  before
the  roots  can  go  far,  some  people  sow  garden
flowers,  others  other  things  ;  but  when  the  trees
have  grown  strong  they  do  not  do  so,  for  fear  of
damaging  the  roots.

7  Said  Stolo:  In  this  connection  what  Cato  writes
about  crops  seems  good — that  heavy  and  fertile  soil,
if  it  be  without  trees,  should  be  sown  with  corn ;
while  if  the  same  is  cold,  it  is  best  to  sow  on  it
turnips,  radishes,  millet,  and  panic.

^   Vallus  or  vallos.    Cf.  note  on  xxii,  i.


66  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

CHAPTER  XXIV

OF  OLIVES,   AND  TREE  PLANTING

1  He  States  also  that  in  heav)  and  hot  land,  the  olive'
for  pickling,  the  "radius  major,"  ^  the  Sallentine,
the  orchis,'  the ' '  posea,"  the  Sergian,  the  Colminian,
the  "waxy,"  should  be  planted — and  of  all  these
varieties  you  should  choose  that  which  enjoys  the
best  local  reputation.  For  an  olive  plantation  no  land
is  at  all  suitable  that  does  not  face  the  west  wind  and

2  get  plenty  of  sun.  In  comparatively  cold  and  poor
soil  the  Licinian  olive  should  be  sown.  If  you  put
it  in  heavy  or  warm  land,  the  hostus  *  (yield)  becomes
worthless,  and  the  tree  dies  from  its  luxuriant  bear-

3  ing,  and  is  infested  by  red  moss.  By  hostus  is
meant  the  amount  of  oil  returned  at  each  ' '  making, "
by  "making"  the  amount  of  olives  treated  at  one
time  —  which  some  place  at  i6o  modii,  others
bring  as  low  as  120,  the  number  depending  on  the
size  and  number  of  receptacles  used  in  making  the

*  Oleam  conditaneavi,  etc.  In  Italy,  then,  as  now,  there
were  many  varieties  of  olive.  In  17S8  Giovanni  Presta  pub-
lished a  memoir  "on  the  sixty-two  samples  of  different  olives
presented  to  Ferdinand  IV,  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies."

"^  Radiiis.    The  long  shuttle-shaped  kind.

'  Orchis.  The  oval  olive.  Posca  (Pliny,  pausea).  The  bitter
kind.

Presta  thought  that  many  of  these  names  were  traceable  in
Italian,  as  for  instance />flwj-fr7,  \iPi\\a.n  Pasola;  Licinia,  Italian
Risciola,  etc.

'  Hostus  no  doubt  =  Art wj/mj,  draught.


I]  OF  VINES  67

oil.  As  for  Cato's  statement  that  elms  and  poplars
should  be  planted  round  the  farm  to  provide  leaves
for  the  sheep  and  cattle,  and  timber  for  use  on  the
farm  (this,  however,  is  not  necessary  on  all  farms,
nor  where  it  is  so  are  leaves  the  chief  object)  they
may  usefully  be  placed  on  the  north  side,  as  they
do  not  then  cut  off  the  sunlight.
4  Scrofa  added  on  the  same  authority  that  if  the
place  be  damp  you  should  plant  there  shoots  of
poplar  trees  and  make  a  reed  plantation.  It  is  first
dug  with  a  large  spade,  and  then  the  eyes  of  the
reed^  are  planted  at  intervals  of  three  feet  [and  with
them  wild  asparagus,  that  the  garden  variety  may
result  from  it].  Both  asparagus  and  reeds  need
pretty  much  the  same  kind  of  treatment.  Osiers
should  be  planted  round  the  reed  bed,  to  provide
material  for  tying  up  the  vines.


CHAPTER  XXV

OF  VINES

As  to  the  kind  of  place  in  which  to  plant  vines  you
must  observe  the  following  rules.     The  best  and

^  Aptam  esse,  etc.  I  have  inserted  "and  with  them  wild
asparagus,"  etc.,  from  Cato,  6,  3.  The  construction  requires
something  to  be  added,  and  the  sense  this.  Palladius,  writing
about  reed  beds  (iii,  23),  says  :  "  Amongst  these  you  may  also
scatter  asparagus  seeds  .  .  .  for  asparagus  is  grown  and  burnt
in  the  same  way  as  reeds.''''


68  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

sunniest  situation  for  wine  growing  should  be  kept
for  the  small  Aminean  variety,  the  double  Eugenean,
and  the  small  yellow  grape.  When  the  land  is
heavy  or  cold  the  larger  Aminean,  Murgentine,
Apician,  or  Lucanian  should  be  planted.  The  other
kinds,  and  especially  the  common  '  black  grape,  suit
any  sort  of  land.


CHAPTER  XXVI

OF  VINEYARDS

In  every  vineyard  great  care  is  taken  that  the  sup-
ports of  the  vines  be  protected  towards  the  north,
and  if  live  cypresses  are  planted  to  serve  as  vine-
props  in  alternate  rows  with  the  vines,  they  are  not
allowed  to  grow  higher  than  ordinary  supports,  nor
are  the  vines  planted  close  to  them,  for  vine  and
cypress  hate  each  other."

'  Miscellas.  Cf.  Hesychius :  MicrKtAAo^'  ivrt\/)g  (cat  fjiiXag
olpoc.

^  Et  si  cupressos.  It  is  strange  that  live  cypresses  should
be  used  as  supports  for  vines  when  there  is  an  antipathy
between  the  two  plants.  Perhaps  Varro's  statement  ends
with  patiantur  {or  patiuntiir),  and  a  ^nnntnaiictis,  reniLMnber-
ing  the  passage  of  Varro  (i,  i6,  6),  where  the  violent  disHke
of  the  vine  for  cabbage  {olus)  is  mentioned,  added,  as  a  note,
neque propter  o\\iS,  etc.,  which  became  ncque propter  eos,  etc.

It  is  strange  also  that  no  other  ancient  writer  has  mentioned
the  use  of  live  cypresses  as  supports,  though  Columella  (iv,
26,  i)  speaks  of  the  tapering  prop  made  of  laurel,  juniper,
or  cypress.


I]  OF  TIMES  AND  SEASONS  69

Said  Agrius  to  Fundanius:  I  am  afraid  the
temple-keeper  will  be  here  before  our  friend  gets
to  the  fourth  act.  I  am  waiting  for  the  vintage.
Don't  be  afraid,  said  Scrofa,  but  get  ready  the
baskets  and  the  urn.'


CHAPTER  XXVII

OF  TIMES  AND  SEASONS

1  Now  we  have  two  measures  of  time:  the  year
created  by  the  sun's  annual  revolution,  and  the
month  which  the  revolving  moon  determines.  I
will  first  speak  of  the  sun.  Its  annual  course  is,  to
begin  with,  roughly  divided  into  four  parts  of  about
three  months  each,  or  more  accurately  into  eight
of  a  month  and  a  half:  into  four,  for  its  divisions
are  spring,  summer,  autumn,  and  winter.

2  As  to  the  spring  sowing,  the  unploughed  land
must  first  be  broken  up,  so  that  weeds  which  have
sprung  up  in  it  may  be  uprooted  before  any  seed
can  fall,  and  at  the  same  time  the  clods  must  be  made
better  able  to  absorb  the  rainfall  by  being  baked
by  the  sun,  and,  so  loosened,  made  easier  to  work.
It  should  be  ploughed  at  least  twice,  or,  better  still,

3  three  times.  In  summer  the  harvest  is  to  be  reaped ;
in  autumn,  during  the  dry  weather,  the  vintage  to
be  made;    then  is  the  best  time  for  treating  your

'   Uma.     Vessel  holding  lialf  an  amphora^  i.e.,  about  three
and  a  half  gallons.


70  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

woods — the  trees  to  be  cut  close  to  the  ground,  but
the  roots  must  be  dug  as  soon  as  the  first  rains
have  fallen,  that  no  new  shoots  may  spring  from
them.  In  winter  the  trees  are  to  be  pruned  only  at
times  whenas  their  bark  is  free  from  rime  and  ice
after  rain.


CHAPTER  XXVIII

OF  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  YEAR

1  The  first  day  of  spring  occurs  when  the  sun  is  in
Aquarius,  of  summer  in  Taurus,  of  autumn  in
Leo,  and  of  winter  in  Scorpio.  Now,  as  the  first
day  of  the  four  seasons  is  the  twenty-third  after
the  successive  entry  of  the  sun  into  each  of  these
signs,  it  results  that  spring  has  91  days,  summer  94,
autumn  91,  and  winter  89.  These  periods  reduced
to  our  modern  civil  calendar  make  the  first  days  of
spring  date  from  the  7th  of  February,  of  summer
from  the  9th  of  May,  of  autumn  from  the  nth  of

2  August,  and  of  winter  from  the  loth  of  November.
With  the  more  minute  division  certain  dates  must
be  taken  into  account,  and  these  seasons  are
divided  into  eight  parts:  (i)  from  the  time  when
Favonius  begins  to  blow  to  the  vernal  equinox,
45  days;  (2)  from  then  to  the  rising  of  the  Vergiliae
(Pleiads),   44;    (3)   from    this    to   the   solstice,  48;

(4)  thence    to  the    rising   of  the    Dog    Star,    27;

(5)  next  to  the  autumnal  equinox,  67  ;  (6)  tlience


I]  OF  THE  FIRST  DIVISION  71

to  the  setting  of  the  Pleiads,  32;  (7)  from  this
date  to  the  winter  solstice,  57  ;  and  (8)  thence  to  the
blowing  of  Favonius  again,  45.


CHAPTER  XXIX

OF  THE  FIRST  DIVISION

1  In  the  first  interval — between  the  time  when
Favonius  begins  to  blow  and  the  vernal  equinox —
the  following  things  should  be  done:  Seed  beds  of
every  kind  should  be  sown,  the  small  trees  which
support  the  vines  pruned,  the  meadows  manured,
the  roots  of  the  vines  cleared,  the  outcropping  roots
cut  off,  the  meadows  weeded,  willow  beds  planted,
corn-lands  hoed.  Seges  (corn-land)  means  land
which  has  been  ploughed  and  sown,  arinim
(plough-land)  that  which  has  been  ploughed  but
not  yet  sown;  fallow-land,'  land  which  has  been
sown  before  it  is  ploughed  and  sown  again  (in  the

2  third  year).  The  term  proscindere  (to  cleave)  is
used  of  the  first  ploughing,  offringere  (to  break
up)  of  the  second — for  big  clods  are  thrown  up,  as
a  rule,  by  the  first  ploughing ;  when  land  is  ploughed
the  second  time  they  call  it  "breaking  it  up."  At
the  third  ploughing,  when  the  seed  has  been  cast,

'  Novalis  ager.  The  word  indicates  two  kinds  of  land:
(i)  unbroken  grass-land  (Columella,  vi,  Praef.);  (2)  land  that
was  tilled  and  allowed  to  rest  alternately.  Cf.  Varro,  L.  L.,
V,  cap.  4:  Contra  qui  intennittitiir  {ager)  a  novando  novalis.


72  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

oxen  are  said  to  "furrow"  when  by  means  of
small  planks  attached  to  the  ploughshare  they  cover
the  corn  that  has  been  sown  on  the  ridges,  and
at  the  same  time  cleave  trenches  to  carry  off  the
rain-water.  Some  people  who  do  not  own  such
broad  acres — as  in  the  case  of  Apulian  and  similar
farms — then  usually  break  up  any  great  clods  left
on  the  ridges  by  means  of  hoers.  When  the  plough
makes  a  gap,  a  channel,  with  the  share,  it  is  called  a
furrow.  That  which  is  between  two  furrows — the
raised  earth — is  called  a  ridge  {porca),  because  that
part  of  the  corn-land  "casts  iovXh''^  {porricit)  the
corn.  In  the  same  way,  too,  when  giving  the
entrails  to  the  gods,  they  used  the  term  porricere
(to  cast  forth).


CHAPTER  XXX

THE  SECOND  PERIOD

In  the  second  period — between  the  vernal  equinox
and  the  rising  of  the  Pleiads — the  following  is  to
be  done  :  the  corn-lands  to  be  weeded — that  is,  the
weeds  cleaned  from  them ;  oxen  to  do  the  first
ploughing,  willows  to  be  cut,  the  meadows  fenced.
Such  things  as  should  have  been  done  before  and
are  not  quite  finished  must  be  done  now,  be-
fore they  (the  plants)  begin  to  put  forth  buds  and
flowers,   because  if  deciduous  plants  have  begun  to


I]  THE  THIRD  PERIOD  73

blossom/  before  planting,  they  are  from  that  mo-
ment unfit  for  planting.  The  olive  must  be  planted
and  pruned  here  and  there.


CHAPTER  XXXI    '

THE  THIRD  PERIOD

1  In  the  third  period — between  the  rising  of  the
Pleiads  and  the  summer  solstice — the  following
things  should  be  done:  dig  or  plough  round  the
young  vines,  then  hoe,  that  is,  break  the  soil,  to
get  rid  of  all  clods.  People  use  the  word  occare  (to
hoe),  because  by  hoeing  they  destroy  {occidtmt)  the
clods.  The  vines  must  be  "stopped,"  but  by  a  man
who  knows  his  work,  as  this  is  an  operation  of
greater  importance  than  pruning.    It  is  to  be  per-

2  formed  on  the  vine,  not  on  the  tree.  "Stopping"
means  pinching  off  from  the  rod  all  but  two,  or  occa-
sionally three,  of  the  strongest  shoots  that  spring
from  it,  lest,  if  all  be  left  on,  the  vine-rod  should
be  unable  to  furnish  sufficient  sap.  Accordingly,
in  the  vine  nursery,  when  the  vine  first  comes  up
from  the  ground  it  is  usual  to  cut  it  entirely  back,
in  order  that  on  coming  up  again  it  may  have  a
stronger  stem,  and  greater  power  to  produce  shoots.

3  For  a  poor  stem  is  barren  from  its  weakness,  and

^  Si  quae  folia,  etc.  Cf.  Geoponica,  iii,  5  :  cijXov  ovtoq  uq
TTttv  (pVTOV  Trplv  iKoiSijaai  irpog  f3\darT]<nv  Scktikov  iariv  tiQ  ^vriiav.
OliSiv  yap  ^Xaariiaav  iina^  SvvljaeTai  (jtviaQai.


74  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

incapable  of  producing  the  vine-shoot,  which  is
called  when  comparatively  small  fJagellus^  and
when  larger  and  already  beginning  to  bear  grapes
a  palma.  The  first  word  flagellus  *  is  derived  by
changing  a  single  letter  from  flatus  (the  "  blowing
of  the  wind  "),  thus  flahellum  becomes  flagellum.
The  latter,  the  palma,  since  it  is  a  shoot  destined
to  bear  {parere)  grapes,  seems  first  to  have  been
pronounced  parilema,  from  the  word  parere,  to
beget,  then  by  a  common  change  of  letter  began

4  to  be  called  palma.  On  the  other  side  it  bears  a
tendril,  which  is  a  vine-twig  twisted  like  a  curl.
It  is  by  these  tendrils  that  the  vine  grips  that  along
which  it  crawls,  in  order  to  reach  a  place,  from
which  word  {capere)  it  is  called  capreolus.

All  fodder  must  be  cut,  first  ocinum,  then  farrago,
then  vetches,  and  lastly  hay.  Ocini/f)?  is  derived
from  the  Greek  word  wxraj,  which  means  "  quickly."
The  same  etymology  applies  to  the  garden  ocimum
{basil).  It  is  further  called  ociniim,  because  it
speedily  purges  cattle,   and  is  given  to  them  for

5  that  purpose.  It  is  cut  green  from  a  bean-crop
before  it  produces  pods.  On  the  other  hand  it  may
be  that  when  barley,  vetch,  and  leguminous  plants
were  sown  mixed  together,  they  were  called/frn/^o,

'  FJagello.  One  of  Vairo's  absurd  etymologies.  The  word
is  derived  of  course  from  flagrum,  and  means  a  "switch."
Servius  must  have  had  Varro's  derivation  in  mind  when
commenting?  on  Vergil,  Georg.,  ii,  299;  he  defines  flageUa  as
"the  highest  parts  of  trees  so  called  because  they  have  to
stand  many  gusts  {flatus)  of  wind."


I]  THE  FOURTH  PERIOD  75

from  the  fact  that  they  were  cut  green  for  fodder
from  the  field  with  a  knife  {ferro)y  or  farrago  be-
cause it  was  first  made  from  a  crop  of  spelt  {far).
With  it  horses  and  other  beasts  of  burden  are
purged  and  fattened  in  spring  time.  Vetch  {vicia)
is  derived  from  vincire  (to  bind),  which  also,  like
the  vine,  has  tendrils,  by  means  of  which,  as  it
creeps  upwards  to  attach  itself  to  a  lupin's  stalk
or  that  of  some  other  plant,  it  binds  the  latter.

If  you  have  meadows  to  be  irrigated  you  should
do  it  as  soon  as  you  have  got  in  the  hay.  In  the
dry  season  water  must  be  given  in  the  evening  to
the  grafted  fruit.  These  may  have  been  called  fruit
{porno)  from  the  fact  that  they  need  drink  {potus).


CHAPTER  XXXII

THE  FOURTH  PERIOD

In  the  fourth  period,  between  the  summer  solstice
and  the  rising  of  the  Dog  Star,  most  people  get  in
the  harvest,  for  they  say  that  corn  is  fifteen  days
in  its  sheath,  flowers  in  fifteen,  and  in  fifteen  be-
comes dry,  being  then  ripe.  You  must  now  finish
off  your  ploughing,  which  is  the  more  effective  the
hotter  the  ground  when  it  is  done.  After  the  open-
ing up  of  the  earth  by  the  first  ploughing,  it  must
be  broken  up  by  the  second,  that  the  clods  may  be
destroyed,  for  at  the  first  only  big  clods  are  cloven
out  of  the  earth.


76  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

You  must  now  sow  vetch,  lentils,  chick-peas,  the
bitter  vetch,  and  other  plants  which  some  call
leguniina^  others,  as  some  Gallic  farmers,  legarica^
both  words  being  derived  from  legere  (to  gather),
because  these  are  not  cut,  but  "gathered"  by
plucking.

You  must  hoe  your  old  vineyards  a  second  time,
the  new  ones  a  third,  if  by  that  time  there  are  any
clods  remaining.


CHAPTER  XXXIII

THE  FIFTH  PERIOD

In  the  fifth  period,  between  the  rising  of  the  Dog
Star  and  the  autumnal  equinox,  the  straw  must
be  cut  down  and  stacked,  the  second  ploughing
done,  the  trees  cleared  of  superfluous  leaves,  and
the  second  crop  cut  on  the  meadows  which  are
irrigated.


CHAPTER  XXXIV

THE  SIXTH  PERIOD

I  In  the  sixth  period,  our  authors  state,  sowing
should  be  begun  at  the  autumnal  equinox,  and
may  go  on  for  ninety-one  days ;  but  after  the  winter
solstice  you  should  not  sow  unless  compelled  by


I]  THE  SEVENTH  PERIOD  77

necessity — and  this  makes  such  a  difference  that
plants  which  come  up  in  seven  days  if  sown  before
the  solstice,  hardly  come  up  in  forty  if  sown
later.  And  they  are  of  opinion  that  you  should  not
begin  before  the  equinox,  because,  if  bad  weather
sets  in,  the  seeds  generally  rot.  Beans  are  best
sown  at  the  time  of  the  setting  of  the  Pleiads;  while
between  the  autumnal  equinox  and  the  setting  of  the
Pleiads,  your  grapes  must  be  picked  and  the  vintage
made.  Then  one  must  begin  to  prune  the  vines  and
propagate,  and  plant  fruit  trees.  In  some  districts,
where  the  hard  frosts  set  in  comparatively  early,  it
is  better  to  do  these  things  in  the  spring-time.


CHAPTER  XXXV

THE  SEVENTH  PERIOD

I  In  the  seventh  period,  between  the  setting  of  the
Pleiads  and  the  winter  solstice,  the  following  things
are  to  be  done,  we  are  told.

Plant  lilies  and  crocus.

To  form  a  rose-plantation  take  a  plant  which  has
already'  struck  root,  and  cut  the  stem,  beginning
at  the  root,   into  slips  a  palm-breadth  long,  then

'  Quae  iam  egit,  etc.  Cf.  Geoponica,  xi,  i8.  "Others  take
them  (rose  trees)  up  with  the  roots,  then  cut  into  three-inch
lengths  the  roots  and  what  has  grown  from  them,  and  plant
the  cuttings  at  a  distance  of  a  cubit  from  one  another."


78  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

cover  them  with  earth  and  transplant  them  when
they  too  have  made  a  Hving  root.  It  is  not  good  to
make  violet  beds  on  a  farm,  because  the  earth  must
be  raised  for  them,  and  small  mounds  are  thus
necessarily  produced  which  are  washed  away  by
artificial  watering  and  by  rain  storms,  and  so  im-
poverish the  soil.

From  the  time  when  Favonius  begins  to  blow
until  the  rising  of  Arcturus,  you  may  properly
transplant  serpillum  (wild  thyme),  so  called  from
its  creeping  {serpere).

New  ditches  must  be  dug,  the  old  ones  cleared
out,  the  vines  and  their  supporting  trees  pruned —
provided  that,  like  most  operations  of  this  kind,
they  be  not  done  within  fifteen  days  after  or  before
the  winter  solstice — though  some  plants,  such  as
elms,  may  properly  be  planted  at  that  time.


CHAPTER  XXXVI

THE  EIGHTH  PERIOD

In  the  eighth  period,  that  is,  between  the  winter
solstice  and  the  time  when  Favonius  begins  to
blow,  the  following  things  must  be  done.

Any  water  standing  on  the  cornfields  must  be
drained  off.  If,  however,  it  is  a  time  of  drought,
and  the  land  crumbles  easily,  it  should  be  hoed.

Prune  the  vines  and  their  trees.


I]        MOON  AND  SIXFOLD  DIVISION       79

When  no  work  can  be  done  in  the  fields,  every-
thing: that  can  be  done  in  the  farm-house  should
then  be  finished  off  in  the  dark  winter  dawns.  It  is
good  to  have  the  rules  which  I  have  given  written
out  and  hung  well  in  view  in  the  farm-house,  in
order  that  all,  and  especially  the  bailiff,  may  know
them.


CHAPTER  XXXVII

THE  MOON  AND  THE  SIXFOLD  DIVISION  OF  THE  YEAR

T  Attention  must  be  paid  also  to  the  days  of  the
moon,  which  may  be  regarded  as  divided  into
two  series;  the  one  in  which  the  moon  waxes
from  nev/  to  full,  the  other  in  which  it  wanes  to
new  moon  until  it  reaches  the  day  dividing  two
months  when  the  moon  is  said  to  be  ending  and
beginning.  Hence,  at  Athens  this  day  is  called  'm
Koi  vsa  (old  and  new),  whilst  others  term  it  TpiaKag.
Certain  farm  operations  are  better  done  when  the
moon  is  waxing  than  when  it  is  waning,  while  with
certain  others  the  reverse  is  the  case,  as  the  cut-

2  ting  of  corn  and  timber.  Why,  said  Agrasius,
I  practise  those  precepts  not  only  when  shearing
sheep,  but  in  the  matter  of  my  hair  even  (following
my  father  in  this),  for  fear  of  growing  bald  if  I  cut
it  when  the  moon  is  waxing.  Said  Agrius:  In
what  sense  has  the  moon  four  periods,  and  what

3  influence  has  such  a  division   on    farming?     Did


8o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

you  never  hear  in  the  country,  answered  Treme-
lius,  the  expression,  "  on  the  eighth  day  •  before  the
moon  begins  to  increase,"  and  "the  eighth  day
before  she  begins  to  wane"?  And  that  of  those
things  which  should  be  done  when  the  moon  is
waxing,  some  are  yet  better  done  after  than  before
the  eighth  day  before  full  moon?  And  that  whatever
things  it  was  good  to  do  when  the  moon  was  waning
were  better  done  when  that  luminary  had  the  least
light?

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  fourfold  division
observed  in  agriculture.
4  There  is,  said  Stolo,  a  second  division  of  times
connected  in  a  certain  way  with  the  sun  and
moon,  and  this  division  is  into  six  parts;  for  almost
all  fruits  reach  their  full  perfection  only  with  the
fifth  phase,  and  then  in  the  farm-house  make  the
acquaintance  of  the  jar  or  bushel,  whence  in  the
sixth  phase  they  are  produced  for  consumption.

These  are  the  six  phases:  (i)  Initial  prepara-
tion; (2)  sowing;  (3)  rearing;  (4)  gathering;  (5)
storing;  (6)  producing  for  use.  For  some  things
the  preparations  necessary  are:  trenching,  digging

'  Octavo  Janam  haiani,  like  octavo  Kalendas,  etc.,  witli  el-
lipse o{  ante.

Nii^idius,  according  to  Macrobius  (Saturnalia,  i,  9,  8)  identi-
fied lanus  with  Apollo  (the  Sun-God)  and  lana  with  Diana
(the  Moon-God).  Tertullian  (Ad  Xat.  ii,  15,  p.  128)  makes
lana  the  goddess  of  the  bow  or  the  arch.

Here  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  moon  is  meant,  and
many  commentators  (Gesner)  have  considered  luna  to  be  a
gloss.


I]  OF  MANURING  81

over  the  ground  again,  and  making  of  furrows,  as,
for  example,  if  you  want  a  plantation  or  an  orchard ;
for  others,  you  must  plough  or  dig,  as  when  the
land  is  destined  for  corn ;  again,  for  certain  things
5  the  earth  must  be  turned  to  a  greater  or  less  depth
with  the  large  spade,  as  some  roots — cypress  roots,
for  example — spread  but  little,  while  others,  such
as  those  of  the  plane-tree,  spread  more.  Theo-
phrastus,  indeed,  describes  a  plane-tree  at  Athens
in  the  Lyceum  which,  though  it  was  even  then  but
a  young  tree,  had  put  out  roots  thirty-three  cubits
long.

In  some  cases  after  breaking  up  the  land  with
oxen  and  plough,  you  have  to  plough  a  second
time  also  before  sowing  the  seed.

Then  there  is  the  preparation,  if  any  has  to  be
made,  in  the  case  of  meadows — namely,  fencing
them  in  to  keep  the  cattle  out  (and  this  is  generally
done  when  the  pear-tree  begins  to  bloom),  and
watering  them  in  good  time  if  they  are  to  be
watered.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII

OF  MANURING

I  Now  we  must  consider  what  parts  of  the  farm
should  be  manured,  how  it  is  to  be  done,  and  what
kind  of  manure  should  be  preferred;  for  there  are

Q


82  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

several  kinds.  Cassius  writes  that  the  best  is  that
from  birds,  excepting  marsh  or  water  fowl.  Of
these  he  gives  the  preference  to  pigeons'  dung,  as
being  the  warmest  and  as  setting  up  fermentation

2  in  the  soil.  According  to  him  it  should  be  scat-
tered on  the  ground  like  seed  and  not  heaped  up,  as
cattle  dung  is.  I  consider  the  best  to  be  that  taken
from  aviaries  where  field-fares  and  blackbirds
are  kept,  for  it  is  not  only  good  for  the  soil,  but
supplies  a  fattening  food  for  both  cattle  and  swine.
We  find  accordingly  that  the  rent  paid  for  aviaries
is  less  in  cases  where  the  owner  reserves  this  man-
ure for  the  farm  than  where  it  is  thrown  in  as  part
of  the  bargain.  Cassius  writes  that  next  to  pigeons'
dung  comes  that  of  man,  and    in  the   third  place

3  that  of  goats,  sheep,  and  asses;  while  horse  dung
is  the  worst  of  all,  though  it  is  good  for  corn-crops.
For  meadows  it  is  perhaps  the  best  of  all  manures,
since  it  produces  an  abundant  crop  of  grass,  which
is  the  case  with  the  dung  of  all  beasts  of  burden  fed
on  barley.  The  dung-hill  must  be  made  close  to
the  farm-house,  so  that  the  labour  of  carrying  it
away  may  be  as  small  as  possible.  They  say  that
no  serpent  breeds  in  the  dung-hill  if  a  piece  of  oak-
wood  '  be  driven  into  the  middle  of  it.

^  Rohusia  jna/eria  =  oak  wood.  Cf.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xvii,  9:
Palo  e  robore  depacto  fieri  iubet.  Ita  fore  ne  innascantur  his
serpentes.


I]  OF  MODES  OF  PROPAGATION        83

CHAPTER  XXXIX

OF  MODES  OF  PROPAGATION

1  Now  with  regard  to  the  second  phase — the  sowing
— the  following  questions  arise :  What  season  of  the
year  is  naturally  adapted  for  the  sowing  of  a  given
seed?  For  as  in  a  farm  the  aspect  of  each  part  of  it
is  of  importance,  so  also  is  the  season  at  which
each  kind  of  plant  grows  with  the  least  difficulty.
Do  we  not  see  that  some  plants  blossom  in  the
spring,   others  in   the  winter,  and  that   the   same

2  things  do  not  jflower  in  autumn  as  in  winter?  And
accordingly  some  things  are  sown,  grafted,  or
mown  earlier  or  later  than  others.  We  notice  also
that  though  most  grafting  is  better  done  in  the
spring  than  in  autumn,  yet  figs  are  grafted  near  the
summer  solstice  and  cherries  in  the  heart  of  winter.

3  And  so,  as  there  are  four'  ways  in  which  plants  are
propagated — one  natural,  three  artificial,  namely,
the  transference  of  things  with  quick  roots  from  soil
to  soil,  the  taking  of  shoots  from  a  tree  and  planting
them  in  the  ground,  and  the  grafting  on  one  tree  of
a  slip  taken  from  another,  we  must  examine  in  de-
tail the  conditions  of  time  and  place  required  for
each  of  these  operations.

'  Ouare  cum  semina,  etc.  This  section  is  taken  from  Theo-
phrastus  (H.  P.,  ii,  i),  where,  however,  eight  modes  of  pro-
pagation are  given.

Vergil  (Georg.,  il,  10-36),  using  Theophrastus  or  Varro,
enters  into  greater  detail.


84  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XL

SOWING,   PLANTING,  AND  GRAFTING

1  The  primary  seed  which  is  the  origin  of  reproduc-
tion is  of  two  kinds.  It  is  either  visible  or  invisible;
invisible  where  the  seeds  are  in  the  air  (and  Anaxa-
goras,^  the  natural  philosopher,  asserts  that  there
are  such),  or,  as  Theophrastus  writes,  where  water
flowing  on  to  the  land  carries  them  with  it.

The  visible  seeds,  as  they  concern  farmers,  de-
mand our  close  attention.  Certain  seeds,  indeed,
quite  capable  of  reproducing  their  kind,  are  so  small
as  to  be  seen  with  difficulty;  as,  for  instance,  those
of  the  cypress — for  the  nuts  which  grow  on  this
tree,  small  encapsulated  balls,  as  it  were,  are  not

2  the  true  seed,  which  is  inside  them.  Nature  has
given'  the  original  seeds ;  the  others  were  discovered
through  experiments  made  by  the  farmer.  The
first  seeds  were  those  which  unaided  by  him  grew
before  they  were  planted  ;  the  second,  those  which
were  got  from  the  former,  and  which  did  not  grow

'  Anaxagoras.  Theophrastus,  citing  Anaxagoras,  assigns
to  him  both  these  statements.  Cf.  Theophrastus  (H.  P.,  iii,
I,  4):  'Ava^ayopae  \iiv  tov  depa  navTwv  tpaoKwv  ixuv  aTripfiara  Kai
ravra  (n)yKa-a<pip6iiiva  T(f  vcari  yivvav  to.  (jivto..

What  Aristotle  called  ofioionepi'i  (cf.  Lucretius,  i,  834)  Anaxa-
goras himself  called  aTripfiara  rCjr  xp'J/iarwr.

^  Dedit  Natura,  etc.    Cf.  Vergil  (Georg.,  ii,  20):

Hos  Natura  viodos  primum  dedit  .  .  .
Sunt  alii  quos  ipse  via  sibi  rcppcrit  iisus


I]       SOWING,   PLANTING,  GRAFTING      85

before  they  were  planted.  With  regard  to  the
original  seeds  we  must  be  careful  that  they  have  not
lost  their  virtue  through  age,  that  they  are  not
mixed  with  others,  and  that  they  are  not  the  wrong
ones  through  resemblance  to  another  sort.  The
effect  of  age  on  some  things  is  so  great  as  to  change
their  nature ;  for  from  old  cabbage  seed,  they  say,
springs  rape,  and  conversely  from  rape  seed  cab-
bages.

3  In  propagating  by  the  second  '  means  one  must  be
careful  to  do  so  neither  too  early  nor  too  late.  The
proper  seasons,  according  to  Theophrastus,'  are
spring,  autumn,  and  the  rising  of  the  Dog  Star,
though  this  does  not  apply  to  every  soil  and  every
kind  of  plant.  In  dry,  poor,  clayey  soils,  since  they
have  the  least  moisture,  spring  should  be  chosen ;
whereas  in  the  case  of  good  and  rich  land  autumn  is
the  best  time,  for  in  spring  there  is  much  wet.  Some
people  fix  about  thirty  days  as  the  time  within
which  each  sowing  should  be  made.

4  The  third  kind  of  germ,  which  is  transmitted
from  the  tree  to  the  earth  by  means  of  shoots,  if
planted  in  the  soil,  needs  care  in  some  instances
that  the  severance  from  the  parent  tree  be  made  at
the  proper  time — that  is  before  any  flowers  or  buds
appear — and  that  whatever  shoots  you  transplant  be
torn  ^  from  the  stock  rather  than  broken  off,  for  the

^  Secunda  semina.    Cf.  xxxix,  3.
*  Theophrastus.    Cf.  Causa  Plant.,  i,  7.

'   Ut  ea  deplantes  potiusquam  defringas.    The  commentators
give  little  help  as  to  the  meaning  of  deplantare.    But  I  feel


86  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

wider  the  heel  of  a  shoot  is  the  firmer  it  is,  or  else
the  more  easily  does  it  put  forth  roots.  These  shoots
are  quickly  planted  before  the  sap  can  dry  up.  In
the  case  of  olive  cuttings  see  that  the  shoot  be  taken
from  a  young  branch,  and  cut  off  evenly  at  both
ends ;  such  shoots  are  called  by  some  clavolae  (little
clubs),  by  others  taleae,  and  are  cut  about  a  foot
long.
5  With  regard  to  the  fourth  kind  of  propagator
which  from  one  tree  passes  to  another:  attention
must  be  paid  both  to  the  tree  from  which  it  is  taken
and  that  on  which  it  is  grafted,  as  well  as  to  the
time  and  to  the  manner  in  which  the  grafting  is
done;  for  oak  will  not  take  pear,  and  this  is  so,
though  the  apple-tree  will.  This  is  a  matter  care-
fully heeded  by  many  who  give  ear  to  the  harus-
ptces,^  for   these  declare  that   as    many  lightning

sure  that  the  translation  is  right.  Planta  means  a  sucker,  or
shoot,  and  this  was  torn  from  the  tree  so  that  some  part  of
the  mother  plant  came  with  it.  Cf.  Plinj-,  N.  H.,  xvii,  lo:
Avulsique  arboribus  stolones  vixere.  Quo  in  genere  et  cum
perna  sua  avelluntur,  partcmque  aljquam  e  inatris  qtioque  corpore
auferunt  secum  jimbriato  corpore.

Vergil  speaks  of  rending  them  off.  Cf.  Georg.,  ii,  23.  Hie
plantas  tenero  abscindens  de  corpore  matrum,  and  bids  one  (ii,
300)  not  to  break  them  off.  .  .  .

aut  summas  defringe  ex  arbore  plantas,
tantus  amor  terrae.

Columella  uses  the  word  in  this  sense,  I  think  (ii,  2,  26,  and
iii,  10,  7).  Theophrastus's  word  TrapaoTrdg  (surculus)  means
literally  a  shoot  "  torn  off."

'  Qui  haruspices  audiunt,  etc.     Pliny  (N.  H.,  xv,  15),  who


I]       SOWING,  PLANTING,  GRAFTING      87

flashes  are  produced  at  one  stroke  from  that  which
has  generated  the  flash  as  there  are  kinds  of  plants
grafted  on  one  tree.  If  you  graft  a  pear-shoot  on  a
wild  pear-tree,  no  matter  how  good  the  latter  the
flavour  will  not  be  so  good  as  if  you  had  grafted  it
on  one  that  is  not  wild.
6  On  whatever  tree  you  graft,  supposing  it  and  the
shoot  to  be  grafted  of  the  same  kind — for  example
if  both  be  apple-trees — you  should  (if  you  hope  for
good  fruit)  so  graft  that  the  shoot  is  of  a  better  kind

alludes  to  this  passage,  does  not,  unfortunately,  explain  it.
His  words  are:  Neque  omnia  insita  misceri  fas  est,  sicut  me
spinas  insert  quando  fulgura  expiari  non  queunt facile :  quotque
genera  insita  fuerunt  tot  fulgura  uno  ictu  pronuntiantur.
Again  (xvii,  17)  he  states  that  religio  fulgtcrum  forbids  the
grafting  of  a  mulberry  on  a  branch.  He  mentions  that  all
lightnings  (ii,  52)  did  not  come  "from  the  stars,"  but  ex
proxima  atque  turhidiore  natura.  Some  trees  were  not  struck,
the  laurel  for  instance  (ii,  55).  But  why  the  grafting  on
certain  trees  should  make  them  more  likely  to  be  struck  no
one  explains.  Perhaps  the  haruspices  found  that  some  trees
invited  the  lightning  more  than  others,  and  regarded  the
piercing  of  holes  for  grafting  as  a  further  invitation.  Seneca
(Nat.  Quaest.,  ii,  40),  6\sc\issing  fuhnina  {fulmen  he  defines
as  concentrated  fulgur),  says  that  one  sort  goes  out  by  the
hole  iforaine7i)  through  which  it  entered ;  another  kind  does
not,  but  shatters  what  it  strikes.  He  speaks  also  (Nat.
Quaest.,  i,  i)  of  exhalation  from  the  earth,  some  dry,  some
ignibus  concipiendis  idonea.  May  the  whole  passage,  then,
mean  that  an  exhalation  of  this  kind  (illud  quod  fulmen
concepit),  on  reaching  a  suitable  tree,  makes  entry  at  each
of  the  weak  places  (where  the  grafts  have  been  made)  and
becomes  so  many  fulmina?  The  lihrifulgurales  of  the  Etrus-
can Haruspices  would  doubtless  explain.


88  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

than  the  tree  to  which  it  comes.  There  is  a  second
way  ^  lately  discovered  of  grafting  tree  upon  tree,
when  the  two  are  close  together.

You  bring  from  the  tree  which  you  mean  to  graft
to  the  one  on  which  vou  intend  to  graft  it  a  small
branch,  and  in  a  bough  of  the  second  tree  which
has  been  cut  off  at  the  end  and  split,  you  insert  the
small  branch  which  is  now  in  contact  with  the  place
made  ready  for  it,  after  the  part  which  is  to  be  in-
side has  been  whittled  on  both  sides  with  a  knife.
You  must  manage  so  that  on  the  outside  where  it
will  see  the  sky  the  inserted  branch  may  have  its
bark  accurately  adjusted  to  the  bark  of  the  bough
which  receives  it,  and  you  must  take  care  that  the
top  of  the  inserted  branch  stands  straight  up  point-
ing to  the  sky.  The  next  year  when  it  has  taken
well  hold  you  cut  it  off  from  the  other  tree — that
from  which  it  was  grafted.


CHAPTER  XLI

GRAFTS  AND  CUTTINGS

I  With  regard  to  the  proper  time  of  grafting  we
must  note  in   particular  those  plants  which  used

'  Est  altera  species.  This  method  is  described  with  his  usual
clearness  by  Columella  (v,  xi,  13).  By  it,  he  says,  "any  kind
of  shoot  may  be  grafted  on  any  kind  of  tree."  The  possibility
of  this  is  denied  by  modern  horticulturists,  but,  according  to
Columella,  it  was  a  seven-years  business,  so  that  tlio  method
may  not  have  been  given  a  fair  trial  in  modern  times.


I]  GRAFTS  AND  CUTTINGS  89

formerly  to  be  grafted  in  spring,  but  are  now
grafted  at  the  summer  solstice  as  well — the  fig-tree,
for  example,  because  of  the  looseness  of  its  fibre  and
its  consequent  need  of  warmth.  Hence  in  a  cold
district  the  impossibility  of  having  plantations  of
fig-trees.

Rain  ^  is  harmful  to  the  freshly-made  graft,  for  it

2  quickly  rots  the  small  and  delicate  shoot,  so  the
best  time  for  grafting  them  (fig-trees)  is  thought  to
be  when  the  Dog  Star  rises.  Again  in  the  case  of
such  plants  as  are  of  less  soft  a  nature,  they  tie
immediately  above  the  graft  some  kind  of  vessel,
from  which  water  may  drop  slowly  and  prevent  the
shoot  withering  before  it  unites  with  the  tree.  The
rind  of  the  shoot  must  be  kept  intact,  and  in  sharpen-
ing it  for  insertion  care  must  be  taken  not  to  lay
bare  the  inner  pulp.  In  order  that  the  rains  from
without  or  excessive  heat  may  not  hurt  it,  it  is  well
to  smear  the  graft  with  clay  and  bind  it  up  with  a

3  strip  of  bark.  At  the  same  time  people  cut  a  vine-
shoot  three  days  before  grafting  it,  that  the  super-
fluous moisture  in  it  may  run  off  before  it  is  used,
or  they  make  an  incision  in  the  tree,  which  is  to
receive  the  shoot,  a  little  below  the  point  of  insertion,
that  the  superabundant  moisture  may  there  escape.
On  the  other  hand  in  the  case  of  the  fig-tree,  pome-

'  Aqua  recenti.  Nearly  the  whole  of  this  chapter  is  taken
from  Theophrastus  (Caus.  Plant.,  i,  6).  But  the  latter  dis-
tinguishes between  grafting  and  "  budding  "  {tvotpOaXiafioo),  and
it  is  to  budding,  according  to  him,  that  moisture  is  hostile.
To  5'  uoutp  Ti^i  fiiv  tvo(pOa\iani{i  TroXefiiov  k.t.X.


90  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

granate,  and  others  of  their  kind,  which  are  of  a
comparatively  dry  habit,  one  grafts  at  once.  In
some  cases  the  shoot  to  be  transferred  must  be  in
bud — as  is  the  case  with  fig-trees.

4  Of  these  four  methods  of  propagation,  for  slow-
growing  things  it  is  best  to  use  cuttings,  as  is  done
in  the  case  of  fig  plantations.  For  the  true  seed  of
the  fig-tree  is  enclosed  in  the  fig  which  we  eat —
tiny  grains  which  owing  to  their  small  size  can
hardly  produce  a  paltry  sprout.  For  in  general,  all  ^
things  that  are  fine  and  dry  are  slow  to  grow,  whilst
things  of  looser  tissue  are  also  more  fruitful — as
female  than  male;  and  this  rule  holds  good  for
plants  also.    Thus  the  fig,  pomegranate,  and  vine,

5  feminine  in  their  softness,  grow  quickly — the  palm,
cypress  and  olive  slowly;  since  in  the  matter  of
growth  ^  moist  things  are  quicker  than  dry.  So  it
pays  better  to  plant  cuttings  from  the  fig  orchard  in
nurseries,  than  to  bury  in  the  ground  seeds  from  the
fig:  except  indeed  where  one  is  forced  to  do  the
latter,  as  for  instance  if  at  any  time  one  wants  to

■  Omnia  enim  niinuta.  From  Theophrastus  (Caus.  Plant.,
i,  8),  'Va  fiiv  yap  irvKva  Koi  ^tjpa  cvffnv^})ra  k.t.X.  But  7ru»cvd  =  not
minuta,  but  detisa.  One  is  sometimes  tempted  to  believe  that
Varro,  despite  his  long  stay  at  Athens,  was  not  a  very  good
Greek  scholar.

■^  /«  hoc  enim  umidiora.  One  would  have  expected  Varro
to  say  that  these  plants  were  examples  of  the  quicker  growth
shown  by  what  was  loose  of  fibre  and  moist  than  by  what  was
close  of  fibre  and  dry.  Cf.  Theophrastus  (/.  c),  ivav^ortpa
yap  ra  GijXta  rwi'  a^piviov,  vy poripa  Kai  fiavwnpa  ttiv  (piiaiv
bvra.


I]  ON  SOWING  LUCERNE  91

send,  or  send  for,  seeds  across  the  sea;  for  in  that
case  a  string  is  run  through  the  ripe  figs — such  as
we  eat — and  when  dry  they  are  packed  up,  and
despatched  where  they  are  wanted,  so  that  when
planted  in  a  nursery  garden  they  may  propagate
their  kind.
6  It  is  in  this  way  that  Chian,  Chalchidian,  Lydian
and  African  figs,  and  all  the  other  kinds  from  over
the  sea  have  been  brought  to  Italy.  For  a  similar
reason  since  the  seed  of  the  olive-tree  is  a  stone,
and  a  stem  grows  from  it  more  slowly  than  from
other  plants,  we  therefore  prefer  to  plant  in  nurseries
the  taleae  (cuttings)  which  we  have  described.


CHAPTER  XLII

ON  SOWING  LUCERNE

You  must  be  particularly  careful  not  to  sow  seed
on  a  soil  that  is  either  too  dry  or  too  sodden,  but
on  well-tempered  land.  On  land  of  this  kind,  say
our  authors,  a  peck  and  a  half  of  lucerne  per  iu-
geriini  is  sufficient.  In  sowing  it  the  seed  must
be  scattered  just  as  when  one  sows  grass-seed  or
corn.

'  Sesquimodium.  The  modius  =  wery  nearly  eight  quarts  =
a  peck.  It  Is  frequently  mistranslated  "  bushel,"  which  equals
four  pecks.


I


92  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XLIII

CYTISUS

Cytisus^  is  sown  in  well-ploughed  land,  like
cabbage  seed.  Thence  it  is  transplanted  and  set  at
intervals  of  a  foot  and  a  half;  or  else  small  branches
are  taken  from  the  more  hardened  plant,  and  are
set  out  and  planted  in  the  same  way.


CHAPTER  XLIV

OF  CROPS

1  Beans  are  sown  four  pecks  to  the  iugerum,  wheat
five,  barley  six,  and  spelt  ten,  but  in  some  places  it
may  be  a  little  more  or  less — more  if  the  soil  be
rich,  less  if  poor.  So  it  will  be  your  practice  to
adopt  the  quantity  which  is  customary  in  your
district,  as  the  influence  of  the  kind  of  soil  in  a
district  is  so  great  that  the  same  seed  yields  in  some
places  ten-fold,  in  others  fifteen-fold,  as  in  several

2  parts  of  Etruria.  In  Italy  too,  in  the  country  about
Sybaris,  they  say  that  the  usual  yield  is  a  hundred
fold,  and  in  Syria  near  Gadara,  and  in  Africa  in

^  Cytisum,  the  more  usual  form  of  which  is  Cytisus,  was,
according  to  Keightiey  ("  Flora  Virgiliana,"  p.  381),  the  name
given  to  two  different  plants,  (i)  the  laburnum,  and  (2)  the
arborescent  lucerne.


I]  OF  CROPS  93

Byzacium '  from  one  peck  the  return  is  likewise  a
hundred  pecks.  It  is,  besides,  of  much  moment
whether  you  sow  in  virgin  soil,  or  in  such  as  has
been  sown  every  year  (which  is  called  restibilis),  or
in  that  which  has  occasionally  lain  fallow.^

3  Agrius  remarked  to  him  that  in  Olynthia  the
fields  were  said  to  be  sown  yearly,  but  in  such  a
way  as  to  produce  richer  crops  every  third  year.
Licinius  said:  Land  ought  to  be  left  fallow  every
other  year,  or  else  be  sown  a  little  more  lightly,
that  is,  in  a  manner  less  exhausting  to  the  soil.

We  will  now  discuss  the  third  phase,  said  Agrius,

4  that  is  the  rearing  and  nurture  of  plants.  Stolo
answered.  All  plants  that  are  born  on  a  farm
grow  in  the  ground,  conceive  on  attaining  puberty,
and,  becoming  pregnant,  when  they  have  reached

^  Ad  Byzacium.  Byzacium  was  the  name  of  a  tract  of
country,  250  miles  in  circumference,  on  the  north  coast  of
Africa,  which  was  inhabited  by  Liby-Phoenicians.  Its  chief
towns  were  Leptis,  Adrumetum,  Ruspina,  and  Thapsus.
Pliny  (N.  H.,  v,  4)  mentions  this  extraordinary  fertility.
Solinus  Polyhistor  (cap.  xxx)  alludes  to  it :  In  agro  Byzaceno,
qui  patet  passuum  ducentis  vel  amplius  viilibus,  glehis  ita
praepinguihus  ut  iacta  ibi  sernina  cum  incremento  centesimae
frugis  renascantur.  He  quotes  Varro  a  little  before  this  pass-
age, so  he  may  have  read  him.  Usually  he  annexes  Pliny's
facts  without  acknowledgement !

^  In  vetvacto.  Vervactum  =  land  which  has  been  ploughed
and  allowed  to  lie  fallow.  Sometimes  it  means  land  ploughed
for  the  first  time.  Cf.  Servius  on  Georg.,  i,  50  {At prius  igno-
tum  ferro  quam  scindimus  aequor),  i.e.,  antequam  faciamus
vervactum.  Cf.  Gottlob  Schneider's  excellent  note  on  this
word  vefvactum  in  his  index  to  the  agronomes.


94  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

their  term  bring  forth  fruits,  or  the  ear,  etc.  And
the  seed  returns  whence  it  came.  So  if  you  pluck
off  a  blossom  or  unripe  pear,  or  anything  else  of
the  kind,  nothing  grows  again  in  that  same  place
the  same  year,  for  it  is  impossible  for  the  same
thing  to  have  two  pregnancies  ^  in  one  year.  For
just  as  women  have  fixed  times  for  parturition,  so
too  do  trees  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth.


CHAPTER  XLV

OF  THE  GROWTH  OF  PLANTS

1  Barley  generally  comes  up  first  in  seven  days,
wheat  a  little  later;  leguminous  plants  in  about
four  or  five  days,  with  the  exception  of  the  bean,
for  it  comes  up  a  good  deal  later;  millet,  sesame,
and  other  similar  crops  appear  in  about  the  same
number  of  days,  save  when  peculiarity  of  district  or
weather  produces  some  defect  which  prevents  this
from  happening.

2  Plants  of  a  delicate  nature,  which  are  raised  in  a
nursery,  should,  if  the  climate  be  chilly,  be  covered
during  the  winter  with  leaves  or  straw.  If  rains
follow,  see  that  there  may  be  no  stagnant  water
anywhere;  for  frost  is  poison  to  the  delicate  roots.

Plants  do  not   grow   equally  in  the  same  time

^  Quod praegnationes .  Cf.  Theophrastus  (Caus.  Plant.,  i,  14) :
"Nor  yet  if  you  remove  fruit  or  flower  can  the  plant  bring
forth  others,  as  it  has  not  the  time  necessary  for  pregnancy."


I]         OF  THE  GROWTH  OF  PLANTS        95

3  below  and  above  the  ground.  For  in  autumn  or
winter  the  roots  grow  more  below  ground  than  do
the  parts  above,  since  they  are  protected  and  forced
by  the  warmth  of  the  earth,  whilst  above  ground
they  are  kept  back '-  by  the  more  chilly  atmosphere.
And  places  in  the  woods,  near  which  no  sower  has
ever  been,  show  this  to  be  the  case;  for  roots  grow
before  that  which  springs  from  them,  yet^  roots
go  no  further  than  where  the  sun's  warmth  reaches.
The  growth  of  the  roots  depends  on  two  things:
(i)  The  fact  that  nature  gives  greater  extension  to
roots  of  one  kind  of  wood  than  to  those  of  another,
and  (2)  that  one  kind  of  soil  is  more  permeable
than  another.

'  Coguntur.  Victorius  found  in  the  M.SS.  fing'untur.  Petrus
Crescentius,  a  writer  on  agricultural  subjects  of  the  thirteenth
century,  who  copied  large  portions  of  Varro  inaccurately  and
with  little  understanding,  has  cinguntur.  The  passage  of
Theophrastus  which  Varro  copied  is :  oti  to.  fiev  avio  KwXverai
SiA  Tov  irtpiS,  aspa  i^/vxpov  ovra.  Keil's  coguntur  translates
KwXvETai.  Cinguntur  (are  surrounded)  goes  well  with  rbv  irspiK
aspa.

As  Crescentius  possibly  had  access  to  MSS.  of  earlier  date
than  any  we  possess,  and  as  the  change  from  finguntur  to
cinguntur  is  much  less  than  to  coguntur,  I  incline  to  the
cinguntur  of  Crescentius,  despite  his  frequent  inaccuracy,  and
would  translate  "and  are  surroundedby  a  chillier  atmosphere."

*  Nisi  quo  tepor  venit  solis.  Pliny  does  not  believe  this.
Cf.  N.  H.,  xvi,  31  :  Quidam  non  altius  descendere  radices  quam
solis  calor  tepefaciat,  idque  natura  loci  tenuioris  crassiorisve
dixere,  quod /ahum  arbitror.


96  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

CHAPTER  XLVI

OF  THE  HABITS  OF  PLANTS

With  regard  to  such  matters,  nature  displays  in
plants  many  differences  which  are  remarkable,  as
the  fact  that  one  should  be  able  to  tell  the  time  of
year  from  certain  leaves,  by  their  turning — as  do
the  olive,  the  white  poplar,  and  the  willow.  For
when  the  leaves  of  these  trees  turn/  we  say  that
the  summer  solstice  is  past.  Equally  remarkable
is  what  happens  in  the  case  of  those  flowers  which
are  called  heliotropia^  from  the  fact  that  in  the  morn-
ing they  face  the  rising  sun,  and  follow  its  course
to  where  it  sets,  ever  turning  towards  it.

CHAPTER  XLVn

OF  THE  CARE  OF  CROPS

Plants  that  have  been  reared  in  the  nursery  from
shoots,  and  whose  sprouts  are  of  a  somewhat  deli-
cate nature — as  the  olive  and  fig — must  have  their
tops  protected  each  by  two  small  boards  which  are

'  Propter concvi  versuram.  The  "turning"  of  the  leaves  is
in  relation  to  the  quarter  of  the  heaven  they  turn  to.  PHny,
N.  H.,  xviii,  28:  Alia  paitc  caelum  respiciunt  qiiam  qua
spectavere  pridie\  and  Theophrastus  (quoted  by  Victorius)
says  :  aTpi(piiv  yap  doKovai  ra  inr-ria  fiiTU  rpoTrac  Ofpii'dc  (Schneider
has  xfifupivaQ !)  Kai  TOVT<^  yvwpi'Covaiv  oti  yeyirTjvrai  rpoirai.


I]  OF  GRAIN  97

fixed'  in  the  ground  to  the  right  and  left  of  it,  and
the  weeds  must  be  pulled  up.  This  must  be  done
while  they  are  green,  for  if  they  become  dry  they
resist  fiercely,  and,  instead  of  following  the  hand,
quickly  snap  off.  On  the  other  hand,  grass  that  is
grown  with  a  view  to  the  hay  harvest  must  not  be
pulled  up  while  growing,  nor  even  trodden  on.  So
cattle  and  every  kind  of  beast  of  burden,  and  even
men,  should  be  kept  off  a  meadow.  For  the  foot  of
man  is  perdition  to  grass,  and  makes  the  beginnings
of  a  foot-path.


CHAPTER  XLVIII

OF  GRAIN

I  Now  in  the  case  of  crops,  that  by  which  the  stalk
puts  forth  the  grain  is  the  ear.  The  latter,  when
entire,"  has  in  barley  and  wheat  three  parts  closely
connected — the  grain,  the  husk,  and  the  beard,  and
also  the  sheath,  present  when  the  ear  first  emerges.
The  solid  body,  the  innermost  part  of  the  ear,  is

'  Deligata.  This,  the  best  supported  reading,  seems  to  me
to  give  no  satisfactory  sense.  I  have  translated  deligatis,
though  alligatis  ad  verticem  is  what  one  would  expect.  Ursinus
considered  deligata  to  be  a  gloss.  Crescentius,  however,  ac-
cording to  Schneider,  has  integenda  sunt  binis  tabeUis,  dextra
aut  sinistra  ligatis.

'  Quae  mutilata  non  est.  Oats  and  spelt  have  no  beard.
Cicero  in  the  De  Amicitia  (cap.  xv)  makes  Cato  say  that  the
beard  protects  the  grain  from  the  bites  of  small  birds.

H


98  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

called  the  grain,  its  little  envelope  the  husk,
and  the  long  slender  needle  (as  it  were)  that  pro-
jects from  the  husk  is  called  the  beard  (as  if  husk
and   beard  formed  the  peaked'  cap  of  the  grain).

2  The  words  "beard"  and  "grain"  are  familiar  to
nearly  every  one,  the  word  ghima  (husk)  to  but
few,  for  to  my  knowledge  Ennius  is  the  only
writer  who  has  used  it,  in  his  translation  of  the
books  of  Euhemerus.  The  word  {gluvia)  seems  to
be  derived  from  gluhere  (to  strip),  because  the  grain
is  stripped  of  its  envelope.  Accordingly  they  call
by  the  same  name  the  envelope  of  the  fig  which  we
eat.  The  beard  {arista)  is  so  called  because  it  is
the  first  to  become  dry  {arescere),  the  grain  {granum)
is  from  gerere  (to  bear),  as  corn  is  sown  that  the
ear  may  bear  not  the  husk  or  the  beard,  but  the
grain,  just  as  the  vine  is  planted  that  it  may  bear
grapes,  not  leaves.  Again  the  spica  (ear),  which
the  countryfolk,  following  an  ancient  tradition,  call
speca^^  seems  to  have  been  so  called  from  spes  (hope),

3  for  they  sow  in  the  hope  that  it  will  come.     An  ear

'  Apex,  the  cap  worn  by  the  flamcns  and  Salii.  It  was
close-fitting,  and  from  its  centre  a  spike  of  olive  wood  stood
up.  Cf.  Servius  ad  Aeneid,  viii,  664:  Jlamines  in  Capite  hab-
ebant  p ileum  in  quo  erat  brevis  virga.  The  gluma,  of  course,  is
the  cap  proper,  the  arista  the  spike.  It  is  strange  that  the
obvious  meaning  of  this  passage  should  have  escaped  Schneider
and  all  the  commentators  before  him.

^  Speca,  a  rustic  development  of  the  original  speica.  The
short  1  normally  became  6  in  rustic  Latin;  as  vea  for  via,
mateola  for  matiola.


I]  OF  GRAIN  99

having  no  beard  is  called  "  hornless,"'  for  the  beard
forms,  as  it  were,  the  horns  of  the  ear.  When  the
latter  are  in  process  of  formation,  and  are  not  yet
quite  visible,  they  lie  hid,  covered  by  a  green  en-
velope which  is  called  the  sheath,  like  that  in  which
a  sword  lies  hidden.^  The  upper  extremity  of  the  ear
now  ripe,  which  is  less  in  size  than  the  grain,  is
called  frit\  that  which  lies  at  the  lower  extremity
of  the  ear,  at  its  junction  with  the  highest  part  of
the  straw  (likewise  less  than  the  grain)  is  called
urru.^

^  Mutila.  Caesar  describing  elks  calls  them  viutilae  comi-
bus,  and  Columella  (vii,  3,  3)  speaks  of  a  mutilus  aries.  In
vii,  6,  4,  he  distinguishes  between  a  capella  vtuHla  and  one
comuta.

^  Gladium.  Neuter,  of  course.  Cf,  Varro,  11.  ix,  49 :  quod
dicitur  a  viultis  duobus  modis  hie  dupondius  et  hoc  dupondiutn,
ut  hoc  gladium  et  hie  gladius.

'  Frit  and  Urru.  About  these  two  words  no  one  appears
to  know  anything,  oppof,  or  oi'|oa  =  the  tail  or  rump.  The
reading  of  the  MSS.  is,  however,  urrucum  and  then  contieu-
isset,  which  may  well  have  been  urrucum  cum  contieuisset.
Urructim  might  be  for  urrucum  {  =  urruneum)y  and  urruncu7n
stand  for  oppoyicov  which  means  a  "mountain  top,"  urnincum
being  thus  the  top  of  the  straw.  Frit  is  connected  by  Pont-
adera  with  (ppiTreiv,  to  shiver,  to  bristle.  All  (mine  included)
profitless  guess-work,  I  am  afraid.


lOo  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XLIX

THE  HAY  HARVEST

1  Stolo  finished  speaking,  and  thinking  that  as  no
further  questions  were  asked,  nothing  more  was
needed  on  the  subject  of  the  nutrition  of  plants,  he
said  that  he  would  proceed  to  discuss  the  getting
in  of  the  ripe  crops.  And,  firstly,  said  he,  re-
garding meadows  reserved  for  hay,  when  grass  has
ceased  growing  and  the  heat  begins  to  dry  it  up,  it
should  be  cut  close  with  the  scythe,  and  then  tossed
with  forks  until  thoroughly  dry.  When  it  is  quite
dry  it  should  be  made  into  bundles  and  then  carted
to  the  homestead.  Then  any  hay  left  on  the  mea-
dows must  be  raked  up,  and  the  heap  thus  made

2  added  to  the  rest  of  the  hay.  That  done,  you  must
go  over  ^  the  fields  again,  that  is,  cut  with  scythes
whatever  bits  have  been  passed  over  by  the  mowers,
leaving  little  tufts  of  grass  on  the  surface.  From
this  cutting  {secari)  I  fancy  that  the  word  sicilire
(to  cut  a  second  time)  is  derived.

*  Sicilienda  prata.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xviii,  28)  defines  the  word
in  the  same  way :  hoc  est  quae  faenisices  {foeniseces)  practeri-
erunt  secari,  adding,  est  enim  in  primis  inutile  enasci  herbas
sementaturas.


I]  OF  REAPING  loi


CHAPTER  L

OF  REAPING

The  term  harvest,  messis,  is  properly  applied  to
such  things  as  we  measure  {metimur),  especially  to
corn — and  from  that  word  {metiri)  it  is  derived.
The  corn  harvest  is  got  in  three  ways;  one,  as  in
Umbria,  where  they  cut  the  straw  close  to  the
ground  and  lay  the  sheaves  as  they  are  cut,  on  the
1  ground.  When  they  have  got  a  good  number  of
sheaves,  they  go  over  them  again,  and  sheaf  by
sheaf  they  cut  off  the  ears  from  the  straw.  The  ears
are  thrown  into  a  basket  and  sent  to  the  threshing
floor,  the  straw  is  left  on  the  field  to  be  taken  away
and  stacked.  In  the  second  method  of  reaping,
used,  for  instance,  in  Picenum,  they  have  a  curved  ^
piece  of  wood  with  a  small  iron  saw  at  the  end.
This  grasps  a  bundle  of  ears,  cuts  them  off,  and
leaves  the  stalks  standing  in  the  field  to  be  subse-
quently cut  close  to  the  ground.  The  third  method
— adopted  near  Rome  and  in  most  places — is  to  cut
the  stalk,  the  top  of  which  is  held  by  the  left  hand,

^  Incurvum  bacillum.  Pliny  (N,  H.,  xviii,  30)  describes  a
horse-drawn  corn-mower  which  may  be  this  referred  to  by
Varro:  Valli  praegrandes  dentibus  in  margine  infestis,  duahus
rotis  per  segetem  impelluntur ;  iumento  in  contrarium  iuncto:
ita  direptae  in  vallum  cadunt  spicae.  Palladius  (June  II)  de-
scribes at  greater  length  and  more  clearly  a  corn-cutter  which
was  pushed  by  an  ox.


I02  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

mid-way,  and  I  fancy  that  the  word  harvest  {messis)
is  derived  from  the  word  middle  {medius).  That
part  of  the  stalk  below  the  hand  which  adheres  to
the  ground  is  afterwards  cut  close  to  the  earth,
while  that  part  which  is  attached  to  the  ear  is  carried
3  off  in  baskets  to  the  threshing-floor;  there  it  is
separated  in  an  uncovered  place  in  full  view  {palam)^
whence  perhaps  its  name  palea  (straw).  Some
people  derive  its  name  stramenium  from  stare  (to
stand)  from  which  stameii  is  also  derived ;  others
from  stratum  (strewing),  because  it  is  strewn  under
cattle.  When  the  crop  is  ripe  it  must  be  reaped;
and  in  regard  to  this  it  is  said  that  one  man's  work
for  a  day  is  roughly  enough  for  about  a  iiigertmi,^
if  the  land  be  easy  to  work.  The  cut  ears  should  be
carried  in  baskets  to  the  threshing-floor.


CHAPTER  LI

THE  THRESHING-FLOOR

I  The  threshing-floor  should  be  on  raised  ground,
that  the  wind  may  blow  through  it;  it  should  be  of
a  size  proportionate  to  that  of  the  crop;  round  for
choice,  with  the  centre  swelling  up  a  little,  so  that
in  case  of  rain  the  water  may  not  stand,  but  may

'  /«  iugenim.  This  seems  irrelevant,  and  the  remainder
of  the  chapter  a  vain  repetition  of  what  was  said  immediately
before.


I]  THE  THRESHING-FLOOR  103

flow  down  out  of  the  threshing-floor  by  the  shortest
possible  way,  and  in  a  circle  a  straight  line  from
the  centre  to  the  edge  is  always  the  shortest;  it
should  be  of  solid  earth,  well  rammed  down,  especi-
ally if  it  is  clay,  lest  the  heat  of  summer  crack'  it,
and  grains  of  corn  get  lost  in  the  fissures,  letting
in  water  and  discovering  holes  for  mice  and  ants.
To  prevent  this  people  frequently  drench  it  with
amurca^'  as  the  latter  is  poison  to  weeds,  ants,  and
2  moles.  Some  people,  in  order  to  keep  it  solid,  streng-
then the  threshing-floor  with  stones  or  even  pave  it.
Others,  such  as  the  Bagiennae,^  even  roof  their
threshing-floors  to  protect  them  from  storms,  which
are  frequent  in  their  country  at  harvest  time.  When

^  Paeininosa.  Nonius  Marcellus  quotes  this  passage  thus :
Paeininostim,  malt  odoris:  a  paedore  dictum.  Varro  de  Re
Rustica,  lib.  i :  Solida  terra  pavita,  ?7taxime  si  est  argilla,  ne
situ  paeminosa,  in  rimis  eius  grana  oblitescafif,  where  it  is  to
be  noticed  that  Nonius  gives  to  paeminosa  the  sense  of  "  foul,"
and  has  situ  (by  neglect)  instead  of  aestu  (which  Victorius
found  in  his  "most  faithful  and  ancient  manuscript").

Taking  Nonius's  reading  the  translation  is  "lest  it  become
foul  through  neglect,"  etc.

The  Vi' ovd  paeminosus  is  not  found  elsewhere.

Kail's  interpolation,  si  sit,  seems  unnecessarj-,  ior  paeminosa
(Ablative)  with  area  understood  is  quite  in  Varro's  distressing
manner.

^  Amurca  (a/topyr/c)  =  the  watery  part  of  olives,  distinct  from
the  oil.

•^  In  Bagiennis.  These  are  probably  Pliny's  Vagienni{N.  H.,
iii,  20),  a  branch  of  the  Celtic  Caturiges  settled  in  the  moun-
tainous parts  of  Liguria,  where  sudden  storms  do  still  arise
in  summer  time.


I04  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  threshing-floor  is  without  a  roof  and  the  climate
is  hot,  shelters  should  be  built  near  it  to  which  the
workmen  may  repair  in  the  broiling  noon-tide
heat.


CHAPTER  LII

OF  THRESHING

I  Ears  of  the  finest  and  best  crop  should  be  taken  to
the  threshing-floor  and  kept  separate  from  the  rest,
so  that  the  farmer  may  have  the  best  possible  seed.
The  ears  are  threshed  on  the  threshing-floor.  Some
do  this  by  means  of  yoked  beasts  and  a  threshing
sleigh,  which  is  made  of  a  piece  of  wood  roughened
underneath  with  stones  or  iron,  on  which  either  the
driver  stands,  or  a  large  weight  is  placed.  It  is  then
drawn  by  the  animals  harnessed  to  it,  and  shakes
the  grains  of  corn  from  the  ears.  Or  it  is  made  of
planks  of  wood  furnished  with  teeth  and  little
wheels,  and  is  then  called  the  ' '  Punic  wain. "  A  man
must  sit  on  it  and  drive  the  animals  which  draw  it,
as  is  the  practice  in  Hither  Spain  and  other  places.

2  With  others  the  threshing  is  done  by  means  of  a
herd  of  beasts  which  are  driven  on  to  the  threshing-
floor  and  are  kept  going  by  poles,  the  grains  of
corn  are  thus  rubbed  out  of  the  ears  by  their  hoofs.
When  the  ears  have  been  threshed  they  should  be
tossed  up  from  the  ground  with  winnowing  baskets '

'    Vallis  for  vannulis.    The  vatinus  was  a  kind  of  basket  or
sieve.    Servius  (ad  Georg. ,  i,  i66,  where  he  says  Varro  read


I]  THE  GLEANING  105

or  winnowing  shovels'  when  there  is  a  gentle  breeze
blowing,  so  that  the  lighest  part  of  them,  called
aciis  or  palea  (chaff),  may  be  blown  away  outside
the  threshing-floor,  while  the  heavy  part,  the  grain,
comes  clean  of  chaff  to  the  basket.


CHAPTER  LHI

THE  GLEANING

When  the  harvest  is  over,  you  should  sell'  the
gleaning,  or  pull  the  stalks  yourself;  or  else,  if  the
ears  be  few  and  labour  dear,  they  should  be  eaten
down.  For  you  must  look  to  the  main  chance  lest
in  this  matter  the  cost  exceed  the  return.

vallus)  defines  it  as  a  cribrum  areaIe  =  Si  sieve  used  on  the
threshing-floor.  It  was  used  in  the  absence  of  wind  (Colu-
mella, ii,  21).

'  Ventilabrum  was  a  winnowing  shovel  {-Krvov)  by  which
the  corn  was  thrown  up  into  the  air  across  the  wind.  Win-
nowing seems  to  have  been  done  in  the  same  way  in  Homer's
as  in  Varro's  time.    Cf.  Iliad,  v,  499.

^  Venire.  This  is  an  instance  of  Varronian  ambiguity.  It
may  mean  (i)  to  be  sold,  (2)  to  come.


io6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  LIV

OF  WINE-MAKING

1  In  the  vineyards,  when  the  grapes  are  ripe,  you
must  proceed  to  the  vintage,  making  up  your  mind
first  on  the  kind  of  grape  and  the  part  of  the  vine-
yard with  which  you  intend  to  begin.  For  the  quick-
ripening  and  the  common  kind,  called  black,  ripen
a  good  deal  earlier  than  the  others  and  should
therefore  be  gathered  before  them,  and  the  sunnier
part  of  the  plantation  and  vineyard  ought  to  come

2  down  before  other  parts.  During  the  vintage  a  good
farmer  not  only  gathers  his  bunches,  he  also  selects
them.  He  gathers  for  drinking,  he  selects  for  eat-
ing. Accordingly,  those  gathered  are  taken  off  to
the  wine-yard^  to  go  thence  into  the  empty  cask;
those  selected  are  put  into  a  separate  basket  to  be
transferred  into  small  jars  and  then  thrust  into
casks  full  of  grape  refuse;  others  to  go  down  in  a
pitch-coated  ampliora  into  a  tank,  others  to  go  up  to
a  shelf  in  the  larder.  The  stalks  and  skins  of  the
grapes  that  have  been  trodden  must  be  put  under
the  press,  that  whatever  "must"  remains  in  them

3  may  be  squeezed  out  into  the  same  vat.  Some
people,  when  the  juice  ceases  to  flow  under  the
press,  cut  round  the  edge  of  the  mass  and  press
again,  and  what  is  squeezed  out  in  the  second
operation  is  called  circumcisicium.    It  is  kept  apart,

'  Forum  viiiarium.     Cf.  Cato,  xviii,  3.


I]  OLIVE  PRODUCTS  107

for  it  tastes  of  iron.  The  skins  of  the  grapes  are
thrown  into  casks  and  water  is  added  to  them.  It
is  then  called  lora^  an  abbreviation  for  lota  acina
(watered  grape-skins),  and  in  winter  is  given  in-
stead of  wine  to  the  workmen.


CHAPTER  LV

OLIVE   PRODUCTS

1  We  now  come  to  the  olive  plantation.  Such  olives
as  you  can  reach  with  the  hand  from  the  ground  or
from  ladders '  are  better  pulled  than  shaken  from  the
tree ;  for  those  which  have  been  struck  lose  flesh  and
give  less  oil.  Those  which  are  picked  by  hand  are
better  if  gathered  with  the  bare  fingers,  not  with
pincers,   for   the   hardness  of  the  latter    not   only

2  nips  the  berry  but  barks  the  branches  as  well,  and
leaves  them  unprotected  against  the  frost.  Those
branches  that  cannot  be  reached  by  the  hand  should
be  beaten  with  a  reed  rather  than  a  pole,  for  a  heavy
blow  demands  a  doctor.    The  man  who  beats  must

3  not  strike  the  olive  directly,  for  often  an  olive  so
struck  carries  a  green  shoot  away  with  it  from  the
branch,  in  which  case  the  fruit  of  the  next  year  is
lost ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why  they
say  that  every  other  year  olive  plantations  bear  no
fruit  or  a  diminished  crop.

'  Scalis.    The  Geoponica  (ix,   17)  recommend  Tpiywva   dva-
(iaTTjpia — triangular  steps.


io8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

4  The  olives  go  home  the  same  two  ways  as  do
grapes;  some  to  be  eaten,  others  to  be  turned  into
a  liquid,  a  lubricant  for  the  outside  as  well  as  for
the  inside  of  the  owner's  body.  And  so  it  follows
him  to  the  baths  ^  and  the  gymnasium.    The  latter

5  kind  of  olives,  from  which  oil  is  made,  are  generally
piled  up  in  heaps  (one  heap  for  each  day),  on
shelves,  to  remain  there  until  they  become  mod-
erately soft,  when  they  are  taken  down  heap  by
heap  in  pails,"  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  laid
down,  to  the  oil  vessels  and  presses.  The  latter  are
mill-stones  of  a  hard   and  rough    stone  used    for

6  crushing  olives.  If  the  olives  gathered  have  re-
mained too  long  in  heaps  they  go  soft  through  the
heat,  and  the  oil  goes  bad.  And  so  if  it  should  be
impossible  to  make  your  oil  in  good  time,  you
must  air  them  by  frequent  stirring.

7  From  the  olive  we  get  two  products  (i)  the  oil,
with  which  everybody  is  familar,  and  (2)  amurca,
which  (most  people  are  unaware  of  its  usefulness)
we  may  see  running  from  the  oil-presses,  not  only
blackening  the  earth,  but,  when  there  is  much  of  it,
rendering  it  barren:  whereas  this  liquid,  used  in
moderation,  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in  farm-

^  Balneas  —  Y)uhllc  baths,  balneum  being  a  private  bath —
so  Varro  in  the  Lingua  Latina.

^  Per  serias.  I  have  translated  the  reading  of  the  most
ancient  MS.  as  given  by  Victorius,  viz.,  per  sena,  taking  sena
for  sina  ("  pails,"  as  si'num  laciis,  Columella,  vii,  8,  2).  Scaliger
found  always  in  Nonius  senum  not  sinum,  and  the  change  of
1  to  (5  in  rustic  Latin  has  already  been  noted.


I]  GRANARIES  109

ing,  as  well  as  in  many  other  directions.  It  is  com-
monly poured  round  the  roots  of  trees,  especially
olive  trees,  and  wherever  there  are  weeds.


CHAPTER  LVI

OF  STORING  HAY

Said  Agrius  to  Stolo:  I  have  been  sitting  for
a  long  time  in  the  farm-house,  waiting,  key  in
hand,  for  you  to  bring  the  produce  home.  Stolo
answered,  Well,  here  I  am,  coming  to  the
threshold ;  throw  open  the  doors.

To  begin  with,  hay  is  better  stored  beneath  a
roof  than  in  stacks,  for  so  it  makes  sweeter  fodder.
This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  if  you  set  both
before  cattle  they  eat  the  one  in  preference  to  the
other.


CHAPTER  LVII

GRANARIES

I  Wheat  should  be  stored  in  granaries  raised  above
the  ground,  wind-swept  from  the  east  and  north,
and  safe  against  any  damp  breeze  that  may  blow
from  the    immediate  neighbourhood.     Walls   and


no  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

floor  must  be  coated  with  a  marble  cement  ^ — failingf

2  that  with  clay  mixed  with  corn  chaff  and  amurca.
As^  the  latter  keeps  away  mice  and  worms,  and
renders  the  grains  of  corn  firmer  and  stronger,
some  people  sprinkle  the  corn  itself  with  it,  add-
ing about  a  quadrantal  (seven  gallons)  to  the
thousand  pecks.  Different  people,  too,  grate  or
sprinkle  different  substances  on  it,  for  example,
Chalcidian  or  Carian  chalk,  or  wormwood  and  the
like.

3  Some  people  use  as  granaries  underground  caves,
called  siros^  as  is  done  in  Cappadocia  and  Thrace,
others  wells,  as  in  Hither  Spain,  and  also  in  the
Carthaginian  and  Oscan  country.  On  the  floor  of
these  they  spread  straw,  and  are  careful  to  prevent
moisture  or  air  from  getting  in,  except  when  the
corn  is  brought  out  for  consumption.  For  where  no
air  penetrates,  there  the  weevil  does  not  appear.
Corn  thus  stored  keeps  for  even  fifty  years,  millet
for  more  than  a  hundred.

Some  people  build  granaries  on  the  farm  raised
high  above  ground,  in  Hither  Spain  and  Africa  for
instance,   so   constructed   that  the  wind   may  cool

'  Marmorato.  Cement  made  of  powdered  white  marble  {opus
alhariuni)  was  frequently  used  as  a  finishing  coat  for  the  inside
walls  of  houses,  etc.  It  was  almost  as  hard  as  native  marble.
Pictures  were  often  painted  on  it.

*  Quod  inurem.  Keil's  punctuation  here  seems  bad.  The
sense  is  much  improved  if  a  full  stop  is  placed  after  amurca,
and  a  comma  instead  of  a  full  stop  aStQr  Jirmiora — and  so  I
have  translated.


I]        STORING  BEANS  AND  GRAPES      iii

them  not  only  by  blowing  through  windows  at  the
sides,  but  also  by  blowing  from  the  ground
upwards.


CHAPTER  LVIII

OF  STORING  BEANS  AND  GRAPES

Beans  and  other  leguminous  crops  keep  good  for
a  very  long  time  in  olive  jars  when  covered  with  a
coating  of  ashes.

Cato  says  that  the  Aminnean  grape — both  the
smaller  and  larger  variety — and  the  Apician  are
best  stored  in  jars,  and  that  they  likewise  keep  well
in  sapa  ^  and  *'  must,"  while  the  best  for  hanging  are
the  Diiracinae  ^  and  the  Aminnean  (Scantian).

^  Sapa  (  =  "  must,"  unfermented  wine)  diminished  in  volume
by  boiling  to  f ,  |,  or  \  of  its  original  bulk.  Columella  (xii,  19)
describes  the  process  at  length,  and  says  that  the  best  sapa  is
that  which  has  lost  half  its  bulk.  Pliny,  however,  calls  this
defrutum  (N.  H.,  xiv,  9).

The  word  is  used  unchanged  in  modern  Italian ;  the  saying
dolce  come  la  sapa  being  common  in  Florence.

'^-  Duracinas.  Schneider  thinks  this  word  is  connected  with
durare  (to  keep).  A  pure  guess,  unsupported  by  evidence !
The  ^lupaKivov  of  the  Geoponica  seems  from  the  description  to
be  the  apricot  (Geop.,  x,  13,  i).


112  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  LIX

OF  STORING  APPLES

1  Of  apples  the  kinds  for  keeping  are  the  small  ^  and
the  large  quince,  the  Scantian  apple,  the  Scaudian,
the  "small  rounds"  and  those  which  used  to  be
called  "sweet-wines,"  and  now  go  by  the  name  of
"honey-apples";-  all  keep  well,  it  is  thought,  if  laid
on  straw  in  a  dry  and  cool  place.  And  for  this
reason  those  who  build  storehouses  for  their  fruit
take  care  to  put  windows  facing  north,  and  to  give
free  access  to  the  wind  from  that  quarter,  adding,
however,  shutters,  lest,  if  the  wind  blow  persist-
ently, the  apples  lose  their  juice  and  shrivel  up.

2  And  for  the  same  reason — for  greater  coolness —
they  do  over  the  ceilings,  walls,  and  floor  with
marble  cement.  Some  people  even  have  a  dining
table  and  couches  made  ready  here.  And,  indeed,
when  men  are  extravagant  enough  to  do  so  in  a
picture  gallery,  where  art  provides  the  pageant,
why  should  they  not  enjoy  a  gift  of  nature's  pro-
viding, in  the  shape  of  the  beauty  of  fruits  beauti-

'  Ma/a  strnthea,  cotonea.  Cf.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xi,  ii),  where
these  are  described.  The  struthea  was  a  smaller  kind  of
cotonea,  Cotonea  {mala)  was  the  Yiv5ii)via  of  the  Greeks,  our
quinces  {cotogna  in  modern  Italian).

^  McUmcla.  According  to  the  Geoponica  (x,  76)  these  were
produced  by  grafting  apple  on  quince.


I]  OF  STORING  APPLES  113

fully  arranged?  Though  we  must  assuredly  not  do
as  some  have  done — bring  to  the  country  fruit
bought  at  Rome/  in  order  to  turn  a  storeroom  into
a  banqueting-hall.

Some  people  think  that  apples  keep  well  enough
in  a  storehouse  when  placed  on  shelves  or  a  plaster
floor;  others  prefer  to  have  straw  under  them  or
even  flocks  of  wool.  Pomegranates  keep  well,  it  is
said,  if  their  branches  are  stuck  into  a  cask  full  of
sand;  the  greater  and  less  quince'  on  hanging
mats  of  reeds,""  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  ripe
Anician  pears  are  best  preserved  in  sapa.  Some
consider  that  "sorb  apples"  cut  in  pieces  and  dried  in
the  sun  like  pears  keep  well,  and  that  this  fruit  can
be  kept  without  difficulty  just  as  it  is  wherever  it  is
put,  provided  the  place  be  dry.  Rape  may  be  cut
up  and    kept   in    mustard-seed,    walnuts  in  sand,

'  Romae  coempta.  Victorius  quotes  in  illustration  part  of
an  epigram,  the  author  of  which  he  does  not  name.

Quaeque  iibi  posui  tamquam  vernacula  poma
De  Sacra  nulli  dixeris  esse  via.

(Don't  tell  anyone  that  my  home-grown  fruit  was  bought  in
the  Sacra  Via.)

'^  Mala  cotonea,  struthea.  Keil  has  not  the  comma,  which
should  be  there.    Cf.  note  i,  p.  112.

3  In  pensilibus  iunciis.  In  despair  I  have  translated  iuncis
instead  of  iunctis.  Columella  (x,  306)  uses  iuncus  for  a  basket
made  of  reeds.  As  the  text  stands  one  can  only  understand
with  pensilibus,  surculis,  and  translate  "  on  hanging  branches
joined  together."  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xv,  17)  says  that  quinces  should
be  shut  up  so  that  no  breath  of  air  may  get  to  them ;  or
should  be  preserved  In  honey.

I  -^


114  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

pomegranates '  also  in  sand,  if  put  there  when  they
have  just  been  plucked  and  when  ripe — even  unripe
ones,  if  you  put  them,  still  attached  to  the  branch,
into  a  pot  without  bottom,  and  sink  them  in  the
ground,  then  pitch  round  the  branches  to  prevent
the  outside  air  from  getting  to  them,  are  not  only
sound  when  taken  up,  but  bigger  than  they  would
ever  have  been  if  left  hanging  on  the  tree.


CHAPTER  LX

OLIVES  FOR  EATING

Of  the  fruit  of  the  olive,  Cato  writes  that  eating
olives — Orcites  and  P(a)useae — are  best  kept  either
green  in  brine,  or,  after  being  well  bruised,  in
mastic  oil.  He  adds  that  if  the  Orcites,  when  black
and  dry,  be  well  rubbed  with  salt  for  five  days,  and
you  then  shake  off  the  salt  and  leave  them  in  the
sun  for  two  days,  they  remain  as  a  rule  in  good
condition,  and  that  they  may  also  be  put  without
disadvantage  unsalted  into  new  wine  boiled  down
to  half  its  bulk.

^  Punica  mala,  etc.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xv,  17)  writes:  "  M.  Varro
recommends  that  they  be  kept  in  tubs  of  sand,  or  else  be
buried  unripe  in  the  ground — in  jars  of  which  the  bottoms
have  been  knocked  out ;  but  you  must  keep  the  air  out  and
the  branch  must  be  smeared  with  pitch.  They  then  grow  to  a
greater  size  than  they  can  on  the  tree."


I]  KEEPING  AND  CONSUMING  115


CHAPTER  LXI

OF  AMURCA

Good  farmers  store  amurca  in  casks  just  as  care-
fully as  they  do  oil  or  wine.  The  method  of  storing
is  as  follows:  As  soon  as  ever  it  has  been  squeezed
out  by  the  press,  two-thirds  of  it  are  boiled  away,
and  what  remains  is  put  when  it  has  cooled  into
vessels.  There  are  also  other  methods  of  storing,
as,  for  example,  that  in  which  ''  must"  is  added.


CHAPTER  LXII

KEEPING  AND  CONSUMING

As  no  one  stores  up  produce  save  with  the  inten-
tion of  bringing  it  out  again,  I  must  also  give  a
few  words  to  this  subject,  which  constitutes  the
sixth  phase.  People  bring  out  what  they  have
stored,  either  for  its  preservation,  or  for  consump-
tion, or  for  sale.  Now  as  these  objects  are  unlike,
different  times  must  be  chosen  for  preserving  and
consuming  different  kinds  of  produce.


n6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

CHAPTER  LXIII

ON  BRINGING  CORN  OUT  OF  STORE

For  its  preservation:  that  corn  must  be  brought
out  which  weevils  are  beginning  to  eat.  When  it
has  been  got  out,  pans  of  water  must  be  placed  in
the  sun,  as  the  weevils  crowd  to  them  and  commit
suicide.

Those  who  keep  their  corn  in  those  underground
chambers  called  siros  must  get  it  out  some  consider-
able time  after  opening,  as  it  is  dangerous  to  enter
them  when  newly  opened — so  much  so  that  people
have  been  suffocated.  Spelt  that  you  have  stored
in  the  ear  during  summer,  and  wish  to  prepare  for
food,  must  be  taken  out  in  winter  time  to  be  pounded
in  the  mill  and  roasted.

CHAPTER  LXIV

PREPARATION  OF  AMURCA

Amurca,  which  is  a  watery  fluid,  mixed  with  im-
purities, after  being  pressed  from  the  olive  and  put
into  an  earthenware  jar,  is  commonly  kept  in  the
following  way:  in  fifteen  days'  time  the  lightest
part,  the  scum,  is  blown  oft'  from  it,  and  put  into
other  vessels,  and  this  is  repeated  with  the  same
intervals  of  fifteen  days  twelve  times  for  the  next
six  months — and  when  this  operation  is  performed
for  the  last  time,  they  prefer  to  decant  when   the


I]  OF  WHITE  OLIVES  117

moon  is  on  the  wane.  Then  they  boil  it  down  in
cauldrons  over  a  slow  fire,  until  it  is  reduced  to
two-thirds  of  its  original  volume,  and  then  only
may  it  be  brought  out  to  be  used.


CHAPTER  LXV

OF  WINE

The  "must"  put  into  the  cask  to  become  wine,
should  not  be  brought  out  while  it  is  fermenting —
nor  even  when  it  has  actually  become  wine,  if  you
want  to  drink  it  old — and  it  does  not  become  old
before  a  year  has  been  added  to  its  age.  When  it  is
a  year  old  it  is  brought  out  for  consumption.  If  it
belongs,  however,  to  the  class  of  grape  which  quickly
turns  acid,  you  must  consume  or  sell  it  before  the
next  vintage.  There  are  some  kinds  of  wine — the
Falernian  amongst  them — which  are  the  more  valu-
able when  you  bring  them  out,  the  more  years  you
keep  them  in  the  cellar.

CHAPTER  LXVI

OF  WHITE  OLIVES

White  olives  which  have  been  stored,  if  brought
out  too  soon  when  fresh,  are  nauseous  owing  to
their  bitterness,  as  also  are  the  black  ones  unless
they  are  rendered  palatable  by  being  first  steeped
in  salt.


ii8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

CHAPTER  LXVII

WALNUTS,  DATES,  AND  FIGS

As  for  the  walnut,  the  date,  and  the  Sabine  fig,  the
quicker  you  bring  them  out  the  better  the  flavour,
for  age  makes  the  fig  paler,  the  date  rotten,  and  the
nut  too  dry.

CHAPTER  LXVni

HUNG  FRUIT

Fruits  that  are  hung,  such  as  grapes,  apples,  and
sorbs,  show  of  themselves  when  they  should  be
consumed,  as  by  the  change  of  colour  and  the
shrivelling  of  the  berries  they  let  you  know  that
they  will  come  down  to  be  thrown  away  if  you  do
not  take  them  away  to  be  eaten.  Ripe  sorbs  which
have  been  stored  when  soft  must  be  used  pretty
quickly — those  which  have  been  hung  when  sour
may  wait  longer,  as  before  mellowing  they  want  to
attain  in  the  house  the  maturity  which  they  cannot
hope  to  reach  on  a  tree.


I]  ON  PRODUCE  FOR  MARKET         119

CHAPTER   LXIX

ON  PRODUCE  FOR  MARKET

I  Of  the  spelt  which  has  been  mown,  that  which  you
wish  to  be  prepared  for  food  should  be  brought  out
in  the  winter  to  be  roasted  in  the  bakery.  Such  of
it  as  you  want  sown  should  be  brought  out  when
the  fields  are  ready  to  receive  it.  So,  in  general,
the  various  kinds  of  corn  to  be  sown  must  be  got
out  at  their  proper  times.  As  for  the  things  which
are  for  market  you  must  note  the  proper  time  for
each,  for  some  things — those  that  will  not  keep —
you  must  bring  out  and  sell  quickly  before  they
spoil,  others,  which  will  keep,  you  must  sell  when
they  fetch  a  good  price.  For  it  often  happens  that
what  you  keep  back  for  some  time  not  only  gives
you  interest  on  your  outlay,  but  even  doubles  your
profit  if  you  bring  it  out  at  the  right  moment.

'  Far  {i^iin,  spelt,  French  epeautre)  a  poor  kind  of  wheat
which,  however,  grows  well  on  poor  soils.  It  was  the  prin-
cipal food — eaten  in  the  form  of  porridge — of  the  ancient
Romans.  The  words  farina  (flour),  confarreatio,  and  diffar-
reatio  (patrician  forms  of  marriage  and  divorce)  were  derived
from  it.    It  was  much  used  in  sacrifices — to  Ceres,  Tellus,  etc.

Like  barley,  it  was  roasted  first  and  then  pounded  in  a
wooden  mortar  (Cf.  Pliny,  N.  H.,  xviii,  11):  twice — the  first  time
to  remove  the  husk,  the  second  to  reduce  the  grain  to  flour.

Pliny  tells  us  in  the  same  chapter  that  only  those  who
"  pounded  "  ya;' were  called  bakers;  and  that  there  were  no
bakers  by  trade  in  Rome  before  the  Persian  war — 580  years
after  the  foundation  of  the  city  {i.e.,  174  B.C.).


I20  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.  i

2  As  Stolo  was  saying  this,  the  freedman  of  the
temple-guardian  came  up  to  us  weeping,  and
begged  us  to  forgive  him  for  having  kept  us  wait-
ing, and  asked  us  to  go  to  his  '  funeral  the  next  day.
We  all  started  up  and  cried  out  with  one  voice  '•
What?  To  the  funeral?  What  funeral?  What  has
happened?  With  tears  in  his  eyes  he  told  us  that
his  master  had  been  stabbed  with  a  knife  by  some-
body, and  had  fallen  to  the  ground.  "I  was  not
able,"  he  said,  "to  notice  in  the  crowd  who  it  was.  I
only  heard  clearly  a  voice  saying,  'I  have  made  a

3  mistake.'  I  took  him  home  and  sent  slaves  to  find
a  doctor  and  bring  him  as  soon  as  possible.  And  I
think,  gentlemen,  I  may  be  pardoned  for  having
done  what  I  did  instead  of  coming  to  you.  And
though  I  couldn't  prevent  my  old  master  from
breathing  his  last  soon  after,  I  do  still  think  I  did
my  duty."  We  told  him  he  was  quite  right,  and
walking  down  the  temple-steps  went  our  separate
ways,  feeling  more  sorrow  for  human  mischance
than  wonder  that  such  a  thing  had  happened  in
Rome.

^  Et.  I  have  kept  in  the  translation  the  ambiguity  of  the
text.    Et  cannot,  of  course,  in  any  way  refer  to  the  speaker.

The  freedman  in  his  agitation  said:  "please  come  to  his
funeral,"  forgetting  that  he  had  not  mentioned  his  old  master.


BOOK  II
CONCERNING  CATTLE

INTRODUCTION

1  Good  reason  had  our  great  ancestors  for  setting  the
Romans  of  the  country  above  those  of  the  town.
For,  just  as  in  the  country  those  who  live  and  work
inside  the  farmhouse  are  of  slacker  fibre  than  those
who  work  on  the  land,  so  those  who  led  the  sed-
entary life  of  a  town  were  accounted  by  our  an-
cestors a  feebler  folk  than  those  who  tilled  the  fields.
Accordingly,  in  dividing  their  year  they  arranged
for  the  transaction  of  city  business  every  ninth  day
only,'  giving   the  remaining  seven   days    of  each

2  "week"  to  the  cultivation  of  the  fields.  And  as
long   as    they   maintained    this   custom   two  ends

'  JVonis  viodo  diebus.  We  should  say  every  eighth  day.  The
Roman  reckoning  was  inclusive  of  the  first  and  last  day  of
any  period  of  time.  Thus  nudius  tertius  for  the  day  before
yesterday,  etc.  This  method  of  counting  has  persisted  amongst
the  Latin  races  to  some  extent ;  cf.  the  French  and  Italian  for
a  fortnight,  quinze  jours  and  quindici giorni.  Varro  alludes  to
the  nundinae  {novem  dinae)  or  market-day,  which  was  the  last
day  of  the  eight-day  week.  On  it  the  country  folk  ceased  work
in  the  fields,  and  came  to  Rome  to  buy  or  sell  in  the  market,
and  to  hear  public  announcements ;  especially  with  regard  to
comitia  and  the  business  to  be  conducted  at  them.

121  —


122  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

were  achieved :  by  cultivation  they  made '  and  kept
their  lands  most  productive,  while  they  themselves
enjoyed  a  lustier  health,  and  might  dispense  with
the  town  gymnasia  of  the  Greeks.  Whereas  nowa-
days men  are  hardly  satisfied  with  one  gymnasium
apiece,  and  do  not  consider  that  they  possess  a
country  house  unless  it  is  dignified  by  a  lot  of
Greek  names,*  which  they  give  to  its  several  parts,
such  a.sprocoeton  (antechamber),  palaestra  (room  for
exercise),  apodyteriuvi  (undressing-room), ^em^/o.?
(colonnade),  ornithon  (poultry  -  yard),  peristeron
(dove-cote),  oporothece  (store-house  for  fruit).

And  now  that  nearly  all  heads  of  families  have
deserted  scythe  and  plough,  and  sneaked  within
the  city  walls,  preferring  to  keep  their  hands  astir
in  theatre  and  circus  rather  than  amidst  corn-crops
and  vineyards,  we  contract  ^  with  people  to  bring  us

1  Ut  haherent  .  .  .  ac  ne.  Perhaps  both  better  translated
as  "  final  "  conjunctions — though  Cicero  writes  (De  Finibus,
bk.  ii) :  Ex  quo  efficitur  non  ut  voluptas  ne  sit  voluptas  sed  ut
voluptas  non  sit  summum  honum.

^  Retiyieant.  I  can  find  no  parallel  to  the  use  of  retinere  here.
Auc,  Ad  Herennium,  iii,  3,  has  ret inete  fort ittidinem  in  the  sense
of  conseivarCy  to  keep  up.  Gesner  conjectures  ingeniously  re-
tinniat.  If  this  be  adopted  the  passage  means:  "do  not  think
they  have  a  country-house  unless  it  '  tinkles '  with  a  lot  of
Greek  names,  etc."

^  Frumentum  locamiis.  Columella  in  the  preface  to  his  work
on  farming  paraphrases  most  of  this  introduction — and  this
passage  thus :  "And  so  in  this  Latium,  in  this  land  of  the  good
god  Saturn,  where  the  gods  taught  agriculture  to  their  off-
spring, we  have  now,  lest  we  starve,  to  contract  for  corn  to  be


II]  INTRODUCTION  123

the  corn,  whereby  we  may  grow  fat,  from  Africa
and  Sardinia,  and  get  in  the  vintage  by  ship  from

4  the  islands  of  Cos  or  Chios.  And  so  in  that  country
where  the  city's  founders  were  shepherds  and
taught  agriculture  to  their  descendants,  these  de-
scendants have  reversed  the  process,  and,  through
covetousness  and  in  despite  of  laws,  have  turned
corn-land  into  meadow,  not  knowing  the  difference
between  agriculture  and  grazing.  For  a  shepherd
is  a  different  thing  from  a  ploughman,  and  if  herds
of  cattle  can  and  do  graze  on  the  land,  a  cattle
drover  is  not  therefore  the  same  as  a  teamster.  For
grazing  cattle  do  not  help  to  produce  what  grows
on  the  land,  they  remove  it  with  their  teeth ;  where-
as the  domestic  ox  makes  the  corn  grow  better  in
the  corn-land,  and  fodder  in  the  fallow  land.

5  Different,  I  repeat,  is  the  method,  the  science,  of
the  farmer  from  that  of  the  shepherd — the  farmer's
province  being  such  things  as  are  made  by  means
of  agriculture  to  spring  from  the  ground,  the  shep-
herd's those  that  spring  from  the  flock.  But,  as  the
two  are  intimately  connected,  and  seeing  that  as  a
rule  it  pays  the  owner  better  to  have  the  fodder
eaten  on  his  farm  than  to  sell  it,  and  manuring  is
excellent  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth — for  which  pur-
pose cattle  are  most  suitable — therefore  the  man
who  owns  an  estate  should  adopt  both  systems,
agriculture  and  pasture-farming,  and  even  the
rearing  of  animals  within  the  precincts  of  the  farm-
brought  us  from  the  provinces  across  the  sea,  and  get  our
vintages  in  from  the  Cyclades,  Baetica,  and  Gaul."


124  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

house,  for  from  this  latter  also  considerable  profits
can  be  made.  I  mean  from  poultry-yards,  hare-
6  warrens,  and  fish-ponds.  And  seeing  that  I  have
written  a  book  on  the  first  of  these,  ^  namely,  agri-
culture, for  the  benefit  of  my  wife  Fundania  who
has  bought  a  farm,  I  write  this  short  treatise  on
the  essentials  of  cattle  raising  for  you,  my  friend
Turranius  Niger,^  since  you  take  so  keen  a  delight
in  cattle,  if  one  may  judge  from  the  frequency  with
which  your  feet  bear  you,  on  cattle-buying  bent,  to
the  market  at  Campi  Macri,  with  the  object  of  thus
helping  to  provide  for  expenses  which  make  many
demands  on  your  purse.  This  I  shall  be  able  to  do
without  difficulty,  having  myself  kept  large  flocks
of  sheep  in  Apulia,  and  of  horses  in  the  country
about  Reate.  What  I  write  will  be  drawn  from
conversations  that  I  had  with  the  owners  of  large
flocks  in  Epirus,  when  I  was  in  command  of  the

^  E  quis  quoniam.  The  whole  three  books  were  written  for
Fundania  (cf.  i,  i,  4),  so  that  it  is  curious  that  this  book  is
dedicated  to  Turranius  Niger,  and  the  third  to  Q.  Pinnius  (iii,
I,  10).  It  may  be  that  the  first  book  was  pubHshed  some  time
before  the  others,  and  that  Varro  forgot  when  he  dedicated  the
latter  to  the  two  men  mentioned  that  he  had  already  promised
the  three  to  his  wife.  Nonius  Marcellus  quotes  forty-two  pass-
ages from  the  first  book,  none  from  the  second  or  third.

*  Turranius  Niger.  Nothing  is  known  of  him.  Cicero
mentions  a  D.  Turranius  (Ad  Att.,  i,  6)  whom  he  calls  hom-
inem  x^r\(sTo\iLaQ7].

The  name  Turranius  (spelt  also  Turannius)  seems  connected
with  taurus  [turu  =  taurus  in  Umbrian),  and  cattle  are  the
subject  of  this  book.


II]      CATTLE  FARMING:    ITS  ORIGIN     125

Greek  fleets  between  Delos  and  Sicily  at  the  time
of  the  war  against  the  pirates/  I  will  here  begin.
Here  we  left  off.^


CHAPTER  I

cattle-farming:  its  origin,  repute,  and
practice

I  On  the  departure  of  Menates,  Cossinius  ^  turned  to
me  and  said:  We  shall  not  \&tyou  go  until  you  have
finished  your  exposition  of  those  three  matters — you

'  Piratico  bello,  waged  by  Pompey  in  67  B.C.  Varro  gained
a.  corona  rostrata  {VWwy ,  N.  H.,  xvi,  4):  M.  Varrone  e  piraticis
bellis  dante  Magno  Pompeio.

"  Hie  intermisimus.  These  words,  found  in  the  archetype  in
capital  letters,  immediately  after  incipiam  hinc,  axe  no  doubt
the  words  of  the  copyists  who  had  been  in  turn  copying  a  manu-
script of  this  work.  They  seem  mildly  facetious.  "  I  will
begin  here,"  said  Varro.  "  Here  we  left  off,"  said  they.  Was
it  because,  one  wonders,  the  MS.  was  illegible  at  this  place,
for  it  is  obvious  that  much  has  been  omitted  between  incipiam
hinc  and  cum  Menates?  Did  they  give  up  in  despair  here  and
go  on  copying  further  on,  when  the  MS.  was  moderately  legi-
ble— though  imperfectly  so,  for  we  have  trouble  a  few  lines
later  with  cum  poetam  sesutn,  etc.  ?

It  seems,  at  any  rate,  absurd  to  suppose  with  Lachmann
that  the  words  are  Varro's,  who  attempts  to  out- Homer
Homer.

'  Cossinius.  Cicero  in  two  consecutive  letters  to  Atticus
(Ad  Att,  i,  20,  and  ii,  i)  mentions  a  L.  Cossinius,  to  whom  he
had  sent  a  book  written  in  Greek  about  his  (Cicero's)  consul-


126  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

remember — on  which  you  were  recently  beginning
to  speak  when  we  were  interrupted.  What  three
matters?  asked  Murrius;  do  you  mean  what  you
told  me  yesterday  about  cattle-raising?  Precisely,
answered  Cossinius:  I  mean  the  discourse  which
our  friend  Varro  here  was  beginning,  on  the  origin,
dignity,  and  art  of  cattle-raising  (we  had  come  to
see  Paetus,^  who  was  not  very  well),  only  the
arrival  of  the  doctor  prevented  our  further  discus-
sion.

For  my  part,  said  I,  I  consent  to  treat  the  his-
torical part  only,  to  say  what  I  know  about  the  first
two  parts,  namely,  the  origin  of  the  art  and  its
dignity.  The  third,  the  practical  part,  Scrofa"must
take  in  hand.  For  Scrofa,  og  Trsp  fjLou  ttom^ov  a/uLelviov
("  who  is  a  much  better  man  than  I  ") — I  say  it  in
Greek  to  two  half-Greek  shepherds — is  the  man
who  taught  C.   Lucilius  Hirrus,   your  son-in-law,

ship.  A  few  lines  further  (i,  20)  he  mentions  a  L.  Paplrius
Paetus  who  was  an  Epicurean  and  a  man  of  much  wit  and
learning.  To  him  were  written  twelve  of  Cicero's  letters
(Ad  Fam.,  ix,  15-26).

^  Cum  poetam  sesum.  This  passage  is  manifestly  corrupt.
Sesuin  may  be  iox fesum  {i.e.,/essum)  in  the  sense  of  ///(Ursi-
nus)  and  poetam  for  pactum.  The  passage  would  then  read :
Cum  Poetum  fessum  visere  venissemus.  For  visere  venissemus
cf.  Plautus  (Rudens,  94),  ntmc  hue  ad  Veneris  fanum  venio
visere.

^  Scrofa  {Trevtellius)  constantly  quoted  by  Columella  as  a
great  authority.  Columella  (i,  i,  12)  says  that  "  Cato  first
taught  Agriculture  to  speak  Latin,  the  two  Sasernae  con-
tinued her  education,  Trcmcllius  Scrofa  made  her  eloquent,
Varro  gave  her  polish  (!),  and  Virgil  made  a  poet  of  her."


II]      CATTLE  FARMING:    ITS  ORIGIN      127

whose  flocks  in  the  country  of  the  Bruttii  are
accounted  so  famous.

But,  said  Scrofa,  you  shall  have  what  we  can
give  only  on  the  condition  that  you,  who  are  Epirots
and  therefore  are  great  men  at  cattle-raising,  repay
us  by  bringing  what  you  know  to  the  common  stock.
For  no  one  can  know  everything.

When  I  had  received  the  assent  of  the  company
to  the  first  two  parts  (only)  being  mine — not  but
what  I  too  possess  flocks  in  Italy,  but  the  harp  does
not  make  the  harper — I  began.

Well,  gentlemen,  as  from  the  nature  of  things
men  and  sheep  must  always  have  existed — for
whether  we  suppose  that  there  was  an  original
generating  principle  for  animals,  which  was  the
opinion  of  Thales  of  Miletus^  and  Zeno  of  Citium,^
or  on  the  other  hand  that  animals  had  no  begin-
ning at  all,  as  Pythagoras  of  Samos^   and  Aris-

^  Thales  Milesius.  Water  to  wit:  cf.  Plutarch  (Plac.  Phil.,
i,  3)  :  OT0XaX,f-TO-<-  ^'  i^  TOVTOV  KpoJTOV  OTi  TrdvTiov  Twv  ^(^wv  j)  ■yo»'»)
dpxti  iffTiv  vypd  ovaa.

-  Ze?io  Citietis  (borrowing  from  Heracleitus)  made  fire  the
ultimate  physical  principle;  cf.  Diogenes  Laertius,  vii,  156:
cok€i  5'  avToic  T>}v  n'tv  ipiiaiv  eivai  irvp  nxviKov  oS<f  iSaSi^ov  dg
ykvtffiv.  Cf.  Cicero,  N.  D.,  ii,  41  :  Quare  cum  soli's  ig'nis  similis
eorum  igniuvt  sit  qui  sunt  in  corporihus  animantium,  etc.,  and
Varro  (L.  L.,  v,  10):  Sive  ut  Zeno  Citieus  atiimalium  semen
ignis.

^  Pytkagoras  Samiiis.  Varro  alludes  perhaps  to  the  incessant
transmigration  of  souls.  Cf.  Porphyrius,  Vita  Pythag.,  19:
■KpCorov  fiev  wc  dddvarov  ilval  (pijm  t))v  \j/vx>)v  ilra  fiera^uWovaav  elg
uWa  ykvr}  ^(ftxtv  .  .  .  vkov  0'  ovSiv  (ittXCjq  tan.


128  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

totle  of  Stagyra^  believed,  human  life  must  have
come  down  from  the  highest  antiquity  to  our  time,
stage  by  stage,  as  Dicaearchus  writes,  and  the  re-
motest stage  must  have  been  the  state  of  Nature
when  man  lived  on  those  things  which  the  virgin

4  earth  produced  spontaneously.  Then  from  this
mode  of  life  they  must  have  descended  to  the
second  mode,  the  pastoral,  in  which,  by  plucking
from  wild  and  woodland  trees  and  shrubs  acorns,
arbutus  berries,  and  mulberries,  they  made  a  store
of  fruit  for  subsequent  use,  and  in  the  same  way
and  for  the  same  end  captured  such  wild  animals  as
they  could  and  shut  them  up  and  tamed  them.
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  amongst  these
animals  sheep  were  the  first  adopted,  on  account  of
their  usefulness  and  gentle  nature,  for  they  are  by
nature  extremely  gentle  and  especially  fitted  for
association  with  man's  life,  for  through  them  milk
and  cheese  were  added  to  his  food,  and  for  his  body
they  furnished  clothing  in  the  shape  of  skins.

5  Finally,  with  the  third  stage,  they  reached,  from
the  pastoral  mode  of  life,  the  agricultural,  retaining
in  it  much  of  the  two  former  stages,  and  went  on
long  in  the  stage  which  they  had  reached  before
they  could  attain'  our  present  civilization.    Even

1  Aristotle.  Cf.  Phys.,  li,  i,  192:  tmv  ovtwv  rci  fiiv  ta-t  <pvon,
tA  Si  Sl'  dWai;  airiag,  ^vaei  fitv  -a  Tt  ^ipa  km.  to.  fiiptj  avrwi'  Kal
TO.  0vra.".  They  exist,  therefore,  by  (pmig — the  eternal  apxi)
KivqatcjQ.

*  Dum  ad  nos perveniret.  This  impersonal  use  oi  the  active
verb — normal  with  the  passive  verb — is  common  with  Varro.
Cf.  i,  44,  I ;  i,  21,  3,  etc.


II]    CATTLE  FARMING:    ITS  REPUTE     129

now  in  many  places  there  are  several  kinds  of  wild
animals;  there  are  sheep,  for  instance,  in  Phrygia,
where  many  flocks  are  to  be  seen,  and  in  Samo-
thrace  there  are  wild  she-goats  of  the  kind  called  in
Latin  rotae.^  For  many  exist  in  the  neighbourhood
of  MountFiscellum'and  Mount  Tetrica.^  Everybody
knows  about  wild  pigs — except  the  man  who  thinks
that  wild  boars  are  not  properly  called  pigs.  At
the  present  day  quite  wild  bulls  are  found  in  Dar-
dania,  Maedica  and  Thrace,  wild  asses  in  Phrygia
and  Lycaonia,  and  wild  horses  in  Hither  Spain,  in
some  districts.


6  The  origin  of  the  art  is  as  I  have  stated;  its  high
repute  I  proceed  to  show.  Amongst  the  ancients  the
most  famous  men  were  all  shepherds,  as  is  evident
from  both  the  Latin  and  Greek  languages,  and
from  the  old  poets  who  call  some  of  their  heroes
polyarnae,  others  polymeloi^  and  others  polybiitae,
and  to  express  their  costliness  they  stated  that  the
sheep  had  actually  golden  fleeces,  like  the  one  at
Argos  which,  Atreus  complains,  had  been  stolen

'  Rotas.  Scaliger  conjectures  (p.  233)  platycerotas  from
Pliny  (N.  H.,  xi,  37).  Platyce  rotas  might  easily  be  corrupted
by  the  unintelligent  copyist  into  Latine  rotas — two  words
which  he  understood.  Schneider's  conjecture,  strepsicerotas,
does  not  account  for  the  word  Latine.

^  Fiscellum,  near  Soracte.

^  Tetrica,  in  Northern  Italy,  on  the  borders  of  the  Picentine
country.

K


I30  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

from  him  by  Thyestes,^  or  like  the  ram  in  Colchis
in  the  possession  of  Aeetes,  in  quest  of  whose  fleece
went  the  Argonauts  of  kingly  race,  so  runs  the
story;  or  like  the  golden  mala^'  that  is,  in  the
ancient  manner  of  speech,  goats  and  sheep  which
were  in  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides  in  Libya,  and
were  brought  thence  from  Africa  to  Greece  by
7  Hercules.  For  the  Greeks  called  these  animals
7nela  from  the  sound  they  utter,  while  our  fellow
countrymen  to  express  the  same  sound  use  much
the  same  word,  changing  only  the  initial  letter,  (for
the  sound  which  sheep  make  seems  to  be  rather
he^^  than  we),  and  speak  of  sheep  when  they  bleat
as  making  the  sound  he,  bealare:  and  this  word
bealare  becomes  balare  by  the  excision  of  a  letter,  as
happens  in  many  cases.  Again,  if  sheep  and  goats,
etc.,  had  not  been  highly  esteemed  amongst  the  an-
cients, then  astrologers  in  mapping  out  the  heavens
would  not  have  given  their  names  to  constellations;
and  this  they  not  only  did  without  hesitation,  but
many  of  them  even,   in  their  enumeration  of  the

^  Thyestem  subduxe.  Pacuvius,  quoted  by  Cicero  (N.  D.,
iii,  27) :

Agnum  inter  pecudes  atirea  clartim  coma

Quern  cldm   (v.I.,    quondam)    Thyestem    clepere  ausum   6st  e
rigia.

*  Aurea  mala,  "  the  golden  apples  "  of  the  Hesperides;  but
as  [ir\\a  =  either  mala  or  oves,  Varro  gives  it  the  latter  sense
of  "  sheep."

^  Sed  be  sonarc  videntiir.  Cf.  Cratinus  (Dion.,  5) :  6  ^'  j)Xt0(oc
oidTTfp  TTpo^uTov  /3//  j3j)  Xtywv  jSaSil^ti.


II]     CATTLE  FARMING:    ITS  REPUTE    131

twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  actually  begin  with
them,  with  the  Ram  and  the  Bull  that  is,  placing
them  before  Apollo  and  Hercules.  For  these  latter,
gods  though  they  are,  follow  them,  though  these

8  signs  are  called  (by  some)  Gemini^  (twins).  And  not
content  that  a  sixth  of  the  twelve  signs  should  bear
the  names  of  cattle,  they  added  Capricorn  to  make
up  the  quarter.  Of  domestic  animals  they  also  added
the  goat,  kids,  and  dogs.

And  are  not  many  tracts  of  both  sea  and  land  dis-
tinguished by  these  names — the  Aegean  Sea,"  for
instance  (which  owes  its  name  to  goats),  Mount
Taurus  in  Syria,  Mount  Cantherius  ^  in  the  land  of
the  Sabines,  and  the  Thracian  and  Cimmerian  Bos-

9  porus?  *  And  are  there  not  many  places  on  land  with
these  names,  such  as  the  town  in  Greece  called
"  Hippios  (horse-rearing)  Argos"?  Finally  is  not
the  word  Italy  derived  from  mtuli  (bullocks)  as  Piso
states?  Again,  who  denies  that  the  Roman  people
sprang  from  shepherds?  who  but  knows  that  Faus-

'  Gemini  are  the  Dioscuri,  Castor  and  Pollux,  so  that  ii
del  cannot  be  the  subject  of  appellantur  but  ea  signa.  This  is
a  good  example  of  one  of  Varro's  worst  habits ;  cf.  ii,  3,  6 ;
ii,  4,  19;  iii,  9,  2.  Apollo  and  Diana  were  sometimes  called
Gemini.   Varro,  L.  L.,  vii  {sub fin.),  quoting  Manilius:

' '  Latona  pariit  casta  complexu  lovis
Delia  Deos  Geminos.

id  est  Apollinem  et  Dianam.''''

-  Aegaeum.    a'iytwg,  from  ai^,  a  goat.

^  Cantherius  =  a  gelding.

^  Bosporus.    iSoavopoQ  =  Ox-ford.


132  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

tulus,  who  was  the  foster-father  of  Romulus  and
Remus,  and  brought  them  up,  was  a  shepherd?
Will  it  not  be  obvious  that  they  were  themselves
shepherds,  if  we  consider  that  they  chose,  as  the
time  to  found  their  city,  a  shepherd-festival  (the
Parilia)?'  Is  not  the  same  thing  proved  by  the  fact
that  a  fine'  is  even  nowadays  estimated,  when  the
ancient  custom  is  followed,  in  terms  of  sheep  and
oxen;  that  the  most  ancient  copper  coinage^  is
stamped  with  the  figure  of  an  ox;  that  w^hen  the
lo  city  was  founded  the  position  of  the  walls  and  gates^
was  marked  out  by  a  bull  and  cow,  that  when  the
Roman  people  is  purified  by  the  Suomtaurilia^  a

'  Parilihus.  21st  April.  Varro,  L.  L.,  vi,  3,  calls  the  festival
Palilia — Palilia  dicta  a  Pale  quod  ei  feriae.  Cicero  generally
writes  Parilia.  For  a  full  and  interesting  account  of  this
festival  cf.  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv,  721-82.

-  Multa.  Cf.  Pliny,  N.  H.,  xviii,  3;  Aulus  Gellius,  xi,  i;
Servius  (ad  Georg.,  iii,  387),  where  it  appears  that  one  murder
cost  a  ram  in  the  time  of  the  kings  !

^  Aes  antiquissiinum.  Tiie  as  of  Servius  Tullius,  cf.  Pliny
(xviii,  3):  Setvius  rex  ovium  boumque  effigie  primtis  aes  sig-
navit.

^  Qua  essent  muri.  Cf.  Servius  (Aeneid,  v,  755):  "Which
Cato  in  his  Origins  says  was  the  way.  For  the  founders  of  a
city  yoked  a  bull  and  cow  together — the  bull  to  the  right  the
cow  on  the  inside— and  .  .  .  held  the  plough-handle  inclined
so  that  all  the  clods  fell  on  the  inside.  And  thus,  by  the  furrow
traced,  they  marked  the  position  of  the  walls;  lifting  tiie
plough  at  the  places  where  gates  were  to  be."

Varro,  L.  L.,  v,  32:  Oppida  condcbant  in  Latio  Etrusco  ritu
multiy  id  est  iunctis  bohus,  tauro  et  vacca  interiore  aratro  circutn-
agebant  sulcnni.


II]  CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE    133

boar,  a  ram,  and  a  bull  are  driven  round  the  city;
and  finally,  that  we  have  many  Roman  names  de-
rived from  both  kinds  of  cattle,  the  larger  and  the
less?  From  the  less,  Porcius,  Ovinius,  Caprilius,
and  similarly  from  the  larger,  Equitius,  Taurius,
Asinius.  The  same  point  is  further  illustrated  by
the  use  of  the  names  of  cattle  as  cognomina,
in  the  case  of  the  families  the  Anni  Caprae,'  the
Statili  Tauri,  the  Pomponi  Vituli,  and  many  others
who  get  their  names  from  cattle.

There  remains  for  discussion  the  theory  and
practice  of  cattle-grazing;  and  Scrofa,  to  whom
our  generation  assigns  the  palm  in  every  depart-
ment of  agriculture,  will  discuss  it,  as  he  is  better
qualified  than  the  rest  of  us.

Here  everybody  looked  at  Scrofa,  and  he  began,
Well,  gentlemen,  it  is  a  science  which  is  concerned
with  the  acquiring  and  feeding  of  cattle  to  the  end
that  the  greatest  possible  profit  may  be  made  from
it — from  those  animals  to  which  money  {pecunia)
itself  owes  its  name.  For  cattle  are  the  origin  of  all
money.

This  science  has  nine  parts — three  separate  sets
of  three — the  subject  matter  of  one  part  being  the
smaller  cattle,  of  which  there  are  three  kinds —
sheep,  goats,  pigs ;  that  of  the  second  the  large  cattle,

^  Anni  Caprae.  Cf.  Plutarch,  Quaestiones  Romanae  (about
the  middle)  :  Sii  kcu  twv  ovonariav  TroXXa  roTf  TraXaioig  avD\Xtoi  Kai
/3ow/3o\(coi  Kai  vopKioi  Pitxav  wf  (pcuveoTiXXag  (Fenestella)  eiptijuf.


134  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

which  nature  has  divided  also  into  three  classes —
oxen,  asses,  horses.  The  third  part  of  the  science
has  to  do  with  those  animals  which  in  stock-raising
are  not  acquired  for  the  sake  of  direct  profit,  but
which  are  either  aids  to  stock-raising,  or  result  from
it,  as  mules,  dogs,  shepherds.  Again,  each  one  of
these  parts  contains  in  it  at  least  nine  sub-sections
of  general  application  ;  four  of  which  are  needed  in
the  buying  of  cattle,  other  four  in  their  feeding,  and
there  is  one  besides  which  concerns  both.  This
makes  in  all  eighty-one  parts  at  the  least,  which
are  moreover  indispensable  and  of  the  greatest
importance.

13  In  the  first  place,  to  get  a  good  flock  or  herd,  you
must  know  the  best  age  at  which  to  buy  each  kind
of  animal,  and  how  long  to  keep  it.  For  example,
in  the  case  of  a  herd  of  cows,  a  yearling  and  a
cow  above  ten  years  old  cost  less  to  buy,  as  a  cow
begins  to  bear  at  two  or  three  years  old,  and  does
not  continue  much  longer  than  the  tenth  year.
For  in  the  first  and  last  years  of  life  every  beast  is
sterile.

14  The  second  of  the  four  sections  consists  in  the
knowledge  of  the  "points"  of  each  kind  of  animal
(its  shape, ^  colour,  etc.),  as  these  are  of  great  im-
portance where  profit  is  the  end  in  view.  For  ex-
ample, a  man  would  rather  buy  a  cow  with  black

^  Forma.  Not  of  course  "shape"  alone,  but  all  the  other
qualities  also  which  constitute  the  ideal  type — the  Aristotelian
tlSoQ.  Cicero  frequently  uses  the  word  as  a  translation  of  the
Platonic  iota.


II]  CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE    135

than  one  with  white  horns,  a  big  she-goat  in  prefer-
ence to  a  small  one,  and  pigs  with  long  bodies  but
small  heads.

The  third  section  deals  with  the  question  of
breed.  In  this  respect,  for  instance,  the  asses  from
Arcadia  in  Greece  have  become  famous,  and  in  Italy
those  from  Reate — so  much  so  that  within  my  re-
collection an  ass  has  sold  for  60,000  sesterces
(;^48o),  and  a  single  team  of  four  fetched  at  Rome
400,000'  sesterces  (;^3,20o).

15  The  fourth  section  deals  with  the  acquisition  of
stock  in  its  legal  aspect,  with  the  formalities  pre-
scribed by  the  Civil  Law  for  the  buying  of  each
kind  of  animal,  since  before  that  which  belongs  to
another  can  become  mine,  some  intermediate  pro-
cess is  required — and  there  are  cases  where  the
agreement  to  sell  at  a  given  price  and  the  payment
of  the  money  do  not  constitute  a  change  of  owner-
ship. When  buying  you  must  sometimes  have  the
animal  warranted  sound,  sometimes  the  flock  or
herd  from  which  it  comes,  at  other  times  neither
guarantee  is  required.

16  The  second  four  sections  which  must  be  borne  in
mind  after  the  buying  is  done,  are  concerned  with
the  grazing,  breeding,  rearing,  and  health  of  the
flock  or  herd.  In  regard  to  the  first  of  these — the
grazing — three  matters  have  to  be  considered,
namely:  (i)  the  district  to  be  selected  for  the  graz-

'  Quadringentis  milihus.  Cf.  iii,  2,  7;  and  Pliny  (N.  H.,
viii,  43),  who  says  that  perhaps  this  is  the  greatest  price  ever
paid  for  an  animal.  ^


136  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

ing  of  each  particular  kind  of  animal;  (2)  the  time;
and  (3)  the  method;  as  an  example:  goats  are  taken
to  graze  in  a  mountainous  bush-covered  country,
rather  than  on  grassy  plains;  mares  not  so.  Again,
it  does  not  suit  all  animals  to  feed  in  the  same  dis-
trict both  in  winter  and  summer.  So  people  drive
flocks  of  sheep  a  considerable  distance  from  Apulia,
to  spend  the  summer  in  Samnium  (they  must  re-
gister their  names  with  the  tax-farmer,  lest,  by
grazing  an  unregistered^  flock,  they  incur  the
17  penalties  of  the  censor's  law^).  And  mules  are  in
summer  driven  from  the  plain  of  Rosea  to  the  high
mountains  of  Burbur.^

Then  you  have  to  consider  just  the  right  method
of  feeding  each  kind  of  cattle,  for  not  only  does  a
mare  or  a  cow  grow  fat  on  hay,  while  pigs  shun  it

^  Inscriptuni  pecus.  On  the  meadow  land  of  the  ager  puh-
licus  every  citizen  had  the  right  to  graze  his  cattle  after  first
registering  his  name  before  the  manceps  or  publicamis,  and
paying  the  registration  tax.  This  was  called  the  scriptura,
which  owed  its  name,  according  to  Festus,  to  the  fact  that
publicanus  scribendo  conficit  ratio7iem  cum  pastore.

*  Lege  censoria.  This  refers  to  the  censoria  locatio,  where
the  censor  put  up  to  auction  the  collection  of  certain  vectigalia.
The  highest  bidder — individual  or  syndicate  {societas) — gave
securit)'  for  the  amount  bid,  and  proceeded  to  collect  what  he
could.  The  lex  censoria  defined  the  conditions  of  the  hcattOy
and  gave  the  publicanus  the  legal  authority  by  which  he  en-
forced payment.

From  the  first  book  (cap.  7)  it  would  appear  that  cases  were
tried  before  the  censor,  such  probably  as  were  connected  with
the  up-keep  of  the  temples,  public  buildings,  and  roads.

^  hi  Durbures  (or  Gurgures).    Nothing  is  known  of  these


II]   CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE    137

to  seek  acorns,  but  barley "  and  beans  may  occa-
sionally have  to  be  given  to  some  animals,  lupines
to  cows,  and  lucerne  and  clover  to  the  latter  when
they  are  suckling  their  young.  You  must  remem-
ber also  that  for  thirty  days  before  they  are  used  for
breeding,  rams  and  bulls  are  given  more  food  in
order  to  maintain  their  strength,  while  cows  are
given  less,  because  it  is  said  they  conceive  more
readily  when  they  are  thin.

18  The  second  section  has  to  do  with  gestation — and
here  I  define  "gestation"  as  lasting  from  concep-
tion to  birth,  for  these  are  respectively  the  begin-
ning and  end  of  pregnancy.  So  we  must  first  con-
sider the  time  when  the  males  of  each  species
should  be  admitted  to  the  females.  Now  for  swine
the  best  time  is  thought  to  be  from  Favonius  ^  to  the
vernal  equinox;  for  sheep  between  the  setting  of
Arcturus  and  the  setting  of  Aquila.

Again,  we  must  consider  how  long,  before  ad-
mission, the  males  should  be  kept  separate  from
the  females.  This  is  done  in  almost  all  cases  for  a
couple  of  months  before,  by  both  neatherds  and
shepherds.

19  The  second  division  (of  this  second  section)  tells

mountains,  and  no  emendation  at  all  plausible  has  been  pro-
posed.

^  Hordeuin  et  faha  .  .  .  obicienduvt.  This  seems  quite  im-
possible in  any  Latin  {pace  Keil).  S\ire\y  fabam,  and  further  on
medicam,  as  suggested  by  Ursinus,  must  be  read.  The  con-
struction is  then  the  normal  one  for  Varro.  The  corruption
from  medico,  to  medica,  faba  iofaba,  is  easy.

-  A  favonio.    Cf.  i,  29.


138  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

us  what  to  keep  in  mind  when  pregnancy  has  be-
gun, for  different  animals  bring  forth  at  different
times.  For  instance,  a  mare  is  pregnant  for  twelve
months,  a  cow  for  ten,  sheep  and  goats  respectively
for  five,  and  pigs  for  four  months.

Speaking  of  pregnancy,  let  me  tell  you  some-
thing w^hich  happens  in  Spain;  no  one  will  believe
it,  but  it  is  none  the  less  true.  In  Lusitania,  near
the  ocean,  in  that  stretch  of  country  where  is  the
town  Olisipo,^  certain  mares  on  Mount  Tagrus'
conceive  at  a  certain  time  of  the  year  by  means  of

'  Olisipo,  now  Lisbon.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  iv,  22)  calls  it:  mn-
nicipium  civium  Romanorum,  Felicitas  Julia  cognominatum.

^  Monte  Tagro.  Columella  (vi,  27,  7) :  Cum  sit  notissimum
etiam  in  Sacro  monte  Hispaniae  qui  procurrit  in  occidentem
iuxta  Oceanum,  frequenter  equas  sine  coitu  ventrem  pertulisse,
foetumque  educasse,  qui  tamen  inutilis  est,  quod  triennio,  prius
quam  adolescat,  morte  ahsuinitvr.

Pomponius  Mela  (iii,  i)  mentions  three  promontories  (i)
Cuneus,  (2)  Sacrum  (Cape  St.  Vincent),  and  (3)  Magnum,  and
he  places  Ulysippo  on  the  last,  near  the  mouth  of  the
Tagus.

Pliny  (N.  H.,  iv,  22)  writes:  Oppida  memorabilia:  a  Tago
in  era,  Olysippo  equarum  efavonio  vento  conceptu  nobile.  .  .  .
And  again  (viii,  42) :  Constat  in  Lusitania  circa  Olysiponem
oppidum  et  Tagum  Amnem  .  .  . ;  and  goes  on  to  relate  Varro's
story.

It  has  been  proposed  therefore  to  read  (i)  on  Columella's
authority  Monte  Sacro  (now  Sagres),  which  is  obviously  wrong,
as  the  Sacrum  Promontorium  is  several  hundred  miles  from
Lisbon,  (2)  Amne  Tago,  and  (3)  Monte  Artahro.  Solinus  Poly-
histor  (cap.  xxvi)  calls  the  Promontorium  Artabrum  Ulysippo-
nense,  so  that  the  last  conjecture  seems  the  most  plausible.
But  then  how  account  for  the  Monte  Tagro  of  the  text?


II]   CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE    139

the  wind,  just  as  hens  frequently  do  with  us,  the
eggs  of  which  we  call  "wind-eggs."'  The  foals,
however,  born  of  these  mares  do  not  live  longer
than  three  years.

See  to  it  that  the  young  which  are  born  at  full
term  or  after  have  a  clean  and  soft  place  to  stand
upon,  and  that  they  be  not  trampled  under  foot.
Those  lambs  are  called  cordi  which  are  born  after
the  regular  time,  having  remained  in  the  internal
membrane,  which  is  called  chorion^-  whence  the
name  cordi.

The  third  section  deals  with  the  knowledge  neces-
sary in  rearing  animals,  and  tells  you,  in  respect  of
this,  for  how  many  days  the  young  should  be
suckled  by  the  mother,  and  the  time  when,  and
place  where,  this  is  to  be  done.  It  instructs  you,  if
the  mother  has  not  milk  enough,  to  put  them  to  the
breast  of  another  mother.  Those  with  whom  this  is
done  are  called  siihritmi^  for  rumis^  was,  I  imagine,
the  ancient  word  for  "  breast."

'  Hjpenemia,  vTrrjvfuia  (Aristotle,  Hist.  A.,  v,  i).  Pliny
(N.  H.,  X,  60)  calls  them  irrita,  and  says  that  they  are  sterile,
small,  of  poorer  flavour,  and  more  watery  than  good  eggs.

^  Chorion.  Keil  thinks  that  several  words  have  here  dropped
out  from  the  text;  the  literal  translation  of  which,  as  it  stands,
is  of  course :  "  That  from  which  they  get  the  name  of  cordi  is
called  the  chorion  " — which  was  probably  all  the  explanation
Varro  meant  to  give.

^  Rumis.  Cf.  ii,  11,  5,  and  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xv,  18) :  lupa  infan-
tibus  praebens  rumen  {ita  vocabant  mammam),  and  Varro  (Ant.
R.  D.  Agahd.,  p.  170) :  quia  rumam  dixerunt  veteres  mammam
(from  Aug.,  De  Civ.  Dei,  iv,  11).  The  goddess  who  looked
after  the  suckling  of  children  was  called  Rumina,  ar^d  the  fig-


I40  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

Lambs  as  a  rule  are  not  weaned  until  four
months  old,  kids  until  three,  pigs  until  two.  Of  the
last-named  those  which  are  without  blemish,  and  fit
for  sacrifice,  were  once  called  sacres,  a  word  em-
ployed by  Plautus  in  the  phrase,  "  What  price  are
porci  sacres?  "  ^  Similarly  fat  beasts,  fattened  for
public  sacrifices,  are  called  opimi.

The  fourth  section  deals  with  the  health  of  the
stock.  It  is  of  wide  extent  and  must  be  taken  into
serious  account,  for  an  unhealthy  flock  is  very  vul-
nerable, and  owing  to  its  weakness  often  suffers
great  disaster  from  disease.

Now,  of  this  science  (of  health)  there  are  two
branches,  as  in  the  case  of  men,  one  concerned  with
such  things  as  need  the  attendance  of  a  doctor,  the
other  with  those  which  even  a  shepherd  who  takes
pains  may  treat.  It  has  three  divisions,  for  you
must  note  (i)  what  is  the  cause  of  each  particular
ailment;  (2)  what  are  the  characteristic  symptoms  of
those  causes,  and  (3)  what  is  the  treatment  which
each  disease  requires.

In   general  what   causes  most   diseases  will    be

tree  near  the  Palatine  under  which  the  twins  were  suckled
was  coW&^jicus  Ruminalis.

^  Porci  sacres.  The  passage  referred  to  by  Varro  is  Plaut.,
Menaechm.,  ii,  2,  15:

Adolescens  quibus  hie  prStits  porci  v^neunt
Sacres,  sinceri?  Nummo.    Eum  a  me  dccipe
Itibe  te  piari  de  mca  pecunia.

Sacri  and  sacres  are  parallel,  like  hiJari  and  hilarcs,  epiiloni
and  epuloncs,  etc.


II]  CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE   141

found  to  be  sickness  induced  by  heat  or  by  chills,
or  again,  by  too  much  work  or  by  the  opposite  ex-
treme, lack  of  exercise,  or  by  giving  food  or  drink
immediately  after  exercise.

The  symptoms  are:  in  case  of  a  fever  which  is
the  result  of  overwork  an  open  mouth,  rapid  and
moist  breath,  and  a  hot  body;  the  treatment  when

23  this  is  the  case  is  as  follows:  the  animal  is  bathed
all  over  with  water,  and  thoroughly  rubbed  with  a
mixture  of  tepid  oil  and  wine,  its  strength  is  kept  up
by  food,  and  some  wrapping  is  thrown  over  it  to
prevent  it  from  taking  cold.  If  it  is  thirsty,  luke-
warm water  is  given.  If  nothing  is  gained  by  this
method  of  treatment,  the  animal  is  bled — preferably
from  the  head.

Again,  different  diseases  have  different  causes
and  different  symptoms,  and  of  these,  in  the  case  of
every  flock  or  herd,  the  man  to  whose  care  it  is
committed  should  have  a  written  record.

24  There  remains  now  the  ninth  division  mentioned
before,  which  is  concerned  with  number,  and  is
common  to  each  of  the  two  parts.  For  he  who  buys
stock  must  fix  a  number,  must  determine  how  many
flocks  he  intends  to  feed,  and  the  number  in  each
flock,  lest  there  be  too  much  or  too  little  grazing
ground  for  them,  and  loss  be  the  result.  He  must
know  besides  how  many  breeding  ewes  to  keep  in  a
flock,  how  many  rams,  how  many  lambs  of  each
sex,  and  how  many  of  the  poorer^  sort  should  be
weeded  out.

'   Quot  reiculae.      Cf.    Nonius  {sub  verbum,  edit.  Lindsay,


142  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

As  to  the  rearing  of  them :  if  too  many  lambs  are
born,  you  must  follow  the  practice  of  some  farmers
and  part  with  some  of  them ;  the  result  of  doing  so
is  generally  that  the  rest  thrive  better.

15  I  am  afraid,  said  Atticus,  that  you  are  mistaken,
and  thatyour  nine  divisions  are  applicable  only  to  the
smaller  and  greater  cattle.  For  how  will  they  apply
to  mules  and  shepherds,  where  there  is  no  question
either  of  "  admission  "  or  of  "  gestation  ";  fori  see
that  in  speaking  of  dogs  the  nine  divisions  may  be

:6  used.  I  grant,  however,  that  the  number  nine  may
be  retained  in  the  case  of  human  beings  as  well ;  for
farmers  keep  women  in  the  winter-quarters  of  the
slaves — in  the  farm  buildings,  I  mean — while  some
do  so  even  in  their  summer  quarters;  their  object
being  to  make  it  easier  to  keep  the  shepherds  with
their  flocks,  to  increase  the  number  of  the  slaves
by  child-bearing,  and  thus  to  make  their  stock  farm-
ing a  more  profitable  business.

Said  I :  This  number  is  not  given  as  an  exact  one,
any  more  than  when  we  say  that  a  thousand  ships
went  to  Troy,  or  speak  of  the  court  of  the  Centum-
viri"^  (hundred  men)  at  Rome.  So  strike  off,  if  you
like,  in  the  case  of  mules,  the  two  things,  impregna-

p.  247) :  Reiculas  oves,  aut  aetate  aut  tuorbo  graves.  Varro,
Cato  vel  de  liberis  educandis  :  ct  ut  in  grege  opilio  oves  minus
idoneas  reniovere  solet,  quas  reiculas  appellant.

^  Centu7iiviri.  They  formed  a  court  for  the  trial  of  certain
civil  causes  at  Rome  —  for  the  most  part  connected  with
property  and  especially  with  matters  of  inheritance.  It  con-
sisted in  Varro's  time  of  105  members  chosen  from  the  tribes
(three  from  each  of  the  thirty-five).


II]  CATTLE  FARMING:  ITS  PRACTICE  143

27  tion  and  foaling.  Foaling?  said  Vaccius,  as  though
one  didn't  sometimes  hear  of  a  mule  having  foaled  '
at  Rome!  I,  to  support  him,  put  in  the  statement
of  Mago  and  Dionysius  to  the  effect  that  mules  and
mares  are  delivered  in  the  twelfth  month  after  they
have  conceived.  And  so,  said  I,  if  the  parturition
of  a  mule  be  with  us  in  Italy  a  portent,  all  countries
do  not  agree  with  us  in  thinking  it  one.  Swallows,
moreover,  and  storks,  which  breed  in  Italy,  do  not
do  so  in  all  countries.  You  know,  of  course,  that
the  Syrian  date-palm,'  which  bears  in  Judaea,  can-

28  not  do  so  in  Italy.  But,  said  Scrofa,  if  you  prefer
to  make  up  the  number  eighty-one  without  reference
to  the  parturition  of  mules  and  the  rearing  of  their
young,  there  is  a  way  of  filling  up  the  two  gaps,
for  there  are,  in  addition,  two  supplementary  means
of  making  profit  which  are  of  considerable  import-
ance; one  of  which  is  shearing — for  sheep  and  goats
are  shorn  or  plucked — the  other,  of  wider  extent,
has  to  do  with  milk  and  cheese;  to  it  the  Greeks
have  given  a  special  name,  TupoTroiia,  and  have  written
much  concerning  it.

^  Pepensse,  held  as  a  prodigy  by  the  Romans.  Cf.  Livy,
xxvi,  23:  lapidibus pluisse  et  Reate  viulain peperisse ;  and  ag'ain,
xxxvii,  3:  Terra  apud  se  pluisse  TuscuJani  nunciahant:  et
Reatini  mulani  in  agro  suo  peperisse.  It  is  curious  how  often
Varro's  Reate  is  mentioned  by  Livy  as  the  scene  of  prodigies !

^  PahnuJas.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xiii,  ^):  Judaea  vero  inclyta  est
vel  magis  palmis.  .  .  .  Sunt  quidem  et  in  Europa  vul^oque
Italia,  sed  steriles.


144  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER   II

OF  SHEEP

1  But,  as  we  have  now  completed  our  task,  and  the
subject  of  cattle-raising  has  been  sketched  in  out-
line, it  is  the  turn  of  you  Epirot  experts  to  fill  in  the
details  and  show  the  mettle  '  of  shepherds  from  Per-
gamis'  and  Maledos.    Then  Atticus,  who  was  then

2  Titus  Pomponius,  but  is  now  called  Ouintus  Cae-
cilius  Atticus,'  as  he  still  keeps  the  cognomen  Atti-
cus, said,  I  suppose  I  had  better  begin,  for  if  I  am
not  mistaken  it  was  at  me  you  looked  when  you
spoke  just  now.    My  topic  shall  be  the  most  ancient

'  Potts  sint.  Archaic,  of  course,  ior  poss int.  Varro,  L.  L.,
vii,  5,  quotes  Pacuvius  :  Nulla  res  neque  j|  Cicurare  neque  viederi
potis  est.  The  word  potis  is  g'enerally  considered  to  be  an  in-
declinable adjective  or  an  adverb  like  magis.  Varro,  how-
ever, has  Dii  potes.  Ennius  has  potessunt  for  possunt.  Lu-
cretius (v.  1) :  Nee  potis  est  cemi  quod  cassum  lumine  fertur,
"  Nor  is  it  possible,"  etc.  Plautus  (Poenulus,  i,  2,  17) :  Populo,
cui  lubet,  plus  satis  dare  potis  sunt.

"^  Pergamis  and  Maledos.  Nothing  seems  to  be  known
about  either.

^  Nunc  Ouintus  Caecilius.  In  58  B.C.  Atticus  was  adopted
{testamento)  by  his  uncle  Quintus  Caecilius.  On  4th  October
of  the  same  year  Cicero  writes  from  Thessalonica  to  congratu-
late him.  The  letter  is  headed:  "Cicero  S.  D.,  Q.  Caecilio
Q.  F.  Pomponiano  Attico."

Atticus's  full  name  after  the  adoption  was  thus :  Quintus
Caecilius  Pomponianus  Atticus.  So  Caius  Octavius  became
C.  Julius  Caesar  Octavianus.


II]  OF  SHEEP  145

kind  of  stock.     For,  as  you  remark,  sheep  were  the
first   animals  caught  and  tamed  by  mankind.

The  first  thing  is  to  buy  good  ones,  and  such
they  will  be  as  regards  age  if  they  are  not  too  old
on  the  one  hand,  nor  on  the  other  merely  young
lambs,  for  as  the  latter  cannot  yet  give  increase,  so
the  former  can  no  longer  do  so,  but  of  the  two,  the
age  which  is  accompanied  by  hope  is  better  than

3  that  which  is  soon  followed  by  death.  As  to  type,
a  sheep  should  be  big-bodied,  with  plenty  of  soft
wool,  with  the  hairs  standing  high  and  thick  over
the  whole  body,  and  especially  about  the  shoulders
and  neck.  The  belly  also  should  be  covered  with
wool.  Accordingly  those  which  are  without  this
quality  were  called  by  our  ancestors  apicae,^  and
were  rejected  as  inferior.  They  should  be  short-
legged.  As  to  tails,  it  is  the  practice  in  Italy  to  have
them  long;  in  Syria,  short.

4  It  is  of  great  importance  to  see  that  your  flock  be
of  a  good  breed.  This  can  generally  be  determined
by  two  indications:  the  external  characteristics  and
the  offspring.  The  best  type  of  ram  has  the  fore-
head well  covered  with  wool,  horns  twisted  and
inclined  towards  the  muzzle,  gray  eyes,  ears  covered
with  wool,  broad  breast,  shoulders  and  hind-quar-
ters, and  the  tail  broad  and  long.    You  must  see,

^  Apicae.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  48):  In  ipsa  ove  satis generosi-
tatis  ostenditur  brevitate  crurum,  ventris  vestitu:  quibus  nndus
esset ' '  apicas  "  vocabant,  damnabantque.  Syriae  cubitales  ovium
candae.  The  word  is  no  doubt  Greek,  d-TrtKoi  (aTroKoi),  from
TTOKOQ  =  fleece,    Varro,  ii,  2,  6,  calls  them  niinas.  ^

L


146  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

too,  that  he  has  not  a  black  or  parti-coloured  tongue,
for  those  which  have  beget  as  a  rule  either  black
or  parti-coloured  lambs.  Again,  the  oJEfspring  will
prove  the  good  quality  of  the  breed  if  they  be
shapely.

5  In  buying,  we  make^  use  of  the  rights  implied  in
the  form  adopted.  For  in  it  some  people  make
more,  others  fewer,  reservations.  Some  people,  for
example,  after  settling  the  price  per  head  of  the
sheep,  stipulate  that  two  lambs  born  after  term  should
be  reckoned  as  one  sheep,  and  that  where  sheep
have  lost  their  teeth  through  age,  two  should  count
for  one.  For  the  rest  the  ancient  "formula"  is
generally  used :  after  the  purchaser  has  said.  Have
I  bought  them  for  so  much?  and  the  seller  has  re-
plied. You  have,'  and  the  purchaser  has  pledged
himself  to  pay  the  price,  the  latter  then  asks  for  a
warrant,  using  the  words  of  the  time-honoured  for-

6  mula: — Do  you  guarantee  that  those  sheep  before
our  eyes,  about  which  the  bargain  is  being  made,  are

1  Quae  lex praescripsit.  Cicero  (De  Oratore,  i,  58)  speaks  of
the  leges  Manilia7iae  venaliiun  vendendonim ,  concerning  which
Ernesti  (Clavis  Cicer.  article  lex)  remarks,  Quid  sunt  nisi
formulae  a  Ilio  cojiceptae  quihus  uti  in  emendis  vendendisque
rebus  liceret?  They  were  probably  not  laws  in  our  sense  of  the
word,  but  forms — like  our  forms  of  agreement  between  land-
lord and  tenant — which  it  was  prudent  alike  for  buyers  and
sellers  to  use.

^  Et  expromisit  nummos.  Keil  places  a  comma  here,  Schnei-
der a  colon.  Either  makes  the  sense  obscure,  whereas  if  the
comma  be  placed  after  emptor  it  is  clear — et  exprotnisit  nummos
emptor.


II]  OF  SHEEP  147

genuinely  sound  in  the  sense  in  which  a  flock  of
sheep  is  considered  genuinely  sound,  excluding^
those  blind  of  one  eye,  deaf,  or  minae — that  is,''
with  belly  devoid  of  wool — that  they  do  not  come
from  a  tainted  flock,  that  possession  is  good  in  law,
and  that  this  sale  is  legal?  When  this  has  been
done,  the  flock  has  still  not  changed  owner  unless
the  money  has  been  paid  down ;  yet  the  buyer  may
bring  and  win  an  action  under  the  head  of  "bought
and  sold"'  against  the  seller  if  he  does  not  deliver
them,  even  though  he  may  not  have  paid  the  money,
just  as  the  seller  may  bring  a  similar  action  against
the  buyer  if  he  does  not  pay.

^  Extra.  Extra  quam  si,  words  which  introduce  an  exception
in  the  text  of  an  agreement.  Cf.  Cicero  (Ad  Atticum,  vi,  i,  14) :
Extra  quam  si  ita  yiegotium  gestuni  est  ut  eo  stari  non  oporteat
ex  fide  bona.

*  Id  est  ventre  glabra.  If  these  words  are  not  an  interpola-
tion made  by  an  unintelligent  copyist,  apicae  and  minae  have
the  same  meaning.  This  does  not  seem  probable,  for  both  the
words  are  explained  by  Festus  :  Apice  dicitur  ovis  qtiae  ventrem
glabrum  habet;  and  :  Minam  ait  Aelius  vocitatam  mammam
alteram  lacte  deficientetn  (for  alteram,  which  is  unintelligible,
alturae  or  ad  alturam  is  plausible).

Meursius,  and  after  him  Miiller,  suggest  that  mijius  is  the
positive  of  minor,  and  means  tenuis  (cf.  modern  Welsh,  main
=  "  slight."  Perhaps  the  word  means  here  "with  unde-
veloped teats,"  and  the  following  phrase  is  a  gloss.

^  Ex  empto  vendito,  a  titulus  iuris.  Cf.  Cicero  (De  N.  D.,
iii,  cap.  30) :  Reliqua  quae  ex  empto  aut  vendito.  .  .  .  Co?itra
fidem  fiunt.

As  to  the  fact,  cf.  Justin,  Instit.,  iii,  24:  Emptio  et  venditio
contrahitur  simul  atque  de  pretio  convenerit  quamvis  nondum
pretium  numeratum  sit.


148  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

7  The  second  four  divisions — feeding,  breeding,
rearing,  and  the  health  of  the  flock,  I  will  discuss
in  order.

In  the  first  place  you  must  see  that  the  sheep  be
properly  fed,  indoors  and  out,  the  whole  year  round ;
their  stalls  must  be  in  a  suitable  place,  free  from
draughts,  and  facing  east  rather  than  south.  The
ground  on  which  they  are  to  stand  should  be
levelled,  and  sloping,  so  that  it  may  easily  be  swept
out  and  cleaned.  For  wet  spoils  not  only  a  sheep's
wool,  but  the  hoofs  as  well,  and  makes  them
scabby.

8  After  they  have  been  for  some  days  [on  the  same
bedding]  you  must  put  under  them  fresh  brushwood,
that  they  may  have  a  softer  couch  to  sleep  on,  and
be  cleaner.  For  so  their  appetites  are  better.  You
must  also  build  pens  apart  from  the  rest  that  you
may  be  able  to  isolate  the  pregnant  ewes,  as  well  as
those  which  are  ill.  These  instructions  are  applic-
able more  especially  to  flocks  which  are  kept  at  the

9  farmstead.  On  the  other  hand,  those  others  which
feed  on  grazing  grounds,  and  are  far  from  roofed
buildings,  take  with  them  hurdles  or  netting,  with
which  sheepfolds  may  be  made  in  the  wilderness —
and  all  other  needful  things.  For  generally,  sheep
range  far,  and  graze  in  places  wide  apart,  the  winter
pastures  often  being  many  miles  from  those  used  in

.    summer.     I  know  that  well  enough,   I  exclaimed,

(r  for  flocks  of  mine  used  to  winter  in  Apulia  which

I    spent  the  summer  on  the  mountains  about  Reate,

though  the  pastures  were  far  from  each  other  and


II]  OF  SHEEP  149

connected  between  these  two  places  by  public  tracks

10  like  a  pair'  of  baskets  by  their  yoke.  And  even  when
they  graze  in  the  same  district  all  the  year,  yet  the
seasons  make  a  difference  to  their  times  of  feeding,
for  in  summer  they  go  forth  to  feed  as  the  day  is
breaking,  since  then  the  dewy  grass  is  sweeter  than
the  drier  herbage  of  noon.  When  the  sun  is  well  up,"^
the  shepherds  drive  them  forth  to  drink,  that  by
thus  refreshing  them  they  may  make  them  eager

11  again  to  feed.  During  the  noon-tide  heats,  they
are  brought  beneath  the  shade  of  rocks  and  spread-
ing trees  that  they  may  cool  down  until  the  heat
abates.  In  the  cool  evening  air  they  feed  them  again
until  sun-set.  When  feeding  sheep  you  should  drive
them  so  that  they  have  their  backs  turned  to  the  sun,
for  in  a  sheep  the  head^  is  the  weakest  part.  A
short  while  after  sunset  they  are  taken  to  drink,
and  then  fed  again  until  it  grows  dark;  for  after
sunset  the  sweetness  of  the  grass  will  be  a  second
time  renewed.*    This  way  of  feeding  is  generally

^  Sirpiculos.  Possibly  connected  with  sirpea  which  Varro
defines  (L.  L.  v,  39):  Sirpea  quae  virgis  sirpatur,  id  est  coll i-
gando  implicatur  in  qua  stercus  aliudve  quid  ■vehitur.  The
iugum  (yoke)  is  the  Greek  d(n\\a  or  uvatpopivQ,  used  to  carry
buckets,  pails,  etc.

^  Prima  luce.  With  this  passage  compare  Virgil's  beautiful
paraphrase  (Georg.,  iii,  324-338),  and  Columella's  directions
concerning  the  feeding  of  sheep  (vii,  3,  23).

^  Caput.  Columella,  vii,  3,  24:  Si  quidem  plurimum  refer t  ut
ne  pascentium  capita  sint  adversa  soli.

*  Redintegrahit.  Perhaps  the  translation  should  run,  *'  will
again  refresh  them,"  though  one  suspects  that  redintegrabitur


I50  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

practised   from   the  rising   of  the    Pleiads   to  the

12  autumnal  equinox.  In  places  where  the  harvest
has  just  been  got,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  drive  them
on  to  the  corn-fields,  for  a  double  reason :  they  get
fat  on  the  fallen  ears,  and  by  trampling  the  straw
and  by  dunging  they  improve  the  crops  for  the
following  year.  The  other  modes  of  feeding  in
winter  and  spring-time  differ  from  this  in  that  they
drive  the  sheep  out  to  pasture  only  when  the  hoar-
frost has  evaporated,  and  feed  them  throughout  the
whole  day,  thinking  it  enough  to  take  them  once
only  to  drink,  at  noon.

13  So  much  for  the  different  ways  of  feeding.  What
I  am  now  about  to  say  relates  to  breeding.  The
rams  which  you  mean  to  use  for  this  purpose
should  be  separated  from  the  flock  two  months^
before,  and  given  a  more  generous  allowance  of
food.  When  they  return  from  grazing  to  their
stalls,  if  barley  is  given  them  they  grow  stronger
and  more  capable  of  enduring  fatigue.

The  best  time  for  their  service  is  from  the  setting
of  Arcturus"  to  the  setting  of  Aquila,  for  those  that

not  redintegrahit  should  be  in  the  text.    Cf.  Vergil  (Georg.,  iii,

336) :

Soils  ad  occasum  cum  frigidus  aera  Vesper

Temperat  et  saltus  reficit  lain  roscida  Luna.

Varro  (iii,  7,  6)  uses  redlntcgrare  in  the  sense  of  "refresh":
quod  llbero  acre,  cum  exierlnt  in  agros,  redintegrentur.

'  Bimestrl  tempore.  Cf.  Geoponica,  xvlii,  3,  where  Varro  Is
closely  followed  throughout  the  chapter.

'^  Ah  Arcluri  occasu.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  47)  gives  precise
dates — from  13th  May  to  23rd  July.


ii]  OF  SHEEP  151

are  conceived  later  than  this  grow  up  small    and

14  weak.  A  sheep  is  pregnant  for  150  days.  Thus
birth  takes  place  at  the  end  of  autumn,  when  the
air  is  temperate,  and  the  grass,  called  forth  by
the  first  showers,  is  beginning  to  spring  up.  As
long  as  the  ram  is  serving  there  must  be  no  change
in  the  water, ^  as  a  change  makes  the  wool  streaky
in  colour,  and  damages  the  womb.  When  all  the
ewes  have  conceived,  you  must  again  separate  the
rams  from  the  flock,  for^  by  pestering  sheep  already
pregnant  they  do  them  harm.  Again  you  must  not
let  ewes  under  two  years  old  be  covered,  for  if  they
are,  what  is  born  of  them  is  of  no  use,  and  the
mothers  themselves  are  harmed.  There  is  none
better  for  breeding  than  a  three-year-old  ewe.  Ewes
are  sometimes  protected  from  the  male  by  fastening
behind  them  small  baskets  made  of  rushes  or  some
other  material.  They  are,  however,  more  easily
kept  safe  if  fed  apart.

15  As  to  the  rearing  of  lambs:  so  soon  as  the  ewes
begin  to  bear  they  are  driven  into  stables  set  apart
for  the  purpose,  and  in  them  the  new-born  lambs
are  put  close  to  the  fire  until  they  have  gained
strength.    The  ewes  are  then  kept  in  these  stables

^  Eadeni  aqua  uti.  Aristotle  (Hist.  An.,  iii,  12),  discussing
the  change  of  colour  in  animals,  says :  koX  Trtpl  Tag  oxeiag
S'  tarlv  vSara  TroWaxov  roiavra,  a  Tcivovra  kcu  oxivaavra  fierd  tijv
TTOffiv  TU  TrpojSara,  fifkavaq  ytvvwai  tovq  apvag,  k.t.X.

^  lam.  So  Keil  for  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  ita.  But  the
latter  seems  to  make  excellent  sense :  "  they  do  harm  to  the
ewes  which  have  thus  become  pregnant,  by  pestering  them,"
the  word  ita  having  reference  to  cum  conceperunt.


152  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

two  or  three  days,  until  the  lambs  learn  to  recognize
their  mothers  and  get  their  fill  of  food.  Next,  when
the  mothers  go  out  with  the  flock  to  graze,  the
lambs  are  kept  at  home,  and  when  the  mothers  are
brought  back  to  them  towards  evening,  they  are
suckled  by  them,  and  then  again  separated,  lest  the
mothers  should  trample'  on  them  in  the  night.  This
procedure  is  repeated  in  the  morning,  before  the
mothers  go  out  to  graze,  that  the  little  lambs  may
i6  get  a  good  meal'  of  milk.  When  about  ten  days
have  elapsed,  stakes  are  driven  into  the  ground,  and
to  these  the  lambs  are  fastened  at  some  distance
from  one  another,  by  strings  made  of  rind  or  some
other  smooth  material,  lest  by  running  about  all
day  and  colliding  with  one  another  the  frail  little
things  knock  the  skin  off  a  limb.  If  a  lamb  will  not
come  to  its  mother's  udder,  you  must  put  it  there,
and  smear  its  lips  with  butter''  or  hog's  lard,  and
give  its  lips  the  savour '  of  milk.    A  few  days  after

^  Conculcentur.    Cf.  Geoponica  (/oc.  cit.).

^  Satulli,  a  diminutive  from  satur.  The  fondness  for  dimin-
utives, a  characteristic  of  rustic  Latin,  is  strong  in  inodern
Italian.  This  word  satullus —\\.2X\a.n  satollo,  and  Varro's  word,
quoted  by  Nonius,  i"a/M//a;'^=  Italian  satoUare.

'  Buturo.  Pliny  (N.  H.  xxviii,  9)  describes  butter-making,
and  tells  one  a  good  deal  about  butter.  "Amongst  barbarous
nations  it  is  highly  esteemed  as  a  food."  "  Hog's  lard  comes
next  to  it  in  merit."  "  It  may  be  used  instead  of  oil  "  (xxviii,
10),  and  is  a  "  capital  remedy  if  you  happen  to  have  swallowed
a  leech."  "It  is  astringent,  fattening,  emollient,  and  purga-
tive." But  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  lambs'  lips  are
to  be  smeared  with  it !

*  Olfacere  labra.   The  text  must  be  corrupt  here.    Olfacere


II]  OF  SHEEP  153

you  should  give  them  ground  vetch  or  young  grass
before  they  go  out  to  graze,  and  also  when  they

17  return.  And  in  this  manner  they  are  reared  until
they  reach  four  months.  Some  people  meanwhile
do  not  milk  the  mothers  at  these  times.  They  do
still  better  who  do  not  milk  them  at  all  the  whole
time,  as  they  then  give  more  wool  and  bear  more
lambs.  When  the  lambs  are  weaned  care  must  be
taken  lest,  missing  the  mother's  udder,  they  pine
away.  So  in  rearing  them  you  must  make  the  loss
more  easy  for  them  by  good  feeding,  and  must  take
care  that  they  do  not  suffer  at  all  from  cold  or  heat.

18  When,  having  forgotten  milk,  the  lamb  ceases  to
miss  its  mother,  then,  but  not  till  then,  should  you
let  it  join  the  flock.  Lambs  must  not  be  castrated
before  they  are  five  months  old,  nor  before  the  ex-
treme heat  or  cold  has  abated.  The  rams  preferred
for  service  are  those  which  come  from  dams  that
usually  bear  twins.  ^

makes  no  sense.  Schneider  in  his  index  gives  it  the  meaning
of  ■Kpo(joG(l>paiveadai,  but  this,  in  the  only  place  I  can  find  it,
Geoponica,  xix,  2,  means  to  "bring  to  smell."  One  would
have  expected  madefacere  or  something  of  the  kind.  Colu-
mella (vii,  3,  17)  says  that  the  teats  of  the  mother  should  be
pressed  and  a  few  drops  of  milk  squeezed  between  the  parted
lips  of  the  lamb,  uberihus  ad  moveri,  ttint  etiam  eius  diductum
OS  pressis  huinectare  pupillis.  Madefacere  is  used  by  Varro,
ii,  4,  15,  and  iii,  10,  7.  If  in  the  MS.  the  ma  were  obliterated,
defacere  might  easily  be  altered  to  olfacere  by  one  of  the  canes
qui  tavi  viisere  Varronem  dilacerarunt!  as  Schneider  calls  the
copyists.

^  Geminos.    Aristotle  (H.  A.   vi,   19)  says  that  "  sheep  or


154  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

In  general  a  similar  treatment  should  be  followed
with  "jacketed"  ^  sheep,  such  as  those  of  Tarentum  ^
and  Attica,  which  are  protected  by  skin  jackets,  so
that  their  wool  may  not  be  soiled,  as  dirt  prevents
it  from  being  properly  dyed,  washed,  and  bleached.
19  Greater  care  is  taken  that  the  pens  and  stables  of
these  sheep  may  be  clean  than  in  the  case  of  those
with  coarse  wool,  the  stable  being  paved  to  prevent
urine  from  collecting  anywhere  in  it.  They  are
given  whatever  they  like  to  eat,  such  as  fig-leaves,
straw,  grape-skins,  bran,  in  moderate  quantities,  so
that  they  may  eat  neither  too  much  nor  too  little,
as  either  extreme  prevents  them  from  putting  on
flesh.    For  this  purpose  the  best  food  is  lucerne  ^

goats  produce  twins,  if  they  are  well  fed,  or  if  the  ram  or  he-
goat  is  accustomed  to  get  twins  or  the  mother  to  bear  them."

^  In  ovibus  pellitis.  Cf.  Pliny  (N.  H.  viii,  47):  Ovium
summa  genera  duo,  tectum  et  colonicum,  illtid  molUus,  hoc  in
pascuo  delicatius  quippe  cum  tectum  ruhis  vescatur,"  where
tectum  =pellitum.  The  delicate  sheep  with  fine  wool,  such  as
those  of  Megara,  Attica,  and  Tarentum,  were  protected
against  the  cold  and  dirt  by  jackets  made  of  skin.  Diogenes
the  Cynic  (Cf.  Diogenes  Laertius  in  vita  Diogenis)  when  he
was  in  Megara  noticed  that  the  children  went  about  naked,
while  the  rams  were  clothed,  and  remarked  that  it  was  evid-
ently better  to  be  a  Megarian's  ram  than  his  child !

-  Tarentum.  Festus,  in  a  much  mutilated  text,  appears  to
say  that  a  Tarentine  sheep  was  worth  about  a  pound  sterling.

^  Medica.  Columella  (ii,  11,  2)  praises  it  extravagantly:
"One  sowing  lasts  ten  years;  it  gives  generally  four,  some-
times six  cuttings  in  the  year,  enriches  the  land,  fattens  all
kinds  of  lean  cattle,  and  cures  such  as  are  sick.  Two-thirds  of
an  acre  of  it  will  feed,  and  feed  well,  three  horses  for  a  whole


II]  OF  SHEEP  155

and  snail-clover,  for  it  fattens  them  readily  and
produces  milk.
20  As  to  the  health  of  the  flock  there  are  many
points  to  be  noted;  but  these,  as  I  said  before,  the
flock-master  has  set  down  in  a  book.  He  also
carries  with  him  what  is  necessary  for  the  medical
treatment  of  the  flock.  The  question  of  number
remains  for  discussion.  Some  people  make  it  greater,
others  less,  for  there  is  no  one  scale  indicated  by
nature.  In  Epirus  nearly  all  of  us  take  care  to  have
not  less  than  one  man  for  each  hundred  of  the
rough-coated  variety,  and  two  for  each  hundred  of
the  ''jacketed  "  sheep.

year."  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xviii,  16)  describes  its  appearance  (i'/wzV/i'
est  trifolio,  caule  foliisque geniculata  :  quicquid  in  caule  assurgit,
folia  contrahuntur).  According  to  him  it  was  brought  to
Greece  by  the  Medes — whence  its  name — in  the  time  of
Darius.  Amphilochus  wrote  a  whole  book  about  it  and  the
Cytisus.  But  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  iii,  21)  states  that  Medica
dries  up  the  milk  of  animals,  especially  of  ruminants.  T»^c
^e  rpotpfiQ  7]  fikv  a^ivvvai  to  ya\a,  oiov  »/  Mjj^ik?)  iroa,  Kcd  fiaXiara
toIq  iirjpvKuZovai.  Palladius  (April.  Tit.,  i)  repeats  Columella,
and  adds  that  a  cyathus  full  (.082  pint)  of  seed  was  enough
to  sow  a  plot  of  land  15  ft.  by  10  ft.


156  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  III

OF  GOATS

1  Then  said  Cossinius  to  him,  Long  enough  hast
thou  bleated,  O  Roman  Faustulus,^  now  listen
while  I  tell  of  goats,  I,  the  Melanthius"  of  Homer,
born  out  of  season,^  and  learn  from  me  how  a  man
should  speak  without  waste  of  words.

He  who  would  form  a  flock  of  goats  must  first
consider  the  question  of  age,  buying  such  as  can
now  yield  increase,  and  of  these  preferring  one  that
has  a  longer  breeding  time  before  it;  for  a  young

2  one  is  more  profitable  than  an  old.  As  to  their
points:  see  that  they  be  big  and  strong,  having  a
smooth  body,  and  thick  hair  (except  when  they  are
hairless — for  there  are  two  varities) ;  under  the  chin

'  O  Fatistule.  An  allusion  to  the  shepherd  foster-father  of
Romulus  and  Remus.    He  was  the  shepherd  of  Amulius.

-  Melanthio.  Melanthius  was  the  goatherd  (MeXav^toe  axizoKoq
aiyCiv)  of  Ulysses,  who  supplied  the  suitors  with  the  best  of  the
flock  (Od.,  xvii,  217).  For  this  he  was  mutilated  horribly  and
killed  by  Telemachus  (xxii,  474).

^  Cordo.  Cordus,  which  means  "  born  out  of  season,"  was  a
Roman  family  name  (Quintilian,  i,  4,  25).  Cicero  mentions  a
L.  Cordus — a  negotiator  Siculus — (Verr.,  iv,  20).  The  phrase
Homerico  Melanthio  Cordo  reminds  one  of  Persius's  line  (vi,
11),  Maeonides  Ouintus  pavone  ex  Pythagoreo,  where  there  is
precisely  the  same  kind  of  pun  as  here,  for  "  Quintus  "  is  a
Roman  praenomen  and  means  "fifth,"  and  Ennius  (so  the
Scholiast)  was  fifth  from  the  peacock — the  order  being,  pea-
cock, Euphorbus,  Homer,  Pythagoras,  Ennius.


II]  OF  GOATS  157

they  ought  to  have  two  teat-like  appendages/  as
those  which  have  them  are  the  most  fertile.  The
udder  should  be  large,  that  so  they  may  give  milk
both  rich  and  abundant.  The  he-goat  must  have
rather  soft  hair,  preferably  white,  neck  and  throat
short,  and  larynx  *  comparatively  long.  The  flock
proves  better  if  it  be  not  a  made-up  collection,  but
a  single  flock'  of  old  companions.
3  As  for  the  breed,  I  say  what  Atticus  said  when
treating  of  sheep,  with  this  difference — the  race
of  sheep  is  relatively  slow-going,  inasmuch  as
they  are  of  gentler*  temperament,  while  the  goat
kind  are  quicker  of  movement.  About  their  nimble-
ness  Cato  in  his  book  *'Of  Origins,"  writes  these
words:    '*  On   Mount  Soracte  ^  and   Mount   Fiscel-

'  Mammulas.  Columella  (vii,  6,  2)  calls  them  little  warts :
Caper  cui  sub  maxillis  binae  verniculae  collo  dependent  optimus
hahetur.

^  Gurgulione  (yapyapedjv).  The  Geoponica,  xviii,  9,  trans-
late this  (ipoyxoQ-  It  is  evidently  the  larynx — prominent  in
males.  In  the  same  passage  it  is  said  that  the  goats  should  be
oatTVTpixiQ,  i-e.,  shaggy.  The  word  molUori  does  not  seem
right.    Perhaps  melioris  is  the  true  reading.

^  Grex  una.  Columella  says  (vii,  6,  5):  Atque  ubi  caprae
primum  comparantur,  melius  est  unum  gregem  totum  quain  ex
pluribus  particulatim  mercari,  and  gives  as  reasons  ut  nee  in
pastione  separatim  laciniae  diducantur,  el  in  caprili  maiore  Con-
cordia quietae  consistant.

*  Placidiores.  Aristotle  (H.  A.  ix,  3) :  di  yap  olig  /laWov
i}<rvxu^ov<7i  Kal  izpoa'ipxovTai  irpoQ  avQpunrovQ.

'  Soracti.  For  a  most  interesting  account  of  Mount  Soracte
(Sant  Oreste)  see  Dennis,  "Cities  and  Cemeteries  of  Etruria,"
cap.  X.


158  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

lus^  there  are  wild  she-goats  that  will  leap  more  than
sixty  feet  from  a  rock."  I  quote  this  because  just
as  domestic  sheep  are  sprung  from  wild  ones,  so  the
goats  which  we  feed  are  sprung  from  the  wild  kind.
From  them  the  island  of  Caprasia,"  near  Italy,  takes
its  name.

4  Since  among  she-goats  such  as  bear  twnns  are  the
best  breed,  it  is  customary  to  choose  for  breeding
purposes  the  males  sprung  from  these.  Some
people,  too,  take  care  to  have  she-goats  from  the
island  of  Melia,^  as  it  is  thought  that  there  the  big-
gest and  handsomest  kids  are  born.

5  As  to  buying,  I  do  not*  give  the  same  formula  as

^  Fiscello.  Varro  (ii,  i,  5)  speaks  of  the  wild  goats  near
Mount  Fiscellus.  Here  the  river  Nar  (now  Nera)  had  its  source
— a  river  whose  waters  are  still  white  and  still  vitiatus  odoro
sulfure  (Claudian  i,  256).  Reate  (Rieti),  Varro's  birthplace,  is
on  this  river.

^  Caprasia.  Now  Cabrera  (goat  island),  a  little  south  of
Minorca.

^  Melia.  Probably  (Scaliger)  the  island  of  Melos,  in  the
Cretan  Sea.  I  have  searched  the  geographers  but  can  find  no-
where any  connection  between  Melos  and  goats  mentioned.
But  the  mountainous  nature  of  the  country  is  well  suited  to
them.

'  AUter  dico  atque  fit.  Atticus  had  before  (ii,  2,  6)  mentioned
the  "ancient  formula"  used  in  buying  sheep.  In  this  they
were  guaranteed  to  be  healthy  and  from  a  healthy  flock.  In
this  chapter,  §  3,  Cossinius  says  that  he  agrees  with  Atticus
about  the  breed  of  go.its ;  and  here  that  the  formula  quoted  by
Atticus  for  buying  sheep  will  not  serve  for  buying  goats  and
is  in  point  of  fact  not  used.

This  sense,  which  seems  clear,  has  apparently  escaped  all  the


II]  OF  GOATS  159

Atticus  did  for  sheep,  and  the  usage  is  different,  for
no  one  of  sound  mind  guarantees  goats  sound,  as
they  are  never  without  fever.^  Accordingly  the  war-
rant required  contains  only  a  few  stipulations  taken
from  the  general  formula,  and  Manilius^  has  left  on
record  the  following:  *' Do  you  guarantee  these
she-goats  as  being  to-day  able  to  eat  and  drink
properly,  and  that  the  purchase  is  legal?"  There
is  a  remarkable  fact  about  goats,  related  also  by
Archelaus :  ^  several  shepherds  more  observant  than
the  rest  assert  that  they  do  not  breathe  through
their  nostrils  like  other  animals,  but  through  their
ears.
6  With  regard  to  the  second  four  divisions,  my
opinion  about  the  feeding  of  goats  is  as  follows.

commentators.  The  objection  to  the  translation  is,  of  course,
that  aliter  atque  would  in  normal  Latin  mean  ' '  otherwise
than,"  but  there  is  no  reason  why  the  passage  should  not  mean
dico  atque  fit  aliter.  I  say  differently  and  the  practice  is  differ-
ent.   This  agrees  perfectly  with  what  follows.

^  Sine  fehri  sunt.  Geoponica,  xviii,  g :  fvaiKuig  du  itvpirru,
and  go  on  to  say  that  "if  the  fever  leaves  them  they  die."
Another  interesting  fact  mentioned  in  the  same  chapter  is
that  a  he-goat  will  not  run  away  if  you  cut  off  his  beard  !

^  Manilius.  Manius  (not  Marcus)  Manilius,  a  celebrated
jurisconsult,  the  author  of  the  Leges  Manilianae  {venalium
vendendorum).    He  was  Consul  149  B.C.

3  Archelaus.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xviii,  3)  mentions  him  among
the  kings  who  have  written  on  agriculture,  and — -viii,  50 —
credits  him  with  the  statement  in  the  text  Auribus  eas  spirare
non  naribus,  nee  umquamfebri  carere  Archelaus  auctor  est.

Aristotle  (H.  A.,  i,  xi)  says:  "Alcmaeon  does  not  speak  the
truth  when  he  asserts  that  goats  breathe  through  their  ears,"


i6o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

The  flock  is  better  housed  if  the  stable  faces  the
winter  sunrise,  for  goats  are  chilly  ^  animals.  It,  like
most  stables,  should  be  paved  with  stone  or  bricks"  to
prevent  the  goat-house  from  being  damp  and  muddy.
When  they  have  to  sleep  out  of  doors,  pens  also
facing  the  same  quarter  of  the  heavens  should  be
strewn  with  brushwood,  that  they  may  not  get
dirty.  In  the  feeding  of  this  kind  of  cattle  much
the  same  attention  must  be  given  to  them  as  to

7  sheep,  though  they  have  their  own  peculiarities,  as
they  are  happier  in  woodland  glades  than  in  mea-
dows. For  they  eagerly  pluck  their  food  from  wild
shrubs,  and  on  cultivated  land  nip  off  small
branches.  For  this  reason  goats  get  their  name
{caprae)  from  carpere  (to  pluck).  Hence,  too,  in  the
text  of  an  agreement  for  letting  a  farm,  an  excep-
tive clause  is  generally  found  forbidding  the  tenant
to  graze  on  the  farm  the  offspring  of  the  she-goat.
For  the  she-goat's  teeth  are  hostile  to  the  growing
crops,  and  even  the  astronomers,  while  admitting
them  to  the  sky,  have  shut  them  out  from  the  circle
of  the  twelve  signs — the  two  kids  and  the  she-goat
being  not  far  from  the  bull.''

8  With     regard     to    breeding:     At    the    close    of

'  Alsiosum.  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  ix,  3):  ihl  ^'aJ  diyfQ  Svapi-
yoTipai  Twv  oi(i)V.

'  Testa  (Vitruvius,  ii,  2>)  =  Iateres  cocli,  kiln-baked  bricks.

^  Sunt  duo  haedi .  .  .  atauro.  These  words  Ursinus,  Gesner,
and  Schneider  would  expunge  from  the  text,  thinking  them  to
have  been  taken  b\-  a  commentator  from  ii,  i,  8.  But  Varro
frequently  repeats  himself.


II]  OF  GOATS  i6i

autumn  (about  loth  November)  the  males  are
driven  from  the  flock  which  is  on  the  plain  to  goat-
houses,  as  has  been  mentioned  in  the  case  of
rams.^  Those  goats  which  have  conceived  are  de-
livered after  the  fourth  month  -  in  the  springtime.

As  to  rearing:  As  soon  as  the  kids  are  three
months  old,  they  are  put  into  the  flock  and  begin  to
form  a  part  of  it.

What  am  I  to  say  of  their  health,  when  they  are
never  healthy?  I  will  just  mention  the  one  fact
that  the  guardians  of  a  flock  have  certain  written
directions  as  to  what  remedies  to  use  against
some  of  their  diseases  and  against  wounds,  which
are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  their  case,  as  they
fight  with  one  another  with  their  horns  and  feed
in  thorny  places.
9  There  remains  for  discussion  the  question  of  num-
ber. This  is  smaller  in  the  case  of  a  flock  of  goats
than  of  sheep,  as  she-goats  are  full  of  mischief,^
and  prone  to  scatter,  whilst  sheep  are  gregarious
in  nature  and  huddle  together  into  one  place.
Hence  in  the  Ager  Gallicus^  men  keep  many  in
preference  to  large  flocks,  for  in  those  which  are
large  disease  often  breaks  out  suddenly,  and  brings

^    Ut  in  arietibus  dictum.    Cf.  ii,  2,  13.

^  Post  quartum  mensevi.    Aristotle,  H.  A.,  vi.  9:  kvu  5t  Trivrf
(irjvaQ  Kal  irpo^arov  Kal  cu.%.

Pliny,  N.  H.,vili,  50:  Concipiunt Novembri  mense  ut  Marfio
pariant.

'  Lascivae.    Cf.  Columella,  vii,  6,  7.

^  Ager  Gallicus.    Cf.  note,  i,  14,  4.

M


i62  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

lo  them  to  destruction.  A  flock  of  about  fifty  is  con-
sidered big  enough.  And  these  conclusions  are
supported,  it  is  thought,  by  what  happened  to
Gaberius,  a  Roman  eqiies.  He  owned  i,ooo  iiigera  ^
(700  acres)  on  the  outskirts  of  Rome,  and  hearing
from  a  certain  goat-herd,  who  had  brought  to  the
city  ten  she-goats,  that  each  of  them  brought
him  in  a  denarius  a  day,  he  bought  a  thou-
sand she-goats,  expecting  to  get  from  his  estate  a
thousand  denarii  C£Z'^)  ^  day.  So  far  was  he  out
in  his  reckoning,  that  in  a  short  time  he  lost  them
all  through  disease.  However,  in  the  country  of
the  Sallentini  and  about  Casinum  they  graze  flocks
containing  as  many  as  a  hundred  "  she-goats.

As  to  the  proportion  of  males  to  females,  there
is  much  the  same  difference  of  opinion,  some,  like
myself,  providing  one  he-goat  to  ten  females,  others,
like  Menas,"*  one  to  fifteen;  others  again,  such  as
Murrius,  one  to  twenty.

^  Mt'l/e  iugerum.  Varro,  ii,  i,  26,  has  milJe  naves.  In  everj-
other  place  where  the  word  occurs  in  the  singular  in  this  work,
it  is  a  neuter  noun.  Aulus  Gellius  (i,  16)  gives  many  examples
of  its  use  as  a  declinable  neuter  noun,  quoting  from  Cicero
(Mil.  53),  Mille  hominum  versabatur,  and  Lucilius  (Bk.  xv),
Hunc  milli  possum  quivicerit  atque  duobus\\  Campanus  sonipes^
etc.,  and  again  from  Lucilius  (Bk.  viii),  Tii  milJi  nummum
potes  uno  quaerere  centum.

^  Ad  centenas.  Columella  (vii,  6,  5)  makes  this  number  the
superior  limit,  though,  he  says,  there  Is  no  objection  to  your
penning  1,000  sheep  together.  Sed  numerum  huius  generis
maiorem  quam  centum  capitum  sub  uno  clauso  non  expedit
habere,  cum  lanigerae  mille  pariter  commode  stabulentur.

'  Menas   is   possibly    the    frecdman    of    whom    Suetonius


II]  OF  PIGS  163


CHAPTER  IV

OF  PIGS

I  But  who  ^  next  sails  out  from  an  Italian  port  to
discuss  the  subject  of  pigs?  Scrofa's  peculiar  fit-
ness to  discuss  this  question  is,  however,  indicated
by  his  nick-name  Scrofa.  Said  Tremellius  (Scrofa)
to  him.  You  don't  seem  to  know  why  I  am  called
Scrofa.  So,  in  order  that  you  and  our  friends  sitting
near  you  may  learn  the  reason,  let  me  tell  you  that
the  surname  connected  with  pigs  does  not  belong"
to  my  gens,  and  that  I  do  not  claim  descent  from
Eumaeus.^     My   grandfather   was   the   first   to   be

speaks  (August!  Vita,  74) :  Valerius  Messala  tradit,  neminem
uviquam  libertinorum  adhihitum  aheo  caenae,  excepto  Mena,  sed
asserto  in  ingenuitatem  post  proditani  Sexti  Poinpei  cJassem.
The  Menas  who  first  brought  barbers  to  Rome,  300  B.C.,  was
a  Sicilian.    Cf.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  vii,  59).

1  Sed  quis  e  portu,  etc.  Many  ingenious  emendations  have
been  proposed  of  these  words,  the  best  being  Schneider's :
Sed  quis  e  porculaforihus  Italicis.  But  none  is  needed.  The
last  two  speakers,  Atticus  and  Cossinius,  were  called  by  Varro
(ii,  I,  2)  semi-graeci  and  Epirotici  peciiariae  athletae.  Atticus
(Athenian)  was  a  Greek  cognomen,  and  Cossinius  had  just
described  himself  as  Homericus  Melanthius  Cordus.  Now  it
is  suggested  that  a  genuine  Italian  hailing  from  an  Italian
harbour  should  treat  the  subject  of  pigs,  not  Greeks  from
Athens  or  Epirus.

^  Eumaeus  was  the  swine-herd  (^oc  vipopjioQ — (n^fScorrjg  opxafiog
avdpojv. — Od.,  xiv,  beginning)  and  faithful  servant  of  Ulysses

;       and  looked  after  his  600  brood  sows  in  Ithaca.    He  received

I       and  fed  Ulysses  when  he  returned  home.


i64  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

called  Scrofa.  He,  being  quaestor  to  Licinius
Nerva,*  who  was  praetor  in  the  province  of  Mace-
donia, had  been  left  in  command  of  the  army  until
the  return  of  the  praetor,  whereupon  the  enemy,
thinking  that  they  had  a  chance  of  victory,  began
2  to  assault  the  camp.  My  grandfather,  as  he  urged
the  soldiers  to  take  up  their  arms  and  sally  forth
against  the  enemy,  said  that  he  would  scatter  them
as  a  sow  scatters "  young  pigs.  And  scatter  them
he  did,  for  in  that  battle  he  routed  the  enemy  so

^  A.  Licinius  A^eri'a  was  one  of  the  envoys  (169  B.C.)  sent
by  the  Senate  to  Macedonia  to  collect  information  about  the
general  state  of  affairs  for  L.  Aemilius  Paullus  (Consul  de-
signate) who  was  about  to  take  the  field  against  King  Per-
seus (Li\y,  xliv,  18).

A.  Licinius  Nerva  is  mentioned  b}-  Lix-y  (xlv,  44)  as  one  of
the  six  praetors  created  167  B.C.,  a  year  after  the  battle  of  Pydna
and  the  deposition  of  Perseus — so  that  Varro's  storj-  does  not
relate  to  the  Macedonian  war.  Macedon,  moreover,  did  not  be-
come a  Roman  province  before  148  B.C.  In  142  B.C.  a  pretender
to  the  name  of  Alexander  (a  brother  of  Philip)  headed  a  revolt
against  the  Roman  power,  which  was  promptly  crushed.  Prob-
ably Ner\'a  was  praetor  for  the  second  time  in  142  B.C.,  and  itwas
in  this  rising  that  L.  Tremellius  gained  his  cognomen  Scrofa.

-  Disiecturum.  Cf.  Plautus  (True,  ii,  2,  13):  lam  Hercic
ego  hie  te,  tnulier,  quasi  sus  catulos,  pedibus  proteram.  Macro-
bius  (Saturn,  i,  6)  makes  Tremellius  win  his  name  of  Scrofa
in  a  very  different  and  much  less  creditable  way.  His  slaves
had  stolen  and  killed  a  neighbour's  sow.  His  house  was
surrounded  and  restitution  of  the  scrofa  demanded.  Tre-
mellius heard  that  the  sow  was  hidden  under  his  wife's  bed,
she  being  in  bed  at  the  time.  He  gave  permission  for  his  house
to  be  searched,  and  when  the  bedroom  was  reached  swore  that
he  had  no  other  sow  in  the  house  save  that  under  the  bed-


II]  OF  PIGS  165

decisively  that  the  praetor  Nerva  was  on  that
account  saluted  as  *' Imperator,"  and  my  grand-
father gained  his  nick-name,  being  thereafter  called
"  Scrofa."  Neither  my  great-grandfather,  nor  any
of  the  Tremellii  before  him,  was  ever  named  Scrofa,
and  I  am  one  of  seven  of  my  gens  who  were  one
after  another  praetors.  However,  I  do  not  shirk
3  saying  what  I  know  about  pigs,  for  I  have  loved
farming  from  my  youth,  and  the  subject,  moreover,
will  have  an  interest  shared  in  common  by  you
gentlemen  and  myself,  as  we  are  all  of  us  great
stock-breeders.  For  which  of  us  farmers  does  not
keep  pigs,  and  has  not  heard  our  fathers  say  that
that  man  is  a  lazy  spendthrift  who  buys  at  the
butcher's  the  flitch  ^  hanging  up  in  the  larder,  in-
stead of  growing  it  on  his  own  farm?

To  continue,  the  man  who  wants  a  good  herd
must  firstly  choose  pigs  of  the  right  age,  secondly
of  the  right  type;  that  is,  having  large  limbs,"^  but

clothes.  The  searchers  withdrew  and  Tremellius  was  ever
afterwards  called  "Scrofa."

^  Succidiam.  Cf.  Varro  (L.  L.,  v,  32):  Succidia  ab  suibus
caedendis ;  nam  id  pecus  primum  occidere  coeperunt  domini  et
ut  servarent  sallere.  Cato  (Aulus  Gellius,  xiii,  24)  makes  use  of
the  expression  succidias  huinanas  facere="  to  butcher  men,"
and  Cicero  (De  Senec,  xvi)  makes  Cato  say:  [am  hortum
ipsi  agricolae  succidiam  alteram-  appellant.  The  farmers  them-
selves call  the  garden  their  second  flitch.

^  Cutn  amplitudine  membrorum.  Cf  Geoponica  (xix,  6):
Trtc  \>.'(.v  9rjXeiag  %o('poue  doKifidZovai  rag  TrapafiijKearspag  kuI  Tnpioxnv
ixovaag  Kai  fisydXac,  toIq  adofiatji,  iKrig  rije  KC^aXfjg  Kai  twv  Trodaiv.

Columella    (vii,    9,     i)    says    that    the     boars    should    be


i66  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

small  feet  and  heads.  They  are  better  of  one  uni-
form colour  rather  than  parti-coloured.  See  that
the  boars  have  the  same  qualities,  and  in  any  case

4  that  they  have  big  shoulders.  Pigs  of  a  good  breed
are  recognized  by  their  shape,  by  the  size  of  the
litters,  and  by  the  district  whence  they  come.  By
their  shape,  when  boar  and  sow  are  handsome;  by
the  litters,  when  these  are  big ;  and  by  the  district,
when  they  come  from  one  where  the  breed  is  big,

5  not  small.  They  are  generally  bought  with  this
stipulation  :  "  Do  you  guarantee  that  these  sows  are
sound,  that  the  possession  of  them  is  good  in  law,
that  they  are  warranted  ^  against  claims  for  damages,

"square"  rather  than  long,  but  the  sows  as  long  of  body  as
possible.

'  Noxis  que  praestari.  One  would  have  expected  either  a
noxis  praestari  as  in  Cicero  (Ad  Div.,  i,  4)  a  vi  praestare  nihil
possum,  or  tioxis  solutas  as  in  the  Digests.

If  any  one  of  the  pigs  had  done  damage  when  with  one
owner,  and  then  had  been  transferred  to  another,  the  action
would  lie  against  the  latter.  As  was  the  case  with  a  slave :  Cf.
Justinian  (Inst.,  iv,  tit.  8 — De  noxalibus  actionibus) :  Nam  si
servus  tuus  noxam  commiserit:  quamdiu  in  tua  potestate  sit,
tecum  est  actio.  Si  autem  inalterius  potestatem  pervenerit:  cunt
illo  incipit  actio  esse.  The  phrase  may  also  have  reference  to
bad  habits  contracted  before  purchase,  which  might  lead  to
the  loss  or  damage  of  the  animals.  Cf.  Alexander  ab  Alex-
andro,  iii,  14  (about  the  middle) :  Quod  si  periculosam  rem
antea  facere  servus  consuerat .  .  .  tuque  vendito  a  te  servo  id
imperasti  quod  sine  periculo  exsequi  nequibat,  censuit  Paulus
teneri  venditorem  ob  necem  damnumve  si  quam  in  pemiciem
servus  incurrisset.  I  now  incline  to  the  latter  view,  and  would
translate,  "  warranted  free  from  dangerous  habits."


II]  OF  PIGS  167

and  that  they  do  not  come  from  a  diseased  herd?  "
Some  people  add  "and  have  got  through  fever  and
diarrhoea."  '

For  the  pasturing  of  this  kind  of  stock  a  damp
place  is  suitable,  for  it  delights  both  in  water  and
in  mud.  And  "  this  is  the  reason,  they  say,  why  a
wolf  which  has  got  hold  of  a  sow  drags  it  to  the
water,  as  its  teeth  cannot  bear  the  heat  of  the  flesh.
6  This  animal  (the  pig)  feeds  especially  on  acorns —
failing  them,  on  beans,  barley,  and  other  grains,
for  these  not  only  produce  fat,  but  also  give  the
flesh  a  pleasant  flavour.

In  summer  they  are  driven  out  to  pasture  in  the
morning  before  the  heat  begins  to  a  shady  place,
where  there  must  be  water.  In  the  afternoon,  when
the  great  heat  has  abated,  they  are  allowed  to  graze
again.    In  the  winter-time  we  do  not  drive  them  out

^  Foria.  Nonius  (Foriolus) :  Foriolus,  qui foria  facile  eniittat,
soluti  scilicet  venfris.  He  defines  foria  as  stercora  liquidiora.
Aristotle  (Hist.  An.,  viii,  21)  says  that  pigs  suffer  from  three
diseases:  (i)  (ipayxog,  characterized  by  inflammatory  swelling
of  the  throat  and  jaws  ;  (2)  fever  (Kpavpa)  accompanied  by  head-
ache and  dullness,  which  may  be  cured,  but  usually  kills  in
three  or  four  days;  and  (3)  diarrhoea,  "which  appears  to  be
incurable."  Avo  S' dXX'  iari,  Xkytrai  ce  Kpavpdv  dficpio  thv  to  fikv
'irtpov  tan  Ke^aXiig  ttovoq  Kai  [Sdpog  .  .  .  to  S'  STtpov,  7)  KoiKia  pel.
Kal  TovTo  fiiv  ^owr  dviarov  tlvai.  Varro  obviously  alludes  to
(2)  and  (3).  Kpavpa  in  (2)  is,  to  judge  from  the  rest  of  Aristotle's
description,  a  scrofulous  disease  accompanied  by  fever.  Colu-
mella (vii,  10)  and  the  Geoponica  (xix,  7)  also  discuss  the
subject.

^  Itaque,  etc.  The  meaning  is,  of  course,  swine  love  to  bathe
[as  they  are  hot-bloodedj,  so  much  so  that  a  wolf,  etc.


i68  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

to  feed  until  the  hoar-frost  has  evaporated,  and  the
ice  has  melted.

7  For  breeding,  the  boars  should  be  separated  from
the  herd  two  months  before  they  are  admitted  to
the  sows.  The  best  time  for  their  admission  is  from
Favonius  to  the  vernal  equinox,  as  thus  the  sow
brings  forth  her  young  in  the  summer,'  for  she
goes  four  months  and  then  litters  when  there  is
plenty  of  pasturage  on  the  land.  The  sows  should
not  be  covered  before  they  are  a  year  old ;  it  is
better  to  wait  until  they  are  twenty  months,  that
they  may  be  two  years  old  when  they  become
mothers.  It  is  said  that  after  they  have  begun  "  to
breed  they  can  go  on  well  up  to  the  seventh  year.

3  At  the  time  of  covering  they  are  driven  forth  into
miry  paths  ^  and  muddy  pools  that  they  may  wallow

'  Aestate  pariat.  The  Geoponica  (xix,  6)  follow  Varro.
dpiaTt]  Se  uipa  .  .  .  dird  ^((pvpov  TTvoije  itx)g  EOjOivi/f  iffi]fi£piac,  Hiare
ykvicBai  Kara,  to  QkpoQ  rbv  tokstov.  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  v,  14)  says
that  the  young  pigs  born  in  summer  are  the  worst,  being
puny  and  thin,  and  that  the  best  time  for  birth  is  the  be-
ginning of  winter.  This  is  no  doubt  true  in  the  case  of  a  hot
climate.

^  Cu7?i  coeperunt.  Columella  (vii,  9,  3) :  Femina  sus  hahetur
ad  partus  edendos  idonea  fere  usque  in  annos  septetn,  quae
quanta  foe cundior  est  celerius  senescit.

^  Lutosos  limites.  Limitcs  does  not  seem  to  be  the  right
word.  Schneider  suggests  lamas,  bogs,  which  the  scholiast
to  Horace  (Ep.,  i,  13,  10)  defines  as  lacujias  maiores  continentes
aquam  pluviam,  quoting  from  Ennius.

Silvorum  saltus,  latehras,  lamasque  lutoras.
The  word  was  rare,  and  would  probably  have  been  unintel-


iij  OF  PIGS  169

in  the  mire,  which  is  as  much  rest  and  refreshment
to  them,  as  bathing  is  to  a  human  being.  When  the
sows  have  all  conceived,  the  boars  are  again  separated
from  the  herd.  A  boar  of  eight '  months  begins  to
procreate,  and  remains  able  to  do  so  adequately  up
to  three  years  old;  then  he  goes  down-hill,"  until
finally  he  reaches  the  butcher,  the  appointed  go-
between  for  pork  and  people.
)  The  pig  is  called  in  Greek  5j,  formerly  6i/f,  from
the  verb  Oi/eiv,  to  sacrifice,  for  when  men  first  sacri-
ficed animals,  they  began  apparently  with  the  race
of  pigs.  Traces  of  this  remain  in  the  sacrifice  of  a
pig  at  the  initiation  Mn  the  Eleusinian  mysteries;
the  killing  of  one  at  the  initiation  of  peace  when
a  treaty  ^  is  struck;  and  in  the  fact  that  at  the  begin-

Hglble  to  a  copyist.  Lama  in  modern  Italian  means  a  swamp.
Dante  (Inf.,  xx,  99) :  JVon  molio  ha  corso,  che  irova  una  lama.

'  Octo  mensuni.  Columella  (vii,  9,  3)  says  six.  Possunt
tameit  etiayn  semestres  implere  feminam .

^  It  retro.    He  deteriorates,  as  in  Vergil's  oft-quoted  lines  :

Sic  omnia  fatis
In  peius  mere  et  retro  sublapsa  referri.

Columella  (vii,  9,  4)  says  that  boars,  when  three  or  four  years
old,  are  castrated  and  then  fattened,  bimi  aut  quadrimi  cas-
irantur  ut  possint  pinguescere\  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  ix,  50)  that
ovariotomy  was  performed  on  sows  for  the  same  purpose.
iKTSfiveTcn  de  (cai  >'/  KUTrpia  ruiv  OtfXeiwv  vStv  oxsTf.  .  .  .  TriaivsaOai  TaxtbiQ.

^  Initiis  Cereris.  Sid  to  tv  toIq  fjivaTtjpioic  riic  Ai'j/xijrpog  QveaOai
XoipovQ.    Scholiast  on  Aristophanes'  Achar.,  729  (764).

*  Foedus.  Cf.  Vergil,  viii,  641  :  Stabant;  et  caesa  iungebant
foedera  porca,  where  Servius  {ad  loc.)  says  that  Vergil  ought
to  have  written  porco  (as  Varro  here) :  /also  autem  ait  porca ;
nam  ad  hoc  genus  sacrificii  porcus  adhibebatur.    According  to


170  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

ning  of  a  wedding  among  the  ancient  princes  and
exalted  personages  of  Etruria  the  newly  made
husband  and  wife  at  their  union  first  sacrifice  a
lo  pig.^  The  ancient  Latins,  too,  as  well  as  the
Greeks,  seem  to  have  had  the  same  custom;  for  the
women  of  our  country  (especially  nurses)  call  that
part  which  in  girls  distinguishes  their  sex  porcus
(pig),  the  Greek  women  ^o'^pc''-''  (pig")?  meaning  that
the  term  is  a  worthy  symbol  of  marriage.  The  race
of  pigs  is,  they  say,  a  gift  of  nature  designed  to
grace  the  banquet,  and  so  life  ^  was  given  them,
just  as  salt  is,  to  keep  their  flesh  good.

Athenaeus  men  first  learnt  the  joys  of  roast  pork  through
sacrifice.  Lamb,  in  his  essay  on  roast  pork,  assigns  another
and  an  equally  credible  origin.

'  Porcum  immolant.  Athenaeus  (Deipn.,  iii)  says  that  the
ancient  Greeks  used  to  sacrifice  a  pig  to  Venus,  and  Aristo-
phanes (Ach.,  758)  has:

AI.    ahX  ovy\  \olpoc,  t    ^A(ppo^i.Tt],  Overai.
ME.    ow  X^^POQ  ^AcppociTCf  ;  fiovcf  ya  Saiixovwv.

But  this  is  a  mere  scurrility ;  and  neither  passage  helps  us  to
a  knowledge  of  the  Etruscan  custom  about  which  I  can  find
nothing.

^  Xolpov,  as  frequently  in  Aristophanes.  Cf.  Scholiast  on
Acharnians,  737  (773) :  Toiiro  cprjmv  tTnl  kuI  to  yvvaiKtlov  alSolov
xolpov  tKoXovv  oi  "EX\t]vsc.

^  Anima.  Cicero  (Nat.  D.,  ii,  64)  ascribes  this  saying  to  the
Stoic  Chrysippus.  Sus  vero,  quid  habet  praeter  escam?  Cui
qtiidein,  ne  pufresceret,  animam  ipsam  pro  sale  datum  dicit  esse
Chrysippus.  He  repeats  the  saying  (De  Fin.,  v,  13).  Pliny
(N.  H.,  viii,  51)  says  that  "the  pig  is  the  stupidest  of  animals,
and  it  was  thought,  not  without  humour,  that  life  was  given
to  it  instead  of  salt."


II]  OF  PIGS  171

The  Gauls  make  of  them  flitches  of  much  excel-
lence and  great  size.  Their  excellence  is  shown  by
the  fact  that  at  the  present  time  there  are  brought  to
Rome  every  year  Comacine^  and  Cavaran  hams  and
shoulders.  Touching  the  size  of  the  Gallic  flitches,
Cato  writes  in  these  terms:  "  In  Italy  (Lombardy),
the  Insubres  salt  three  or  four  thousand  flitches;
the  sow  gets  so  fat  than  she  cannot  unaided  keep

1  Comacinae  et  Cavarae.  Comaci  (?)  and  Cavari  were,  prob-
ably, both  tribes  of  Gallia  Narbonensis,  as  the  latter  certainly
were  (Pliny,  N.  H.,  ili,  4).  But  the  text  here  is  very  doubtful,
and  Schneider,  Scaliger,  and  others  have  proposed  many
emendations  with  little  to  support  them.  Strabo  (bk.  iv)  says
that  the  best  hams  come  from  the  Sequani,  Wtv  al  KoWiarai
rapixilai  fwv  viiwv  Kpewv  fig  Tr)v  'Put/iriv  KaTaKofii^ovrai.  Schneider
proves  conclusively  that  the  pernae  were  the  hind-legs,  the
petasones  the  fore-legs.

This  is  Cato's  (c.  162)  recipe  for  salting  hams:  "When  you
have  bought  your  hams,  cut  off  the  hoofs.  Take  half  a  peck
of  Roman  salt  ground  fine  for  each.  Lay  salt  over  the  bottom
of  the  tub ;  then  put  in  a  ham,  the  skin-side  looking  down-
wards. Cover  it  over  with  salt.  Then  put  another  ham  on
top,  taking  care  that  meat  does  not  touch  meat.  So  deal  with
them  all.  When  you  have  got  them  all  snug  put  salt  over
them,  so  that  no  meat  is  visible,  and  make  the  surface  level.
When  they  have  been  in  salt  five  days  take  them  all  out,  and
the  salt  with  them.  Then  put  them  in  again  in  reverse  order
so  that  those  which  were  before  on  top  are  now  at  the  bottom.
Cover  them  over  and  make  them  snug  in  the  same  way  as
before.  After  twelve  days  at  most,  take  the  hams  out,  rub  off
all  the  salt  and  hang  them  up  in  a  draught  for  two  days.  On
the  third  day  wipe  them  well  over  with  a  sponge  and  rub
them  with  oil.  Hang  them  for  two  days  in  the  smoke.  Then
take  them  down,  rub  them  well  with  a  mixture  of  oil  and
vinegar  and  hang  them  up  in  the  meat  larder."


172  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

her  feet  nor  advance  a  step.  And  so  if  one  wants
to  move  them  from  place  to  place,  one  puts  them
into  a  wagon."  Atilius  of  Spain,  a  trustworthy-
author  of  wide  experience  and  much  learning,  used
to  assert  that  once  when  a  pig  had  been  killed  in
Lusitania  in  further  Spain,  there  were  sent  as  a  pre-
sent to  the  senator  L.  Volumnius,^  two  of  its  ribs
with  the  meat  attached,  which  weighed  twenty-three
pounds,  and  that  in  that  pig  the  depth  of  flesh  from

12  skin  to  bone  was  one  and  a  quarter  feet.  I  said  to
him :  A  fact  quite  as  strange  was  once  told  me  in
Arcadia,  and  I  went,  I  remember,  to  look  at  a
sow  which  was  not  only  incapable  of  getting  up
owing  to  its  fat,  but  had  actually  allowed  a  shrew-
mouse  to  eat  away  some  of  its  flesh  and  make  a
nest  there  and  give  birth  to  young  ones.  I  am  in-
formed that  the  same  thing  has  occurred  in  Venetia  ^
also.

13  With  regard  to  breeding,  the  fertility  of  a  sow  is
generally  estimated  from  the  first  litter,  as  she  does
not  vary  much  in   later  ones.     As  to  the  rearing

^  L.  Voluninio.  Cicero  (Ad  Div.,  vii,  32)  mentions  him  as
one  of  his  intimate  friends,  adduhitavi  num  a  Seiiatore  essent
Volumnio  quocum  mihi  magnus  est  usus.

^  In  Vineta.  In  place  of  this,  which  is  unintelligible,  I  have
translated  Victorius's  conjecture,  in  Venetia.  Varro  (i,  8,  5)
speaks  of  vineyards  being  sometimes  so  overrun  by  mice  that
they  had  to  be  filled  with  mouse-traps.  In  vineto  therefore
suggested  itself — but  pigs  do  not  live  in  vineyards !  Scaliger
remarks  about  this  story  that  "none  need  hesitate  to  believe
it,  as  there  are  people  alive  to-day  who  will  testify  that  this
has  happened  in  the  south  of  France !  "


II]  OF  PIGS  173

of  the  little  pigs,  which  is  called  porculatio,  these
are  left  with  the  mother  a  couple  of  months;  then,
when  they  can  feed  for  themselves,  are  separated
from  her.  Pigs  born  in  the  winter  become  thin  ^
owing  to  the  cold,  and  because  the  mothers  having
but  little  milk,  and  in  consequence  finding  their
teats  hurt  by  the  young  ones'  teeth,  push  them
away.

Every  sow  should  have  her  own  sty,  and  rear  her
own  litter  only,  for  she  does  not  refuse  to  feed
another's  little  ones;  if,  therefore,  they  get  mixed, -
14  the  sow  becomes  worse  for  breeding.  Their  year  is
naturally  divided  into  two  parts,  as  they  give  birth
twice  within  the  year,  a  sow  being  pregnant  four
months,  and  suckling  for  two.    The  sty  should  be

^  Exiles.  The  Geoponica  (xix,  6)  say  "  owing  to  the  inclem-
ency of  the  weather  and  the  fact  that  they  do  not  get  enough
milk  from  their  mothers,  who  push  them  away,  as  their  teats
lacking  milk  are  violently  squeezed  and  pulled  by  the  teeth  of
the  young  ones.  As  to  the  teeth,  cf.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  51):
Diebus  x,  circa  hruniant  statim  dentatos  nasci  Nigidius  tradit.
In  winter  they  are  born  with  teeth.

^*  Conturbati.  Cf.  Geoponica  (xix,  6) :  wffrs  /u»)  n'lyvvaQai
CLKKrjKoiq  ra  irapa  Cia(p6pwv  TiKTofitva — 'iav  yap  aXKi]KoiQ  avvavafiiyri,
aSvvarov  Siayvuivai  avrd  r«c  reKovcrag.  If  the  young  of  different
mothers  are  mixed,  it  is  impossible  for  the  mothers  to  dis-
tinguish their  own.  Columella  (vii,  9,  11):  Navi  facillime
porci,  si  evaserint  haram,  viiscent  se,  et  scrofa  cum  decubiiit
aeque  alieno  ac  suo  praebet  ubera.  From  the  last  words  of  this
passage  it  is  obvious  that  the  non  inserted  by  Keil  before
aspernatur  is  necessary.  It  was  omitted  by  the  scribe  no  doubt
owing  to  the  nos  of  alienos  immediately  before  it.

Columella  recommends  the  branding  of  sow  and  pigs.


174  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

made  about  three  ^  feet  high,  and  a  little  more  than
three  feet  wide,  not  any  lower  than  this  from  the
ground  lest  a  sow  when  pregnant  should  attempt  to
jump  out  and  so  miscarry.  The  height  should  be
such  that  the  swineherd  can  see  the  whole  sty  at  a
glance,  and  prevent  any  little  pig  from  being
crushed  by  its  mother;  and  may  also  be  able  to
clean  out  the  hutch  w^ithout  difficulty.  There  should
be  a  door  to  the  sty,  and  the  threshold  -  should
be  one  and  a  third  feet  high,  to  prevent  the
little  pigs  from  jumping  over  it  when  their  mother

15  goes  out.  It  is  the  swineherd's  duty,  every  time  he
cleans  out  a  sty,  to  throw  sand  into  it  or  something
of  the  kind,  which  will  absorb  moisture ;  and
after  a  sow  has  littered,  to  keep  up  her  strength
with  a  more  generous  diet,  so  that  she  may  be  the
better  able  to  provide  milk.  It'  is  usual  to  give
them  about  two  pounds  of  barley  apiece,  soaked  *
in  water,  and  this  allowance  some  people  double,
giving  it  night  and  morning,  if  they  have  nothing

16  else  to  feed  them  with.  After  pigs  have  been  weaned

^   Trium  pedum  altam.    Columella  (\ii,  9,  10)  says  four.

^  Limen  inferius.  Columella  (vii,  9,  13)  prescribes  in  tantam
altitudinein  consurgat  quantain  possit  nutnx  evadere,  lactens
milem  supergredi  non  possit.

^  In  quihus.  Keil  deletes  the  in  without  good  reason,  I
think.  In  quibtis,  meaning  "and  in  their  case,"  is  good  Latin
and  very  common  in  Varro.

*  Aqua  madefactas  probably  means  "boiled."  Columella
(vii,  9,  13):  Quibus  partus  submittitur  cocto  sunt  hordco
susfijiendae.  And  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  vi,  18,  35)  prescribes  the
same  food — t(Ti)kvi<}  Ct  ry  vi  KpiOag  i(p9dg.


II]  OF  PIGS  175

they  are  called  by  some  people  delici,^  and  are  no
longer  spoken  of  as  "sucking-pigs."  On  the  tenth  ^
day  after  birth  they  are  considered  "  pure,"  and  on
that  account  were  termed  by  the  ancients  sacres,
because  they  are  said  to  be  then  first  fit  for  sacrifice.
And  so  in  the  "  Menaechimi  "of  Plautus,  where  the
scene  is  laid  in  Epidamnus,  one  of  the  characters,
thinking  a  man  mad  and  in  need  of  an  expiatory
sacrifice,  asks  him,  "What's  the  price  here  of
'  sacred  '  {sacres)  ^  pigs?  "

It  is  usual  to  give  grape-skins  and  grape-stalks
17  if  the  farm  supplies  them.  When  they  have  lost  the

^  Delict.  Derived,  no  doubt,  from  delinquo.  As  relinquo
gives  relicuos  (Plaut,),  which  early  in  the  first  century  became
relicus,  so  from  delinquo  we  may  suppose  delicuos,  which  later
became  delicus.  This  etymology  would  explain  the  use  of  the
word  deliculus  by  Cato  (2,  7),  delicula  armenta,  deliculas  oves,
cattle  and  sheep  quae  delinquuntur — are  removed,  got  rid  of
by  sale.

*  Decimo  die.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  51)  says  on  the  fifth  day.
Suis  foetus  sacrificio  die  quinto  piirus  est,  pecoris  die  octavo,
bovis  trigesimo.    Festus  (p.  318)  agrees  with  Varro.

^  Sacres.  The  lines  alluded  to  by  Varro  are  (Plaut.,  Men-
aechm.,  289,  etc.) :

Adolescens  quibus  hie  pretiis  porci  veneunt

Sacres,  sinceri?   Cy.  Nummo.    Me.  Eum  a  me  accipe

Jube  te  piari  de  inea  pecunia

Nam  ego  quidem  insanum  esse  te  certo  scio

Qui  niihi  molestus  homini  ignoto,  quisquis  es.

For  the  parasitic  vowel  in  Menaechimis  (for  Menaechmis —
Mfvaix^oie),  compare  mina  for  Greek  fiva,  Tecumessa  for
'X(.K\ii]a(sa,  etc.


176  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

name  of  "  sucking-pigs  "  they  are  called  nefrendes^
(not-crunchers),  from  the  fact  that  they  are  yet
unable  to  crunch,  that  is,  crush  beans.  The  word
porcus  is  an  ancient  Greek  ^  word,  now  obsolete,  for
its  place  has  been  taken  by  the  word  x'^^?^'^-

On  the  birth  of  young  ones  care  is  taken  that  the
sows  drink  twice  a  day,  for  the  sake  of  their  milk.
A  sow  ought,  they  say,  to  give  birth  to  as  many
pigs  as  she  has  teats; '  if  there  are  fewer  she  is  not
likely  to  be  profitable,  if  more,  it  portends  some-
i8  thing.  The  most  ancient  recorded  example  of  such
a  portent  is  Aeneas's  sow,*  which  bore  at  Lavinium

^  Nefrendes.  Varro's  etymology  is  possibly  right.  For  the
form  of  the  word  compare  negotmm,  nefastus,  etc.  Martial
(iii,  47)  speaks  of  a  sucking-pig  as  ' '  not  yet  having  vanquished
beans."

lUic  coronam  pinguibus  g'ravcm  turdis
Leporemque  laesum  Gallici  canis  dente
Nondumque  victa  lacteum  faha  porcum,

where  instead  of  victa,  fresa  (from  frendere)  is  sometimes
read.

"^  Porcus  Graecum  7iomen.  irSpKog,  cf.  Plut.,  Popl.,  11,  and
Varro,  L.  L.,  v,  19  (middle):  Porcus  nisi  si  a  Graecis  quod
Athenis  in  lihris  sacronun  scriptum  est  porcae,  porco  (Trojoicy,

TTO/OKy).

^  Ouot  mammas  haheat.  .A.ccording  to  Pliny  (N.  H.,  xi,  41)
the  number  varies :  haec  plures  habejit,  toto  ventre  dupJici
ordine,  ut  sues,  generosae  duodenas,  vulgares  binas  minus.

*  Stis  Aeneae.  Cf.  .^eneid,  iii,  390-393.  Serv'ius  (ad  loc.)  says
with  regard  to  the  thirty  little  pigs  that  they  signified  the
thirty  years  during  which  .Ascanius  should  reign.  Prodigiale
est  hoc,  qiio  signijicatur  triginta  aniiis  rcgnaftirus  esse  Ascanius.
Varro,   L.  L.,   v,  cap.  40:   Hinc  post  triginta  annos  oppidum


II}  OF  PIGS  177

thirty  white  little  pigs.  And  in  the  result  what  was
portended  did  happen,  as  the  men  of  Lavinium
founded  the  town  of  Alba  thirty  years  later.  Of  this
sow  and  her  young  ones  traces  are  even  now  to  be
found,  for  their  likeness  in  bronze  still  stands  where
all  may  see,  and  the  mother's  body  is  shown  by  the
priests  (as  it  was,  according  to  them,  preserved  in
brine).
19  A  sow  can  feed  eight'  quite  little  pigs  at  first;
when  they  have  grown  bigger,  a  man  who  knows
his  business  generally  takes  away  half  the  number
from  her,  as  she  cannot  supply"  milk  enough  for
all,    nor  can    the  whole  litter  get  enough  food  to

alterum  conditur  Alba;  id  ah  sue  alba  noyninatum.  Haec  e
navi  Aeneae  quoin  fugisset  Lavinium  triginta  parit  porcos;  ex
hoc  prodigio  post  Lavinium  conditum  annis  triginta  haec  urbs
facta,  propter  colorem  suis  et  loci  naturam  Alba  Longa  dictum.
It  will  be  noticed  that  Varro's  story  differs  from  Vergil's.  In
the  former's  the  sow  had  escaped  from  Aeneas's  ship.  Servius
{loc.  cit.)  mentions  both  stoi-ies.  Livy  (i,  3)  states  that  the
Tiber  was  at  this  time  called  "Albula."

^  Octonos.  Cf.  Columella  (vii,  9,  13):  Qui  tamen  non  debet
octo  capitiim  mimerum  excedere.  Non  quia  ignorem  fecundi-
tatem  scrofarum  maioris  esse  numeri;  sed  quia  celerrime  fatiscit
quae  plures  edticat.

Pliny  (viii,  51):  Nu  me  rus  fecund  i tat  is  ad  vicenos  {!):  sed
educare  tarn  multos  nequetmt.

^  Sufferre;  in  Varro  (ii,  8,  5),  in  Columella,  and  in  Vergil,
the  word  means  always  "to  bear."  For  it,  therefore,  Gesner
proposed  to  substitute  sufficere,  which  is  of  common  occurrence
in  the  sense  of  "  to  supply  " — especially  in  Vergil  (cf.  Georg. ,  ii,
424,  436).  Crescentius  copying  this  passage  has  neque  mater
sufficienter  potest  lac  praebere.  So  that  the  emendation  seems
plausible.

N


178  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

grow  up  strong  and  healthy.  In  the  first  ten  days
immediately  following  delivery,  the  mother  is  not
brought  out  from  the  sty  except  to  drink.  When
ten  days  have  elapsed,  she  is  allowed  to  go  out  and
feed  in  some  spot  close  to  the  farmstead,  so  that
she  can  return  frequently  to  suckle  her  little  ones.
3o  When  the  latter  have  grown  big,  they  are  allowed
to  follow  their  mother  when  she  goes  out  to  feed,
but  when  at  home  they  are  separated  from  their
dams,  and  fed  apart,  to  the  end  that  they  may  learn
to  go  without  the  nursing  mother.  This  they  do  in
ten  days.

The  swineherd  should  train  them  to  do  every-
thing in  obedience  to  the  sound  of  the  horn.^  After
first  shutting  them  in,  he  does  not  open  the  door
until  the  horn  blows,  when  they  are  taught  to  go
out  to  a  place  where  barley  has  been  poured  out  in
a  long  line — for  by  this  method  less  is  spoilt  than  if
it  were  piled  in  a  heap,  and  more  pigs  can  get  to  it
and  with  less  trouble.  The  object  we  are  told  of
bringing  them  together  by  blowing  the  horn  is  to

'  Ad  bucinam.  Polybius  (xv,  12,  2)  describes  the  methods
of  the  Italian  swineherds  of  his  day,  who  led  their  herds — not
following  them  as  in  Greece — and  directed  their  movements
by  blowing  the  horn — ^vKavy  (pwi'ovvrec.

Columella  (vi,  2^,  3)  mentions  the  use  of  the  horn  for  as-
sembling cows  :  Cufn  pastorali  signo  quasi  receptui  cmiitur.
Nam  id  quoque  semper  crepusculo  fieri  debet,  ut  ad  sonum  buc-
cinae  pecus,  si  quod  in  silvis  substiterit,  septa  repetere  con-
suescat.    Sic  enim  recogtiosci  grex  poterit.

The  instrument  is  described  by  Ovid  (Mel.,  i,  335).  It  was
twisted  like  a  shell,  spiral  and  gibbous.


II]  OF  PIGS  179

prevent  them  from  being  lost  when  scattered  apart
in  the  woods.

Boars  are  best  castrated  ^  when  they  are  a  year,
in  any  case  not  less  than  six  months,  old;  which
done,  they  change  their  name,  and  are  called
"hogs "  {maiales) '  instead  of  boars.

Touching  the  health  of  swine,  I  will  mention  but
one  fact  in  passing.  If  the  sow  cannot  supply  milk
to  the  sucking-pigs,  you  should  give  them  cooked
wheat  (for,  if  raw,  it  causes  diarrhoea)  or  barley
steeped  in  water,  until  they  are  three  months  old.

As  to  number :  ten  boars  are  enough,  it  is  thought,
for  a  hundred  sows,  though  some  men  employ  even
fewer.  The  total  number  of  pigs  in  a  herd  varies.
I  myself  consider  a  hundred  to  be  a  good  average.
Some^  owners  prefer  bigger  herds  of  150;  others
have  twice  as  many;  others  even  more  than  this.

^  Castrantur.    Columella  (vii,  11)  describes  two  methods.

^  Maiales.  The  ancients  derived  the  word  from  Maia.
Schneider  quotes  Isidorus  :  Maialis  porcus  pinguis  quod  Deae
Maiiae  sacrificabatur.  Maiia  (so  Cicero  spells  the  word),  or
Fauna,  or  Bona  Dea  (>/  ywaiKsia  GeSg)  was  "  so  modest  (Macro-
bius,  Satur. ,  i,  §  27)  that  she  never  saw  or  was  seen  by  a
man,  and  on  this  account  no  man  enters  her  temple."  But  to
Maia,  considered  as  the  Earth,  a  pregnant  sow  was  sacrificed.
Cicero  (in  Pis.,  9)  calls  Piso  no  consul  but  a  maialis  I

^  Aliquot    In  the  MSS.  aliquod  no  doubt  for  aliquot.

In  these  books  there  are  three  places  where  aliquot  is  used
without  an  accompanying  noun  :  this,  where  Keil  thinks  the
word  should  be  altered  to  aliqui,  and  two  others,  iii,  7,  5,  and
iii,  7,  II,  where  he  actually  does  alter  the  text,  on  the  ground
that  whereas  aliquot  is  frequently  used  with  a  noun  in  these
books,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  used  without.


i8o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

A  small  herd  entails  less  expense  than  a  large
one,  as  the  swineherd  needs  fewer  assistants.  So
the  stock-farmer  arranges  the  aggregate  number  in
a  herd  to  suit  his  convenience,  but  not  so  the  propor-
tion of  boars,  as  this  is  dictated  by  nature.


CHAPTER  V

OF  COWS  AND  OXEN

I  Such  was  Scrofa's  contribution.  At  this  point  the
senator  Lucienus,*  a  gentleman  of  extreme  refine-
ment and  great  humour  with  whom  we  were  all
well  acquainted,  came  in  and  said,  "  How  do  you
do,  my  fellow  Epirots,'  for  Scrofa,  and  our  friend
Varro,  TroifMsva  Aawv,^  I  saw  and  greeted  early  this
morning.  Some  of  us  said,  How  do  you  do?  to
him,  whilst  others  scolded  him  for  not  keeping  his
appointment  more  punctually.     I  will  see  you,  he

'  O.  Lucienus  Senator.  Varro  (L.  L.,  v,  i)  has  Sic  declinantes
Graeci  nostra  nomina  dicunt  Lucienum  AovkUvov  et  Ouintium
Ko/vT-iov.    I  can  find  no  allusion  to  him  elsewhere.

-  Synepirotae.  I.e.,  ^vi'tj-n-ttpuirai,  the  semi-Graeci,  Atticus
and  Cossinius  (cf.  note  on  ii,  4,  i).

'  TToifitva  Xawv.  "Shepherd  of  the  people,"  a  phrase  com-
monly applied  by  Homer  to  kings  and  generals,  frequently  to
Agamemnon,  who  led  the  fleet  against  Troy.  Varro  at  the
time  of  this  conversation  was  in  command  of  the  fleet  between
Delos  and  Sicily.    Cf.  Varro's  introduction  to  this  book,  §  6.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  i8t

answered  presently,  my  merry  ^  friends,  and  will
bring  along'  my  hide  and  the  whips,*  but  now  will
you,  Murrius,comeas  my  legal  adviser,  while  I  pay  my
pence  to  the  Lares,'  so  that  you  can  give  evidence

'■  Balatrones.  The  word  is  rare  and  is  generally  taken  to
mean  a  professional  jester.  It  is  probably  connected  with
blaterones  which,  Gellius  (i,  15)  says,  was  a  term  applied  by  the
ancients  to  foolish  chatterers.  Perhaps  there  is  an  allusion  to
the  balatus  of  Atticus  (cf.  iii,  i) :  Quoniani  satis  balasti,  inquity
o  Faustule  noster.

■^  Hoc.  The  old  form  of  Hiic — common  in  Plautus.  Vergil
uses  it  (Aeneid,  viii,  423) :  Hoc  tunc  Ignipotens  caelo  descendit  ah
alto,  where  Servius  remarks,  Nam  Verrius  Flaccus  .  .  .  dicens
in  adverbiis pro  "  m,"  ^^  o" plerumque  maiores ponere  consuetos :
et  sic  pro  ' '  htic  "  "  hoc  "  ve feres  dicere  solebant.

'  Flagra.    Used  in  the  punishment  of  runaway  slaves,  etc.

*  Laribus.  The  reading  of  the  MSS.  is  Palibus.  Ursinus
conjectures  Palilibus,  Schneider  Pali.  Neither  word  makes
very  good  sense.  Keil  gives  Laribus,  and  quotes  a  fragment
(Nonius,  538)  of  Varro  to  the  effect  that  "asses"  were  paid  to
the  Lares.  But  this  was  in  the  case  of  brides.  And  even
granted  the  general  custom,  for  which  there  is  no  evidence,
why  is  Lucienus  to  pay  asses  to  them?

I  would  with  diffidence  suggest  Palicis.  The  Palici  (cf.
Servius,  Aen.,  ix,  584,  and  Diodorus  Siculus,  xi,  89)  were  two
benevolent  deities  who  presided  over  agriculture  (though  the
pseudo-Servius  says  Nauticos  deos  Varro  appellat)  and  were
worshipped  in  a  temple  not  far  from  Mount  Aetna  and
the  river  Synaethus.  This  temple  gave  asylum  to  runaway
slaves,  who  were  not  given  up  to  their  masters  until  lenient
treatment  had  been  assured  by  an  oath  taken  by  the  latter.
The  word  Palicus  was  popularly  derived  from  -kolKiv  and  "ikuv
to  come  back.  Now,  owing  to  the  loss  of  some  of  this  book,
we  do  not  know  precisely  the  scene  of  the  dialogue ;  the  time
was  when  Varro,  as  legatus  of  Pompey  in  the  war  against


i82  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

in  case  they  try  to  get  me  to  pay  them  over  again?

2  Atticus  said  to  Murrius,  Tell  your  friend,  as  ^  you
go,  what  has  been  said  and  what  remains  to  be  said,
so  that  he  may  come  primed  for  his  part,  while  we
in  the  meantime  add  to  the  play  the  second  act,  the
subject  of  which  is  the  larger  cattle.  In  which,  said
Vaccius,  there  is  a  part  for  me,  as  there  are  cows
{vaccae)  in  it.  I  will  therefore  proceed  to  tell  you  what
knowledge  I  have  gained  about  cows  and  oxen,  so
that  if  there  is  any  point  a  man  does  not  know  he
may  learn   it  from   me,  and   if  he  does  know  may

3  note  whether  I  make  any  mistakes.  Be  careful,
Vaccius,  said  I,  what  you  are  about,  for  in  the
matter  of  stock-raising  the  ox  should  hold  the  place
of  honour — particularly  in  Italy,  since  that  country
is  supposed  to  have  derived  its  name  from  cattle.
For  ancient  Greece,  asTimaeus-  writes,  used  to  call


the  pirates,  commanded  a  detachment  of  ships.  The  place
then  may  well  have  been  somewhere  in  Sicily — possibly  at
Catana,  not  far  from  which  was  the  temple  of  the  Palici.  If
we  read  Palicis,  then,  the  passage  makes  fair  sense.

Lucienus  on  going  says  that  he  will  return  bringing  the
whip  for  the  beating  which  he  has  deserved  through  being
absent.  He  goes  as  a  runaway  slave  to  the  Palici  to  claim
their  protection  after  paying  a  few  pence  for  sacrifice,  and
then  to  return  sure  of  lenient  treatment  from  his  masters.
Cf.  Vergil,  Aeneid,  ix,  585 :  Pin^^iiis  uhi  et  placabilis  am
Palici.

^  Eadem.  k\\  adverb  common  in  Plautus  (Trin.,  577,  etc.)
who  always  uses  with  it  the  Future  or  Future-Perfect.  It
means  "at  the  same  time."

''■  TimaeuSy  352-256  B.C.    .'\  Greek  historian  whose  principal


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  183

bulls  itali;  and  it  was  owing  to  the  great  number
and  beauty  of  these,  and  to  the  breeding  of  bullocks
ivituli)  in  this  country  that  the  name  of  Italy  was
bestowed  upon  it.  Others  have  written  that  it  was
because  of  a  famous  bull  called  Italus  which  Her-
cules pursued  into  Italy.

The  ox,    I   say,   is  the  comrade  of  man   in  the

4  labours  of  the  field,  and  the  servant^  of  Ceres,  and

the  ancients  were  so  firmly  determined  to  guard  his

life  that  they  punished  with  death-  any  one  who

work  was  a  history  of  Sicily  from  the  earliest  times  down  to
264  B.C.    Of  this  only  a  few  scraps  remain.

Cf.  Gellius,  xi,  i  :  Timaeus  in  historiis  .  .  .  et  M.  Varro
in  Antiquitatibus  R.  H.  terram  Italiam  de  Graeco  vocabulo  ap-
pellatam  scripserunt  quoniam  hoves  Graeca  vetere  lingua  haXoi
vocitati  sint.  Curtius  (Gk.  Etym.,  i,  p.  257)  remarks:  "This
etymology  is  splendidly  confirmed  by  'Viteliu'  (Italy)  in  the
inscription  on  Oscan  coins."  Probably  the  word  is  connected
with  (/')e7-oc,  a  year,  and  its  root  meaning  is  "yearling."

'  Cereris  minister.  At  Eleusis,  the  most  ancient  seat  of  the
worship  of  Demeter,  certain  sacred  cattle  were  kept  (their
keepers  were  called  ^ov^vyai — o\  ra^  UpaQ  (Sovg  h>  EXevtnvi  dporpi-
oiiaaQ  rpi<povrie  (Schol.  ad  Aristidem),  and  by  them  the  Rharian
plain  was  solemnly  ploughed  every  year  in  memory  of  the  first
sowing  of  wheat  by  Demeter  or  Triptolemus.

^  Capite  sanxerint.  Pliny  (viii,  4,  5)  and  Valerius  Maximus
(viii,  i)  tell  how  a  man  who  had  killed  an  ox  was  damnatus  a
Populo  Romano  die  dicta  .  .  .  actusque  in  exilium  tanquam
colono  suo  interempto.  Columella  (praef.  §  7  to  Bk.  vi)  says
that  "  at  Athens  in  Attica  he  is  called  the  servant  of  Ceres  and
Triptolemus,  shares  the  sky  with  the  brightest  constellations,
is  the  most  hard-working  comrade  of  man  in  the  tilling  of  the
soil,  and  was  so  venerated  by  the  ancients  that  it  was  as  much
a  capital  offence  to  have  slain  an  ox  as  a  citizen."    In  the  age


i84  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

slew  him.  To  this  fact  Attica  and  Peloponnesus
are  witnesses.  For  it  is  to  the  ox  that  Buzuges '  at
Athens  and  Homogvros'  at  Arg^os  owe  their  fame.
I  know  well,  answered  Vaccius,  the  dignity  of  oxen,
and  that  many  great  things  are  called  after  them,
as  husycos  (bull-fig),  biipaida  (bull-boy,  lump  of  a
boy),  hiUimos  (bull-hunger),  hoopis  (cow-eyed,  great-

of  iron  men  took  to  eating  the  domestic  ox  (cf.  Aratus  Phae-

nom.,  134)  which  Cicero  translates  thus:

Ferrea  turn  vero  proles  exorta  repente  est
Ausaque  funestum  prima  est  fabri carter  ensem
Et gustare  manu  vinctum  domitumque  iuvencuin.
Vergil  (Georg.,  ii,  537)  imitates  Aratus:

Et  ante
Impia  quam  caesis  gens  est  epulata  iuvencis.

Aristotle  in  the  Oeconomica  calls  the  ox  "the  poor  man's
slave  " — ^ovq  avTi  oiKBTov  toTq  Trkvi]aiv  iarii'.  At  Athens  he  was
not  allowed  to  be  sacrificed  on  the  ground  that  "  he  was  a
cultivator  and  shared  in  the  toil  of  men."  ynupyoQ  tan  koI  raiv
IV  dvQpwTTOig  KafiuTiHv  Koivutvot;.

'  Buzuges  was  he  who  first  yoked  oxen — Triptolemus  or
Epiinenides.  Afterwards  it  was  the  name  of  the  keeper  of  the
sacred  cattle  at  Eleusis  or  Athens.

"  Homogyros.  Both  these  statements  Varro  took  from  a
previous  book  of  his,  De  gente  populi  Romani.  His  words
— or  the  substance  of  them — are  preserved  for  us  by  Saint
Augustine  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xviii,  6) :  Qui  honor  .  .  .  delatu^  est
homini  privato  et  fulminato  cuidam  Homogyro  eo  quod  primus
ad  aratrum  boves  iunxerit  (Keil).  There  is  another  passage
(Isidor.  Or.,  xvii,  i),  which  seems  to  have  escaped  the  com-
mentators:  Primuin  ad  aratrum  bovis  iujixisse  Jerunt  quetidam
privatum  hominem  et  fulminatum  7iomine  Homogirum.  Ouidam
autem  Osirim  dicunt  huius  artis  esse  invetitoretn,  quidani  Trip-
tolemum.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  185

eyed),  and  that  a  kind  of  large  grape  is  called
5  bumamma  (cow's  udder).  I  know,  too,  that  Jupiter
chose  to  assume  the  form  of  a  bull  when,  being  in
love  with  Europa,  he  carried  her  from  Phoenicia
across  the  sea ;  that  it  was  a  bull  who  saved  Nep-
tune's children  by  Menalippa  when  they  were  babies
from  being  trampled  in  a  cattle-pen  under  the  feet
of  a  herd ;  and,  lastly,  that  from  its  putrid  corpse
spring  the  sweet  bees,  mothers  of  honey — whence
the  Greeks  call  bees  bugenes  ((3oy7£i'£?j  =  ox-born).  We
have  it  recorded  in  writing  that  an  ox  spoke  plainer
Latin  than  did  Hirrius  ^  at  Rome  in  the  Senate  after
he  had  been  elected  praetor.

But  do  not  be  uneasy,  I  will  give  you  as  much
satisfaction  as  the  man  who  wrote  the  "  Bugonia  "  "
could  have  done.

'  The  text  here  Is  hopelessly  corrupt.  No  plausible  emenda-
tion has  ever  been  proposed — and  no  story  concerning  either
Plautius  (?)  Hirrius  or  an  ox  is  known  which  seems  to  apply
even  remotely  to  anything  in  the  text.  Planius  might  easily
have  been  corrupted  to  plautius.  I  have  translated  planius.
The  speaking  of  an  ox  was  a  common  prodigy.  Cf.  Livy,
XXXV,  21  :  Et,  quod  inaxime  terrebat,  Consulis  Cn.  Do?nitii
hovern  locutuni :  Roma  Cave  tibi,  etc.  Cf.  Pliny,  viii,  45  :  Est
frequens  in  prodigiis  priscorum  bovem  locutum:  quo  nuntiato
senatum  sub  dio  haberi  solitum.

-  BugoniaTu.  Keil  quotes  Hieronymus  in  Euseb.  Chron.  :
Eumelus,  qui  btigoniain  et  Europam  .  .  .  coitiposuit,  and  thinks
with  Scaliger  and  others  that  the  bugonia  was  a  poem  in  praise
of  bees.  There  seems  to  be  no  evidence  to  support  this,  and
l3ovyovia  must  surely  mean  ' '  the  begetting  of  oxen  "  (cf.  9i}\v-
■yovia,  Oioyovia,  etc.),  not  the  birth  (of  bees)  from  oxen.

The  words  are,  of  course,  connected  with  §  2:    Vide  quid


i86  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

6  Firstly,  in  the  matter  of  horned  cattle  there  are
four  terms  to  denote  differences  of  age — first,  calves,
secondly,  bullocks;  thirdly,  young  bulls;  fourthly,
old  bulls.  Differences  in  sex  are  indicated  in  the
first  case  by  the  names  calf,  she-calf;  in  the  second,
bullock,  and  heifer;  and  in  the  third  and  fourth  by
the  words  bull  and  cow.  A  barren  cow  is  called
taura^^  one  in  calf,  horda.'  Hence  in  the  calendar
one  day  is  termed  hordicidia^  because  cows  in  calf
are  then  sacrificed.

7  He  who  means  to  buy  ^  a  herd  of  cattle  must  first

agas,  inquam,  Vacci,  when  Varro  hopes  that  Vaccius  may  be
able  to  perform  what  he  promises  with  so  light  a  heart.  To
.    this  Vaccius  here  answers  :  "  Don't  be  uneasy,"  etc.

^  Taura.  Schneider  thinks  that  this  means  hermaphrodite,
comparing  Aristotle  (De  Gen.  Anim.),  where  the  word  Tpd-
■yaivai  (rpdyoc)  signifies  hermaphrodite  goats.  But  Festus  and
Servius  (Aen.,  ii,  140)  both  translate  it  sterilis  vacca.

^  Horda.  Varro  in  the  Lingua  Latina  spells  these  words
{horda,  hordicidia,  etc.)  with  an  initial  F  not  H.  Cf.  L.  L.,
vi,  cap.  3 :  Fordicidia  a  fordis  hubus.  Bos  forda  quae  fert  in
ventre.  Quod  eo  die  puhlice  immolantur  boves  praegnates  in
curiis  coviplures,  a  fordis  caede7idis  Fordicidia  dicta.  This  use
of  f  where  Latin  has  h  is  dialectal  (Sabine  ?).  Cf.  fasena,
Jircus,  faedus,  fordeum  for  harena,  hircus,  etc.

^  Hordicidia.  A  festival  in  honour  of  Tellus  held  at  Rome
15th  April,  when  pregnant  cows  were  sacrificed.  The  ashes  of
the  exsected  calves  (burned,  on  the  day  when  the  hordicidia
was  celebrated,  by  the  Senior  Vestal)  were  used  later  at  the
Parilia — 21st  April — in  the  lustration  of  the  city  and  people.

^  Omz  gregem,  etc.  This  description,  which  corresponds
with  that  given  by  Columella  (vl,  i,  3,  and  vi,  21)  is  taken  from
the  work  of  Mago  the  Carthaginian.  Varro's  words  seem  to
be  almost  literally  translated  by  the  Geoponica,  xvii,  2.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  187

see  that  its  members  are  young  and  fresh,  and  fitted
to  give  increase  rather  than  incapable'  of  bearing;
that  they  are  well  put  together,  sound  of  limb,  in
shape  square  and  of  great  size,  with  blackish  horns,
wide  foreheads,  big  black  eyes,  and  hairy  ears;
they  should  have  flattened  jaws  and  be  somewhat
snub-nosed;  they  must  not  be  hump-backed'  but
have  a  slightly  concave  spine ^;  the  nostrils  should
be  well  opened,  the  lips  blackish,  the  neck  thick
and  long  with  hanging  dewlap,  body  well  ribbed
up,  shoulders  broad,  buttocks  *  of  good  size  with
a  long  tail  reaching  to  the  heels,  and  ending  in
a  tuft  of  slightly  curly  hair.    The  legs '  should  be

'  Expartae.  The  word  occurs  nowhere  else.  Scaliger  de-
rives it  from  ex  and  partus,  and  quotes  certain  ' '  old  glosses  "
which  he  had  in  his  possession :  expatta — partu  vactca.  The
reading  Victorius  found  in  his  MS.  is  ex  parte.  That  found  in
all  editions  before  him  is  expertae  which,  pace  Scaliger,  seenis
perfectly  intelligible  if  taken  closely  with  integrae.  The  pre-
ference is  to  be  given  to  cows  which  have  never  had  calves
{integrae  ad,  etc.)  over  those  which  have  already  had  some  ex-
perience (in  bearing  young).  Keil  follows  Scaliger — wrongly,
I  think.

^  Ne  gihberae.  This  is  the  )u>)  Kvprdq  of  the  Geoponica.
KvproQ  )(  KolXoQ  in  the  Mathematicians  =  convex  )(  concave.

^  Spina.  Columella  {/oc.  cit.)  \ia.?,dorso  recto  planoque  ^^  sub-
sidente.

■*  Bonis  clunibus.    Columella  {loc.  cit.)  has  clunibus  rotundis.

'  Cruribus potius.  The  Geoponica  (Joe.  cit.)  make  the  mean-
ing of  this  passage  quite  clear :  Tii  aKtKr]  6p9d,  artpea  Traxvrtpa
IxaWov  Tj  jiaKportpa,  jxi)  Trapa-pij^ofiiva  irpoQ  uWrfkn,  ttoociq  tv  Tip  l3adi-
Ziiv  fxj)  vXarvvoHEVovg  ayav,  /iTj^k  x^^"<^  SicaToXfikva^,  roi'c  ovvxd^  re
Xe'tovQ  Kai  'iffovg,  jSvpaav  ivatpTi  Kai  fit)  ciin^vXiijfiivtjv.


i88  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

straight  and  short  rather  than  long,  the  knees
somewhat  prominent  with  a  good  distance  between
them,  the  feet  narrow,  and  not  spreading  out  as  the
animal  walks,  the  cleft  in  the  hoof  not  wide,  and
the  two  toes  smooth  and  even.  The  skin  must  not
be  harsh  or  hard  to  the  touch.  The  best  colour '  is
black,  then  red,  then  dun,  then  white — for  oxen  of
the  last  colour  are  the  most  delicate,  as  those  of  the
9  first  mentioned  are  the  hardiest.  Of  the  two  middle "
colours  the  first  is  more  common  than  the  second,
both  of  them  than  either  black  or  white.

The    males  as  well  ought  to  be  (i)  of  a  good

^  Colore potissimum.  Columella  (vi,  i,  i)  mentions  the  diffi-
culty of  laying  down  rules  for  the  buying  of  cattle  owing  to
the  great  number  of  breeds  to  be  found,  each  of  which  has  its
own  excellence — e.g.^  the  Asiatic,  Gallic,  Epirot,  and  Italian
kinds.  And  the  Italian  kinds  differ  greatly.  The  Campanian
ox  is  small  and  white,  that  of  Umbria  white  and  of  huge  size.
There  are  also  red  Umbrians  which  are  as  good-tempered  as
they  are  big-bodied.  The  Etrurian  and  Latian  oxen  are  close-
knit  but  strong ;  those  bred  on  the  Apennines  are  the  hardiest
of  all,  will  indeed  stand  any  amount  of  hardship,  but  are  ugly
to  look  at.

■  De  mediis  duobus.  Keil  expunges  the  771  eo  prior  of  the
MSS.

Zahlfeldt  (Qu.  Crit.  in  Varr.,  R.R.,  32)  conjectures  crebrior,
which  seems  satisfactory.  Something  of  the  kind  is  needed,
else  the  construction  is  harsh  even  for  Varro.

In  the  Geoponica  {loc.  cit.)  the  best  colours  are  thought  to
be  the  various  shades  of  red  (rae  roic  ^pwfiaai  ^av9i!^ovffaQ) ;
cows  with  black  legs  are  highly  thought  of  (rd  «tkA»;  fttXava
fXoi'nac).  Pliny  (viii,  48)  says  that  both  black  and  white  oxen
are  bad  workers.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  189

breed  and  their  shape  must  be  carefully  looked  to,
as  the  progeny  reproduce  the  qualities  of  the
parents,  and  (2)  the  place  also  where  they  were
born  is  a  matter  of  moment.  In  Italy,  for  example,
those  of  the  Gallic  ^  breed  are  mostly  good  workers,

10  while  those  of  Liguria  are  of  small  account,  and
those  of  Epirus  '  across  the  sea  surpass  not  only  the
cattle  of  all  Greece,  but  those  of  Italy  as  well.  Some
people,  however,  use  Italian  cattle  for  sacrifice,  and
reserve  them  for  solemn  supplications  of  the  gods,
for — so  they  say — these  are  more  suitable  than
others,  owing  to  their  great  bulk.  For  religious
functions  they  certainly  are  to  be  preferred,  be-
cause of  their  majestic '  size  and  striking  colour.
There  is  also  another  reason  for  keeping  them  for
sacrifice,  white  cattle  being  rarer  in  Italy  than  they
are  in  Thrace — near  the  Melanic*  gulf — where  few
of  any  other  colour  are  to  be  found.

11  When  we  are  buying  oxen  which  have  been
broken  in,  the  warrant  required  is  as  follows:  *'  Do
you  guarantee  that  these  oxen  are  sound  and  that

'   Gallici.    \.Q.,  Piceni  et  Cimimpadani.

-  Epirotici.  Cf.  Pliny  (viil,  45) :  In  nostra  orbe  Epiroticis  laus
maxima.  Aristotle  (Hist.  A.,  viii,  7)  speaks  of  /3owe  ■nvp'p'xxa-c,  iv
Ty  'HTTfipy.  The  excellence,  he  says,  of  the  breed  was  due  to
the  fact  that  they  were  kept  from  the  bull  for  nine  years.

*  Dignitatem  amplitudinis.  Varro  refers  no  doubt  to  the
white  Umbrians;  cf.  Columella,  vi,  i,  2:  Umhria  {progenerat)
vastos  et  albos.  White  bullocks  were  sacrificed  on  the  occasion
of  a  triumph;  ci.  inter  alios ,  Claudian,  speaking  of  Clitumnus,
Candida  quae  Latiis  praebent  armenta  triumphis.

*  MeXava  (coXttov.    Now  the  Gulf  of  Samos.


I90  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  buyer  incurs  no  liability  ^  for  damage  done  by
them?"  In  buying  them  unbroken  it  is:  "  Do  you
guarantee  that  these  oxen  are  sound  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  word,  come  from  a  sound  herd,  and
that  the  buyer  incurs  no  liability  for  damage  done
by  them?"  Butchers  who  buy  an  ox  for  cutting  up,
if  they  adopt  the  Manilian  forms,  use  rather  more
words  than  these,  while  those  who  buy  for  sacrifice
do  not  as  a  rule  exact  any  guarantee  as  to  the  health
of  the  victim."

Cattle  are  best  pastured  in  clearings  where  there
are  shrubs  and  leaves  '  in  abundance.    When  they

^  Noxisque  praestari.  Cf.  note  on  ii,  4,  5.  The  -ce  in  illosce
is  "deictic,"  "those  before  our  eyes."

*  Non  Solent  stipulari.  Because  the  priests  themselves  ap-
plied tests  "offering  the  bulls  barley,  the  he-goats  pulse  (tpf-
fSivQovc).  Refusal  to  eat  was  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  ill-health.
The  test  for  a  she-goat  was  cold  water"  (Plutarch,  Orac.
Defect.).

^  I^ros  multa.  Cf.  Columella  (vi,  3,  6) :  "  From  this  time  (ist
July)  to  I  St  November — that  is,  through  the  summer  and
autumn — they  may  be  fed  on  leaves.  The  best  for  the  purpose
are  those  of  the  elm,  the  ash,  and  the  poplar ;  the  worst  those
of  the  holm  oak,  the  oak,  and  the  laurel.  These,  however,  you
are  obliged  to  use  after  summer  as  the  others  then  fail.  Fig
leaves  may  also  be  given."

The  number  of  things  used  as  food  for  cattle  is  astonishing.
Columella  {Joe.  cit.)  mentions:  peas,  beans,  vetches,  lupines,
ocinum,  barley,  wheat,  straw,  grass,  hay,  acorns,  leaves,
grape  refuse— which  he  specially  recommends  as  having  the
virtues  oi  both  meat  and  wine,  cytisus.  Cato  (54)  mentions  in
addition  bean  bran  and  ivy  leaves.  Much  attention  was  given
to  the  health  and  feeding  of  the  working  ox.  Cato  (54)  says :
Nihil  t'.v/  quoii  inagis  expediat  quain  doves  bene  curare.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  191

spend  the  winter  near  the  sea,  they  are  driven  off
at  the  time  of  the  great  heats  to  wooded  mountains.
For  breeding  purposes,  the  following  is  my  usual

12  practice.  For  one  month  before  the  admission  of
the  bull,  the  cows  must  not  get  their  full  measure  ^
of  food  and  drink,  for  it  is  thought  that  they  con-
ceive more  readily  when  thin.  On  the  other  hand,
two  months  before  that  time  I  fatten  up  my  bulls
with  grass,  chaff  and  hay,  and  separate  them  from
the  cows.  I  keep  the  same  number  of  bulls  as  does
Atticus,  that  is,  for  seventy"  breeding  cows,  two
bulls,  one  of  them  a  year,  the  other  two  years  old.
This  I  practise  just  about  the  rising  of  that  constella-
tion which  is  called  by  the  Greeks  >.vpa,  by  our
countrymen  "fides"  (the  lyre).     When  the  busi-

13  ness  is  over  I  drive  back  the  bulls  to  the  flock.  One
can  tell  whether  the  cow  has  conceived  a  male  or  a
female  by  noticing  during  the  act  of  coition  on
which  side  the  bull  comes  down.  If  it  is  a  male  he
goes  more  to  the  right,  if  a  female  to  the  left.  Why
this  is  the  case,  said  he  to  me,  you  readers  of
Aristotle'^  must  determine.  Impregnation  should
not  take  place  before  the  animals  are  two  years  old,

'  Se  impleant.  Cf.  Col.  vi,  24,  3 :  Ne  eas  steriles  reddat  nimia
corporis  obesitas.

^  LXX.  Columella  (vi,  243)  says  one  to  fifteen.  Unum
marem  quindecim  vaccis  sufficere  abunde  est.  Possibly  XXL  or
XXX  should  be  read,  which  gives  the  same  proportion  as
Columella  and  Pliny,  viii,  45  (as  amended  by  Pintianus) :
Implent  et  singuli  quindenas  eodem.  anno.

^  Aristotelem.  De  Gen.  An.,  v,  and  vi.  Cf.  Col.  vi,  24,  3,
Pliny,  viii,  45,  and  Geoponica,  xvii,  6.


192  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

so  that  they  may  be  three  when  they  calve — if  they
are  four  years  old,  so  much  the  better.  Most  cows
go  on  bearing  for  ten  years,  some  even  longer.  The
most  suitable  time  for  the  beginning  of  pregnancy
is  during  a  period  of  forty  or  a  few  more  days  from
the  rising  of  the  Dolphin ;  ^  for  those  which  have  so
conceived  calve  at  the  most  temperate  time  of  the
14  year,  as  cows  are  pregnant  ten  months.  I  have
found  recorded  a  strange  fact  about  them:  if  they
are  covered  by  a  bull  immediately  after  he  has  been
castrated  they  conceive. '  They  should  graze  in  green
and  watery  places.  Care  must  be  taken  not  to  let
them  stand  too  near  one  another,  and  that  they  do

^  Delphini.  The  Geoponica  (xvii,  10,  3)  fix  the  time — in  the
early  part  of  June — wpa  Zi  wpog  oxuav  rj  otto  SeXflvog  iiriToXijv,
TOvAari  TTipi  rag  cipxaQ  rov  ^lovviov  fir}v6c,  'iwg  -qjupixiv  fi  (40).  Colu-
mella (xi,  2,  45)  says  that  the  Dolphin  rises  in  the  evening  on
loth  June.  He  (vi,  24,  i)  g-ives  July  as  the  proper  time.
Pliny,  in  a  chapter  which  borrows  largely  from  Varro  (viii,  45),
has  Coitus  a  Delphini  Exortu  ad  [sic]  pridie  Nonas  Januarias
diebus  xxxx.

I  have  no  doubt  that  Pliny  wrote  Coitus  a  D.  Exortu  ad  dies
xxxXy  and  that  the  rest  is  the  gloss  of  an  ignorant  scribe  who
wished  to  explain  Delphini  exortus  and,  remembering  another
passage  of  Pliny  (xviii,  26) :  Pridie  Non.  Jan.  Caesari  Delph-
inus  matutino  exoritur,  used  it  as  a  note  which  was  afterwards
inserted  in  the  text.  Or  it  may  have  been  a  slip  made  by  Pliny
himself — using  his  commonplace  books  carelessly,  and  con-
fusing the  evening  rising,  which  Varro  obviously  means,  with
the  morning  rising  of  the  Dolphin.  Keil  and  others  notice  the
discrepancy  but  do  not  explain  how  it — probably — arose.

^  Concipere.  Cf  Aristotle  (De  Gen.  An.,  i,  4):  Ka\  I'l^t]  ravpng
Ttr,  fifTa  -))v  iKTofii^v,  n''9eMr  oxevoag  iirKtfpwai,  ha  r'v  pi'iTrio  roi'g
TTopovg  dveaTTuaOai.


II]  OF  COWS  AND  OXEN  193

not  gore  or  run  against  one  another.  And,  as  in
summer  gad-flies^  generally  annoy  them,  and  a
kind  of  small  gnat  breeds  under  their  tails,  some
people,  to  prevent  this  annoyance,  keep  them  shut
up  in  pens.  Leaves  or  some  substitute  should  be
strewn  on  the  floor  of  their  stalls  that  they  may  rest
more  comfortably.     In  summer  time  they  must  be

15  driven  twice  to  the  water,  in  winter  once.  When
they  begin  to  breed,  fresh  fodder  (for  them  to  taste
as  they  go  out)  should  be  kept  close  to  the  stalls,
for  their  appetite  becomes  capricious  at  this  time.
Care  must  also  be  taken  that  the  place  to  which  they
return  be  not  cold,  for  cold  as  well  as  hunger  makes
them  grow  thin.

16  In  the  rearing  of  cattle  proceed  as  follows.  The
sucking  calves  must  not  sleep  with  their  mothers,

'■  Tabani.  Tabanus,  the  popular  name  for  the  Greek  olarpoQ,
the  proper  Latin  equivalent  being  asilus.  At  least  so  says  Isi-
dore (xii,  8,  last  paragraph) :  Oestrum  animal  armentis  aculeis
pennolestum.  Oestrum  autein  Graecum  est,  quod  Latine
"  asilus, ^^  vu/£-o  tabanus  vacatur.  The  word  is  still  in  use  in
Italian,  tabdno  meaning  a  "back-biter,"  and  tafdno  a  gad-

fly.  .

Crescentius,  paraphrasing  this  passage  (ix,  65,  quoted  by
Schneider)  puts  for  the  bestiolae  minutae,  Zentalos  Muscas.
Zentahs  is  no  doubt  the  modern  Italian  Zanzara,  an  onoma-
topoeic word  meaning  gnat.  If  the  text,  however,  be  correct,
Varro  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  eggs  laid  by  the  tabatius
under  the  tails  of  the  oxen.

The  Geoponica  (xvii,  7)  advise  the  sprinkling  of  the  pastures
with  a  decoction  of  laurel  berries  as  a  means  to  get  rid  of  the
gad-flies,  "which  run  away  because  they  hate  it"  {^la  r^v
avTiirdQaav).


194  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

for  otherwise  they  are  trampled  on  by  them.  They
should  be  taken  to  the  mother  early  in  the  morning
and  again  when  they  come  back  from  the  pasture.
When  the  calves  are  grown  big,  keep  up  the  strength
of  the  dams  by  giving  them  green  fodder  in  their
stalls.  In  the  case  of  these,  as  generally  of  all
stables,  a  flooring  of  stone  or  some  other  material
must  be  laid  down  to  prevent  the  hoofs  from  rotting.
From   the  autumnal  equinox  onwards  they  graze

17  with  their  dams.  Bulls  should  not  be  castrated
before  they  are  two  ^  years  old,  as  otherwise  they  do
not  easily  recover  from  the  operation.  Those  which
are  castrated  after  that  age  grow  up  hard  to  manage
and  useless  for  purposes  of  work.  Again,  as  is  the
case  in  all  other  flocks  of  domestic  animals,  every
year  a  choice  should  be  made  of  the  cows  to  be  kept,
and  those  which  it  is  not  desirable  to  keep  '  must  be
got  rid  of,  as  they  take  up  the  room  of  those  which
are  able  to  yield  increase.  Should  any  cow  have  lost
a  calf  you  must  put  under  her  calves  whose  mothers
give  them  too  little  milk.  To  six-months-old  calves
wheaten  bran,  barley-flour,  and  young  grass  is
given,  and  they  are  made  to  drink  night  and  morn-

iSing.     Many  directions   concerning    their    health   I

1  A?i/e  bimum.  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  ix,  50)  says :  "when  they
are  a  year  old,"  iviavaioi.

Mago  states,  according  to  Columella  (vi,  26,  i — where  two
ways  of  performing  the  operation  are  described)  xntuli  duin
adhuc  teneri  sunt.

^  Reiculae.  Cf.  note  on  ii,  i,  24.  The  Geoponica  (xvii,  10)
give  as  the  equivalent  of  this  word  "  the  barren  and  weakly
cows  and  those  of  advanced  age."


II]  OF  ASSES  195

make  my  herdsman  '  copy  out  from  Mago's  books,
and  I  take  care  that  he  reads  one  or  more  of  them
frequently.  You  must  so  regulate  the  number  of
bulls  and  cows  as  to  have  two  of  the  former  to  sixty
of  the  latter — ^one  a  year  old,  the  other  two.  Some
maintain  either  a  greater  or  less  proportion :  for
example,  at  Atticus's  there  are  two  bulls  where  there
are  seventy  breeding  cows.  Different  people  have
herds  of  different  sizes;  some,  like  myself,  think  a
hundred  '  a  good  average  number.  Atticus  has  120,
as  has  Lucienus.


CHAPTER  VI

OF  ASSES

I  Thus  Vaccius.     Whereupon  Murrius,  who  had  re-
turned with  Lucienus  while  Vaccius  was  speaking,

^  Amientarium  .  .  .  ut  legal  euro.  A  common  Greek  con-
struction much  used  in  these  books,  cf.  ii,  9,  15,  iii,  10,  4,  and
iii,  16,  28,  which  last  Is  an  exact  parallel  to  this  passage,
Aquarti  mulsam  in  vasculis  prope  ut  sit  curant,  Aliquid  here
Kell  would  take  as  an  adverb.  The  adverbial  use  of  aliquid
and  nihil  is  of  course  common  enough,  but  here  It  seems
simpler  to  connect  aliquid  with  exscripta.  Besides,  It  would  be
difficult  to  quote  an  example  of  the  so-called  adverbial  use  (It
Is  really  a  cognate  accusative)  of  aliquid  resembling  this  at  all
points.

"^  Centenarium.  Varro  (ii,  4,  22)  makes  the  same  statement
about  a  herd  of  pigs  :  Sed  ego  modicum  puto  centenariumj.


196  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

remarked:  I  choose  as  my  topic  asses/  for  my
native  place  is  Reate,  where  the  best  and  largest
are  found.  From  the  Reatine  breed  I  have  bred
foals  there  and  have  sold  them  more  than  once  even
2  to  Arcadians  themselves.  Well,  he  who  wants  to
make  a  really  good  herd  of  asses  must  first  take
care  to  choose  both  males  and  females  of  the  right''
age,  so  that  both  sexes  may  be  a  source  of  profit  for
as  long  as  possible;  he  must  have  them  strong,
handsome  at  every  point,  stout  of  limb,  of  good
breed — that  is,  coming  from  those  places  where  the
best  are  found.  Thus  do  those  who  in  the  Pelopon-
nesus buy  from  Arcadia '  rather  than  elsewhere,  and
in  Italy  from  the  Reatine  land.  For  it  does  not  follow,
you  know,  because  the  best  "  floating  "Mampreys  are

'  De  asinis.  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  43)  says  that  they  were  a
source  of  very  great  profit :  Ouaestus  ex  its  opima  praedia  ex-
superat,  that  they  were  useful  for  carting,  sometimes  even  for
ploughing,  but  that  they  were  especially  valuable  as  the  sires
of  mules.

-  Bona  aetate.  In  Plautus  frequently  bona  aetas  means
youth,  and  mala  aetas  old  age.     Cf.  Aulularia,  i,  1,4.

'  Arcadia.  Isidore  (xii,  1)  speaks  of  the  asses  found  there
as  alti  et  magni.

*  Murenae  flutae.  Varro  (quoted  by  Macrobius,  Sat.,  iii,
15,  7)  says  that  "  murenae  flutae  in  Sicily  can  be  caught  by  the
hand,  as  owing  to  their  fatness  \h&\ float  on  the  surface  of
the  water."  They  are  the  /xvpalvai  TrXwrat  of  Athenaeus.  This
was  the  most  esteemed  kind  of  lamprey,  cf.  Col.,  viii,  17,  8:
Item  flautas,  quae  maxitne  probantur,  muraenas.  They  were
"preserved"  by  Roman  epicures  in  artificial  fish-ponds  into
which  the  sea  flowed.     Pliny  (viii,  55)  tells  how  Hortensius,


II]  OF  ASSES  197

to  be  found  in  Sicilian  waters,  and  the  "  helops  "  ^
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rhodes,  that  these  fishes,
of  the  same  quality  and  size,  exist  in  every  sea.
;  Of  asses  there  are  two  kinds,  the  one  wild,  called
**  onagri,"  such  as  are  found — many  flocks  of  them
— in  Phrygia  and  Lycaonia,  the  other  tame,  as  are
all  those  of  Italy.    The  "onager"'  is  suitable  for

the  great  rival  of  Cicero,  loved  a  lamprey  so  much  that  he
wept  when  it  died  !

^  Helops.  Pliny  (ix,  17)  says  that  this  fish  was  the  same  as
the  acipenser  (sturgeon?),  "  which  was  the  most  famous  of  all
fishes  amongst  the  ancients,"  and  that  it  was  the  only  one  the
scales  of  which  turned  towards  the  head  {unus  omnium  squamis
ad  OS  versis).    Varro  (iTri  ry  ratpy  nvpov)  calls  it  multtnummus,

Nee  multtnummus  piscis  ex  salo  captus
helops  ;

but  in  Pliny's  time  it  was  not  of  much  account,  rare  though
it  was — nullo  in  honore  est  .  .  .  cum  sit  rarus  inventu  (Joe.  cif.).
Columella  (viii,  16,  9)  says  that  it  fed  only  in  the  depths  of  the
Pamphylian  Sea  (Gulf  of  Adalia),  which  is  a  couple  of  hundred
miles  from  Rhodes,  though  in  the  same  latitude.  Non  enim
omni  mari  potest  omnis  esse,  ut  helops  qui  Pamphilio  pro/undo
nee  alio  paseitur.

^  Ojiagrus.  The  Geoponica  (xvi,  21)  repeat  this  statement
of  Varro.  Columella  (vi,  37),  however,  seems  to  contradict  it
indirectly,  for,  speaking  of  the  progeny  of  a  he-ass  and  a  mare,
he  says :  ''  Neque  tamen  ullum  est  in  hoc  pecore  aut  animo  aut
forma  praestantius  quam  quod  seminavit  asinus.  Posset  huie
aliquatenus  comparari  quod  progenerat  onager,  nisi  et  indom-
itum  et  servitio  contumax,  silvestris  more,  strigosum  patris
praeferret  habitum."  He  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  onager's
swiftness  and  strength,  and  recommends  the  breeder  to  put
the  male  offspring  of  an  onager  and  a  mare  to  a  mare,  as  in


198  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

breeding  purposes,  as  when  wild  he  may  readily  be
tamed,  and  once  tamed  never  becomes  wild  again.
As  the  offspring  resemble  their  parents,  both  sire
and  dam  must  be  chosen  carefully,  both  must  be
fine  animals.  In  trading,  change  of  ownership  is
effected — just  as  in  the  case  of  other  domestic
animals — by  purchase  and  delivery;  and  a  guar-
antee that  their  health  is  good  and  that  they  have
done  no  damage  for  which  the  purchaser  may  be
4  held  responsible  is  usually  required.  Their  proper
food  is  spelt  and  barley  bran.  The  male  is  put  to
the  female  before  the  solstice,  that  the  latter  may
foal  the  next  year  at  the  same  time;  for  she-asses
reproduce  their  kind  twelve  months  after  conception.
During  pregnancy  they  are  relieved  from  work;  for
toil  makes  the  womb  produce  inferior  offspring,'
whereas  the  male  is  not  kept  from  work,  as  he  de-
teriorates through  lack  of  it.  As  regards  breeding,
the  practice  is  much  the  same  as  with  horses.  After
birth,  the  foals  are  not  taken  from  the  mothers  for  a
year ;  the  next  year  they  are  allowed  to  be  with  them

the  third  generation  the  wild  nature  of  the  onager  would  be
mitigated  {per gradus  infracta feritate).

For  their  swiftness  cf.  Xenophon,  Anab.,  i,  5.  The  Greeks
found  it  difficult  to  catch  them,  for  they  ran  much  faster  than
horses.  Some,  however,  they  did  catch,  using  relays  of  horses.
The  flesh  was  found  to  resemble  that  of  the  stag,  but  it  was
more  tender.

^  Natio.  Festus  {ad  vcrhuni) :  In  pecorihus  qtioque  bofius
proventus  feturae  bona  natio  dicitur.  Cicero  frequently  uses
the  word  contemptuously,  as  Mur.,  33,  tota  nalio candidatorum.
Pro  Scxt.,  44,  7ialio  upiimaiium.


II]  OF  ASSES  199

at  night,  and  are  kept  loosely  tied  with  a  halter,  or
something  of  the  kind.  With  the  third  year  one
begins  to  break  them  to  the  work  for  which  one
means  to  use  them.
5  There  now  remains  for  discussion  the  number —
but  of  asses  herds  are  not  made,  with  the  exception
of  those  which  bear  burdens,  as  they  are  mostly
drafted  off  to  the  mills  or  to  work  on  the  farms
when  there  is  carting  to  be  done,  or  even  to  the
plough  where  the  soil  is  light,  as  in  Campania,
What  herds  of  asses  there  are  generally  belong  to
traders,  such  as  those  who  convey,  by  means  of
pack-asses,^  oil,  wine,  corn,  and  the  like,  from  the
country  about  Brundisium  or  Apulia  to  the  sea
coast.

*  Asellis  dossuariis.  Cf.  Velius  Long^us,  79,  4 :  Sicetdossum
per  duo  S.  The  cJiteUae  used  in  loading  asses  or  mules  were
perhaps  a  pair  of  paniers,  though  I  can  find  very  little  evidence
■  for  the  fact.  Festus  {adverb.)  has  eae  quibus  sarcinae  Con-
ligatae  niulis  porfantur,  and  says  that  a  part  of  the  Via
Flaminia — descending,  then  ascending — was  called  Clitellae.
On  Trajan's  Column  there  is  a  picture  of  a  mare  with  clitellae
loaded  with  amphorae,  and  I  can  find  no  resemblance  to  a
pair  of  paniers.  These  asini  dossuarii  were  called  in  Greek
ovoi  Kav9t)\ioi.  Cf.  Scholiast  or  Arist.,  Vesp.,  170,  who  quotes
Xenophon  and  Polybius.  From  the  passage  quoted  from
Polybius  it  is  evident  that  the  word  KavOi'iXui  means  the  pack-
saddle.


200  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  VII

OF    HORSES    AND    MARES

I  Then  said  Lucienus,  I  too  will  take  my  turn,  throw
open  the  barriers,'  and  let  my  horses  go,  and  not
the  males  only,  which  I,  like  Atticus,  keep  as
stallions,  one  to  every  ten  mares.

The  brave  Q.  Modius  Equiculus-  used  to  think
as  much  of  mares  as  of  horses  even  for  military  ser-

^  Carceres.  These  were  stalls  or  vaults  in  the  circus  from
which  in  the  chariot  races  the  horses  with  their  chariots
started.  They  were  closed  by  bars,  or  more  probably  by  doors
of  open  woodwork  (canceUi),  which  were  thrown  open  simul-
taneously when  the  signal  for  beginning  the  race  was  given.

There  is  a  marble  in  the  British  Museum  which  figures  very
clearly  these  cancelli.  Here  they  are  folding  doors  which  open
inwards.

*  O.  Moditis  Equiculus.  Nothing  is  known  of  him.  Is  he
a  Mrs.  Harris?  The  words  which  follow  in  Keil's  text,  vir
fortissimus  etiam  patre  militari,  are  absurdly  irrelevant,  and
need  emendation.  I  have  translated  Ursinus's  conjecture,
etiam  in  re  militari,  which  makes  good  sense.  It  is  difficult
to  understand,  however,  if  this  be  the  true  reading,  how  the
corruption  arose.  I  would  suggest  etiam  a  parte  i7iilitari
{etid  a  parte).  The  second  a  a  copyist  would  naturally  omit,
and  parte  might  easily  have  been  changed  to  patre.

Pliny  (viii,  42)  mentions  the  use  of  mares  in  preference  to
horses  in  war.  Scythae  per  hcUa  faeminis  uti  maltint,  quoniani
urinam  cursu  non  impedito  reddant,  and  the  best  horses  which
went  to  the  war  against  Troy  were  the  mares  of  Pheretiades,
"  swift  as  birds  "  (Iliad,  ii,  763).


II]  OF  HORSES  AND  MARES  201

vice.  Those  who  wish  to  keep  herds  of  these  horses
and  mares,  as  some  do  in  the  Peloponnesus  and
Apulia,  must  first  consider  the  question  of  age,
about  which  the  following  directions  are  given :
We  take  care  that  they  (the  mares)  are  not  less  than
2  three  or  more  than  ten  years  old.  The  age  ^  is  in-
ferred of  horses,  and  generally  of  all  animals  with
undivided  hoofs,  and  even  of  horned  animals,  from
the  fact  that  a  horse  at  thirty  months  first  sheds  the

^  Aetas  cognoscitur.  k?,  in  the  first  book  Varro  used  Theo-
phrastus  as  his  principal  authority,  so  in  this  Aristotle.  The
latter  discusses  (H.  A.,  vi,  22)  this  matter  of  a  horse's  teeth
thus :  "  A  horse  has  forty  teeth ;  when  thirty  months  old  he
sheds  the  first  four  (two  upper,  two  lower) ;  when  a  year  has
gone  by  he  sheds  in  the  same  way  other  four  (two  upper,  two
lower) ;  and  again  when  another  year  has  passed,  other  four
in  the  same  way;  when  four  years  and  six  months  have
elapsed  he  sheds  no  more."

The  Geoponica  (xvi,  i)  give  more  details  :  "  At  thirty  months
the  foal  begins  by  shedding  its  front  teeth  which  we  call  '  in-
cisors ' — the  two  middle  ones  of  each  jaw.  At  the  beginning
of  the  fourth  year,  he  loses  two  on  one  side  (one  from  each
jaw)  and  two  on  the  other.  Then  the  canine  teeth  appear.
At  the  commencement  of  the  fifth  year  he  loses  the  rest-
upper  and  lower — one  from  each  side  \sic\.  But  those  which
are  now  growing  are  hollow.  When  he  has  reached  the  sixth
year  the  hollows  of  the  first  begin  to  fill  up,  and  when  he  is
seven  years  old  he  has  his  full  number  of  teeth,  none  of  which
is  hollow.  And  when  this  has  happened  it  is  no  longer  easy
to  tell  the  age."

Palladius  and  Columella  do  not  deserve  to  be  quoted.  As
to  the  facts  Schneider  vouches  for  the  accuracy  of  Varro's
statements,  and  tells  us  that  when  he  was  writing  his  com-
mentary on  the  passage,  he  (Schneider)  had  a  large  number
of  horses'  skulls  in  front  of  him !


202  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

middle  teeth,  the  two  upper  and  two  lower.  As
they  enter  upon  their  fourth  year  of  life  they  shed
others  in  like  manner — the  four  teeth  next  those
which   they  have  already  lost — and  the   so-called

3  canine  teeth  begin  to  grow.  Similarly,  at  the
beginning  of  the  fifth  year,  the  horse  loses  in  like
manner  two,  and,  whereas  those  which  are  growing
again  are  hollow,  in  the  sixth  year  they  are  filled
in,  and  with  the  seventh  year  he  generally  has  all
his  teeth  to  the  full  number  grown  again.  They
say  that  you  cannot  tell  the  age  of  those  that  are
older,  only  when  the  teeth  have  become  prominent^
and  the  eyebrows  gray,  with  hollows  under  them,
they  say — judging  from  this — that  the  horse  is
sixteen  years  old.

4  As  to  type :  they  should  be  of  moderate  size,  for
if  excessively  big  or  small  they  do  not  look  well.
The  mares  should  have  broad  quarters  and  bellies.
Such  horses  as  are  destined  for  stud  purposes  you

^  Denies  hrocchi.  Cf.  Columella  (vi,  29,  5) :  Nee  postea  quot
annorum  sit,  manifesto  comprehendi  potest.  Decimo  tamen  anno
tempora  cavari  incipiunt,  ct  superciUa  nonjiumquam  catiescere,
et  dentes  prominerc.

Brocchus  or  broncus  is  defined  by  Nonius  (Bk.  i,  ad  verb.)  as
producto  ore  dentibtis prominentihus.  He  cites  Lucilius,  Bk.  Ill  :
Broncu"  Bovillanus  dente  adverso  eminulo,  hie  est  rinoceros.

The  word  is  found  also  in  a  fragment  of  Plautus,  quoted  by
Festus:  Aut  varum  aut  valgum  aut  conipemem  aut paetum  aut
brocchum  filium.  In  both  these  cases  it  describes  persons,
while  Varro  here  and  ii,  9,  3  uses  it  of  the  teeth  themselves.
Crescentius,  not  understanding  it,  translates  brocchi  by  pli-
cati  (bent !).


ii]  OF  HORSES  AND  MARES  203

should  choose  big  of  body,  shapely,  with  no  part
5  of  the  body  out  of  proportion.  You  can  guess
from  the  foal  the  kind  of  horse '  he  is  going  to  be —
[a  good  one]  if  his  head  is  small,  if  he  has  well-
proportioned  limbs,  black  eyes,  well  opened  nos-
trils, ears  leaning  ^forwards,  the  mane  abundant,  in
colour  leaning  to  dark,  and  slightly  curling,  with
rather  fine  hair  falling  to  the  right  side  of  the  neck,
the  chest  broad  and  full,  broad  shoulders,  belly  of
moderate  size,  loins  sloping  downwards,  broad
shoulder-blades,  the  spine,  if  possible,  double,'
failing  this  not  projecting,*  tail  abundant  and  curl-
ing slightly,  the  legs  straight,  symmetrical,  and
turning  rather  inwards  than  outwards,  the  knees
round  and  small,  and  the  hoofs  hard.  He  should
have  the  veins  visible  all  over  his  body,  for  a  horse
of  such  a  kind  can  readily  be  treated  '  when  he  is  ill.

'  Oualis  equus.  Compare  with  this  description  of  the  perfect
horse  Columella's  (vi,  29,  2),  Verg'il's  (Georg.,  iii,  75-88),
that  of  the  Geoponica  (xvi,  1) — all  of  which  follow  Varro
closely.

*  Auribus  adplicatis.  Adplicatus:  replicatus :  :  aduncus :  red-
uncus.  Columella  {he.  cit.)  has  hrevihus  auriculis  et  adrectis,
the  Geoponica  {loc.  cit.)  to.  wtu  ivpoataTaX^tva,  Palladius  breves
et  argutas  (flickering — mobile).

^  Spina  duplici.  Cf  Georg.,  iii,  87:  At  duplex  agitur  per
lumhos  spina.  In  a  well-conditioned  muscular  man  or  horse
the  spinal  vertebrae  are  not  visible,  as  the  spine  lies  between
two  ridges  formed  by  the  dorsal  muscles,  and  is  covered  by
their  muscular  attachments.

^  Non  exstanti.    Cf.  ne  gibberae  of  ii,  5,  7.

"  Ad  medendum.  In  the  treatment  of  sick  animals  bleeding
was  as  much  used  by  the  ancients  as  it  was  in  the  Middle  Ages


204  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

6  The  stock  they  come  from  is  of  great  importance,
for  the  breeds  are  many.  So  it  comes  about  that
famous  horses  are  called  after  their  districts,  as  in
Greece,  the  Thessalian  horses  from  Thessaly;  in
Italy  the  Apulian  from  Apulia,  and  the  Rosean
from  Rosea.  It  is  a  sign  that  a  horse  will  be  a
good  one  if  he  strives  with  his  fellows  in  the  herd
for  supremacy  in  running,  etc.,  or  if,  when  the
herd  has  to  ford  a  river,  he  is  among  the  first  ^  to
advance,  and  does  not  keep  looking  back  at  the
others.  The  buying  of  horses  is  much  the  same  as
that  of  asses  and  oxen,  change  of  ownership  being
effected  with  the  same  forms  as  those  contained  in
the  Manilian  Actions.

7  The  best  food  for  horses  is  grass  when  they  are
on  the  meadows,  and  hay  when  they  are  in  stables
or  stalls.  After  they  have  foaled,  barley  should  be
added  to  the  food  of  the  mares,  and  water  given
them  twice  a  day.  In  breeding  horses  the  male
should  first  be  put  to  the  mare  some  time  between

for  sick  men.    Blood  was  let  from  veins.    It  was  therefore  an
advantage  if  they  were  visible  and  so  readily  found.
^  In  primis.    Cf  Georg.,  iii,  76:

Continuo  pecoris  gcnerosi  puUus  in  arvis
Ahius  ingreditur,  et  mollia  crura  rcponit:
Primus  et  ire  viam  etfluvios  tentare  minaces
Audet,  et  ignoto  sese  comtnittere.

Columella  (vi,  28)  says  that  the  colt  should  be  "  bright  and
full  of  fun,  unafraid,  not  frightened  by  unaccustomed  sights
and  sounds.  He  should  run  in  advance  of  the  herd  and  some-
limes  romp  and  race  with  his  companions  and  beat  them,  or
jump  a  ditch,  or  cross  a  bridge  or  river  without  hesitation."


II]  OF  HORSES  AND  MARES  205

the  vernal  equinox  and  the  solstice,  so  that  birth
may  occur  at  a  suitable '  season — for  they  say  it
takes  place  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  twelfth  month.
Foals  born  after  term  ^  have  generally  some  defect,

8  and  prove  useless.  When  the  time  of  year  has
come  the  horse  should  be  put  to  the  mare  twice  a
day,  morning  and  evening,  by  a  groom — so  the
man  who  has  this  duty  is  called — for  when  he  helps,
the  mare  having  been  tied  up,  the  operation  is  more
quickly  performed,  and  the  horse  does  not,  through
too  great  excitement,  emit  his  seed  to  no  purpose.
The  point  of  sufficient  intercourse  is  indicated  by
the  mares  themselves,  as  when  it  is  reached  they
repulse  the  male.  If  a  distaste  is  shown  for  his
work,  the  heart  of  a  squill  is  pounded  in  water  until
it  has  the  consistency  of  honey,  then  with  this  the
natural  parts  of  the  mare  are  touched  at  the  time
of  the  menstrual  flow,  while  on  the  other  hand  the
stallion's    nostrils   are   touched   with    what   comes

9  from  the  parts  of  the  mare.  Though  incredible,  the
following  fact^  deserves  to  be  recorded :  A  stallion

'  Idoneo  tempore.  I.e.,  in  spring  or  early  summer,  when
there  is  abundant  pasture,  and  the  mares  can  supply  their
young  with  plenty  of  milk.

*  Post  tempus.  Cf.  ii,  i,  19:  Dicuntur  agni  cordi  qui  post
tempus  nascuntur.

In  the  Geoponica  (xvi,  i)  this  seems  to  have  been  misunder-
stood; Ta  5i  jXiTO.  rpoiraQ  QtpivaQ  KiiiaKofitva  Svajtvij  yivsTai  Kai
dxpita.  "What  are  conceived  after  the  summer  solstice  are
useless."  Unless,  indeed,  post  id  tempus  should  be  read  in
Varro's  text.

^  Quod  usu  venit.  The  same  story  is  told  by  Aristotle  (H,  A,


2o6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

could  not  be  induced  to  mount  his  mother;  so
the  groom  covered  up  the  former's  head,  and  then
brought  him  up  and  made  him  do  so.  As  the
stalHon  was  getting  off  the  groom  removed  the
covering  from  his  eyes,  whereupon  the  horse  rushed

lo  upon  him  and  bit  him  to  death.  When  the  mares
have  conceived  you  must  see  that  they  are  not  even
a  little  over-worked,  and  do  not  stay  in  any  cold
place,  for  cold  is  particularly  hurtful  to  them  when
pregnant.  And  so  in  the  stables  you  must  not  let
the  ground  get  wet,  and  must  keep  the  doors  and
windows  shut,  and  the  mares  must  be  separated  by
long  bars  attached  to  the  manger  to  keep  them
apart,  and  prevent  them  from  fighting  with  one
another.    A  mare  in  foal  must  neither  be  over-fed  nor

Hallowed  to  go  hungry.  Farmers  who  admit  the
male  every  other  year  only,  say  that  thus  the  mares
last  longer,  and  the  foals  are  better,  and  that  just
as  fields  which  produce  ^  every  year  are  sooner  ex-
hausted, so  too  are  mares  which  breed  every  year.
Ten  days  after  birth  foals  must  be  driven  out
with  their  mothers  to  graze,  lest  the  dung  rot  their

ix,  47)  of  a  camel,  and  a  similar  one  about  a  horse,  but  the
horse,  instead  of  killing  the  groom,  hurled  himself  over  a
precipice.

'  Restibiles  segetes.  The  comparison  of  a  mare  to  a  field  is
taken  from  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  vi,  22,  near  the  end) :  'iva  S'  iviavrov
Kai  irafiwav  avdyKtj  SiaXtiTrnv  Kai  rroie'ti'  wcnrep  veior  (fallow  land).

Columella  (vi,  27,  13)  says  that  "cart  mares  may  bear  every
year,  but  thoroughbreds  every  alternate  year  only  so  that  the
colt  may  grow  strong  on  its  mother's  milk  and  may  be  able  to
bear  the  strain  of  racing."


II]  OF  HORSES  AND  MARES  207

soft  hoofs.  At  five  months  they  should  be  given,
when  brought  back  to  the  stable,  barley  flour
ground  up  with  bran,  or  any  other  product  of  the
soil  they  may  fancy.

J  2  When  they  have  completed  their  first  year  they
should  be  given  barley  and  bran  as  long  as  they
are  suckled  by  their  mothers,  and  should  not  be
weaned  until  they  have  turned  two  years  old.
When  they  are  standing  with  their  mothers  you
should  occasionally  pat  and  stroke  them,  so  that
they  may  not  be  terrified  when  they  are  separated
from  them,  and  for  the  same  reason  bits  ^  should  be
hung  up  in  the  stable,  so  that  the  foals  may  get
used  to  their  appearance   and  to  the  jingling  of

13  them  when  they  are  moved.  As  soon  as  the  foals
have  learnt  to  come  to  hand,  you  should  some-
times put  a  boy  on  their  backs,  for  the  first  two  or
three  times  lying  flat  on  his  stomach,  afterwards
he  may  sit.  This  is  to  be  done  when  the  colt  is
three  ^  years  old,  for  then  is  the  time  when  he  grows

'  Frenos.   Vergil  has  made  much  use  of  this  chapter.    Here
cf.  Georg.,  iii,  182  :

Primus  equi  labor  est  anitnos  atque  arma  videre
Bellantum,  lituosque  pati,  tractuque  genientem
Ferre  rotani  et  stabulo  frenos  audire  sonantes.
Turn  magis  atque  magis  blandis  gaudere  magistri
Laudibus,  et  plausae  sonitum  cervicis  antare
A  tque  haec  iam  primo  depulsus  ab  ubere  matris
Audiat.
'   Trimus.    Cf  Vergil  (Georg.,  iii,  190):

A  t  tribus  exactis  ubi  quarta  accesserit  aestas
Carpere  mox  gyruni  incipiat,  etc.


2o8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

most  and  puts  on  muscle.  Some  say  a  colt  may  be
broken  in  after  eighteen  ^  months,  but  it  is  better  to
defer  it  until  he  is  three  years  old,  when  it  is  usual
to  give  him  mixed  green  food  (farrago"),  as  this
purge  is  especially  necessary  for  horses.  It  should
be  given  him  for  ten  days,  and  he  must  not  be
14  allowed  to  taste  any  other  food.  From  the  eleventh
to  the  fourteenth  day  give  him  barley,  gradually
increasing  the  amount  day  by  day.  To  the  quantity
given  on   the  fourth  ^  (fourteenth?)  day  you   must

'  Aimum  et  sex  menses.  Columella  (vi,  29,  4)  distinguishes:
Equus  himus  ad  usum  domesticum  recte  domatur;  certaviinihus
auteni  triennio  expleto.  Sic  tainen  ut  post  quartu7n  demuin
annum  lahori  committatur.  So  Pliny  (N.  H.,  viii,  42):  Diversa
autem  Circo  ratio  quaeritur.  Itaque  cum  himi  in  alio  suhiguntur
imperio  non  ante  quinquennio  ibi  certamen  accipit.

The  ancients  did  not  race  their  horses  until  they  were  five
years  old,  and  they  seem  to  have  lasted  on  that  account  longer
than  our  race-horses.  A  riding-horse,  Pherenicos  (cf.  Pindar,
Pythia,  iii),  which  was  at  least  fifteen  years  old,  won  the
Pythian  prize,  and  Pliny  (loc.  cit.)  says  that  racers  were  sent
from  the  circus  to  the  stud  at  twent)-  years,  a  circo  post  vicesi-
mum  annum  mittatitur  ad  sobolem  reparandam!

^  Farrago.    Cf.  Vergil  (Georg. ,  iii,  205) :

Ttirn  demum  Crassa  magman  farragine  corpus
Crescere  iain  domitis.

But,  Vergil  goes  on  to  say,  farrago  must  not  be  given  to  them
before  breaking,  or  else

negabunt
Verbera  lenta  pati  et  duris  parere  lupatis.

^  Quarto.  Ursinus  conjectures  quarto  decimo,  and  Cres-
centius  in  his  paraphrase  says  quartum  decimum  diem  ct  decern

diebus  ultra.


II]  OF  HORSES  AND  MARES  209

adhere  for  the  next  ten  days.  Then  begin  to  give
him  moderate  exercise,  and  rub  him  well  with  oil
after  he  has  sweated.  If  it  is  frosty  a  fire  should  be
15  put  in  the  stable.  As  horses  are  suitable  for  various
purposes — some  for  military  service,  some  for
carrying,  some  for  breeding  (as  stallions),  some
for  riding  or  driving — they  cannot  all  be  viewed
in  the  same  light,  or  kept  in  the  same  way.  Thus
the  soldier  chooses,  rears,  and  trains  one  kind
of  horse,  the  charioteer  and  circus-rider  another,
nor  does  the  man  who  wants  to  turn  out  horses  for
carrying,^  that  is,  riding  or  driving^  horses,  pro-
ceed in  the  same  way  as  he  who  wants  them  for
military  service;  for  just  as  we  need  them  high-
spirited  for  camps,  so  we  prefer  to  have  them  quiet

^  Vectorios.  I  have  translated  Keil's  text,  though  it  does
not  sound  right  to  me.  For  (i)  vectura  means  "transport,
carrying  oi  g'oods"  and  vecturam  facere  means  "to  be  a
carrier,"  and  so  (2)  I  cannot  think  that  vectorios  is  defined  by
equos  ad  ephippium  aiit  ad  raedam  {factos).  I  would  propose
to  read  neque  idem  qui  vectorios  facere  vult  aut  ad  ephippium,
etc.,  and  would  translate:  "  Nor  does  he  who  means  to  train
horses  for  carrying  (pack-horses)  or  for  the  saddle  or  for
driving,"  etc.  Aut  followed  by  ad  might  easily  have  dropped
out  of  the  text.

'^  Ad  raedam.  The  raeda  or  reda  was  a  four-wheeled  travel-
ling carriage  big  enough  to  hold  a  man  and  his  family  (if
moderate)  and  luggage.  Cicero,  writing  to  Varro,  says :  Quod
si  hcri  tuam  redam  non  habuissem  varices  haberem,  and  (Ad
Att.,  v,  17,  beginning)  he  dictates  a  letter  to  Attlcus  sitting  in
a  reda  when  he  was  starting  on  a  two-days  journey :  Hanc
epistolam  dictavi  sedens  in  reda  cum  in  castra  proficiscerer  a
quibus  aberam  bidui.

P


2IO  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

on  the  road.  To  this  difference  the  practice  of  cas-
tration is  principally  due,  for  on  the  removal  of
their  stones  horses  become  gentler  because  they
have  no  seed.  Castrated  horses  are  called  geldings
{cantherii),  as  castrated  pigs  are  termed  hogs
i6  (maiales),  and  castrated  cocks  capons  icapi).  As
regards  medicine,  in  the  case  of  horses  there  are
very  many  symptoms  of  disease,  and  methods  of
treatment,  and  these  the  groom  should  have  written
down.  And  so  veterinary  surgeons  are  in  Greece
called  by  the  special  name  of  iVOTar^oi  (horse  doctors). '


CHAPTER  VIII

OF  MULES  AXD  HIXNIES

I  As  we  were  talking  thus  a  freedman  came  from
Menas'  to  say  that  the  cakes  {liha)  were  ready  and

^  'i.-mriaTpoi  =  veterinarii,  those  who  treated  veterina  animalia.
Veterinus.  Festus  and  Nonius  derive  from  veho,  and  trans-
late "beasts  of  burden,"  omnia  quae  vehere  quid  possunt.
Nonius  quotes  Lucretius,  v :

Et genus  omne  quod  est  veterino  semine  partum.

*  Menate.    Cf.  ii,  i,   i,   and  for  tcrtium  actum  below  cf.  ii,

I,    12.

One  would  like  to  know  what  Menas  was  doing  all  this
time!  Was  he  cooking  the  //7w?  It  seems  pretty  certain,  as
this  book  was  written  for  shepherds,  and  the  interlocutors  are
pecuarii,  and  as  sacrifice  was  now  to  be  made  with  liba,  that


II]  OF  MULES  AND  HINNIES  211

the  sacrifice  prepared:  would  the  gentlemen  please
come  and  sacrifice  for  themselves.  For  my  part,  I  ex-
claimed, I  won't  let  you  go  until  you  give  me  my
due,  the  third  act,  in  which  figure  mules,  dogs,  and
shepherds.  There  is  little  to  be  said  about  them,
answered  Murrius,  for  both  mules  and  hinnies  are
mongrels — grafts — not  springing  from  roots  of  their
own  kind.  For  from  mare  and  he-ass  comes  a  mule,
2  while  from  horse  and  she-ass  a  hinny.^  Both  of
them  are  good  for  work,  while  neither  earns  any-

the  conversations  in  this  book  were  held  on  the  occasion  of  the
Parilia,  and  that  the  sacrifice  here  mentioned  was  to  Pales,
the  god  of  shepherds.    Cf.  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv,  775  :

Quae  precor  eveniant:  et  nos  faciamus  ad  annum
Pastorum  dominae  grandia  liba  Pali.

But  the  Parilia  would  be  celebrated  in  the  provinces  as  well  as
at  Rome.  So  that  this  does  not  tell  against  the  supposition  that
the  place  of  these  conversations  was  Sicilj-.    Cf.  note,  ii,  5,  i.

The  liba  were,  of  course,  cakes  made  of  flour  and  milk,  or
of  pounded  cheese,  fine  flour,  and  eggs ;  cf  Cato,  Ixxv.  The
priest's  slave  in  Horace,  Epist.,  i,  lo,  lo,  ran  away  because  he
was  tired  of  eternal  cakes.

Utque  sacerdotis  fugitivus  liba  recuso.

'  Hinnus.  Columella  (vi,  37,  5) :  Qui  ex  equo  et  asina  con-
cepti  generantur,  quamvis  a  patre  nomen  traxerint  quod  hinni
vocantur  matri  per  omnia  magis  similes  sunt.  Pliny  (viii,  44)
speaks  of  hinni  as  being  "  unmanageable  and  incurably  slow."
Aristotle  (An.  Gen.,  ii,  8,  end)  calls  -fivvoq  the  offspring  of  a
horse  and  an  ass,  wdiich  has  suffered  in  the  womb,  and  says
that  it  is  ijiiiovog  avaTrripog,  "  a  damaged  mule,"  and  like  aporcus
cordus  {ja  fterdxoipa  iv  Tolg  x^'po'c)-  The  small  size  of  the  Pyg-
mies, he  continues,  is  accounted  for  in  the  same  way  (by  illness
of  the  foetus).


212  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

thing  by  breeding.  A  foal  of  an  ass  is  put  when
just  born  under  a  mare,  as  the  latter's  milk  makes
him  bigger,  for  they  say  it  is  more  feeding  than
asses'  milk.  Chaff,  hay,  and  barley  are  given  to
him  in  addition.  Much  care'  is  taken  of  the  foster-
mother,  also  that  she  may  be  able  to  give  a  supply
of  milk  as  food  to  the  foal.  Thus  reared  he  may  be
used  for  breeding  purposes  from  three-  years  old,
and  being  used  to  live  with  the  mares  he  feels  no
3  repugnance  for  them.  If  you  use  him  as  a  stallion
younger,  not  only  does  he  flag  more  quickly,  but
the  offspring  also  are  poorer.  Those  who  do  not
possess  an  ass  which  has  been  suckled  by  a  mare,
and  want  to  keep  an  ass  for  stud  purposes,  pick  the
biggest  and  handsomest  they  can,  and  one  that
comes  from  a  good  nursery — in  Arcadia,  said  the
ancients  ;  but  our  experience  leads  us  to  prefer  the
Reatine  country,  where  some  stallions  have  been
sold  for  ^240  and  even  ;^320  apiece.    We  buy  asses

^  Inservhint.  Schneider  translates  cihum  largiiis  praebent,
and  the  word  must  mean  something  of  the  kind.  The  nearest
parallel  I  can  find  is  Cicero,  Ad  Div.,  xvi,  17:  valetudini fide-
liter  inserviendo.

*  A  trivio.  Columella  (vi,  37,  9)  says  "not  less  than  three,
or  more  than  ten  years  old."  And  a  few  lines  earlier:  "  Thus
reared  the  ass  grows  fond  of  mares.  Sometimes,  too,  though
suckled  by  his  own  mother,  if  he  becomes  familiar  with  them
when  he  is  quite  young  he  seeks  their  company  afterwards."

Aristotle  (H.  A.,  vi,  23,  end)  says  that  it  is  indispensable  for
an  ass  which  is  to  procreate  mules  to  be  reared  under  a  mare.
Ov  npoaSexirai  S'  oi'G'  )'/  'iVtto*;  top  uvov  ov9'  1)  vvo£  Toy  imror,  iuv  fii)
Tvxy  TiOtjXaKwf;  6  tivof  'iinrov.


II]  OF  MULES  AND  HINNIES  213

as  we  do  horses,  and  require  the  same  guarantee
in  buying,  and  adopt  the  same  formahties  in  taking
them  over  as  have  been  described  in  the  case  of

4  horses.  We  feed  asses  principally  on  hay  and  bar-
ley, and  increase  their  allowance  before  they  are
put  to  the  female,  so  that  by  food  we  may  flush
them  with  strength  for  their  work.  They  are
brought  to  it  at  the  same  time  as  are  horses,  and
similarly  a  groom  is  there  to  help  the  stallion  when
he  performs  the  operation.  When  a  mare  has
brought  forth  a  he-  or  she-mule  we  bring  it  up  and

5  feed  it.  If  mules  are  born  in  a  marshy  and  damp
district  they  have  soft  hoofs;  but  if  they  are  driven
to  the  mountains  in  summer  time — as  is  done  in  the
Reatine  country — their  hoofs  become  very  hard.
In  buying  a  herd  of  mules  you  must  observe  their
age  and  shape,  the  former  that  they  may  be  able  to
stand  hard  work  when  engaged  in  carrying  loads;
the  latter,  that  one  may  take  pleasure  in  looking  at
them.  For  when  a  pair  of  these  is  yoked  together
they  can  draw  on  the   road  any  kind  of  vehicle.

6  You  might  have  taken  my  word  for  these  facts,  said
he  to  me,  as  I  come  from  Reate;  but  you  keep
herds  of  mares  at  your  place  and  have  yourself  sold
herds  of  mules.  What  is  called  a  hinnus  (hinny)
comes  from  a  horse  and  a  she-ass  ;  they  are  smaller
in  size  than  mules,  and  generally  of  a  colour  with
more  red'  in  it,  have  ears  like  those  of  a  horse,  and

^  Rubicundior.  Isidore  of  Seville  (xii,  i,  end)  calls  a  hinny
hurdo  {burro  ?) — mulus  ex  eqtia  et  asino:  burdo  ex  equo  etasina.
Vegetius  (vi,  2,  2)  speaks  of  hurici.     In  Italian  buricco  is  a


214  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

mane  and  tail  like  those  of  an  ass.  Like  horses,
too,  they  remain  in  the  mother's  womb  for  twelve
months;  they  are  reared  and  fed  in  the  same  way
as  horses,  and  their  age  is  likewise  inferred  from
their  teeth.


CHAPTER  IX

OF  DOGS

1  Said  Atticus:  Of  quadrupeds  dogs  now  remain  to
be  discussed — a  subject  particularly  interesting  to
us  who  feed  wool-bearing  stock.  For  the  dog  is  the
guardian  of  those  animals  which  need  its  com-
panionship for  defence.  Amongst  these  sheep  come
first,  she-goats  second.  These  the  wolf  is  ever  try-
ing to  catch,  and  against  him  we  set  dogs  to  defend
them.  Of  the  pig  kind,  however,  some  animals  can
defend  themselves,  namely,  boars,  hogs,  and  sows —
for  these  animals  closely  resemble  wild  boars  which
in  the  woods  have  often  been  known  to  kill  dogs  with

2  their  tusks.  I  need  hardly  mention  the  larger  cattle,
for  I  know  that  when  a  herd  of  mules  have  been
feeding,  and  a  wolf  has  appeared  on  the  scene,  the

familiar  term  for  a  donke}-,  and  in  French  hourrique  means  an
dne  ch^tif.  All  these  names  are  probably  connected  with  the
red  colour  mentioned  by  Varro,  for  we  know  from  Festus  that
burrus  in  rustic  Latin  was  used  for  rufus.  It  is  of  course  the
Latin  equivalent  of  rruppor  (Dor.  irvppixog).


II]  OF  DOGS  215

mules  of  their  own  accord  have  surrounded  him  and
trampled  him  to  death  with  their  hoofs;  and  that
bulls  will  stand  flank  to  flank,  opposing  an  unbroken
front '  against  wolves,  and  easily  drive  them  off
with  their  horns.

About  dogs  then:  there  are  two  kinds,  one  for
hunting'  connected  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the
woods,  the  other  bought  for  purposes  of  defence,
and  used  by  the  shepherd.    I  will  discuss  the  latter,

^  Adversos.  So  Keil  for  the  diversos  of  the  MSS. ;  wrongly
I  think,  for  bulls,  it  is  known,  form  a  half  circle,  not  a  line,
against  the  attacks  of  the  larger  carnivora.  Their  hind-
quarters {dunes)  might  then  be  close  together,  while  their
heads  would  be  properly  described  by  the  word  diversa,
"turned  in  difiFerent  directions."

*  Unum  venaticuviy  etc.  The  text  of  the  MSS.  is  a  singular
jumble!  It  is  as  follows :  Ununi  venaticum  et  pertinet  ad /eras
bestibiis  assiluestribus  assiluestres  alterum,  etc.  Nor  is  one
satisfied  with  Keil's  emendation.  The  cams  venaticus  differed
greatly  from  the  canis  pastoralis,  being  slimmer,  smaller,
weaker,  but  more  speedy  (cf.  Aristotle,  H.  A.,  ix,  i).  It  was
used  for  hunting  wild  animals  (bestiae  siluestres)  such  as  the
hare,  stag,  etc.  The  sheep-dog,  the  Molossus,  protected  sheep
against  beasts  of  prey  {bestiae  ferae),  and  was  bred  for  size,
strength,  and  courage.  I  would  propose  then  to  read :  Unum
venaticum  ad  bestias  siluestres,  ad  /eras  bestias  alterum  quod
custodiae  causa  paratur  et  pertinet  ad  pastorem.  The  first  et
pertinet  probably  arose  out  of  the  second.  The  translation
will  be :  "  One  for  hunting  wild  animals,  the  other  used  against
beasts  of  prey  which  is  bought  to  serve  as  a  guard  and  is  con-
nected with  the  shepherd."  Columella  (vii,  12)  distinguishes
between  the  venaticus  and  the  villaticus,  the  latter,  the  watch-
dog, being  the  biggest,  strongest,  and  slowest  of  the  three.
He  also  says  venaticus  nihil  pertinet  ad  nostram  professionem.


2i6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

keeping  in  my  treatment  of  the  art  to  the  nine-fold  '
division  which  was  before  explained.

3  In  the  first  place  you  must  get  dogs  of  the  proper
age,  for  puppies  and  old  dogs  are  no  protection
either  to  themselves  or  to  sheep,  and  sometimes  fall
a  prey  to  wild  beasts.  In  shape  ^  they  should  be
handsome ;  of  great  size,  with  eyes  black  or  yellow-
ish, with  nostrils  to  match;'  the  lips  should  be
blackish  or  red,  the  upper  ones  neither  too  much
turned  up  nor  hanging  down  too  low;  the  lower
jaw  short,*  and  the  two  teeth  springing  from  it  on
the  right  and  left  side  projecting  a  little,  while  the
upper  teeth   should   be   straight  rather  than   pro-

4Jecting;'  the  incisors  should  be  covered  by  the
lip;  the  head  and  ears  large  and  the  latter  broad
and  hanging ;  the  neck  and  throat  thick,  the  parts
between  the  joints  long,  the  legs  straight  and  turn-

Novem  partes.  Cf.  ii,  i,  12:  Haruin  tma  quaeque  in  se
}reneralis  partis  habet  minimum  novenas,  quarum  in  pecore
parando  necessariae  quattuor,  alterae  in  pascendo  totidem,  prae-
terea  communis  una.  The  nine  divisions  are  (i)  age,  (2)  type,
(3)  breed,  (4)  legal  formalities  in  buying,  (5)  feeding,  (6)  breed-
Jng".  (7)  rearing,  (8)  health,  and  (9)  number.

^  Facie.  Most  of  what  follows  is  translated  almost  word
for  word  by  the  Geoponica,  xix,  2.  Cf.  also  Columella,  vii,  12
— a  delightful  chapter.

'  Congruentibus.  The  Geoponica  {he.  cit.)  have  nvKrijpa
vnoxpoiav  txovrir.   In  ii,  7,  5,  congntentes  meant  "symmetrical."

^  Mento  suppresso.  Most  of  the  dogs  represented  on  ancient
monuments  resemble  Varro's  description  in  regard  to  the
short  lower  jaw,  the  straight  back,  and  the  pendent  ears.

'  Brocchis.  In  a  former  passage  (ii,  7,  4)  Crescentius  trans-
lated this  word  plicati.     Here  he  translates  it  bv  torti.


II]  OF  DOGS  217

ing  outwards  ^  rather  than  inwards ;  the  feet  big
and  broad,  spreading- out  as  they  walk;  the  toes
well  separated,  claws  hard  and  curved  ;  soles  not
horny  or  too  hard,  but  rather  as  it  were  spongy  and
soft;  the  body  tucked  in  near  the  top  of  the  thighs,
the  spine  neither  prominent  nor  curved,  and  the
tail  thick.  The  bark  should  be  deep,  the  stretch  of
jaw^  great,  the  colour  preferably  white,*  because
they  are  thus  more  easily  recognized  in  the  dark,
S  and  their  appearance  should  be  lion-like.  Breeders
like  the  bitches  to  have,  besides,  breasts  furnished

'  Potius  varis.  Cf.  Geoponica  (loc.  cit.):  oKa^^onpa  /xaXXov
?/  liXaiad.

^  Disphdantur.     Cf.  note  to  ii,  5,  8.

^  Hiatu  magno.  rove,  /xiya  to  x"ff^"  ixovrac  (Geoponica,  loc.
cit. ).

*  Potissimum  albo.  Columella  {loc.  cit.)  says  white  for  the
sheep-dog,  black  for  the  house-dog.  The  former  is  to  be  white
so  that  in  the  dark  mornings  or  the  twilight  of  evening  he
may  readily  be  distinguished  from  a  beast  of  prey,  and  may
not  be  killed  by  the  shepherd  in  mistake.  The  black  house-
dog is  a  terrible  fellow,  "big,  black,  thick-set — his  head  so
large  as  to  seem  the  largest  part  of  his  body — with  drooping
ears,  black  or  yellow  eyes  gleaming  with  a  fierce  light,"  etc.
And  again:  "The  watch-dog  is  a  policeman,  and  if  the  thief
comes  in  broad  daylight  the  dog  looks  more  terrible  being
black,  while  if  the  burglar  come  at  night  the  watch-dog  is
not  visible  at  all  owing  to  his  likeness  to  a  shadow,  and  so
can  get  at  him  more  safely.  .  .  .  The  sheep-dog  need  not
be  so  lean  and  fleet  as  the  stag-hound  nor  so  stout  or  heavy  as
the  watch-dog.  He  must,  however,  be  very  strong  and  to
some  extent  quick  and  vigorous,  as  he  is  expected  to  be  able
both  to  fight  and  run — to  drive  off  the  crafty  wolf  or  follow
him  and  make  him  drop  his  prey."


2i8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

with  teats  of  equal  size.  One  must  also  see  that  they
come  of  a  good  breed,  and  so  they,  too,  are  called
after  the  districts  whence  they  come,  Laconian,^
Epirot,  Sallentine."  Be  careful  not  to  buy  dogs
either  from  hunters  or  butchers,  for  butchers'  dogs
are  too  lazy  to  follow  the  flock,  while  hunting  dogs,
if  they  see  a  hare  or  a  stag,  will  follow  it  instead  of
the  sheep.  Hence  the  best  is  one  bought  from
shepherds,  that  has  been  trained  to  follow  sheep,  or
has  had  no  training  at  all.  For  a  dog  acquires  a
habit  more  readily  than  other  animals,  and  the
attachment  to  shepherds  resulting  from  familiar  in-
tercourse with  them,  is  stronger  than  that  which  he
feels  for  sheep.
6  Publius  Aufidius  Pontianus,  of  Amiternum,  had
bought  some  flocks  of  sheep  in  furthest  Umbria,^

1  Lacones,  etc.  Vergil  mentions  the  Laconian  and  the
Epirot  (Molossus),  Georg.,  iil,  404:

Nee  tibi  cura  canuni  fuerit postrema,  sed  una
Veloces  Sparine  catulos  acremque  Afolossum
Pasce  sero  ping-ui,  numquam  custodihus  ill  is,  etc. ,
where  Servius  In  Laconicis  velocitas  in  Molossis  {Molossia —
civitas  Epiri)  fortitudo  laudatur.    The  Laconian  hound  was
used  for  hunting,  and  Columella  says  a  farmer  has  no  business
to  keep  one,  "  for  it  takes  him  from  his  proper  work  and  makes
him  lazy  in  it."

^  The  Sale7itini  Campi  in  the  north-west  part  of  lapygia.
What  Schneider  means  by  calling  these  dogs  Umbrian  I
cannot  guess!  Sextus  Pompeius  i^stib  Salentinos)  says  that  the
lllyrians  were  called  Salcnfini,  from  Saltirn.  The  Sallentine
may  possibly  have  been  an  Illyrian  breed.

'  In  Umbria.  The  Umbrian  dogs  were  famous  for  their
keen  scent.     Umhernare  sagax  (^SW.  Ital.,  iii.  294).


II]  OF  DOGS  219

and  in  the  bargain  were  included  the  dogs,  but  not
the  shepherds  who  were  to  take  the  sheep  down  to
the  forest  clearings  near  Metapontum  and  the  mart
of  Heraclea.  The  shepherds  having  performed  their
task  returned  home;  but  a  few  days  later,  the  dogs,
missing  sorely  their  human  friends,  came  back  of
their  own  accord  to  the  shepherds  in  Umbria,  having
got  themselves  food  from  the  surrounding  country
— and  this  though  the  journey  took  many'  days.
Yet  none  of  the  shepherds  had  followed  the  advice
given  by  Saserna,  when  writing  on  farming,  to  the
effect  that  any  one  wanting  a  dog  to  follow  him
about  should  throw  him  a  cooked  frog.

It  is  of  great  importance  that  your  dogs  should
be  of  the  same"  blood,  for  when  akin  they  are  the
greatest  protection  to  one  another.
7  In  the  fourth  place  comes  the  question  of  pur-
chase. Change  of  ownership  is  effected  by  delivery
from  the  first  to  the  second  owner.  As  to  health
and  liability  for  damage  the  same  guarantees  are  re-
quired as  in  the  case  of  cattle  (oxen),  save  that  in
this  case  (of  dogs)  due  exceptions  ^  are  made  on  the

'  Dierum  multorum.    A  distance  of  about  300  miles.

-  Eodem  semine.  Cf.  Geoponica,  xix,  2 :  Opsirrkov  Se  roig
Kvvaq  Kara  avyykvuav.  dfivvovm  yap  aXKr]\oig  (pvaiKwg.

^  Exceptum  est.  On  these  exceptiones  cf.  Justinian,  Inst.,
where  a  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  subject.

Keil  makes  the  hie  in  this  sentence  refer  to  pecoris,  and
pecoris  he  takes  in  the  limited  sense  of  "  sheep."  But  turning
to  ii,  2,  6,  we  find  that  the  "exceptions"  in  the  case  of  sheep
closely  resemble  what  is  mentioned  here  about  dogs,  pretio
facto  in  singulas  oves,  ut  agni  cordi  duo  pro  una  ove  adnumer-


220  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

score  of  equity.  Some  people  buy  their  dogs  separ-
ately, others  in  buying  arrange  for  the  puppies  to
go  with  the  mother,  others  that  two  puppies  shall
count  as  one  dog,  as  two  lambs  do  for  one  sheep;
others  arrange  that  those  dogs  shall  be  taken  over
which  have  been  accustomed  to  be  together.

8  A  dog's  food  is  more  like  a  man's  than  a  sheep's,
for  it  feeds  on  bits  of  meat,^  etc.,  and  bones,  not
grass  and  leaves.  You  must  be  very  careful  to  give
them  food,   for  if  you   do  not,   hunger  will   drive

9  them  to  hunt  for  it  and  desert  the  flock;  if  indeed
they  do  not  (and  some  people  think  they  will)  go  so
far  as  to  give  the  lie  to  the  ancient  proverb,"  or  a
practical  illustration  of  the  myth  about  Actaeon  by

lo  turning  their  teeth  against  their  master.     And  you
must  give*  them  barley-bread,  which  must  be  well

entur,  etc.  So  that  hie  clearly  refers  to  dogs.  But  then  pecoris
cannot  mean  "sheep";  it  must  mean  cattle  hi  the  sense  of
oxen,  in  the  case  of  which  these  exceptions  were  not  made.
Cf.  ii,  5,  lo.  Pecus,  of  course,  as  a  legal  term,  included  oves,
boves,  eqtios,  capras,  and  even  sues,  but  generally  meant  oxen
and  cows.    AUquando  bonus  dormitat  Homerus!

'  EduUis.  Fulgentius  defines  edulium  as  praegustativa
comestio=^'  a  snack."

*  Proverbium.  Cam's  caninaiK  non  est  ("Dog  doesn't  eat
dog").  Cf.  Varro,  L.  L.,  vii,  cap.  3  (§  87,  Spengel):  N^am
idem  quod  Trapoifiiav  vocant  Graeci,  ut  est  "  Auribus  lupunt
teneo,^''  "  Ca?iis  caninatn  non  est."  Man)'  proverbs,  all  more  or
less  irrelevant,  had  been  suggested  by  the  commentators,
when  Keil,  by  indicating  this,  made  the  whole  passage  clear.

^  JVec  non  .  .  .  non.  The  second  non  is,  of  course,  incorrect.
Varro's  careless  use  of  negatives  (Keil  gives  many  examples
in  his  note  to  i,  2,  23)  reminds  one  strongly  of  the  practice  in


II]  OF  DOGS  221

soaked  in  milk,  for  when  once  accustomed  to  such
a  diet  they  are  slow  to  desert  the  flock.  They  are
not  allowed  to  eat  the  flesh  of  a  dead'  sheep  for
fear  that  their  power  of  self-restraint  may  be
weakened  by  its  good  flavour.  They  are  given  also
bone  soup,'  or  the  bones  themselves  after  they  have
been  broken,  for  this  makes  their  teeth  stronger,
and  the  mouth  wider  owing  to  the  vigour  with  which
their  jaws  are  distended  as  they  eagerly  enjoy  the
marrow.  Dogs  are  fed  generally  in  the  day  time,
when  they  go  out  to  the  pasture,  and  in  the  evening
when  they  come  back  to  the  stalls.

11  For  breeding,  they  begin  to  put  the  dog  to  the
bitch  at  the  opening  of  spring,  for  it  is  then  that
they  are  in  what  is  called  "heat."  That  is,  they
show  their  desire  for  mating.  Bitches  which  are
covered  at  this  time  litter  about  the  summer  sol-
stice, for  gestation  lasts  usually  three  months.
During  pregnancy  you  should  give  barley  rather
than  wheaten  bread,  for  it  nourishes  them  better,

12  and  they  give  a  greater  supply  of  milk.  As  to  rear-
ing the  puppies:   if  there  are  many  of  them  you

early  Eng-llsh.  Double  negatives  are  quite  common  as  late
as  Elizabethan  times.  Cf.  Roger  Ascham  (37):  "No  sonne,
were  he  never  so  old  of  yeares,  might  noi  marry."

^  Morticuiae.  Generally  used  of  a  natural  death.  Cf.  iii,  2,
18.  The  Geoponica  (Joe.  cit.)  more  fully:  TiDv  Si  a.iro9vr]aK6vTwv
Bpeuucirwv  ovk  tuxriv  uTTTtuOai  'iva  fit)  avveOiaQwai  Kai  ToXg  ^waif
iTriTiOetrOai.  SvafieToiKXrjToi  yiip  iK0ait'OV(nv  orav  uttci^  ojfiocpayi'jaioaiv.

-  Ins  ex  ossibus.  In  the  corresponding  passage  the  Geo-
ponica (xix,  i)  have  6  ik  tiZv  oar'nxiv  fiviKoi^.  But  this  perhaps
refers  to  medullarum  lower  down.


222  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

should  choose  immediately  after  birth  those  you
mean  to  keep,  and  get  rid  of  the  rest/  The  fewer
you  leave  the  better  they  grow,  owing  to  the  abund-
ance of  milk  they  get.  Put  chaff  or  something  of
the  sort  for  them  to  lie  on,  for  the  more  comfortable
their  bed  the  more  easily  are  they  brought  up."
Puppies  begin  to  see  at  twenty  days.^  For  the  first
two  m.onths  after  birth  they  are  not  separated  from
their  mother,  but  learn  little  by  little  to  do  without
her.  Sometimes  several  of  them  are  taken  to  one
place  and  are  egged  on  to  fight,  as  it  makes  them
fiercer,  but  they  are  not  allowed  to  tire  themselves
13  out,  because  this  breaks  their  spirit.*  They  are
trained  to  allow  themselves  to  be  tied  up  at  first
with  light  leather  thongs,""  and  they  are  beaten  if

^  Reliquos  ahicere.  The  Geoponica  {Joe.  cit.) :  "  Out  of  seven
keep  three  or  four,  of  three  keep  two."

^  Educantur.  "For  this  animal  also  is  verj'  intolerant  of
cold"  (Geoponica,  loc.  cit.).

^  Diehus  xx.  The  Geoponica  have  iv  ijuspaic  k  (20).  Pliny,
viii,  40  :  "  The  more  milk  they  get  the  longer  are  they  before
they  can  see;  they  are  never  blind,  however,  beyond  the
twenty-first  day  and  never  see  before  the  seventh."  Aristotle
(H.  A.,  vi,  20)  makes  this  depend  on  the  time  of  gestation  in
the  mothers.  "The  Laconian  bitch  is  pregnant  a  sixth  part
of  the  year — about  two  months — and  her  pups  are  blind  for
twelve  days ;  others  for  a  fifth  part  of  the  year  (about  seventy-
two  days),  and  the  puppies  of  these  are  blind  for  fourteen
days ;  others  for  a  quarter  of  the  year  (three  whole  months),
and  theirs  are  blind  for  seventeen  days."

•*  Segniores  fiunt.  Geoponica  {loc.  cit.):  Kara^apuaQai  S'  ovk
iwat,  xap'»'  ^oii  f")  SftXt^v,  "do  not  let  them  be  over-done  lest
they  grow  cowardly."

'  Levibus  vine/is.    In  the  Geoponica  the  words  are  Seaftols  S^


II]  OF  DOGS  223

they  try  to  gnaw  them  away — until  the  habit  is
lost.  On  rainy  days  beds  should  be  made  for  them
with  leaves  or  grass,  for  two  reasons — that  they

14  may  neither  get  dirty,  nor  catch  a  chill.  Some
people  castrate  them,  thinking  them  thus  less  likely
to  leave  the  flock ;  others  do  not,  for  they  consider
that  it  takes  away  their  spirit.  Some  people  rub
their  ears  and  between  their  toes  with  a  mixture  of
pounded  almonds  and  water,  because  it  is  said,
unless  this  ointment  be  used,  flies,  ticks  and  fleas

15  cause  ulcers  there.  To  prevent  them  from  being
wounded  by  wild  beasts  collars  are  put  on  them —
the  collar  called  nielium,'^  which   is  a  band  made

.  .  .  TO  fiiv  TTpdjTov  ifiavTi,  dra  Kara  fifpog  aiSfjpq) — "at  first  with
a  leather  strap,  then  by  degrees  with  an  iron  chain."  In  all
the  printed  editions  before  Victorius  instead  of  vinclis  was
found  numellis.  Numella  is  defined  in  a  fragment  of  Festus
as  genus  vuiculi  quo  quadrupedes  alligantur;  solent  autem  ea
fieri  nervo  aut  corio  crudo  bovis.  This  corresponds  admirably
with  iixavTi  above ;  and  it  is  strange  that  in  Varro  there  is  no
deinde  {tlra)  to  balance  primuni.  One  would  have  expected
something  like  levibus  vmclis{Ssafioig),  pn'tnum  mmiellis  (l/iaj^n)
quas  .  .  .  solent;  deinde  ferrets  {aihkpi^).  But  the  MSS.  give  no
support  to  such  a  reading.

^  Meliuni.  This  kind  of  collar  was  in  the  time  of  Festus —
and  according  to  him  in  that  of  Scipio  Afrlcanus — called  inillus.
He  defines  it  thus:  "A  hound's  collar  made  of  leather  and
studded  with  iron  nails  which  stick  out — as  a  protection  against
an  attacking  wolf."

The  Geoponica  (Joe.  cit.)  say  that  iron  spikes  two  fingers'
breadth  from  one  another  "should  project  from  the  collar."
The  heads  of  the  nails  were,  of  course,  on  the  under  side  of
the  collar,  hence  the  need  of  stitching  on  a  piece  of  soft  leather
to  prevent  the  dog's  neck  from  being  chafed.


224  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

of  stout  leather  going  round  the  neck  and  furnished
with  nails  having  heads.  Under  these  heads  a
piece  of  soft  leather  is  sewn,  so  that  the  hardness  of
the  iron  may  not  hurt  the  dog's  neck.  If  a  wolf  or
any  other  animal  has  been  wounded  by  this  collar
it  makes  all  the  other  dogs  safe  from  him,  even
i6  those  that  do  not  wear  it.  The  number  of  dogs  is
usually  made  proportionate  to  the  size  of  the  flock,
and  it  is  thought  to  be  in  most  cases  proper  for  one
dog  to  follow  each  shepherd.  As  to  the  number,  how-
ever, people  differ  in  their  estimate,  for  if  the  district
be  one  where  wild  beasts  abound,  more  dogs  are
needed — which  is  the  case  with  those  who  have  to
journey  with  their  flocks  to  winter  or  summer
quarters  by  long  tracks '  through  the  forest.  But
for  a  flock  staying  at  the  farmstead  two  are  thought
enough  for  the  farm — a  dog  and  a  bitch.  For  so
they  stick  better  to  their  work,  since  the  same*  dog

'  CaJles.  Cf.  Isidore,  xv,  i6  (towards  the  end):  Callis  est
iter  pecudum  inter  montes  angustum  et  tritum,  a  callo  pecudum
vocatum,  sive  callo  pccuduvi  perduratum,  i.e.,  a  "sheep-walk."

2  Quod  cum  altero  item,  etc.  The  archetj'pe  has  quod  cum
altero  idernfit  acrior  et  si  alter  videm  fiter  aeger  est  ne  sine  cane
grex  sit,  which  Keil  emends  arhitrio  suo.  He  objects  to  the
idem,  which  seems  pure  Varro  (cf.  i,  23,  6).  The  same  dog
becomes  another  dog — much  keener — when  he  has  a  comrade.
Crescentius  also  has  idem.  As  to  the  rest  Keil's  emendation
diverges  widely  from  the  MSS.,  and  the  ne  sine  cane  grex  sit
seems  impossibly  harsh.

Is  it  not  possible  to  keep  much  closer  to  the  archetype  by
reading  et  si  alter  uter{or  quidon)  Jit  aeger,  est  ne  sine  cane
grex  sit?  The  use  of  est  (which  is  needed  for  the  apodosis)  is
common  when  followed  by  an  affirmative  clause.    Cf.  Horace's


II]  OF  SHEPHERDS  225

when  he  has  a  companion  grows  keener  than  before,
and  if  one  or  other  falls  ill,  the  flock  need  not  be
without  a  dosf.


CHAPTER  X

OF  SHEPHERDS

1  Atticus  looked  round  as  though  to  ask  whether
he  had  omitted  any  point,  and  I  remarked:  This
silence  calls  another  actor  on  to  the  stage,  for  in
this  act  the  only  part  left  is  to  determine  the  number
and  nature  of  the  shepherds  to  be  kept.  Then  said
Cossinius :  For  the  larger  cattle  you  need  older  men,
for  the  smaller  even  boys  will  do,  but  either  men  or
boys  whose  life  is  spent  in  forest  tracks  must  be
stronger  than  those  who  return  home  every  day  to
the  farmstead.  Thus  in  forest  glades  one  may  see
men  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  armed  as  a  rule,  while
on  the  farm  even  girls  as  well  as  boys  look  after  the

2  flock.  You  must  make  your  shepherds  feed  their
flocks  throughout  the  day,  letting  the  flocks  graze
all  together,  but  at  night  they  must  separate  and
each  shepherd  stay  with  his  own.  They  must  all  be
under  one  flock-master  who  should  be  older  than

Est  ut  viro  vir  latius  ordinet,  etc.,  and  resembles  the  Greek
(.(jTiv  ioare.  Cf.  Soph.  (Phil.,  6,  56):  ap  iaTiv  ioart  KayyvBev  9eav
.Xa/Seiv.  One  would  have  expected,  however,  est  ut  non  (or  ut
ne)  .  .  .  sit.    And  perhaps  ut  ne  .  .  .  sit  was  written.

Q


226  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  others,  and  more  skilful  than  them  all,  for  he
who  is  older  and  wiser  than  the  rest  is  more  cheer-

3  fully  obeyed  by  them.  He  must  not,  however,  be
so  much  older  as  to  be  unable  through  age  to  stand
hard  work.  For  both  the  aged  and  the  very  young
bear  with  difficulty  the  hardships  of  travel  through
forest  paths  and  up  steep  and  rugged  mountains,
and  these  hardships  are  inevitable  for  those  who
have  herds  to  drive,  especially  if  these  consist  of
cattle  or  goats,  which  like  to  feed  amidst  rocks  and
woods.

The  kind  of  man  chosen  should  be  strong,  swift,
nimble,  with  supple  limbs;  capable  not  only  of
following  his  flock  but  of  defending  it  from  wild
beasts  and  robbers;  able  to  heave  loads  on  to  the
backs  of  beasts  of  burden,  to  run  swiftly  forward

4  and  to  hurl  the  javelin.  It  is  not  every  race  that
is  fitted  for  dealing  with  cattle — for  instance  the
Bastulian  ^  and  Turdulian  are  of  little  use,  while  the
Gauls  are  just  the  men  for  it,  especially  for  draught
cattle.

As  to  purchase,  there  are  six  ways  of  becoming
the  legal  owner  of  a  slave:  (i)  by  legal  inheritance;
(2)  receiving  with  the  proper  forms  by  mancipation  -

*  Bastulus  et  Ttirduhis.  The  inhabitants  of  Granada  and
Andalusia.    Cf.  Pomponius  Mela,  iii,  i.

^  Mancipio.  Mancipatior — purchase,  per  aes  et  libram  was
conducted  in  the  presence  of  six  Roman  citizens  oi  full  aj^e.
One  of  them  called  libripetis  (the  weigher)  held  a  pair  of
scales ;  the  buyer  placed  a  hand  on  the  thing  being  bought
(f.^.,  slave),  and  said,  "  I  assert  that  this  slave  is  mine  .  .  ,
and  he  is  purchased  by  me  with  this  piece  of  money  and  brazen


II]  OF  SHEPHERDS  227

from  a  person  who  had  the  right  to  sell ;  (3)  by
legal  surrender '  before  the  praetor  by  the  proper
person  at  the  proper  time;  (4)  by  right  of  undis-
turbed possession ;  (5)  by  purchase  at  a  public
auction  of  goods  captured  in  war;  (6)  by  buying
him  among  the  goods  or  at  the  sale  of  the  property  ^
5  of  a  proscribed  man.  When  a  slave  is  bought  the
peciiliitm  goes  as  a  rule  with  the  slave  (or  a  reserva-
tion of  it  is  made),  and  a  guarantee  is  inserted  that
he  is  healthy,  and  has  committed  no  thefts  or
damage;  or  that  where  the  transfer  is  not  effected
by  mancipation,^  either  double  the  purchase  money

scales."  He  then  struck  the  scales  with  the  piece  of  money
and  gave  it  to  the  seller  as  a  symbol  of  the  price  (Gains,  Inst.,
i,  119).

^  Si  in  iure  cessit.  A  process  resembling"  "conveyance  by
fine  and  by  common  recovery  "  which  was  in  use  in  England
a  hundred  years  ago.  It  was  a  kind  of  fictitious  suit,  the
parties  to  which  were  the  dominus  qui  cessit,  the  person  cui
cedebatur,  and  the  magistrate  (usually  the  praetor)  qui  addixit.
The  real  owner  and  the  purchaser  appeared  before  the  magis-
trate, the  latter  claimed  the  thing  in  question  as  his  own ;  the
magistrate  asked  the  owner  if  he  had  any  defence,  the  latter
replied  that  he  had  not ;  whereupon  the  magistrate  adjudged
the  thing  to  the  claimant.

For  this  cf.  Gains,  Inst.,  i,  2,  De  Nexu faciendo.

^  In  sectione.  When  a  man  was  proscribed  his  property  was
confiscated  to  the  State  and  was  sold  by  auction — not  in  lots,
but  the  whole  to  one  person.  This  sale  was  called  sectio  and
the  purchaser  sector.

^  Si  mancipio  non  datur.  A  vendor  who  had  a  doubtful  title
would  not  sell  by  mancipation,  for  the  law  bound  him  to  war-
ranty in  double  the  amount  or  value  of  the  thing  sold.  He
might  instead  simply  deliver  the  thing,  leaving  the  purchaser


228  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

is  to  be  paid  (in  case  of  eviction),  or,  if  such  has
been  the  agreement,  only  the  amount  paid.

In  the  day  time  the  shepherds  of  each  separate
flock  should  feed  by  themselves,  in  the  evening  all
those  who  are  under  one  chief  shepherd  should  eat
together  at  the  evening  meal.  The  chief  must  see
that  all  the  implements  needed  by  the  flock  and
shepherds  accompany  them,  especially  those  which
are  necessary  for  the  feeding  of  the  men  and  for  the
medical  treatment  of  the  sheep.  For  this  purpose
owners  keep  pack  animals,  some  using  mares,
others  some  other  animal  instead,  which  can  carry
a  load  on  its  back.

As  to  the  breeding  of  men :  there  is  no  difficulty
with  the  shepherd  who  remains  permanently  on  the
farm,  as  he  has  a  female  slave  as  mate  in  the  farm-
buildings,  for  the  Venus  of  shepherds  looks  no
further  afield  than  this.  Those  however  who  feed
their  flocks  in  forest  glades  and  places  in  the  woods,
and  find  shelter  from  storms  not  in  a  farmhouse  but
in  hastily  built  huts,  are  with  advantage,  as  many
people  think,  given  women  who  can  follow  the
flocks,  prepare  the  shepherds'  victuals  and  keep  the
men  from  roving.  But  these  women  must  be  able-
bodied  and  not  uncomely.    In  many  districts  they

to  acquire  legal  ownership  by  usucapion  (undisturbed  posses-
sion for  a  year).

But,  in  case  the  title  was  bad,  the  purchaser,  before  the  year
was  out,  might  be  compelled  to  cede  the  thing  to  the  proper
owner,  and  would  have  no  immediate  legal  remedy  against  the
vendor.  Hence  the  necessity  when  a  slave  was  not  sold  by
mancipation  for  the  stipulation  i^iven  here  by  Varro.


II]  OF  SHEPHERDS  229

are  as  good  workers  as  men — a  fact  which  you  may
observe  everywhere  in  Illyricum  where  they  can
either  shepherd  the  flock,  or  carry  logs  to  the  fire
and  cook  the  food,  or  look  after  the  farm   imple-

8  ments  in  the  huts.  As  to  the  suckling  of  the
young,  I  may  mention  that  the  mothers  in  nearly
all  cases  suckle  their  own.  And  here,  looking  at
me,  he  said :  I  hav^e  heard  you  say  that  when  you
went  to  Liburnia  (Croatia)  you  saw  there  Liburnian
house-wives  carrjnng  logs,  and  at  the  same  time
children,  whom  they  were  suckling;  thus  proving
how  feeble  and  contemptible  are  our  modern  newly-
delivered  mothers,  who  lie  for  days  inside  mosquito  '

9  nets.  True  it  is,  I  replied,  and  here  is  an  even  more
striking  illustration.  In  Illyricum  ^  it  often  happens
that  a  pregnant  woman  when  the  time  of  delivery
has  come,  retires  a  little  distance  from  the  scene  of
her  work,  is  there  delivered,  and  comes  back  with
a  child  whom  you  would  think  she  had  found,  not

'  Conopiis.  The  use  of  mosquito  nets  ((cw^wTrfia — Kuivwxp,  a  gnat)
is  very  ancient.  Herodotus,  ii,  94,  describes  how  the  Egyptian
fisherman  used  his  net  (d/jiipifiXtjcTpov)  in  the  day  for  fishing,  and
at  night  arranged  it  round  him  in  the  form  of  a  tent — and  the
mosquitoes  didn't  even  try  to  get  in  ! — dia  Si  tov  Siktvov  6vce
TTHpwvTai  apxhv.  When  Judith  was  introduced  to  Holofernes  in
his  tent,  he  was  "  lying  on  his  bed  inside  the  mosquito  curtain
which  was  of  purple  and  gold,  with  emeralds  and  other  precious
stones  inwoven  "  (Judith,  x,  21) :  kv  rtf  KwviDTnitf),  0  tjv  ek  ■!rop(pvpag
Kai  xpvaiov  Kai  afiapdycov  Kat  XiOtuv  Tro\vTf\ojv  KaOv(paaiiBvtov.

^  lUyrico.  The  same  story  is  told  of  Ligurian  women  by  the
author  of  the  book  -Ktpi  Gavfiaaiuiv  aKovafidrtiiv,  cap.  93.  "The
women  bear  children  in  the  midst  of  work,  and  as  soon  as  they
have  washed  the  baby  dig  and  hoe,"  etc.


230  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

brought  into  the  world.  Another  striking  fact:
girls  there,  called  "virgins,"  sometimes  twenty
years  old,  are  not  forbidden  by  the  custom  of  the
country  to  mate  with  any  one  they  like  before
marriage,  and  to  wander  about  unaccompanied,
and  have  children.

TO  Rules  and  prescriptions  relating  to  the  health  of
the  men  and  the  flock,  and  such  treatment  as  can
be  given  without  a  doctor,  the  chief  shepherd  should
have  set  down  in  writing.  For  if  he  cannot  read
and  write  he  is  no  good  for  his  post,  being  quite
incapable  of  correctly  making  up  the  accounts
connected  with  his  master's  stock.

As  to  the  number  of  shepherds,  some  set  a  higher,
some  a  lower,  standard.  I  have  assigned  one  shep-
herd to  every  eighty  wool-bearing  sheep,  Atticus

II  one  to  every  hundred.  Where  the  flocks  of  sheep
are  large — some  have  them  up  to  a  thousand  sheep —
you  may  more  easily  subtract  from  the  total  number
of  men  than  in  the  case  of  smaller  flocks,  such  as
those  belonging  to  Atticus  and  myself.  For  mine
consist  of  seven  hundred  head,  you,  I  believe,  have
had  flocks  of  eight  hundred,  agreeing,  however,  with
me  in  keeping  one  ram  to  every  ten  sheep.

For  a  herd  of  fifty  mares  two  men  are  wanted,
and,  without  doubt,  each  of  them  should  have  a  mare
that  has  been  broken  for  riding,  in  those  districts
where  the  mares  are  rounded  up  and  driven  to  their
stables  at  night,  as  is  often  the  case  in  Apulia  and
Lucania.


II]  OF  MILK  AND  WOOL  231


CHAPTER   XI

OF  MILK  AND  WOOL

1  Now,  said  Cossinius/  that  we  have  finished  what
we  set  ourselves  to  do,  let  us  go.  Yes,  said  I,
after  you  have  added  a  word  or  two,  as  it  was  pre-
viously agreed,  about  the  supplementary '"  products
from  sheep — milk  and  wool  to  wit.  Of  all  liquids
taken  as  food,  milk  is  the  most  nutritious;  first
sheep's  milk,  then  that  of  goats.  Mares'  ^  milk  is
the  most  strongly  purgative;  next  in  order  comes
that  of  asses,  then  that  of  cows,  and  last  that  of

2  goats.  These  different  milks,  however,  present
certain  differences,  depending  on  the  pasturage,  the
nature  of  the  animals,  and  the  birth  of  the  young
one;  on  the  pasturage,  for  milk  is  especially  nu-
tritious which  is  got  from  an  animal  that  has  been
fed  on  barley  and  straw,  or,  in  general,  on  dry  and
solid  food,  while  that  is  most  purgative  which  comes
from  one  that  has  fed  on  green  fodder,  especially  if

'  It  is  obviously  Cossinius  wlio  speaks.  Twice  later  in  this
chapter  Varro  interrupts  him,  §  5  and  §  10.  In  §  11,  Suscipit
Cossinius.

-  Extraordinario.    Cf.  ii,  i,  28.

'  Equinum.  It  would  seem  from  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  iii,  20)
that  the  thinner  the  milk  the  more  purgative  it  is.  The  thinnest
milk  is  camel's —then  comes  mare's  milk,  then  ass's,  while
cow's  is  the  "  thickest  "  of  all.


232  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  latter  consist  of  plants  ^  which,  when  taken
directly,  generally  act  with  us  as  purgatives;  on
the  nature  of  the  animal,  for  milk  is  better  which
comes  from  those  that  are  in  robust  health  and  still
young  than  if  the  reverse  is  the  case;  on  milking
and  the  birth  of  the  young  one,  as  that  milk  is  the
best  which  is  taken  not  too  long  after,  nor  imme-
diately' after,  birth.

3  Of  cheeses,^  those  which  are  made  from  cows'
milk  are  the  most  nourishing,  but  pass  through  the
body  with  the  greatest  difficulty;  in  the  second
place  come  those  made  from  sheep's  milk,  while
the  least  nutritious  and  most  laxative  are  those
made  from  goat's  milk.  We  must  also  distinguish
between  soft  and  new  cheese,  and  that  which  is  old
and  dry;  soft*  cheese  being  the  more  nutritious
and  less  constipating,  while  the  opposite  is  the  case

4  with  old   and  dry  cheese.    Cheese-making  begins

^  Ex  herhis.  Such  as  scammony,  hellebore,  or  periwinkle.
Cf.  Dioscorides,  ii,  75.

-  A  parlu  continuo.  Varro  refers,  of  course,  to  the  colostra
of  which  .Aristotle  {Joe.  cit.)  says,  dxptjarov  Sk  to  irpuirov  Kal
vcTipov.  The  mulso  of  the  text  is  difficult.  Keil  makes  it  syn-
onymous with  the  colostra,  quoting  Pliny's  words  about,  foie
gras :  FartiUbus  in  viagnam  avipUtudinem  crescit:  exemptum
quoque  lacte  mulso  augetur  (Pliny,  x,  22),  and  says  that  the  first
milk  after  parturition  was  called  viuhtim  because  of  its  sweet-
ness. I  can  find,  however,  no  authority  for  the  statement  save
the  doubtful  one  given  above.

^  Casei.  For  an  interesting  account  of  cheese-making  cf.
Columella,  vii,  8.

*  MoUes.  Pausanias  (vi,  7)  says  that  the  ancient  athletes
used  to  train  on  soft  cheese,  in  preference  to  llesh  meat.


I


II]  OF  MILK  AND  WOOL  233

with  the  rising  of  the  Pleiads/  in  spring,  and  goes
on  to  the  rising  of  the  same  in  summer.  Milking
for  the  purpose  of  making  cheese  is  done  in  spring
time,  early  in  the  morning,  at  other  times  about
noon,  though  owing  to  the  varying  nature  of
climate  and  food  the  same  practice  does  not  obtain
in  every  place.  To  about  two  co/igii  {about  one-and-
a-half  gallon)  of  milk  is  added  to  cause  coagulation
a  piece  of  rennet  the  size  of  an  olive — rennet  taken
from  a  hare  or  kid  being  better  than  that  from  a
lamb.  Some  people  use  instead  of  rennet  the  milk
from  a  fig"  branch  and  vinegar;  they  also  sprinkle
the  milk  with  several  other  things  which  are  in-
cluded under  one  term  by  the  Greeks.  The  term
5  used  is  sometimes  oTrdg,-  sometimes  ^atcpvov.    I  would

^  A  Vergilias  vemas.  Cf.  Festus :  Vergiliae  dictae  quia
earum  ortu  ver  finitur  et  aestas  incipit,  and  Isidore,  iii,  70 :  Has
{Pleiadas)  Latini  Vergilias  dicunt  a  temporis  significatione  quod
vere  exoriuntur.  Nam  occasu  suo  hiemem,  ortu  aestatem  priin-
aeque  navigationis  tempus  osfendunt.  Cf.  also  Pliny,  xviii,  25.
The  morning  rising  of  the  Pleiads  was  loth  May.  According
to  the  Caesarian  calendar  they  set  in  Spring  on  5th  April,  and
were  invisible  for  thirty-four  days  (Pliny,  xviii,  26).

'^  Fici  ramo.  Columella  (vii,  8,  i) :  "  Milk  is  generally  made
to  curdle  by  means  of  the  rennet  from  a  lamb  or  a  kid,  but  the
down  of  the  wild  thistle  will  do  it,  as  well  as  fig-milk  which  is
emitted  from  the  tree  if  you  wound  the  green  bark.  The  best
cheese,  however,  is  that  which  is  the  least  *  doctored  ' — but
for  a  pail  {sinum)  of  milk,  a  piece  of  rennet  weighing  not  less
than  a  silver  denarius  (franc)  is  needed."

^  6v6c.  Any  exudation  from  a  plant  was  called  indifferently
oTToc  or  SciKpvov.  Cf.  Theophrastus  (C.  P.,  vi,  11,  16):  "And
they  call  these  sometimes  ottovq,  sometimes  SaKpva  (tears),  the


234  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

not  deny,  I  remarked,  that  this  was  the  reason  why
the  fig  tree  was  planted  by  the  shepherds  near  the
chapel  of  the  goddess  Rumina,  for  the  sacrifices
offered  now  are  milk  instead  of  wine  and  sucking-
pigs.  For  rwniis '  is  an  ancient  word  meaning
"breast,"  and  we  still  speak  of  sucking  lambs  as
subrumi,  just  as  we  use  the  term  lactantes  (suck-
lings) from  lac  (milk).

6  For  sprinkling  over  cheese  rock-salt  is  better
than  sea-salt.

In  sheep-shearing  I  first  notice,  before  setting  to
work,  whether  they  suffer  from  scab  or  ulcers,  so
that,  if  necessary,  they  may  receive  proper  treat-
ment before  being  shorn.  The  time  for  sheep-
shearing  is  between  the  vernal  equinox  and  the
summer  solstice,  when  the  sheep  have  begun  to
sweat.    From  the  word  sudor  (sweat)  fresh-clipped

7  wool  is  called  sucida  (juicy).  Sheep  newly  shorn
are  smeared  the  same  day  with  wine  and  oil,  but
some  people  use  a  mixture  of  white  wax  and  bacon
fat,  and  if  the  sheep  is  used  to  wearing  a  jacket -
they  put  on  again  the  skin  with  which  it  was  for-
merly covered,  after  smearing  the  inner  side  of  it
with  the  same  mixture.  If  in  the  course  of  shearing
a  sheep  has  been  wounded,  one  anoints  the  place
with    liquid    pitch.'     Sheep  with   coarse  wool   are

common  term  being  ottoi.    But  there  is  perhaps  no  diflference
in  meaning."

'  Rumis.    Cf.  note  to  ii,  i,  20.

^  Cf.  the  ovcs  pclUtas  of  ii,  2,  20.

^  Pice  liquida.     Hot  pitch  was  also  used  for  branding  the


II]  OF  MILK  AND  WOOL  235

shorn  here  about  the  time  of  the  barley  harvest,  in

8  other  places  before  hay  cutting.  Some  shear  them
twice  within  the  year — as  is  the  case  in  Hither
Spain — that  is,  every  six  months,  putting  in  double
work  with  the  idea  of  getting  more  wool,  just  as
some  people  mow  their  meadows  twice.  The  more
thrifty  farmers  shear  their  sheep  on  little  mats,  to

9  avoid  the  loss  of  any  wisps  of  wool.  Fine  weather
is  chosen  for  the  work,  which  then  goes  on  roughly
between  10  a.m.  and  4  p.m.  For  when  the  sheep
is  sheared  when  the  sun  is  hot  its  wool  is  softer,
heavier,  and  better  coloured,  owing  to  the  sweat.
This  wool,  removed  from  the  sheep  and  piled
together,  is  called  by  some  vellera  (fleeces),  by
others  velamina.  From  this  word  vellera  it  may  be
inferred  that  in  the  matter  of  wool,  plucking  was
invented  before  clipping.  Those  who  even  now
"  pluck  "  keep  their  sheep  fasting  for  three  days
before,    for   when    they   are    without   strength  the

10  roots  of  the  wool  come  away  more  easily.     Hair-
cutters  '  are  said  first  to  have  come  to  Italy  in  300

sheep  with  the  owner's  name.    Cf.  Calpurnius  (Eel.  v,  82) :

.  .  .   Coquito  lentumque  bitumen  aheno
Impressurus  ovi  tua  nomina :  nam  tibi  lites
A  uferet  ingentes  lectus  possessor  in  armo.

(quoted  by  Schneider).

^  Tonsores.  Pliny  (vii,  59)  states  the  same  fact,  using  Varro
as  his  authority.  He  adds  that  Scipio  Africanus  the  younger
was  the  first  who  had  himself  shaved  every  day.  After  him  the
practice  became  general  until  the  time  of  Hadrian,  who  let  his


236  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

B.C.  from  Sicily,  as  is  proved  by  the  public  archives
of  Ardea/  and  to  have  been  introduced  by  Publius
Titinius  Menas.  That  in  older  time  no  barbers
existed  is  shown  by  the  statues  of  the  ancients,  for
most  of  them  have  long  hair  and  a  big  beard.

Cossinius  resumed :  As  the  sheep  yields  up  its
wool  for  clothing,  so  the  she-goat  gives  its  hair
for  the  use  of  sailors,'  for  military  engines,  and  for
mechanics'  tools.  Moreover  some  tribes  are  clad  in
goat-skins,  as  is  the  case  in  Gaetulia  and  Sardinia.
That  the  practice  of  wearing  them  prevailed  among
the  ancient  Greeks  is  evident,  as  in  their  tragedies

beard  grow,  to  hide,  it  is  said,  scars  on  the  lower  part  of  his
face.  The  Greeks  were  generally  bearded  until  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Great.  Cf.  Alexander  ab  Alexandro,  v,  i8.  I  am
convinced  that  Varro  uses  totisores  here  in  the  restricted  sense
of  "  barbers  " — and  that  an  entry  in  a  "  Common-place  book  "
or  his  memory,  that  of  a  polymath,  caused  the  sudden  diver-
gence from  the  subject.

^  Ardea.  Pliny  (xxxv,  lo)  speaks  of  verj- ancient  inscriptions
in  a  temple  at  Ardea,  and  (xxxv,  3)  of  certain  pictures  which
were  older  than  the  city  of  Rome.

^  Ad  usum  na7ificum,  etc.  Cf.  Geoponica,  xviii,  g:  "Their
hair  is  used  for  making  ropes  and  bags  and  the  like — and
things  for  sailors ;  for  what  Is  made  of  this  hair  is  not  easily
cut  and  does  not  rot."  Cf.  also  Vergil's  well-known  lines
(Georg'.,  HI,  312),  on  which  see  Servius,  who  quotes  Varro:

Cyniphii  tondent  hirci  saetasque  coinantes
Usum  in  citstroruni  et  miseris  velaviina  nautis.

The  military  engines  are,  of  course,  the  catapiiJta,  haJlista,
etc.

As  for  the  mechanics'  tools  I  am  at  a  loss — unless  their  tool
bags  were  of  goat-skin.


II]  OF  MILK  AND  WOOL  237

old  men  are  from  this  skin  called  diphtheriae,  and
in  comedies  those  who  work  on  the  farm  ; '  witness
the  young  man  in  the  Hypobolimaeus  of  Caeci-
lius,  and  the  old  man  in  Terence's  Heauton-
12  timorumenus.  Goats  are  shorn  owing  to  the
length  of  their  hair  over  a  large  part  of  Phrygia"
and  from  this  country  come  to  us  hair-cloths  and
other  fabrics  of  the  same  kind.  But  it  is  said  that
as  such  shearing  was  first  practised  in  Cilicia,
the  Cilicians  affixed  the  name  (Cilicia)  to  the
product.

Here  the  conversation  ended,  and  Cossinius
found  nothing  to  alter  in  what  had  been  said.  And
at  that  moment  Vitulus's^  freedman,  coming  out
from  the  park  on  his  way  to  the  city,  turned  off
to  us  and  said :  I  was  sent  to  you,  and  was  on  my
way  to  your  house  to  ask  you  not  to  shorten  the
holiday,  but  to  come  at  once.     And  so,  Turranius

^  Rustico  opere.  ' '  On  truuve  encore  les  diphtheres  en  France  au
XIXe  siecle:  tous  les  pay  sans  du  Maine  et  des  frontieres  de  la
Bretagne  .  .  .  sont  vetus  de  peaux  de  chevre." — Dureau  de  la
Malle,  Insc.  et  Belles  Lettres,  21  avril  1827.

^  Phrygiae.  Dureau  de  la  Malle  thinks  that  these  long-
haired Phrygian  goats  are  Angoras:  '■^ Videntite  des  lieux,  le
caractere  des  oreilles  tongues  et pejidantes  (Aristotle,  H.  A.,  viii,
28),  et  la  circonstance  de  la  gratide  longueur  des  polls  .  .  .
nous  font  recontiattre  la  race  des  chevres  d^  Angora."  Probably,
therefore,  these  fabrics  {cilicia)  of  goats'  hair  were  fine  and
soft,  not  resembling  the  hair-shirt  {cilices)  of  the  mediaeval
ascetic.

^  Vituli.  This  is  the  first  time  that  Vitulus  has  been  men-
tioned. The  name  is  given  ii,  i,  lo,  as  a  cognomen  of  the
Pomponii.


238


VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.  ii


Niger,  my  friend,  we  parted,  Scrofa  and  I  through
the  grounds  to  Vitulus's  house,  whilst  the  rest
went  some  to  their  own  homes,  others  to  Menas's
house.


BOOK  III

OF  SMALLER  STOCK

CHAPTER  I

INTRODUCTION  AND  DEDICATION

1  In  the  history  of  mankind,  my  dear  Pinnius,  we
find  two  modes  of  life,  that  of  the  country  and  that
of  the  town,  and  it  is  obvious^  that  these  two  differ
not  only  as  to  place,  but  as  to  the  time  when  they
began  to  be.  The  country  life  is  much  the  more
ancient  of  the  two,  seeing  that  there  was  once  a
time  when  men  lived  in  the  country  and  had  no

2  towns  at  all.    For  the  oldest  Greek  town  known  to

'  Ouidni.  The  ante- Victorian  MSS.  have  O.  Pinni.  The
reading  Ouidni oiihQ  Archetype  restored  by  Keil  from  a  note  of
Politian,  seems  pointless  as  it  is  here  used.  The  word  is  gener-
ally used  to  emphasize  a  previous  statement  and  is  usually
followed  by  a  corroborative  clause — as  often  in  Catullus.  Cf.
Ixxvii,  I :

Lesbius  est  pulcher!  quidni?  quern  Leshia  malit,  etc. ;
Ixxxvi,  i:

Gellius  est  tenuis :  quidni?  quoi  tarn  bona  mater,  etc. ;

and  Varro,  in  the  next  chapter,  §  15.

Varro,  besides,  generally  uses  the  friendly  mi  or  noster  of
the  man  to  whom  he  is  dedicating  a  book:  cf.  ii,  Int.  6;  ii,  11,
12;  iii,  17,  10.  Possibly  wz /*/««/ was  written  originally,  and
quidni  was  the  ineptitude  of  a  scribe.

239


240  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

history  is  the  Boeotian  Thebes,  which  was  built  by
King  Ogygos ;  ^  the  oldest  town  in  Roman  territory
Rome,  which  King  Romulus  built.  With  regard
to  this  matter  it  is  possible  now,  though  it  was  not
when  Ennius  wrote,  to  say  with  truth  " 'Tis  a
little  more  or  less  than  seven "  hundred  years
since  far-famed  Rome  was  founded  under  august
auspices."
3  Well,  Thebes,  which  was  founded  it  is  said  before
the  Ogygian  deluge,  has  yet  not  existed  for  more

^  Og'ygos.  'Qyvytjc,  King  of  the  Hectenes,  who  were  the  oldest
inhabitants  of  Boeotia.  The  flood  which  occurred  in  his  time
preceded  that  of  DeucaHon  and  Pyrrha  (Serv.  Vergil,  E.,  vi,
41),  and  happened,  according  to  Eusebius,  1,040  years  before
the  foundation  of  Rome.

The  Phoenician  Cadmus  is  generally  supposed  to  have
founded  the  Boeotian  Thebes ;  cf.  Diodorus  Siculus  (v,  2),  who
is  followed  by  Propertius  (i,  7),  Lactantius,  and  Statius,  and
others.  The  story  is  familiar  (Herod.,  v,  58,  59).  It  is  highly
probable  that  Thebes  was  a  Phoenician  settlement,  and  the
name  Cadmus  is  connected  by  most  scholars  with  the  Phoe-
nician Kadmon,  i.e.,  "the  aged  one,"  or  "the  Oriental."
Homer  frequently  uses  icaSntloi  or  Kadneim'iQ  as  the  name  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Thebes  (cf.  II.  iv,  385),  and  the  Acropolis
there  was  known  in  historical  times  (Xen.,  Hell.,  vi,  3,  11)  as
>)  KaSfieia.  Amphion  and  Zethus  built  the  lower  city  and  walled
it :  o'i  TrpioToi  aijlirig  sSog  iKTiaav  iTrraTruXoio  (Odyssey,  xi,  262)
though  a  scholium  to  this  passage  makes  Amphion  the  original
founder,  and  Solinus  (13)  agrees  with  him.

Vai'ro  is  followed  by  Festus :  Offv^ia  moenia  Accuis  in  Dio-
medc  appellans  significat  Thehas  quod  cam  urbein  Ogygus  con-
didisse  traditur.

-  Scptingcnti.  Ennius  died  about  170  B.C.  Varro  was  writing
this  work  in  36  B.C.


Ill]  INTRODUCTION  241

than  two  thousand  ^  one  hundred  years.  And  if  you
consider  those  years  with  reference  to  that  far-off
time  when  fields  began  to  be  cultivated,  and  man
lived  in  huts  and  hovels  nor  knew  what  a  wall  or  a
gate  was,  you  will  see  that  farmers  are  more  ancient
than  the  dwellers  in  towns  by  an  astounding  number

4  of  years;  and  small  wonder,  for  divine  nature  made
the  country,  but  man's  skill  the  towns,  and  all  the
arts  were  discovered  in  Greece,  'tis  said,  within  the
space  of  a  thousand  years,  but  there  was  never  a
time  when  there  were  in  the  world  no  fields  which
could  be  cultivated.

And  not  only  is  farming  more  ancient,  it  is  also
better;  wherefore  our  ancestors  with  good  reason
sent  their  citizens  from  the  town  back  to  the  land,
for  in  peace  they  were  fed  by  the  rustic  Romans

5  and  in  war  were  defended  ^  by  them.  With  good
reason,  too,  did  they  call  the  same  land  by  the
names  of  ''Mother "and  "Ceres,"  and  believed  that
they  who  cultivated  her  lived  a  holy  and  useful  life,
and  were  all  that  remained  of  the  race  of  good  King
Saturn.  And  with  this  agrees  the  fact  that  the
sacred   rites   in   honour  of  Ceres  are  in  a  special

'  Duo  milia  et  centum.  Ogygus  must  therefore  have  been  at
least  350  years  old  when  the  deluge,  called  after  him,  hap-
pened !

^  Ducebantur.  In  the  Archetype  was  alebantur — no  doubt  an
echo  from  the  first  part  of  the  sentence.  In  Victorius's  time
the  recepta  lectio  was  tuehantur;  and  this  I  have  translated  in
preference  to  Keil's  conjecture,  ducebantur.  Victorius  produces
an  inscription  found  in  Spain,  in  which  tueor  is  used  in  the
Passive.

R


242  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

6  sense  called  initia  ^  (rites  of  initiation).  The  name
also  of  Thebes  is  no  less  an  indication  of  the  greater
antiquity  of  the  country,  as  it  was  derived,  not  from
the  founder,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  district.  For
in  the  ancient  tongue,  and  in  Greece  the  Aeolians^
of  Boeotia  call  hills  tebas^  without  the  aspirate,  and
in  the  Sabine  country  which  Pelasgians  from  Greece
visited  the  term  is  still  used  in  this  sense.  Traces
of  this  are  to  be  found  in  the  Sabine  country  not  far
from  Reate  on  the  Via  Salaria,  where  a  slope  a
mile*  in  length  is  called  tehae.

^  Initia.  The  ancient  form  of  the  worship  of  Ceres,  the
Italian  Goddess  of  Agriculture,  was  extremely  simple.  The
porca  praecidanea  was  sacrificed  at  the  beginning  of  harvest
and  the  praemetium — the  first  ears  cut — was  dedicated  to  her
(cf.  Festus,  ad  verba).  But  after  496  B.C.,  when  at  Rome  Ceres
was  identified  with  the  Greek  Demeter,  the  service  in  her
honour  was  performed  there,  in  the  Greek  language,  and  the
elaborate  ritual  of  the  Eleusinia  was  adopted  together  with
the  ceremony  of  initiation.  Cf.  Cicero  (De  Leg.,  ii,  9),  who
quotes  from  the  Twelve  Tables :  Neve  quern  initianto  nisi,  ut
assolet  Cereri  Graeco  more.

^  Aeolis.  The  Greek  nominative  plural  'AtoXfTc.  He  uses  it
again,  iii,  12,  6,  and  several  times  in  the  De  Lingua  Latina.

^  Tebas.  Scaliger  is  very  angry  with  Varro  because  of  this
derivation.  He  says  that  the  word  means  a  little  boat.  The
Egyptian  Thebes  was,  in  Egyptian,  T-ape="the  head,"  a
meaning  which  would  square  well  with  Varro's  coi/is;  cf.
the  use  of  "pen"  meaning  "  he^id "  or  "mountain  top"  in
Celtic.

^  Miliarius  clivus.  The  translation  given  is  a  guess,  perhaps
a  bad  one.  Schneider  thinks  that  the  expression  means  a  slope
or  hill  on  which  is  a  mill-stone— which  seems  to  me  much
worse — in  fact  an  impossible  rendering!  Good  sense  would  be


Ill]  INTRODUCTION  243

7  The  first  farmers  were  unable,  owing  to  their
poverty,  to  distinguish  in  practice  between  different
kinds  of  farming,  and,  being  the  children  of  shep-
herds, both  sowed  and  grazed  the  same  land.  The
produce^  then  increased  and  was  distributed  to
different  people  by  means  of  money,  and  so  it  came
about  that  some  were  called  farmers,  others  shep-

8  herds.  Now  the  shepherd's  business,  stock-raising,
is  itself  of  two  kinds,  though  no  one  has  made  the
distinction  sufficiently  clear — the  one  concerned  with
animals  raised  within  the  precincts  of  the  farm,  the
other  with  those  which  are  taken  to  graze  at  a  dis-
tance in  the  country.  The  latter  kind  is  well  and
deservedly  known  under  its  other  name  oi pecuaria,
cattle-raising;  and  in  order  to  practise  it,  men  of
large  wealth    possess   clearings  which   they   have

made  by  reading  non  longe  a  Reatino  mUiario  or  a  millario
Reate,  i.e.,  not  far  from  the  mile-stone  at  Reate.

Again,  one  is  not  satisfied  with  Keil's  transposition  of  cum
which  in  the  Archetype  comes  immediately  before  agri  and
makes  quite  good  sense  there.

'  Quae  postea  creverunt.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  how
Varro  could  introduce  money  at  so  early  a  stage  in  the  evolu-
tion of  society,  for  he  so  often  emphasizes  tlie  fact  that  it  came
late  in  time  (and  "  stamped "  money  not  until  the  time  of
Servius).  Peculia  {Jucundus)  is  tempting.  "  They  divided  the
Increase  (cattle  and  corn)  as  private  lots  {peculia)"  For  this
use  of  the  word  cf  Isidore  (xv,  17):  Omne  enim  patrimoniuvi
apud  antiquos  peculium  dicebatur  a  pecudibus,  in  quibus  eorum
constabat  imiversa  siibstantia.

Compare  with  this  passage  Lucretius's  account  of  the  origin
of  property  (v,  1 105,  etc.) :  El pecus  alquc  agros  divisere.  .  .  .  ||
Posterius  res  invenlast  auninique  repertum.


244  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

either  rented  or  bought.  The  former  kind,  the
rearing  of  animals  in  the  farm  buildings,  was  con-
sidered by  some,  owing  to  its  humble  nature,  as  a
mere  adjunct  to  agriculture,  though  in  reality  it
was  a  kind  of  stock-raising,  and  it  has  not,  so  far  as
I  know,  been  fully  set  forth  as  a  distinct  branch  of

9  farming  by  any  one.  So,  as  I  considered  farming
conducted  for  profit  as  having  three  chief  divisions:
namely  (i)  the  cultivation  of  the  soil;  (2)  the  rear-
ing of  cattle ;  and  (3)  the  raising  of  animals  within
the  farm-buildings,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  make
three  books.  Of  these  I  have  written  two,  the  first
addressed  to  my  wife  Fundania  on  agriculture;  the
second  on  cattle-farming,  to  Turranius  Niger;  the
remaining  third  book,  which  treats  of  the  rearing
of  animals  within  the  precincts  of  the  farm,  I  send
herewith  to  you,  as  I  feel  that  to  you  more  than  to
any  one  else  I  owe  this  dedication,  seeing  that  we

10  are  near  neighbours  and  excellent  friends.  As
you  who  possess  a  country-house  made  beautiful
by  plaster,  inlaid-work,  and  fine  mosaic^  floors,
would  have  felt  that  there  was  something^  lacking
unless  its  walls  had  been  embellished  by  your  own
literary  ^  works,  so  I  have  done  my  best  by  means  of

^  Lithostrotis .  For  these  pavements  and  the  history  of  mosaic
in  general  cf.  Pliny,  xxxvi,  25.  1  find  it  generally  stated  that
lithostrota  were  made  of  bits  of  stone  or  marble  of  natural
colours  (Seyffert,  Diet,  of  Antiquities,  etc.);  but  Isidore  (xiv,  8)
is  against  this  conclusion  :  Lithostrota parvulis  cnistis  ac  tessellis
tinctis  in  varios  colores.

*  Parum,  supply  spectandam.

^   Tuis  quoque  Utteris.    Nothing  is  known  of  this  Pinnius,  or


I


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    245

this  treatise  to  embellish  it  with  the  produce  of  the
farm.  I  now  therefore  send  it  to  you  remembering
the  conversations  we  once  had  on  the  subject  of
the  perfect  country  house,  and  I  will  here  make  a
beginning  by  relating  them.


CHAPTER  II

ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS

It  was  at  an  election  of  aediles  and  the  sun  was
hot,  when  I  and  Q.  Axius  the  senator,  who  be-
longed to  my  tribe,  having  recorded  our  votes,  were

of  any  literary  work  bearing  his  name.  But,  if  the  text  be
sound,  these  words  must  refer  to  works  written  by  Pinnius.
Gesner  conjectures  tui,  and  considers  the  meaning  of  the  pass-
age to  be  "unless  your  walls  were  also  adorned  with  literary
works,"  i.e,^  unless  there  were  a  library  in  the  villa.  But  the
position  of  the  enclitic  quoque  would  still  emphasize  the  word
tui.    One  suspects  the  genuineness  of  tuis.

Perhaps  ni  nitidis  quoque  litteris  was  written  by  Varro,  "  un-
less its  walls  were  adorned  with  beautifully  bound  literature
also."  Nitidus  would  be  no  bad  epithet  for  the  novi  libri  of  a
Suffenus.

Novi  umbilici,  lora  rubra,  memhrana
Directa  plumbo  et  pumice  omnia  aequata.

The  syllable  ni  in  nitidis  might  have  dropped  out  of  the  text
owing  to  the  ni  immediately  before  it.  The  general  sense  of
the  passage  is  clear:  Just  as  the  inside  of  a  villa  is  improved
by  a  library,  so  is  the  outside  by  cocks  and  hens,  doves,  pea-
cocks, etc.,  which  are  the  subject  of  this  third  book  dedicated
to  Pinnius.


246  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

waiting  to  attend  on  his  way  home  the  candidate
whom  we  supported.  Said  Axius  to  me :  Suppose
while  the  votes  are  being  counted '  we  make  use  of
the  shelter  of  the  Villa  Publica '  (People's  Hall)
instead  of  making  one  for  ourselves  with  the  bench  '

^  Dirihentur.  Literally,  "shall  be  divided."  The  diribitores
divided  the  votes  {tabellae)  as  they  were  taken  out  of  the  chests
(cisiae),  and  handed  them  over  to  the  custodes,  who  checked
them  off  by  dots  made  on  a  waxed  tablet.

^  Villa Puhlica.  Cf.  Livy,  iv,  22  :  Eo anno {^■^i^'B.Q,.)  C.  Furius
Pacilus  et  M.  Geganius  Macerinus  Censores  Villam  publicam
in  Campo  Martio  probaverunt:  ibique  primuni  census  populi  est
actus.  The  purposes  for  which  it  was  used  are  stated  in  the
next  chapter,  §  4.  Some  remains  of  it  still  exist,  cf  Middleton's
Rome.

At  the  time  of  these  conversations  (54  B.C.),  Cicero  and  "the
friends  of  Caesar  "  were  about  to  build  marble  saepta  for  the
Comitia  Tributa,  and  a  new  Villa  Publica  (Ad  Atticum,  iv,  16).

^  Tabella  dimidiata.  The  text  here  is  assuredly  corrupt,  and
the  emendations  and  explanations  of  Jucundus,  Ursinus,
Gesner,  Scaliger,  and  the  rest  are  merae  nugae.  I  have  trans-
lated as  best  I  could,  taking  umbram  which  is  understood  here
in  the  sense  given  to  it  by  Festus  {ad  verbuni) :  Umbrae  vocantur
Neptunalibus  casae  frondeae  pro  tabemaculis.  The  rustics,  at
the  festival  of  Anna  Perenna  (Fasti,  iii,  523),  made  themselves
shelters  against  the  sun  with  boughs  of  trees,  or  by  sticking
reeds  into  the  ground  and  stretching  their  togas  over  them.

Sub  Jove  pars  durat,  pauci  tentoria  ponunt
Sunt  quibus  e  raniis  frondea  facta  casa  est

Pars  ubi pro  rigidis  calamos  statuere  columnis
Desuper  extentas  imposuere  togas.

Perhaps  the  tabella  (whatever  it  was)  might  have  been  used
together  with  leafy  boughs  as  a  protection  against  the  sun.

Instead  oi  tabella ^  tabema  has  been  proposed  in  the  sense  of
taberjiaculo.     And  it  is  quite  likely  that  a  candidate  used  to


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    247

which  we  share  between  us,  provided  by  a  private
candidate.  Well,  I  answered,  I  am  of  opinion  that,
true  as  is  the  proverb  "  bad '  advice  is  worst  for  the
adviser,"  it  is  equally  true  that  good  advice  must
be  considered  good  both  for  the  adviser  and  the
advised.  And  so  to  the  People's  Hall  we  went.
There  we  found  the  augur"  Appius  Claudius  sitting
on  one  of  the  benches,  ready  for  the  consul  in  case
any  circumstance  should  call  for  his  services.  On
his  left  sat  Cornelius  Merula  (Blackbird),  belonging
to  a  consular  house,  and  Fircellius  Pavo  (Peacock)

provide  some  sort  of  shelter  for  his  personal  friends  who  were
there  to  support  him.  But  then  what  is  to  be  made  of  aedifi-
cemusl  a.nd  dimidiata?    Viderint  doctiores !

'  Malum  consilium,  etc.  In  explanation  of  the  proverb
Gellius  (iv,  5)  tells  a  story  which,  he  says,  he  found  in  the
Annales  Magni :  A  statue  of  Horatlus  Codes  had  been
struck  by  lightning — a  prodigy  concerning  which  the  Etruscan
haruspices  were  consulted  as  usual.  But  at  that  time  the
Etruscans  were  bitterly  hostile  to  Rome,  and  the  haruspices
purposely  gave  bad  advice  to  the  Romans.  The  former  were
arrested,  confessed  the  crime,  and  were  executed.  Whereupon
this  witty  verse  was  composed  and  sung  by  boys  all  over
the  city :  Malum  consilium  consultori  pessimumst.  Gellius  also
notes  that  the  verse  is  a  translation  of  Hesiod's  /j  hi  kuio)  /3owX»)
Tt^  (iovKtvaavTt  KaKiarr]  {tpywv  Kai  rifjupuiv,  i,  264).

^  Augurem.  An  augur,  or  augurs,  was  always  present  at
the  Comitia  to  take  the  auspices,  etc.  For  an  excellent  account
of  their  duties  cf.  Alexander  ab  Alexandro,  v,  19.  Varro,  at
the  end  of  Bk.  vi  (L.L.)  speaks  of  the  augur  attending  on  the
Consul  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata :  Hoc  nunc  Jit  aliter  atque  olim,
quod  augur  consuli  adest  tum  cum  exercitus  imperatur  (y}\\Qn  the
people  were  ordered  to  assemble  for  the  Comitia)  ac  praeit  quid
eum  dicere  oporleat.


248  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

of  Reate,  on  his  right  Minucius  Pica  (Jay),  and
M.  Petronius  Passer  (Sparrow).  When  we  joined
them,  Axius  smihng  said  to  Appius:  Will  you  let
us  come  into  your  aviary  where  you  are  sitting
3  amongst  the  birds?  I  certainly  will,  answered
Appius,  and  you  rather  than  another,  for  I  can  still
taste  the  birds  that  you  set  on  the  table  when  you
entertained  me  a  few  days  ago  at  your  villa  at
Reate.  I  was  then  on  my  way  to  Lake  Velinus  on
business    connected   with    disputes^    between    the

^  De  controversiis.  The  quarrel  arose  through  the  draining
of  Lake  Velinus  (now  Lago  di  S.  Susanna),  which  appears  to
have  done  harm  to  the  people  of  Interamna,  good  to  the
Reatini.  In  fact,  according  to  Servius  (Aen.,  vii,  712),  the
extraordinary  fertility  of  the  Rosean  country  (part  of  the  Ager
Reatinus),  mentioned  by  Varro  (i,  7,  10),  dated  from  the  time,
when  M.  Curius  let  out  Lake  Velinus  into  the  river  Nar  "by
cutting  through  the  mountain."  It  is  most  interesting  to  find
that  it  was  Cicero  himself  who  conducted  the  case  for  the  men
of  Reate,  and  that  he  stayed  on  that  occasion  with  Axius.  Cf.
Ad  Atticum  (iv,  15):  Reatini  me  ad  sua  Tempe  duxerunt  ut
agereni  causam  contra  Interamnaies  apud  consulem  et  decern
legatos ;  quod  lacus  Velinus  a  M.  Curio  emissus  interciso  monte,
in  Narem  defiuit:  Ex  quo  est  ilia  siccata,  et  huynida  tamen  modice
Rosea.  Vixi  cum  Axio.  Appius  was  probably  one  of  the  decern
legati.  This  letter  of  Cicero's  fixes  the  time  of  these  conversa-
tions, for  it  was  written  in  54  B.C.,  when  Appius  Claudius
Pulcher  and  L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus  were  consuls.  It  is
singular  than  an  Appius  Claudius  was  also  an  augur.  Can  it
be  that  the  consul  and  the  augur  were  the  same  man,  for  we
know  from  Cicero's  letters  (Ad  Diversos,  bk.  iii,  passim)  that
the  Consul  had  been  an  augur  at  the  same  time  as  Cicero,  and
had  written  a  book,  De  iure  augurali,  which  he  dedicated
to  him?


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    249

people  of  Interamna  and  Reate.  But,  he  went  on,
isn't  this  villa,  built  by  our  ancestors,  in  severer
taste  and  better  than  your  luxurious  mansion  at

4  Reate?  Can  you  see  any  citrus  wood  or  gold  here,
any  vermilion  or  azure,  any  coloured  ^  or  marble
mosaic — all  of  which  your  house  possesses  in  lavish
profusion?  Besides,  this  house  is  the  property  of  a
whole  people,  yours  belongs  but  to  yourself.  To
this  resort  Roman  citizens  from  the  Campus  Martius
and  men  of  all  nations;  to  yours,  mares  and  asses.
Again  this  serves  for  the  conduct  of  State  affairs,
for  it  is  here  the  cohorts  meet  when  brought  before
the  Consul  on  the  occasion  of  a  levy,  here  that  the
inspection  of  arms  takes  place,  and  the  censors  con-
voke the  people  for  the  census.

5  Of  course,  said  Axius,  this  public  mansion  of
yours  on  the  edge  of  the  Campus  Martius  is  merely
useful?  Its  decorations  did  not  cost  more  than  those
of  all  the  villas  of  Reate  put  together,  did  they?
Why,  its  walls  are  plastered  with  pictures,  and  statues
as  well,  while  mine  shows  never  a  trace  of  Lysippus "

'  Emblema.  t/xfiXTj/xa  means  in  Greek  any  ornament  in  raised
work — such  as  jewels,  etc.,  whicii  could  be  removed.  In  Latin
the  word  denotes  a  tessellated  pavement  of  various  colours.
The  emblema  vermiculatum  of  Lucilius  (Cic.  Orator,  149),  is
supposed  to  owe  its  name  to  the  resemblance  of  the  pattern  to
the  contortions  of  worms.  Nonius,  however,  has  vermiculatum
pro  minuto  atque  mijtiato,  small  and  coloured  with  red  lead.

^  Lysippi.  Lysippus  was  a  great  sculptor,  statuarius  nobil-
issimus  (Cic,  Brut.,  86),  contemporary  with  Alexander  the
Great,  who  would  allow  none  other  but  him  to  carve  his  like-
ness ;  all  his  statues  were  in  bronze.   Of  one — the  Apoxyomenus


250  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

or  Antiphilus/  though  many  of  the  hoer  and  the
shepherd.  And  my  villa  has  a  large  farm  attached,
a  farm  made  clean  ^  and  neat  by  cultivation,  while
yours  hasn't  a  rood  of  land  or  a  single  cow  or  mare.

6  And  finally,  what  likeness  has  yours  to  the  country-
house  owned  by  your  grandfather  and  great-grand-
father? It  has  not  seen,  as  the  latter  saw,  hay  in  the
hay-loft,  the  vintage  in  the  wine  cellar,  the  corn  in
the  granary.  For  because  a  building  is  outside  the
city  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is  a  country-house  any
more  than  is  the  building  belonging  to  people  living
outside  the  Porta  Flumentana^  or  in  the  Aemilian*
suburb.

7  As  it  appears,  said  Appius  with  a  smile,  that  I
don't  know  what  a  country-house  is,  please  to  en-

— there  Is  a  glorious  marble  copy  in  the  Vatican  Museum  at
Rome.

'  Antiphili.  Antiphilus  was  contemporary  with  Lysippus
and  Apelles,  and  was  famous  especially  for  his  genre  pictures :
e.g.,  a  boy  blowing  a  fire,  women  dressing  wool,  etc.  He
painted  a  humorous  picture  of  a  man  called  Giyllus  (ypii\Xoc-  =
pig),  and  ever  afterwards  caricatures  were  called  ^/;>7//.

For  both  him  and  Lysippus  cf.  Plin}',  xxxv,  lo,  ii.

^  Polito.  Nonius :  PoUtiones  agrorum  cultus  diligentes  ut
polita  omnia  dicimus  excuJta  et  ad  nitorem  deducta.  Ennius
Satyrarum  lib.  Hi,  lati  campi  quos  gerit  Africa  terra  politos.

■'  Porta  Flumentana.  Close  to  the  Porta  Carmentalis,  and
nearer  than  it  to  the  Tiber.  Festus  :  Flumentana  Porta  Romae
appellata  quod  Tiheris partem  ea  fhtxisse  affirmatit.  Hortensius,
Cicero's  rival,  had  a  house  close  to  it  (Ad  Atticum,  vii,  3).

'  Aemilianis.  The  Aemiliana,  probably  a  part  of  the  town
in  the  Campus  Martius  near  the  Saepta.  Cf.  Suetonius,
Claudius,  18.


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    251

lighten  me,  lest  I  err  through  ignorance,  for  I  am
intending  to  buy  one  near  Ostia,  from  M.  Seius.
But  if  buildings  are  not  villas  unless  they  contain
your  ;^320  ass  that  you  shoAved  me  at  your  place,
then  I  am  afraid  I  may  be  buying  a  Seian  '  house
(a  white  elephant)  on  the  shore  instead  of  a  villa.

8  Now  my  friend  here,  Lucius  Merula,  made  me
eager  to  acquire  this  building  by  saying,  after  a
visit  of  a  few  days  to  Seius,  that  he  had  never  been
entertained  in  a  villa  he  liked  so  well,  though  he
saw  there  no  picture,  nor  a  single  bronze  or  marble
statue,  nor  yet  the  apparatus  for  wine-pressing,  nor

9  oil-jars  or  olive-presses.  Why,  replied  Axius,  look-
ing at  Merula,  what  kind  of  a  villa  is  that  which
has  neither  the  decorations  of  a  suburban  villa  nor
the  implements  to  be  found  in  a  farm-house?  Well,
said  Merula,  is  not  your  house,^  situated  at  a  bend
of  the  river  Velinus,  though  neither  painter  nor
plasterer  ever  set  eyes  on  it,  to  be  considered  just
as  much  a  villa  as  the  other  at  Rosea  which  is
adorned  with  plaster-work  in  the  best  taste,  and  is

10  owned  by  you  in  common  with  your  ass?    Axius

'  Aedes  Seimtas.  Unless  there  be  an  allusion  here — which
no  one  seems  to  have  noticed — to  the  celebrated  Seian  horse
which,  like  the  gold  of  Tolosa,  invariably  brought  disaster  to
the  possessor  of  it,  Varro's  words  seem  pointless.  The  equus
Seianus  belonged  successively  to  Cn.  Seius,  Dolabella,  Cassius,
and  Antony,  all  of  whom  perished  miserably.  Hinc  proverbium
de  hominibus calamitosis ortum,  dicique  solitum  ^' Ille homo  habet
equutn  Seianum  "  (Gellius,  iii,  9).

*  Villa  ad  angulum  Velini.  This  was  the  villa  at  which
Cicero  stayed  in  54  B.C.    Cf.  §  3  of  this  chapter,  witli  note.


252  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

admitted  with  a  nod  that  a  house  which  was  merely
a  farm-house  was  just  as  much  a  villa  as  one  which
was  both  a  suburban  mansion  and  a  farm-house
as  well,  but  wanted  to  know  what  inference  his
friend  drew  from  the  facts.  What  inference?  said
he,  why,  if  we  must  approve  your  farm  because
animals  are  fed  there,  and  if  it  is  properly  called
a  "villa,"  because  cattle  are  fed  and  stabled  in  it,
the  estate  of  which  I  speak  should  with  equal  reason
be  called  by  that  name,  as  great  profits  are  made

11  in  it  by  feeding  animals.  For  what  does  it  matter
whether  you  make  your  profit  out  of  sheep  or  birds?
Or  do  you  think  the  return  from  the  oxen  on  your
farm — which  give  birth  to  bees — sweeter  than  that
from  the  honey-bees  which  work  in  the  bee-hives
at  Seius's  villa?  Do  you  get  more  ^  from  the  pork-
butcher  for  the  boar-pigs  reared  there  than  Seius
does  from  the  man  in  the  market  for  the  wild  boars

12  bred  on  his  estate?  But  what  prevents  me,  said
Axius,  from  having  bees  and  wild  boars  on  my
villa  at  Reate?  Unless  indeed  the  honey  made
at   Seius's  is   Sicilian,''   that   at   Reate    the    bitter

'  Pluris.  Probably  much  less,  for  the  flesh  of  the  wild  boar
wiis  much  esteemed,  especially  CuUum  aprxignum  and  lumbi
aprugni.  Cf.  Macroblus,  ii,  9,  where  the  menu  of  a  cena  pon-
tificum  is  given.  It  included,  amongst  many  other  things,
hedge-hogs,  raw  oysters  {quantum  vellent)^  field-fares,  aspar-
agus, a  fat  chicken,  oyster  patty,  boiled  moor-fowl,  hares,
various  roast  meats,  haggis,  Picentian  rolls,  and  lumbi  aprugni
and  siticiput  aprugnum.

-  Siculum,  The  most  famous  honey  came  from  the  bees  oi
Mount  Hybla  in  Sicily.


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    253

Corsican  '  kind,  and  unless  the  acorns  he  buys  make
the  boars  fat  on  his  estate,  while  on  mine  those  which
I  get  for  nothing  make  them  thin?  But,  replied
Appius,  Merula  does  not  say  that  you  couldn't
fatten  the  same  animals  as  Seius,  only,  as  I  have

13  seen  with  my  own  eyes,  you  don't.  Now  there
are  two*  kinds  of  feeding;  the  one  is  conducted
out  in  the  fields,  under  which  head  comes  cattle-
raising;  the  other  within  the  home  buildings,
where  are  reared  hens,  doves,  bees,  and  the  other
animals  which  are  usually  fed  there.  On  the  latter
we  possess  special  treatises  by  Mago  of  Carthage
and  Cassius  Dionysius,  as  well  as  scattered  obser-
vations to  be  found  in  their  longer  works;  and
these  Seius  has  apparently  read  to  such  good
purpose  that  he  makes  more  profit  out  of  a  single
villa  by  this  method  of  feeding  than  other  people

14  do  out  of  a  whole  farm  devoted  to  agriculture.  It  is
true,  said  Merula,  for  I  have  seen  there  great  flocks
of  geese,   hens,   doves,   cranes,^  and  peacocks,  as

'  Corsicum.  The  Corsican  honey  was  bitter  because  the
bees  fed  on  wormwood  (Dioscorides,  ii,  102).  Isidore  (xx,  3)
makes  the  same  statement  about  the  Sardinian :  Sardum
amarum  est  absinthii  causa:  cuius  copia  eius  reg^ionis  apes
nutriuntur.

'^  Cum  sint.  These  anacolutha  are  common  in  Varro.  Cf.
i,  I,  2 ;  ii,  I,  3;  iii,  i6,  2,  8.

*  Gruum.  Both  cranes  and  storks  were  fattened  for  table.
At  one  time  storks  were  preferred,  though  in  Pliny's  time  no
one  would  touch  one  (Pliny,  x,  23).  Peacocks,  of  course,  at  the
time  when  Varro  wrote  this  book  almost  always  appeared  at  a
dinner  of  ceremony.     In  one  of  Cicero's  letters  to  Atticus  he


254  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

well  as  hosts  of  dormice,  fishes,  wild  boars,  and
other  game.  And  the  freedman  who  keeps  his
books — he  once  waited  on  Varro  and  used  to  enter-
tain me  when  his  patron  was  away — told  me  that
his  master  used  to  make  out  of  his  villa  by  means
of  them  more  than  50,000  sesterces  (;^40o)  a  year.
As  Axius  seemed  amazed,  I  remarked  to  him:
Doubtless  you  know  my  maternal  aunt's  farm  in  the
Sabine  country,  which  is  twenty-four  miles  from
15  Rome  on  the  Via  Salaria?  Naturally,  said  he,  as  in
summer  when  I  am  going  to  Reate  from  Rome  I
generally  break  the  day  there  at  noon,  or  on  my
way  back  in  winter  pitch  my  camp  there  at  night.
Well,  I  added,  in  this  villa  the  aviary  alone  turned
out  to  my  knowledge  five  thousand  fieldfares  worth
three  denarii  (2^-.  6d.)  apiece,  so  that  in  that  year
that  department  of  the  villa  made  60,000  sesterces
(;^48o),  which  is  twice '  as  much  as  your  farm  of
200  iugera(i3oacres)  makes.  What!  sixty  thousand,

speaks  of  having  given  Hirtius  a  dinner  sine  pavone\  Plutarch
gives  a  horrid  account  of  the  fattening  of  cranes :  aXXoi  -^t^aviDv
o\i\iaTa  CLTToppc'ripavTic  Kat  cnroKXiiffaprec  tv  aKorei  Triaii'ovm  k.t.X.
(De  Esu  Carnium,  ii,  near  the  beginning).

1  Bis  tantuin  quain.  Is  this  Latin  ?  I  can,  after  diligent
search,  find  no  instance  of  this  use  either  in  Varro  or  else-
where. The  nearest  parallel  I  can  discover  is  in  Columella
(i,  8,  8),  duplicia  quatn  numerus  servorum  exigit,  but  this  is
not  so  violent  as  bis  tantum  quam.  I  imagine  that  what  was
written  is  bis  fantu  qiiantil  hius.  The  scribe,  suspecting  his
predecessor  of  dittography,  would  without  hesitation  write
quam  tuus.  On  the  otiier  hand  it  may  be  a  colloquial  in-
accuracy.


Ill]     ON  VARIOUS  KINDS  OF  VILLAS    255

said  Axius,  sixty,  sixty  \  you  are  joking.  Sixty,  I
16  repeated.  Well,  but  to  make  this  haul,'  said  he,
you'll  want  a  banquet,"  or  somebody's  triumph  such
as  that  of  Metellus  Scipio  in  former  days,  or  club^
dinners,  which  now  in  endless  number  inflate  the
market  price  of  provisions.  Every  year,  said  I,  you
may  look  for  such  a  return,  and,  I  hope,  your  aviary
will  pay  *  its  way ;  in  these  days  of  luxury  it  happens

^  Bolum.  j8oXoc  =  (i)  a  cast  of  a  net  (pure  Latin  iactus),
(2)  the  thing  caught.    Cf.  Euripid.  (Electra,  582) :

7/v  tKaTTaffiofxai  y'  ov  ncTepxofiai  j36\ov.

Plautus  (Rudens,  360)  uses  the  word  in  the  first  sense :

Nimis  lepide  iecisti  bolum,  peHurum  perdidisti.

Terence  (Heauton.,  673)  in  the  second  :

Crucior  bolum  niihi  tdntum  ereptum  tdm.  desubito  efaiicibus,

though  the  older  commentators  consider  this  to  be  a  different
word — the  Latin  form  of  the  Greek  /SoJXoc,  "a  lump."

^  Epulum.  Columella  (viii,  lo,  6)  understood  this  in  the
limited  sense  of  a  banquet  in  celebration  of  a  triumph.
M.  Terentius  ternis  saepe  denariis  singulos  emptitatos  esse  sig--
nificat  avorum  temporibus,  quibus  qui  triumphabant  populo
dabant  epulum.

'  CoUegiorum.  The  reference  is  probably  not  to  the  four
great  collegia  of  the  priests  in  particular,  but  to  the  collegia
artificum,  sodalicia,  etc.,  as  well.

*  Non  decoquet.  Decoquere  is  used  by  Cicero  to  denote
ruinous  extravagance.  Cf.  Phil.,  ii,  i8:  tenesne  memoria  te
praetextatum  decoxisse,  i.e.,  pafrimotiium  tuum.  Pliny  (xxi,  6)
has  :  Serere  in  Italia  minime  expedit,  ad  scrupula  usque  singula
areis  decoquentibus — "  eating' up  f|  of  the  gain,"  so  Grono-
vius  interprets.  Here  I  conceive  the  meaning  to  be:  "Your
aviary  will  not  eat  up  the  profit  (or  hanc  summavi)  by  the  ex-
pense of  its  up-keep."


256  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

but  rarely  that  you  are  deceived,  for  how  few  are
the  years  in  which  you  don't  see  a  solemn  banquet,
or  a  triumph,  or  in  which  the  clubs  do  not  feast.
More  than  that,  he  answered,  modern  luxury  creates
what  one  may  call  a  daily  banquet  within  the  gates
17  of  Rome.  Was'  it  not,  I  went  on,  a  frequent  state-
ment of  L.  Abuccius,  a  most  cultured  gentleman,
as  you  know^,  whose  satires  are  modelled  on  those
of  Lucilius,  that  his  farm  in  the  Alban  country
was  always  beaten  by  his  villa  and  the  animals
it  bred,  for  the  land  made  less  than  10,000  sesterces
(;^8o),  the  villa  more  than  20,000  (;^i6o)?  It  was
he  too  who  stated  that  if  he  could  have  had  his
villa  in  a  place  of  his  own  choosing  near"  the  sea
he  would  have  made  out  of  it  more  than  100,000
sesterces  (;^8oo).  And  again,  quite  recently,  when
M.  Cato  became  guardian  to  young  Lucullus,'  did

^  Nonne.     Here  Varro  goes  on  again.

^  Sectmdum  mare.  So  that  it  might  be  possible  to  build
fish-ponds,  which  were  enormously  profitable.

^  LucuUi.  This  was  the  son  of  the  well-known  L.  Lucullus
who  fought  against  Mithridates.  When  L.  Lucullus  died  he  left
a  little  boy,  and  in  his  will  made  Cato  (Uticensis),  the  uncle
of  the  boy,  his  guardian.  It  is  in  keeping  with  Cato's  char-
acter that  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to  sell  his  ward's  fish-ponds
as  being  an  unnecessary  luxury.  Columella,  at  any  rate,  says
that  the  fish-ponds  (not  fishes)  were  sold  for  400,000  sesterces
(viii,  16,  5).  Pliny  also  says  fish-ponds,  and  makes  the  price
paid  still  greater,  namely,  four  million  sesterces  (ix,  54).  The
words  in  Varro's  text,  quadraf^nta  milibus  sestertiis,  can  only
mean  40,000  sesterces.  Cf.  iii,  16,  11  :  dcna  milia  sesicrtia.
Macrobius  (ii,  11)  agrees  with  Varro  (he  alludes  to  this
passage)  as  to  the  price,  but  makes  Cato  the  heir !


Ill]  OF  VILLA-BRED  STOCK  257

he  not  sell  his  ward's  fishes  for  40,000  sesterces
18  (^320)?  Said  Axius:  My  dear  Merula,  take  me,  I
implore  you,  as  your  pupil  in  the  art  of  feeding
animals  within  the  villa.  Certainly,  and  as  soon  as
you  promise  the  school-fee,  I  will  begin.  Well,  I
don't  refuse,  and  you  can  have  it  to-day,  or  later
many  times  over  from  the  animals  I  shall  feed  under
your  tuition.  Ah  yes,  said  Appius,  whenever  one
of  these  animals  dies  (a  natural  death),  say  a  goose
or  a  peacock!  Well,  said  Axius,  what  does  it  matter
if  you  eat  birds  or  fishes  that  have  died,  seeing  that
you  never  eat  them  except  when  dead?  But  please
set  me  now  in  the  way  of  the  scientific  practice  of
the  art,  and  expound  its  scope  and  method.


CHAPTER  III

OF  ANIMALS  FED  WITHIN  THE  VILLA

I  Merula  began  without  demur.

In  the  first  place  the  owner  should  have  a  know-
ledge of  those  things  which  can  be  reared  and  fed
in  and  about  a  villa  with  a  view  to  the  master's
profit  or  pleasure.  Of  this  art  there  are  three  sec-
tions, concerned  respectively  with  aviaries,  warrens,'

^  Leporaria.  Gellius  (ii,  20),  who  quotes  this  passage,  says
that  in  his  own  time  they  were  commonly  called  vivaria — "a
word  which  has  not  the  support  of  any  ancient  writer";  in
Scipio's.  roboraria,  from  the  oaken  planks  with  which  they
were  fenced.

S


258  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

and  fish-ponds.  The  word  "aviary,"  in  the  sense
in  which  I  now  use  it,  covers  all  winged  things
which  are  fed  within  the  walls  of  the  villa.  "Warren"

2  I  want  you  to  understand  not  in  the  sense  our
grandsires  used  the  word — as  a  place  in  which  were
only  hares  ^ — but  as  any  enclosure  attached  to  the
villa  which  contains  shut  up  in  it  animals  to  be  fed.
In  the  same  way  I  mean  by  fish-pond  any  pond,  be
the  water  fresh  or  salt,  which  has  fish  confined  in  it

3  close  to  the  villa.  Each  class  of  the  things  men-
tioned may  be  subdivided  into  at  least  two  divi-
sions: those  animals  which  are  content  with  dry
land  alone — peacocks  for  example,  together  with
doves  and  fieldfares — belong  to  the  first,  while
under  the  second  division  come  those  for  which  dry
land  alone  is  insufficient,  as  they  need  water  as  well ;
such  as  geese,  teal,  and  ducks.  In  the  same  way
the  second  division  I  mentioned  above  as  connected
with  hunting,  has  two  separate  classes,  the  one  in-
cluding wild  boars,  roes,  and  hares,  the  other,
animals  which  are  also  without  the  villa,  such  as

4  bees,  snails,  and  dormice.  Similarly  the  third  class
of  aquatic  creatures  has  two  divisions,  for  men  keep
fishes,  some  in  sea- water,  and  some  in  fresh.

Now  with  regard  to  these  six  divisions:  you  must
get  three  kinds  of  craftsmen  corresponding  with  the
three  classes  I  mentioned  to  you  just  now,  namely,
fowlers,  hunters,  and  anglers,  or  else  you  must  buy
from  them  animals  which  may  be  committed  to  the

*  Soli  Icporcs.  Cf.  iii,  12,  6,  where  tlie  word  includes
cuniculi,  rabbits.


Ill]  OF  VILLA-BRED  STOCK  259

care  of  your  own  slaves,  and  by  them  looked  after
during  pregnancy  until  the  young  ones  are  born.
These  when  born  will  be  reared  and  fattened  until
they  are  ready  for  the  market.  There  are,  too,  cer-
tain other  animals  which  must  be  added  to  the  villa's
stock,  animals  which  do  not  call  for  the  nets  of
fowlers,  hunters,  or  fishers — such  as  dormice,  snails,
and  hens.

5  Now  of  these  creatures  those  which  are  kept
within  the  precincts  of  the  villa  were  the  first  to
which  men  gave  their  attention — for  in  the  earliest
times  it  was  not  only  the  augurs  who  procured
chickens  in  order  to  take  the  auspices,  but  the  heads
of  families  in  the  country  did  so  as  well.  In  the
second  place  came  those  animals  which,  being  used
for  hunting,  are  enclosed  near  the  villa  by  a  wall,
and  close  to  the  villa  the  bee-hives,  for  bees  origin-
ally were  kept  under  the  eaves '  of  the  farmhouse,
and  had  the  shelter  of  its  roof.  Third  in  order  of
time  were  fresh-water  fish-ponds  which  men  began
to  make  for  the  fishes  that  had  been  caught  in  the

6  rivers.  Each  of  these  classes  has  two  stages,  the
earlier,  which  the  thrift  of  antiquity  adopted,  the
later,  that  elaborated  by  modern  luxury.  For  the
first  stage  was  reflected  in  the  excellent  old-time

'  Sugrutidas  =  yiLaa,  the  projecting  part  of  the  roof.  PHny
(xxv,  13)  speaks  of  the  house-leek,  hypogeson,  so  called  quod  in
suhgrundiis  fere  nascitur.  Cf.  Columella  (ix,  pref. ,  §  2) :  Apibus
quoque  dabatur  sedes  adhuc  nostra  memoria  vel  in  ipsis  villae
parietibus  excisis,  vel  in  protectis  porticibus.  The  -/pwQoi  ^vXivoi
(Mathem.  Vet)  were  projecting  supports.


26o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

practice  of  our  ancestors  which  allowed  but  two
"aviaries,"  namely,  on  the  surface  of  the  ground  a
farmyard  in  which  hens  were  fed — and  their  return
was  eggs  and  chickens — and  above  the  ground  a
second  place  in  which  were  pigeons  in  turrets  or  on
the  roof  of  the  villa.     But  nowadays  aviaries  have

7  changed  their  name,  being  called  "  ornithones,"
and  those  acquired  by  the  modern  epicure  have
buildings  for  lodging  fieldfares  and  peacocks  more
extensive  than  were  entire  villas  in  former  times.

8  Now  with  regard  to  the  second  section — the
warren — your  father,  Axius,  never  in  his  life  saw
anything  as  the  result  of  his  hunting  more  than  a
paltry  hare.  For  the  big  walled-in  enclosure  made
to  hold  wild  boars  and  roes  in  large  numbers  did
not  exist  in  his  time.  While  you,  said  he,  turning
to  me,  when  you  bought  your  estate  at  Tusculum
from  M.  Piso,'  found  wild  boars  in  plenty  in    the

9  warren,  did  you  not?  Touching  the  third  section:
in  ancient  times  did  any  one  dream  of  having  any
but  a  fresh-water  fish-pond,  or  other  fish  in  it  than
"  squali "  and  "mugiles"?  but  now  every  man  of
refined  ^  taste  tells  you  that  he  would  as  soon  keep

^  M.  Piso.  M.  Pupius  Piso  Calpurnianus,  who  was  Consul
in  6i  B.C.  He  is  frequently  mentioned  by  Cicero  as  a  friend
of  the  notorious  Clodius  (Ad  Atticum,  i,  14).  In  the  De  Finibus
(v,  i)  he  is  made  to  champion  the  Peripatetic  doctrine  con-
cernini;^  the  summtan  hontim.

•^  Minlhon.  Keil  substitutes  this  word  for  tlic  rhynton  of
the  Archetype,  and  for  the  meaning-  quotes  Philodemus  of
Gadara,  who  defines  /jivOwv  as  a  supercilious  fop  "  who  looks
down  upon  everybody  and  depreciates  all  whom  he  meets  or


Ill]  OF  VILLA-BRED  STOCK  261

a  pond  full  of  frogs  as  of  these  fishes.  Philippus'
once — the  story  is  familiar — called  upon  his  friend
Ummidius*  at  Casinum,  and  a  fine  lupus^  (pike)

hears  of  even  if  they  be  people  reputed  great,"  etc.  The
word  is  derived  from  fiivQa,  mint.  Cf.  the  muguets  (liHes)  of
the  time  of  Louis  XIV.

'  Philippus.  Probably  L.  Marcius  Philippus  (Cons.  91  B.C.),
whom  Cicero  describes  (De  Orat.,  iii,  i)  as  homini  et  vehementi
et  diserto  et  imprimis  forti  ad  resistendum.  And  again  (Brutus,
47) :  Sed  tamen  erant  ea  in  Philippo  .  .  .  sum?im  libetias  in
oratione,  midtae  facetiae  ...  in  altercando  cum  aliquo  aculeo
et  maledicto  facetus.

^  Ummidius.  Perhaps  the  Uinmidius  of  Horace  (Sat.,  i,
i>  95):

Ummidius  quidam — non  longa  estfahula — dives
Ut  metiretur  num77ios,  ita  sordidus  ut  se
Non  umquam  servo  melius  vestiret  ad  usque
Supremum  tempus,  etc.

There  is  an  inscription  kept  by  the  monks  of  Monte  Cassino
which  sets  forth  that  the  theatre  at  Casinum  (Cassino)  was
built  at  the  expense  of  Ummidia(Quadratilla) — a  lady  described
by  Pliny  (Epist.  vii,  24)  as  being  very  fond  of  "pantomimi."
This  theatre,  in  moderately  good  preservation,  stands  about
300  yards  from  the  poor  remains  of  Varro's  villa.  The
characters  assigned  to  the  two  men  by  Cicero  and  Horace
accord  well  with  Varro's  story.  The  wealthy  miser  gave
Philippus  a  dinner,  and  the  fish  was  the  cheap  lupus  instead
of  the  usual  mullet,  sturgeon,  or  lamprey,  and  Philippus
showed  his  resentment  in  such  a  manner  as  we  should  expect
from  Cicero's  description  of  him.

3  Lupus.  This  fish  was  much  esteemed  by  the  contempor-
aries of  Lucilius.  One  of  them,  in  a  Zolaesque  description  of
the  debauchery  of  the  young  nobles  of  that  time,  gives  an
account  of  their  behaviour  in  Court.  "  He  is  so  drunk  that
he  can  hardly  keep  his  eyes  open,  and,  when  theyjise  for


262  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

taken  from  your  *  river  was  set  before  him.  He
tasted  it,  then  spat  it  out  with  the  remark,  I'll  be
10  hanged  if  I  didn't  think  it  was  fish.  Then  our
generation,  not  content  with  the  extravagant  exten-
sion of  its  warrens,  has  pushed  its  fish-ponds  up  to
the  sea  and  summoned  to  them  swarms  of  deep-sea
fishes.  Was  it  not  from  these  that  Sergius  Orata^
(gold-fish)  and  Licinius  Murena  (lamprey)  got  their
names?  And  who  but  knows — so  famous  are  they —
of  the  fish-ponds  of  Philippus,  Hortensius,  and  the
Luculli?  Well,  Axius,  tell  me,  where  do  you  want
me  to  begin?

discussion,  he  says,  '  What  the  deuce  have  I  to  do  with  these
idiots?  How  much  better  it  would  be  for  us  to  go  and  drink
mulsum  mixed  with  Greek  wine,  and  eat  a  real  fine  lupus
caught  between  the  two  bridges  '  "  (Macrobius,  ii,  12,  end).

Pliny  (xxxii,  2)  says  that  the  lupus  is  not  so  intelligent  as
the  viugil,  "which  knows  that  the  bait  conceals  a  hook,"  but
is  more  vigorous,  for  "when  it  is  hooked  it  dashes  wildly
backwards  and  forwards,  making  the  wound  wider,  until  at
last  the  hook  comes  away."

^  E  tuoflumine.  Cf.  iii,  5,  9:  Cum  habeam  sub  oppido  Casino
fluinen  quod  per  villain  Jluat.  This  was  the  river  Vinius,  now
called  //  Rapido.

-  Sergius  Orata.  Cf.  Columella,  viii,  16,  5:  Velut  ante  de-
victartiin  gentium  Numantinus  et  Isauricus,  itn  Sergius  Orata
et  Licinius  Muraena  captorum  pisciuin  laetabantur  vocabulis.
Sergius  Orata  first  had  hanging  baths,  "  first  laid  down  oyster
beds  at  Baiae,"  etc.  (Macrobius,  ii,  11).


Ill]  OF  BIRDS  IN  GENERAL  263

CHAPTER  IV

OF  BIRDS  IN  GENERAL

1  I,  REPLIED  Axius,  should  like  you  to  begin  with
the  "  post-principia,"  '  as  they  say  in  camp — with
modern  times,  I  mean,  rather  than  with  remoter
ages,  for  more  profit  is  made  out  of  peacocks  than
out  of  hens.  And  what  is  more,  I  will  not  conceal
my  wish  to  hear  first  about  the  "ornithon,"  since
fieldfares  have  made  it  a  term  synonymous  with
"gain,"  for  the  60,000  sesterces  (^480)  of  Fir-
cellia*  have  wonderfully  stimulated  my  desire.

2  Said  Merula:  There  are  two  kinds  of  aviary.
One  (and  it  has  many  admirers)  made  for  pleasure,

'  A  post-prittcipiis.    Cf.  Plautus  (Persa,  iv,  1,4):

Atque  edepol  ferme  ut  quisque  rem  accural  suam

Sic  ei  procedunt  postprincipia  de7iique

Si  malus  aut  nequamst  male  res  vortunt  quas  agit.

And  Gellius  (xvi,  i8) :  Sed  haec,  inquit  M.  Varro,  aul  omnino
non  discimiis  autprius  desistemus  quant  intelligemus  cur discenda
sint.  VoluptcLS  autem  inquit  vel  utilitas  talium  disciplinafum  in
postprincipiis  exsistit  cum  perfectae  absolutaeque  sunt,  in  prin-
cipiis  vero  ipsis  ineptae  et  insuaves  videntur.

Barn-door  fowls  were  the  principia,  peacocks  the  postprin-
cipia. The  word,  used  metaphorically,  is  fairly  common.  Cf.
Cicero  (Pro  Sestio,  55) :  postprincipia  vitiosae  vitae;  but  of  its
use  in  the  literal  sense  1  can  find  no  trace.  It  is  not  noticed
in  Kempf 's  Sermonis  Castrensis  Reliquiae.

^  Fircellina.  Cf.  iii,  2,  15.  Varro's  maternal  aunt  must
therefore  have  been  called  Fircellia.


264  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

such  as  that  of  our  friend  Varro  here,  who  has  buik
one  close  toCasinum;  the  other  for  profit,  to  which
kind  belong  the  enclosures  which  certain  people
who  supply  the  market  possess  in  Rome  and  in  the
country — the  latter  being  generally  let  to  tenants  in
the  Sabine  district,  as  there,  owing  to  the  nature  of
the  soil,^  fieldfares  are  to  be  found  in  large  num-
3  bers.  Lucullus  claimed  that  the  aviary  on  his  Tus-
culan  estate  made  by  combining  these  two  kinds,
formed  a  third  kind.  It  was  built  so  as  to  have  in
the  same  building — in  the  "ornithon,"  that  is —
a  dining-room,  where  he  could  dine  delicately  and
see  fieldfares,  some  lying  cooked  in  the  dish,  whilst
others  fluttered  about  the  windows  of  their  prison.
But  the  experiment  failed  because  the  sight  of  birds
fluttering  on  the  inside  of  windows  does  not  please
the  eye  as  much  as  the  disagreeable  smell  which
fills  one's  nostrils  offends  the  nose.


CHAPTER   V

OF  FIELDFARES

I  However,  Axius,  as  I  think  you  prefer  it  so,  I
will  first  discuss  the  aviary  built  for  profit,  whence,
not  where, ^fatted  fieldfares  are  taken.   Well,  a  large

^  Affri  naturam.  The  countr)'  about  Casinum  abounded  in
olive  plantations,  and  fieldfares  are  verj^  fond  of  olives.

^  Unde  non  ubi.  I  have  translated  Varro's  play  upon  words
literally.     He  means,  of  course,  that  he  will  describe  the  kind


Ill]  OF  FIELDFARES  265

domed  building,  a  peristyle/  as  it  were,  covered
with  tiles  or  net,  is  constructed,  in  which  several
thousands  of  fieldfares  and  blackbirds  may  be  en-
2  closed,  though  some  people  add  to  them  other  birds
as  well,  which,  when  fattened,  fetch  a  good  price,
such  as  ortolans^  and  quails.  Into  this  building
water  should  be  brought  by  means  of  a  pipe,  and
it  had  better  then  flow  slowly  along  narrow  troughs
such  as  can  easily  be  cleaned  out  (for  if  the  water
spreads  over  a  large  area  it  is  more  easily  fouled
and  it  is  not  so  good  to  drink),  and  the  over-
flow ^  from  these  should  be  taken  off  by  a  pipe,  lest

of  aviary  from  which  birds  are  taken  (sumuntur)  to  the  market,
not  that  of  Lucullus,  in  which  they  are  eaten  {sumuntur —
consuviuntur).

^  Ut  peristylum.  Keil  thinks  the  text  sound  here,  Schneider
proposes  aut,  and  remarks  that  a  testudo^  the  essential  part  of
which  was  its  dome,  would  need  neither  tiles  nor  net.

^  Miliariac.  Cf.  Varro,  L.  L. ,  v,  ii  :  Ficedulae  et  miliariae
a  cibo  quod  alterae  fico  alterae  milio  fiant  pingues.  The  Greek
word  Ktyxpoq  means  "millet,"  and  tceyxp^s  seems  to  be  the
"ortolan."

^  Caduca.  Keil  quotes  here  Fronto  (De  Aquis,  ii,  94),  to
show  that  aqua  caduca  was  a  technical  phrase  to  indicate  the
overflow  from  a  tank  or  the  droppings  from  a  pipe,  and  goes
on  to  remark  :  Ex  quibus  apud  Varronem  dilucidafit  verborum
coniunctio,  in  qua  inlerpretes  haeserunf.  But  I  cannot  see  how
this  gets  over  the  difficulty  perceived  by  Ursinus  and  Schneider.

The  water  goes  in  by  a  pipe,  is  distributed  along  several
small  runnels  or  troughs  (cana/es)  which  converge  at  the
further  end  of  the  aviary  to  another  pipe  by  which  it  flows  out
(exti) — so  that  there  is  a  continuous  flow  of  fresh  and  clean
water.  This  seems  to  be  the  obvious  meaning.  But  then
what   is   to   be   done   with   the   words  quae  abundat?    How


266  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

3  the  birds  be  harmed  by  the  mud.  The  aviary  should
have  a  door  low  and  narrow,  and  preferably  of  the
kind  called  "coclia"^  (rotating  cage),  such  as  is
usually  found  in  the  amphitheatre  where  bulls
fight.  It  must  have  but  few  windows,  through
which  the  trees  and  birds  outside  cannot  be  seen,
for  the  sight  of  these  and  the  longing  for  them
make  the  imprisoned  birds  pine  away.  The  place
should  have  just  enough  light  to  let  them  see  where
to  perch  and  where  to  find  their  food  and  water.
About  the  doors  and  windows  there  should  be  a
coating  of  smooth  plaster,  that  no  mouse  or  other

4  animal  may  anywhere  enter.  Around  the  walls  of
this  building  on  the  inside  should  be  many  poles

can  water  which  actually  overflows  be  made  to  go  out  per
Jistulam?  So  Ursinus  proposed  to  expunge  these  words  as
being  a  gloss  explicative  of  caduca.  These  removed  the  trans-
lation would  go  smoothly  :  ' '  And  the  falling  water  (running
down  the  gutters)  goes  out  from  them  by  means  of  a  pipe."

Columella's  description  of  the  way  in  which  water  is  sup-
plied to  the  hen-house  is  interesting  (viii,  3,  8) :  Sunt  qui  aut
aqua  replentur  aut  cibo  plumbei  canales,  quos  magis  utiles  esse
ligneos  aut  fictiles  compeHum  est.  Hi  supeipositis  operculis
dauduntur  et  a  lateribus  super  mediam  partem  per  spatia  pal-
7naria  nwdicis  forantur  cam's  ita  ut  avium  capita  possint  ad-
mittere.

'  Quod  cocliavi  appellant,  etc.  I  have  given  Gesner's  inter-
pretation of  this  passage;  Schneider  in  his  index  takes  coclia
to  be  equivalent  to  cataphracta,  i.e.,  a  sort  of  portcullis.  I
have  translated  cavea  amphitheatre  with  Gesner,  but  suspect
the  text.     In  Horace  (A.  P.,  473)  it  means  the  cage  itself:

ac  velut  ursus
Obiecto  caveae  valuit  si  frangere  clatros.


Ill]  OF  FIELDFARES  267

for  the  birds  to  perch  on,  and  also  rods  sloping  to
the  ground  from  the  wall,  with  other  rods  fastened
cross-wise  like  the  rungs  of  a  ladder,  and  resem-
bling the  railings  in  a  theatre.  Water  should  flow
down  to  the  ground  for  them  to  drink,  and  for  food
cakes  should  be  placed  there.  These  cakes  are
mostly  made  of  figs  and  barley  well  mixed  together
and  rolled.  Twenty  days  before  fieldfares  are  wanted
they  are  given  a  more  liberal  diet,  that  is,  more
food  is  set  before  them,  and  the  flour  now  used  is
of  a  finer  quality.  In  this  building  there  should  be
recesses  furnished  with  several  shelves  to  supple-
5  ment  the  perches,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  here
(on  the  shelves)  that  the  bird-keeper^  generally
keeps  on  the  spot  those  birds  which  have  died  in
the  aviary,  so  as  to  account  for  them  to  his  master.
When  those  birds  that  are  fit  are  to  be  removed
[for  sale]  from  this  aviary,  they  must  be  transferred

'  Aviarium.  The  Archetype  has  contra  hie  aviarium,  etc.
Much  has  been  written  about  this  passage  by  Gesner,  Schneider,
Keil — the  latter  indicating  a  supposed  lacuna  in  the  text  by  a
star — so  that  it  is  with  much  distrust  iudicoli  mei  that  I  pro-
pose what  appears  a  very  simple  and  almost  certain  emenda-
tion, namely,  aviarius  instead  of  aviarium.  The  bird-keeper
{aviarius)  will  keep  any  birds  here  that  have  died  until  his
master  sees  them,  etc.  Thus  there  is  a  subject  to  solet,  which
is  badly  wanted,  for  though  with  Varro  there  is  often  an
ellipsis  of  dominies,  I  can  find  no  instance  where  the  word
slave — not  previously  mentioned — must  be  supplied.  So,  too,
there  is  no  need  to  change  the  hie  of  the  Archetype  into  hoc,
there  is  no  lacuna,  and  the  whole  sentence  Is  irreproachable
both  in  sense  and  construction.


268  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

to  a  smaller  one,  which  is  united  to  the  larger  by  a
door,  and  has  more  light.  This  is  called  the
"  Seclusorium."  When  the  owner  has  thus  en-
closed the  number  he  purposes  to  sell  he  kills  them

6  all.  This  is  done  in  secret  and  away  from  the  others
lest  these  seeing  it  should  mope,  and  die  at  a  time
inconvenient  to  the  seller.

Fieldfares  do  not  resemble  other  immigrant  birds
in  breeding  on  the  ground  like  storks,  or  under  the
roof  like  swallows — their  masculine  name  {turdi)
by  the  way  does  not  imply  that  there  are  no  females
amongst  them,  any  more  than  the  feminine  name
for    blackbird    {merula)   prevents    blackbirds  from

7  being  some  of  them  males.  Again,  some  birds  are
migratory,  such  as  swallows  and  cranes;  others,  as
doves  and  hens,  are  indigenous,  and  it  is  to  the
former  immigrant  kind  that  fieldfares  belong,  for
they  fly  across  the  sea  to  Italy  every  year  about  the
autumnal '  equinox,  and  about  the  spring  equinox
fly  back  to  the  same  place  [whence  they  came] ;  so
at  a  different  season  do  turtle-doves  and  quails  in
vast  numbers.    This  fact  is  made  clear  in  the  neigh-

^  Circiter  aequinoctium  aiitumnale,  etc.  This  passage  Is  im-
portant as  fixing  the  meaning  of  the  word  turdus  used  by
Varro,  Horace,  etc.,  as  it  accurately  describes  the  migratory
habit  of  the  turdiis  pilaris  of  Linnaeus — the  fieldfare — which
visits  this  country  in  October,  and  leaves  It  in  May  for  its
northern  breeding  places.

The  fenerator  Alphius  of  Horace's  delightful  second  epode
speaks  of  snaring  turdi  in  the  winter;

Aut  amite  levi  rara  iejtdit  rctia
Turdis  edacibus  dolos.


m]  OF  FIELDFARES  269

bouring  islands  of  Pontiae,'  Palmaria,  and  Panda-
teria,  for  there  on  their  first  flight — when  they  came
that  is — they  stay  a  few  days  to  rest,  and  also  on
crossing  the  sea  on  their  way  back  from  Italy.
;  Said  Appius  to  Axius,  You  have  only  to  put  here
five  thousand  ^  birds,  and  supposing  a  public  feast  or
a  triumph  take  place,  you  have  at  once  the  60,000
sesterces  ^  (;^48o)  you  want,  and  may  then  lend  them
out  at  good  interest.'  Then  turning  to  me  he  said.
Now  tell  us,  please,  about  the  second  kind  of  aviary,
the  one  which,  we  are  told,  you  built  for  your
pleasure  near  Casinum,  by  it  surpassing,  men  say,
not  only  the  original  aviary  of  our  friend  the  in-
ventor, M.   Laenius  Strabo,'  who  was  our  host  at

*  Pontiis.  Palmaria  (Palmarola),  Pontia  with  Sinonia
(Ponza),  and  Pandateria  (Vandotena),  are  small  islands  lying
about  thirty-five  miles  off  the  coasts  of  Latium  and  Campania.

*  Quinque  tnilia,  i.e.,  the  quinque  milia  turdorum  mentioned
in  chap,  ii,  §  15.

*  Sexaginta  milia,  the  sum  mentioned  (iii,  2,  15),  which  took
Axius's  breath  away.

*  In  femes.  Frequent  allusion  is  made  in  this  book  to  the
cupidity  of  Axius.  When  he  hears  of  the  profits  made  out  of
villatica  pastio,  he  is  on  fire  to  learn  the  art  (2,  19);  Merula,
about  to  discuss  aviaries,  says  that  he  will  begin  with  that
which  is  a  source  of  gain,  as  he  knows  Axius  will  prefer  this
(5,  i);  Appius,  after  having  given  the  natural  history  of  bees,
says  that  he  knows  Axius  must  be  bored  to  death,  qtiod  de

fructu  nihil  dixi  (16,  9).

The  point  of  these  allusions,  I  take  it,  lies  in  the  fact  that
Quintus  Axius,  a  Roman  senator,  and  intimate  friend  of  Cicero
(Gellius,  vii,  3,  10),  was  a  money-lender  (cf.  Ad  Atticum,  i,  12,
and  x,  11).

'  M.  Laeni  Strabonis.    Ernesti  in  the  Clavis  thinks  that  this


270  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

Brundisium  and  was  the  first  to  keep  shut  up  in  a
pillared  hall  birds  which  could  be  fed  through  a
net  thrown  over  it,  but  even  the  great  structures  on
Lucullus's  estate  at  Tusculum.
9  You  must  know,  I  replied,  that  near  the  town  of
Casinum  I  have  a  river  flowing  through  my  grounds.
It  is  clear  and  deep,  with  stone  kerbs.  Its  breadth
is  fifty-seven  feet,  so  that  bridges  are  necessary  to
cross  from  one  part  of  the  villa  to  the  other;  its
length  is  950  feet,  and  it  goes  in  a  straight  line  from
an  island  in  the  lower  reach  of  the  river,  where
another  stream  joins  it,  to  the  upper  reach  where  the
10  museum  ^  (place  for  study)  is  situated.     Along  the

is  the  man  who  is  mentioned  by  Cicero  in  his  letter  to  Terentia
(Ad  Div.  xiv,  4)  in  58  B.C.,  who,  despising  the  threats  of
Clodius,  risked  his  Hfe  and  fortune  by  receiving  Cicero  into  his
house  at  Brundisium.  But  in  the  text  is  found  M.  Laenius
Flaccus.

There  is  a  Strabo  mentioned  In  Ad  Atticum,  xii,  17,  who
seems  to  have  been  an  augur.  But  cf.  Pliny  (x,  50):  Aviaria
primus  instituit  inclusis  omnium  ge7ieru7n  avibus  M.  Laelius
(Laenius  ?)  Strabo  Brundisii  equestris  ordinis.  Ex  eo  coepimus
carcere  animalia  coercere  quibtis  Natura  caelum  assigiiavci-at.

^  Ubi  est  Museiun.  Schneider  points  out  the  remarkable
likeness  of  this  villa  of  Varro's  to  Cicero's  at  Arpinum  (cf.  De
Legibus,  ii,  capita  i  and  3).  There  the  river  Fibrenus  is  divided
into  two  streams  by  an  island,  and  this  island  Cicero  describes
as  his  museum.  Nam  illo  loco  libentissime  soleo  uti  sive  quid
viecum  ipse  cogito,  sive  quid  ant  scribo  aut  lego.  One  wonders
if  Varro's  "  museum"  were  the  island  itself,  and  if  one  should
read,  ab  insula  a  Museo,  etc.,  and  regard  Ubi  est  Museum?  as
the  query  of  a  commentator  who  did  not  understand  this!  In
that  case  huius  would  refer  to  the  island,  and  circum  would
have  its  proper  meaning.    Local  tradition  places  "  lo  studio  di


Ill]  OF  FIELDFARES  271

banks  of  the  stream  is  an  uncovered  walk  ten  feet '
broad ;  off  this  walk  and  in  the  direction  of  the  open
ground  is  the  place  where  the  aviary  stands  shut  in
on  two  sides,  right  and  left,  by  high  walls.  Between
these  walls  is  the  site  of  the  aviary,  fashioned  in
the  likeness  of  a  boy's  writing-tablet  with  its  ring'^
at  the  top.  It  measures  in  the  rectangular  part
forty-eight  by  seventy-two  feet;  where  it  is  circular,
at  the  upper  end  of  the  enclosure,  twenty-seven
II  feet.  In  addition,  figuring,  as  it  were,  the  lower
margin  of  the  writing  tablet,  there  is  a  "walk,"
and    connected  with  the  aviary  a.  plumula^  (little

Marco  Varrone  "  not  far  from  the  right  bank  of  the  Rapido
facing  a  little  island  situated  at  the  junction  of  the  two  streams.
So  I  learnt  from  the  village  priest  (il  padre  Benedetto  del  Greco)
who  showed  me  over  the  site  of  Varro's  villa.

^  Denos  surely  must  be  decern.  The  numeral  x  would  stand
for  either,

*  Cum  capitulo.    Cf.  Horace's  frequently-quoted  line  (Sat.  i,

6,74):

Laevo  suspensi  loculos  tabulamque  lacerto

on  which  the  Scholiast:  tabulam,  buxum  in  quo  vteditantur
scrihere.  The  quaad  which  follows,  written  by  Keil  as  one
word,  should  surely  be  two,  qua  ad  capitulujn,  etc.

^  Plumula.  In  this  word  some  of  the  older  commentators
saw  the  pteron  {irTtpov)  of  Pliny  (xxxvi,  5),  or  the  TrnpajfiaTa
(wings)  of  Vitruvius  (iii,  2);  others  thought  that  the  word  was
corrupt  and  concealed  a  number,  thus :  P  Iviii,  that  is  fifty-
eight  feet.  Neither  view  appears  promising.  Perhaps  the  word
represents  some  adjective  agreeing  with  ambulatio,  such  as
proxuma  or  plurima  (of  considerable  extent);  or  stands  for
pluriniae  agreeing  with  caviae,  the  translation  then  being  "a
walk  adjoining  the  aviary  in  the  middle  of  which,  at  the  place


272  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

wing),  in  the  middle  of  which  are  bird-cages  where
the  entrance  to  the  quadrangle  is  placed.  At  the
threshold  and  along  the  sides  right  and  left  colon-
nades are  arranged,  the  front  columns  being  of
stone,  and  instead  of  columns  between  them  and
the  wall  there  are  dwarf  trees,  while  from  the
top  of  the  wall  to  the  architrave  the  colonnade  is
covered  by  a  hempen  net  which  is  continued  also
from  the  architrave  to  the  stylobate.  These  colon-
nades are  filled  with  all  kinds  of  birds  which  are
fed  through  the  net,  and  water  flows  to  them  in  a
12  tiny  stream.  Adjoining  the  inner  side  [i.e.  facing  the
area]  of  the  stylobate  at  the  upper  end  of  the  quad-
rangular space,  two  separate  narrow  oblong  ponds
stretch  from  the  middle  of  the  quadrangle  in  the
direction  of  the  colonnades.  Between  these  ponds
is  a  path,  the  only  means  of  access  to  the  tholus
beyond,  which  is  a  rotunda  supported  by  pillars,  as

where  the  entrance  to  the  quadrangle  stands,  are  many  bird-
cages." I  am  aware  tliat  such  conjectures  without  some  further
support  are  not  valuable ;  but  the  passage  seems  to  need  strong
medicine,  and  the  copyist  has  been  very  careless  throughout
this  description.  For  example,  five  lines  further  down  he  has
artihusculis  for  the  obvious  arbusculis,  and  (lo)  ad  stylobate  for
stylohaten.  In  limine^  too,  I  believe  to  be  an  explanation,  inter-
polated in  the  text,  of  the  previous  clause ;  for,  it  will  be  re-
membered, the  aviary  is  enclosed  by  walls  only  on  two  sides,
so  that  the  arrangement  described  in  lines  6-9  could  not  have
been  in  limine.

This  second  amlmlatio  may  have  been  cither  the  usual
"alley  "  of  clipped  box,  etc.,  or  a  covered  colonnade.  Cf.  Cicero,
Ad  Q.  F. ,  iii :  Ita  omnia  convestit  hedera,  qua  basim  villae  qua
intercolumnia  ambulationis.


Ill]  OF  FIELDFARES  273

is  the  case  with  Catulus's  ^  hall  if  you  put  pillars
instead  of  walls.  Beyond  these  pillars  is  a  wood  of
great  trees  planted  by  hand,  which  admits  light
only  at  the  lower  part,  and  the  whole  is  shut  in  by

13  high  walls.  Between  the  outside  pillars  of  the
domed  building,  which  are  of  stone,  and  the  slender
inside  ones,  the  same  in  number,  which  are  of  fir,  is
a  space  five  feet  in  width.  The  outside  columns  are
joined  together  by  a  net  made  of  gut,  which  serves
as  a  wall,  so  that  it  is  possible  to  look  out  into  the
wood  and  see  what  is  there,  without  a  bird  being
able  to  get  through.  The  inner  pillars  are  connected
by  a  fowling-net  thrown  over  them,  instead  of  a
wall.  Between  the  inner  and  outer  pillars  there  has
been  constructed,  as  it  were,  a  little  bird-theatre,
with  seats  rising  tier  by  tier,  since  on  all  the  pillars
many  brackets  have  been  placed  as  "  seats"  for  the

14  birds.  Within  the  net  are  birds  of  all  kinds,  mostly
songsters,  such  as  nightingales  and  blackbirds,
which  are  served  with  water  by  means  of  a  small
gutter,  while  food  is  thrown  to  them  under  the  net.
Under  the  stylobate  of  the  pillars  is  stone-work  one
foot  nine  inches  high  above  a  platform,^  which  is

^  In  aede  Catuli.  The  poHicus  Catuli  built  de  manubiis  Cim-
hricis  is  well  known  (cf.  Cicero,  Pro  Dom.  Sua,  38) ;  but  I  can
find  no  reference  save  here  to  an  aedes  Catuli.  The  word  aedes,
of  course,  quite  frequently — especially  in  Plautus  and  Livy —
means  "  hall "  as  well  as  "  temple."

2  Falere.  This  word  Is  not  to  be  met  with  except  In  this
chapter.  It  is  connected  by  the  different  commentators  with
(1)  0aXapof  or  <pd\epog,  white;  (2)  Falerii,  a  city  built  on  a  high

T


274  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

itself  two  feet  above  a  pond,  and  five  feet  wide,  so
that  guests  can  walk  round  to  their  cushions  and
the  small  columns/  Lowest  of  all  and  surrounded
by  the  platform  is  a  pond  having  a  margin  a  foot
wide,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  pond  is  a  little
island.  Round  about  the  quay  docks  have  also
15  been  cut  out  as  houses  for  the  ducks.  In  the  island
is  a  small  column  which  has  inside  it  a  vertical  rod
that  supports,  instead  of  a  table,  a  wheel  with
spokes,  and  at  the  circumference  of  the  wheel  where
is  generally  the  curved  felloe  is  a  board  hollowed

rock;  {2)  falerae  or  phalerae  (Keil),  the  breast  ornaments  of
horses  or  men.

May  it  not  be  for  Phalerum?  The  (paXripov,  the  western
harbour  of  Athens,  was  almost  circular  in  form.  The  navalia
{veioaotKOL),  mentioned  later,  would  then  continue  the  metaphor.
I  ought,  perhaps,  to  have  translated  "a  circular  quay."

^  Columellas.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  what  Is  meant  by
these.  Are  they  the  coluvinas  tenues  of  §  13,  or  small  pillars —
not  mentioned  before — which  served  as  tables  for  the  guests?
Keil,  however,  considers  that  all  previous  commentators  have
erred  in  thinking  that  there  were  any  guests  at  all  to  be  fed,
and  holds  that  the  ducks  were  themselves  the  coiivivae.  He
reminds  us  that  Varro  had  already  disapproved  (4,  3)  of
Lucullus's  practice  of  having  a  dining-room  in  the  aviary.
But  what  need  had  ducks  of  culcitae?  Why  the  elaborate
arrangement  described  for  providing  drink  {ad  bibetidum)  as
well  as  food  if  It  was  for  ducks  which  swam  In  a  pond?  And
why  have  hot  water  laid  on  for  them?  The  aviarv  was  built
for  pleasure  {animi  causa),  and  to  it  Varro,  no  doubt,  often
took  his  guests,  and  when  they  were  lliere  gave  them,  not
indeed  a  cena,  but  perhaps  a  cold  lunch  laid  out  on  the  rotating
table.  The  hot  and  cold  water  was  of  course  to  mix  with  their
wine  and  to  cleanse  their  hands  after  eating.


Ill]  OF  FIELDFARES  275

out  like  a  tambourine,  two-and-a-half  feet  wide  and
four  inches  deep.  It  can  be  turned  by  a  single
serving-man,  and  on  it  all  the  things  to  eat  and
drink  can  be  set  at  the  same  time  and  moved  round

16  to  each  guest.  From  the  side  of  the  quay  where  the
coverlets  '  are  usually  found  the  ducks  walk  into  the
pond  and  swim  about  in  it.  The  pond  is  connected
with  the  two  fish-ponds  I  mentioned  by  a  stream,
and  little  fishes  swim  constantly  backwards  and
forwards,  while  from  the  circular  board  forming  the
table,  which,  as  I  said,  is  at  the  ends  of  the  spokes,
hot  and  cold  water  is  made  to  flow  to  each  guest  by

17  the  turning  of  different  taps.  Inside,  under  the
dome,  the  morning  star"  by  day,  the  evening  star

^  Ubi  Solent  esse  peripetasmata.  This  is  said  in  precisely  the
same  way  as  the  uhi  orbile  solet  esse  above,  and  does  not  mean
that  peripetasmata  were  actually  allowed  to  hang  down.  The
falere  evidently  served  as  the  lectus  of  the  guests,  and  the  sug-
gestum  faleris ,  the  side  facing  the  pond,  corresponded  with  the
space  under  the  seat  of  the  lectus  "where  the  peripetasmata
usually  hang."  These  were  the  same  as  the  better  known
vestes  stragulae — richly  embroidered  coverlets  which  were
spread  over  the  couches  and  hung  down  from  them  to  the
floor.

The  rotating  table  was,  I  imagine,  a  foot  or  so  above  the
level  of  the  falere  not  interrupting  the  view  of  the  pond,  so
that  Varro's  guests  might  sit  or  recline  in  comfort  while  en-
joying the  bird  concert,  watching  the  ducks  and  fishes  in  the
pond,  and  eating  their  luncheon.

^  Lucifer  interdiu.  Lucifer  and  Hesperus,  as  of  course
Varro  knew,  were  different  names  for  the  same  star  Venus.
Cf.  Pliny  (ii,  8) :  Infra  solem  ambit  ingens  sidus,  appellatum
Veneris.  .  .  .  Praeveniens  quippe  et  ante  matutinum  exortens,


276  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

by  night,  move  round  the  lower  part  of  the  hemi-
sphere in  such  a  way  as  to  indicate  the  hour.  In  the
middle  of  the  same  hemisphere,  which  has  a  spindle
in  the  centre,  is  painted  the  cycle  of  the  eight
winds,  like  the  horologium  ^  at  Athens  made  by  the
Cyrrestian,  and  projecting  from  the  spindle  a  pointer
so  moves  to  the  circle  as  to  touch  the  sign  of  what-
ever wind  is  blowing  at  the  time,  so  that  any  one
inside  can  tell.
1 8  As  we  were  saying  this,  shouting  was  heard  in
the  Campus.  We  who  were  old  hands  at  electioneer-
ing were  not  surprised,  knowing  how  excited  voters

Luciferi  nomen  accipit,  ut  sol  alter  diem  maturans:  contra  ah
occasu  refulgens  nuncupatur  Vesper,  etc.

I  believe,  with  Schneider,  that  here  are  meant  certain  images
which  moved  round  the  lower  part  of  the  tholus  where  the
hours  were  marked,  and  that  they  were  actuated  by  some
such  clepsydra  as  that  described  by  Vitruvius  (ix,  9)  under  the
name  of  w/soXoyiov  vSpavXiKov — a  complicated  arrangement  of
wheels  and  water.  Clepsydrae,  which  indicated  the  hour  at
night,  as  well  as  by  day,  were  common  in  Rome  after  159  B.C.

'■  Horologium.  This  was  an  octagonal  tower  made  of  marble
which  contained  a  clepsydra  that  gave  the  hour  of  the  day  or
night.  Each  of  the  eight  sides  of  the  tower  corresponded  to
the  direction  from  which  one  of  the  eight  winds  blew,  and
had  engraved  on  the  frieze  a  picture  of  that  wind.  At  the
summit  of  the  sloping  roof  there  was  the  figure  of  a  Triton
holding  in  his  hand  a  rod  with  which  he  pointed  to  the  picture
of  the  wind  which  was  blowing  at  the  time.  This  tower  was
built  by  Andronicus  of  Cyrrhus  about  the  middle  of  the  first
century  B.C.,  and  is  still  to  be  seen  at  Athens.  There  is  a
good  engraving  of  it  in  SeyfTert's  (Sandys  and  Nettleship)
"  Dictionary  of  Classical  Antiquities,"  p.  648,  and  a  careful
description  of  it  in  Vitruvius,  i,  b.


Ill]  OF  PEACOCKS  277

get  on  these  occasions,  but  still  we  wanted  to  know
what  it  meant,  whereupon  Pantuleius  Parra  ^  came
to  us  with  the  news  that  while  they  were  checking
the  votes  at  the  table  some  one  had  been  caught
throwing  voting  tablets  into  a  ballot-box,'  and
had  been  haled  before  the  Consul  by  the  supporters
of  the  rival  candidates.  Pavo  got  up,  for  it  was  said
that  the  man  caught  was  the  person  who  had  been
put  in  charge  of  his  candidate's  ballot-box.


CHAPTER  VI

OF  PEACOCKS

I  Axius  remarked  on  this:    Now  that  Fircellius  has
gone  you  may  speak  freely  about  peacocks,  for  had

^  Parra.    A  bird  of  evil  omen.    Cf.  Horace  (Odes,  iii,  27,  i) :
Impios  parrae  recinentis  omen
Ducat  et  praegnans  cants  .  .  .

and  the  Eugubine  Tables  (beginning).

^  In  loculum.  For  the  more  common  cistam.  It  is  inter-
esting to  find  that  in  this  year,  54  B.C.,  a  determined  effort
was  made  by  Cato  to  check  bribery  at  elections,  and  Plutarch
(Life  of  Cato,  about  the  middle)  tells  us  that  he  greatly  em-
barrassed the  candidates,  so  much  so  that  "  they  decided  to
deposit  500  sestertia  (cf.  Cicero,  Ad  Att.,  iv,  15,  which  fixes  the
date)  each,  and  then  to  canvass  in  a  fair  and  legal  manner.
If  any  one  were  convicted  of  bribery  he  was  to  forfeit  his
deposit."  A  few  paragraphs  further  on  he  writes:  "This
Favonius  stood  for  the  office  of  Aedile  and  apparently  lost  It ;
but  Cato  upon  examining  the  votes,  and  finding  several  of


278  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

you  said  anything  disrespectful  ^  of  them  in  his
presence  he  would  probably  have  had  a  bone^  to
pick  with  you  for  the  honour  of  his  clan.  To  him
Merula  answered:  As  to  peacocks,  why  I  remember
the  time  when  people  first  began  to  keep  flocks  of
them  and  sell  them  at  a  big  price.  M.  Aufidius
Lurco  '  is  said  to  make  more  than  60,000  sesterces
(;^48o)  a  year  out  of  these  birds.

If  profit  be  your  object  there  should  be  consider-
ably fewer  cocks  than  hens,  if  pleasure,  it  is  the
other  way  about,  for  the  cock  is  the  handsomer  of
the  two.

They  should  be  fed  on  the  farm  in  flocks.  It  is
said  that  beyond  the  sea  they  are  reared  on  islands,
as,  for  instance,  at  Samos  in  the  grove  of  Juno,  and
on  Planasia, '  an  island  which  belongs  to  M.  Piso.

them  inscribed  in  the  same  hand-writing,  appealed  against
the  fraud,  and  the  tribunes  set  aside  the  election."

It  looks  very  much  as  though  the  fraud  mentioned  by
Plutarch  were  the  same  as  that  alluded  to  in  Varro's  text.

^  Secus  here  =  male,  a  not  uncommon  use,  especially  in  Sallust.

^  Serram.  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  suspect  the  text,
as  Scaliger  and  others  have  done.  Quarrelsome  altercation
is  well  expressed  by  the  metaphor  of  the  two-handed  saw.
Tertullian  (De  Corona,  2)  has:  Et  quamdiu  per  hanc  lineam
serram  reciprocabimus?

^  M.  Aufidius  Lurco.  Cf.  Pliny  (x,  20):  "The  first  to  kill
a  peacock  for  the  table  was  the  orator  Hortensius  on  the
occasion  of  an  inaugural  dinner  of  the  Pontifices;  to  fatten
peacocks,  M.  Aufidius  Lurco  about  the  close  of  the  war  against
the  Pirates  (67  B.C.).  From  this  source  he  made  an  income
of  60,000  sesterces."

'  Planasia.     Now   Pianosa,   a   small    island   about   twenty


Ill]  OF  PEACOCKS  279

To  form  a  flock  birds  of  good  age  and  shape
are  bought,  for  to  this  creature  nature  has  given
the  palm  for  shapeHness  and  beauty  over  all  other
winged  things.  Pea-hens  under  two '  years  old  are
no  use  for  breeding,  and  they  cease  to  be  so  when

3  too  old.  They  eat  any  kind  of  grain  given  them,
with  a  preference  for  barley.  Seius  gives  them  a
modius  (peck)  of  barley  each  per  month,  taking
care,  however,  to  increase  the  allowance  (for  the
cock  birds)  at  the  breeding  season  before  copula-
tion begins.  He  expects  his  keeper  to  produce
three  chicks  to  each  pea-hen,  and  for  each  chicken
when  grown  he  gets  50  denarii'  (^i  12^-.),  so  that

4  no  bird  is  so  profitable  as  the  peacock.  He  also
buys  eggs  and  puts  them  under  hens,  and  the
chickens  that  are  hatched  he  takes  from  them  and
puts  in  the  domed  building^  where  he  keeps  his

miles  due  south  of  Elba.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  11,  i):  Itaque
hoc  genus  alitum  nemorosis  et  parvulis  insulis,  quales  ohiacent
Italiae  facillime  continetiir.  Nam  quoniavi  nee  suhlimiter potest
nee  per  longa  spatia  voHtare,  turn  etiain  quia  furis  ac  noxiorum
animalium  rapinae  metus  non  est  sine  custode  lata  vagatur
-maioremque  pahuli partem  sibi  acquirit.

'  Bimae  should  almost  certainly  be  tritnae,  for,  as  Schneider
points  out,  Aristotle,  Columella,  Pliny,  Aelian,  and  the  Geo-
ponica  all  fix  three  years  as  the  earliest  age  at  which  pea-hens
begin  to  lay,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  modern  experience.

-  Quinquagenis  denariis.  Fifty  denarii  =  100  sesterces  =
about  ,;^i  \2s.

^  Testudineni.  For  an  interesting  and  detailed  account  of
the  "peacock-house"  cf.  Columella,  viii,  11,  3.  In  this  he
states  that  separate  pens  must  be  made,  one  for  each  cock-
bird  and  the  five  hens  assigned  to  him.


28o  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

peacocks.  This  building  should  be  made  of  a
size  proportionate  to  the  number  of  peacocks  kept
in  it,  and  should  have  separate  sleeping  places
having  a  smooth  coating  of  plaster  to  prevent  any

5  serpent  or  other  animal  from  getting  in.  It  should
also  have  a  space  in  front  of  it,  where  the  chickens
may  go  out  to  be  fed  on  sunny  days.  These  birds
require  both  places  to  be  clean ;  and  so  their  keeper
must  go  round  with  a  shovel  and  remove  the
droppings,  which  he  will  keep  carefully,  as  they
are  useful  for  tillage  and  as  litter  for  the  chickens.

6  It  is  said  that  these  birds  first  appeared  on  the  table
at  a  dinner-party  given  by  Q.  Hortensius  to  cele-
brate his  election  as  augur,  an  extravagance  which
was  at  that  time  commended  only  by  the  luxurious,
not  by  men  of  virtue  and  prudence.  His  example
was  speedily  followed  by  many,  and  the  price  paid
for  them  went  up  in  consequence,  so  that  their  eggs
sell  now  for  5  denarii  ^  (3^.  ;^d.)  apiece,  while  the
birds  themselves  fetch  without  difficulty  50  denarii
(;^i  12s.)  a  head,  and  a  flock  of  one  hundred  easily
makes  40,000  sesterces  (;^32o),  and  Abuccius  indeed
used  to  say  that  by  requiring  three  chickens  to
each  hen,  60,000  sesterces  (^480)  might  be  made.

'  Denariis  quinis.  Macrobius  (ii,  9),  writing  about  the  be-
ginning of  the  fifth  century  a.d.,  quotes  this  passage,  adding:
Ecce  res  non  admiranda  solum  sed  etiam  pudenda  ut  ova  pav-
onum  quinis  denariis  veneant;  quae  hodie  non  dicam  vilius  sed
ovinino  non  veneunt.

The  sum  of  bo.ooo  sesterces  is  made  up  thus  :  100  hens  pro-
duce 300  chickens,  which  fetch  each  50  denarii  or  200  sesterces  ;
300  X  200  =  60,000.


Ill]  OF  PIGEONS  281


CHAPTER  VII

OF  PIGEONS

1  Meanwhile  Appius's  servant  came  from  the
Consul,  and  said  that  the  augurs  were  wanted.
Appius  went  out  from  the  Hall,  and  at  that
moment  there  fluttered  into  it  a  flock  of  pigeons,
giving  Merula  occasion  to  say  to  Axius:  Now
if  ever  you  had  set  up  a  pigeon-house,  you
might  have  imagined  these  birds  to  be  yours,  wild
though  they  are.  For  in  a  pigeon-house  there  are
usually  the  two  kinds,  one  wild  pigeons,  or  rock-
pigeons  as  some  call  them,  kept  in  turrets  and
gable-ends  {coliimen)  of  the  farmstead — it  is  from
columen  they  get  the  name  columbae — and  seek-
ing the  highest  places  on  buildings  through  their
inborn  timidity.  Hence  the  wild  kind  mostly  haunt
turrets,  flying  up  to  them  from  the  fields  and  back

2  again  as  the  fancy  takes  them.  The  other  kind  of
pigeon  is  less  shy,  for  it  feeds  contentedly  at  home
about  the  doorstep.  This  is  generally  white,'  while
the  other,  the  wild  kind,  is  of  different  colours,  but
not  white.     From  the  union   of  these   two   stocks

'  Colore  albo.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  8,  9):  "The  white  kind,
which  is  commonly  seen  everywhere,  is  not  much  approved
of  by  some  people,  thoug^h  the  colour  is  well  enough  for
pigeons  which  are  kept  in  confinement.  For  those  which  fly
about  freely  it  is  the  worst  possible,  as  it  is  most  easily  espied
by  the  hawk."


282  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

comes  a  third  mongrel  kind  which  is  bred  for  profit.
These  are  put  into  a  place  called  by  some  a  per-
isteron,  by  others  a  peristerotrophion^  in  which
often  as  many  as  five  thousand  birds  are  confined.

3  The  peristeron  is  built  in  the  shape  of  a  large
testudo  with  a  vaulted  roof.  It  has  a  narrow  en-
trance and  windows  latticed  in  the  Carthaginian  ^
fashion,  or  wider  than  these  are  and  furnished
with  a  double  trellis,  so  that  the  whole  place  may
be  well  lit  and  no  snake  or  other  noxious  animal
may  be  able  to  get  in.  Inside  every  part  of  the
walls  and  ceilings  is  coated  with  the  smoothest
possible  cement  made  from  marble;  outside,  too,
the  walls  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  windows  are
plastered  over  to  prevent  a  mouse  or  a  lizard  creep-
ing by  any  way  into  the  pigeon  cotes.    For  nothing

4  is  more  timid  than  a  pigeon.  Many  round  niches^
are  made  in  a  row,  one  for  each  pair  of  pigeons,
and  there  should  be  as  many  rows  as  possible  from
ground  to  ceilinor.  Each  niche  should  be  made  so
that  the  pigeon  may  have  an  opening  just  big
enough  for  it  to  come  in  and  out,  and  should  have
an  inside  diameter  of  three  palms  (one  foot).  Under
each   row    of   pigeon-holes    a    shelf,    eight   inches

'  Punicanis.  The  Carthaginians  gave  their  name  to  many
things  made  of  wood,  as  for  example  the  pJostcUum  Poenicum
(Varro,  i,  52,  i),  the  lectus  Punicayius  (Isidore,  xx,  11),  Puni-
cana  coagvienta  (Cato,  xviii,  2),  etc.

^  Columbaria.  The  writer  of  the  article  "Pigeon"  in  the
"  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  after  criticizing  severely  modern
dove-cotes,  in  his  description  of  the  properly  constructed  pigeon-
house  unconsciously  plagiarizes  from  Varro.


Ill]  OF  PIGEONS  283

broad,   should  be  attached  to  the  wall,  which  the
birds  can  use  as  a  landing-,  and  walk  on  to  it  when

5  they  like.  There  should  be  water  flowing  ^  in  for
their  drinking  and  washing,  for  pigeons  are  very
clean  birds.  The  pigeon-keeper  should,  therefore,
sweep  the  place  out  several  times  a  month,  as  the
dirt  made  there  is  an  excellent  manure,  so  much
so  that  some  authors  speak  of  it  as  the  best  of  all.
If  any  pigeon  has  come  to  any  harm  the  keeper
must  look  after  it,  if  one  has  died  he  must  remove  it,
and  if  any  young  birds  are  fit  for  sale  he  must  bring

6  them  out.  He  must  also  have  a  fixed  place,  which
is  shut "  off  from  the  others  by  a  net,  to  which  the
hen-birds  that  are  sitting  may  be  transferred,  and

^  Quae  influat.  The  reading-  of  the  Archetype  is  quo  influat,
which  is  supported  by  the  Geoponica  (xiv,  6):  "A  fairly  large
bathing  place  should  be  dug  in  the  pigeon-house  for  the  birds
to  bathe  and  drink  in,  so  that  the  keeper  may  not  have  to
disturb  the  birds  frequently  in  order  to  give  them  water."
Columella,  however  (viii,  8,  5),  says  that  "the  drinking  ves-
sels should  be  similar  to  those  used  for  hens,  should  admit
only  the  necks  of  the  birds,  and  should  be  too  narrow  to  allow
of  their  bathing,  which  is  bad  for  the  eggs  or  chickens  on
which  they  are  sitting."

^  Dischisum  ah  aliis.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  8,  4):  "On  the
outside,  too,  the  walls  should  have  a  coating  of  smooth
plaster — especially  about  the  window.  This  must  be  so  situ-
ated as  to  admit  the  sunlight  for  the  greater  part  of  the
winter's  day,  and  it  should  have  appended  to  It  a  fairly  large
house  protected  by  nets  in  order  to  keep  out  the  hawks,  to
admit  the  pigeons  that  are  going  out  to  sun  themselves,  and
to  let  the  mother  birds,  sitting  on  eggs  or  chickens,  out  to
the  fields,  lest  saddened  by  the  slavery  of  continuous  confine-
ment they  fall  sick.    When  they  have  flown  about  the  build-


284  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

it  must  be  possible  for  the  mothers  to  fly  out  of  it
away  from  the  pigeon-cote.  For  this  there  are  two
reasons:  (i)  because,  in  case  they  are  losing  appe-
tite and  are  growing  feeble  in  captivity,  a  flight  into
the  country  and  the  free  air  brings  back  their
strength;  (2)  because,  they  act  as  a  decoy; '  for  they
themselves  in  any  case  come  back  to  the  pigeon-
cote  because  of  their  young  ones,  unless  they  are
killed  by  a  crow  or  caught  by  a  hawk.    These  latter

7  pigeon-keepers  generally  kill  by  means  of  two  limed
twigs,  which  are  stuck  in  the  ground  and  then  bent
so  as  to  touch  each  other.  An  animal  of  the  kind
on  which  hawks  prey  is  then  tied  between  them,
and  so,  smearing  themselves  with  the  birdlime  they
are  beguiled.  That  pigeons  do  return  to  a  place  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  people  often  let  them  fly
from  their  laps  in  the  theatre,  and  they  return
home,  and  unless  they  did  so  they  would  never  be

8  let  loose.  Food  is  given  them  in  sm.all  troughs
placed  round  the  walls,  which  are  filled  from  out-
side by  means  of  pipes.  They  are  fond  of  millet,
wheat,  barley,  peas,  kidney-beans,  and  vetch.  Much
the  same  methods  must  be  adopted — as  far  as  pos-
sible— by  those  who  keep  wild  pigeons  in  turrets
and  on  the  roof  of  the  farmhouse.

ings  for  a  little  while  they  come  back  cheered  and  refreshed
to  their  young  ones."

'  Propter  inlicium.  The  Geoponica  (xiv,  3)  state  that  if  you
anoint  your  pigeons  with  myrrh,  or  add  cummin  or  old  wine
to 'their  food,  "all  the  neighbouring  pigeons  noticing  the
sweetness  of  their  breath  will  come  to  your  dove-cote."


Ill]  OF  PIGEONS  285

For  your  pigeon-house  you  must  get  birds  of  the
right  age — not  young  chicks  and  not  old  hens — and

9  as  many  cocks  as  hens.  Nothing  is  more  proHfic
than  the  pigeon.  Thus  within  the  space  of  forty  days
a  hen-bird  conceives,  lays,  hatches,  and  rears  its
young.  And  this  is  continued  all  the  year  round,'
the  only  interval  being  from  the  winter  solstice  to
the  spring  equinox.  They  have  two  young  ones  at
a  time,  and  when  they  have  grown  up  and  come  to
their  strength  these  go  on  breeding  at  the  same
time  as  their  mothers.  Those  who  fatten  young
pigeons  to  increase  their  market  value  keep  them
apart  from  the  others  as  soon  as  they  are  covered
with  down.  Then  they  stuff  them  with  chewed'
white  bread;    in   winter  twice    a    day,    in  summer

10  three  times,  morning,  noon,  and  evening;  in  winter
the  middle  meal  being  cut  off.  Those  which  are
beginning  to  get  their  wing  feathers  have  their
legs  broken,'  and,  left  in  the  nest,  are  given  over
to  their  mother's  care,  for  so  she  feeds  them  and

'  Toiu7U  annum.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  8,  9) :  Nam  et  ociies
anno  pullos  educat  si  est  bo7ia  matrix.

-  Manducato.  From  a  curious  passage  in  Columella  (viii,
10,  4)  it  appears  that  men  were  hired  to  do  this  chewing,  and
that  they  got  a  good  price  for  the  work.  Hanc  quidam  man-
dunt  et  ita  ohiciunt.  Sed  istud  in  maiore  numero  facere  vix
expedit,  quia  nee  parvo  conducuntur  qui  mandant  et  ah  lis
ipsis  aliqtiantum  propter  iucunditatem  (he  is  speaking  of  a
mixture  of  figs  and  flour)  consumitur.

3  Inlisis  cruribus.  Columella  (viii,  8,  12)  repeats  this,  add-
ing: "the  broken  legs  cause  them  pain  for  not  more  than
two  days  or  at  most  three  "  !


286  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

herself  all  day  long.  Birds  thus  reared  fatten  more
quickly  than  others,  and  the  mother  birds  become
white.'

At  Rome  if  a  pair  are  handsome,  of  good  colour,
without  blemish,  and  of  a  good  breed,  they  sell
quite  commonly  for  200  sesterces  (;^i  12s.),  while
a  pair  of  exceptional  merit  will  fetch  1,000  sesterces
(;^8)."  Lately,  when  a  trader  wanted  to  buy  them  at
that  price  from  L.  Axius,  a  Roman  eques,  the  latter
refused  to  part  with  them  for  less  than  400  denarii
II  (12  guineas).  Said  Axius:  If  I  could  have  bought
a  ready-made  pigeon-house  just  as  I  bought  earth-
enware pigeon  boxes  when  I  wanted  them  at  my
house,  I  should  by  this  time  have  gone  to  buy  it
and  have  sent  it  on  to  my  villa.  Just  as  though,
said  Pica,  there  were  not  at  this  moment  plenty  of
pigeon-houses  in  Rome  as  well  as  in  the  country!
Or  do  you  "^  consider  that  people  who  have  dove-

^  Candidae.  One  does  not  see  why  abundant  food  and
assiduous  care  of  their  young  should  make  the  parent  birds
white !  Schneider  conjectured  gi-andiores  instead  of  the  can-
didiores  of  the  ante-Victorian  editions.

^  Singulis  milibus.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  8,  9) :  "As  Marcus
Varro,  a  great  authority,  assures  us,  for  he  states  that  even
in  those  less  luxurious  times  a  pair  frequently  fetched  a
thousand  sesterces."

^  Tibe.  The  reading  found  in  all  the  IMSS.  The  forms
libe  (older  tibei),  sibc,  are  common  in  inscriptions  of  Varro's
time.  Cf.  Lex  Rubria,  49  B.C.,  etc.  Quinlilian  (i,  7,  24)  says:
Sibe  et  quase  in  multormn  libris  est ;  sed  an  hoc  voluerint
auctores  nescio.  T.  Liviutn  ita  his  usum  ex  Pediano  coinperi
qui  et  ipse  cum  sequcbatur ;  hacc  nos  i  lift  era  finimus.


Ill]  OF  TURTLE-DOVES  287

cotes  on  the  tiles  ^  do  not  possess  pigeon  houses,
though  some  of  these  have  a  plant  worth  more  than
100,000  sesterces  (^800)?  Now  I  should  advise  you
to  buy  the  whole  plant  belonging  to  one  of  them,
and  before  building"  in  the  country  to  learn
thoroughly  here  in  Rome  how  to  pocket  the  big
gain  of  fifty  per  cent.''  every  day.  Now,  Merula,
will  you  go  on  to  the  next  subject?


CHAPTER  VIII

OF  TURTLE-DOVES

Said  he:  For  turtle-doves,  as  for  pigeons,  you
must  build  a  place  of  a  size  proportionate  to  the
number  of  birds  you  m.ean  to  rear,  and  it,  too,  as
we  said  when  speaking  of  pigeons,  must  have  an
entrance,  windows,  pure  water,  and  walls  and  ceil-
ings protected  with  plaster;  but  instead  of  pigeon-
holes '  along  the  wall,  shelves  or  poles  placed  in  a

'  In  tegulu.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  11,  3):  Fiunt  artindinea
septa  in  inodum  caveamm  qualia  columbaria  tectis  superpon-
untur.

'"  Aedificas  does  not  seem  to  be  Latin ;  aedifices  should  be
read,

^  Assem  semissem.  Victorlus  (p.  120)  says  in  regard  to  this
passage:  Antiquoruin  librorum  lectio.  In  excusis  ^'  Ex  asse
semissem"  antea  legebatur.  This  would  mean  "  the  big  profit
of  50  per  cent,  a  day."

'  Pro  columbariis.  Because  the  turtle-dove  did  not  breed  in
captivity.    Cf.  Columella  (viii,  9,  i):   Turturum  educatio  super-


288  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

row,  on  which  little  mats  made  of  hemp  are  placed.
The  lowest  row  should  not  be  less  than  three  feet
from  the  ground,  between  the  other  rows  there
should  be  nine  inches,  and  between  the  top  row
and  the  ceiling  six  inches;  the  row  should  be  of  the
breadth  the  shelf  can  be  made  to  project  from  the
wall,  and  upon  these  shelves  the  birds  feed  '  day  and
night.  For  food  they  are  given  dry  wheat,  about
half  a  peck  a  day  for  every  120  turtle-doves.  Their
quarters  are  swept  out  daily  lest  they  suffer  harm
from  the  dung,"  which  is,  moreover,  kept  for  tillage.
The  best  time  for  fattening  them  is  near  the  time  ol
harvest,^  for  the  mother-birds  are  then  at  their  best

vacua  est,  quoniam  id  genus  in  ornithone  nee  parit  nee  exeudit.
He  goes  on  to  say  that  they  are  fattened  as  soon  as  caught,
and  that  the  best  time  to  do  so  is  in  summer,  as  it  is  difficult
to  fatten  them  in  winter,  and  the  price  obtained  for  them
is  lowered  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  fieldfares  at  that
season.

^  Pascuntur.  Columella  (viii,  9,  3)  closely  follows  Varro,
but  enters  into  greater  detail :  "The  places  made  for  turtle-
doves are  not  boxes  or  little  chambers  hollowed  out  in  the
walls  as  is  the  case  for  pigeons.  Instead  shelves  (brackets)
are  fastened  to  the  walls  in  a  straight  line,  and  these  are
covered  with  little  hempen  mats.  Nets  are  thrown  over  them
to  prevent  the  birds  from  flying,  as  they  lose  flesh  if  they  do.
On  these  shelves  they  are  diligently  fed  with  millet  or  wheat,
which  must  not  be  other  than  dry."

^  A  stercore.  Columella  {Joe.  eit.)  continues:  "The  mats
must  be  carefully  cleaned  lest  the  dung  burn  the  feet  of  the
birds."

'  Cireiter  messem.  Columella  (loc.  eit.)  says:  "About  har-
vest time  when  the  young  broods  have  now  grown  strong."

The  practice  of  fattening  turtle-doves  in  large  numbers  was


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  289

when  most  chicks  are  being  born,  and  the  latter  are
more  easily  fattened  at  this  time.  Thus  they  are
especially  profitable  at  this  season  of  the  year.


CHAPTER  IX

OF  POULTRY

I  MISS,  said  Axius,  two  branches  of  the  art  of
fattening^  birds,  those  connected  with  wood  pigeons
and  hens,  I  mean,  and  I  shall  be  glad  if  you,  Merula,
will  now  speak  about  them — then  if  anything  in
the  other  branches  remains  proper  to  be  discussed
we  can  discuss^  it.    Well  [said  Merula]  the  term

common  in  the  thirteenth  century  in  Italy.  Crescentius  (late
thirteenth  century)  writes:  "The  fowlers  of  Lombardy,  espe-
cially at  Cremona,  net  wild  turtle-doves  all  through  the  summer
and  shut  them  up  in  a  small  well-lighted  building.  They  give
them  clean  water  and  as  much  millet  seed  as  they  will  eat,
and  keep  them  until  winter  or  well  into  the  autumn.  As  many
as  fifteen  hundred  of  them  are  kept  in  one  place,  and  grow
ineffably  fat !  "

^  Farturae.  The  reading  of  the  Archetype  was  sarsurae
assurae.  It  seems  probable  that  the  second  word  is  a  careless
repetition  of  the  first,  and  that  sarsurae  is  ior  faHurae ,  though
the  latter  corruption  is  difficult  to  account  for.  In  the  next
line  Keil  brackets  palumbis — wrongly  I  think,  for  (i)  the
plural  membra  implies  at  least  two  branches,  and  (2)  after
hens  have  been  discussed,  a  few  words  are  actually  givei.  to
wood-pigeons — palumbis  {()y  21).  Perhaps  the  original  words
were  de  palumbis  et  gallinis.

*  Ratiocinari.  Properly  a  book-keeper's  word,  meaning  to
"audit  an  account,"  to  "reckon."    Cf.  Cicero  (Phil.,  ii,  22):

U


290  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

poultry  includes  fowls  of  three  kinds — barn-door,
2  wild,  and  African.  Barn-door^  fowls  are  those
which  are  commonly  kept  at  farmhouses  in  the
country.  With  regard  to  these,  he  who  means  to
set  up  a  poultry-farm — with  the  object,  that  is,  of
making  large  profits  by  the  application  of  skill  and
diligence,  as  the  Delians^  in  particular  have  ever
done — must  give  heed  to  these  five  points:  (i)  buy-
ing: the  kind  and  number  to  be  bought;  (2)  breed-
ing: the  conditions  to  be  observed  for  mating  and
laying;  (3)  eggs:  the  sitting  and  bringing  off;
(4)  chickens:  the  method  of  rearing  and  the  birds

Omnia  denique  quae  postea  vidimus.  Si  rede  ratiocinahimur,
uni  accepta  referemus  Antonio.  The  passage  in  the  text  might
perhaps  run:  "  If  there  is  any  useful  calculation  to  be  made
about  the  other  branches  we  can  then  make  it " — with  a  hit  at
the  commercial  spirit  of  Axius.

'  Gallifiae  villaticae.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  2,  2) :  Cohorfalis
est  avis  quae  viilgo  per  omnes  fere  villas  conspicitur.  Deinceps
in  the  next  line  is  unintelligible,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  it  has  strayed  from  the  passage  three  lines  higher :  Zmw
de  reliquis.  Siquid,  etc.,  the  sense  of  which  would  be  improved
by  the  insertion  of  deinceps  after  reliquis.

^  Deliaci.  Cf.  Columella  (viii,  2,  4) :  Huius  igitur  villatici
generis  non  spertieridus  est  redittis  si  adhibeatur  educandi
scientia  quant  plerique  Graecoruiti  et  praecipue  celebravere
Deliaci.  He  goes  on  to  say,  however,  that  the  Delians  bred
principally  fighting-cocks  (Tanagrian,  Rhodian,  Chalcidic,
and  Median),  and  that  he  prefers  the  native  Italian  breed  (of
which  he  gives  a  detailed  description)  "as  a  source  of  revenue
for  the  hard-working  pater  familias. "  He  strongly  disapproves
of  cock-fighting,  "  as  often  a  man's  whole  patrimony  is  staked
on  a  match  and  is  carried  off  by  the  victorious  boxer  (/Jyc/^j)."
Cf.  Pliny  (x,  50) :  Gallinas  saginare  Deliaci  coepere.


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  291

by  which  they  are  to  be  reared;  and  (5)  the  method
of  fattening  them,  which  forms  an  appendix  to  the
other  four  heads.

3  The  term  "hen"  is  appHed  in  a  special  sense  to
female  barn-door  fowls ;  the  males  are  called  cocks,
the  half-males — those  which  have  been  castrated —
capons.  Cocks  are  castrated — to  make  them  capons
— by  burning  them  with  a  hot  iron  at  the  lower
extremities  ^  of  the  legs  until  the  skin  bursts,  and
the  sore  which  rises  is  smeared  over  with  potter's
clay.

4  He  who  looks  to  have  a  poultry-farm  complete  at
every  point  should  of  course  procure  all  three  kinds,
but  he  must  have,  above  all  others,  barn-door  fowls.
In  buying  these,  those  should  be  chosen  ■  which
are  prolific;  their  short  feathers  should  be  mostly

*  Ad  infima  crura.  This  is  strange — but  Columella  (viii,  2,
3)  has:  Nee  famen  id  patmntur  amissis  genitalibus,  sed  ferro
candente  ealcaribus  inustis,  quae  cum  ignea  vi  consumpta  sunt,
facta  ulcera,  duni  consanescant,  jigulari  creta  linuntur,  and
Pliny  (x,  21):  Desinunt  canere  castrati:  quid  duobtis  Jit  modis,
lumhis  adustis  candente  ferro  (so  Aristotle,  H.  A.,  ix,  50),  aut
imis  cruribus  .   .   .  facilius  ita  pinguescunt.

^  Eligat.  Columella's  description  (viii,  2,  7,  etc.)  of  the
farm-yard  fowl,  which  closely  follows  Varro's,  is  of  the  native
Italian  breed  {vernacuJum  nostrum) ;  consequently  this  is  the
breed  described  by  Varro.

The  cock  came  to  Italy  probably  from  Persia  (it  is  mentioned
in  the  Zend  Avesta)  via  Asia  Minor  and  Greece,  to  which  it
was  brought  in  the  sixth  or  fifth  century  (neither  Homer  nor
Hesiod  mentions  it,  but  Aristophanes  frequently  does  so).
Athenaeus  (xiv,  20)  places  the  original  home  of  the  cock  in
Persia.


292  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

reddish,    wing    feathers    black,    toes    of    unequal
length,  heads  big,  crest  erect,  and  bodies  of  large

5  size,  for  these  are  the  best  layers.  The  cocks  should
be  chosen  for  their  amorous  ^  nature ;  you  may
know  them  by  their  being  fleshy  and  having  a  red
crest,  a  short,  thick,  sharp  beak,  gray  or  black  eyes,
whitish-red  wattles,  a  striped  or  gold-tinged  neck,
well  feathered  thighs,  short  legs,  long  nails,  long
tails  and  wings  with  abundant  feathers — also  by
their  frequent  stretching  up  and  crowing,  by  their
stubbornness  in  fight,  and  by  the  courage  with
which,  so  far  from  fearing  animals  which  harm  the

6  hens,  they  even  do  battle  on  the  hens'  behalf.  You
must  not,  however,  in  choosing  a  breed,  try  to  get
Tanagrian,  Median,-  or  Chalcidic  cocks,  for  though

^  Gallos  solaces  qui.  In  the  Editio  Maior  Keil  brackets  this
qui,  suggesting,  however,  that  it  may  be  an  adverb  meaning
"  somehow  " !  There  would  seem  to  be  three  ways  of  dealing
with  the  passage:  (i)  to  expunge  qtii,  "the  cocks  which  are
good  sires  are  known  by,"  etc. ;  (2)  to  retain  qui  and  insert
sint  taking  gallos  as  the  common  (in  Varro)  Greek  accusative,
and  (3)  to  read  with  Schneider:  g'allos  salaces:  qui  animad-
vertuntur  si  .  .  .,"  supplying  before  g-allos  the  eligat  oportct  of
line  2.  This  seems  to  me  incomparably  the  best  way  of  the
three,  and  so  I  have  translated.

^  Melicos.  Popular  for  medicos  (cf.  iii,  9,  19) ;  also  Festus :
Medicae  gallinae  quod  in  Media  id  genus  avium  corporis  am-
plissimi  fiat,  "/"  littera  pro  "d"  substituta,  and  Columella,
viii,  2,  ^:  et  Medicum  quod  ah  imperito  vulgo  littera  muiata
Melicum  appeUatur.

Columella  (viii,  2,  13)  recommends  that  these  foreign  breeds
be  crossed  with  Italian  liens:  nam  ct  patcrnam  spccicm  gerunt,
et  salacitatem  fecunditatemque  vernaculam  ret  incut"    He  has


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  293

doubtless  handsome,  and  excellent  for  cock  fights
when  matched  with  one  another,  they  are  poor
sires.

Supposing  that  you  intend  to  feed  two  hundred
fowls  you  must  give  them  an  enclosed  space,  and
have  two    hen-houses^    built  in    it   close  together

no  good  word  for  bantams  (^pumiles  aves)  as  they  are  not  pro-
lific or  profitable,  and  the  cocks  are  quarrelsome  and  pleruvique
ceteros  infestat  et  non  patitur  inire  feminas,  cum  ipse  pluribus
sufficere  non  queat.

'  Duae  caveae.  Columella's  lucid  account  (viii,  3)  of  the
hen-house  may  be  compared  with  this.  There  were  three
contiguous  cellae  of  which  the  middle  one  was  the  least,  being
7  ft.  in  every  dimension.  The  other  two  were  12  ft.  by  12  ft.
by  7  ft.  wide,  and  were  each  divided  into  two  storeys,  the
lower  chamber  being  7  ft.  high,  the  upper  4  ft.  The  entrance
to  the  building  was  in  the  middle  cella;  of  the  two  lateral
cellae  the  entrances  right  and  left  adjoined  the  back  wall.  In
the  centre  of  this  back  wall  was  a  fire-place,  the  smoke  from
which  drifted  into  each  of  the  lateral  chambers,  "for,"  says
Columella,  "  smoke  is  very  salutary  for  hens."  Places  were
cut  out  in  the  walls  to  serve  as  nests — or  stakes  were  driven
firmly  in,  and  supported  wicker  baskets.  In  front  of  the  nests
were  "  landings  "  on  which  the  hens  might  alight  when  going
to  lay  or  sit,  for  if  they  flew  directly  on  to  the  nests  they  were
apt  to  smash  the  eggs.  The  birds  were  not  to  sleep  on  the
floors  "as  dung  does  harm  to  their  feet  and  produces  gout";
and  their  perches  were  cut  square.  Water  (which  must  be
clean,  for,  if  foul,  it  gives  them  the  pip)  was  served  to  them  in
wooden  or  earthenware  troughs  provided  with  lids;  it  was
drunk  by  the  birds  through  holes  in  the  sides  which  were  just
big  enough  to  admit  their  necks.  In  the  yard  plenty  of  dust
or  ashes  was  laid  down  along  the  walls — in  the  colonnades  or
wherever  there  was  a  protecting  roof — so  that  the  hens  might
clean  their  feathers  by  rolling  in  it.


294  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

which  face  south ;  each  must  be  some  ten  feet  in
length,  half  as  much  in  breadth,  and  a  little  less
than  ten  feet  in  height.  In  each  there  should  be  a
window  three  feet  wide  and  a  foot  more  in  height.
These  windows  should  be  made  of  osiers  with  wide
interstices,  so  as  to  afford  plenty  of  light,  and  yet
preventing  from  getting  through  them  any  of  those
animals  which  harm  fowls.
7  Between  the  two  houses  there  should  be  a  door
for  the  gallinarius,  their  keeper,  that  is,  to  enter.
In  each  hen-house  there  must  be  numerous  perches
reaching  across  it — enough  to  hold  all  the  hens  in
fact — and  opposite  to  each  perch  separate  nests
should  be  made  for  the  hens.  In  front  must  be,  as
I  said,^  an  enclosed  court  where  they  may  stay  in  the
day-time  and  take  dust-baths.  There  must  be,  be-
sides, a  large-  room  for  the  keeper  to  live  in,  while
all  round  in  the  walls  are  the  hens'  nests,'  either

'  Sicut  dixi.  This  refers,  no  doubt,  to  the  locus  saeptus  of
§6.

-  Cella  grandis.  It  would  appear  from  the  text  that  hens'
nests  were  disposed  round  this  cella  grandis  in  which  the
keeper  lived.  Varro  does  not  state  where  this  was  situated,
though  it  was  probably  between  the  two  hen-houses  and  cor-
responds to  Columella's  cella  minima  (loc.  cit.).  But  in  the
latter  there  were  no  nests — only  a  fireplace ;  and  if  the  keeper's
cell  was  between  the  two  hen-houses  it  is  strange  that  it  was
not  referred  to  above  when  the  door,  which  would  lead  into
it,  was  mentioned.    Schneider  rightly  suspects  the  text.

'  Plena  cubilia.  The  meaning  of //t'«a— for  which  the  edi-
tions before  Victorius  substituted  posita — is  dark  to  me.  Keil's
explanation  is  singular:  "The  nests  had  to  be  full,  lest  the
sitting  hens  should    suffer  from  any   movement."    But  how


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  295

cut '  in  the  walls  themselves  or  firmly  attached  to
them,  for  movement  is  harmful  when  a  hen  is  sit-

8  ting.  When  they  are  going  to  lay  you  must  strew
chaff  in  their  nests,  and,  when  they  have  laid,  this
must  be  taken  away  and  fresh  put  in  its  place,  for
otherwise  fleas  and  other  vermin  breed  in  it,  and
prevent  the  hen  from  keeping  still — the  result  being
that  the  eggs  are  hatched  spasmodically  or  else  go
bad.  They  say  that  when  you  want  a  hen  to  sit,
she  should  not  be  given  more  than  twenty-five
eggs,"  though  being  a  prolific  animal  she  may  have

9  laid  more,  and  that  the  best  time  for  sitting  is
between  the  spring  and  autumn  equinoxes.  Accord-
could  this  apply  to  the  first  case  mentioned,  where  the  nests
were  cut  out  in  the  walls,  or  to  the  second,  where  they  were
attached  to  the  walls  very  firmly  in  order  to  prevent  them
from  moving?

I  can  only  suggest,  if  plena  is  to  be  kept,  that  it  should  be
taken  closely  with  gallinarum  (nests  full  of  hens).

'  Aut  exculpta  aut  adjicta.  Columella  (viii,  3,  4)  describes
both  methods:  "The  walls  should  be  built  thick  enough  to
admit  of  nests  being  cut  in  them  .  .  .  for  this  method  is  both
healthier  and  more  sightly  than  that  adopted  by  some  people
who  drive  stakes  well  into  the  walls  and  then  place  wicker
baskets  upon  them."

^  XXV  ova.  The  Geoponica  give  twenty-one  as  the  maxi-
mum number.  Columella  (viii,  5,  8)  makes  it  depend  on  the
month:  "  In  January  fifteen — never  more  than  this;  in  March
not  less  than  nineteen ;  in  April  twenty-one,  and  twenty-one  for
every  month  up  to  October  ist.  After  that  the  number  does  not
matter,  as  the  chickens  hatched  in  cold  weather  nearly  always
die."  All  ancient  authorities  agree  that  the  number  must  be
odd,  and  that  incubation  should  begin  when  the  moon  is
waxing !


296  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

ingly  the  eggs  laid  before  or  after  this  time,  as  well
as  the  first^  eggs  laid  during  this  time,  should  not
be  used  for  sitting,  and  such  as  are  used  should  be
given  to  quite  old  hens  which  must  not  have  sharp
beaks  or  claws,^  rather  than  to  pullets,'  for  the  time
of  the  young  ones  should  be  taken  up  in  con-
ceiving, not  sitting.  They  lay  best  when  one  or  two
10  years  old.  If  you  mean  to  put  pea-hens'  eggs  under
a  hen,  then  hens'  eggs  may  be  added  only  after
she  has  been  sitting  on  the  former  nine  days,  and
is  beginning  the  tenth,  so  that  she  may  bring  the
chickens  off  at  the  same  time,  for  chickens  take
twice  ten  days  to  hatch,  peacocks  thrice  nine.*   The

^  Prima.  The  Geoponica  (xiv,  7)  translate  this  npinTo-oKa —
"  the  first  eggs  laid  by  a  hen."  Td  Se  Ttpo  tovtov  tov  Kaipov  f;  fitrd
ravTa  TLKTojitva  Kal  to.  TrpcuroTOKci  Trdvra  ov^  vTroOirkov.

-  Ungues.  Columella  (viii,  2,  8)  says  that  it  is  a  sign  of
breeding  in  hens  if  they  have  five  toes,  but  they  must  not  have
cross  spurs  like  cocks,  as  In  that  case  contumax  ad  concubitutn
.  .  .  raroque  fecunda,  etiain  cum  incuhat  calcis  aculeis  ova  per-
fring-it.

^  Pullitris,  Scaliger  defends  the  word  puUitra,  not  found
elsewhere,  on  the  analogy  of  porcetra — a  young  sow  that  has
farrowed  but  once.  The  Geoponica  {loc.  cit.)  tra.ns\site pul/ttris
CLKjiaCovacuQ  Ka'i  tikthv  £vvafiivai£.

*  Ter  noveni.  Schneider  substitutes  ter  deni,  inferring  the
necessity  from  Varro's  own  words ;  but  Varro  was  not  the  man
to  sacrifice  a  neat  antithesis  and  a  fine  number  associated
with  Pythagorean  philosophy  and  magic  spells  (cf.  the  ter
novwjis  cantare  of  i,  2,  27)  to  mere  pedantic  accuracy.  Even
the  later  born  Columella  respects  the  number,  not  changing
but  qualifying  it  (cf.  viii,  5,  10):  Dicbus  ter  septenis  opus  est
gallinaceo  generic  at  pavonino  et  atisenno  patiUo  amplius  ter
novenisX   Pliny,  however,  says  that  the  time  depends  upon  the


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  297

sitting  hens  should  be  confined  so  that  they  may
go  on  sitting  night  and  day,  with  an  interval  in  the
early  morning  and  evening  for  food  and  drink  to

II  be  given  them.  The  keeper  ought  to  go  round
every  few  days  and  turn  the  eggs,  so  that  all  parts
of  them  may  be  kept  equally  warm.  They  say  you
can  tell  if  an  egg  is  good  and  full  or  not  by  putting
it  into  water,  for  an  empty  one  floats  and  a  full  one
sinks,  but  that  shaking  them  in  order  to  find  this
out  is  a  mistake,  as  it  destroys  the  germinal  veins.^
The  same  people  tell  you  that  the  egg  which,  when
held  up  to  the  light,  appears  transparent,  is  good

13  for  nothing.  Those  who  want  to  keep  eggs  for
future  use  rub  them  well  with  fine  salt  or  brine  for
three  or  four  hours.  This  is  then  washed  off,  and
the  eggs  are  covered  over  with  bran  or  chaff.  Care
is  taken  that  the  number  of  eggs  in  a  sitting  is  un-
even. Four  days  after  a  hen  begins  to  sit  it  becomes
possible  for  the  keeper  to  learn  if  the  eggs  being
hatched  contain  an  embryo.    If  he  holds  one  to  the

weather  (x,  54),  ' '  for  eggs  are  hatched  more  quickly  in  warm
weather.  Thus  in  summer  eighteen  days  only  are  needed,  in
winter  twenty-five."

'  Vitales  venas.  Pliny,  who  gives  all  three  tests  {loc.  cit.),
uses  this  expression  (of.  x,  54) :  Concuti  vero  experimento
vetant,  quoniam  non  gignant  confusis  vitalihus  vents.  These
venae  vitales  formed  what  Pliny,  following  Aristotle  (vi,  3,
H.  A.),  cixWs  parva  velut  sanguinea  gutta^  quod  esse  cor  avium
exisiimant,  primum  in  omni  corpore  id  gigni  opinantes:  in  ova
eerie  gutta  salit  palpitatque  (x,  53).

The  Geoponica  (xiv,  7)  call  these  venae  vitales  ru  K(otik6u,
also  ivdiCiQ  ri  /cai  vipainov.


298  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

lightandfindsitis  uniformly  clear,  it  should  be  thrown
away,  it  is  thought,  and  another  put  in  its  place.
13  The  chickens^  that  are  hatched  should  be  taken
from  the  several  nests  and  put  under  a  hen  hav-
ing few  chickens,  and  the  few  remaining  eggs  she
may  have  should  be  taken  from  her  and  put  under
other  hens  that  have  not  yet  hatched  their  eggs.
They  must  have  less  than  thirty  chickens,  for  no
batch  should  exceed  this  number.

For  the  first  fifteen  days  after  hatching  you  must
give  the  chicks  in  the  morning  a  mixture  of  barley-
meal  "  and  cress  seed,   to  which   has    been    added

^  Exctisos  pullos  .  .  .  et  minus  hahent  triginta  puUos.  The
difficulties  of  this  passage  lie  in  the  words  ab  eaque  and  in  the
last  clause,  which  is  sheer  nonsense  as  it  stands.  Fortunately,
however,  there  is  an  almost  exact  translation  in  the  Geoponica
(xiv,  7)  •  '■^  ^*  iKKoXaTTTofieva  veorria  ivOkwg  VTroawaarsov  i^  tKaarijc
opviOoQ  Kai  VTTofSXtjTkov  Ty  oKiyapKovay.  to.  Se  Trap'  avry  nt)  Ko\a<p9ivTa
i)a  KaTafitpijTtov  alg  rag  tri  QaXTtovcaq  'iva  fier'  tKiivoJV  Qa\v6p.tva
Zojoyovrirai.  ry  Si  oKiyapKOvay  \'  ^lovov  firj  TrXtov  VTZofi\t)Tkov.  Now
Schneider  considers  ab  ea  to  mean  ab  ufiaquaque  inatre,  implied
in  the  words  ex  singulis  nidis,  and  quotes  the  passag'e  above
from  the  Geoponica  to  support  his  view.  But  obviously  ■n-ap'
aiiTy  must  refer  to  ry  oXiyapKovay,  not  to  iKd(TrT]g  opviOog,  and  the
sense  of  the  passage  must  be  that  which  I  have  given  to
Varro's  words,  though  it  is  possible,  of  course,  that  the  Greek
is  a  mistranslation.

To  meet  the  second  difficulty  1  would  propose  to  place  a
full-stop  after  excuderu7it,  and  then  read  Et  (or  67)  minus
habeant  triginta  pullos  ("  And  liens  must  have  less  than  thirty
chickens  "),  which  would  then  be  represented  by  the  last  sent-
ence of  the  passage  quoted  from  the  Geoponica.

^  Polentam.  Pliny  (xvlii,  7)  describes  the  various  ways  of
making  this.


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  299

some  wine  ^  and  water  rubbed  up  with  it  a  consider-
able time  before  the  food  is  to  be  used,  lest  when
you  do  use  it  it  swell  up  inside  their  bodies.  They
must  be  given  no  water.  Under  this  mixture  should
be  a  layer  of  fine  dust  to  prevent  their  beaks  from
14  being  injured  by  the  hard  earth.  Where  the  feathers
begin  to  grow  on  the  rump  and  from  the  head  and
neck  you  must  frequently  pick  out  the  lice,  which
often  make  them  ill.  Near  the  hen-houses  a  stag's
horn  "  should  be  burnt,  so  that  no  serpent  may  come
near,  for  chickens  commonly  die  from  the  smell  of
these  animals.  The  chickens  must  be  brougfht  out
into  the  sunlight  and  to  the  dung-hill  where  they
may  tumble  "*  about,  for  so  they  grow  *  better,  and

'  Vino.  Keil  justifies  the  insertion  of  this  word  by  the  fact
that  in  the  parallel  passages  in  Columella  (viii,  5,  17)  and  the
Geoponica  (xiv,  9)  wine  is  mentioned.  In  this  he  follows
Pontedera  {curae  secundae).  The  latter  writes  tactam  instead
of  factam,  comparing  the  aqua  tacta  of  10,  5,  and  expunges
intritam  as  a  gloss  explicative  of  tactam.

-  Cornuvi  cervinutn.  Columella  (viii,  5,  i8)  says  that  gal-
hanuni  or  a  woman's  hair  may  also  be  used  for  the  same
purpose.  As  to  serpents  he  says:  "  You  must  be  careful  that
chickens  are  not  breathed  upon  by  serpents,  the  smell  of  which
is  so  poisonous  that  it  kills  them  every  one."

'  Volutare.  The  reading  of  the  Archetype  was  volitare,
which  seems  inapplicable  to  chickens.  Volutare  is  defended
by  Scaliger  on  the  analogy  of  iii,  17,  7,  cum  mare  turbaret,
but  turbare  is  idiomatic,  not  uncommon  in  this  sense  and  sup-
ported by  authorities  from  Plautus  to  Cicero ;  whereas  Varro
(§  7  of  this  chapter)  has  already  written  in  pulvere  volutari —
so  that  here,  too,  volutari  should  be  read.

^  Alibil lores.  In  ii,  11,  3,  we  have  alibiles  used  actively  in
the  sense  of  "  nourishing."    Several  of  these  words  ending  in


300  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

15  not  only  the  chickens,  but  the  whole  poultry-yard
should  be  taken  out  both  in  summer  and  at  all  times
when  the  weather  is  mild  and  it  is  sunny;  but  a  net
must  be  stretched  overhead  to  prevent  them  from
flying  out  of  the  enclosure  or  a  hawk  or  any  other
bird  of  prey  from  flying  in  from  outside.  Excessive
heat  or  cold  must  be  avoided/  as  either  is  bad  for
them.  As  soon  as  they  have  their  wing-feathers  they
should  be  trained  to  follow  one  or  two  hens,  so  that
the  other  hens  may  be  free  to  breed  instead  of  spend-

16  ing  their  time  in  rearing  young  ones.  Sitting  should
begin  just  after  the  time  of  new  moon,  for  as  a  rule
the  majority  of  sittings  which  are  begun  before  this
time  do  not  turn  out  well.  They  take  about  twenty
days  to  hatch.  As  I  have  said  too  much,  perhaps,
about  these  barn-door  fowls,  I  will  make  up  for  it
by  the  brevity  with  which  I  discuss  the  remaining
topics.

Wild"  hens  are  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  city  and

-bilis  have  two  meanings;  e.^.,  peiieirahilis  in  Ovid  (Met.,
xii,  166)  means  "  penetrable  "  {Quod  iuvenis  corpus  millo  pene-
trahile  telo);  in  Vergil  "penetrating."  Cf.  Georg.,  i,  93:
penetrahile  frigus,  etc.  So  in  English  the  word  "healthy"
has  two  senses.

'  Evitantem.  -ir^maKTiov  .  .  .  iv\aj3ovfiivoi>  to  (caf'/m.  Cf.  i,
•23?  3  •  Quaedam  etiain  serenda  non  tarn  propter  praesentem
fructum  quam  hi  atmum  prospicientem.

-  GalHnae  rusticae.  Schneider  and  Keil  think  that  this  is
the  Italian  partridge.  Durand  de  la  Malle  (Acad,  des  Inscrip-
tions et  Belles  Lettres,  1838)  considers  them  to  have  been  fowls
which  had  reverted  to  the  primitive  type.  La  poule,  redevcnuc
sauvage,  ne  pcrpdtuait pas  son  cspcce  daiis  la  captivity  en  Italie


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  301

are  hardly  ever  seen  at  Rome  save  tame  and  in  a
cage.  They  resemble  in  shape  not^  these  barn-door
fowls  of  ours,  but  the  African  birds  (guinea-fowls).

17  When  perfect  in  appearance  and  shape  they  often
take  a  place  at  public  displays  with  parrots,  white
blackbirds,  and  other  strange  creatures  of  that  kind.
They  lay  eggs  and  bring  off  chickens  in  the  woods,
rarely  in  a  farmyard.  It  is  said  that  the  island  of
Gallinaria  gets  its  name  from  these  hens  {gallinae)
— an  island  in  the  Tyrrhenian  Sea  situated  close  to
Italy,  and  opposite  the  Ligurian  mountains,  Inti-
milium  and  Album  Ingaunum.'  Others  hold  that
the  name  comes  from  our  barn-door  fowls  which
were  brought  there  originally  by  sailors  and  became

18  wild  and  multiplied.  The  African  fowls  (guinea
fowls)  are  big,  speckled,  hump-backed,  and  are  called

comme  le  fait  la  poule  sauvage  des  forets  de  VInde.  Elle  vivait
dans  les  hois  comme  cette  derniere.  De  plus,  la  couleur  du  coq
et  de  la  poule  sauvages  que  Varron  compare  a  celle  de  la  pintade,
est  aussi  celle  de  la  poule  et  du  coq  sauvages  de  VInde.  Or  on
sail  que  les  animaux  et  les  oiseaux  domestiques,  ahandonnes  a
la  vie  sauvage,  reprennent,  au  bout  de  quelques  genirations,  la
couleur  de  Vespece  primitive.

Naturalists  are  agreed,  I  believe,  that  at  least  a  large
number,  if  not  all,  of  the  European  species  spring  from  the
Indian  jungle-fowl.

1  Non  similes.  Columella  (viii,  2,  2)  contradicts  this  rustica
quae  non  dissimilis  villaticae  per  aucupem  decipittcr.  Keil  would
reconcile  the  two  statements  by  supposing  that  Varro  is  speak-
ing only  of  those  seen  in  Rome  at  shows.

-  Alhtim  Ingaujium.  Pomponius  Mela  (c.  27)  has  Albi-
gaunum.  The  town  is  now  called  Albenga;  Intimilium,
Vintimiglia;  and  Gallinaria,  Isola  d'Albenga.


302  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

"  meleagrides  "  '  by  the  Greeks.  These  birds  were
the  last  to  be  introduced  from  kitchen  to  dining-
room  ^  by  the  luxurious  taste  of  man.  Owing  to  their
scarcity  they  are  extremely  costly.
19  Of  the  three  kinds  barn-door  fowls  are  most
commonly  fattened  for  market.  They  are  confined
in  a  place  that  is  moderately  warm,  of  small  dimen-
sions and  admitting  but  little  light,  as  movement
and  light  sets  them  free^  from  fat.    For  fattening,

^  Meleagridas .  Cf.  Pliny  (x,  26):  Simili  modo  pugnant
Meleagrides  in  Boeotia.  Africae  hoc  est  gallinarum  genus
gibherum,  variis  sparsum  pJuniis ;  quae  novissimae  sunt  peri-
grinarum  avium  in  ynensas  receptae  propter  ingratum  virus.
Verum  Meleagri  tumulus  nobiles  eas  fecit.  Aristotle  (H.  A.,
vi,  2,  2)  mentions  the  Meleagris  once  only,  and  says  that  their
eggs  are  spotted  :  rwi'  It  Kareanyfikva  olov  ra  twv  fi(Kiaypidii)v  Kai
(paaiaviZv.

Columella  (viii,  2,  2)  distinguishes  between  the  Meleagris
and  the  African  hen:  Africana  est  quam plerique  Numidicam
dicunt  meleagridi  similis,  nisi  quod  rutilam  galeam  {paleam  ?)
et  cristam  capite  gerit,  quae  utraque  sunt  in  Meleagride  caerulea.
Durand  de  la  Malle  remarks  on  this :  Columelle  n'avait  pas
observe  ces  oiseaux  d^ asses  pres  pour  s''apercevoir  que  la  premiere
itait  la  femelle  et  la  seconde  le  male  d'une  seule  et  mime  espece,
and  refers  to  Buflfon  (Hist,  des  Oiseaux,  iii,  p.  234).  The
guinea  fowl,  so  well  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  seems
to  have  disappeared  from  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  and  to
have  been  re-discovered  only  when  Europeans  sailed  to  India
by  the  West  Coast  of  Africa  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
(D.  de  la  Malle).

■^  Ce7iantium.  Kail's  excellent  emendation  for  ihc  genanium
of  the  MSS.

'  Vindicta  was  the  praetor's  rod  (properly  festuca)  laid  on
the  head  of  a  slave  who  was  being  made  a  free  man.     Colu-


Ill]  OF  POULTRY  303

hens  are  mostly  chosen,  and  not  necessarily  those
which  are  improperly  called  "  Melic " — for  the
ancients,  just  as  they  used  to  say  Thelis  for  Thetis,
so  they  said  Melic  instead  of  "  Medic."  This  name
was  given  to  those  hens  which  had  been  imported
on  account  of  their  great  size  from  Media,  and  to
their  progeny;  afterwards  to  all  big  hens  owing  to
20  their  likeness  to  them.  Their  wing- ^  and  tail-feathers
are  pulled  out  and  they  are  crammed  with  cakes  made
of  barley,  sometimes '  of  barley  mixed  with  darnel
flour  or  with  linseed  steeped  in  fresh  water.  They
are  fed  twice  a  day,  care  being  taken  that  the  first
meal  is  digested  before  the  second  is  given.   This  is

mella  (viii,  14,  11)  gives  the  converse  of  Varro's  statement:
"  Darkness  and  warmth  help  greatly  the  development  of  fat"
— ad  creandas  adipes  viultum  conferunt.

^  Ex  its.  Keil  brackets  these  words  without  reason.  The
form  of  speech  is  peculiarly  Varronian — "from  them,  from
their  wings  and  tails  that  is  " — and  can  be  supported  by  a
dozen  instances  from  these  books:  cf.  iii,  7,  6;  iii,  13,  i;  i,  12,
3;  iii,  6,  4,  etc.

^  Partim  =  aliqui,  as  in  Cicero  (Divln.,  ii,  9):  Caesar  a  nohil-
issimis  civibus,  paHim  etiani  a  se  omnihus  rebus  ornatis,  truci-
datus.  In  the  Geoponica  (xiv,  7)  the  three  kinds  of  food  are
distinguished  :  "  They  fatten  best  if  they  are  kept  in  a  warm
and  dark  house,  and  their  wing  feathers  are  pulled  out  and
barley  mixed  with  water  is  given  them  as  food.  Others  use  a
mixture  of  barley  and  darnel  flour,  others  of  barley  and  lin-
seed." Columella  (viii,  7,  3)  recommends  cakes  {offae)  made  of
barley  flour  that  has  been  moistened  and  well  kneaded,  or,  if
you  want  the  birds  to  be  tender  as  well  as  fat,  wheaten  bread
steeped  in  a  good  wine  diluted  with  three  times  its  bulk  of
water.


304  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

indicated  by  certain  signs.'  After  food  has  been
given, and  their  heads  have  been  thoroughly  cleansed
to  ensure  the  absence  of  lice,  the  birds  are  shut  up
again.  This  treatment  is  continued  for  twenty-five
days,  at  the  end  of  which  they  are  fully  fattened.
21  Some  people  feed  them  on  wheaten  bread  steeped
in  water  mixed  with  a  sound  and  fragrant  wine,  and
manage  to  have  them  fat  and  tender  in  twenty  days.
If  they  lose  appetite  through  excessive  feeding,  the
daily  ration  must  be  decreased  by  the  same  differ-
ence as  it  increased  during  the  first  ten  days,  that
is  to  say,  it  must  be  diminished  by  the  same  daily
amount  in  such  a  way  that  the  amounts  given  on
the  twentieth  and  the  first  day  are  equal.  In  the  same
way  wood-pigeons  are  fed  and  fattened.


CHAPTER  X

OF  GEESE

I  Now,  said  Axius,  pass  on  to  the  kind  which  is
not  satisfied  with  the  farm-house  and  dry  land '
only,  but  needs  ponds  as  well.  This  kind  you
Graecophiles  call  amphibious  {afxcpl^iov)  while  to  the

^  Sig7iis.  Columella  (viii,  7,  3):  "  Nor  must  you  give  them
a  second  meal  until  you  are  sure  by  feeling  the  crop  tliat
nothing  of  the  first  remains."

^  Terra.  Cf.  iii,  3,  2)'.  In  altera  specie  sunt  quae  non  sunt
contentae  terra  solum  sed  etiam  aquam  requirunt,  ut  sunt
ansercs,  querquedulae,  anates.


Ill]  OF  GEESE  305

place  where  geese  are  fed  you  give  the  Greek  name
chenoboscion  '  (%>ivo/3ocr«£rov).  Of  these  geese  Scipio
Metellus  ■  and  M.  Seius  have  some  large  flocks.^

Said  Merula:  Seius  in  making  his  flocks  of  geese
was  careful  to  attend  to  the  following  five  points,
which  I  mentioned  when  I  spoke  of  hens':  (i)  the
choice  of  a  stock,  (2)  breeding,  (3)  the  eggs,  (4)  the

2  chickens,  (5)  fattening  for  market.  In  the  first  place
he  ordered  the  slave  to  see  when  choosing  the  stock,
that  they  were  big  and  white,  as  in  most  cases  the
goslings  resemble  their  parents.  For  there  is  a
second  kind  with  variegated  plumage — they  are
called  wild  geese— which  do  not  willingly  associate

3  with  the  first,  and  do  not  become  so  tame.  For
geese  the  best  time  for  mating  begins  with  the
winter  solstice,   for  laying  and   sitting  it  extends

^  Chenoboscion.  Described  In  detail  by  Columella  (viii,  14).
It  was  a  courtyard  enclosed  by  a  nine  feet  wall  and  had  porticoes
all  round  it.  Under  these  were  the  pens,  built  of  cement  or
brick,  each  three  feet  in  every  dimension  and  having-  a  stout
door.  If  there  was  no  river  or  pond  near,  a  tank  was  made  for
them  to  dive  in.

^  Scipio  Metellus.  Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus  Pius  Scipio,
father-in-law  of  Pompey,  and  his  colleague  in  the  Consulship
for  part  of  the  year  52  B.C.  He  committed  suicide  at  the  close
of  the  civil  war.

^  Greges  magnos.  Pliny  (x,  22)  mentions  Metellus  and  Seius
together  in  connection  with  foie  gras,  and  says  that  it  was
doubtful  which  of  the  two  first  discovered  its  goodness.  Nee
sine  causa  in  quaestione  est  quis  primus  tantum  bonunt  in-
venerit,  Scipio  Metellus,  vir  Consularis,  an  M.  Seius  eadem
aetate  eques  Romanus.

*  Gallinis.    Cf.  HI,  9,  2.

X  -^


3o6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

from  ist  February  or  ist  March  to  the  summer
solstice.  Coupling  generally  takes  place  in  the
water,  for  which  purpose  they  are  driven  i  into  a
river  or  a  pond.  A  goose  does  not  lay  more  than
three  times  in  the  year.  They  must  each  have  a  pen
made  in  which  to  lay  their  eggs,  two  and  a  half  feet
square,  which  must  be  strewn  with  straw.  You  must
put  some  mark  on  their  eggs,  as  they  do  not  hatch
those  of  other  geese.  As  a  rule  nine  or  eleven  are
put  under  the  hen-bird  to  be  hatched,  if  less,  five,
if  more,  fifteen.  Hatching  takes  thirty  days;  when
the  weather"  is   comparatively  mild,   twenty-five.

^  hiiguntur.  Scaliger's  emendation  for  the  inunguentur  of
the  Archetype.  Schneider  supports  the  reading  mergunhirir om
"  the  nature  of  things,"  and  from  Aristotle  (H.  A.,  vi,  2):  olxuvig
oxivdivTiQ  KaraKoXvfijSijJin.

Columella  (viii,  14,  4) :  Ineunt  auteni  non  .  .  .  insistentes
humi:  nam  fere  in  fliimine  aut  piscinis  idfaciunt.

^  Tempestatibus.  This  word  seems  to  have  strayed  from  its
place.  I  would  read :  Incubat  dies  triginta,  tempestatibus  tepi-
dioribus  xxz\''''  for  it  is  much  to  be  doubted  if  tempestatibus
can,  unqualified,  mean  "in  bad  weather,"  or  even  "in  stormy
weather,"  and,  supposing  the  word  to  have  that  meaning
here,  then  it  is  unsuited  to  tepidioribus.  The  Geoponica  (xiv,
22)  say:  "  Hatching  takes  generally  twenty-nine  days,  in  cold
weather  thirty."  Columella  (viii,  14,  7)  has:  triginta  diebus
opus  est  cum  sunt  frigora,  nam  tepidis  xxv  satis  est,"  cf.  Pliny
(x,  59) :  Incubant  tantum  tricenis  diebus,  si  veto  tcpidiores
sint  XXV,  which  supports  the  proposed  change.

In  the  chapter  quoted  above  Pliny  gives  many  interesting
facts  about  geese,  e.g.,  "  the  first  thing  contracted  for  by  the
censors  is  the  food  of  the  sacred  geese.  Geese  walk  all  the
way  from  Brittany  to  Rome.  White  ones  provide  a  second
source   of  income  in  the  shape  of  down,  tlie  best  of  which


Ill]  OF  GEESE  307

4  When  a  goose  has  brought  off  her  chicks,  they  are
left  with  the  mother  for  the  first  five  days.  After-
wards every  day  when  it  is  fine  they  are  taken  to  the
meadows  and  also  to  ponds  or  marshes,  and  pens
are  made  for  them  above  or  under  the  ground,  where
not  more  than  twenty  chickens  at  a  time  are  put;
care  being  taken  that  the  floors  of  these  chambers
are  not  damp,  that  they  are  provided  with  a  soft  bed
of  straw  or  something  else,  and  that  weasels  cannot
get  at  the  chickens  or  any  other  animals  harm  them.

5  Geese  are  fed  in  damp  places,  and  for  their  food  a
crop  is  sown  ^  on  which  the  farmer  may  make  some
profit  [apart  from  these  birds]  while  [especially]  for
them  is  sown  the  herb  called  seris  (endive),  for
even  when  dried  up,  if  it  is  moistened  with  water  it
grows  green  again.  The  leaves  are  plucked  off  and
given  to  the  geese,  as  there  is  danger,  if  you  drive
them  to  where  it  is  growing,  that  they  will  ruin  it  by
trampling  it  under  foot,  or  themselves  die  of  a  sur-
feit— for  they  are  gluttons  by  nature.  And  so  you
must  restrain  them,  for  often  when  feeding  if  they
have  got  hold  of  a  root  they  want  to  pull  out  of

comes  from  Germany  where  the  geese  are  smallish  and  are
called  ganzae.  This  down  is  worth  five  denarii  {^s.  3^?.)  a
pound.  And  so  luxurious  have  we  become  that  not  even  men
can  do  without  it  under  their  necks,"  etc.

'  Serunt.  Varro  is  here  even  more  elliptical  than  himself;
but  the  meaning  of  the  passage  is  fixed  by  Columella  (viii,  14,
2):  "A  marshy  but  at  the  same  time  grassy  piece  of  land
should  be  assigned  them,  and  various  crops  should  be  sown
such  as  vetch,  trefoil,  and  fenugreek,  but  especially  a  variety
of  endive  called  by  the  Greeks  aipiq.  ^


3o8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  ground,  they  break  their  necks/  For  this  part
of  them  is  very  weak,  as  the  head  is  soft.  If  you
have  not  this  kind  of  grass,  give  them  barley  or
some  other  grain.  When  there  is  green  fodder  you
should  give  it  in  the  manner  prescribed  for  seris.

6  If  they  are  sitting  let  them  have  barley  steeped  in
water.  The  goslings  just  hatched  are  served  for  two
days  with  barley  meal  or  barley,  for  the  next  three
with  cress  chopped  up  line  and  mixed  with  water
and  then  put  into  some  kind  of  vessel.  And  when
they  have  been  shut  up  in  their  pens  or  under-ground
chambers — twenty  together,  as  I  said — they  are  given
barley  meal  or  green  fodder  or  some  tender  grass

7  chopped  up.  For  fattening,  goslings  are  chosen
about  six  months'  old.  They  are  shut  up  in  the
fattening  house,  where  their  food  is  barley  meal
and  fine  flour  "  steeped  in  water,  of  which  they  have

'  Abrumpunt  coUuni.  This  statement  is  repeated  by  Colu-
mella (viii,  14,  8)  and  by  Pliny  (x,  59)  and  the  conclusion  is  not
unnatural,  for  a  goose  when  struggling  with  a  tough  root
certainly  looks  as  though  It  would  break  its  neck!

-  Sesquimensein.  As  the  reading  of  the  Archetype  was  cir-
citer  sex  qui  mense  qui  sunt  nata,  and  as  no  one  would  think
of  fattening  goslings  of  \\  months  old,  Keil's  emendation,
circlter  sex  metises  qui  sunt  nati,  seems  fairly  certain,  despite
the  fact  that  Columella  (viii,  14,  10)  gives  four  months  as  the
best  age  at  which  to  begin  fattening.

^  Pollinem.  Ca.to  (i^y,  g)  has  po//itiet>i  polentae.  Pollen  was
the  fine  dust  produced  as  the  grain  was  ground.  Cf.  Colu-
mella (viii,  14,  11):  "These  birds  are  easy  to  fatten,  for
they  need  nothing  but  barley  meal  and  fine  flour  three  times
a  day  provided  always  that  they  have  plenty  to  drink  and
are    not   allowed    to    stray,"   and    the    Geoponica   (xiv,    22):


Ill]  OF  DUCKS  309

as  much  as  they  can  eat,  three  times  a  day.  Immedi-
ately after  a  meal  they  are  allowed  to  drink  copiously.
Thus  treated,  they  become  fat  in  about  two  months.
After  every  meal  the  place  should  be  cleansed,  for
they  like  a  clean  place,  though  they  themselves
never  leave  a  place  clean  where  they  have  been.


CHAPTER  XI

OF  DUCKS

I  Those  who  intend  to  keep  flocks  of  ducks  and  to
set  up   a  nessotrophion   (duck-nursery)^  should   in

"They  eat  three  times  a  day  and  at  midnig'ht,  and  are  great
drinkers. "

'  Nessotrophion  {vi](y(yoTpo(pi~iov).  This  is  described  in  detail
and  with  delightful  clearness  by  Columella  (viii,  15):  a  level
piece  of  ground  was  chosen  and  enclosed  by  a  wall  fifteen  feet
high.  The  roof  was  of  lattice  work  or  nets  with  wide  meshes.
The  wall  was  coated  with  smooth  plaster  to  prevent  pole-cat
or  ferret  from  getting  in,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  duck-house
a  pond  was  dug  two  feet  deep,  the  margin  of  which  was
made  of  cement  (signino,  ' '  a  plaster  composed  of  powdered
tiles  mixed  with  mortar)  and  descended  in  a  gentle  slope  to
the  water.  The  pond  had  a  stone  bottom  covering  two-thirds
of  its  area,  to  prevent  weeds  rising  to  the  surface ;  the  centre
was  uncovered  and  planted  with  the  Egyptian  bean  and  other
green  water  plants.  For  twenty  feet  all  round  the  pond  the
banks  were  clothed  with  grass,  and  beyond  this  piece  of
ground  was  the  wall  in  which  were  the  nesting-places,  each  a
foot  square.  These  were  covered  by  bushes  of  box  or  myrtle,
planted   between  them,   which   bushes  did   not  overtop  the


3IO  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

the  first  place  choose  a  marshy  place,  if  that  be
possible,  as  ducks  prefer  such  a  one  to  any  other.
Failing  that,  the  best  place  is  where  there  is  a
natural  pool  or  pond,  or  an  artificial  tank,  to  which

2  they  can  go  down  by  steps.  The  enclosure  where
they  live  should  have  a  wall  as  much  as  fifteen  feet
high,  like  that  you  saw  at  Seius's  country-house,
and  it  should  have  but  one  entrance.  All  round  the
wall  on  the  inside  is  a  wide  ledge,  on  which  close
to  the  wall  should  be  covered  nesting-places,  and  in
front  of  them  the  outer  landing  of  the  ducks — a  level
floor  of  cement  made  of  broken  pottery.  In  it  there
is  a  gutter  running  the  whole  length,  where  food  is
set  for  them,  and  into  which  water  runs.    For  so

3  they  take  their  food.  All  the  walls  should  be  smoothly
plastered  to  prevent  pole-cats  or  other  animals  enter-
ing to  harm  the  birds,  and  the  whole  enclosure  is
covered  over  by  a  net  with  wide  meshes,  to  prevent
a  hawk  from  flying  in,  or  a  duck  from  flying  out.
The  food  given  them  is  wheat,  barley,  or  grape-refuse
— sometimes  also  river  cray-fish  ^  and  certain  other

wall.    A  gutter  was  let  into  the  ground  and  down  it  ran  the
birds'  food  mixed  with  water.

^  Cammari.  The  precise  meaning  of  this  word  is  not
known,  but  it  seems  to  have  ineant  a  sort  of  crab.  That  it
was  red  when  cooked  and  was  a  cheap  and  little  esteemed
food  appears  from  Martial  (ii,  43,  11):

Immodici  tibi  flava  tegunt  chrysendeta  mulli
Concolor  in  nostra^  cammare  lana  rubes.

Columella  (viii,  15,  6),  a  propos  of  the  feeding  of  ducks,  says  :
Ubi  copia  est,   etiam  glans  ac  vinacea  praebenlur.    Aquatilis


Ill]  OF  DUCKS  311

aquatic  animals  of  the  same  kind.  Abundance  of
water  must  flow  into  the  ponds  in  the  enclosure  so
4  that  it  may  be  always  fresh.  There  are  also  other
species  not  unlike  ducks,  such  as  teal  and  moor-hens
and  partridges/  which,  as  Archelaus  writes,  conceive
on  hearing  the  voice  of  the  male  bird.  These,  though
they  are  not  fattened  as  are  ducks  and  geese  because
of  their  fertility  or  good  flavour,  do  yet  become  fat
if  fed  in  the  same  way.  This  is  what  I  have  to  say
about  what  in  my  opinion  belongs  to  the  first  act  of
farm-yard  feeding.

autent  tihi  si  sitfacultas,  datur  cammarus  ef  rivalis  alecula,  vel
si  qua  sunt  increnienti  parvi  Jluviorum  animalia.  Plutarch
(Quaest.  Nat.,  towards  the  end)  says  that  river  crabs  are
good  for  sows  suffering  from  headache!  at  hi  'itq  tm  toi^
TTOTafiioig  KopicivoiQ  (pkpovrai,  ^oriOovvTai  yap  iaOiovaai  Trpbg  Ke<pa\aX-
yiav.

The  Geoponica  (xiv,  23)  mention  as  food  for  ducks :  * '  Wheat,
millet,  barley,  grape  refuse,  and  occasionally  locusts  or  prawns
or  any  other  similar  animals,  found  in  lakes  or  rivers,  which
they  are  accustomed  to  eat."

'  Perdices.  In  Martial's  delightful  description  of  a  Roman
farm  (iii,  58)  occur  nearly  all  the  birds  mentioned  by  Varro :

Vagatur  omnis  iurba  sordidae  chortis

A  rgutus  anser  gemmeique  pavones
Nomenque  debet  quae  rubentibus  pinnis  (the  flamingo)

Et  picta  perdix  Numidicaeque  ^«//"a^a^
Et  impiorum  phasiana  Colchoruyn

Rhodias  superbi  feminas  premunt  galli
Sonantque  turres  plausibus  columbarum
Gemit  hinc  palumbus,  inde  cereus  turtur,  etc.

The  perdix  in  the  text  is  probably  the  red-legged  partridge —
the  picta  perdix  of  Martial.


312  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XII

OF  WARRENS

1  Meanwhile  Appius  returned,  and  after  mutual  in-
quiries as  to  what  had  been  done  and  said,  he  spoke
on  as  follows :  We  now  come  to  the  second  ^  act,
to  what  is  generally  an  appendage  of  the  farm-house,
and  is  still  called  by  its  ancient  name  of  hare-warren
{leporariu7n),  from  a  part  only  of  the  uses  to  which
the  thing  is  put.  For,  in  fact,  not  only  hares  are
enclosed  in  it,  in  a  wood,  as  was  in  former  times  the
case  with  the  mere  paddock  an  acre  or  two  in  size
— but  there  are  many  acres,  and  stags  or  roes,  as  well
as  hares.  It  is  said  that  Ouintus  Fulvius  Lippinus^
has  forty  iugera  (twenty-six  acres)  enclosed  in  the
country  about  Tarquinii,  in  which  are  confined  not
only  the  animals  I  have  mentioned,  but  wild  sheep
as  well !  The  same  man  has  a  park  even  bigger
than  this  near  Statona,  and  such  parks  are  to  be

2  found  in  other  districts.    In  Transalpine  Gaul,  more-

'  ActiLs  secundi.  Cf.  iii,  3,  i :  Eitis  disciplinae  genera  sunt
tria,  ornithones,  leporaria,  piscinae,

-  Q.  F.  Lippinus.  Cf.  Pliny  (vili,  52) :  ' '  The  first  of  the
Romans  to  make  preserves  for  tliese  and  other  creatures  of
the  woods  was  Fuhius  Lippinus,  who  had  a  park  for  them
near  Tarquinii.  He  was  soon  imitated  by  L.  Lucullus  and
Q.  Hortensius."  And  ag-ain  (ix,  56) :  "  Fuhius  Lippinus  made
an  enclosure  for  snails  near  Tarquinii  a  little  before  the  civil
war  between  Pompey  and  Caesar."


Ill]  OF  WARRENS  313

over,  T.  Pompeius  ^  has  a  great  preserve  for  game,
which  contains  within  its  bounds  a  space  of  about
4,000  paces  square  (about  9,000  acres).  In  the  same
enclosure  it  is  usual  to  have  places  set  apart  for
snails  and  beehives,  and  also  casks  to  hold  dormice.
However,  the  keeping,  breeding,  and  feeding  of  all
these  animals,  bees  excepted,  present  no  difficulty,

3  for  everyone  must  know  that,  in  the  case  of  a  hare-
warren,  the  boundary  walls  should  have  a  coating
of  plaster  and  should  be  high — the  first  to  prevent
weasel,  marten,  or  other  animal  from  getting  in,
the  second  to  make  it  impossible  for  a  wolf  to  jump
over — and  that  there  should  be  places  of  concealment
where  hares  may  lie  hid  during  the  day  in  the  brush-
wood and  grass,  and  trees  with  spreading  branches

4  to  foil  the  efforts  of  the  eagle.  Everyone  knows,
too,  that  if  you  put  in  but  a  few  hares  of  both  sexes,
the  warren  will  swarm  with  them  in  a  short  time,
so  prolific  is  this  quadruped.  Why,  if  you  put  in
no  more  than  four,  the  place  will  shortly  be  full  of
them.  For  indeed,  often  when  a  litter  has  not  long
been  born,  they  are  found  to  have  others^  inside

'  T.  Pompeius.  Valerius  Maximus  (vii,  8,  4)  mentions  a
Pompeius  Beginus,  vir  transalpinae  regionis.  Was  he  a  large
farmer,  one  wonders,  who  gave  his  name  to  the  fig,  pear,
grape,  and  cabbage  called  Pompeian?  Cf.  Pliny,  xv,  15,  18;
xix,  8.

^  In  ventre.  Varron  rappelle  la  fecondite  du  lievre  qui,  si  cet
animal  est  mis  a  Vabri  de  ses  ennemis  dans  un  pare,  est  vraiment
itonnante.  II  connaissait  ce  fait  curieux  de  V organisation  de  cet
animal  dont  la  femelle  reqoit  le  male  et  conqoit  meme  quand  elle
est  dejd  pleine:    Aussi  a-t-elle,  dit  Buffon  (vol.   vii,   105),  en


314  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

them.  Thus  Archelaus  writes,  that  any  one  wishing
to  know  the  age  of  a  hare  should  look  at  the  orifices  '
provided  by  Nature,  as  some  have  certainly  more
5  than  others.  There  is  also  the  recent  fashion,  now
general,  of  fattening  them — by  taking  them  from
the  warren,  shutting  them  up  in  cages,  and  fatten-
ing" them  in  confinement.

Now  of  these  creatures  there  are  roughly  three  ^
varieties:  the  first,  our  Italian  hare,  which  has  short
front  legs  and  long  hind  ones,  the  upper  part  of  the
body  dark,  the  stomach  white,  and  the  ears  long.
This  hare  is  said  to  conceive  even  when  pregnant.

quelque  sorte  deux  matrices  distinctes,  separees,  et  qui  peuvent
agir  independamment  Fune  de  F autre;  en  sorte  que  les  femelles
dans  cette  espece  peuvent  concevoir  et  accoucher  en  differents
temps  par  chacune  de  ces  matrices  (Durand  de  la  Malle,  loc.

ctt-,  515)-

'  Foramina  naturae.  This  is  explained  by  Pliny  (viii,  55) :
Archelaus  auctor  est  quot  sint  corporis  cavemae  ad  excrem^nta
leporiy  totidem  esse  annos  aetatis.  Varius  certe  numerus  reper-
itur.  Idem  utramque  vim  singulis  inesse,  ac  sine  mare  aeque
gignere.

^  Saginarent.  Macrobius  (iii,  9,  end),  who  quotes  Varro,
gives  this  and  the  fattening  of  snails  as  instances  to  prove
that  his  own  age  was  much  less  luxurious  than  Varro's,  for
in  Macrobius's  time  (a.d.  400)  both  these  practices  were  un-
known.

Instead  of  the  reading  of  the  Archetype  saginarent  pi eraqtie,
Macrobius  found  sagitiarentur,  and  instead  of  hos,  hoc.  Keil
suggests  plerique,  which  I  have  translated.

^  Tria  genera.  Xenophon  (Cynegeticus,  c.  5)  distinguishes
two  varieties:  (i)  the  big  kind  the  colour  of  a  half  ripe  olive,
having  a  good  deal  of  white  on  the  forehead,  (2)  the  smaller
kind  reddish  yellow,  with  very  little  white  about  it.


Ill]  OF  WARRENS  315

In  Transalpine  Gaul  and  Macedonia  they  are  very

6  large,  in  Spain  and  Italy  of  but  moderate  size.  There
is  a  second  variety  which  is  found  in  Gaul  near  the
Alps'  which  differs  from  the  former  only  in  being
white  all  over.  These  do  not  often  reach  Rome.  A
third  variety  is  found  in  Spain,  which  resembles  in
some  measure  our  Italian  hare,  but  it  stands  low.
This  is  called  a  cuniculus-  (coney,  rabbit).  L.  Aelius
thought  that  the  hare  {lepus)  derived  its  name  from
its  swiftness,  as  it  was  light-footed  {levipes).  I,  how-
ever, believe  that  it  comes  from  the  ancient  Greek
word,  for  the  Aeolians^  used  to  call  a  hare  rkito^i^.
Rabbits  (cunictdi)  are  so  called  because  they  make
burrows  {cuniculi)  underground  in  the  fields,  to  hide

7  themselves  in.    One  should  have,  if  it  is  possible,

^  Ad  Alpis.  Cf.  Pliny  (viil,  55).  " There  are  several  varieties
of  hares.  On  the  Alps  they  are  white  and  are  thought  to  feed
on  the  snow  in  the  winter  months — they  certainly  turn  reddish
yellow  as  the  snow  melts."

-  Cuniculus.  Pliny  (Joe.  cif.)  speaks  of  their  enormous
fecundity.  They  over-ran  Majorca  and  Minorca  to  such  an
extent  that  the  inhabitants  asked  Augustus  for  military  aid
against  them.  It  is  interesting  to  find  from  the  same  chapter
that  rabbits  were  hunted  with  the  help  of  tame  ferrets  {viverrae)
just  as  now.

^  Aeolis.  Cf.  iii,  i,  6:  Et  in  Graecia  Aeolis  Boeoti  (note).
For  Xknopiv  compare  Gellius's  (i,  i8)  quotation  from  Varro's
Rerum  Divinarum :  A^on  enim  Icporem  dicimus  ut  ait  Aelius
quod  est  levipes  sed  quod  est  vocahulum  anticum  graecum.  And
Varro  (L.  L.,  v,  20,  beginning):  Lepus  quod  Siculis  (Siculi?)
quidam  Graeci  dicunt  Xtnopiv,  a  Roma  quod  orti  Siculi  hinc
illuc  tulere  et  hie  reliquerunt  id  nomen.  Volpes  ut  Aelius  dicehat
quod  volat  pedibus.


3i6  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

all  these  kinds  in  a  warren.  You,  at  any  rate,  Varro,
have  I  think  two,  for  you  were  so  many  years  in
Spain  '  that  I  believe  the  rabbits  there  followed  you
here.


CHAPTER  XIII

OF  WILD  BOARS  AND  OTHER  QUADRUPEDS

I  As  for  wild  boars,  you  know,  Axius,  that  they  can
be  kept  in  the  warren,  and  that  without  much  trouble
both  those  that  have  been  caught  and  the  tame  ones
which  have  been  born  there  are  commonly  fattened
for  market;  for  you  yourself  have  seen  on  the  estate
near  Tusculum,  which  Varro  here  bought  from
M.  Papius  Piso,-  wild  boars  and  roes  meeting  to
feed  at  a  fixed  hour  when  a  horn  ^  was  blown,  while
from  an  eminence  (from  the  palaestra?*)  acorns  were
poured  out  for  the  wild-boars,  and  vetches  or  some-

'  In  Hispania.  This  cannot  allude  to  Varro's  short  and
inglorious  campaign  against  Caesar  in  Spain,  for  that  hap-
pened in  49  B.C.,  and,  as  has  been  shown,  these  conversations
are  represented  as  having  taken  place  in  54  B.C.

^  Piso.    Cf.  note  on  iii,  3,  8.

^  Ad  hucinam.  Cf.  ii,  4,  20:  Subulcus  debet  consuefacere
ovinia  ut  faciant  ad  hucinam.  Primo  cum  incluserunt,  cunt
hucinatum  est,  aperiunt  ut  exire  possint  in  eum  locum  ubi
hordeum  fusum  in  longitudine.  .  .  .  Ideo  ad  hucinam  convenire
dicuntur,  ut  silvestri  loco  dispcrsi  ne  dispcrcant.

^  E  palaestra.  The  meaning  of  this  is  obscure,  and  many
unhappy  emendations  have  been  proposed.  Perhaps  in  pal-
aestra was  originally  written,  for  Varro  may  have  seen  some


Ill]  WILD  BOARvS  317

2  thing  else  for  the  roes.  Yes,  said  Axius,  and  when
I  was  at  O.  Hortensius's  near  Laurentum  I  saw  the
same  thing  done  more  in  the  Thracian  '  fashion,  for
there  was  a  wood  there  of  more  than  fifty  iiigera
(thirty-three  acres)  according  to  Hortensius,  sur-
rounded by  a  wall,  and  this  enclosure  he  did  not
call  a  hare  warren,  but  a  theriotrophion  (place  for
feeding  animals).  There,  on  an  eminence  on  which
a  dining-table  and  couches  were  set  we  dined,  and

3  our  host  summoned  Orpheus  ^  to  appear.    He  came,

fanciful  resemblance  between  a  wrestling  school  and  the  place
where  the  boars  jostled  one  another  as  they  made  for  their
food.  A  palaestrita  would  make  excellent  sense  "by  their
trainer,"  and  might  be  supported  by  Martial  (iii,  82) :  Partitur
apri  glandulas  palaestrita.  A  palaestrita  is  mentioned  also
in  Martial's  account  of  a  Roman  farmhouse  (iii,  58).  The
"trainer"  would  be  the  suhulcus  of  ii,  4,  20,  who  had  to
"train  them  to  do  everything  in  obedience  to  the  sound  of
the  horn."

^  6p(}KiKu}g.  Keil's  certain  emendation  for  the  viagis  tragicos
of  the  Archetype.  The  attendant  took  the  part  of  the  Thracian
Orpheus  whose  music  had  power  to  tame  wild  animals.  Cf.
Horace  (A.  P.,  391):

Silvestres  homines  sacer  interpresqtie  Deoruvi
Caedibus  et  victu  foedo  deterruit  Orpheus:
Dicttts  ob  hoc  lenire  tigres  rabidosque  leones.

^  Orpheus  .  .  .  cum  stola.  In  Rome  the  stola  was  of  course
the  dress  of  respectable  Roman  matrons.  The  Greek  word
aroXri,  however,  applies  to  almost  any  garment,  even  to  the
lion's  skin  worn  by  Hercules  (cf.  Eurip.  H.  F.  465)  iv  aroXy,
6r]p6g — but  generally  means  a  robe.  The  glorious  statue  of
the  Apollo  (Orpheus's  father)  Citharoedus  in  the  Vatican  shows
him  wearing  the  long  Ionian  sto/a,  and  with  a  cithara  in  his
hand.


3i8  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

clad  in  a  stola^  and  on  the  order  to  sing  to  his
cithara  blew  a  blast  on  the  horn,  whereat  a  host  of
stags,  wild  boars,  and  other  quadrupeds  poured
round  us,  making  as  fine  a  show,  I  thought,  as  when
the  Aediles  give  us  a  hunt  without  African  '  beasts
in  the  Circus  Maximus.


CHAPTER  XIV

OF  SNAILS

1  Said  Axius,  Your  part,  my  friend  Merula,  has  been
made  lighter  by  Appius.  The  second  act,  which
concerned  hunting,  has  been  quickly  gone  through,
and  as  for  what  remains — snails  and  dormice — I  am
not  anxious  to  hear  about  them,  as  the  subject  can
present  no  great  difficulty.  More  than  you  think,
Axius  m.y  dear  fellow,  said  Appius,  for  you  have  to
find  a  suitable  place  for  your  snail-beds,  and  it  must
be  open  to  the  sky  and  entirely  surrounded  by  water,
lest  when  you  put  snails  in  it  to  breed,  you  find  not
only  the  children  gone,  but  the  mothers  as  well.
You  must,  I  repeat,  keep  them  confined  by  means
of  water,  or  else  you  will  have  to  get  a  '*  slave-
catcher." -

2  The  best  spot  is  one  visited  by  dew  and  not  baked

'  Africanis  bestiis,  i.e.,  panthers.    Cf.  Pliny,  viii,  17.

^  Fugitivarius .  A  mild  but  thoroughly  characteristic  joke
of  Varro's.  The  fugitivarius  was  the  man  hired  to  track  and
bring  back  a  runaway  {fugitives)  slave.


Ill]  OF  SNAILS  319

by  the  sun.  If  there  is  none  such  provided  by  nature
— which  is  usually  the  case  in  a  sunny  place — and
you  do  not  chance  to  have  a  shady  spot  in  which
to  make  your  snail-bed,  at  the  foot  of  mountain
rocks,  for  instance,  the  base  of  which  is  bathed  by
a  lake  or  streams,  you  will  have  to  make  a  dewy
place  artificially.  This  is  done  by  getting  a  hose-pipe
with  small  teats  attached  to  it  which  squirt  water  on
to  some  stone  near  by,  so  that  the  water  is  splashed
in  all  directions.
3  Snails  need  little  food  and  no  one  to  give  it  to
them ;  they  discover  it,  as  they  crawl  about,  on  the
floor  of  the  enclosure,  and  even  find  it  unless  they
are  stopped  by  a  stream,  by  climbing  the  upright
walls.  1  And,  indeed,  while  they  are  on  the  huckster's
stall  they  manage  to  keep  alive  for  a  long  time  by
chewing '  the  cud,  with  the  help  of  a  few  bay  leaves
thrown  amongst  them  and  a  sprinkling  of  bran.

^  Parietes  stantes  invenit.  Keil  paraphrases  sed  etiam  stantes
parietes  cihi  inveniendl  causa  ascendunt,  which  is  no  doubt  the
meaning.  But  how  get  this  from  the  Latin?  Per  parietes  is
plausible.

^  Ruminantes.  The  Archetype  has  ex  gruminantes  ad  pro-
palain.  Gesner  reads  ex  se  ruminantes  ad propolam.  Keil  dis-
liking ex  se  writes  simply  ruminantes,  not  noticing,  however,
that  this  reading  has  the  support  of  one  MS.  If  the  text  be
right,  ad  must  here  have  the  sense  oiapud.  Propola  =  irpoirdjXtje.
It  is  curious  that  in  all  the  cases  quoted  by  Nonius  of  the  use
of  ruminor  by  Varro,  the  metaphorical  sense  "  to  ponder  over,"
"to  remember,"  is  alone  found,  e.g.,  Ruminari  dictum  in
memoriam  revocare.  Varro,  Tanaquil :  Non  modo  absens  de  te
quidquam  segnius  cogitab it  sed  etiam  ruminabitur  humanitatem.


320  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

And  so  the  cook  as  a  rule  does  not  know  whether
they  are  alive  or  dead  when  he  is  cooking  them.

4  There  are  several  varieties  of  snails:  the  small
white  ones  brought  from  near  Reate,  the  big  ones
from  Illyricum,  and  those  of  middle  size  which  come
from  Africa.  Not  but  what  they  differ  in  these  places
both  in  distribution  and  size;  for  instance,  very  big
snails  come  from  Africa,  called  Solitannae^  which
are  so  big  that  eighty  quadrantes '  (three  gallons)
can  be  put  into  their  shells.  And  similarly  in  other
countries  snails  though  of  the  same  kind  differ  in

5  size  from  one  another.  When  breeding  they  lay  an
incalculable  number  of  young  which  are  very  small
and  have  a  soft  shell  that  hardens  as  time  goes  on.
When  large  islands  are  made  in  the  enclosures,  they
(the  snails)  bring  you  a  big  haul  of  pence.  They
are,  I  may  add,  fattened  usually  in  the  following
way.  A  jar  for  them  to  feed  in  having  holes  in  it  is
lined  with  a  mixture  of  sapa  and  spelt.  It  must
have  these  holes  that  air  may  get  in.  The  snail  is
certainly'  very  tenacious  of  life.

'  LXXX  quadrantes.  Cf.  Pliny,  ix,  56 :  SoJitannae  quibtis
nobilitas.  Quin  et  saginant  earum  commentus  est  sapa  et Jarre
aliisque  generibus  ut  cochleae  quoque  altiles  ganeam  iniplerent:
cuius  artis gloria  in  earn  magnitudinem perductae  siiit  ut  octoginta
quadrantis  caperent  singidarum  calices.    Auctor  est  M.   Varro.

-  Enim  seems  hardly  the  particle  required  here.  One  would
have  expected  tainen,  as  Varro's  words  imply  a  doubt  as  to
whether  the  snails  would  die  even  if  there  were  no  holes.  In
Livy,  xxiii,  45  (end)  enim  has  almost  this  sense :  Romam  vos
expugnaturos  si  quis  dticeret,  fortes  lingua  iactabatis;  enim  nunc
minor  res  est,  etc.


Ill]  OF  DORMICE  321

CHAPTER  XV

OF  DORMICE

1  The  place  where  dormice  are  kept  is  of  a  different
kind,  as  it  is  an  enclosure  bounded  not  by  water,
but  by  a  wall  the  whole  of  which  is  faced  on  the
inside  with  smooth  stone  or  plaster,  to  prevent  the
dormouse  from  crawling  out.  In  it  should  be  small
acorn-bearing^  trees.  When  these  are  not  bearing,
acorns  and  chestnuts  should  be  thrown  inside  the

2  wall  for  the  dormice  to  eat  their  fill.  Fairly  wide  holes
are  to  be  made  for  them  in  which  they  can  bring  forth
their  young.  There  should  not  be  much  water,  as
they  take  but  little  of  it,  and  like  a  dry  place.  They
are  fattened  in  jars,  which  many  people  keep  inside
the  villa.  These  jars  made  by  the  potter  differ
greatly  in  their  construction  from  others,  as  grooves
(paths)  are  made  in  their  sides,  and  a  hollow  in
which  to  place  food.  Into  this  jar  are  put  acorns,
walnuts,  or  chestnuts.  A  lid  is  put  on  the  jars,  and
in  the  darkness  the  dormice  grow  fat.^

1  Quae  ferayit glandem.  Pliny  (xvi,  6)  mentions  beech  nuts
{fagi  g^latis)  in  this  connection:  Fagi  glans  muribus  gratissinia
est  .  .  .  glires  quoque  saginat,  expedit  et  turdis,  so  that  the
word  is  probably  not  used  here  by  Varro  in  the  special  sense
as  given  by  Pliny  {loc.  cit.) :  glandetn,  quae proprie  intellegitur,
ferunt  robur,  quercus,  esculus,  cerrus,  ilex  suber.

^  Sagmantur.  Cf.  Pliny  (viii,  57) :  Semiferum  et  ipsum
animal,  cui  vivaria  iti  doliis  idem  qui  apris  (Fulvius  Lippinus)
instituit.     Qua  in   re  notattim  non  congregari  nisi  pjjpulares

Y


322  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.


CHAPTER  XVI

OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES

1  And  so,  said  Appius,  in  the  matter  of  farmyard
feeding  we  come  to  the  third  act,  which  is  about
fishponds.  Third  act  be  hanged!  said  Axius,  do
you  suppose,  because  you  were  so  very  economical
when  a  young  man  as  not  to  drink  wine  and  honey
at  home,  that  we  are  going  to  neglect  honey?  Axius

2  speaks  the  truth,  said  he,  turning  to  us,  for  I  was
left  with  scanty  means,  and  two  brothers  and  two
sisters '  to  keep.  One  of  the  latter "  I  married  with-
out a  portion  to  Lucullus,  and  it  was  only  when  he

eiusdeni  silvae:  et  si  inisceantur  alienigenae^  amne  vel  nionte
discreti,  interire  diinicando.  Genitoris  suos  fessos  senecta  aJunt
insigni pietate.  .  .  .  InMoesia  silva  Italiae — non  nisi  in  parte —
reperiu7iiur  hi glires.  Albertus  Magnus  (quoted  by  Schneider)
gives  an  excellent  description  of  the  dormouse,  and  states  that
in  his  time  {circa  1250)  they  were  fattened  in  large  numbers  by
the  rustics  of  Bohemia  and  Carinthia.

*  Duabus  sororibus.  Schneider  points  out  that  Appius  had
three  sisters.  Probably  one  of  these  was  married  in  the  life-
time of  her  father.  The  sister  married  to  Lucullus  was  said
by  Cicero  to  have  been  treated  with  as  little  respect  as  was
the  Bona  Dea  by  her  brother  P.  Clodius  whom  Cicero  (Pro
Dom.  34)  calls  on  that  account  Jove :  Si'd  vide  ne  tu  te  debeas
fovcm  dicere  qtiod  tu  iure  eandem  sororem  et  uxorem  appellare
possis.

^  Quarum.  In  view  of  the  anacoluthon  Scaliger  conjectured
earum,  Gessner  duarum.  Neither  is  necessary,  for,  as  it  has
been  shown,  Varro  frequently  has  such  anacolutha.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  323

first  gave  up  an  inheritance  ^  in  my  favour  that
I  myself  began  to  drink  ?nulsiim  at  my  house,
though  it  was  given  almost  every  day  on  the  occasion
3  of  a  banquet'  to  all.  Besides  it  has  been  more  my^
business  than  yours  to  know  the  habits  of  these
winged  creatures,  to  whom  Nature  has  given  the
greatest  talent  and  skill.  And  so  as  a  proof  that  I
have  a  better  knowledge  of  them  than  you,  let  me
tell  you  about  their  amazing  and  untaught  ability.
Merula  must  then  relate  to  us,  as  before,  the  usual
practice  ^  adopted  by  melitturgoe  (as  those  who  keep
apiaries  are  called).

'  Hereditate  me  cessa  for  concessa.  Keil  seems  to  think
that  Appius  was  Lucullus's  heir,  ciim  hereditatem  Luculli  accep-
isset.  Is  not  the  meaning  rather  that  Lucullus  waived  a  prior
claim  to  an  inheritance  ?  Cf.  Cicero  (Pro  Flacc. ,  36) :  Communem
hereditatem  quae  aequaliter  ad  utnimque  venisset,  concessit
adulescenti.  Me  is  for  mihi.  Cf.  Festus,  '' me" pro  "■  mihi"
dicebant  antiqui,  who  quotes  from  Lucilius,  quae  me  impendet.
Vae  te  is  found  in  Plautus.  Lindsay,  however  (Lat.  Lang,
p.  422),  thinks  these  are  old  uses  of  the  accusative.  Quintilian
(i,  5)  seems  to  say  that  mehe  was  an  ancient  form  of  mihi,  but
the  reading  is  doubtful.  The  evidence  for  the  use  of  me  for  mihi
is  certainly  slender.

■^  In  convivio  .  .  .  daretur.  The  reading  of  the  Archetype
was  darem.  If  this  be  kept  the  meaning  is  that  Appius  did
not  drink  mulsum  himself,  though  he  gave  it  all  the  same  to
all  his  guests  when  there  was  a  dinner  party,  and  that  there
was  one  nearly  every  day  at  his  house.  And  this  reading  seems
to  present  fewer  difficulties  than  Keil's  emendation.

*  Meum,  an  allusion  to  the  name  "Appius"  connected  by
Varro  with  apis.

*  Historicos,  laropiKuiq.  In  ii,  i,  2,  historicon  has  precisely
the   meaning   of  the  English   word   "historical,"   foj  Varro


324  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

4  In  the  first  place  bees  are  born,  some  from  bees,
some  from  the  rotten  carcase  of  an  ox/  Thus,
Archelaus '  in  an  epigram  calls  them  Bohg  (pOi/xmg
7rs7r>^vv/xsvx  tskvsc,  "the  roaming  children  of  a  dead
cow,"  and  he  also  writes:  'ittttc^v  /xv.  a(pmBg  ysvsa,  uoo-x^^
5f  /xe?^i(jaai,  "  Wasps  Spring  from  horses  and  from
calves  come  bees."

Bees  are  not  solitary  creatures  like  eagles,  but
gregarious  as  are  men.  And  though  jack-daws  also
resemble  men  in  this,  jQt  it  is  not  the  same  thing,
for  bees  combine  to  work  and  build,  which  is  not
the  case  with  jack-daws;    bees  have  method  and

then  proceeds  to  give  a  sketch  of  the  history  of  his  subject.
Here  historicos  ="in  descriptive  detail"  or  something  of  the
kind.

^  Ex  buhulo  corpore.  The  Geoponica  (xv,  2)  make  Demo-
critus  and  Varro  their  authorities  for  the  following  method  by
which  bees  may  be  produced  from  a  bull.  "  Build  a  house  fif-
teen feet  in  every  dimension,  having  one  door  and  four  windows
— one  in  each  side.  Into  this  house  put  a  bull  of  thirty  months,
fleshy  and  verj'  fat,  which  Is  beaten  to  death  with  clubs  by  a
gang  of  young  men  who  must  bruise  the  flesh  and  break  the
bones  without  drawing  blood.  They  must  then  turn  the  bull
on  to  its  back,  cover  it  with  thyme,  and  leave  the  house.  The
door  and  windows  are  then  to  be  blocked  up  with  thick  mud
so  that  no  air  can  get  in.  In  the  third  week  after  this,  light
and  fresh  air  are  to  be  admitted  by  throwing  open  the  door
and  all  the  windows.  Then  when  the  dead  matter  begins  to
be  alive  the  windows  and  door  must  be  blocked  as  before.  On
the  eleventh  day  after  open  again  and  you  will  find  the  house
filled  with  bees  hanging  together  in  bunches,  and  of  the  bull
nothing  left  but  the  horns,  bones  and  hair."  Cf.  Vergil,  Georg.,
iv,  550-8.

-  Archelaus.    Cf.  note  on  ii,  3,  5.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  325

science,  and  from  them  we  learn  to  work,  to  build,

5  and  to  store  up  food,  for  those  three  things  are  their
concern:  namely,  food,  house,  and  work;  nor  is
the  wax  the  same  thing  as  the  food,  the  honey,  or
the  house.  Each  cell  in  the  honey-comb  has,  as  you
know,  six  angles,  as  many  angles  as  the  bee  has
feet,  and  geometers  prove  that  when  regular  hexa-
gons are  used  to  fill  a  circular  figure  the  largest
possible  amount  of  its  space  is  thus  utilized.  They
feed  outside  in  the  fields,  and  toil  inside  the  hive,
fashioning  the  sweet  substance  that  gods  and  men
alike  love — for  the  honey-comb  reaches  the  altar,
and  honey  is  served  both  at  the   beginning  of  a

6  dinner-party  and  for  the  second  ^  course.  They  have
states  like  ours,  with  king  and  government  and
organized  society.  They  are  attracted  by  nothing
unclean,  and  so  none  of  them  ever  alights  on  a
space  that  is  dirty  or  evil-smelling,  or  even  scented
with  fragrant  oils,  and  so  if  any  goes  near  them
"  oiled  "  '  they  sting  him  instead  of  licking  him  as
flies  do.  Thus  they  are  never  seen,  like  flies,  on
flesh '  or  blood  or  fat,  and  so  settle  only  on  things

'  In  secundam  mensam.  Cf.  Pliny,  xix,  8  (towards  the  end) :
Candidum  papaver  cuius  semen  tostum  in  secunda  mensa  cum
inelle  apud  antiquos  dabatur.  There  was  honey,  too,  in  the
promulsis.

'"■  Unctus.  Cf.  Aristotle,  ix,  40.  The  use  of  unguents  was  very
common  in  the  case  of  wealthy  Romans.  They  bathed  before
dinner,  and  were  then  anointed  with  sweet-smelling  oils,  so  that
unctus  sometimes  is  equivalent  to  our  "in  evening  dress."

'  Cf.  Aristotle,  ix,  40,  of  which  chapter  Varro  makes  large
use,  as  do  Columella  (bk.  ix)  and  Pliny  (bk.  xi).


326  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

7  that  have  a  sweet  savour.  It  is  a  most  harmless '
creature,  spoiling  no  man's  work  by  pulling  it  to
pieces,  brave  enough  to  resist  any  who  should  try
to  harm  its  own,  yet  conscious  of  its  own  weakness.
With  justice  are  they  called  the  "birds  of  the  Muses,"
for  if  ever  they  are  scattered,"  they  are  quickly^
brought  together  again  by  the  clashing  of  cymbals
or  the  clapping  of  hands,  and  as  men  have  given  to
these  deities  Helicon  and  Olympus,  so  to  the  bees
Nature  has  given  the  wild  and  flower-clad  mountains.

8  They  follow  their  beloved  king  wherever  he  goes;
if  he  is  weary  they  support  him;  if  he  cannot  fly,
eager  to  save  him,  they  bear  him  up  on  their
shoulders.  Never  idle  themselves,  they  hate  idlers.
And  so  they  attack  the  drones,  and  drive  them  out
from  the  hive,  since  the  latter  give  no  help  in  the
work  and  eat  up  the  honey,  and  a  whole  crowd  of
drones  crying  out  in  terror  is  often  pursued  by  a
few '  bees.  Outside  the  entrance  of  the  hive  they
block  up  all  apertures  through  which  the  wind  gets
to  the  combs  with  a  substance  called  by  the  Greeks

'  Minime  vialefica.  Cf.  Geoponica,  xv,  3  :  "It  does  not  spoil
the  work  of  others  and  most  stoutly  resists  those  who  try  to
spoil  its  own ;  yet  conscious  of  its  weakness  it  makes  the  en-
trances to  its  home  narrow  and  winding."

■^  DispHcatae.  Gessner  conjectures  dispalatae.  Dissipatac  is
plausible.

*  Ntimero  occurs  several  times  in  Plautus  with  the  meaning
of  cito.    Cf.  Festus,  ad  verbuni.

*  Paucae.  Pliny  (xi,  11)  would  seem  to  have  found  here
paucos,  as  he  says:  Cum  mella  coeperunt  jnaturescere  ahigunt
eos,  multaeque  singulos  aggressae  trucidant.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  327

(jerithace.^  They  all  live  as  in  an  army,  sleeping
and  working  in  regular  and  equal  turns,  and  they
send  out  what  we  may  call  colonies,  and  the  leaders
[of  these  colonies]  get  certain  things  done  to  the  sound
of  their  voice,  imitating  as  it  were  the  trumpet  used
for  an  army.  And  this  happens  when  they  have
signals  for  peace  or  war  which  they  make  to  one

10  another.  But,  Merula,  I  am  afraid  our  friend  Axius
here  is  dying  with  impatience  as  he  listens  to  these
details  of  natural  history,  since  I  have  said  nothing
about  the  profit,  and  so  in  the  race  I  hand  on  the
torch "  to  you.

So  Merula  began:  About  the  profit,  I  have  that

'  Erithace.  Pliny  (xi,  7)  devotes  a  chapter  to  the  explanation
of  this  and  other  special  terms  :  Prima  fundamenta  commosin
vacant  periti,  secunda  pissoceron,  tertia  propolln  inter  coria
cerasque  magni  ad  medicamina  usus.  Conimosis  est  crusta prima
saporis  amari.  Pissoceros  super  earn  venit,  picatus  modo  sed
dilutior.  .  .  .  Propolis  crassioris  iavi  niateriae,  odditis  floribus —
nondum  tamen  cera,  sed  favonim  stabilimentum  qua  omnes  fri-
goris  aut  iniuriae  aditus  ohstruuntur  odore  et  ipsa  etiamnuni
gravi.  .  .  .  Praeter  kaec  convehitur  erithace  quatn  aiiqui  Sanda-
rachajn,  alii  cerinthum  vacant.  Hie  erit  apum  dum  operantur
cibus  qui  ipse  invenitur  in  favonim  inanitatibus  sepositus,  et  ipse
amari  saporis.  Most  of  this  is  from  Aristotle,  ix,  40,  but  the
erithace  of  Pliny  is  not  that  of  Varro,  which  corresponds  to  the
H'lrvQ  of  Aristotle.  Varro  (§  23)  describes  erithace  as  that  quo
favos  extremos  inter  se  conglutinant.

-  Lampada.  A  metaphor  taken  from  the  torch  race  {XafinaSr}-
Spofiia)  at  Athens,  used  by  Plato  and  Lucretius.  Cf.  the  familiar
line  of  the  latter  :

Et  quasi  cursores  vitai  lampada  tradunt.

For  tibe  cf.  note  on  iii,  7,  11.


328  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk."

to  say  which  will  perhaps  please  you,  Axius.  It  is
supported  not  only  by  Seius,  who  lets  his  bee-hives  at
a  yearly  rent  of  5,000  pounds'  weight  of  honey,  but
also  by  our  friend  Varro  here,  whom  I  have  heard
tell  the  following  story.  There  were  two  brothers
named  Veianius,  who  served  under  him  in  Spain/
They  came  from  near  Falerii,  and  were  then  well-
to-do,  though  their  father  had  left  them  only  a  small
farmstead  and  a  bit  of  land — certainly  not  more  than
an  acre.  They  set  up  bee-hives  all  round  the  build-
ing, kept  a  garden,  and  sowed  all  the  rest  (of  their
land)  with  thyme  and  cytisus  and  apiastrum — a
plant  called  by  some  meliphyllon  (honey-leaf),
by  others  melissophyllon  (bee-leaf),  and  by  some
again  melittaena.'  Well,  these  brothers  used  never
to  make  less  out  of  the  honey — taking  a  very  reason-
able estimate — than  10,000  sesterces^  (.i^So)  a  year,

^  1)1  Hispania.  It  would  seem  from  this  passage  and  from
iii,  12,  7,  that  Varro  had  held  some  command  in  Spain  before
54  B.C.,  the  date  of  these  conversations,  and  consequently  before
his  inglorious  campaign  in  the  great  civil  war.

-  Melittae7iani.  An  emendation  of  Keil's  for  the  reading  of
the  Archetype  mellinem,  in  spite  of  the  support  which  the
latter  gets  from  Philargyrius  (ad  Georg.,  iv,  63):  Mclisphylla
herba  est  quam  ut  ait  Varro,  alii  apiastrum  alii  melineni  appel-
lant.   Columella  (ix,  9,  8)  has  melissophylli  vel  apiastri.

^  Sestertia.  Ursinus  suggests  sestertium,  and  certainly  this
must  be  the  meaning  here  and  iii,  6,  6,  and  iii,  17,  3.  I  can
find  no  parallel  in  any  other  author  of  sesfeiiia  used  thus,  and
suspect  the  text  in  each  case,  as  the  corruption  is  easily  ex-
plicable. In  ii,  I,  14,  we  find  asinus  venierit  scstertiis  milibus
sexatfititay  \.&.,ior sesterces — 60,000.  Seslcrtium,  the  neuter  noun,
means,  of  course,  1,000  sesterces,  but  could  have  no  place  here.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  329

but,  as  they  said,  they  were  always  willing  to  wait,
so  as  to  interview  the  buyer  at  a  favourable  moment,
and  were  in  no  hurry  to  sell  if  the  time  were  bad.
Well  then,  said  Axius,  tell  me  where  and  how  to
make  a  bee-house,  that  I  may  reap  large  profits.
Merula  answered,  You  must  set  up  your  bee-hives
in  this  way  —  others  call  them  melittotrophia
(places  for  feeding  bees),  while  the  same  things  are
called  by  some  people  mellaria. — In  the  first  place
they  should  be  if  possible  close  to  the  farm-building,
in  a  place  where  there  are  no  echoes,^  for  this  noise,
it  is,  thought,  puts  them  to  flight.^  The  air  should
be  temperate,  not  blazing  hot  in  summer,  nor  un-
sunned in  winter ;  the  hives  should  preferably  face
the  place  where  the  sun  rises  in  winter,  and  should
have  in  their  neighbourhood  plenty  of  food  and  pure

'  Imagines.  Cf.  Columella,  ix,  5,  6 :  Nee  minus  vitentur
cavae  rupis  atit  vallis  argutiae  quas  Graeci  nx'^vc,  vacant,  and
Pliny,  xi,  19:  Iniviica  est  et  echo  resuJtanti  sono  qui  pavidas
alternos pulsat  sono.  For  imago  in  this  sense  cf.  Horace,  Odes,
i,  12,  4:

Quern  deuvi  cuius  recinit  iocosa
Nomen  itnago.

*  Fugae procerum.  This  is,  of  course,  unintelligible.  Scaliger
gives  as  "  a  certain  emendation  "  protelum,  and  quotes  Varro
(De  liberis  educandis) :  Remotissimum  ad  discendutn  formido,
niviius  terror  et  onuiis  perturbatio  animi:  contra  delectatio  pro-
telum ad  discendum.  Here  protelum  means  "incitement."
Ursinus  and  one  MS.  (Caesenas)  have  instead  oi  procerum,
praeterea,  while  Triller  suggests  Porro  caelum.  None  of  these
is  satisfactory,  but  of  the  three  emendations  Scaliger's  seems
the  best— if  the  passage  which  he  quotes  from  Varro  is  genuine.
Up  to  now  1  have  been  unable  to  trace  it.


330  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

13  water.  If  nature  has  not  provided  the  proper  food,
the  owner  must  sow  such  plants  as  are  generally
sought  by  bees,  which  are :  roses,  wild  thyme,
apiastrum  (balm  gentle),  poppies,  beans,  lentils,
peas,  octmum,  galingale,^  lucerne,  and  especially
cytisus,  which  is  very  good  for  them  when  they  are
unwell.  Moreover  it  begins  to  flower  with  the
vernal  equinox,  and  goes  on   flowering  until   the

14  second,  the  autumnal  equinox.  While,  however,
cytisus  is  excellent  for  their  health,  for  honey-
making  thyme  is  the  best.  And  this  is  the  reason
why  the  Sicilian  honey  bears  the  palm,  for  good
thyme  is  found  there  in  abundance.  And  so  some
people  pound  it  in  a  mortar,  add  luke-warm  water,
and  sprinkle  over  all  the  seed  plots  which  have  been
sown  for  the  bees.

15  As  for  the  situation:  one  near  the  farm-house  is
best  chosen  for  this  purpose:  some  men  have  even
stationed  the  apiary  for  greater  safety  in  the
portico  -  itself  of  the  house.    Hives  are  made  round  '

^  Cyperuvi.  Pliny  (xxi,  18)  describes  the  plant  and  the  uses
made  of  it  in  medicine.

^  In  viUae  porticu.    Cf.  iii,  3,  5.

^  Rutundas,  supply  alvos.  Columella  (ix,  6)  follows  Varro
closely :  "  If  the  district  produces  cork  trees  in  abundance  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  most  useful  hives  are  made  out  of  thin
cork,  as  such  hives  are  neither  bitterly  cold  in  winter  nor
stifling  in  summer;  fennel  stalks  also,  as  they  resemble  cork
in  nature,  will  do  equally  well ;  if  neither  material  is  at  hand
wicker  work  may  be  used,  failing  this,  the  wood  of  a  tree
hollowed  out  or  cut  into  planks.  The  worst  hives  are  those  of
earthenware,   as  they  become  furnaces  in  summer  and   ice-


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  331

by  some  people  and  of  osiers  where  these  are  to  be
found ;  by  others  of  wood  or  bark,  or  of  a  hollow  tree
or  earthenware,  while  others  make  them  rectangular
of  fennel  stalks,  and  about  three  feet  long  and  one
foot  broad,  making  them,  however,  of  smaller
dimensions  in  cases  where  there  are  too  few  bees  to
fill  them,  lest,  being  in  a  big  empty  space,  the  bees
lose  heart.  All  these  constructions  are  called,  from
the  nourishment  {alinionmm)  which  honey  sup-
plies, alvi  (bellies),  and  when'  people  constrict  their
waists,  it  is,  I  imagine,  in  imitation  of  the  shape  of
16  the  bees.  Those  hives  which  are  made  of  withes  are
smeared  inside  and  out  with  cow-dung,  lest  the  bees
be  frightened  away  by  their  roughness.  Hives  are
arranged  on  brackets  projecting  from  the  wall,  in
such  a  way  that  they  do  not  shake,  and  do  not
touch  one  another  when  placed  in  a  row;  then,
with  a  space  between,  a  second  and  third  row^  is
made  below  the  first,  and  they  say  it  is  better  to
have  fewer  rows  rather  than  to  add  a  fourth.  In  the
middle  of  the  hive  small  holes  are  made,  right  and

houses  in  winter.  Two  kinds  remain ;  one  fashioned  with
dung,  the  other  built  of  brick.  The  first  was  properly  con-
demned by  Celsus  owing  to  the  danger  of  fire,  the  second
had  his  approval  though  he  did  not  hide  the  disadvantage  of
its  not  being  portable. "

^  Ouas,  etc.  It  is  Improbable  that  the  hives  were  "  wasp-
waisted,"  so  that  quas  must  refer  to  alvos  in  the  primary  sense
of  "belly."  Aristophanes  (Plutus,  561)  speaks  of  men  being
ofTtKwdei^,  and  Festus  says  that  such  were  called  cinguli:  Cin-
gulos  appellahant  homines  qui  in  his  locis  ubi  cingi  solet  satis
sunt  tenues.


332  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

17  left,  for  the  bees  to  go  in  by,  and  at  the  end  "'  a  lid  is
put  on  the  hives  so  that  the  bee-keepers  can  get  the
honey  out.  The  best  hives  are  made  of  bark,  the
worst  of  earthenware,  for  the  latter  are  most  power-
fully affected  by  cold  in  winter  and  heat  in  summer.
The  bee-keeper  must  inspect  them  in  spring  and
autumn  about  three  times  a  month,  using  moderate
fumigations,  and  should  cleanse  the  hive  from  dirt

18  and  expel  any  vermin.  He  should  also  see  that
there  are  not  several  kings  in  the  same  hive,  as
these  do  harm  by  reason  of  the  quarrels  they  make.
Some "  people  assert,  as  there  are  three  species
of  kings  amongst  bees — the  black,  the  red,  and  the
striped,  or  according  to  Menecrates^  two,  the  black

^  Exfrema,  i.e.,  at  the  back.  Cf.  Pliny,  xxi,  14,  Utilissimum
opei'culum  a  tergo  esse  ambtdatorium,  sqq.

^  Et  quidam  dicunt,  etc.  This  sentence,  monstrum^  horren-
dum,  informe,  ingeyis  though  it  is,  was  probably  thus  written  by
Varro.  The  interminable  parenthesis  tria genera — Jiigrum,  and
the  general  confusion  and  clumsiness  of  the  whole  period  is
characteristic  of  him  at  his  worst.  In  this  passage,  moreover,
he  is  translating  Aristotle,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  under-
stood him,  as  he  failed  occasionally  to  understand  Theophrastus
in  Book  I.  Aristotle  (ix,  40)  writes  as  follows :  tiai  Ik  yivr\  tQv
fieXiTTiijv  TrXeim  .  .  .  ovo  fiiv  I'lyifiovrnv,  6  fiiv  ^fXrtwv  irvppog,  6  Se
fTepog  ixtXag  Kai  noiKiXwrepog  .  .  .  t)  Sk  apiart]  fiiKpa  aTpoyyvXt]  Kai
■JToiKiXr],  dXXt]  fiaKpd  bfio'ia  ry  avOprjvy.  erepog  6  (pwp  KaXovfuerot;  fiiXag
TrXarvydoTtop  K.r.X.  It  will  be  noticed  that  Aristotle  gives  two
varieties;  one  reddish,  the  other  black  and  striped,  and  that
Varro  takes  the  words  "black  and  striped"  as  referring  to
two  separate  species.

'  Mefiecrates.  Cf.  i,  i,  9:  Kasdem  res  etiain  quidam  versibus,
ut  Hesiodus  Ascraeus,  Menecrates  Ephestus,  and  Pliny,  xi,  7.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  333

and  the  striped  (which  is  also  the  better  one) — that
if  there  is  another  king  with  him  he  quarrels  with
him  and  spoils  the  hive,  as  he  either  drives  the  other
away  or  is  himself  driven  away,  taking  with  him  a
large  number  of  bees.  And  so  if  there  are  two  kings
in  the  same  hive  it  is  better  for  the  bee-keeper  to
'9  kill  the  black  one.  Of  bees  which  are  not  kings  the
best  are  the  small,  round,  striped  kind.  The  thief,
called  ^  by  others  the  drone,"  is  black  and  broad-
bellied.  The  bee  which  resembles  the  wasp  '  does
not  join  in  the  work,  and  has  a  habit  of  stinging,
and  the  bees  separate  it  from  their  company.  Bees
differ  in  being  wild  and  tame — and  here  I  mean  by
**  wild  "  bees  those  that  feed  in  woodland  places,  by
"  tame  "  ones  those  that  do  so  on  cultivated  land.
The  wild'  ones  are  smaller  in  size  and  covered  with
hairs,  but  are  the  better  workers.

•    Vocahitur.    Keil  suggests  vacatur,  which  I  have  translated.

^  Fucus.  Aristotle  distinguishes  between  the  "  drone  "  and
the  "thief"  {loc.  cit.):  erepo^  6  <pd)p  KuXovfuvoe,  fxsXag  ical  irXarv-
ydariop.  in  d'  6  KtfipT)v.  oiirog  fikyiarog  iravnov  aKevrpoQ  Si  Kai  v(o9p6g.
"The  second  kind,  the  so-called  'thief  is  black  and  broad-
bellied.  And  again  there  is  the  drone;  this  is  the  biggest  of
all,  but  slingless  and  stupid."  Did  Varro  mistranslate  iti  6  6
KT)<pr]v  ovroc,  "and  again  this  drone,"  etc.,  and  so  identify  it
with  the  "thief"?

'  Vespa.  1  have  adopted  Schneider's  emendation,  vespae,
which  accords  well  with  Aristotle's  aAA/;  fiaKpa  o/j-oia  ry  dvOi'ivij,
and  Pliny's  (xi,  i8)  deteriores  longae  et  quibus  similitudo  ves-
parunt.

^  Silvestres.  Cf.  Aristotle  {loc.  cit. ) :  lial  yap  at  airo  tQv  vXovoficjv
Saa^Wipai  Kai  iXaTTOvc  Kai  fpynriKuiTfpai  Kai  ^^«XtTrwrfpni.  Further  on
in  the  same  chapter  he  says :  "  the  little  ones  are  better  workers


334  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

In  buying  bees,  the  buyer  must  see  whether  they
20  are  in  good  or  bad  health.  Indications  of  good
health  are :  thick  swarms,  sleekness,  and  the  smooth-
ness '  and  uniformity  of  the  work  accomplished.  It
is  significant  of  ill-health  if  they  look  hairy  and
covered  with  bristles,  dusty '  as  it  were ;  unless,  in-
deed, the  time  of  hard  work  is  upon  them,  for  then
toil  makes  them  rough  and  in  poor  condition.
M  If  you  have  to  move  the  hives  elsewhere,  you
must  do  so  with  care,  noting  the  times  to  be  pre-
ferred, and  providing  suitable  places  to  move  them
to.  For  example,  spring-time  is  better  than  winter,
for  if  moved  in  winter  they  do  not  easily  get  used
to  their  surroundings,  and  so  generally  fly  away.

than  the  big ;  the  edges  of  their  wings  are  frayed  and  they  look
black  and  burnt,  while  the  sleek  and  bright-looking  bees  are
like  idle  women."

'■  Leve.  Aristotle  {Joe.  cit.)  says  that  roughly  fashioned  cells
are  the  work  either  of  a  "bad  bee  "  or  an  inexperienced  young-
ster.

^  Ut pulverulentae.    Cf.  Vergil,  Georg.,  iv,  95:
Ut  hinae  reguin  fades  ita  corpora  plebis
Namque  aliae  turpes  horrent;  ceu  pulvere  ah  alto
Cum  venit  et  sicco  terrain  spuit  ore  viator
Aridus;  elucent  aliae,  ct  fulgore  coruscant
Ardentes  auro  et  paribus  I  ita  corpora  guttis.
Haec  potior  soboles.
It  is  often  difficult  to  determine  whether  Vergil  is  paraphrasing
Varro  or  merely  using  the  same  sources.    As  to  the  passage
quoted,  Columella  (ix,  4,  2)  states    that  Vergil  followed  the
authority  of  Aristotle.    Columella  himself  used  principally  for
his  treatise  on    bees  the  writings   of  Hyginus,  Celsus,  and
Vergil,  and  very  often  quotes  from  the  last  named.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  335

If  you  move  them  from  a  good  situation  to  one
where  there  is  no  suitable  food,  they  desert.  Again
if  you  would  transfer  them  from  one  hive  to  another
in    the   same   place,    certain    precautions   must  be

22  taken :  the  hive  to  which  you  mean  to  transfer  them
should  be  rubbed  with  apiastrum,  as  this  attracts
them  strongly,  and  you  must  place  inside,  not  far
from  the  entrance,  some  combs  with  honey  in  them,
lest  when  they  notice  that  there  is  nothing  to  eat  ^

He  says  that  when  they  are  upset  by  the  food  they
find  in  early  spring,  which  consists  of  almond  ^  and
cornel  flowers,  they  suffer  from  diarrhoea,  and  should
be  cured  by  giving  them  urine  to  drink.

23  What  is  called  propolis  is  a  substance  used  by
bees  for  making  (particularly  in  summer)  a  sort  of
gable  in  front  of  the  hive,  over  the  hole  where  they
enter.    Doctors  ^  also  used  propolis^  under  the  same

^  Inopiam.  Much  must  have  here  dropped  out  of  the  text.
Aristotle,  Columella,  Pliny,  Palladius  and  the  Geoponica  give
not  the  slightest  clue  anywhere  to  the  missing  words.  Keil
thinks  that  the  missing  subject  o{  dicit  is  Menecrates.

^  Exjloribus  nucis  Graecae.  Most  of  the  ancient  authorities
speak  of  this  disease — fatal  to  bees — as  caused  by  the  tithy-
malus  (sea  lettuce)  and  the  seed  of  the  elm  {samera  ubni),  and
add  that  in  those  parts  of  Italy  where  these  abound  bees  do
not  flourish  (cf.  Columella,  ix,  13,  2).  Columella  {loc.  cit.)
mentions  many  remedies,  as  pounded  pomegranate  seed,  rose-
mary, etc. ,  and  amongst  them  that  given  by  Varro,  quidam
bubulam  vel  hominis  urinam,  sicut  Hyginus  affirmat,  alvis
apponunt.

'  Medici.  Pliny  (xxii,  24,  beginning)  describes  the  uses  of
propolis  in  medicine.    "  It  draws  out  stings  and  foreign  bodies,


336  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

name,  for  making  plasters;  and  for  this  reason  it
fetches  more  than  honey  in  the  Sacra  Via.  The  so-
called  erithace  ^— a  different  thing  from  honey  or
propolis— h^QS  use  for  sticking  together  the  edges  of
the  combs,  and  so  it  has  the  power  of  attracting
.  them.  Accordingly  people  smear  the  bough  or
other  object  on  which  they  want  a  swarm  to  settle,

24  with  a  mixture  of  it  and  apiastruni.  Honeycomb  is
what  bees  make  of  wax;  this  has  many  compart-
ments in  it,  each  one  of  which  has  six  sides,  as  many
sides  as  nature  has  given  feet  to  each  bee.  It  is
said,  too,  that  they  do  not  extract  from  every  flower
alike  the  materials  which  they  bring  to  the  making
of  the  four  substances,  propolis,  erithace,  honey-
comb and  honey.  Some  plants  serve  for  but  a
single  ^  one  of  them ;  thus  from  the  pomegranate
and  asparagus  bees  extract  food  only,  from  the  olive
tree  wax,  from  the  fig  tree  honey,  which  is,  however,

25  not  good ;  other  plants  serve  for  two,  as  from  beans,
apiastrum,  gourds,  and  cabbages  are  extracted  wax

breaks  up  tumours,  reduces  hard  swellings,  assuages  the  pain
of  muscular  rheumatism,  and  heals  otherwise  incurable  ulcers."
By  the  use  of  the  word  protectum  Varro  hints  at  a  derivation
of  the  word  TrpoTroXtc,  viz.,  Trpo  and  ttoKic,  "  in  front  of  the  city."

'  Erithacen.  Cf.  iii,  16,  8.  Both  Pliny  and  Columella  state
that  it  is  the  bees'  food.

^  Simplex.  One  is  inclined  to  believe,  with  Keil  and  against
Schneider,  that  the  text  is  sound  though  the  construction  is
harsh  and  elliptical.  Simplex  must  be  taken  closely  with  quae
adferunt.  Of  the  things  which  they  bring  (i)  there  is  a  simple
substance  as  .  .  .  (2)  duplex  minist^Hum  praeheri,  "a  two-
fold supply  is  given  by  others,  as  for  example  ..."  etc.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  337

and  food;  two  likewise  are  obtained  from  the  apple
tree  and  wild  pear  tree,  namely  food  and  honey,
and  a  different  two — wax  and  honey — from  the
poppy.  Some  plants  also  supply  the  material  for
three;  the  almond  tree,  for  example,  2in^  lapsaniim^
(cole-wort?),  which  furnish  food,  honey,  wax.  And
so  it  is  with  what  they  extract  from  other  flowers,
for  they  choose  some  things  to  make  one  product,
26  others  to  make  several,  and  also  adopt  yet  another
distinction — or  rather  it  adopts  '  them — which  is
shown  in  the  case  of  honey,  when  from  one  plant
— say  the  blossom  of  sisera^ — they  make  liquid
honey,  from  another,  such  as  rosemary,  honey  that
is  thick.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  other  things,
thus  the  honey  made  from  the  fig  is  insipid,  that
from  the  cytisus  good,  that  from  thyme  ^  the  best
of  all.

^  Lapsanum.  Columella  (ix,  4,  5)  calls  this  lapsana:  lam
vero  notae  vilioi-u  innuinerabiles  nascuntur  herbae  cultis  atque
pascuis  regionibus  quae  favorum  ceras  exuberant;  ut  vulgares
lapsanae.  Pliny  (xx,  9)  gives  a  description  of  it  and  places  it
inter  silvestres  brassicas.

'^  Aut  eas  sequatur.  This  quip  of  Varro's,  as  Keil  points  out,
means  merely  that  the  bees  cannot  themselves  determine  the
kind  of  honey  which  they  will  make  from  a  given  plant.

*  Sisera,  generally  written  siser,  was,  to  judge  from  Pliny's
(xiv,  5)  description,  the  parsnip.  Pontedera  adopts  the  reading
he  found  in  Crescentius,  ciceris  (chick-pea),  reasoning  air'
sIkotoiv.

*  E  thymo  optimum.  Columella  (ix,  4,  6)  after  giving  a  long
list  of  plants  which  are  visited  by  bees,  mentions  the  following
in  order  of  merit:  (i)  thyme,  which  produces  honey  of  the
finest  flavour ;  (2)  almost  as  good :  savorj',  wild  thyme,  and

Z  "^


338  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

27  Now  as  food  is  both  liquid  and  solid,  and  the
liquid  food  of  bees  is  pure  water,  it  should  be  pro-
vided for  them  to  drink.  This  should  be  near  their
hives  and  should  flow  past  in  a  stream,  or  form  a
pool  the  depth  of  which,  however,  must  not  exceed
two  or  three  finger-breadths,  and  in  this  stream  or
pool  bits  ^  of  pot  or  small  stones  should  be  placed
standing  a  little  above  the  surface,  so  that  the  bees
can  alight  on  them  and  drink.  In  this  matter  you
must  be  most  careful  to  see  that  the  water  is  pure,
as  this  is  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  making

28  of  good  honey.  As  all  weathers  do  not  permit  them
to  go  far  afield  in  search  of  food,  food  should  be
made  ready  for  an  emergency,  for  fear  lest,  being
weather-bound,  they  may  have  to  live  on  honey
alone,  or,  when  they  have  finished  ^  it  all,  quit  the

marjoram;  (3)  not  so  good,  but  still  excellent:  rosemary  and
cunila  (a  kind  of  wild  marjoram);  (4)  producing  honey  of
fairly  good  flavour :  the  blossom  of  the  tamarisk  and  jujube
tree ;  while  the  worst  honey  is  produced  from  (5)  esparto  grass,
arbutus,  cabbages,  and  other  plants  which  receive  manure.
Aristotle  (v,  22  middle)  says  that  bees  get  honey  from  all  plants
which  have  flowers  enclosed  in  a  cup :  <^ipn  0'  airb  Travnov  y)
fieXirra  oaa  iv  kc'iXvki  dvQtl.

^  Testae.    There  is,  I  think,  little  doubt  but  that  Vergil  had
this  passage  before  him  when  he  wrote  (Georg.,  iv,  25):
In  medium,  seu  stabit  iners  sea  profluet  humor
Tranversas  salices  et  grandia  conice  saxa:
Pontibus  ut  crebris  possint  consisfere,  et  alas
Pandere  ad  aestivum  solem;  si  forte  viorantes
Sparserit  aut praeceps  Neptuno  immerserit  Eurus.
*  Exinanitas.    This  is  Keil's  interpretation,  to  which  objec-
tion mav  be  made  that  the  antithesis  is  then  false  and  that


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  339

hive.  Accordingly,  about  ten  pounds  of  ripe  figs
are  boiled  down  in  six  congit  (about  four  and  a  half
gallons)  of  water,  and  when  cooked  ^  are  made  into
cakes  and  placed  near  the  hives.  Other  people  have
vessels  filled  with  water  sweetened  with  honey  placed
near  at  hand,  on  to  which  they  put  clean  ^  wool,  so
that  the  bees  may  suck  the  hydromel  through  it,
avoiding  thus  at  one  stroke  the  double  danger  of
either  drinking  too  much  at  a  time  or  of  falling  into
the  water.  Vessels  are  placed,  one  near  each  hive,
and  are  kept  filled.  Other  people  pound  raisins  and
figs  together,  pour  sapa  on  the  mixture,  and  then
make  it  into  cakes  which  are  put  in  some^  place

the  passage  would  seem  to  require  the  emendation  of  Ursinus
which  Keil  rejects,  viz.,  ac  (instead  of  aut)  relinquere.  Ex-
inanitas,  I  imagine,  means  "  deserted  by  its  inhabitants,"  not
"emptied  of  honey."  It  might,  however,  mean  "if  they  have
been  emptied  of  honey."

'  Codas.  The  expression,  ^o^/aj'/wo^j,  "cooked  into  cakes,"
seems  harsh  enough  to  justify  Ursinus's  emendation,  coactas.

'  Lanam  puram.  Cf.  Columella,  ix,  14,  15:  "The  better
practice  is,  I  believe,  in  winter,  when  the  bees  are  starving,  to
place  In  small  troughs  close  to  the  entrances  of  the  hives  dried
figs  which  have  been  pounded  and  then  steeped  in  water,  or
defnitum,  or  raisin  wine,  and  to  steep  in  these  liquids  a  piece
of  clean  wool  on  which  the  bees  may  stand  and  suck  up  the
fluid  as  though  through  a  pipe.  Cf.  Pliny,  xxl,  14 :  Si  cibus
deesse  censeatur  apibus,  uvas  passas  ficosque  siccus  tusas  ad  fores
earuin  posuisse  conveniet.  Item  lanas  tractas  (carded)  madenles
passo  aut  defruto  aqua  7nulsa.

^  Ibi  quo  foras.  I  have  followed  Victorius's  interpretation —
which  is  adopted  by  Keil — but  with  some  misgiving,  for,  as
Schneider  points  out,  bees  do  not  quit  the  hive  in  search  of
food  during  the  winter.     Instead  oi  foras  perhaps  th£  ad /ores


340  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

outside  the  hive  where  the  bees,  though  it  be  winter,
29  can  still  go  for  food.  When  bees  are  about  to  swarm,
which  is  generally  when  a  good  number  of  young
ones  have  been  born  to  them  without  mishap,  and
the  hive  means  to  send  forth  its  children  to  form  as
it  were  a  colony,  just  as  the  Sabines  in  old  times
often  had  to  do  owing  to  the  large  numbers  of  their
children — you  can  tell  when  this  is  going  to  happen
by  means  of  two  signs  which  usually  precede  it.
(i)  Some  days  before,  especially  in  the  evening,
bunches  of  bees  hanging  together  like  grapes  are  to
7,0  be  seen  before  the  entrance  of  the  hive.  (2)  When
they  are  just  on  the  point  of  flying  away  or  have
actually  begun  to  do  so  they  make  a  loud  humming
like  the  sound  made  by  soldiers  when  moving  camp.
Those  which  first  leave  the  hive  fly  about  in  sight,
looking  back  repeatedly  at  the  others  who  have  not
yet  swarmed  until  they  too  come.  When  the  bee-
keeper sees  what  has  happened,  he  terrifies  them
31  by  throwing  dust '  upon  them,  and  by  clashing  brass

{or foras)  of  the  passage  quoted  above  from  Pliny  might  be
read  :  "  Whither — to  the  entrances,  that  is — they  can  at  least
go  for  food  even  though  it  be  winter."  Varro  then  would  be
in  complete  agreement  with  Columella  and  Plinv.  The  precise
definition  of  quo  by  a  parenthetic  ad  fores  is  quite  in  Varro's
manner.

'  laciundo pulvere.    In  Vergil  (Georg.,  iv,  67-S7)  it  is  in  order
to  part  the  armies  of  two  rival  kings  that  dust  is  thrown,  when  :

Hi  motus  animorum  atque  haec  certamina  tanta
Pulveris  exigui  iaclu  coinprcssa  quiescunt.

Vergil's  compressa  corresponds  to  Varro's  perlerrilac,  but  how
the  poet  turns  all  to  favour  and  to  prettiness !


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  341

around  them,  while  the  place,  which  should  not  be
far  away,  to  which  it  is  wished  to  bring  them  is
smeared  '  with  erithace^  apiastrmn,  and  other  things
of  which  they  are  fond.  When  they  have  settled,  a
hive  is  brought  there,  smeared  inside  with  the  en-
ticing substances  I  have  mentioned.  This  is  placed
close  to  the  swarm,  which  is  then  forced  by  a  gentle
fumigation  to  enter  it.  When  once  the  bees  have
entered  the  new  colony  they  remain  there  with  such
goodwill  that,  even  if  you  place  next  to  them  the  old
hive  from  which  they  came,  they  still  prefer  the  new
home.
32  Having  stated  what  I  considered  to  be  of  import-
ance in  the  matter  of  bee-feeding,  I  will  now  pro-
ceed to  discuss  its  object— the  produce.

The  time  for  taking '  the  honey-combs  is  indicated

^  Oblinunt.  For  this  some  such  object  as  ramum  seems  to
be  required,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  Varro  disdained  to  be
more  explicit.

-  Eximendorum  favorum.  As  I  have  translated  this  passage,
i  had  better  perhaps  say  here  what  I  have  translated.  This  is
the  reading  of  the  Archetype  as  given  by  Victorius :  Signuvi
eximendorum  favorum  sumunt  ex  ipsis  viris  a/vos  haheat  nem
cos^erminarit  coniecturd  capiunt  si  intus  faciunt  bomhum  et,  cum
intra  eunt  acforas  trepidant  et  siopercula  alvorum  cum  remoreissi
favorum  foramina  obducta  vidcntur  membranis^  cum  sint  repleti
melle.  Scaliger's  remark  on  this  is :  Non  est  locus  inquinatior
isto,  et  sane  eum  emendandi  omnem  prorsus  spem  abieci.  And
so  say  Victorius  and  Keil.  In  order  to  get  something  to  trans-
late I  have  supposed  this  to  have  been  written  :  Si gnum  eximen-
dorum favoruin  sumunt  ex  ipsis  {fures  a/vos  habeatne  an  contra
exterminarit  coniecturam  capiunt  si  intus  faciunt  bombum  et,
cum  intro  eunt  et  foras,   trepidant)   et  opercula   alvorum   cum


342  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

by  the  state  of  the  honeycombs  themselves,  for  you  may
know  that  it  has  come,  if,  on  removing  the  lids  of
the  hives,  the  cells  are  seen  to  be  covered  with  a
thin  skin,  being  then  full  of  honey;  (one  guesses
whether  the  hive  still  contains  drones  or  has
already  expelled  them  by  the  loud  buzzing  the  bees
make  inside  the  hive,  and  by  their  rushing  in  wild
33  excitement  in  and  out  of  it).  When  the  honey  is  re-
moved, some  say  that  nine-tenths  should  be  taken
and  a  tenth  '  left,  for  if  you  take  away  the  whole  the
bees  will  desert  the  hive.    Some  people  leave  more

remoris  (Keil)  si favoruvi  foramina  ohducta  videntur  vienibranis
— cum  sunt  repleti  melle,  and  I  have  translated  the  parenthesis
last.  As  to  fures  for  viris :  Varro  has  already  mentioned y«r  as
a  name  given  to  drones  (iii,  i6,  19),  and  the  killing  of  them
seems  to  be  indicated  by  what  follows.  Alvos  (here,  of  course,
nominative)  is  frequently  used  by  Pliny  and  Columella  for  the
bees  in  the  hive.  For  neyn  I  have  written  7ie  an.  The  altera-
tion of  congermijiarit  to  contra  exterminarit  is  violent,  but  Colu-
mella (ix,  15,  3)  uses  exterminare  in  this  relation  :  Hos  quidam
praecipiunt  in  totum  exterminari  oportere.  In  the  phrase  ^^jz
favoruvi  .  .  .  cum  remoreissi  Keil  obviously  deletes  the  wrong
si,  and  in  the  last  clause  sunt  instead  of  sint  seems  to  be
necessary.  To  the  reading  proposed  much  support  is  given  by
Columella  (ix,  15,  4) :  Ergo  cum  rixam  fucorum  etapium  saepius
committi  videris  adapetias  alvos  inspicies  ut,  sive  se7nipJeni
favi  sijit  differantur :  sive  iam  liquore  completi,  et  superpositis
ceris  tamquam  opcrcuUs  ohliti  dcmetanttir,  and  Palladius  (June
vii) :  Item  cum  fucos  a  sedibus  suis,  qui  sunt  apes  maiores,  grandi
intentione  deturbant  matura  mella  testantur.

^  Decumam.  Columella  (ix,  15,  8)  says;  "In  summertime
a  fifth,  and  on  the  approach  of  winter,  a  third  of  the  honey
should  be  left;  but  on  this  point  ancient  authorities  dis-
agree.


Ill]  OF  BEES  AND  APIARIES  343

than  the  amount  stated.  As  in  the  case  of  ploughed
lands  those  who  have  yearly '  crops  from  them  get
more  corn  after  intervals  of  comparative  rest,  so  with
hives,  if  you  do  not  take  the  honey  every  year,  or
take  less  of  it,  your  bees  are  busier  and  pay  better.

34  The  honey  should  first  be  taken,  it  is  thought,  at
the  rising  of  the  Pleiads,  next  when  summer  is  over,
before  Arcturus  has  fully  risen,  and  for  the  third  time
after  the  setting  of  the  Pleiads;  and  at  this  time,
even  if  the  hive  be  fertile,  not  more  than  a  third  of
the  honey  should  be  taken,  and  the  rest  should  be
left  for  their  winter  supply,  while  if  the  hive  be  not
fertile  none  at  all  should  be  removed.  When  a  large
amount  is  to  be  taken,  it  should  not  be  removed  all
at  once  or  in  sight  of  the  bees,  lest  they  lose  heart.
If  any  part  of  the  honey-combs  which  have  been  got
has  no  honey  in  it,  or  if  what  it  has  is  dirty,  that

35  part  must  be  cut  off  with  a  knife.  Care  should  be
taken  to  prevent  the  weaker  bees  from  being  bullied
by  the  stronger,  for  so  the  yield  is  decreased.  Ac-
cordingly the  weaker  are  generally  separated  from
the  rest  and  given  another  king.

Those  who  will  continually  fight  together  should
be  sprinkled  with  water  sweetened  with  honey,  when
they  not  only  leave  off  fighting,  but  crowd  together
and  lick  one  another.  The  effect  is  more  marked  if
wine  and  honey  is  used,  the  smell  of  which  makes

^  Restibiles.  Cf.  i,  44,  2  and  3,  a  passage  which  fully  ex-
plains this,  and  makes  unnecessary  the  insertion  of  non  before
restibiles  as  proposed  by  Ursinus  and  others.  Compare  also
ii,  7,  II.


344  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

them  come  to   it  with  great  eagerness  and  drink
until  they  are  stupefied.

36  If  too  few  come  out  of  the  hive,  and  some  con-
stantly remain  behind,  recourse  must  be  bad  to
fumigations,  and  near  by  some  sweet-smelling
herbs '  should  be   placed,  in   particular  apiastrum

37  and  thyme.  The  utmost  care  must  be  taken  to  pre-
vent their  dying  from  extreme  heat  or  cold.  If  ever
they  have  been  surprised  while  feeding  by  a  sudden
shower  or  fall  of  temperature,  which  even  they  had
not  foreseen — for  it  rarely  happens  that  they  are
deceived — and  the  big  drops  have  struck  them  to
the  earth  where  they  lie  as  dead,  you  must  put"
them  together  into  some  vessel,  and  place  them  out
of  the  way  in  a  sheltered  and  moderately  warm  spot,
and  the  next  day  when  the  weather  is  at  its  best,
bits  of  fig-wood  should  be  burned  to  ashes,  and
these,  when  they  are  a  little  hotter  than  lukewarm,

^  Herbarum.  A  use  of  the  genitive  rare  in  Latin,  quite  com-
mon in  Greek,  as  in  such  phrases  as  o\vov  viviiv,  rijc  yiig  Hfiveiv,
etc.    Cf.  Varro,  iii,  17,  7.

^  ColUgendtim.  It  is  remarkable  that  both  Columella  (ix,
13,  4)  and  Pliny  (xi,  20)  speak  of  this  practice  as  adopted  for
the  resuscitation  in  the  spring  of  bees  that  have  died  on  the
approach  of  winter.  Pliny  says  :  "  Some  people  think  that  the
dead  bees  revive  if  they  are  kept  in  the  house  during  the
winter,  and  then,  when  the  spring  comes  are  warmed  in  the
sun  and  kept  hot  for  a  whole  day  in  fig-wood  ashes."  Columella
{loc.  cit.)  makes  substantially  the  same  statement  about  bees
which  have  died  from  disease,  taking  Hyginus  as  his  authority,
"who  himself  followed  ancient  authors  and  dared  not  assert
the  truth  of  the  story."  In  any  case.  Columella  savs,  the  best
thing  is  to  prevent  them  from  dying.


Ill]  OF  FISH-PONDS  345

should  be  sprinkled  over  the  bees,  which  must
then  be  gently  shaken,  vessel  and  all — so  that  you
do  not  touch  them  with  the  hand — and  placed  in
38  the  suji.  Thus  thoroughly  warmed  they  are  re-
stored and  come  to  life  again,  just  as  it  happens  in
the  case  of  drowned  flies.  This  treatment  is  to  be
carried  out  close  to  the  hives,  so  that  when  won
back  to  life,  each  bee  may  return  to  his  own  work
and  home.


CHAPTER  XVH

OF  FISH-PONDS

Meanwhile  Pavo '  came  back  to  us  and  said:
Suppose  we  weigh  anchor;  the  votes ^  have  been
given,  and  the  tribes  are  casting^  lots,  and  the  crier
is  beginning  to  shout  out'  the  name  of  the  aedile
chosen  by  each  tribe.  Appius  at  once  jumped  up;
meaning  to  greet  his  candidate  on  the  spot,  and

'  Pavo.    See  iii,  5,  18.

-  Latis  tabulis,  i.e.,  suffragiis.  Cf.  Cicero,  Pro  Plaiicio,  20:
Vocafae  tribus  latum  suffragium,  descriptae,  renuntiatae.

^  Sortitio  tribuum,  to  decide,  in  the  case  of  competitors  who
had  received  an  equal  number  of  votes,  which  should  be
chosen.  Cf.  Pro  Plancio,  22  :  Neque  enim  umquavi  maiores
nostri  sortitionem  constituissent  aedilitiam,  nisi  viderent accidere
posse  ut  competitores  pares  suffragiis  essent.  This  speech  throws
much  light  on  the  coviilia  aedilitia.

*  Recini.  The  verburn  solenne  is  recitari.  Keil  thinks  there
is  here  a  reference  to  the  "  sing-song  "  utterance  of  the  crier.


346  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

then  go  on  to  his  country  house.'  Whereupon
Merula  remarked:  Some  other  time,  Axius,  I  will
give  you  the  third  act'  concerning  farm-yard  feed-
ing. They  (Merula  and  Appius)  rose,  and  Axius
and  I  stood  looking  back  at  them  as  they  went,  for
we  knew  our  candidate  would  come  that'  way.
Said  Axius  to  me:  I  am  not  sorry  that  Merula
has  left  us  at  this  point,  for  I  know  pretty  well
2  what  remains  to  be  said.  Thus:  there  are  two  sorts
of  fish-ponds,  those  of  fresh  water  and  those  of  salt.

^  Hortos.  Varro  has  the  same  phrase,  discedere  in  hortos,  at
the  end  of  Book  II :  Itaque  discedinius  ego  et  Scrofa  in  hortos  ad
Vituluni.  Horti  has  different  meaning's:  (i)  gardens  in  our
sense — Varro  (i,  i6,  3)  speaks  of  market  gardens:  suh  urbe
hortos;  (2)  pleasure  grounds,  whether  public  or  private;  (3)
the  estate  of  a  country  gentleman — the  villa  with  its  grounds.
Entertainments  were  frequently  given  in  hortis,  cf.  Cicero
(Phil.,  ii,  6):  Hodie  non  descendit  Antonius.  Cur?  Natalitia
dat  in  hortis.  And  again,  De  Ofificiis,  iii,  14:  Ad  cenam
hominem  in  hoitos  invitavit  in  proximum  diem.  For  dinners  in
hortis  stone  triclinia  were  commonly  used.  In  several  of  the
peristylia  of  the  houses  at  Pompeii  these  stone  couches  are  to
be  seen  disposed  round  a  central  table.  They  are  very  com-
fortable. I  imagine  then  that  Appius  intended  to  congratulate
his  candidate  (he  seems  to  have  been  sure  that  he  would  be
elected !)  and  then  go  and  dine  with  him,  just  as,  presumably,
Varro  and  Scrofa  went  to  Vitulus's  country  place  to  spend  what
remained  of  the  holiday.  Perhaps  Applus's  candidate  lived  on
the  slope  of  the  Pincian  Hill  {collis  hortoruni)  which  was  less
than  a  mile  away  from  the  Villa  Publica.

*  Tertium  actuni,  i.e.,  de piscinis.    Cf.  iii,  3,  i.

'  Et  candidalum.  I  have  translated  Ursinus's  emendation
ea,  for  the  et  of  the  Archetype  seems  pointless,  seeing  that
Appius's  candidate  was  not  coming.


Ill]  OF  FISH-PONDS  347

Those  of  the  one  kind,  in  which  water  is  supplied
to  ouf  home-fed  fishes  by  the  river  Nymphs/  are
kept  by  men  of  the  people,  and  are  profitable
enough;  while  the  other  sea-water  ponds  which
belong  to  the  nobles,  and  get  both  water  and
fishes  from  Neptune,  appeal  more  to  the  eye  than
to  the  pocket,  and  empty  rather  than  fill  the
owner's  purse.  For  they  cost  a  great  deal  to  build,
a  great  deal  to  stock,  and  a  great  deal  to  feed.
Hirrus'  used  to  make  12,000^  sesterces  {£g^)  a
year  out  of  the  buildings  round  about  his  fish-
ponds— and  spent  every  penny  of  it  on  food  for  the
fishes.  And  no  wonder,  for  I  remember  he  lent
on  a  single  occasion  to  C.  Caesar  2,000^  lampreys
by  weight,  and  that  his  villa  fetched  four  million
sesterces  (;^32,ooo)  when  sold,  owing  to  the  great

^  Lymphae.  Keil  in  both  editions  writes  this  word  with  a
small  initial  letter.  It  seems  much  better  to  write  it  with  a
capital,  for  the  sake  of  the  antithesis  between  the  Lymphae
and  Neptune.  Varro  has  already  (i,  i,  6)  mentioned  Lympha
as  a  goddess :  Nee  non  etiam  precor  Lymphain  ac  Bonum  Even-
turn.

"  Hirrus.    Cf.  ii,  i,  2.

^  Duodena  milia.    Cf.  note,  iii,  16,  11.

*  Duo  milia.  Pliny  (ix,  55)  has  six  thousand :  Murenarum
vivarium  privatim  excogitavit  C.  Hirrus  ante  alios  qui  cenis
triumphalibus  Caesaris  Dictatoris  sex  milia  numero  murenarum
mutuo  appemiit  (Varro's  muttia  inpondus  dedit).  Nam permutare
quidem.  pretio  noluit  aliave  merce.  Hirrus  would  accept  no
payment  in  money,  but  stipulated  for  the  return  of  the  same
weight  of  lampreys.  Macrobius  (ii,  11)  repeats  Pliny's  state
ment  and  adds  the  detail  that  Hirrus's  villa  was  not  very  big
{quamvis  non  amplam  aul  latam).


348  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

quantity  of  fish  in  its  waters.  So  with  good  reason
is  the  inland  pond,  owned  by  common  people,  called
"  sweet"  and  the  other  "  bitter,"  for  which  of  us  is
not  contented  with  a  single  fish-pond  of  the  former
kind,  and  on  the  other  hand,  what  man  that  has
begun  with  a  single  salt-water  pond,  but  goes  on  to
4  have  a  regular  suite  of  them?  For  just  as  Pausias  '
and  the  other  painters  of  his  school  have  large  paint-
boxes divided  into  compartments  in  which  to  keep
their  wax-pigments  of  difi"erent  colours,  so  our
wealthy  men  possess  fish-ponds  having  similar
compartments  for  keeping  separate  different  kinds
of  fish,  these  fish  being  sacred  and  more  inviolable
than  those  Lydian  ones  that  you  used  to  tell  us

^  Pausias.  Pliny  (xxxv,  ii,  beginning-)  gives  an  interesting
account  of  him.  He  was  a  native  of  Sicyon,  which  he  made
for  a  long  time  "the  home  of  painting,"  and  was  a  con-
temporary of  Apelles,  and  taught  by  the  same  master,  Pam-
phylus.  He  was  the  first  to  become  famous  as  a  painter  of
encaustic  pictures  (Ceris  pingere  ac  picturam  inurere).  The
most  interesting  fact  about  him,  however,  is  that,  according  to
Plinv,  he  discovered  fore-shortening :  Earn  enim  picturam
primus  invenit  quam  postea  ijiiitati  sunt  multi,  aequavit  nemo.
Ante  omnia,  cum  long-itudineni  bovis  ostendere  vellet,  adversum
eum  pinxit  nan  transversum  unde  et  abunde  intelligitur  ampli-
tudo  .  .  .  magna  prorsus  arte  in  aequo  exstantia  ostendens  et  in
confracto  omnia  solida.  Did  he  show  the  naive  delight,  one
wonders,  in  his  invention,  which  Uccello,  who  re-discovered
the  art  some  eighteen  centuries  later,  displays  in  his  pictures?
Varro  was  doubtless  familiar  with  his  original  works,  for  In
the  aedileship  of  Aemilius  Scaurus,  who  was  consul  in  the
year  of  Varro's  birth,  Sicyon  being  unable  to  pay  its  debts,
they  were  forfeited  and  taken  to  Rome.


Ill]  OF  FISH-PONDS  349

about,  Varro,  which,  when  you  were  sacrificing  near
the  sea  came  up  at  the  sound  of  a  flute  to  the  edge
of  the  shore  and  quite  close  to  the  altar,  no  one
daring  to  catch  them — it  was  about  the  same  time
that  you  saw  the  Lydian  islands  dancing  ^  round
and  round — well,  these  fishes  of  ours  are  equally
sacred,  so  sacred  that  no  cook  dares  to  call  them
5  over"  the  coals.  Our  common  friend  Quintus  Hor-
tensius  had  fish-ponds  near  Bauli  ^  which  had  cost

'  XopevovaaQ.  Pliny  devotes  a  chapter  (ii,  95)  to  "islands  which
always  float,"  and  mentions  many  such  in  Italy  near  Reate,
Statona,  etc.,  as  well  as  those  in  Lydia  called,  from  the  abund-
ance of  reeds  {KoKanoi)  which  grew  on  them,  calaminae.  With
regard  to  the  latter  he  says  :  In  Lydia  quae  vocantur  Calaminae
non  ventis  solum  sed  etiam  contis  quolibet  impuhae  multorum
civium  Mithridatico  bello  salus.  So  that  Varro  probably  saw
these  islands  when  he  was  one  of  Pompey's  Jegati  in  67  or  66  B.C.
Scaliger  quotes  the  following  passage  from  Martianus  Capella
(which  I  have  not  consulted) :  In  Lydia  Nympharum  insulas
dicunt  quas  etiam  recentior  asserentium  Varro  se  vidisse  testahir
quae  in  medium  stagnum  a  continenti procedentes  cantu  tihiarum
primo  in  circulum  motae,  dehinc  ad  liiora  revertuntur.

^  In  ius.  Cicero  somewhere  in  the  Verrines  makes  the
same  sort  of  pun,  speaking  of  the  ius  Verrinum,  i.e.,
Verres's  administration  of  justice,  or  "Boar's  gravy."  The
passage  in  the  text  means  literally  "to  summon  to  ius,  trial
or  sauce."

'  Baulos.  The  modern  Bacoll,  about  two  miles  from  Baiae
(Baja).  Ruins,  now  partly  under  water,  of  the  very  fish-ponds
mentioned  here  by  Varro  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Bacoli.  Cf.  Pliny
(ix,  55)  :  Apud  Baulos  in  parte  Baiana  piscinam  habuit  Hor-
tensius  Orator  in  qua  murenam  adeo  dilexit  ut  exanimatam  ftesse
credatur.  Cicero  called  Hortensius/w<:/«ar/MJ  (Macrobius,  ii,
II,  and  Cicero,  Ad  Atticum,  i,  19).


350  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

him  a  great  sum  to  build,  and  I  know,  for  I  often
used  to  stay  with  him  at  his  country-house,  that  he
used  always  to  send  to  Puteoli  to  buy  the  fish  for

6  dinner.  And  it  was  not  enough  that  his  fish-ponds
didn't  feed  him,  but  he  must  needs,  if  you  please,
with  his  own  '  hands  feed  them,  being  more  anxious
lest  his  mullets  should  feel  the  pangs  of  starvation
than  I  do  lest  my  asses '  at  Rosea  should  go  hungry.
He  spent,  too,  a  good  deal  more  on  the  former  than
I  do  on  the  latter  in  the  matter  of  both  food  and
drink.  For  all  I  need  for  the  feeding  of  my  costly
asses  is  one  little  slave,  a  trifle  of  barley,  and  water
found  on  the  estate,  while  Hortensius  in  the  first
place  kept  an  army  of  fishermen  to  feed  the  fish,
who  used  constantly  to  bring  him  masses  of  tiny
fishes  which  were  destined  to  serve  as  food  for  the  big

7  ones.    He  would  buy,  besides,  salt-fish,  and  throw

'  Ipse,  "with  his  own  hands."  Macrobius  (ii,  9)  tells  this
story  about  Hortensius:  "He  used  to  water  his  plane  trees
with  wine,  and  in  a  certain  case  in  which  he  and  Cicero  had
both  to  speak,  he  asked  Cicero  as  a  favour  to  change  with  him,
as  he  was  obliged  to  go  home  to  water  with  his  own  hands  a
plane  tree  which  he  had  planted  on  his  Tusculum  estate  " —
abi're  in  viUam  necessario  se  velle  ut  vinum  platano  quam  in
Tusculano  posuerat  ipse  suffu7ideret.  Macrobius  says  also  that
Hortensius  prosecuted  his  colleague  for  assault  and  battery,
because  the  latter,  meeting  him  on  a  narrow  footpath,  had
jostled  him  and  disordered  the  folds  of  his  toga — which  he
used  to  arrange  before  a  looking-glass  !

^  Asinos.  Cf.  iii,  2,  9.  In  the  muUi  above,  Schneider  sees  a
pun,  from  the  similarity  of  sound  in  muJli  and  mtiJi.  It  is  very
likely  that  he  is  right,  for  the  pun  would  give  point  to  the
antithesis  between  mullet  (mules)  and  asses.


in]  OF  FISH-PONDS  351

it  into  his  ponds,  when  the  sea  was  stormy,  and '
when,  owing  to  the  weather,  the  market  that  supphes
the  fish-ponds  (the  sea,  that  is)  refused  its  food,  and
the  live  food,  the  fish  eaten  by  the  common  people
for  supper,  could  not  be  got  to  shore  with  a  net.
You  would  sooner,  said  I,  have  got  Hortensius's
consent  to  your  taking  his  carriage-mules  from  the
stable   and   keeping   them    for  your  own,  than   a

8  bearded  mullet  from  his  fish-pond.  And,  Axius
went  on,  he  was  as  much  troubled  about  a  sick  fish
as  about  a  slave  who  was  not  very  well,  and  so  took
less  pains  to  prevent  a  slave  who  was  ill  from  drink-
ing cold  water  than  to  see  that  his  fish  had  it  fresh.
For  neglect  in  this  matter  he  used  to  blame  Marcus
Lucullus,^  and  thought  little  of  his  fish-ponds,  as,
he  said,  Lucullus  had  no  proper  tidal  basins,  and
as  the  water  was  stagnant  his  fish  lived  in  an  un-

9  healthy  place,  whereas  Lucius  Lucullus,  who  near

*  Ac.  The  sense  of  the  passage  would  be  greatly  improved
if  nee  were  read  instead  of  ae,  for  then  mare  {piscinarum  mare),
doubtless  interpolated,  could  be  explained  as  a  scribe's  note  on
macellum.  Hortensius  used  to  buy  salt  fish,  when,  owing  to  a
storm,  the  market  which  usually  supplied  his  fish-ponds  (i.e.,
the  sea)  did  «o/ supply  food,  etc.  Columella  (viii,  17,  12)  recom-
mends all  kinds  of  salt  fish,  rotten  sardines,  etc.,  and  the
sweepings  of  the  fishmongers'  stalls  {quae  ceiariorum  officinis
everrantur).

^  Marctis  Lucullus.  A  brother  of  Lucius  Lucullus.  The  two
are  often  mentioned  together  by  Cicero,  cf.  De  Provin.  Con-
sular., 9,  and  De  Officiis,  ii,  14  {ut  duo  LuculJi),  etc.  Cf.
Velleius  Paterculus  (ii,  49,  i):  sipHus gratulatus  ero  O.  Catulo,
duobus  Lucullis,  Metelloque  et  Hortensio,


352  VARRO  ON  FARMING  [bk.

Naples  had  pierced  a  mountain  '  and  let  in  the  sea
into  his  fish-ponds,  whereby  the  latter  themselves
became  tidal,  had  as  fine  a  fishing-ground  as
Neptune — for  it  seems  as  though  he  had  brought
his  beloved  fish  on  account  of  the  boiling  heat  into
a  cooler  climate,  as  is  the  custom  of  the  Apulian "
cattle  breeders,  who  lead  their  flocks  along  the
cattle-tracks  to  the  Sabine  mountains.  And  in  the
case  of  his  country-house  at  Baiae  he  was  when
building  it  consumed  with  such  eagerness  that  he
gave  his  architect  permission  to  spend  money
as  though  it  were  his  (the  architect's)  own,  pro-
vided that  he  managed  to  make  a  passage  from
his  fish-ponds  to  the  sea,  and  threw  out  a  mole  by
which  twice  a  day  from  the  first  quarter  of  the  moon
to  the  next  new  moon  the  tide  could  come  in  and  go
back  to  the  sea — and  thus  cool  his  fish-ponds,
lo  Our  conversation  had  reached  this  point  when
there  was  a  noise  on  the  right,  and  our  candidate,
now  aedile-designate  came  into  the  Villa  Publica
clad  in  the  toga  ^  praetexia.    We  went  up  to  him

^  Montem.  Cf.  Pliny,  ix,  54.  Lucullus  exciso  etiam  monte
iuxta  Neapolim  inaiore  impendio  quavi  viUam  aedijicaverat,
euripum  et  maria  admisit.  Qua  de  causa  Magnus  Pompeius
Xerxen  togatum  eum  appellahat.  This  Neapolitan  villa  is  men-
tioned by  Cicero  (Academicorum,  ii,  3)  in  connection  with
Hortensius's  villa,  ad  Baulos,  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  paid  by
Cicero,  Catulus,  and  Lucullus  to  Hortensius.  It  stood  on  the
hill  of  Posilipo,  where  Vedius  Pollio,  Vergil,  and  many  others
had  villas.

^   Ut  Apuli  solent.    Cf.  ii,  i,  16,  and  ii,  2,  9.

^  Cum  lata.    Their  candidate  had  just  been  elected  Curule


Ill]  OF  FISH-PONDS  353

and  after  congratulations  escorted  him  to  the
Capitol.  And  so  he  to  his  house/  we  to  ours.
And  thus  ended  the  conversation  about  "home
feeding,"  of  which,  my  friend  Pinnius,  I  have
given  you  the  gist.

Aedile  and  so  had  the  right  to  wear  the  dress  peculiar  to
senators  and  certain  magistrates — the  toga  praetexta — which
had  a  broad  band  of  purple  (latus  clavus).  The  word  to  be
understood  after  lata  is  "gxo^i^kAy  purpura.  For  the  right  of  a
Curule  Aedile  to  wear  the  toga  praetexta  cf.  Cic.  in  Verrem,
V,  14 — the  locus  class icus  for  the  duties  and  privileges  of  a
Curule  Aedile.

^  Endo  suam  domum.  This  is  a  deliberate  archaism  and  is
thought  to  be  an  imitation  of  Ennius's  endo  suam  do  (quoted
by  Ausonius),  where  the  do  is  an  apocopated  form  of  domum
resembling  Homer's  SS).


A  A


EXCURSUS  I

ON  THE  TIME  AND  PLACE  OF  THE  DIALOGUE  IN
BOOK  II

With  regard  to  the  place  and  occasion  of  the  dialogue
in  Book  II  there  is  great  difficulty;  for  whereas  in  the
two  other  books  Varro  mentions  these  explicitly,  here
neither  is  indicated,  and  the  conversation  begins  so
abruptly  that  nearly  all  the  commentators  have  been
driven  to  infer  a  large  lacuna  in  the  text.  Gesner,  how-
ever, followed  by  Gaston  Boissier,  maintains  that  nothing
is  missing,  and  that  Varro,  like  Homer  in  the  Odyssey,
plunged  at  once  into  the  heart  of  his  subject  in  order  to
quicken  the  curiosity  of  the  reader.  This  opinion  is,  I
think,  quite  untenable,  for  save  in  this  respect  the  plan
of  all  three  books  is  the  same — introduction,  dedication,
place,  and  occasion,  while  the  obvious  corruption  of  the
text  at  the  point  where  the  dialogue  begins,  and  the
fact  that  here  fresh  copyists  took  up  the  work  of  tran-
scription, make  it  not  improbable  that  much  has  been  lost,
especially  as  the  place  where  the  gap  is  thought  to  be  is
precisely  where  in  the  two  other  books  Varro  describes
the  circumstances  in  which  the  conversations  arose —
namely,  at  the  end  of  the  introduction.  Most  editors,
assuming  this  loss,  refuse  to  waste  time  on  the  attempt
to  solve  an  insoluble  riddle,  and  Pontedera  [Curae  Post-
humae)  even  charges  Varro  with  self-contradiction,  for

355


356  VARRO  ON  FARMING

he  says  :  "from  Varro's  statement  that  the  dialogue  took
place  when  he  was  in  command  of  the  fleets  between
Delos  and  Sicily  we  must  infer  that  the  place  was  not  in
Italy,  while  from  xi,  12,  libertus  in  urhem  veniens  ex
hortis,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  in  Rome. "  The  problem  may
be  insoluble,  but  deserves,  I  think,  more  consideration
than  it  has  received.

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  is  clear  from  viii,  i,  and
xi,  12,  that  the  interlocutors  were  met  together  to  cele-
brate a  holiday.  Now  as  Varro  was  careful,  in  the  first
book,  to  choose  a  time  and  place  especially  appropriate
to  the  topic  to  be  discussed — the  Sementivae  and  the
temple  of  Tellus — (in  the  third  there  was  no  divinity  or
temple  which  was  connected  with  his  subject)  it  is  a
priori  probable  that  he  took  the  same  course  in  the
second.  As  the  topic  was  here  cattle,  and  the  speakers
were  pastores — pecuarii — no  other  festival  could  be  so
appropriate  as  the  Palilia,  the  great  shepherd-festi-
val and  the  birthday  of  Rome,  which  was  founded  by
shepherds.  And  there  is  direct  evidence  in  the  text
for  this  supposition.  Lucienus,  v,  i,  after  greeting  the
company,  leaves  them  for  a  few  minutes  to  "pay  his
pence  to  Pales"  (I  read  Pali  bis  for  the  Palibus  of  the
archetype,  Schneider's  Palilibus,  or  Keil's  Larihiis)  and
the  libertus  of  Menas  (viii,  i)  says;  "the  liba  are
ready,  and  will  the  gentlemen  come  and  sacrifice  for
themselves."  But  liba  were  especially  characteristic
of  the  bloodless  sacrifices  to  Pales,  cf.  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv,
774:

At  nos  taciamus  ad  annum
Pastorum  dominae  grandia  liba  Pali.

It  may  be  regarded,  I  think,  as  practically  certain  that


EXCURSUS  I  357

these  imaginary  conversations  are  supposed  to  have  been
held  at  the  festival  of  the  Palilia,  67  B.C.

To  fix  with  the  same  certainty  the  place  where  they
took  place  is,  I  fear,  not  possible,  but  2Lpriina  facie  case
may  perhaps  be  made  out  for  Buthrotum  or  Cassiope.

Varro  at  the  end  of  the  introduction  says  that  he  will
reproduce  conversations  which  he  had  had  with  owners
of  large  cattle-ranches  in  Epirus,  at  the  time  of  the  war
against  the  Pirates  when,  as  a  legatus  of  Pompey,  he
was  in  command  of  fleets  between  Delos  and  Sicily ;  so
that  the  scene  of  the  dialogue  must  have  been  outside
Italy.  Pontedera's  second  inference  that  it  must  have
been  Rome  is  absurd,  for  urbs  unqualified  does  not
necessarily  mean  Rome,  and  the  Palilia  being  the  birth-
day of  the  capital,  was  doubtless  celebrated  not  only  in
Italy  but  in  all  the  Roman  provinces.  As  Varro  states
that  the  dialogue  is  between  Epirot  cattle-breeders,  and
as  three  of  the  speakers  are  demonstrably  Epirots —
Atticus,  whose  income  came  principally  from  cattle-
farms  in  Epirus  (cf.  Corn.  Nep.,  Atticus),  Cossinius,  and
Lucienus,  who  addresses  the  other  two  as  l.vvr\-Ktipu>Tai
(v,  i) — and  as  the  coast  there  would  be  in  Varro's  beat
(the  Sicilian  and  Ionian  Seas  as  far  as  Acarnania,  cf.
Appian  B.  Mith.  39),  and  as  Epirus  was  celebrated  for
its  cattle  and  so  was  not  unlikely  to  be  chosen  by  Varro
for  these  imaginary  conversations,  some  city  in  or  near
Epirus  seems  indicated.

It  appears  from  the  beginning  of  the  dialogue  that  the
discussion  was  continued  from  a  short  while  before,
when  it  had  been  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of  the  doctor.
Now  in  i,  4,  5,  Varro  says  that  when  the  fleet  and  army
were  at  Corcyra,  and  all  the  houses  were  filled  with  sick
or  dead  people,  he  managed  by  taking  certain  ptecau-


358  VARRO  ON  FARMING

tions  to  bring-  back  his  comrades  and  household  safe  and
sound.  Corcyra  was  just  oflF  Epirus  and  opposite
Buthrotum,  where  Atticus  had  a  house  (Cicero,  Ad  Att.,
iv,  8).  We  know,  too,  from  Cicero  (Ad  Att.,  i,  5-8)  that
between  68  and  66  Atticus  was  travelling  in  Greece ;  and
that  Corcyra  was  malarious,  for  in  51  Atticus  (Ad  Att.,
vi,  2)  caught  a  bad  quartan  fever  there  from  which  he
recovered  with  difficulty  (Ad  Att.,  vii,  5,  9,  etc.).  If  Varro
was  at  Cassiope  {partus  Corcyraeorunt,  cf.  Cic.  Ad  Div. ,
xvi,  9)  no  doubt  his  friend  Atticus,  if  then  at  Buthrotum,
would  run  over  to  see  him.  The  epidemic  which  was
raging  would  explain  the  visit  of  the  doctor.

Again,  the  talk  must  have  taken  place  in  some  build-
ing-in  the  city  (vii,  i),  for  in  v,  i,  Lucienus  is  spoken  of
as  introiens  (coming  inside),  and  not  in  a  private  house,
for  the  libertus  of  Vitulus  was  on  his  way  to  Varro's  quar-
ters when  seeing  him  and  the  others  he  came  to  them.
It  seems  likely  that  the  building  was  a  temple  (just  as  in
Book  I),  possibly  an  aedes  Palis.  I  would  suggest  the
following  as  a  plausible  reconstruction  of  the  plot.

Some  time  in  April  67  B.C.  the  fleet  with  which  Varro
was  hunting  pirate  galleys  put  into  Cassiope,  the  princi-
pal harbour  of  Corcyra.  On  the  20th,  or  a  little  before,
Atticus  and  Cossinius  came  over  to  see  him,  and  began
a  conversation  on  cattle-raising,  which  was  interrupted
by  the  arrival  of  the  doctor,  who  carried  off  Varro
(Troi/xeva  XaQv)  to  see  a  sick  man,  or  to  consult  about  the
health  of  the  soldiers  and  seamen.  On  the  following  day
Varro,  Atticus,  Cossinius,  Murrius,  Vaccius,  Scrofa,
Pomponius  Vitulus — probably  a  kinsman  of  Atticus —
and  Menas  met  by  appointment  to  make  arrangements
for  spending  the  Palilia.  Vitulus,  who  had  a  house  and
grounds   outside   the    city    (xi,    12),   asked   \^arro   and


EXCURSUS  I  359

Scrofa  to  spend  the  holiday  with  him,  and  on  their
accepting  went  away  to  give  the  necessary  orders.
Menas,  who  had  a  house  not  far  away,  invited  others  of
the  party  to  come  to  him,  and  he  too  left.  After  some
general  conversation  (as  in  Books  I  and  III)  Varro  pre-
pared to  go  to  Vitulus's,  but  the  rest  refused  to  let  him
depart  (II,  i,  ii)  until  he  had  given  the  discourse  on
cattle-raising  which  he  had  previously  begun.  And  so
the  dialogue  begins  and  goes  on  for  four  chapters,  when
Lucienus  arrives,  is  scolded  by  the  others  for  coming
late,  and  goes  off  to  pay  his  pence  to  Pales,  taking
Murrius  with  him  as  a  witness,  for  fear  they  should  try
to  make  him  pay  his  contribution  twice  over.  He  is
absent  for  a  few  minutes,  then  returns  to  discourse  later
on  horses.  A  few  chapters  further  Menas's  freedman
comes  to  tell  them  that  the  sacrificial  cakes  are  ready,
and  to  ask  his  friends  to  go  and  sacrifice.  The  Palilia,
by  the  way,  was  a  private  as  well  as  a  public  festival
(cf.  Scholiast  to  Persius,  i,  72).

Later  still  (xi,  12),  Vitulus,  growing  impatient — and
no  wonder! — sends  his  freedman  to  beg  Varro  and
Scrofa  to  come  at  once  and  not  to  cut  short  the  holiday
as  they  were  doing.  "And  so,  my  friend  Turranius
Niger,  we  parted,  Scrofa  and  I  through  Vitulus's
grounds  to  his  house,  while  the  rest  of  the  party  went
some  to  Menas's,  some  to  their  own  homes."


EXCURSUS  II

THE  TEXT  OF  THE  RERUM  RUSTICARUM

There  is  not  much  to  be  said  concerning-  the  text  of
these  books,  which  rests  in  the  last  resort  upon  the
authority  of  one  manuscript  only,  which  has  long  ago
disappeared.  In  1794  Schneider  pointed  out  that  all  ex-
isting manuscripts  were  derived  directly  or  indirectly
from  it,  and  this  fact  has  been  abundantly  proved  in
modern  times  by  the  great  German  scholar  Keil.  This
manuscript — the  Marcian — which  Pietro  Vittorio  calls
"  liber  antiquissimus  et  fidelissimus,"  was  in  his  time  in
the  library  of  St.  Mark  at  Florence,  and  was  much  used
by  him  in  the  preparation  of  his  edition  of  Cato  and
Varro,  published  in  1541.  Its  most  important  readings
— where  they  diverge  from  the  printed  editions  and
other  manuscripts  to  which  he  had  access — are  given,
and  are  occasionally  discussed  in  the  "  Explicationes
suarum  in  Catonem,  Varronem,  Columellam  castiga-
tionum,"  which  appeared  in  1542.  Before  Vittorio,
Angelo  Politian  had  in  1482  collated  this  manuscript
with  the  Jenson  edition  (editio  princeps  1472,  made
under  the  auspices  of  Georgius  Merula)  and  had  entered
in  his  copy  of  the  latter  all  readings  of  the  Marcian
MS.,  which  differed  from  the  printed  edition.
Of  remaining  manuscripts  the  most  important  are  the
360


EXCURSUS  II  361

Codex   Parisinus   (early  thirteenth  century),   a  faithful
transcript  of  a  good  copy  of  the  Marcian,  not  mentioned
by  Vittorio,   and   the    Codex  which    is   called  by  Keil
"  Mediceus  "  (fourteenth  century),  and  is  frequently  re-
ferred to  by  Vittorio  as  "  Semivetus,"  or  "  Gallicanus."
By  the  help  of  Politian's  collation,  Vittorio's  edition  of
1541,  his  *'  Explicationes  "  of  1542,  and  the  two  manu-
scripts mentioned,  the  Archetype  has  been  disentangled
from  the  numerous  emendations  of  Renaissance  scholars
which,  owing  to  ignorance  of  Varro's  peculiar  style,  and
the  fact  that  they  were  not  made  in  accordance  with  any
fixed  principle  of  textual  emendation  are  in  many  in-
stances as  worthless  as  they  are  ingenious.    Unfortun-
ately, however,  the  Archetype  thus  restored  to  us  is  full
of  corruptions,   and  neither  Politian  nor  Vittorio  has
given  any  clue  to   its  probable  date — though  Vittorio
calls  it  very  ancient — or  mentions  the  script  in  which  it
was  written.   It  seems  probable,  however,  that  the  Arche-
type was  an  early  Carolingian  Minuscule,  for  (i)  Vittorio
says  that  it  was  older  than  his  other  manuscripts  longo
intervallo',  (2)  the  abbreviations,  as  we  may  gather  from
his  "  Explicationes,"  are  few  and  simple,  which  is  the
case  with  early  minusculae,  but  not  with  late ;    (3)  the
mistakes  made  are  precisely  those  usually  made  by  the
scribes  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  when  copying
from  earlier  minuscule  MSS.,  written  in  one  or  other  of
the  so-called  national  scripts.    As  an  example,  "  a  "  and
"  u  "  are  persistently  confused  in  the  Archetype — twenty-
one  cases  occur  in  the  three  books.   Now  Alcuin  in  a  letter
to  Charlemagne  refers  to  the  corruptions  which  arose
from  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing   between  them —
"  possunt    quaedam    ex    his    exemplis    vitio    scriptoris
esse  corrupta  et   '  u  '  pro   '  a '  vel   etiam   *  a '  pro   '  u  '


362  VARRO  ON  FARMING

posita."  (Lindsay,  Latin  Textual  Emendation,  84.)  In
some  Meroving-ian  and  Lombard  scripts  these  letters  are
almost  indisting^uishable.  Ag^ain  the  first  words  of  thefirst
book  are  given  by  Politian  as  "P.  otius,"  for  "siotium" —
and  "  si "  in  some  pre-Carolingian  minusculae  looks  exactly
like  P.  There  are  of  course  also  the  mistakes  common
to  scribes  of  all  ages — dittography,  haplography,  wrong-
division  of  letters  to  form  words  as  well  as  those  arising
from  the  misreading  of  certain  abbreviations,  which
varied  in  different  scripts:  cf.  the  confusion  between  the
forms  of  the  relative,"  qui,"  "  quae,"  "  quod"  "  quam  ";
"  aliqui  "  and  "  aliquod  "  ("aliquot"),  etc.

On  the  other  hand,  had  the  Archetype  been  written  in
Merovingian,  Lombardic,  or  Visigothic  script,  Vittorio
would  surely  have  mentioned  the  fact.

For  these  and  other  reasons  it  seems  probable  that
the  Archetype  was  a  ninth-  or  tenth-century  minuscule,
copied  from  a  pre-Carolingian  minuscule.

For  the  emendation  of  the  faulty  text  of  the  Rerum
Rusticarum  use  has  been  made  of:  (i)  internal  evidence
from  the  books  themselves;  (2)  Varro's  other  writings;
(3)  quotations  made  from  the  Rerum  Rusticarum  by  the
ancient  grammarians,  especially  by  Monius  Marcellus,
who  quotes  frequently  from  the  first  book ;  (4)  the  sources
which  Varro  used,  especially  Cato,  Theophrastus,  and
Aristotle ;  (5)  the  Geoponica,  in  which  Varro  is  often
literally  translated ;  (6)  the  authors  who  without  quoting
his  actual  words,  paraphrase  or  expand  passages,  or  cite
facts  to  be  found  in  the  Rerum  Rusticarum — Columella,
Pliny,  Palladius,  Servius,  Macrobius,  St.  Augustine,
Isidore  of  Seville,  etc.  For  the  right  spelling  of  proper
names  much  assistance  is  given  by  Cicero,  Caesar,  and
Horace,  and  by  inscriptions.


EXCURSUS  II  363

There  is  besides  help  to  be  gained  from  a  method
which,  I  think,  has  not  been  applied  before  to  Varro.  It
consists  in  digesting-  and  tabulating  obvious  corruptions
in  the  text  which  can  at  once  be  corrected,  and  using
the  results  for  further  emendation.  As  a  case  in  point :
there  are  in  these  books  several  examples  of  such  a
phrase  as  "duodena  milia  sestertia,"  III,  17,  3,  which
does  not  seem  to  be  any  Latin  for  12,000  sesterces.
Several  scholars  suggested  "  sestertium,"  but  both
Schneider  and  Keil  retained  "sestertia"  in  the  text,
probably  because  the  emendation  lacked  paleographical
confirmation.  But  "  sestertium "  would  in  an  early
minuscule  MS.  most  probably  be  written  "  sestertiu  ";
in  early  Lombard  and  Franco-Lombard  script  the  let-
ters "a"  and  "u"  are  barely  distinguishable,  and  on
turning  to  our  table  of  usual  corruptions  we  find  that  the
confusion  between  the  two  letters  is  of  constant  occur-
rence in  the  text,  while  in  many  cases  the  line  above  a
vowel,  which  stands  for  "  m  "  or  "  n  "  is  frequently  neg-
lected. It  is  then  hardly  possible  to  doubt  that  the  scribe
found  "sestertiu,"  in  his  text,  neglected  the  stroke  above
the  "  u,"  and  for  the  latter  wrote  "  a."

This  method,  as  will  be  seen,  I  have  used  freely  in  the
emendations  which  have  been  attempted  in  the  com-
mentary and  in  Excursus  III.


EXCURSUS  III

CRITICAL  NOTES  AND  SUGGESTIONS

Quae  Coniecturae  meae  turn  mihi  placebunt  cum  a  doctioribus
viris  probari  audiam. — ViCTORlus.

I,  13,  I.  "  Fructus,  ut  est  vinum  et  oleum,  loco  piano
in  cellis,  item  ut  vasa  vinaria  et  olearia  potius  faciendum  :
aridus,  ut  est  faba  et  faenum  in  tabulatis."  Keil  (p.  45)
simply  expunges  "  ut,"  and  g-ives  a  wholly  unsatisfactory
explanation  of  the  untranslatable  "potius."  Pontedera
(Curae  Secundae)  suggests  "  ubi  "  instead  of  "ut,"  and
"  possint  esse"  for  "potius."  But  it  is  difficult  to  see
how  "potius"  could  have  arisen  from  "possint  esse."
Instead  of  the  latter  I  would  propose  "  ponas."  In  early
minuscule  MSS.  it  is  often  difficult  to  discriminate  be-
tween "  ti  "  and  "n"  (cf.  II,  i,  15,  where  "  statim  "  is
found  in  the  Archetype  for  the  obvious  "  sanum  " — in
II,  2,  16  "n"  becomes  in  the  Archetype  "  ti  "),  and  in
early  Lombard  script  the  word  itself — "potius" — looks
extremely  like  "  ponus  "  or  "ponas."  As  I  have  shown
in  Excursus  II  "a"  and  "u"  are  very  frequently  con-
fused in  these  books,  e.g.,  "  -um  "  for  "  -am  "  {passim),
"putulas"  for  "  patulas  "  (II,  2,  11),  etc.  Again  "ut"
or  "  uti  "  is  frequently  found  for  original  "ubi"  (cf.  I,
6,  2,  III,  6,  15).

Varro  appears  to  mention  three  places  (i),  "Celiac,"
where  liquid  produce,  such  as  wine  and  oil,  was  stored

364


EXCURSUS  III  365

in  "dolia";  (2)  a  place — the  "  torcular  "  or  "  forus
vinarius  et  olearius  " — for  the  plant  needed  for  the  mak-
ing of  wine  and  oil ;  and  (3)  barns  for  dry  produce.
Columella,  in  a  chapter  (I,  6,  9)  which  is  little  else  than
an  elegant  paraphrase  of  Varro,  mentions  these  three
places  together:  "Pars  autem  fructuaria  dividitur  in
cellam  oleariam,  torculariam,  cellam  vinariam,"  etc.
The  passage  would  read,  as  amended:  "  Fructus,  ut
est  vinum  et  oleum,  loco  piano  in  cellis  (item  uhi  vasa
vinaria  et  olearia  ponas  faciendum) :  aridus  ut  est  faba
et  faenum  in  tabulatis."

I>  13»  3'  "Cohortes  in  fundo  magno  duae  aptiores:
una  ut  interdius  compluvium  habeat  lacum  ubi  aqua
saliat,  qui  intra  stylobatas  cum  velit  sit  semipiscina."

Keil  (p.  47)  makes  "compluvium"  an  adjective — of
which  no  other  example  is  to  be  found — and  interprets
thus:  "  Compluvium  autem  lacum  dicit  in  quern  interdiu
canalibus  aqua  .  .  .  ducitur."  But  it  is  obvious  that  no-
thing like  this  is  contained  in  or  implied  by  the  text,  for
"compluvium"  must  either  be  the  familiar  noun  or
"compluvium  lacum"  mean  a  tank  or  pond  in  which
rain  collects.  In  either  case  "interdius"  seems  to  be
inadmissible  and  the  word  "  saliat  "  inappropriate.

In  Chapter  XI  Varro  had  said  that  the  villa  should
possess  a  spring  within  its  precincts,  or  that  water
should  flow  into  it  all  the  year  round ;  but  that  if  there
were  no  "live"  water  a  "  lacus  sub  dio "  should  be
made  for  the  cattle;  and  Palladius  (I,  31)  states  that
there  should  be  two  "  piscinae,"  which  could  be  filled
"  aut  fonte  aut  imbre."  It  seems  possible  that  Varro
alludes  in  the  text  to  the  two  alternatives:  meaning
that  when  there  was  no  "aqua  viva,"  i.e.,  spring  or
stream,  a  "compluvium  "  was  to  be  employed  from  which


366  VARRO  ON  FARMING

the  rain  water  would  fall  into  an  "  impluvium,"  which
might  be  used  as  a  pond — the  "  lacus  sub  die"  of
Chapter  XI — while,  if  running  water  were  at  hand  (for
"aquasaliens"  opposed  to  "putei"  or  "fontes,"cf.  Pliny,
Ep.,  ii,  17,  25),  it  was  to  be  directed  into  a  pond  in  the
yard,  probably  into  the  portico  where  it  would  form  a
semi-piscina,  having  the  stylohates  on  two  sides  (a  piscina
had  usually  masonry  on  all  four  sides).  I  suggest  there-
fore: "  Cohortes  in  fundo  magno  duae  aptiores:  una  ut
interius  (having  inside  it)  compluvium  habeat,  aut  lacum
ubi  aqua  saliat  quae  (Schneider)  intra  stylobatas  cum
venit  (Merula,  approved  by  Keil)  sit  semipiscina."  One
may  regard  the  omission  of  "  aut"  as  a  case  of  haplo-
graphy,  of  which  we  have  many  examples  in  these  books.
"  Qui  "  improperly  written  for  "  quae  "  occurs  very  many
times  (cf.  II,  i,  27,  etc.).

I,  15,  I.  "  Praeterea  sine  saeptis  fines  praedii  sationis
notis  arborum  tutiores  fiunt."  Schneider,  followed  by
Keil,  cuts  the  knot  by  deleting  "  notis  "  and  writing  "  sa-
tione  "  for  "sationis."  If  the  text  may  not  stand — and
I  do  not  feel  sure  that  it  may  not — "  farm  boundaries  if
unfenced  are  made  safer  by  the  indications  given  by  the
sowing  of  trees,"  though  the  double  genitive  is  terribly
harsh,  perhaps  might  be  read:  "  Praeterea  sine  saeptis
fines  praedii,  satione  si  noti  (or  notati),  tutiores  fiunt."
For  the  form  of  the  expression  "si  noti  "  cf.  I,  13,  i:  "Si
fessi  opere  ";  II,  4,  20,  "  si  in  acervo  positum  ";  III,  5,  2,
"si  enim  late  ibi  diffusa  aqua  .   .    .    bibitur  inutilius."

I,  10,  2.  "Is  modus  acnua  latine  appellatur."  The
use  of  the  word  "  latine  "  here  and  in  II,  1,5,  "in  Samo-
thrace  Caprarumquas  latine  rotas  appellant,"  is  perhaps
due  to  the  ignorance  of  the  scribe.  Pontedera  (Cur.
Sec.)  points  out  that  Varro's  usual  formula  in  such  cases


EXCURSUS  HI  367

is  "  nostri  appellant,"  "  a  nostris  appellatur."  With  re-
gard to  the  first  passage  Columella  (v,  i,  5)  has:  "  Sed
hunc  actum  provinciae  Baeticae  rustici  acnuam  vocant,"
and  compares  the  Baetic  "  acnua  "  with  the  Gallic  "  are-
pennis  "  (Fr.  arpent).  Columella's  uncle,  on  whose  au-
thority the  statement  is  made,  was  a  native  of  Gades,
and  had  probably  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  fact.
Varro  also,  who  once  stayed  for  a  long  time  in  Spain
(cf.  Ill,  12,  6),  was  likely  to  know  the  local  term.  Per-
haps "  Baetice  "  was  originally  written  and  "  latine  "
put  instead  of  it  by  a  scribe  who  did  not  understand  the
former  word.  In  II,  i,  19  "b"  and  "1"  are  confused,
"  Obsippo "  for  "Olisippo."  In  the  second  passage,
"in  Samothrace  caprarum  quas  latine  rotas  appellant,"
I  would  adopt  Turnebus's  emendation  approved  by  Sca-
liger — "  platycerotas  "  (TrXarffctpwrac),  cf.  Pliny,  xi,  37.
A  few  lines  before  the  copyist  had  written  "la"  for
"  pla  "  ("  laciditatem  "  instead  of  "  placiditatem  ").  Per-
haps he  read  here  "  latyce  rotas,"  and  not  knowing
what  to  do  with  "  latyce  "  wrote  instead  a  word  he  did
know — "latine."

II,  I,  I.  "  Insta  an  quid  ille,  quae  coeperat  hie  dis-
serere  quae  esset  origo,  quae  dignitas,  quae  ars  cum  f
poetam  sesum  visere  venissemus  ne  medici  adventus
nos  inredisset."  The  copyist  of  the  earlier  part  of  this
book  seems  to  have  been  extremely  unintelligent,  not
in  the  least  understanding  what  he  was  copying ;  any
vowel  is  written  by  him  for  any  other,  letters  and  whole
syllables  are  omitted  or  interpolated,  and  letters  are  often
absurdly  grouped — for  instance,  nine  lines  further  on,  for
the  obvious  "  pecuariae  athletae  remuneremini  nos,"  the
Archetype  has  "  pecuariathietae  remune  remininos."  So
perhaps  some  boldness  in  emendation  is  permissible.


368  VARRO  ON  FARMING

Most  of  the  passage  above  was  easily  and  soon  cor-
rected. Obviously  "  insta"  =  "  ista,"  "an  quid  "  ^
"inquit,"  "ne"  =  "ni"  (or  "nisi — n*''"),  and  "  inre-
disset  "  =  perhaps  "  impedisset  ";  but  for  "  poetam  se-
sum "  no  convincing  emendation  has  been  proposed.
Ursinus  gave  "  Paetum  "  (Aldus  "  Petam  "),  "  fessum  "
taking  "fessum  "  to  mean  "  ill."  But  no  example  is  to
be  found  of  the  word  having  this  meaning  absolute.
Scaliger  proposed  "adportam  vis  (for  "  vix  ")  e  re,"  etc.,
which  needs  no  comment.  In  Excursus  I  I  have  given
reasons  for  supposing  that  the  scene  of  these  conversa-
tions was  at  some  port  in  or  near  Epirus.  I  would
therefore  propose — with  extreme  diffidence — to  read  as
follows:  "  Ista,  inquit  ille,  quae  coeperat  hie  disserere
.  .  .  cum  eum,  portum  ingressum,  visere  venissemus
ni  medici  adventus,"  etc.  One  would  then  take  "  ni  .  .  .
impedisset "  closely  with  "coeperat  disserere,"  trans-
lating: "  Precisely,  answered  Cossinius,  I  mean  the  dis-
course which  Varro  here  was  beginning  .  .  .  when
we  had  come  to  call  on  him  after  he  had  entered  the
harbour  (Cassiope  or  Corey ra),  only  the  arrival  of  the
doctor  prevented  our  further  conversation."  The  omis-
sion of  "eum"  might  be  explained  as  a  case  of  haplo-
graphy.  "Portum"  would  be  written  "portu,"  while
the  "in"  of  "ingressum"  might  have  been  taken  (as
often)  for  "m";  but  how  "  sesum  "  could  have  arisen
from  "  gressum  "  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain — unless
one  may  assume  that  "g"  was  simply  omitted.  In  II,
2,  12,  "  inigere  est  utile  "  (Ursinus)  is  given  by  all  editors
for  the  meaningless  reading  of  the  Archetype  "  interest
utile."  The  general  sense  seems  here  to  compel  the
correction,  and  "i"  and  "t"  are  frequently  confused ;
but    how  is  the    "g"    to    be   justified?    If  one   might


EXCURSUS  III  369

assume  that  "  ingressum  "  was  abbreviated,  the  diffi-
culty would  be  less,  for  "gr"  in  the  abbreviated  "  in-
greditur  " — as  given  by  Prou  in  his  dictionary  of  Latin
abbreviations — is  very  like  an  "S";  but  I  can  find  no
indication  anywhere  as  to  the  date  of  the  MSS.  in  which
this  abbreviation  is  used.

II,  I,  21.  "  Et  quae  quemque  morbum  curatio  curandi
sequi  debeat."  Keil  deletes  "curandi."  Jucundus's
conjecture,  "ratio  curandi,"  seems  preferable.

II,  4,  17,  "  Fructuariam  idoneam  non  esse."  "  Fruc-
tuariam  "  is  probably  a  gloss  explicative  of  "  idoneam."

11,4,  17.  "In  eorum  petu  ("pecu"  in  Victorius's  semi-
vet.  MS.)  scrofae  bis  die  ut  bibant  curant."  Victorius
suggested  "  foetu  "  ;  Keil  prefers  "partu,"  which  suits
"  eorum "  better.  In  this  book  "p"  and  "f"  are
several  times  confused  {e.g.,  II,  i,  17,  "fastor"  for
"  pastor,"  etc.).  So  perhaps  here  "  in  earum  fetu  "  was
originally  written.  Cf.  Cicero,  De  Fin.,  iii,  19:  "  labo-
rum  bestiarum  in  fetu  et  in  educatione."

II,  5,  I.  "  Tu  vero,  Murri,  veni  mi  advocatus  dum
asses  solvof  Palibus,  si  postea  a  me  repetant  ut  testi-
monium perhibere  possis."  For  "Palibus"  Keil  gives
"  Laribus,"  referring  to  a  passage  of  Varro's  cited  by
Nonius,  to  prove  that  asses  were  paid  to  the  Lares.  But
this  fact  is  stated  by  Varro  only  in  relation  to  newly
married  brides.  Aldus  conjectures  "Palilibus."  It  is
nearly  certain  that  these  conversations  took  place  at  the
Palilia,  and  probably  that  the  place  was  an  "  aedes
Palis"  (cf.  Excursus  I).  Instead  of  "  Palibus"  I  would
suggest  "Pali  bis" — "dum  asses  solvo  Pali,  bis  si
postea  a  me  repetant,"  etc.

II,  5,  4.  "  Praeterea  scio  hunc  esse  .  .  .  et  huncf
Plautium  iocutum  esse  latine  quam  Hirrium  pr9.etorem

BB


370  VARRO  ON  FARMING

renuntiatum  Romam  in  Senatum  scriptum  habemus."
This  passage  seems  hopelessly  corrupt,  no  emendation
in  the  least  plausible  has  ever  been  proposed,  and  no
story  is  related  by  Cicero,  Livy,  Pliny,  Valerius  Maxi-
mus,  Julius  Obsequens,  etc.,  about  Plautius,  Hirrius,
or  a  speaking  ox,  which  seems  to  apply  even  remotely
to  anything  in  this  passage.  But  Pliny,  I  think,  gives
a  clue.  In  viii,  45  (last  sentence),  he  says:  "Est  fre-
quens  in  prodigiis  priscorum  bovem  locutum :  quo  nun-
tiato  Senatum  sub  dio  haberi  solitum."  For  this  state-
ment of  Pliny  I  have  been  able  to  find  no  authority ;  the
commentators  are  unanimously  silent  with  the  exception
of  Dalecampius,  who  does  but  refer  one  to  Alexander
ab  Alexandro  (v,  7,  suh  fin.) — a  contemporary  of  Lau-
rentius  Valla.  Alexander  repeats  Pliny.  And  here  again
all  the  commentators  are  silent.  It  seems  to  me  prob-
able that  this  very  passage  of  Varro  is  the  authority
used  by  Pliny — who  never  quotes  Varro's  exact  words —
and  that  Varro's  actual  words  were :  "  Et  hunc  Plautum
locutum  esse  latine,  quo  miro  praetori  (i.e.,  'urbano,'
cf.  Suetonius,  Claud.,  22)  nuntiato  Romam,  Senatum
sub  dio  habemus  " — "  And  that  this  '  Plautus  '  has  been
known  to  speak  good  Latin — on  the  announcement  of
which  portent  to  the  praetor  at  Rome  we  hold  the  Senate
in  the  open  air.^'  The  joke  seems  exactly  in  Varro's
manner.  Plautus  was  famous  amongst  the  ancients  for
the  excellence  of  his  Latin,  cf.  Quintilian,  x,  i :  "Licet
Varro  dicat  Musas  Plautius  sermone  locuturas  fuisse
si  latine  loqui  vellent,"  and  on  the  other  hand  "  plautus  "
(flat-footed,  cf.  Festus,  ad  verbum)  was  an  epithet  ap-
plied to  the  Umbrians,  and  the  "  vasti  Umbriae  boves  "
(Col.,  vi,  I,  2)  were  famous  among  cattle.  It  is  to  these
that  Varro  alludes,  II,  5,  10.


EXCURSUS  III  371

For"Plautium"for  "Plautum"cf.  11,8,2,  "hinnius"
for  "  hinnus."  As  for  the  rest  I  imag-ine  that  the  scribe
for  *'quo  miro "  read  "  quam  iru,"  and  remembering
Hirrus  already  mentioned  wrote  "Hirrum"  or  *' Hir-
rium "  (of  "h"  interpolated  there  are  numerous  ex-
amples in  this  book,  "  hostia  "  for  "  ostia,"  etc.),  "  nun-
tiato  "  he  read  as  "  nuntiatu  (nuntiatum)  " — and  "  sub-
dio  "as  "  scribtu  (scriptum)."  The  "  in  "  {"  Romam  in
Senatum  ")  is  perhaps  a  case  of  dittography,  "in"  and
*'m"  being'  frequently  indistinguishable  in  Pre-Caro-
lingian  minusculae.

II,  7,  I.  "E  quis  feminas  Q.  Modius  Equiculus
etiam  patri  militari  iuxta  ac  mares  habere  solebat."  The
words  "etiam  patre  militari"  seem  quite  irrelevant.
Ursinus  conjectured  "etiam  in  re  militari" — which
makes  excellent  sense.  Keil  first  adopted  this  correc-
tion, but  rejected  it  afterwards,  probably  because  of  the
difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  corruption.  "Etiam  a
parte"  ("etia  a  parte" — the  second  "a"  disappearing
through  haplography)  is  plausible.  Pliny  in  a  chapter
(viii,  42  end)  which  owes  much  to  Varro,  mentions  the
fact  that  the  Scythians  preferred  to  use  mares  rather
than  horses  for  military  purposes,  "  Scythae  per  bella
feminis  (i.e.  equabus)  uti  malunt,  quoniam  urinam  cursu
non  impedito  reddant."  Varro  frequently  uses  "pars"
in  the  sense  of  "section,"  "department,"  and  "a"
meaning  "in  respect  of,"  cf.  I,  7,  5,  "a  qua  parte  vel
maxime  bonus  aut  non  bonus  appellatur,"  and  II,  2,  2,
"  quae  ita  ab  aetate,"  "  in  respect  of  ag-e."

II,  7,  15.  "  Neque  idem  qui  vectorios  facere  vult  ad
ephippium  aut  ad  raedam  quod  ad  rem  militarem."  I
would  insert  "aut"  after  "vult,"  cf.  the  note  to  the
passage  in  the  Commentary.  .^


372  VARRO  ON  FARMING

II,  9,  i6.  "  Ita  enim  sunt  adsiduiores  quod  cum  altero
idem  fit  acrior,  et  si  alter  videm  fiter  aeger  est  ne  sine
cane  grex  sit."  In  the  first  place  it  is  difficult  to  under-
stand Keil's  objection  to  "idem"  (for  which  he  substi-
tutes "item,"  saying-  "'idem'  .  .  .  non  habet  quo
referatur),"  for  the  turn  of  thought  is  quite  Varronian.
The  same  dog  becomes  another,  much  fiercer — when  he
has  a  mate.  As  for  the  rest  many  unhappy  emendations
have  been  made,  while  no  one  seems  to  have  noticed
the  anacoluthon — harsh  even  for  Varro — "quod  ...  fit
acrior — et  si  .  .  .  est,  ne  sine  cane  grex  sit."  "Est,"  I
think,  ought  to  be  in  the  apodosis,  where  it  is  much
needed — and  the  sentence  might  be  written  "  et  si
alteruter  fit  aeger,  est  ut  ne  sine  cane  grex  sit,"  "for
so  they  stick  better  to  work,  for  the  same  dog  when  he
has  a  mate  becomes  fiercer,  and  if  either  of  them  falls  ill,
the  flock  need  not  be  without  a  dog."  "Est"  would
then  be  used  as  in  Horace's  "Est  ut  viro  vir  latius
ordinet  ||  arbusta,"  or  as  in  II,  i,  28,  "est  qui  ex-
pleas  .  .  .  lacunam."  With  "  ut "  inserted  the  Latin
is,  of  course,  normal,  the  "  ne "  negativing  only  the
words  "sine  cane."  In  these  books  "  ut "  is  omitted
two  or  three  times,  cf.  II,  11,  i,  III,  2,  16,  etc.,  and
Krumbiegel's  index  verborum  at  the  end  of  Keil's
"Editio  Maior."

For  "videm"  I  have  written  "uter,"  but  it  may  be
simply  an  echo  from  the  words  "altero  idem"  preced-
ing. The  "er"  in  "fiter"  is,  perhaps,  due  to  the  scribes
writing  the  "  er  "  of  "  aeger  "  prematurely  and  neglect-
ing to  correct  it.

III,  I,  ID.  "In  tuis  quoque  litteris."  For  "  tuis "  I
suggest  "nitidis"  (haplography).  The  passage  is  dis-
cussed in  the  Commentary.


EXCURSUS  III  373

III,  5,  5.  "Contra  hie  aviarium,  quae  mortuae  ibi
sunt  aves  ut  domino  numerum  reddat,  solet  ibidem  ser-
vare."  Keil  changes  *'hic"  to  "hoc"  and  indicates  a
lacuna  after  "aviarium."  It  seems  much  simpler  to
write  "aviarius."  There  is  then  a  much  needed  subject
for  "  solet,"  there  is  no  need  to  alter  the  "  hie  "  of  the
archetype,  the  sense  is  perfectly  plain,  and  there  is  no
need  to  assume  a  gap  in  the  text.  "  Um  "  is  sometimes
mis-written  for  "us,"  cf.  Ill,  16,  5,  where  "  neque  idem
quod  cera  cibum  "  is  found  in  the  Archetype  for  the
obvious  "neque  .  .  .  cibus,"  and  a  little  later  in  the
same  section  "  favum  "  for  "favus."

Ill,  5,  10.  "  quaad  capitulum  rutundum  est  "  (so  Keil).
"  Qua  ad  capitulum  "  should  surely  be  written — for  the
sake  of  the  sense  and  of  the  antithesis  ("  qua  est  quad-
rata") — and  this  is  the  reading  of  the  Archetype.

Ill,  14,  3.  "  Et  hunc  (cibum)  dum  serpit  non  solum
in  area  reperit  sed  etiam,  si  rivus  non  prohibet,  parietes
stantes  invenit."  Keil  interprets  thus:  "Cochleae  non
solum  cibum  in  areapositum  reperiunt,  sed  etiam  stantes
parietes  cibi  inveniendi  causa  ascendunt."  This  is  no
doubt  what  Varro  means,  but  it  is  not  contained  in  the
text.  Jucundus  conjectured  "in  parietes,"  Ursinus  "in
pariete  stante."  Better,  I  believe,  is  "per  parietes"  for
the  omission  of  "per"  may  be  explained  as  a  case  of
haplography,  and  "invenit"  has  then  its  usual  sense
and  governs  "  cibum."  Schneider  objected  to  "  stantes  "
on  the  ground  that  all  "parietes  stant,"  but  the  word  is
used  emphatically  as  Horace's  "  vides  ut  alta  stet  nive
Candida  II  Soracte,"  and  in  antithesis  to  "area."  The
snail  not  only  crawls  about  the  "area,"  but  even  climbs
the  perpendicular  walls.

Ill,  16,  32.   "  Eximendorum  favorum  signum^umunt


374  VARRO  ON  FARMING  |

ex  ipsis  t  viris  alvos  habeat  nem  cogerminarit  coniectura
capiunt  si  intus  faciunt  bombum  et  cum  intro  eunt  ac
foras  et  si  opercula  aluum  cum  remoreissi  favorum  fora-
mina obductavidentur  membranis  cum  sint  repleti  melle."
Scalig'er's  remark  on  this  is  "  Non  est  locus  inquinatior
isto,  et  sane  eum  emendandi  omnem  prorsus  spem
abieci " — and  Victorius  and  Keil  say  much  the  same
thing".  Schneider  rewrites  the  whole  passage  arbitrarily.
I  would  suggest  "  Signum  eximendorum  favorum
sumunt  ex  ipsis  (fures  alvos  habeatne  an  contra  exter-
minarit  coniecturam  capiunt  si  intus  faciunt  bombum  et
cum  intro  eunt  et  foras,  trepidant)  et  opercula  alvorum
cum  remoris  (Keil)  si  favorum  obducta  videntur  mem-
branis— cum  sunt  repleti  melle."

The  cumbrous  parenthesis  is  characteristic  of  Varro
in  these  books.  As  to  "fures"  for  "uiris,"  Varro  (III,
16,  19)  mentioned  "fur"  as  a  name  given  to  drones,
and  the  expulsion  of  them  seems  indicated  by  what
follows.  The  copyist  probably  took  the  "  f "  for  "  s  "  (a
common  mistake,  cf.  "sit"  for  "fit,"  etc.)  and  found  he
had  already  written  "s"  in  "ipsis."  "Alvos"  (nominative
here)  is  frequently  used  by  Columella  and  Pliny  to
signify  the  bees  in  the  hive.  For  "nem"  I  have  given
"  ne  an."  The  corruption  would  be  easy,  as  the  MS.  of
which  the  Archetype  was  a  copy  had  almost  certainly  the
open  a.  The  change  of  "cogerminarit"  to  "contra
exterminarit "  is  violent — but  "c"  and  "t"  are  fre-
quently (seventeen  times)  confused  in  these  books  (cf.
"  torium  "  for  "corium,"  II,  5,  8,  etc.),  and  the  scribe
may  have  read  the  "  t's  "  as  "c's"  ("contra,"  I  find,  was
sometimes  written  con),  and  his  eye  may  have  jumped
the  letters  between  c5n  and  "  cerminarit  "  (cf.  "  a(d)ver-
tendum"  for  "  animadvertendum,"  I,  12,  2).    The  result


EXCURSUS  III  375

would  be  *'  concerminarit,"  made  more  like  a  Latin  word
by  the  change  of  the  second  "  c  "  to  "  g"."

Columella  (IX,  15,  3)  uses  "  exterminare  "  in  this  rela-
tion :  "  Hos  quidem  praecipiunt  in  totum  exterminari
oportere."  In  the  phrase  "et  si  favorum  .  .  .  cum  re-
moreissi "  Keil  deletes,  I  think,  the  wrong"  "si,"  for  it
is  Varro's  constant  habit  to  place  his  conjunction  as
near  the  end  of  the  phrase  as  possible.

In  the  last  clause  "sunt"  for  "  sint "  seems  neces-
sary.   In  these  books  they  are  perpetually  confused.

To  the  reading  proposed  support  is  given  by  Columella
(IX,  15,  4):  "  Ergo  cum  rixam  fucorum  et  apium  saepius
committi  videris,  adapertas  alvos  inspicies  ut  sive  semi-
pleni  favi  sint,  differantur;  sive  iam  liquore  completi  et
superpositis  ceris,  tamquam  operculis,  obliti,  deme-
tantur" — and  by  Palladius  (June,  cap.  7),  "Item  cum
fucos  a  sedibus  suis,  qui  sunt  apes  maiores,  grandi  in-
tentione  deturbant  matura  mella  testantur."

Ill,  17,  2.  "  Ubi  lymphae  .  .  .  ministrant."  Keil
writes  "  lymphae  "  with  a  small  initial  letter  in  both  edi-
tions. It  should  be  written  with  a  capital.  The  "  Lym-
phae "  are  contrasted  with  "  Neptunus  "  farther  down,
and  "  Lympha"  is  personified  by  Varro,  I,  i,  6  ("  Lym-
pham  et  Bonum  Eventum  ").

Ill,  17,  3.  "  Hirrus  .  .  .  duodena  milia  sestertia
capiebat."  This  ungrammatical  "sestertia"  is  found
also  III,  16,  1 1,  and  III,  6,  6.  I  feel  sure  that  in  all  three
cases  "  sestertium  "  ("  sestertiu  ")  should  be  written,  for
as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  nothing  is  commoner  in
these  books  than  the  confusion  of  "a"  and  "u"
(twenty-one  times).


CHISWICK  PRESS  :    CHARLES  WHITTINGHAM  AND  CO.
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE,  LONDON.


^v


University  of  British  Columbia  Library

DUE  DATE

11         --^

GUI  0  1  Wb

(yBlfnTOr:^!,!!

APR  1  5  13S6

NOV  -  8  RECB

ET-6

V


1    MacMILLAN
I     LIBRARY


-I  UNIVERSITY  OF  B.C.  LIBRARY


3  9424  00635  7575


STORAGE


III!  j"  university  of
-  british
Columbia


LIBRARY
