The Law of Nations; or, Principles of the Law of Nature (Emer de Vattel; Joseph Chitty, ed., 1863)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Chitty's 1863 edition (https://archive.org/details/lawnationsorpri01vattgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================


LAW  OF  NATIONS ; ' '  °


OB.


PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATURE,


APPUID  10  TBI


CONDUCT  AND  AFFAIRS


NATIONS  AND  SOYEREIGNS.


FROM  THE  FRENCH


or


MONSIEUR  DE  VATTEL.


^Klhfl  ebt  •nim  illi  prindpi  Peo  qui  omnem  hmie  mundum  regit,  quod  quklem  tn  terrte  fiat,
qmun  oonciUs  ooetusqae  hominum  jure  sodatJ,  qun  ciTltates  appellantur.** — Gicrao,  Som.  Bgif.


FROM  THE  NEW  EDITION,


BT

JOSEPH CHITTY, Esq.


BARRISTBR  AT  LAW,


WITH ADDITIONAL NOTES AND RSFEBENCXS,

By  EDWARD  D.  INGRAHAM,  Esq.


PHILADELPHIA:
T.  &  J.  W.  JOHNSON  &  CO.,  LAW  BOOKSELLERS,

HO. 585  0HE8TMUT 8TBXET.

1868.


I-


Enterod  Mcordmflc  to  Act  of  Conicress.  in  the  year  lo52,  hj
in  the  Glerk'B  Office  of  the  District  Coun  of  the  Eastern  Disttict  of  PennsylyaniA.


JAN 17 1938


^'.•- ■■■.v-^„„fv-


PREFACE  TO  THIS  EDITION.


The  text  of  the  present  translation  of  Vattel  has  been  care-
fully compared  with  that  of  the  original  work,  in  the  first
edition  which  appeared,  {ZondreSy  1758,  2  vol.  in  quarto,)  pub
liahed  at  Neuchatel;  in  that  of  Amsterdam^  {Van  Ilarrevett^
Vllby  2  vol.  in  quarto,)  the  best  known  till  recently;  and  in
that  of  M.  de  HofftnanSy  {PariSy  1839,  2  vol.  in  octavo,)  the
last  and  best  edition.  Great  care  has  been  taken  also  in  re-
gard to  the  British  decisions  cited  by  the  English  ^ditor.  It
was  discovered,  that  many  inaccuracies  existed  in  the  citations,
particularly  in  the  names  of  the  cases  cited,  which  have  been
corrected  by  references  to  the  original  reports  of  the  decisions ;
and  wherever  it  appeared  that  the  notes  of  the  English  editor
required  additions  to  render  the  doctrine  advanced  ixi  them
clearer,  or  more  intelligible,  such  additions  have  been  made ;
care  having  been  taken  to  distinguish  the  matter  added  by
enclosing  it  in  brackets.  The  editor  regrets  very  much  that
the  size  of  the  volume — ^which  would  have  been  too  much  in-
creased by  such  an  extension — did  not  permit  him  to  annex
to  it  the  "  Bibliographie  choisie  et  syst^matique  du  Droit  de  la
Nature  et  des  Gens,  et  du  Droit  Public,"  of  M.  de  IloffmanSy
which  is  an  excellent  guide  in  the  choice  of  Works  upon  a
subject  much  less  attended  to  than  is  demanded  by  its  im-
portance.

Philadelphia,  Sept  29, 1852.


ui


ADVERTISEMENT


TO  THE  EDITION  OF  A.  D.  1797.


XN  undertaking  this  new  edition  of  Monsieur  De  Vattel's  trea-
tise, it  was  not  my  intention  to  give  what  might  strictly  be
called  a  new  translation.  To  add  the  author's  valuable  notes
from  the  posthuijaous  edition,  printed  at  Neufchatel  in  1773, —
to  correct  some  errors  I  had  observed  in  the  former  version, —
and  occasionally  to  amend  the  language  where  doubtful  or
obscure, — were  the  utmost  limits  of  my  original  plan.  As  I
proceeded,  however,  my  alterations  became  more  numerous ;
but  whether  they  vnll  be  acknowledged  as  amendments,  it
must  rest  with  the  reader  to  determine.  Even  if  this  decision
should  be  more  favourable  than  I  have  any  reason  to  expect,  I
lay  no  claim  to  praise  for  my  humble  efforts,  but  shall  esteem
myself  very  fortunate  if  I  escape  the  severity  of  censure  for
presenting  the  work  to  the  public  in  a  state  stiU  so  far  short
of  perfection.  Conscious  of  its  defects,  I  declare,  with  great
sincerity, —

•  •  •  Veniam  pro  lande  peto, — ^landatus  abtmdey
Non  fastidituB  si  iibi|  lector,  ero.

THE  EDITOR.

London,  JHh^  1, 1797


IT


PEEFACB


TO  THE  PRESENT  EDITION.


1  HE  merits  and  increasing  utility  of  this  admirable  work  have
not,  as  yet,  been  sufficiently  known,  or  justly  appreciated.  It
has  been  generally  supposed  that  it  is  only  adapted  for  the
study  of  sovereigns  and  statesmen,  and  in  that  view  certainly
the  author's  excellent  Preface  points  out  its  pre-eminent  im-
portance. But  it  is  of  infinitely  more  extended  viUUy.  It  con-
tains a  practical  collection  of  ethics,  principles,  and  rules  of
conduct  to  be  observed  and  pursued,  as  well  by  private  indivi-
duals as  by  stateSy  and  these  of  the  utmost  practical  importance
to  the  well4)eing,  happiness,  and  ultimate  and  permanent  ad-
vantage and  benefit  of  all  mankind ;  and,  therefore,  ought  to
be  studied  by  every  gentleman  of  liberal  educaUon,  and  by  youthy
in  whom  the  best  moral  principles  should  be  inculcated.  The
work  should  be  familiar  in  the  IfniverdtieSy  and  in  every  class
above  the  inferior  ranks  of  society.  And,  as  regards  lawyers^
it  contains  the  clearest  rules  of  construing  private  contracts^
and  respecting  the  Admiralty  and  Insurance  Law.  The  posi-
tions of  the  author,  moreover,  have  been  so  sensibly  and  clearly
supported  and  explained,  and  so  happily  illustrated  by  histo-
rical and  other  interesting  examples,  that  the  perusal  cannot
fail  to  entertain  as  well  as  instruct.  The  present  Editor,
therefore,  affirms,  without  the  hazard  of  contradiction,  that
every  one  who  has  attentively  read  this  work,  will  admit  that
he  has  acquired  a  knowledge  of  superior  sentiments  and  more
important  information  than  he  ever  derived  from  any  other

work,

a2  t


IV  PREFACE  TO  THE PRESENT  EDITION.

Many  years  have  elapsed  since  the  original  work  was  pub-
lished, long  before  the  invaluable  decisions  of  Sir  William
Scott,  Sir  C.  Eobinson,  and  Sir  John  Nichol,  and  other  emi-
nent Judges  in  the  Courts  of  Admiralty,  and  Prize  and  other
Courts ;  and  the  last  edition,  upon  which  any  care  was  be-
stowed, was  pubhshed  in  A.  n.  1797;  since  which  time,  and
especially  during  the  last  general  war,  many  most  important
rules  respecting  the  Law  of  Nations  were  established.  The
object  of  the  present  Editor  has,  therefore,  been  to  collect  and
condense,  in  numerous  notes,  the  modem  rules  and  decisions,  and
to  fortify  the  positions  in  the  text  by  references  to  other  au-
thors of  eminence,  and  by  which  he  hopes  that  this  edition
will  be  found  of  more  practical  utility,  without  interfering  with
the  text,  or  materially  increasing  its  size.

The  Editor  had  proposed  to  form  an  Index,  so  as  to  render
the  work  more  readily  accessible ;  but,  in  that  desire,  he  has
been  overruled  by  the  publishers,  who  think  that  the  exceed-
ingly full  Analytical  Table  of  Contents  following  the  Preface,
and  naming  the  pages  where  each  position  is  to  be  found,  are
sufficient,  without  increasing  the  bulk  of  the  work,  and,  con-
sequently, the  expense.  The  Editor  hopes  that  the  student
who  may  examine  his  numerous  notes  will  not  think  that  he
has  wasted  time.

J.  CHITTT.

Chanhen,  6,  Ohaneerf/  XoM^
NovemheTf  18S8.


▼1


PREFACE.


J.  HE  Law  of  Nations,  though  so  noble  and  important  a  subject,  has
not,  hitherto,  been  treated  of  with  all  the  care  it  deserves.  The  greater
part  of  mankind  have,  therefore,  only  a  vague,  a  very  incomplete,  and
often  even  a  false  notion  of  it.  The  generality  of  writers,  and  even
celebrated  authors,  almost  exclusively  confine  the  name  of  "  Law  of
Nations'*  to  certain  maxims  and  treatises  recognised  among  nations,  and
which  the  mutual  consent  of  the  parties  has  rendered  obligatory  on
them.  This  is  confining  within  very  narrow  bounds  a  law  so  extensive
in  its  own  nature,  and  in  which  the  whole  human  race  are  so  intimately
concerned ;  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  degradation  of  that  law,  in  conse-
quence of  a  misconception  of  its  real  origin.

There  certainly  exists  a  natural  law  of  nation^,  since  the  obligations
of  the  law  of  nature  are  no  less  binding  on  states,  on  men  united  in
political  society,  than  on  individuals.  But,  to  acquire  an  exact  know-
ledge of  that  law,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  know  what  the  law  of  nature
prescribes  to  the  individuals  of  the  human  race.  The  application  of
a  rule  to  various  subjects,  can  no  otherwise  be  made  than  in  a  manner
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  each  subject.  Hence,  it  follows,  that  the
natural  law  of  nations  is  a  particular  science,  consisting  in  a  just  and
rational  application  of  the  law  of  nature  to  the  affairs  and  conduct  of
nations  or  sovereigns.  All  treatises,  therefore,  in  which  the  law  of
nations  is  blended  and  confounded  with  the  ordinary  law  of  nature,  are
incapable  of  conveying  a  distinct  idea,  or  a  substantial  knowledge  of
the  sacred  law  of  nations.

The  Romans  often  confounded  the  law  of  nations  with  the  law  of  nature,
giving  the  name  of  "the  law  of  nations"  (Jibs  Gentium)  to  the  law  of
nature,  as  being  generally  acknowledged  and  adopted  by  all  civilized
nations.* The  definitions  given  by  the  emperor  Justinian,  of  the  law

iff  nature,  the  law  of  nations,  and  the  civil  law,  are  well  known.  "  The
aw  of  nature,"  says  he,  "  is  that  which  nature  teaches  to  all  animals"  if
thus  he  defines  the  natural  law  in  its  most  extensive  sense,  not  that
natural  law  which  is  peculiar  to  man,  and  which  is  derived  as  well  from
his  rational  as  from  his  animal  nature.  "  The  civil  law,"  that  emperor
adds,  "  is  that  which  each  nation  has  established  for  herself,  and  which
peculiarly  belongs  to  each  state  or  civil  socfety.  And  that  law,  which  na-

*  Keque  rero  hoc  solum  natorft,  id  eet^  jure f  Jus  natnrale  eet,  quod  natnra  omnia  ani-
lenkiumj  Ao. Cicero  de  Offie.  lib.  iiL  o.  5.  malia  docuii. Instit  lib.  1.  tit  2.

tU


Vm  •  PBBPACB.

tural  reason  has  established  among  all  mankind,  and  which  is  equally  ot-
served  by  all  people,  is  called  the  law  of  nations,  as  being  law  which  all
nations  follow.*  In  the  succeeding  paragraph,  the  emperor  seems  to  ap-
proach nearer  to  the  sense  we  at  present  give  to  that  term.  "  The  law  of
nations,"  says  he,  "is  common  to  the  whole  human  race.  The  exigencies
and  necessities  of  mankind  have  induced  all  nations  to  lay  down  and  adopt
certain  rules  of  right.  For  wars  have  arisen,  and  produced  captivity
and  servitude,  which  are  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature ;  since,  by  the
law  of  nature,  all  men  were  originally  born  free."t  But  from  what  he
adds, — ^that  almost  all  kinds  of  contracts,  those  of  buying  and  selling,
of  hire,  partnership,  trust,  and  an  infinite  number  of  others,  owe  their
origin  to  that  law  of  nations, — ^it  plainly  appears  to  have  been  Justinian's
idea,  that,  according  to  the  situations  and  circumstances  in  which  men
were  placed,  right  reason  has  dictated  to  them  certain  maxims  of  equity,
so  founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  that  they  have  been  universally
acknowledged  und  adopted.  Still  this  is  nothing  more  than  the  law  of
nature,  which  is  equally  applicable  to  all  mankind.

The  Romans,  however,  acknowledged  a  law  whose  obligations  are
reciprocally  binding  on  nations :  and  to  that  law  they  referred  the  right
of  embassies.  They  had  also  their  fecial  law,  which  was  nothing  more
than  the  law  of  nations  in  its  particular  relation  to  public  treaties,  and
especially  to  war.  The  feciales  were  the  interpreters,  the  guardians,
and,  in  a  manner,  the  priests  of  the  public  faith.  J

The  moderns  are  generally  agreed  in  restricting  the  appellation  of
"the  law  of  nations"  to  that  system  of  right  and  justice  which  ought
to  prevail  between  nations  or  sovereign  states.  They  differ  only  in  the
ideas  they  entertain  of  the  origin  whence  that  system  arose,  and  of  the
foundations  upon  which  it  rests.  The  celebrated  Grotius  unders,tands
it  to  be.  a  system  established  by  the  common  conselit  of  nations :  and
he  thus  distinguishes  it  from  the  law  of  nature :  "  When  several  persons,
at  different  times,  and  in  various  places,  maintain  the  same  thing  as
certain,  such  coincidence  of  sentiment  must  be  attributed  to  some  gene-
ral cause.  Now,  in  the  questions  before  us,  that  cause  must  necessarily
be  one  or  the  other  of  these  two — either  a  just  consequence  drawn
from  natural  principles,  or  a  universal  consent. '  The  former  discovers
to  us  the  law  of  nature,  and  the  latter  the  law  of  nations. "§

That  great  man,  as  appears  from  many  passages  in  his  excellent
work,  had  a  glimpse  of  the  truth:  but  as  he  had  the  task  of  extracting


*  Quod  ({uisque  popnlus  ipse  sibi  jua  oon-  turali  jori  contraries. Jure enim  saturali

Btituit,  id  ipsius  proprium  civitatis  est,  voca-  omnes  hominos  ab  initio liberi  nascebantor.

turque  jus  civilci  quasi  Jas  proprium  ipaiuB  Id,  J  2.

oivitatis  :  quod  yero  nataralis  ratio  inter  om-  {  ^^cio^^^j  quod  fidei  publicn  inter  populoi

lies  homines  constituit,  id apud  omnes  per-  prseerant :  nam  per  hos  fiebat  ut  justum  con-

eque  custoditur,  yocaturque  jus  gentium,  qua-  oiperetur  bellnm  (et  inde  desitum),  et  ut  foB*

si  quo  jure  omnes  gentes  utantur. Instit.  lib.  i.  dere  fides  pacis  constitueretur. Ex  his  mitte-

tit.  ii.  J  1.  bant,  antequam  oonciperetur,  qui  res  repete>

"I-  Jus  autem  gentium  omni  httmano  generi  rent :  et  per  hos  etiam  nunc  fit  foedus. Varra

commune  est;  nam  usu  exigente  et*humani8  de  Ling.  Lat.  lib.  it.

necessitatibus,  gentes  humansc  jura  qusddam  {  De  Jure  Belli  et  PacU,  translated  by  Bm

■ibi  const 'iuerunt Bella  otenim  orta  8unt»  et  beyrac :  Preliminary  Discourse,  }  41.
captiyitates  secntsB  et  scryitutes,  quao  rant  na-


PREFACE.  !x

from  the  rude  ore,  as  it  were,  and  reducing  into  regular  shape  and
fonn,  a  new  and  important  subject,  which  had  been  much  neglected
before  his  time,  it  is  not  surprising  that,  having  his  mind  burthened
with  an  immense  variety  of  objects,and  with  a  numberless  train  of  quo-
tations, which  formed  a  part  of  his  plan,  he  could  not  always  acquire
those  distinct  ideas  so  necessary  in  the  sciences.  Persuaded  that  na-
tions, or  sovereign  powers,  are  subject  to  the  authority  of  the  law  of  na-
ture, the  observance  of  which  he  so  frequently  recommends  to  them,  that
learned  man,  in  fact,  acknowledged  a  natural  law  of  nations,  which  he
somewhere  calls  the  internal  law  of  nations :  and,  perhaps,  it  will  appear
that  the  only  difference  between  him  and  us  lies  in  the  terms.  But  we
have  already  observed,  that,  in  order  to  form  this  natural  law  of  na-
tions, it  is  not  sufficient  simply  to  apply  to  nations  what  the  law  of  na-
ture decides  with  respect  to  individuals.  And,  besides,  Grotius,  by  his
very  distinction,  and  by  exclusively  appropriating  the  name  of  "  the
law  of  nations"  to  those  maxims  which  have  been  established  by  the
common  consent  of  mankind,  seems  to  intimate  that  sovereigns,  in
their  transactions  with  each  other,  cannot  insist  on  the  observance  of  any
but  those  last-mentioned  maxims,  reserving  the  internal  law  for  the
direction  of  their  own  consciences.  If,  setting  out  with  the  idea  that
political  societies  or  nations  live,  with  respect  to  each  other,  in  a
reciprocal  independence,  ii)  the  state  of  nature,  and  that,  as  political
bodies,  they  are  subject  to  the  natural  law,  Grotius  had,  moreover,  con-
sidered that  the  law  must  be  applied  to  these  new  subjects  in  a  manner
suitable  to  their  nature,  that  judicious  author  would  easily  have  disco-
vered that  the  natural  law  of  nations  is  a  particular  science ;  that  it
produces  between  nations  even  an  external  obligation  wholly  indepen-
dent of  their  will ;  and  that  the  common  consent  of  mankind  is  only
the  foundation  and  source  of  a  particular  kind  of  law,  called  the  -4r-
bitrary  Law  of  Nations.

Hobbes,  in  whose  work  we  discover  the  hand  of  a  master,  notwithstand-
ing his  paradoxes  and  detestable  maxims, — Hobbes  was,  I  believe,  the
first  who  gave  a  distinct,  though  imperfect  idea,  of  the  law  of  nations.
lie  divides  the  law  of  nature  into  that  of  man,  and  that  of  states:  and
the  latter  is,  according  to  him,  what  we  usually  call  the  law  of  nations.
"  The  maxims,"  he  adds,  "  of  each  of  these  laws  are  precisely  the  same:
but  as  states,  once  established,  assume  personal  properties,  that  which
is  termed  the  natural  law,  when  we  speak  of  the  duties  of  individuals,
is  called  the  law  of  nations  when  applied  to  whole  nations  or  states.*'*
This  author  has  well  observed,  that  the  law  of  nations  is  the  law  of  na-
ture applied  to  states  or  nations.  But  we  shall  see,  in  the  course  of  this
work,  that  he  was  mistaken  in  the  idea  that  the  law  of  nature  does  not
suffer  any  necessary  change  in  that  application,  an  idea,  from  which

—  —  II  - . . — ■  -  -■ - —  -

*  Kurous  {lex)naturali8  dividi  potest  in  prietates  hominum  peisonales,  lex  quam,  lo-

naturalem  nominum,  qua  sola  obtinuit  did  quentes  de  hominum  singuloriim  officio,  na-

Tax  Natura^  et  naturalem  cwUaium,  qus  did  twralem  didmus,  applicata  totis  dvitatibiis,  na-

potest  Lex  Gentium,  vulgo  autem  Jut  Gentium  tionibus,  sive  gentibua,  vocatur  Jim  Gentium,

appellatur. Pnecepta utriusque  eadem  sunt:  De  Give,  o.  xiv.  §  4.
Bed  quia  dvitat«8  semel  institute  induunt  pro-

2


Z  7REFACB.

he  concluded  that  the  maxims  of  the  law  of  nature  and  those  of  the
law  of  nations  are  precisely  the  same.

Puffendorf  declares  that  he  unreservedly  suhscribes  to  this  opinion
espoused  by  Ilobbes.*  He  has  not,  therefore,  separately  treated  of  the
law  of  nations,  but  has  everywhere  blended  it  with  the  law  of  nature,
properly  so  called.

Barbeyrac,  who  performed  the  oflSce  of  translator  and  commentator
to  Grotius  and  Puffendorf,  has  approached  much  nearer  to  the  true  idea
of  the  law  of  nations.  Though  the  work  is  in  everybody's  hands,  I
shall  here,  for  the  reader's  convenience,  transcribe  one  of  that  learned
translator's  notes  on  Grotius's  Law  of  War  and  Peace.f  "  I  acknow-
ledge," says  he,  "that  there  are  laws  common  to  all  nations — things
which  all  nations  ought  to  practise  towards* each  other:  and  if  peoplb
ihoose  to  call  these  the  law  of  nations,  they  may  do  so  with  great  pro-
priety. But,  setting  aside  the  consideration  that  the  consent  of  man-
kind is  not  the  basis  of  the  obligation  by  which  we  are  bound  to  observe
those  laws,  and  that  it  cannot  even  possibly  take  place  in  this  instance —
the  principles  and  the  rules  of  such  a  law  are,  in  fact,  the  same  as  these
of  the  law  of  nature,  properly  so  called ;  the  only  difference  consisting
in  the  mode  of  their  application,  which  tnay  be  somewhat  varied,  on
account  of  the  difference  that  sometimes  happens  in  the  manner  in  which
nations  settle  their  affairs  with  each  other."

It  did  not  escape  the  notice  of  the  author  we  have  just  quoted,  that
the  rules  and  decisions  of  the  law  of  nature  cannot  be  purely  and  simply
applied  to  sovereign  states,  and  that  they  must  necessarily  undergo
some  modifications  in  order  to  accommodate  them  to  the  nature  of  the
new  subjects  to  which  they  are  applied.  But  it  docs  not  appear  that
he  discovered  the  full  extent  of  this  idea,  since  he  seems  not  to  approve
of  the  mode  of  treating  the  law  of  nations  separately  from  the  law  of
nature  as  relating  to  individuals.  He  only  commends  Budjeus's  method,
saying,  "  It  was  right  in  that  author  to  point  out, J  after  each  article
of  the  law  of  nature,  the  application  which  may  be  made  of  it  to  nations
in  their  mutual  relations  to  each  other,  so  far,  at  least,  as  his  plan  per-
mitted or  required  that  he  should  do  this."§  Here  Barbeyrac  made  one
step,  at  least,  in  the  right  track :  but  it  required  more  profound  reflec-
tion, and  more  extensive  views,  in  order  to  conceive  the  idea  of  a  sys-
tem of  natural  law  of  nations,  which  should  claim  the  obedience  of
states  and  sovereigns,  to  perceive  the  utility  of  such  a  work,  and  espe-
cially to  be  the  first  to  execute  it.

This  glory  was  reserved  for  the  Baron  de  Wolf.  That  great  philoso-
pher saw  thkt  the  law  of  nature  could  not,  with  such  modifications  as
the  nature  of  the  subjects  required,  and  with  suflScient  precision,  clear-
ness, and  solidity,  be  applied  to  incorporated  nations,  or  states,  without
the  assistance  of  those  general  principles  and  leading  ideas  by  which

*  Puffendorf  s  Law  of  Natmre  and  NaiionB, J  Note  2  on  Puffendorf 'a  Law  of  Kature
b.*ok  ii.  cbap.  iii.  {  23.  and  Nations,  book  ii.  chap.  3,  g  23. I  havf

f  Book  L  chap.  i.  }  14,  note  8.  not boen able  to proctire Budaeus's  work

j  Li  his  Elomenta  PhUos.  Praot  fW>m  which  I  suspoct  that  Barbejrac  dorived

this  idea  of  the  Law  of  Nations.


PREFAOK.  ,  XI

the  application  is  to  be  directed ;  that  it  is  by  those  principles  alone  we
are  enabled  evidently  to  demonstrate  that  the  decisions  of  the  law  of
nature,  respecting  individuals,  must,  pursuant  to  the  intentions  of  that
very  law,  be  changed  and  modified  in  their  application  to  states  and
political  societies,  and  thus  to  form  a  natural  and  necessary  law  of  na-
tions:* whence  he  concluded,  that  it 'was  proper  to  form  a  distinct
system  of  the  law  of  nations,  a  task  which  he  has  happily  executed.
But  it  is  just  that  we  should  hear  what  Wolf  himself  says  in  his  Pre-
face.

"Nations,"!  says  he,  "do  not,  in  their  mutual  relations  to  each
other,  acknowledge  any  other  law  than  that  which  Nature  herself  has
established.  Perhaps,  therefore,  it  may  appear  superfluous  to  give  a
trc}3,tise  on  the  law  of  nations,  as  distinct  from  the  law  of  nature.  But
those  who  entertain  this  idea  have  not  sufficiently  studied  the  subject.
Nations,  it  is  true,  can  only  be  considered  as  so  many  individual  per-
sons living  together  in  the  state  of  nature ;  and,  for  that  reason,  we
must  apply  to  them  all  the  duties  and  rights  which  nature  prescribes
and  attributes  to  men  in  general,  as  being  naturally  bom  free,  and  bound
to  each  other  by  no  ties  but  those  of  nature  alone.  The  law  which
arises  from  this  application,  and  the  obligations  resulting  from  it,  pro-
ceed from  that  immutable  law  founded  on  the  nature  of  man;  and  thus
the  law  of  nations  certainly  belongs  to  the  law  of  nature :  it  is,  there-
fore, on  account  of  its  origin,  called  the  natural^  and,  by  reason  of  its
obligatory  force,  the  necessary  law  of  nations.  That  law  is  common  to
all  nations ;  and  if  any  one  of  them  does  not  respect  it  in  her  actions,
she  violates  the  common  rights  of  all  the  others.

"  But  nations  or  sovereign  states  being  moral  persons,  and  the  sub-
jects of  the  obligations  and  rights  resulting,  in  virtue  of  the  law  of  na-
ture, from  the  act  of  association  which  has  formed  the  political  body,
the  nature  and  essence  of  these  moral  persons  necessarily  differ,  in  many
respects,  from  the  nature  and  essence  of  the  physical  individuals,  or
inen,  of  whom  they  are  composed.  When,  therefore,  we  would  apply
to  nations  the  duties  which  the  law  of  nature  prescribes  to  individual
man,  and  the  rights  it  confers  on  him  in  order  to  enable  him  to  fulfil  his
duties,  since  those  rights  and  those  duties  can  be  no  other  than  what
are  consistent  with  the  nature  of  their  subjects,  they  must,  hi  their  ap»
plication,  necessarily  undergo  a  change  suitable  to  the  new  subjects
to  which  they  are  applied. Thus,  we  see  that  the  law  of  nations  does

*  If  it  were  not  more  adTiaable  for  the  founded  on  the  nature  of  man,  so  the  natural

sake  of  brevity,  of  avoiding  repetitions,  and  law  of  nations  is  the  natural  law  of  political

taking  advantage  of  the  ideas  already  formed  societies, and founded on the nature ot

and established  in the minds  of  men, — ^if,  those  societies. But  as  the  result  of  either

for  all  theoe  reasons,  it  were  not  more  conve-  mode  is  ultimately  the  same,  I  have,  in  prefer-

nient  to  presuppose,  in  this  instance,  a  know-  ence,  adopted  Uie  more  compendious  one.

ledge  of  the  ordinary  law  of  nature,  and  on  As  the  law  of  nature  has  already  been  treated

that  ground  to  undertake  the  task  of  applying  of  in  an  ample  and  satis&ctory  manner,  the

it  to  sovereign  states, — it  would,  instead  of  shortest  way  is  simply  to make  a  rational

•peaking  of  such  application,  be  more  accurate  application of  it  to  nations,
•o  say,  that,  as  the  law  of  nature,  properly  so f  A  nation  here  means  a  soyereign  state,

called,  is  the  natural  law  of  individuab  and  an  independent  political  society.


Zil  PREFACE.

not,  in  every  particular,  remain  the  same  as  the  law  of  nature,  regu
lating  the  actions  of  individuals. Why  may  it  not,  therefore,  be  sepa-
rately treated  of,  as  a  law  peculiar  to  nations?"

Being  myself  convinced  of  the  utility  of  such  a  work,  I  impatiently
waited  for  Monsieur  Wolf's  production,  and,  as  soon  as  it  appeared,
formed  the  design  of  facilitating,  for  the  advantage  of  a  greater  number
of  readers,  the  knowledge  of  the  luminous  ideas  which  it  contains.  The
treatise  of  the  philosopher  of  Hall  on  the  law  of  nations  is  dependent  on
all  those  of  the  same  author  on  philosophy  and  the  law  of  nature.  In
order  to  read  and  understand  it,  it  is  necessary  to  have  previously  stu-
died sixteen  or  seventeen  quarto  volumes  which  precede  it.  Besides,  it
is  written  in  the  manner  and  even  in  the  formal  method  of  geometrical
works.  These  circumstances  present  obstacles  which  render  it  nearly
useless  to  those  very  persons  in  whom  the  knowledge  and  taste  of  the  true
principles  of  the  law  of  nations  are  most  important  and  most  desirable.
At  first,  I  thought  that  I  should  have  had  nothing  farther  to  do  than
to  detach  this  treatise  from  the  entire  system,  by  rendering  it  indepen-
dent  of  every  thing  Monsieur  Wolf  had  said  before,  and  to  give  it  a  new
form,  more  agreeable,  and  better  calculated  to  insure  it  a  reception  in
the  polite  world.  With  that  view,  I  made  some  attempts ;  but  I  soon
found,  that  if  I  indulged  the  expectation  of  procuring  readers  among
that  class  of  persons  for  whom  I  intended  to  write,  and  of  rendering  my
efforts  beneficial  to  mankind,  it  was  necessary  that  I  should  form  a  very
different  work  from  that  which  lay  before  me,  and  undertake  to  furnish
an  original  production.  The  method  followed  by  Monsieur  Wolf  has
had  the  effect  of  rendering  his  work  dry,  and  in  many  respects  incom-
plete. The  different  subjects  are  scattered  through  it  in  a  manner  that
is  extremely  fatiguing  to  the  attention :  and,  as  the  author  had,  in  his
"Law  of  Nature,"  treated  of  universal  public  law,  he  frequently  con-
tents himself  with  a  bare  reference  to  his  former  production,  when,  in
handling  the  law  of  nations,  he  speaks  of  the  duties  of  a  nation
towards  herself.

From  Monsieur  Wolfs  treatise,  therefore,  I  have  only  borrowed
whatever  appeared  most  worthy  of  attention,  especially  the  definitions
and  general  principles ;  but  I  have  been  careful  in  selecting  what  I
drew  from* that  source,  and  have  accommodated  to  my  own  plan  the  ma-
terials with  which  he  furnished  me.  Those  who  have  read  Monsieur
Wolfs  treatises  on  the  law  of  nature  and  the  law  of  nations,  will  see
what  advantage  I  have  made  of  them.  Had  I  everywhere  pointed  out
what  I  have  borrowed,  my  pages  would  be  crowded  with  quotations
equally  useless  and  disagreeable  to  the  reader.  It  is  better  to  acknow-
ledge here,  once  for  all,  the  obligations  I  am  under  to  that  great  master.
Although  my  work  be  very  different  from  his,  (as  will  appear  to  those
who  are  willing  to  take  the  trouble  of  making  the  comparison,)  I  confess
that  I  should  never  have  had  the  courage  to  launch  into  so  extensive
a  field,  if  the  celebrated  philosopher  of  Hall  had  not  preceded  my  steps,
and  held  forth  a  torch  to  guide  me  on  my  way.

Sometimes,  however,  I  have  ventured  to  deviate  from  the  path  which
he  had  pointed  out,  and  adopted  sentiments  opposite  to  his. I  will


PREPACB.  Xm

here  quote  a  few  instances.  Monsieur  Wolf,  influenced,  perhaps,  by
the  example  of  numerous  other  writers,  has  devoted  several  sections*
to  the  express  purpose  of  treating  of  the  nature  of  patrimonial  kingdoms,
without  rejecting  or  rectifying  that  idea  so  degrading  to  human  kind.
I  do  not  even  admit  of  such  a  denomination,  which  I  think  equally
Bhocking,  improper,  and  dangerous,  both  in  its  effects,  and  in  the  im-
pressions it  may  give  to  sovereigns :  and  in  this,  I  flatter  myself  I  shall
obtain  the  suffrage  of  every  man  who  possesses  the  smallest  spark  of
reason  and  sentiment,  in  short,  of  every  true  citizen.

Monsieur  Wolf  determines  (Jus  Gent.  §  8^8)  that  it  is  naturally  law-
ful to  make  use  of  poisoned  weapons  in  war.  I  am  shocked  at  such  a
decision,  and  sorry  to  find  it  in  the  work  of  so  great  a  man.  Happily
for  the  human  race,  it  is  not  difficult  to  prove  the  contrary,  even  from
Monsieur  Wolfs  own  principles.  What  I  have  said  on  this  subject  may
DC  seen  in  Book  III.  §  156.

In  the  very  outset  of  my  work,  it  will  be  found  that  I  differ  entirely
from  Monsieur  Wolf  in  the  manner  of  establishing  the  foundations  of
that  species  of  law  of  nations  which  we  call  voluntary.  Monsieur  Wolf
deduces  it  from  the  idea  of  a  great  republic  {civitatis  maximce)  instituted
by  nature  herself,  and  of  which  all  nations  of  the  world  are  members.
According  to  him,  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  is,  as  it  were,  the  civil
law  of  that  great  republic.  This  idea  does  not  satisfy  me ;  nor  do  I
think  the  ^ction  of  such  a  republic  either  admissible  in  itself,  or  capa-
ble of  affording  sufficiently  solid  grounds  on  which  to  build  the  rules  of
the  universal  law  of  nations,  which  shall  necessarily  claim  the  obedient
acquiescence  of  sovereign  states.  I  acknowledge  no  other  natural  so-
ciety between  nations  than  that  which  nature  has  established  between
mankind  in  general.  It  is  essential  to  every  civil  society  (eivitati)  that
each  member  have  resigned  a  part  of  his  right  to  the  body  of  the  society,
and  that  there  exist  in  it  an  authority  capable  6{  commanding  all  the
members,  of  giving  them  laws,  and  of  compelling  those  who  should  re-
fuse to  obey.  Nothing  of  this  kind  can  be  conceived  or  supposed  to
subsist  between  nations.  Each  sovereign  state  claims,  and  actually  pos-
Besses  an  absolute  independence  on  all  the  others.  They  are  all,  accord-
ing to  Monsieur  Wolf  himself,  to  be  considered  as  so  many  individuals
who  live  together  in  the  state  of  nature,  and  who  acknowledge  no  other
laws  but  those  of  nature,  or  of  her  Great  Author.  Now,'  although
nature  has  indeed  established  a  general  society  between  mankind,
by  creating  them  subject  to  such  wants  as  render  the  assistance  of  their
fellow  creatures  indispensably  necessary  to  enable  them  to  live  in  a
manner  suitable  to  men,  yet  she  has  not  imposed  on  them  any  parti-
cular obligation  to  unite  in  civil  society,  properly  so  called :  and  if  they
all  obeyed  the  injunctions  of  that  good  parent,  their  subjection  to  the
restraints  of  civil  society  would  be  unnecessary.  It  is  true,  that  as
there  does  not  exist  in  mankind  a  disposition  voluntarily  to  observe
towards  each  other  the  rules  of  the  law  of  nature,  they  have  had  le^
course  to  a  political  association,  as  the  only  adequate  remedy  against
the  depravity  of  the  majority — the  only  means  of  securing  the  conditioii

*  In  the  Ymth  part  of  hu  Law  of  Nature,  and  in  hie  Law  of  Natione.

B


ZIY  PREFACS.

of  the  good,  and  repressing  the  wicked :  and  the  law  of  nature  itself
approves  of  this  establishment.  But  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  the  civic
association  is  very  far  from  being  equally  necessary  between  nations,
as  it  was  between  individuals.  We  cannot,  therefore,  say,  that  nature
equally  recommends  it,  much  less  that  she  has  prescribed  it.  Indivi-
duals are  so  constituted,  and  are  capable  of  doing  so  little  by  themselvea,
that  they  can  scarcely  subsist  without  the  aid  and  the  laws  of  civil  society
But,  as  soon  as  a  considerablQ  number  of  them  have  united  under  the
same  government,  they  become  able  to  supply  most  of  their  wants ;  and
the  assistance  of  other  political  societies  is  not  so  necessary  to  them  as
that  of  individuals  is  to  an  individual.  These  societies  have  still,  it  is
true,  powerful  motives  for  carrying  on  a  communication  and  commerce
with  each  other ;  and  it  is  eveh  their  duty  to  do  it ;  since  no  man  can,
without  good  reasons,  refuse  assistance  to  another  man.  But  the  law
of  nature  may  suffice  to  regulate  this  commerce,  and  this  correspondence.
States  conduct  themselves  in  a  different  manner  from  individuals.  It
is  not  usually  the  caprice  or  blind  impetuosity  of  a  single  person  that
forms  the  resolutions  and  determines  the  measures  of  the  public :  they
are  carried  on  with  more  deliberation  and  circumspection :  and,  on  dif-
ficult or  important  occasions,  arrangements  are  made  and  regulations
established  by  means  of  treaties.  To  this  we  may  add,  that  independ-
ence is  even  necessary  to  each  state,  in  order  to  enable  her  properly
to  discharge  the  duties  she  owes  to  herself  and  to  her  citizens,  and  to
govern  herself  in  the  manner  best  suited  to  her  circumstances.  It  is«
therefore,  sufficient  (as  I  have  already  said)  that  nations  should  conform
to  what  is  required  of  them  by  the  natural  and  general  society  esta-
lished  between  all  mankind.

But,  says  Monsieur  Wolf,  a  rigid  adherence  to  the  law  of  nature
cannot  always  prevail  in  that  commerce  and  society  of  nations  ;  it  must
undergo  various  modifications,  which  can  only  be  deduced  from  this
idea  of  a  kind  of  great  republic  of  nations,  whose  laws,  dictated  by
sound  reason,  and  founded  on  necessity,  shall  regulate  the  alterations
to  be  made  in  the  natural  and  necessary  law  of  nations,  as  the  civil  laws
of  a  particular  state  determine  what  modifications  shall  take  place  in
the  natural  law  of  individuals.  I  do  not  perceive  the  necessity  of  this
connequence ;  and  I  flatter  myself  that  I  shall,  in  the  course  of  this
work,  be  able  to  prove,  that  all  the  modifications,  all  the  restrictions, —
in  a  word,  all  the  alterations  which  the  rigour  of  the  natural  law  must
be  made  to  undergo  in  the  affairs  of  nations,  and  from  which  the  volun-
tary law  of  nations  is  formed, — to  prove,  I  say,  that  all  these  alterations
are  deducible  from  the  natural  liberty  of  nations,  from  the  attention  due
to  their  common  safety,  from  the  nature  of  their  mutL.  1  cirrespondence,
their  reciprocal  duties,  and  the  distinctions  of  their  various  rights,  in-
ternal and  external,  perfect  and  imperfect, — ^by  a  mode  of  reasoning
nearly  similar  to  that  which  Monsieur  Wolf  has  pursued,  with  respect
to  individuals,  in  his  treatise  on  the  law  of  nature.

In  that  treatise  it  is  made  to  appear  that  the  rules  which,  in  conse-
quence of  the  natural  liberty  of  mankind,  must  be  admitted  in  ques-
tions of  external  right,  do  not  cancel  the  obligation  which  the  internal
right  imposes  on  the  conscience  of  each  individuaL It  is  easy  to  apply


PBEFACB.  XT

this  doctrine  to  nations,  and,  by  carefully  drawing  the  line  oT  distinc-
tion between  the  internal  and  external  right — ^between  the  necessary
and  the  voluntary  law  of  nations — ^to  teach  them  not  to  indulge  them-
selves in  the  commission  of  every  act  which,  they  may  do  with  impunity,
unless  it  be  approved  by  the  immutable  laws  of  justice  and  the  voice
of  conscience.

Since  nations,  in  their  transactions  with  each  other,  are  equally  bound
to  admit  those  exceptions  to,  and  those  modifications  of,  the  rigour  of
the*  necessary  law,  whether  they  be  deduced  from  the  idea  of  a  great
republic  of  which  all  nations  are  supposed  to  be  the  members,  or  derived
from  the  source  from  whence  I  propose  to  draw  them, — ^there  can  be  no
reason  why  the  system  which  thence  results  should  not  be  called  the
Voluntary  Law  of  nations,  in  contradistinction  to  the  neccBsary^  inter-
nal, and  consciential  law.  Names  are  of  very  little  consequence :  but
it  is  of  considerable  importance  carefully  to  distinguish  these  two  kinds
of  law,  in  order  that  we  may  never  confound  what  is  just  and  good  in
itself,  with  what  is  only  tolerated  through  necessity.

The  necessary  and  the  voluntary  laws  of  nations  are  therefore  both
established  by  nature,  but  each  in  a  different  manner :  the  former,  as  a
sacred  law  which  nations  and  sovereigns  are  bound  to  respect  and  follow
in  all  their  actions ;  the  latter,  as  a  rule  which  the  general  welfare  and
safety  oblige  them  to  admit  in  their  transactions  with  each  other.  The
necessary  law  immediately  proceeds  from  nature ;  and  that  common  mo-
ther of  mankind  recommends  the  observance  of  the  voluntary  law  of
nations,  in  consideration  of  the  state  in  which  nations  stand  with  respect
to  each  other,  and  for  the  advantage  of  their  affairs.  This  double  law,
founded  on  certain  and  invariable  principles,  is  susceptible  of  demon-
stration, and  will  constitute  the  principal  subject  of  this  work.

.  There  is  another  kind  of  law  of  nations,  which  authors  call  arbi-
trary^ because  it  proceeds  from  the  will  or  consent  of  nations.  States,
as  well  as  individuals,  may  acquire  rights  and  contract  obligations,  by
express  engagements,  by  compact  and  treaties ;  hence  results  a  conven-
tional law  of  nations,  peculiar  to  the  contracting  powers.  Nations  may
also  bind  themselves  by  their  tacit  consent :  upon  this  ground  rest  all
those  regulations  which  custom  has  introduced  between  different  states,
and  which  constitute  the  usage  of  nations,  or  the  law  of  nations  founded
on  custom.  It  is  evident  that  this  law  cannot  impose  any  obligation
except  on  those  particular  nations  who  have,  by  long  use,  given  their
sanction  to  its  maxims :  it  is  a  peculiar  law,  and  limited  in  its  operations,
as  the  conventional  law ;  both  the  one  and  the  other  derive  all  their  obli-
gatory force  from  that  maxim  of  the  natural  law  which  makes  it  the  duty
of  nations  to  fuUU  f  oeir  engagements,  whether  express  or  tacit.  The  same
maxim  ought  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  states  with  regard  to  the  trea-
ties they  conclude  and  the  customs  they  adopt.  I  must  content  myself
with  simply  laying  down  the  general  rules  and  principles  which  the  law
of  nature  furnishes  for  the  direction  of  sovereigns  in  this  respect.  A
particular  detail  of  the  various  treaties  and  customs  of  different  states
belongs  to  history,  and  not  to  a  systematic  treatise  on  the  law  of  nations.

Such  a  treatise  ought,  as  we  have  already  observed,  principally  to
consist  in  a  judicious  and  rational  application  of  the  principles  of  the


law  of  nature  to  tte  affairs  and  conduct  of  nations  and  sovereigns
The  study  of  the  law  of  nations  supposes  therefore  a  previous  knowledge
of  the  ordinary  law  of  nature ;  and,  in  fact,  I  proceed  on  the  supposition
that  my  readers  are  already,  to  a  certain  degree  at  least,  possessed  of
that  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  as  it  is  not  agreeable  to  readers  in  ge-
neral to  be  obliged  to  recur  to  other  authorities  for  proofs  of  what  an
author  advances,  I  have  taken  care  to  establish,  in  a  few  words,  the
most  important  of  those  principles  of  the  law  of  nature  which  I  intend
to  apply  to  nations.  But  I  have  not  always  thought  it  necessary  to
trace  them  to  their  primary  foundations  for  the  purpose  of  demonstra-
tion, but  have  sometimes  contented  myself  with  supporting  them  by
common  truths  which  are  acknowledged  by  every  candid  reader,  without
carrying  the  analysis  any  farther.  It  is  sufficient  for  me  to  persuade,
and  for  this  purpose  to  advance  nothing  as  a  principle  that  will  not
readily  be  admitted  by  every  sensible  man.

The  law  of  nations  is  the  law  of  sovereigns.  It  is  principally  for  them^
and  for  their  ministers,  that  it  ought  to  be  written.  All  mankind  are
indeed  interested  in  it ;  and,  in  a  free  country,  the  study  of  its  maxims
is  a  proper  employment  for  every  citizen ;  but  it  would  be  of  little  con*
sequence  to  impart  the  knowledge  of  it  only  to '  private  individuals,
who  are  not  called  to  the  councils  of  nations,  and  who  have  no  influence
in  directing  the  public  measures.  If  the  conductors  of  states,  if  all
those  who  are  employed  in  public  affairs,  condescended  to  apply  seri-
ously to  the  study  of  a  science  which  ought  to  be  their  law,  and,  as  it
were,  the  compass  by  which  to  steer  their  course,  what  happy  effects
might  we  not  expect  from  a  good  treatise  on  the  law  of  nations  !  W€
every  day  feel  the  advantages  of  a  good  body  of  laws  in  civil  society: —
the  law  of  nations  is,  in  point  of  importance,  as  much  superior  to  the
civil  law,  as  the  proceedings  of  nations  and  sovereigns  are  more  mo-
mentous in  their  consequences  than  those  of  private  persons.

But  fatal  experience  too  plainly  proves  how  little  regard  those  who
are  at  the  head  of  affairs  pay  to  the  dictates  of  justice,  in  conjunctures
where  they  hope  to  find  their  advantage.  Satisfied  with  bestowing  their
attention  on  a  system  of  politics  which  is  often  false,  since  often  unjust,
tl^e  generality  of  them  think  they  have  done  enough  when  they  have
thoroughly  studied  that.  Nevertheless,  we  may  truly  apply  to  states  a
maxim  which  has  long  been  acknowledged  as  true  with  respect  to  indi-
viduals,— that  the  best  and  safest  policy  is  that  which  is  founded  on
virtue.  Cicero,  as  great  a  master  in  the  art  of  government  as  in  elo*
quence  and  philosophy,  does  not  content  himself  with  rejecting  the  vul*
gar  maxim,  that  "a  state  cannot  be  happily  governed  without  commit-
ting injustice;"  he  even  proceeds  so  far  as  to  lay  down  the  very  reverse
of  the  proposition  as  an  invariable  truth,  and  maintains,  that  ^'  without
a  strict  attention  to  the  most  rigid  justice,  public  affairs  cannot  be  ad-
vantageously administered."*

Providence  occasionally  bestows  on  the  world  kings  and  ministers
whose  minds  are  impressed  with  this  great  truth. Let  us  not  renounce

^  Nihil  est  quod  adhuo  de  repablioSl  puiem  injuria  non  posse;  sed  hoc  Teri8simam,-5iii«
dictum,  et  qao  poBMim  longius  progrediy  nisi  sit  summiL  justitiil  rempublicam  regi  non  posso^
<^nfinnatami  non  modo  falsnm  esse  iatad*  sin* Cieero,  Fragment,  ex  Ub.  de  Republioft.


PREFACE.  rm

the  pleasing  hope  that  the  number  of  those  wise  conductors  of  nations
irill  one  day  be  multiplied ;  and  in  the  interim  let  us,  each  in  his  own
sphere,  exert  our  best  efforts  to  accelerate  the  happy  period.

It  is  principally  with  a  view  of  rendering  my  work  palatable  to  those
\>j  whom  it  is  of  the  most  importance  that  it  should  be  read  and  relished,
th&t  I  have  sometimes  joined  examples  to  the  maxims  I  advance :  and
in  that  idea  I  have  been  confirmed  by  the  approbation  of  one  of  those
ministers  who  are  the  enlightened  friends  of  the  human  race,  and  who
alone  ought  to  be  admitted  into  the  councils  of  kings.  But  I  have  been
sparing  in  the  use  of  such  embellishments.  Without  ever  aiming  at  a
vain  parade  of  erudition,  I  only  sought  to  afford  an  occasional  relaxation
to  the  reader's  mind,  or  to  render  the  doctrine  more  impressive  by  an
example,  and  sometimes  to  show  that  the  practice  of  nations  is  conform-
able to  the  principles  laid  down :  and,  whenever  I  found  a  convenient
opportunity,  I  have,  above  all  things,  endeavoured  to  inspire  a  love  of
virtue,  by  showing,  from  some  striking  passage  of  history,  how  amiable
it  is,  how  worthy  of  our  homage  in  some  truly  great  men,  and  even  pro-
ductive  of  solid  advantage.  I  have  quoted  the  chief  part  of  my  exam-
ples from  modern  history,  as  well  because  these  are  more  interesting,
as  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  those  which  have  been  already  accumulated
by  Grotius,  Puffendorf,  and  their  commentators.

As  to  the  rest,  I  have,  both  in  these  examples  and  in  my  reasonings,
studiously  endeavoured  to  avoid  giving  offence ;  it  being  my  intention
religiously  to  observe  the  respect  due  to  nations  and  sovereign  powers :
but  I  have  made  it  a  still  more  sacred  rule  to  respect  the  truth,  and
the  interests  of  the  human  race.  If  among  the  base  flatterers  of  despotic
power,  my  principles  meet  with  opponents,  I  shall  have  on  my  side  the
virtuous  man,  the  friend  of  the  laws,  the  man  of  probity,  and  the  true
citizen.

I  should  prefer  the  alternative  of  total  silence,  were  I  not  at  liberty
in  my  writings  to  obey  the  dictates  of  my  conscience.  But  my  pen  lies
under  no  restraint,  and  I  am  incapable  of  prostituting  it  to  flattery.  I
was  born  in  a  country  of  which  liberty  is  the  soul,  the  treasure,  and  the
fundamental  law ;  and  my  birth  qualifies  me  to  be  the  friend  of  all
nations.  These  favourable  circumstances  have  encouraged  me  in  the
attempt  to  render  myself  useful  to  mankind  by  this  work.  I  felt  con*
Bcious  of  my  deficiency  in  knowledge  and  abilities :  I  saw  that  I  was
undertaking  an  arduous  task ;  but  I  shall  rest  satisfied  if  that  class  of
readers  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  respect,  discover  in  my  labours
the  traces  o{  the  honest  man  and  the  good  citizen.


iS


CONTENTS


PRELIMINARIES.

Idea  and  General  Principles  of  the  Lato  o/NdHonw.

Pirn

1  What  is  meant  by  a  nation  or  state  •  •  •  • If

2  It  is  a  moral  person .•••••  16.
8  Definition  of  the  law  of  nations . . • . •  • t6.

4  In  wliat  light  nations  or  states  are  to  be  considered  •  •  Ivi

5  To  what  laws  nations  are  snbject .  ..  •  •  • t&.

6  In  what  the  law  of  nations  originally  consists •  •  •  16.

7  Definition  of  the  necessary  law  of  nations •  •  •  •  lyiii

8  It  is  immutable  ..••••  t6.

9  Nations  can  make  no  change  in  it^  nor  dispense  with  the  obligations

arising  from  it  ....••  t6.

10  Society  established  by  nature  between  all  mankind •  •  • lix

11  And  between  all  nations  ....••  Ix

12  The  object  of  this  society  of  nations  •  •  •  . Ixi

13  General  obligation  imposed  by  it  •  •  •  .  16.

14  Explanation  of  this  observation  .  .  .  .  , ib.

15  The  second  general  law  is  the  liberty  and  independence  of  nations Ixii

16  Effect  of  that  liberty  •  ,  . - .  .  . ib.

17  Distinctions  between  internal  and  external;  perfect  and  imperfect  obli-

gations and  rights  .  •  .  •  •  , ib.

18  Equality  of  nations  •••••• Ixiii

19  Enect  of  that  equality  .  .  •  .  .  . ib.

20  Each  nation  is  mistress  of  her  own  actions^  when  they  do  not  affect

the  perfect  rights  of  others ^ .  •  •  •  . ib.

21  Foundation  of  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  .  •  .  ih,

22  Right  of  nations  against  the  infractors  of  the  law  of  nations •  .  Ixit  ^

23  Measure  of  that  right ......  t6

24  Conventional  law  of  nations,  or  law  of  treaties  •  •  .  Ixi

25  Customary  law  of  nations  .  •  •  •  •  t6

26  General  rule  respecting  that  law •  •  •  •  . ib

27  Positive  law  of  nations .  .  .  •  .  . Ixr.

28  General  maxim  respecting  the  use  of  the  necessary  and  the  voluntary

law •••••••.  %o*


C0KTB1TT&


BOOK  I.


OF  NATIONS  CONSIDEREB  IN  THEMS£LyE&

CHAP.L
OfNatUms  or  Sovereign  States,

1  Of  the  Btate,  and  of  sovereignty .

2  Authority  of  the  body  politic  over  the  members
8  Of  the  several  kinds  of  government  •  •

4  What  are  sovereign  states  •  •  •

5  States  bound  by  unequal  alliance •  •
g  or  by  treaties  of  protection «  •

7  Tributary  states «  •  •  •

8  Feudatory  states  .  •  •  •

9  Two  states  subject  io  the  same  prince  •

10  States  forming  a  federal  republic  .  •

11  A  state  that  has  passed  under  the  dominion  of  another

12  Objects  of  this  treatise •  •  •  •


1

ih.

2
ih.
%b.
<h.

3
ib.
ift.
ib.
ib.

4


CHAP.IL


hergeif.


18  A  nation  ought  to  act  agreeably  to  her  nature • •  .4

14  Preservation  and  perfection  of  a  nation • • • •  ii.

15  End  of  civil  society . • • •  . 5

16  A  nation  is  under  an  obligation  to  preserve  herself • •  i5.

17  and  to  preserve  her  members • • .  , t6.

18  A  nation  has  a  right  to  evei^  thing  necessary  for  her  preservation  6

19  She  ought  to  avoid  every  thing  that  might  occasion  her  destruction  • ih.

20  Her  right  to  every  thing  that  may  promote  this  end . •  ib.

21  A  nation  ought  to  perfect  herself  and  her  condition . .  , ib,

22  and  to  avoid  every  thing  contrary  to  her  perfection •  7

28  The  right  she  derives  from  these  ooligations • •  . ib.
24  Examples . •••••!&.

225  A  nation  ought  to  know  herself • • • •  .8


CHAP.  m.

0/the  OofuHtutian  of  a  State,  and  ike  DtUiee  and  Righu  of  a  Nation

ih  that  reepecL

26  Of  the  public  authority ••••••

27  What  is  the  constitution  of  a  state  •  •  •  •

28  The  nation  ought  to  choose  the  best  constitution •  •

29  Political,  fundamental,  and  civil  laws .  •  •  •

80  Support  of  the  constitution,  and  obedience  to  the  laws

81  Bight  of  a  nation  with  respect  to  her  constitution  and  government


8
9

a.

10


CONTENTS.

Pag§

32  She  may  refona  the  government .  •  •  •  .JO

83  and  may  alter  the  constitution  .  .  •  t6.

84  Of  the  legislatiye  power^  and  whether  it  can  alter  the  constitution  • 11

85  The  nation  ought  not  to  attempt  it  without  great  caution  •  12

86  She  is  the  judge  of  all  disputes  relative  to  the  government •  « ib

87  No  foreign  power  has  a  right  to  interfere  •  •  • *  i&

CHAP.  IV.
Of  the  Sovereign f  hU  OhUgcUioniy  and  hta  lights.

38  Of  the  sovereign .  .  .  .  .  •  ,12

39  He  is  solely  established  for  the  safety  and  advantage  of  society •  13

40  His  representative  character  .  .  .  .  .14

41  He  is  intrusted  with  the  obligations  of  the  nation^  and  invested  with

her  rights  .  .  .  .  •  .  • i&.

42  His  duty  with  respect  to  the  preservation  and  perfection  of  the  nation ib.

43  His  rights  in  that  respect .  .  .  •  •  • t6.

44  He  ought  to  know  the  nation .  .  •  •  .15

45  Extent  of  his  power : — prerogatives  of  majesty  .  .  • ib,

46  The  prince  is  bound  to  respect  and  support  the  fundamental  laws  ib,

47  He  may  change  the  laws  not  fundamental .  •  •  .16

48  He  is  bound  to  maintain  and  observe  the  existing  laws •  •  ib,

49  In  what  sense  he  is  subject  to  the  laws  •  •  •  . ib.

50  His  person  is  sacred  and  inviolable  ....  17

51  But  the  nation  may  repress  a  tyrant,  and  renounce  her  allegiance  to  him ib.

52  Arbitration  between  the  king  and  his  subjects .  •  •  20

53  Obedience  which  subjects  owe  to  a  sovereign  •  •  .21

54  In  what  cases  they  may  resist  him  •  • '  •  •  ib.

55  Ministers •  •  •  «  •  •  •  .23

CHAP.  V.

O/StcUeSj  Elective^  Successive^  or  Hereditcery,  and  of  those  called  Patrimonial.

56  Elective  states  •  .  .  .  •  •  .23

57  Whether  elective  kings  be  real  sovereigns  •  .  .  .24

58  Successive  and  hereditary  states :— origin  of  the  right  of  succession . ib.

59  Other  origin  of  that  right  .....  i&.

60  Other  sources,  which  still  amount  to  the  same  thing  •  . 24

61  A  nation  may  change  the  order  of  the  succession  •  •  ib.

62  Renunciations  .  .  .  •  .  •  .25

63  The  order  of  succession  ought  commonly  to  be  observed  •  •  26

64  Eegents ....  •  ... 27

65  Indivisibility  of  sovereignties .  •  .  . * .  ib.

66  Who  are  to  decide  disputes  respecting  the  succession  to  a  sovereignty ib

67  The  right  of  succession  not  to  depend  on  the  judgment  of  a  foreign

power .  .  •  •  •  .  •  .29

68  States  called  patrimonial  .  •  •  •  .  30

69  Every  true  sovereignty  is  unalienable  .  .  .  .31

70  Ihity  of  a  prince  who  is  empowered  to  nominate  his  successor .  32

71  His  nomination  must  be  sanctioned  by  at  least  the  tacit  ratification  of

the  people •  •  •  .  •  .  •  .  ib.


XJLXl  CONTENTS.

CHAP.  VL

Principal  Objects  of  a  good  Government;  and  fint^  to  provide  for  the  Necet-

sities  of  the  Nation,

Sect.  Pag€

72  jThe  object  of  sooiety  points  oat  the  duties  of  the  sovereign: — he  is

bound  to  prooure  plenty .  .  •  .  .  .33

73  to  take  care  that  there  be  a  sufficient  number  of  workmen tb.

74  to  prevent  the  emigration  of  those  that  are  useful  . ih.

75  Emissaries  who  entice  them  away  ....  34

76  Labour  and  industry  must  be  encouraged •  •  •  . tb,

CHAP.  vn.

Of  the  OuUivaHon  of  the  Sad.

77  Utility  of  Agriculture  .  .  . • .  .  .34

78  Eegulations  necessary  in  that  respect : — ^for  the  distribution  of  land tb,

79  for  the  protection  of  husbandmen  .  .  .  .35

80  Husbandry  ought  to  be  placed  in  an  honourable  light •  .  tb.

81  Cultivation  of  the  soil  a  natural  obligation •  ^  •  . i&.

82  Public  granaries  ...••.  86

CHAP.  vm.

Of  Commerce,


.  37

•  •  •  ib.

•  •  m  ib.

•  •  •  ib,

•  •  •  u9

of  purchasing  •  ib.


83  Domestic  and  foreign  trade  •  •

84  Utility  of  domestic  trade  •  •

85  Utility  of  foreign  trade

86  Obligation  to  cultivate  domestic  trade

87  Obligation  to  carry  on  foreign  trade

88  Foundation  of  the  laws  of  commerce :«— right

89  Right  of  selling .  .  •  .  •  •  , ib.

90  Prohibition  of  foreign  merchandises •  .  •  •  30

91  Nature  of  the  risht  of  purchasing •  . ' •  .  , ib.

92  Each  nation  to  determine  for  herself  how  she  will  carry  on  oommeroe ib.

93  How  a  nation  acquires  a  perfect  right  to  a  foreign  trade •  . 40

94  Simple  permisdon  to  carry  on  trade .  .  •  •  t&.

95  Whether  commercial  rights  be  subject  to  prescription  •  . ib.

96  Imprescriptibility  of  rights  founded  on  treaty ...  41

97  Monopolies,  and  trading  companies  with  exclusive  privileges  . 42

98  Balance  of  trade,  and  attention  of  government  in  that  respect •  43

99  Import  duties  ...  ••.%&.

CHAP.  IX.

Of  the  Care  of  the  Public  Ways;  and  of  Tolls,

100  Utility  of  highways,  canals,  &c. .  .  *  .  .43

101  Duty  of  government  in  that  respect ....  ib,

102  Its  right  in  that  respect .....  44

103  Foundation  of  the  right  to  demand  toll  .  •  .  i&

104  Abuse  of  that  right  •  •  •  •  •  , ih.


CONTENTS.  xxm

CHAP.  X.  ^
0/ Money  and  Exchange.

105  Establishmeiit  of  money .  .  .  .  .  .46

106  Duty  of  the  nation  or  prince  with  respect  to  the  coin •  .  ib

107  Their  rights  in  that  respect  .  .  .  .  .46

108  How  one  nation  may  injure  another  in  the  artiole  of  coin  •  47

109  Exchange^  and  commercial  laws •  •  •  •  .16.

CHAP.  XI.

Second  Object  of  a  good  Government, — to  procure  the  true  Sappines$  of  a

Nation,

110  A  nation  is  bound  to  labour  after  her  own  happinefls  •  • 47

111  Instruction .••••••!&.

112  Education  of  youth  •  •  •  •  .  .48

113  Arts  and  sciences  ••••••  t&.

114  Freedom  of  philosophical  discussion  •  .  .  .49

115  Love  of  virtue,  and  abhorrence  of  yice,  to  be  excited .  .  51

116  The  nation  may  hence  discover  the  intention  of  her  rulers  . tb,

117  The  nation,  or  public  person,  bound  to  perfect  her  understanding  and  will  52

118  and  to  direct  the  knowledge  and  virtues  of  the  citizens  to

the  welfare  of  the  society .  •  •  •  .  52

119  Love  for  their  country .  .  •  •  .  .53
120 in  individuals . . . . *  %b.

121  in  the  nation  or  state  itself,  and  in  the  sovereign  • tb.

122  Definition  of  the  term  '*  country^'  ••••16.

123  How  shameful  and  criminal  to  injure  our  country  •  « 54

124  The  glory  of  good  citizens : — ^Examples  •  •  •  %b,

CHAP.  xn.

Of  Piety  and  Religion.

»

125  Piety .  .  .  .  .  •  •  .55

126  It  ought  to  be  attended  with  knowledge  •  •  .  tb,

127  Eeligion,  internal  and  external .  •  .  .  • 56  <

128  Rights  of  individuals : — ^liberty  of  conscience .  .  .  i&.

129  Public  establishment  of  religion : — ^rights  and  duties  of  the  nation t^.

130  1 when  there  is  as  yet  no  established  religion  .  57

131  when  there  is  an  established  religion .  .  . t5.

132  Duties  and  rights  of  the  sovereign  with  respect  to  religion  •  58

133  where  there  is  an  established  religion .  •  .59

134  Objects  of  his  care,  and  the  means  he  ought  to  employ  .  .  60

135  Toleration  .  .  .  •  .  .  , ib,

136  How  the  prince  is  to  act  when  the  nation  is  resolved  to  change  her

religion  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ib,

137  Difference  of  religion  does  not  deprive  a  prince  of  his  crown .  61

1 38  Duties  and  rights  of  the  sovereign  reconciled  with  those  of  the  subjects  ib,

139  The  sovereign  ought  to  have  the  inspection  of  the  affairs  of  religion,

and  authority  over  those  who  teach  it '  .  .  .  .62

140  He  is  bound  to  prevent  the  abuse  of  the  established  religion .  63

141  His  authority  over  the  ministers  of  religion  •  .  ib.


ZZiy  CONTENTS.

Sect.  Pag9

142  Nature  of  that  authority . • . • .  • &

143  Rale  to  he  observed  with  respect  to  ecclesiastics .  . t&.

144  Recapitulation  o£the  reasons  which  establish  the  sovereign's  rights  in

matters  of  religion,  xb, — ^Authorities  and  examples .  • 65

145  Pernicious  consequences  of  the  contrary  opinion • •  , io,

146  Abuses  particularised. — 1.  The  power  of  the  popes •  . 66

147  2.  Important  employments  conferred  by  a  foreign  power  . 68

148  3.  Powerful  subjects  dependent  on  a  foreign  court  • •  ib.

149  4.  Celibacy  of  the  priests : — Convents . .  .69

150  5.  Enormous  pretensions  of  the  clergy : — ^Pre-eminence  . 70

151  6.  Independence,  immunities . . •  * . 71

152  7.  Immunity  of  church  possessions • •  • 72

153  8.  Excommunication  of  men  in  office • •  .73

154  9. and  of  sovereigns  themselves ...  74

155  10.  The  clergy  drawing  every  thing  to  themselves,  and  inter-

rupting the  course  of  justice • •  • 75

156  11.  Money  drawn  to  Rome . . • .  .76

157  12.  Laws  and  customs  inimical  to  the  welfiure  of  states  • %b.


CHAP.  xm.  .

0/Jtuttce  cmd  Polity m

158  A  nation  is  bound  to  make  justice  flourish  .  .  .77

169  to  establish  good  laws  ....  ih.

160  to  enforce  them  .  .  .  .  .78

161  Functions  and  duties  of  the  prince  in  that  respect  •  .  t&.

162  How  he  is  to  dispense  justice  .  .  .  .  .  i&.

163  His  duty  to  appoint  upright  and  enlightened  judges .  .  ih

164  The  ordinary  courts  should  determine  causes  relating  to  the  revenue  79

165  Necessary  to  establish  supreme  courts,  from  whose  sentence  there  shall

be  no  appeal .  .  .  •  •  .  . t&.

166  The  prince  bound  to  observe  the  forms  of  justice  •  .  80

167  to  support  the  authority  of  the  judges,  and  enforce  their

decrees  .••...•«&•

168  Distributive  justice :— distribution  of  employments  and  rewards .  ib,

169  Punishment  of  transgressors : — ^foundation  of  the  right  of  punishing  81

170  Criminal  laws . . • • . . ,  ih.

171  Degree  of  punishment  •  •  •  .  .82

172  Execution  of  the  laws • • • • . .  ib,

173  Right  of  pardoning ••••..  83

174  Internal  police . • • • • . .  ih.

175  Duel  or  single  combat .....  84

176  Means  of  putting  a  stop  to  that  disorder • • • •  i&.

CHAP.  XIV.
Third  Object  of  a  good  Oovemmenty — to  fortify  itself  against  External  Attaclu,

177  A  nation  ought  to  fortify  herself  against  external  attacks •  . 87

178  National  strength ••....  t^.

179  Increase  of  population . • . . .  .16.

180  Valour .......  88

181  Other  military  virtues .^ . .. • ,  . 89


OONTBirrB*


Poff

182  Riches .••....  89

183  Public  reyenues  and  tazee •  •  .  *  .  90

184  The  nation  ought  not  to  increase  her  power  by  unlawful  means • tb.

185  Power  is  but  relatiye •••.•«»&«


CHAP.  XV.

QfAe  Olory  of  a,  Nation,

186  Advantages  of  glory • • . • •  .91

187  Duty  of  the  nation. — ^How  true  glory  is  acquired • •  %b,

188  Duty  of  the  prince • • . • r  , tb.

189  Duty  of  the  citizens ••••••  92

190  Example  of  the  Swiss' • . . . •  , ih,

191  Attacking  the  glory  of  a  nation  is  doing  her  an  injury • •  98

CHAP.  XVL
Protection  umght  ly  a  Nation^  and  her  voluntary  Buhmisnon  to  a  Foreign  Power.

192  Protection . . . . . •  .93

193  Voluntary  submission  of  one  nation  to  another • •  94

194  Several  kinds  of  submission . . . .  . t6.

195  Right  of  the  citizens  when  the  nation  submits  to  a  foreign  power  tb.

196  These  compacts  annulled  by  the  failure  of  protection .  . 95

197  ■  or  by  the  infidelity  of  the  party  protected .  .  t6.

198  ■■  and  by  the  encroachments  of  the  protector  .  . ib.

199  How  the  right  of  the  nation  protected  is  lost  by  her  silence •  96

CHAP.  xvn.

How  a  Nation  may  separate  hendf/rom  the  State  o/tohich  t^  is  a  Member ^
and  renounce  her  Allegiance  to  her  Sovereign  when  she  is  not  protected.

200  Difference  between  the  present  case  and  those  in  the  preceding  chapter 96

201  Duty  of  the  members  of  a  state,  or  subjects  of  a  prince,  who  are  in

danger .  .  •  .  •  •  •  .97

202  Their  right  when  they  are  abandoned •  •  •  » ib

CHAP.  xvnL

JSstahlishment  of  a  Nation  in  a  Country.

203  Possession  of  a  country  by  a  nation « • •  .91

204  Her  right  over  the  part  in  her  possession . • •  i6

205  Acquisition  of  the  sovereignty  in  a  vacant  country . .  . 9d

206  Another  manner  of  acquiring  the  empire  in  a  free  country •  ib.

207  How  a  nation  acquires  the  property  of  a  desert  country •  . i6.

208  A  question  on  this  subject .....  t2».

209  Whether  it  be  lawful  to  take  possession  of  part  of  a  country  inhabited

only  by  a  few  wandering  tribes .  •  .  •  100

210  Colonies  •  .  •  •  ^  .101

4  0


\


CONTENTS.

CHAP.  XIX.
Of  OUT  Native  OourUryf  and  various  Matten  rdating  to  iL

Sect,  Pagt

211  What  IB  our  country  •  •  •  •  •  .101

212  Citizens  and  natiyes ••••••  t5.

2 IS  Inhabitants  •••••..  102

214  Naturalization  .:••..  t&.

215  Citizens'  children  bom  in  a  foreign  country  •  •  .  tb.

216  Children  bom  at  sea .  .  .  .  .  .  ib.

217  Children  bom  in  the  armies  of  the  state^  or  in  the  house  of  its  minister

at  a  foreign  court ••••..  108

218  Settlement . . . • • .  . ib.

219  Vagrants . . . . • • •  t^.

220  Whether  a  person  may  quit  his  country • * • •  . ib.

221  How  a  person  may  absent  himself  for  a  time . . .  105

222  Variation  of  the  political  laws  in  that  respect : — they  must  be  obeyed  ib,

223  Cases  in  which  a  citizen  has  a  right  to  quit  his  country . .  ib

224  Emigrants . . . . . .  .106

225  Sources  of  their  right ......  i6.

226  If  the  sovereign  infringes  their  right,  he  injures  them .  .  107

227  Supplicants . . . . . • ,  ib.

228  Exile  and  banishment . . . . .  » ib.

229  The  exile  and  the  banished  man  have  a  right  to  live  somewhere  108

230  Nature  of  that  right . . . . .  , ib.

231  Duty  of  nations  towards  them .....  t7^.

232  A  nation  cannot  punish  them  for  faults  committed  out  of  her  territories  109

233  except  such  as  affect  the  common  safety  of  mankind .  ib.

CHAP.  XX.

Public^  Common,  and  Private  Property.

234  What  the  Eomans  called  res  communes ....  109

235  Aggregate  wealth  of  a  nation,  and  its  diyisions  •  .  t5.

236  Two  modes  of  acquiring  public  property .  .  .  .110

237  The  income  of  the  public  property  is  naturally  at  the  soyereign's  dis-

posal .......  ib.

238  The  nation  may  grant  him  the  use  and  property  of  her  common  pos-

sessions ........ ib,

289  or  allow  him  the  domain,  and  reserve  to  herself  the  use  of

them  •••••..  ib.

240  Taxes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .111

241  The  nation  may  reserve  to  herself  the  right  of  imposing  them .  ib.

242  Sovereign  possessing  that  power .  •  •  .  , ib.

243  Duties  of  the  prince  with  respect  to  taxes  •  •  .112

244  Eminent  domain  annexed  to  the  sovereignty  •  •  . ib.

245  Dominion  over  public  property  .  .  .  .  ,113

246  The  sovereign  may  make  laws  respecting  the  use  of  things  possessed

in  common . . . .  . • , tb

247  Alienation  of  the  property  of  a  corporation  • . ih.

248  Use  of  common  property . . «  . • .114

249  How  each  member  is  to  enjoy  it .  • • • 16

250  Right  of  anticipation  in  the  use  of  it •  • • m ib.

251  The  same  right  in  another  case •  • • • t'l


COKTEKTS.


.SV«5t


252  Preservation  and  repairs  of  common  possessions .

253  Duty  and  right  of  the  sovereign  in  that  respect

254  Private  property  .  .  .  .

255  The  sovereign  may  subject  it  to  regulations  of  police

256  Inheritances  •  •  .  •  •


Pam

.  116

• ih,

ih.

.  116


CHAP.  XXL

0/ihe  Alienation  of  the  PMic  Property,  or  the  Domain^  and  that  of  a  Part

of  the  State.

257  The  nation  may  alienate  her  public  property  •  •  .  116

258  Duties  of  the  nation  in  that  respect .  •  •  •  t^.

259  Duties  of  the  prince  ..••••  117

260  He  cannot  alienate  the  public  property  •  .  •  ib.

261  The  nation  may  give  him  a  right  to  do  it .  .  .  . ib.

262  Rules  on  that  subject  with  respect  to  treaties  between  nation  and  nation ib.

263  Alienation  of  a  part  of  the  state .....  118

264  Rights  of  the  dismembered  party  •  .  .  •  ib.

265  Whether  the  prince  has  power  to  dismember  the  state  •  .  119


CHAP.  xxn.

0/ Rivers,  Streams,  and  Lakes.

266  A  river  that  separates  two  territories

267  Bed  of  a  river  which  is  dried  up  or  takes  another  course

268  Right  of  alluvion  .  •  •  .  •

269  Whether  alluvion  produces  any  change  in  the  light  to  a  river

270  Consequence  of  a  river  changing  its  bed

271  Works  tending  to  turn  the  current

272  or  generally  prejudicial  to  the  rights  of  otihen

273  Rules  relative  to  interfering  rights

274  Lakes ...••••

275  Increase  of  a  lake  .  •  •  •  •

276  Land  formed  on  the  banks  of  a  lake  •

277  Bed  of  a  lake  dried  up  •  •  •  .

278  Jurisdiction  over  lakes  and  rivers  •  •


120
121

ib.

ib.
122

ib.

ib.

ib.
128

i&.
125

ib.

ib.


CHAP.  XXTTT.

0/ihe  Sea.

279  The  sea,  and  its  use . . . . .  .  125

280  Whether  the  sea  can  be  possessed,  and  its  dominion  appropriated  ib.

281  Nobody  has  a  right  to  appropriate  to  himself  the  use  of  the  open  sea* ib.

282  A  nation  attempting  to  exclude  another  does  her  an  injury .  126

283  She  even  does  an  injury  to  all  nations • . •  . ib.

284  She  may  acquire  an  exclusive  right  by  treaties . •  ib.
285 but  not  by  prescription  and  long  use • .  ,  127

286  unless  by  virtue  of  a  tacit  agreement . .  ib.

287  The  sea  near  the  coasts  may  become  property • •  • i6.


IZfili  COimENTS.

Ace.  Pmf§

288  Another  leaflon  for  appropriating  the  sea  bordering  on  the  coasts *  1^

289  How  &r  that  possession  may  extend •  .  •  .  t5.

290  Shores  and  ports ..••••.  129

291  Bays  and  straits  ••••••%&.

292  Straits  in  particolar  •••...  130
298  Right  to  wrecks ....••  i6.

294  A  sea  inclosed  within  the  territories  of  a  nation .  .  . \b.

295  The  parts  of  the  sea  possessed  by  a  sovereign  are  within  his  jurisdiction  131


BOOK  11.

OF  A  NATION  CONSIDEBED  IN  H£B  BELATION  TO  OTHER  STATES.

JHAP.  L

Of  the  common  DuHe$  of  a  NcUion  towards  other  States^  or  the  Officei  of

Humanity  hetvoeen  Nations.

1  Foundation  of  the  common  and  mutual  duties  of  nations  .183

2  Offices  of  humanity,  and  their  foundation  .  .  , 134

3  General  principles  of  all  the  mutual  duties  of  nations  •  .  135

4  Duties  of  a  nation  for  the  preservation  of  others  •  ^  .  ih.

5  She  is  bound  to  assist  a  nation  afflicted  with  famine  or  any  other

calamity  ....... 136

6  She  is  bound  to  contribute  to  the  perfection  of  other  states .  • tb.
7 but  not  by  force ..... 137

8  The  right  to  require  the  offices  of  humanity  •  .  .  138

9  The  right  of  judging  whether  they  are  to  be  granted •  .  xb.

10  A  nation  is  not  to  compel  another  to  perform  those  offices  of  which  the

refdsal  is  no  wrong ......  t^.

11  Mutual  love  of  nations  .  .  .  .  •  • i6.

12  Each  nation  is  bound  to  cultivate  the  friendship  of  others  .  ih

13  to  perfect  herself,  with  the  view  to  the  advantage  of  others,

and  to  set  them  good  examples  .  .  •  . 139

14 to  tak€  care  of  their  glory . . . .  . tfc.

15  Difference  of  religion  ought  not  to  preclude  the  offices  of  humanity  ih.

16  Rule  and  measure  of  the  offices  of  humanity • •  ,  140

17  Particular  limitation  with  respect  to  the  prince • • •  141

18  No  nation  ought  to  injure  others • * • .  . t6.

19  Offences .••••••  142

20  Bad  custom  of  the  ancients • \ • • •  .  143

CHAP.  XL
Of  the  Mutual  Commerce  between  Nations,

21  Gknend  obligation  of  nations  to  carry  on  mutual  commerce .  .143

22  They  are  bound  to  favour  trade  .  .  .  .144
28  Freedom  of  trade . •••••• i6


CONTENTS.
SeeL  Pom

24  Right  of  trading  belonging  to  nations  •  •  .  .  144

25  Each  nation  is  sole  judge  of  the  propriety  of  eonuneroe  on  her  own  part  ib,
2G  Neoessitj  of  oommerciad  treaties •  •  •  .  •  145

27  Gleneral  rule  oonceming  those  treaties ••••!&.

28  Ihitj  of  nations  in  making  such  treaties •  .  .  , tb.

29  Perpetual  or  temporary  treaties,  or  treaties  revocable  at  pleasure  i&.

80  Nothing  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  a  treaty  can  be  granted  to  a  third  party  146

81  How  fiir  lawful  to  give  up  by  treaty  the  liberty  of  trading  with  other

nations • . . . • .  * %b,

82  A  nation  may  restrict  her  commerce  in  favour  of  another  nation  •  ib.
88  A  nation  may  appropriate  to  herself  a  particular  brannh  of  trade  •  147
84  Consuls  ••••••••  i6.


CHAP.  ni.


0/the  Dignity  and  Equality  of  Nations, — of  Titles,— and  other  Marks

of  Honour,

85  Dignity  of  nations  or  sovereign  states  •  .  •  .  149

86  Their  equality .  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  i&.

87  Precedency  •  .  •  •  •  •  , ib.

88  The  form  of  government  is  foreign  to  this  question  .  . 150

89  A  state  ought  to  retain  her  rank,  notwithstaQding  any  changes  in  the

form  of  her  government  .  .  .  .  • t&.

40  Treaties  and  established  customs  are  to  be  observed  in  t(iat  respect tb.

41  Name  and  honours  given  by  the  nation  to  her  conductor •  .  151

42  Whether  a  sovereign  may  assume  what  title  and  honours  he  pleases 152
48  Bight  of  other  nations  in  that  respect •  •  .  . tb.

44  Their  duty  ..••••.  t5.

45  How  titles  and  honours  may  be  secured •  •  •  .  158

46  We  must  conform  to  general  custom •  •  •  .  tb

47  Mutual  respect  due  bv  sovereigns  to  each  other •  •  • ib,

48  How  a  sovereign  ought  to  maintain  his  dignity •  •  • 154


CHAP.  IV,

Of  the  Right  to  Security ^  and  the  Effects  of  the  Sovereignty  and  Independence

of  Nations.

49  Right  to  security ..•••.•  154

50  It  produces  the  right  of  resistance  •  •  •  •  tb,

51  and  that  of  obtaining  reparation •  •  •  .155

52  and  the  right  of  punishing .  .  .  .  ih,

58  Right  of  all  nations  against  a  mischievous  people •  •  . %b.

54  No  nation  has  a  right  to  interfere  ia  the  government  of  another  state ib,

55  Otie  sovereign  cannot  make  himself  judge  of  the  conduct  of  another ih,

56  How  far  lawful  to  interfere  in  a  quarrel  between  a  sovereign  and  his

subjects  ...•••.  156

57  Right  of  opposing  the  interference  of  foreign  powers  in  the  affairs  of

government  ...•••• 157

58  The  same  right  with  respect  to  religion  •  •  •  • t&.

59  No  nation  can  be  constrained  in  rehgious  oonoems  •  • 158

60  Offices  of  humanity  in  these  matters :— missionaries  •  • ib

0%


CONTEKTS.

Act  Pyt

61  Cirenmspeotion  to  be  used •  •  •  •  • • •  l6d

62  .What  a  soyereign  may  do  in  fayour  of  those  who  profess  his  religion

ux  another  state •••••.*(.


CHAP.  V.

Of  the  Observance  of  Justice  between  NcUtcns.

63  Necessity  of  the  obseryance  of  justice  in  human  society • .  160

64  Obligation  of  all  nations  to  oultiyate  and  obserye  justioe .  f6.

65  Right  of  refasing  to  submit  to  injustice . • . ,  ib.

66  This  right  is  a  perfect  one . . • • •  161

67  It  produces — ^the  right  of  self-defence . • • •  ib,
58  the  right  of  doing  ourselyes  justice . . .  tJ.

69  The  right  of  punishing  injustice . . . • .  ib.

70  Eight  of  all  nations  against  one  that  openly  despises  justice •  i&.

«

CHAP.  VI.
0/ihe  Concern  a  Nation  may  have  in  the  Actions  of  her  Oitizens.

71  The  soyereign  is  bound  to  ayenge  the  wrongs  of  the  state  and  to  pro-

tect the  citizens ......  161

72  He  must  not  suffer  his  subjects  to  offend  other  nations  or  their  citizens  162

73  The  acts  of  indiyiduals  not  imputable  to  the  nation • .  ib.

74  unless  she  approve  or  ratify  them . , .  ib.

75  Conduct  to  be  pursued  by  the  offended  party . . .  ib,

76  Duty  of  the  aggressor's  soyereign . . . .  163

77  If  he  refuses  justice,  he  becomes  a  party  in  the  fault  and  offence .  t&.

78  Another  case  in  which  the  nation  is  guilty  of  the  crimes  of  the  citizens  164

CHAP.  vn.

Effects  of  the  Domain,  between  Nations.

79  General  effects  of  the  domain .....  164

80  What  is  comprehended  in  the  domain  of  a  nation . .  165

81  The  property  of  the  citizens  is  the  national  property  with  respect  to

foreign  states . . . . ' . . .  ib.

82  A  consequence  of  that  principle  . . • . .  ib.

83  Connection  of  the  domain  of  the  nation  with  the  soyereignty .  t6.

84  Jurisdiction .......  166

85  Effects  of  the  Jurisdiction  in  foreign  oountries • • •  ib.

86  Desert  and  uncultiyated  places • • • •  167

87  Duty  of  the  nation  in  that  respect  .  •  .  .168

88  Eight  of  possessing  things  that  haye  no  owner , . *  ih,

89  Eights  granted  to  another  nation . . . . •  ib

90  Not  allowable  to  expel  a  nation  from  the  country  she  inhabits •  ib.

91  nor  to  extend  by  yiolence  the  bounds  of  empire , .  169

92  The  limits  of  territories  ought  to  be  carefully  ascertained .  ib,

93  Violation  of  territory . . . . . ,  ib

94  Prohibition  to  enter  the  territory • . • •  170

95  A  country  possessed  by  several  nations  at  the  same  time . .  ib,

96  A  country  possessed  by  a  private  person « . .  ib.


COKTSSTB.


Sect,


Page

97  Independent  fiunilies  in  a  country  •  •  •  .  17G

98  Posseasions  of  certain  plaoeB  only,  or  of  certain  rightfly  in  a  vacant

country  ...••.. 171


CHAP.  VUL
Rvhs  regpecHng  Foreignen,

99  General  idea  of  tbe  conduct  a  state  ought  to  obeerve  towards  foreigners  171

100  Entering  the  territory  ...

101  Foreigners  are  subject  to  the  laws  .  •

102  and  punishable  according  to  the  laws

108  Who  is  the  judge  of  their  disputes  .  •

104  Protection  due  to  foreigners

105  Their  duties  .  .  .  •  •

106  To  what  burthens  they  are  subject

107  Foreigners  continue  members  of  their  own  nation

108  The  state  has  no  right  over  the  person  of  a  foreigner

109  nor  over  his  property

110  Who  are  the  heirs  of  a  foreigner

111  Will  of  a  foreigner

112  Escheatage

113  The  right  of  traiU  foraine

114  Immovable  property  possessed  by  an  alien

115  Marriages  of  aliens  •


CHAP


172

t5.

ih.
173

ib.

ih.
174

ih,

ih.
174
175

ib,
176
177

ib.

ib


IX.


Of  the  RighU  retained  by  aU  Nations  after  the  Introduction  of  Domain

and  Property.

116  What  are  the  rights  of  which  men  cannot  be  deprived '.  .  178

117  Rights  still  remaining  from  the  primitive  state  of  communion  •  ib.

118  Eight  retained  by  each  nation  over  the  property  of  others .  • ib.

119  Right  of  necessity . . . . .  .  ib-

120  Bight  of  procuring  provision  by  force  ....  179

121  Right  of  making  use  of  things  belonging  to  others •  .  ih.

122  Right  of  carrying  off  women . . • •  , ib.

123  Right  of  passage . . . . .  .180

124  and  of  procuring  necessaries •  •  •  , ih,

125  Right  of  dwelling  in  a  foreign  country  • • . ib,

126  Things,  of  which  the  use  is  mexhaustible  • • • .  181

127  Right  of  innocent  use . • •  • • • t&.

128  Nature  of  that  right  in  general •  • • • .  182

129  and  in  cases  not  doubtful •  •  •  •  t&.

130  Exercise  of  that  right  between  nations •  •  •  . ib

CHAP.  X.

How  a  Nation  is  to  ttse  Tier  Right  of  Domain,  in  order  to  discharge  her  Duties
towards  other  Nations,  toith  respect  to  the  Innocent  Use  of  Things,


131  General  duty  of  the  proprietor
182  Innocent  passage


183
ih.


00NTBNT8.
Sect.  Pmm

183  Secnritiefl  maj  be  required  •  •  •  •  •  lfv4

134  Passage  of  merchandise  •  •  •  .  »  tb.

185  Residence  in  the  country .  .  •  .  .  , ib.

136  How  we  are  to  act  towaids  foreigners  who  desire  a  perpetoal  residence  185

187  Right  accniing  from  a  general  permission •  •  .  . ib.

188  A  right  granted  as  a  fiivour .  •  •  •  • 186

139  The  nation  ought  to  be  courteous •  •  •  •  . %b

CHAP.  XL

0/  mucaption  and  Prescription  between  NoHofu.

140  Definition  of  nsucaption  and  prescription .  '  .  .  .187

141  Usucaption  and  prescription  derived  from  the  law  of  nature •  ib.

142  What  foundation  is  required  for  ordinary  prescription  •  .  189

143  Immemorial  prescription  .  .  •  •  »  ib,

144  Claimant  alleging  reasons  for  his  silence ....  190

145  Proprietor  sumoiently  showing  that  he  does  not  mean  to  abandon  his

right • . • • • •  •  , ib.

146  Prescription  founded  on  the  actions  of  the  proprietor •  •  ib.

147  Usucaption  and  prescription  take  place  between  nations  •  . ib.

148  More  difficult,  between  nations,  to  found  them  on  a  presumptive  desertion  ib.

149  Other  principles  that  enforce  prescription . .  •  .  191

150  Effects  of  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  on  this  subject •  .  ib.

151  Law  of  treaties,  or  custom,  in  this  matter • •  •  «  192

CHAP.  xn.

0/  Treaties  o/AUiance  and  other  FMic  Treaties,

ii^\  j7ature  6i  treaties •••••.  192

53  Coikipacts,  agreements,  or  conventions • • • •  id.

54  By  whom  treaties  are  made . • • • .  ih,

55  Whetihcr  a  state  under  protection  may  make  treaties • •  193

56  Treatieii  concluded  by  proxies  or  plenipotentiaries • • .  tb.
bl  Validity  of  treaties ..*•••  194

58  Injury  dtKVi  not  render  them  void •  •  •  •  • t5.

59  Duty  of  nations  in  that  respect  •  •  •  m  ib

60  Nullity  of  treaties  which  are  pernicious  to  the  state  •  . ih

61  Nullity  of  treaties  made  for  an  unjust  or  dishonest  purpose • 195

62  Whether  an  alliance  may  be  contracted  with  those  who  do  not  profess
the  true  religion ••••••«&.

63  Obligation  to  observe  treaties  .  .  •  •  . ib,

64  The  violation  of  a  treaty  is  an  act  of  injustice .  .  . .  196

65  Treaties  cannot  be  made  contrary  to  those  already  existing  . ib.

66  How  treaties  may  be  concluded  with  several  nations  with  the  same  view  197

67  The  more  ancient  ally  entitled  to  a  preforenoe  •  •  . ih

68  We  owe  no  assistance  in  an  unjust  war  •  •  •  %b,

69  General  division  of  treaties; — those  that  relate  to  things  already  due
by  the  law  of  nature  .....  tS

70  Collision  of  those  treaties  with  the  duties  we  owe  to  ourselves  •  198

71  Treaties  in  which  we  baiely  promise  to  do  no  injury  , .  ih

72  Treaties  concerning  thin^>(  that  are  not  naturally  due :— equal  treaties ih


8e&L  Pagn

178  Obligation  to  preserre  equalitj  iu  treaties .  •  »  .  199

174  Difference  between  eqnal  treaties  and  equal  alliances .  - 200

175  Unequal  treaties,  and  unequal  alliances .  .  .  . i6.

176  An  alliance  with  dinunution  of  sovereignty  may  annul  preceding

treaties  ....... 202

177  We  ought,  as  much  as  possible,  to  avoid  making  unequal  alliances 203

178  Mutual  duties  of  nations  with  respect  to  unequal  alliances  .  i6.

179  in  alliances  where  the  inequality  is  on  the  side  of  the  more

powerful  party  .  .  .  .  .  . i&.

180  How  inequality  of  treaties  and  alliances  may  be  conformable  to  the

law  of  nature  ...... 204

181  Inequality  imposed  by  way  of  punishment  •  .  •  205

182  Other  kinds,  of  which  we  have  spoken  elsewhere  .  .  ib.

183  Personal  and  real  treaties  .  .  .  .  . t6.

184  Naming  the  contracting  parties  in  the  treaty  does  not  render  it  personal ih.

185  An  alliance  made  bv  a  republic  is  real .  .  .  . t6.

186  Treaties  concluded  by  kings  or  other  monarchs  .  . 206

187  Perpetual  treaties,  and  those  for  a  certain  time •  .  . ih,

188  Treaties  made  for  the  king  and  his  successors .  .  •  ih,

189  Treaties  made  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom  .  .  . t5.

190  How  presumption  ought  to  be  founded  in  doubtful  cases  . 207

191  The  obligations  and  rights  resulting  from  a  real  treaty  pass  to  the

successors .......  208

192  Treaties  accomplished  once  for  aU,  and  perfected . . .  ih.

193  Treaties  already  accomplished  on  the  one. part . . .  209

194  The  personal  alliance  expires  if  one  of  the  parties  ceases  to  reign  211

195  Treaties  in  their  own  nature  personal ....  ih,

196  Alliance  concluded  for  the  defence  of  the  king  and  royal  family  ih,

197  Obligation  of  a  real  alliance,  when  the  allied  king  is  deposed .  212

CHAP.  XTTT.

Of  the  Dissolution  and  Renewal  of  Treaties.

198  Expiration  of  alliances  made  for  a  limited  time .  . % .  213

199  Benewal  of  treaties .  .  .  .  .  .  ih,

200  How  a  treaty  is  dissolved,  when  violated  by  one  of  the  contracting  parties  21^

201  The  violation  of  one  treaty  does  not  cancel  another .  .  ih.

202  The  violation  of  one  article  in  a  treaty  may  cancel  the  whole  .  215
20S  The  treaty  is  void  by  the  destruction  of  one  of  the  contracting  powers  216

204  Alliances  of  a  state  that  has  afterwards  put  herself  under  the  protec-

tion of  another .  .  .  •  .  •  . ih.

205  Treaties  dissolved  by  mutual  consent •  •  •  • 217

CHAP.  XIV.

0/ other  public  ConvendonSy — of  those  that  are  made  by  Svhordinate  Pmcers^
'•'-particularli/  of  the  Agreement  called  in  Latin  Sponsio, —anc?  of  Convene
tions  between  the  Sovereign  and  Privaie  Persons.

206  Conventions  made  by  sovereigns .....  21?

207  Those  made  by  subordinate  powers •  •  .  .  H

208  Treaties  concluded  by  a  public  person,  without  orders  from  the  sove-

reign, or  without  sufficient  powers  .  •  •  .  219

ft


00KTBNT8. •

209  The  agreement  called  monno . • • •  219

210  The  state  is  not  bound  dj  such  an  agreement • •  220

211  To  what  the  promiser  is  bound  when  it  is  disavowed •  • t&.

212  To  what  the  sovereign  is  bound • • • •  223
813  Private  contracts  of  the  sovereign . • .  .  226

214  Contracts  made  by  him  with  private  persons,  in  the  name  of  the  state \h,

215  They  are  binding  on  the  nation,  and  on  his  successors •  •  227

216  Debts  of  the  sovereign  and  the  state . \ • .  t6.

217  Donations  of  the  sovereign • • • ..  •  228

CHAP.  XV.
OfiU  Faith  of  Treaties.

218  What  is  sacred  among  nations • • • •  •  229

219  Treaties  sacred  between  nations • • • •  ib.

220  The  faith  of  treaties  is  sacred . • . •  • t&.

221  He  who  violates  his  treaties,  violates  the  law  of  nations .  xb,

222  Right  of  nations  against  him  who  disregards  the  fiiith  of  treaties  .  230

223  The  law  of  nations  violated  by  the  popes  ...«&.

224  This  abuse  authorized  by  princes . . . •  .231

225  U^e  of  an  oath  in  treaties. — It  does  not  constitute  the  obligation  232

226  It  does  not  change  the  nature  of  obligations . .  • t&.

227  It  gives  no  pre-eminence  to  one  treaty  above  another • •  ih,

228  It  cannot  give  force  to  a  treaty  that  is  invalid • •  •  233

229  Asseverations ......  i5

230  The  faith  of  treaties  does  not  depend  on  the  difference  of  religion  • t^.

231  Precaution  to  be  taken  in  wording  treaties . . .  t&.

232  Subterfuges  in  treaties . ... . .  .  234

233  An  evidently  false  interpretation  inconsistent  with  the  fiiith  of  treaties ih,

234  Faith  tacitly  pledged . . . . .  . t^.

CHAP.  XVI.
Of  Securities  given  for  the  Observance  of  Treaties.

235  Guaranty  .  .  .  .  .  ...  235

236  It  gives  the  guarantee  no  right  to  interfere  unasked  in  the  execution

of  a  treaty . . . • . . .  236

237  Nature  of  the  obligation  it  imposes . . •  . ib.

238  The  guaranty  cannot  impair  the  rights  of  a  third  party .  ib.

239  Duration  of  the  guaranty . . . . •  .  237

240  Treaties  with  surety .•••••  i&.

241  Pawns,  securities,  and  mortgages . • • •  . ib,

242  A  nation's  right  over  what  she  holds  as  a  pledge • •  ib,

243  How  she  is  obliged  to  restore  it . • • •  .238

244  How  she  may  appropriate  it  to  herself  •' • • .  t&.

245  Hostages . . . • • • •  . ib,

246  What  right  we  have  over  hostages • • • .  239

247  Their  liberty  alone  is  pledged • • • •  • ih

248  When  they  are  to  be  sent  back . . • .  tA.

249  Whether  they  may  be  detained  on  any  other  account • . .  ib.

250  They  may  be  detained  for  their  own  actions • .  .  240

251  Of  the  support  of  hostages • • • • .  i6.


00NTBNT8.
Sect,  Pm

252  A  subject  cannot  refuse  to  be  a  Hostage • •  •  •  241

253  Rank  of  the  hostages . • • • •  •  i&.

254  They  ought  not  to  make  their  escape • •  •  • ib,

255  Whether  a  hostage  who  dies  is  to  be  repkced • •  •  242

256  Substitute  for  a  hostage . • • •  •  • i&.

257  Hostage  succeeding  to  the  crown • • •  •  ih,

258  The  liability  of  the  hostage  ends  with  the  treaty .  •  • xb.

259  The  violation  of  the  treaty  is  an  injury  done  to  the  hostages  .  ih.

260  The  fate  of  the  hostage  when  he  who  has  given  him  fails  in  his  en-

gagements •  .  .  •  .  •  • 243

261  Right  founded  on  custom •  •  •  •  •  • ib,

CHAP.  XVIL
Of  the  InterpreUUion  of  Treaties.

9

262  Necessity  of  establishing  rules  of  interpretation •  .  .244

263  First  general  maxim- — ^it  is  not  allowable  to  interpret  what  has  no  need

of  interpretation  .  .  .  .  •  . ib.

264  Second  general  maxim — if  he  who  could  and  ought  to  have  explained

himself,  has  not  done  it,  it  is  to  his  own  detriment  .  .  245

265  Third  general  maxim — ^neither  of  the  contracting  parties  has  a  right

to  interpret  the  treaty  according  to  his  own  fancy  .  . ih,

266  Fourth  general  maxim — ^what  is  sufficiently  declared  is  to  be  taken  for

true .•••...« ihm

267  We  ought  to  attend  rather  to  the  words  of  the  person  promising,  than

to  those  of  the  party  stipulating  .  .  .  • ib,

268  Fifth  general  maxim — ^the  interpretation  ought  to  be  made  according

to  certain  rules  ....••  246

269  The  faith  of  treaties  imposes  an  obligation  to  follow  those  rules  247

270  General  rule  of  interpretation  .  .  •  .  m ih.

271  The  terms  are  to  be  explained  conformably  to  common  usage « 248

272  Interpretation  of  ancient  treaties .  •  .  .  • t&.

273  Quibbles  on  words .  .  •  •  •  « 249

274  A  rule  on  that  subject •  •  •  •  •  • ib,

275  Mental  reservations ..••••  i&.

276  Interpretation  of  technical  terms .  •  •  •  • i6.

277  Terms  whose  signification  admits  of  degrees •  •  • 250

278  Figurative  expressions .  •  •  •  •  •' ib,

279  Equivocal  expressiops  •••••!&.

280  The  rule  for  these  two  cases  .....  251

281  Not  necessary  to  give  a  term  the  same  sense  everywhere  in  the  same

QeecL •.•••.•«  ^0^

282  We  ought  to  reject  every  interpretation  which  leads  to  an  absurdity ib.

283  or  which  renders  the  act  null  and  void  of  effect .  .  258

284  Obscure  expressions  interpreted  by  others  more  clear  in  the  same

author ........  254

285  Interpretation  founded  on  the  connection  of  the  discourse  .  ih,

286  Interpretation  drawn  from  the  connection  and  relation  of  the  things

themselves .....«•  255

287  Interpretation  founded  on  the  reason  of  the  deed . •  •  256

288  Where  many  reasons  have  concurred  to  determine  the  will •  ih,

289  What  constitutes  a  sufficient  reason  for  an  act  of  the  will •  •  257


C0NTSNT8.


290

291
292
293

294
295
296
297
298
299
800
801

802
803
804
805

806
307
808
309
810
811
812
813
814
815
816
817
818
819
820
821
822


Extensive  interpretation  founded  on  the  reiBon  of  the  aet .

Frauds  tending  to  elude  laws  or  promises

Bestrictive  interpretation ......

Its  use,  in  order  to  avoid  falling  into  absurdities,  or  into  what  is  un-
lawful ........

or  what  is  too  severe  and  burthensome

How  it  ought  to  restrict  the  significatiou  agreeably  to  the  subject

How  a  change  happening  in  the  state  of  things  may  form  an  exception

Interpretation  of  a  deed  in  unforeseen  cases .  •

Reasons  arising  from  the  possibility,  and  not  the  existence  of  a  thing

Expressions  susceptible  of  an  extensive  and  a  limited  sense

Things  favourable,  and  things  odious  ....

What  tends  to  the  common  advantage,  and  to  equality,  is  favourable :
the  contrary  is  odious ......

What  is  useful  to  human  society,  is  favourable :  the  contrary  is  odious

Whatever  contains  a  penalty  is  odious ....

Whatever  renders  a  deed  void  is  odious

Whatever  tends  to  change  the  present  state  of  things,  is  odious :  the
contraiy  is  favourable

Things  of  a  mixed  nature

Interpretation  of  favourable  things

Interpretation  of  odious  things

Examples  .  •  .  •  •

How  we  ought  to  interpret  deeds  of  pure  liberality

Collision  of  laws  or  treaties

First  rule  in  cases  of  collision

Second  rule .  .  •  •

Third  rule  •  •

Fourth  rule •  •  •  •

Fifth  rule

Sixth  rule •  •  •  •

Seventh  rule  •  •  •

Eighth  rule •  .  •  •

Ninth  rule  •  •

Tenth  rule •  •  .  •

Oeneral  remark  on  the  manner  of  observing  all  the  preceding  rules


Pom

257
258
259

i6.
260

ih.
261
262

ih.
263

2&4
265

t6.

ih

ib.

206

ib,
267
268
270
271

ib.

fb.

ib,
272

t6.
273

ib.
274

ib,

i6.

ib.


CHAP.  xvm.

0/  the  Made  of  terminating  DuptUes  between  Ifationt.
ff

828  General  direction  on  this  subject •  •  •  •  .271

S24  Every  nation  is  bound  to  give  satisfaction  respecting  the  just  com-
plaints of  another  ....«•  275

825  How  nations  may  abandon  their  rights  and  just  complaints •  ih,

826  Means  suggested  by  the  law  of  nature  for  terminating  their  disputes :

amicable  accommodation .  •  .  •  • 276

827  Compromise  •  .  •  •  •  •  . tb.

828  Mediation .  •  •  •  •  .  il

829  Arbitration  ..•••••  277

830  Conferences  and  congresses  . •  .  •  • 278

881  Distinction  to  be  made  between  evident  and  doubtful  cases  • iO

882  Essential  rights,  and  those  of  less  importance •  •  • 27i


1


OOliTBNTS.  XZXm

353  Uow  we  ftoqnire  a  right  of  roeorring  to  foroe  in  a  doubtful  oase  •  280
834  and  even  without  attempting  other  measures •  t&.

335  Voluntary  kw  of  nations  on  that  subject . • •  • i^.

336  Equitable  conditions  to  be  offered • • • •  281

837  Possessor's  right  in  doubtful  cases . • •  .  282

838  How  reparation  of  an  injury  is  to  be  sought • . •  f6.

839  Retaliation . . . . . •  • tft.

340  Various  modes  of  punishing,  without  having  recourse  to  arms •  283

341  Betortion . . . . • .  . t&.

342  Reprisals ...••••  i&.
843  What  is  required  to  render  them  lawful • • •  •  284

344  Upon  what  effects  reprisals  are  made • . • •  i&.

345  The  state  is  bound  to  compensate  those  who  suffer  by  reprisals  •  285

346  The  sovereign  alone  can  order  reprisals . . .  i&.

347  Reprisals  against  a  nation  for  actions  of  her  subjects,  and  in  &vour

of  the  injured  subjects . . . . •  • tft.

348  but  not  in  favour  of  foreigners . . .  t6-

849  Those  who  have  given  cause  for  reprisals  are  bound  to  indemnify

those  who  suffer  by  them  .....  286

350  What  may  be  deemed  a  refusal  to  do  justice • • •  287

351  Subjects  arrested  by  way  of  reprisals . • •  .1*6.

352  Our  right  aeainst  those  who  oppose  reprisals • • •  288
853  Just  reprisals  do  not  afford  a  just  cause  for  war • •  . »6.

354  How  we  ought  to  confine  ourselves  to  reprisals,  or  at  length  proceed

to  hostilities ••....  f&.


BOOK  III.

OF  WAS.

CHAP.  L

Of  War, — its  diffisrent  KincUf-'a/nd  the  Right  ofmahing  War,

1  Definition  of  war •••••••  291

2  Public  war  ...•••.  »6.

3  Risht  of  making  war  •  •  •  •  »  • f6.

4  It  belongs  only  to  the  sovereign  power •  •  •  • 292

5  Defensive  and  offensive  war  •  •  •  •  .  298

CHAP.  n.

0/^  In$tramenU  of  War, — the  Raising  of  Troops^  (fee.— 4ft^r  OcnnmandeHf

or  the  Svhordinaie  Powers  in  War,

6  Instruments  of  war ...••..  298

7  Right  of  levying  troops ...••.  294

8  Obligation  of  the  citizens  or  subjects  • • • • »  ih,

9  Enlisting  or  raising  of  troops • • • • .  t5.


zzxyiii


CONTBNTS.


Sect.

10  Wbetber  there  be  any  ezemptioiis  from  carrying  armfi

11  Soldiers'  pay  and  quarters

12  Hospitals  for  invalids  •  •

13  Mercenary  soldiers

14  Rule  to  be  observed  in  tbeir  enlistment

15  Enlisting  in  foreign  countries

16  Obligation  of  soldiers  •  •

17  Military  laws .  •  •

18  Military  discipline •

19  Subordinate  powers  in  war

20  How  their  promises  bind  the  sovereign

21  In  what  cases  their  promises  bind  only  themselves

22  Their  assumption  of  an  authority  which  they  do  not  possess

23  How  they  bind  their  inferiors •  r  •  •


PaM

294
296

t&
297
293

ib.
299

ib.

ib.

ib.
300

ib.

ib.
301


CHAP.  m.

0/the  Jua  Causes  of  War.

24  War  never  to  be  undertaken  without  very  cogent  reasons •  .  301

25  Justificatory  reasons,  and  motives  for  maJcing  war . •  ib.

26  What  is  in  general  a  just  cause  of  war • • •  .  302

27  What  war  is  unjust ••••••  i&.

28  The  object  of  war . • • • • .  • ib.

29  Both  justificatory  reasons  and  proper  motives  requisite  in  undertaking

a  war  •  •  •  •  •  •  •_ 303

30  Proper  motives — ^vicious  motives . • . .  • ifc.

31  War  undertaken  upon  just  grounds,  but  from  vicious  motives .  ib.

32  Pretexts . . . . . • •  .304

33  War  undertaken  merely  for  advantage • • .  ib.

34  Nations  who  make  war  without  reason  or  apparent  motives •  .  305

35  How  defensive  war  is  just  or  unjust . , . .  ib.

36  How  it  may  become  just  against  an  offensive  war  which  was  originally

just . . • • • • •  . ib.

37  How  an  offensive  war  is  just  in  an  evident  cause • .  ib.

38  in  a  doubtful  cause • • • .  •  306

39  War  cannot  be  just  on  both  sides • • ' • *  ib.

40  Sometimes  reputed  lawful . • • • •  , ib.

41  War  undertaken  to  punish  a  nation . • • .  307

42  Whether  the  aggrandizement  of  a  neighbouring  power  can  authorize

a  war  against  him • . . ...  . ib.

43  Alone,  and  of  itself,  it  cannot  give  a  right  to  attack  him •  30S

44  How  the  appearances  of  danger  give  that  right • •  •  309

45  Another  case  more  evident . • • • •  310

46  Other  allowable  means  of  defence  against  a  formidable  power  .  311

47  Political  equilibrium ...•.,  ib.

48  Way^  of  maintaining  it . • . . *  .312

49  How  he  that  destroys  the  equilibrium  may  be  restrained^  or  even

weak3ned .......  t&

50  Behaviour  allowable  towards  a  neighbour  preparing  for  war  •  .  813


CpNTBNTS.


CHAP.  IV,
Of  the  DeelarcUwn  of  Warf—^and  of  War  in  due  Form,

Sect,

51  Declaration  of  wai : — ^aecessity  thereof  •  •

52  What  it  is  to  contain .  •  •  »  •

53  It  is  simple  or  conditional .....

54  The  right  to  make  war  ceases  on  the  offer  of  equitable  conditions

55  Formalities  of  a  declaration  of  w&r

56  Other  reasons  for  the  necessity  of  its  publication  •

57  Defensive  war  requires  i^o  declaration  .  •  •

58  When  it  may  be  omitted  in  an  offensive  war •  •

59  It  is  not  to  be  omitted  by  way  of  retaliation  •

60  Time  of  the  declaration  .  .  •  .  ,


Pag4

315

Hk
316

^.
ih.
317
ih.
ib.
ih.


61  Duty  of  the  inhabitants  on  a  foreign  army's  entering  a  country  before

a  declaration  of  war .  .  •  •  .  .  '  t&.

62  Commencement  of  hostilities ..... 318

63  Conduct  to  be  observed  towards  the  enemy's  subjects  who  are  in  the

country  at  the  time  of  the  declaration  of  war •  •  • ih.

64  Publication  of  the  war,  and  manifestoes  .  .  •  ih,

65  Decorum  and  moderation  to  be  observed  in  the  manifestoes  .  319

66  What  is  a  lawful  war  in  due  form  .  .  .  .  i6.

67  It  is  to  be  distinguished  from  informal  and  unlawful  war •  .  320

68  Grounds  of  this  distinction  .  •  •  •  •  t6.


CHAP.  v..
Of  the  Enemy  J  and  of  Things  hdonging  to  the  Unemy,

69  Who  is  an  eneniy ...

70  All  the  subjects  of  the  two  states  at  war  are  enemies

71  and  continue  to  be  enemies  in  all  places .

72  Whether  women  and  children^are  to  be  accounted  enei^ies

73  Things  belonging  to  an  enemy

74  continue  such  everywhere •  .  •

75  Neutral  things  found  with  an  enemy  .  •

76  Lands  .possessed  by  foreigners  in  an  enemy's  country •

77  Things  due  to  the  enemy  by  a  third  party •  •


.  821


.  ib,
ih,

.  322
ih,

•  ib,
ib.

. ib.


CHAP.  VI.

Of  the  Ihiemy's  AUies^ — of  Warlike  Associations^ — of  Auxiliaries  and  Sub'

sidies.


78  Treaties  relative  to  war .  •  •  •

79  Defensive  and  offensive  alliances

80  Difference  between  warlike  alliances  and  defensive  treaties

81  Auxiliary  troops  .  •  .  •  .

82  Subsidies ...*••

83  When  a  nation  is  authorised  to  assist  another •  •
34  __  and  to  make  alliances  for  war • •


.  323

ib.

.  324

ibm

• t6.

ih.

. ib


x\


C0NTBN39.


85  Alliances  made  wiih  a  nation  actoally  engaged  in  war

86  Tacit  clause  in  every  warlike  alliance ....

87  To  refdse  saecours  for  an  unjust  war  is  no  breach  of  alliance

88  What  the  castu  foederis  is .

89  It  never  takes  place  in  an  unjilst  wal*  •  •  .  •

90  How  it  exists  in  a  defensive,  war  .  •  •  .

91  and  in  a  treaty  of  a  guaranty ....

92  The  succour  is  not  due  under  an  inabUity  to  furnish  it,  or  when  the

public  safety  would  be  exposed  ....

93  Other  cases : — ^two  of  the  parties  in  an  alliance  coming  to  a  rupture

94  Eefusal  of  the  succours  due  in  virtue  of  an  alliance

95  The  enemy's  associates ......

96  Those  who  make  a  common  cause  with  the  enemy  are  his  associates

97  and  those  who  assist  him,  without  being  obliged  to  it  by


treaties


98


or  who  are  in  an  offensive  alliance  with  him


99  How  a  defensive  alliance  associates  with  the  enemy

100  Another  case .......

101  In  what  case  it  does  not  produce  the  same  effect .

1 02  Whether  it  be  necessary  to  declare  war  against  the  enemy's  associates


Paot

325

ib.

326
ib,
ib.
ib,
ib.

ib.
327

ib.
328

ib.

ib.
329

ib.

ib.
330
331


CHAP.  vn.

0/ Neutrality, — and  the  PoMoge  of  Troops  through  a  Neutral  Country.


and  remain  neuter


war


03  Neutral  nations ....

04  Conduct  to  be  pursued  by  a  neutral  nation

05  An  ally  may  furnish  the  succour  due  from  him,

06  Bight  of  remaining  neuter

07  Treaties  of  neutrality

08  Additional  reasons  for  making  those  treaties

09  Foundation  of  the  rules  of  neutrality

10  How  levies  may  be  allowed,  money  lent,  and  every  kind  of  things

sold,  without  a  breach  of  neutrality

11  Trade  of  neutral  nations  with  those  which  are  at

12  Contraband  goods
18  Whether  su<m  goods  may  be  confiscated

14  Searching  neutral  ships

15  Enemy's  property  on  board  a  neutral  ship  •

16  Neutral  property  on  board  an  enemy's  ship

17  Trade  with  a  besieged  town

18  Impartial  offices  of  neutrals •  •

19  Passage  of  troops  through  a  neutral  country

20  Passage  to  be  asked

21  It  may  be  refused  for  good  reasons

22  In  what  case  it  may  be  forced .
28  The  fear  of  danger  authorizes  a  refusal

24  — —  or  a  demand  of  every  reasonable  security

25  Whether  always  necessary  to  give  every  kind  of  security  required

26  Equality  to  be  observed  towards  both  parties,  as  to  the  passage

27  No  complaint  lies  against  a  neutral  state  for  granting  a  passage


332

ib.
333

ib.

ib.
334

ib.

ib.
335
336
837
839

t&.

%b.

t».
340

ib.

ib.
341

ib..
842

ib.

ib.
843


Sect,  Pag0

128  That  state  may  refose  it  from  fear  of  the  resentment  of  the  opposite

party ........  343

129  and  lest  her  country  should  become  the  theatre  of  war ib.

130  What  is  included  in  the  grant  of  passage ....  344

131  Safety  of  the  passage ...•••  t5.

132  No  hostility  to  be  committed  in  a  neutral  country •  .  , ib

133  Neutral  country  not  to  afford  a  retreat  to  troops^  that  they  may  again

attack  their  enemies  .  .  .  . 345

134  Conduct  to  be  pursued  by  troops  passing  through  a  neutral  country i6«

135  A  psissage  may  be  refused  for  a  war  evidently  unjust  .  . ib.


CHAP.  vni.

Of  the  RighU  of  Natitm%  in  War^ — cmd  first j  of  what  we  have  a  Right  to  do,
and  what  we  are  aUowed  to  do y  0  the  Enemy's  Person  in  a  just  War,

136  General  principle  of  the  rights  against  an  enemy  in  a  just  war .  346

137  Difference  between  what  we  have  a  right  to  do,  and  what  is  barely

allowed  to  be  done  with  impunity  between  enemies .  .  ib,

138  The  right  to  weaken  an  enemy  by  every  justifiable  method  .  347

139  The  right  over  the  enemy's  person .  .  . * .  ib,

140  Limits  of  that  right : — an  enemy  not  to  be  killed  after  eeaaing  to  resist ib*

141  A  particular  case  in  which  quarter  may  be  revised .  . 348

142  Reprisals .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ib.

143  Whether  a  governor  of  a  town  can  be  punished  with  death  for  an

obstinate  defence ..••.. 349

144  Fugitives  and  deserters ...••.  351

145  Women,  children,  the  aged,  and  sick •  •  •  .  ib,

146  Clergy,  men  of  letters,  £c.  .....  352

147  Peasants,  and,  in  general,  all  who  do  not  carry  arms .  .  ib,

148  The  right  of  making  prisoners  of  war  ....  353

149  A  prisoner  of  war  not  to  be  put  to  death  •  •  • 354

150  How  prisoners  of  war  are  to  be  treated .... ih,

151  Whether  prisoners,  who  cannot  be  kept  or  fed,  may  be  put  to  death 355

152  Whether  prisoners  of  war  may  be  made  slaves .  •  .356

153  Exchange  and  ransom  of  pHsoners .... 357

154  The  state  is  bound  to  procure  their  release  •  .  . ib,

155  Whether  an  enemy  may  lawfully  be  assassinated  or  poisoned  .  358

156  Whether  poisoned  weapons  may  be  used  in  war  •  • 361

157  Whether  springs  may  be  poisoned  .  •  .  . ib,

158  Disposition  to  be  entertained  towards  an  enemy  .  • 362

159  Tenderness  for  the  person  of  a  king  who  is  in  arms  against  us  .  363


CHAP.  IX.

Of  the  Right  of  War,  with  Respect  to  Things  beUmging  to  the  Enemy,

160  Principles  of  the  right  over  things  belonging  to  the  enemy  .  364

161  The  right  of  seizing  them  .  .  .  .  *  ib,

162  What  is  taken  from  the  enemy  by  way  of  penalty  .  , ib*

163  What  is  withheld  from  him,  in  order  to  oblige  him  to  give  just  satis-

faction •  .  .  •  *•  •  • 366

6  D2


zlii


Contents.


Sect,

164  Booty •  •  •  •

165  Contribution .  •  •  •

166  Wasto  and  destruction •  •

167  Ravaging  and  burning  •  •

168  What  things  are  to  be  spared  •

169  Bombarding  towns •  •  •

170  Demolition  of  fortresses •  •

171  Safeguards ....

172  General  rule  of  moderation  respecting  the

to  an  enemy

173  Bule  of  the  Yoluntary  law  of  nations  on  the


evil  which  may  be
same  subject


Pom

.  365

366
.  ib.
367
.  36?
ib
. 369
ib.
done
.  ib,
ib.


CHAP.  X.

0/ Faith  between  Enemies^ — of  Stratagems,  Artijkes  in  War,  S^nes,  and

some  other  Practices,

174  Faith  to  be  saored  between  enemies

175  What  treaties  are  to  be  observed  between  enemies

176  On  what  occasions  they  may  be  broken •

177  Lies .  .

178  Stratagems  and  artifices  in  war •

179  Spies .....  •

180  Clandestine  seduction  of  the  enemy's  people

181  Whether  the  offers  of  a  traitor  may  be  accepted

182  Deceitful  intelligence  •


.  871

•

372

.  vb.

•

, ib.

.  S73

•

875

.  376

•

877

.  <b.

CHAP.  XL

Of  the  Sovereign  who  wages  an  unjust  war.

183  An  unjust  war  gives  no  right  whatever

184  Great  guilt  of  the  sovereign  who  undertakes  it

185  His  obligations .  .  .  .  •

186  Difficulty  of  repairing  the  injury  he  has  done .

187  Whether  the  nation  and  the  military  are  boxmd  to  any  thing


378

ib.
379

ib.
380


CHAP.  XII.

Of  the  VoluntOiry  Law  ofNoJtWM,  as  it  regards  the  Effects  of  Regular  Warfare^

independently  of  the  Justice  of  the  Cause.

188  Nations  not  rieidly  to  enforce  the  law  of  nature  against  each  other 381

189  Why  they  are  bound  to  admit  the  voluntary  law  of  nations .  {h.

190  Regular  war,  as  to  its  effects,  is  to  be  accounted  just  on  both  sides 382

191  Whatever  is  permitted  to  one  party,  is  so  to  the  other  .  ib

192  The  voluntary  law  gives  no  more  than  impunity  to  him  who  wages

an  unjust  war ••••••.  383


Pagt

. 384

• tb.

.  885

0

• tb.

.386

387

.  ib.

388

•  i&.

•

891

tX)KTEirEfl. '  zliii

CHAP.  xm.

0/ AcquistHons  hy  War,  and  particular^  of  ConquesU.

Se«t.

198  War  a  mode  of  acanisition  •  •  »

194  Measure  of  the  right  it  gives .  •  •

195  Rules  of  the  Yoluntary  law  of  nations  •  •

196  Acquisition  of  movable  property  •  •

197  Acquisition  of  immovables,— or  conquest •  •

198  How  to  transfer  them  validly .

199  Conditions  on  which  a  conquered  town  is  acquired

200  Lands  of  private  persons  •  •

201  Conquest  of  the  whole  state  •  •  •

202  To  whom  the  conquest  belongs

203  Whether  we  are  to  set  at  liberty  a  people  whom  the  enemy  had  un-

justly conquered  •  •  •  •  •  • tb.

CHAP.  XIV.

0/  the  Right  of  Posiliminium,

204  Definition  of  the  right  of  postliminium •  •  •  .  392

205  Foxmdation  of  that  right  .  •  •  • ' •  t6.

206  How  it  takes  effect  .  .  •  .  •  .893

207  Whether  it  takes  effect  among  the  allies  •  •  •  i6.

208  Of  no  validity  in  neutral  nations .  •  •  •  » ib.

209  What  thinffl  are  recoverable  by  that  right .  •  • 394

210  Of  those  who  cannot  return  by  the  right  of  postliminium •  . ib.

211  They  enjoy  that  right  when  retaken .  .  •  •  ib.

212  Whether  that  right  extends  to  their  property  alienated  by  the  enemy  395

213  Whether  a  nation  that  has  been  entirely  subdued  can  enjoy  the  right

of  postliminium ...... 396

214  Right  of  postliminium  for  what  is  restored  at  the  peace »  •  897

215  and  for  things  ceded  to  the  enemy .  .  .  ib.

216  The  right  of  postliminium  does  not  exist  after  a  peace •  • i6.

217  Why  always  in  force  for  prisoners . . • •  ib.

218  They  are  free  even  by  escaping  into  a  neutral  country •  • ib.

219  How  the  rights  and  obligations  of  prisoners  su^ist • •  898

220  Testament  of  a  prisoner  of  war • . • •  , ib.

221  Marriage .......  t6.

222  Regulations  established  by  treaty  or  custom^  respecting  postliminium i&.

CHAP.  XV.

0/  the  Right  of  Private  Persons  in  War.

223  Subjects  cannot  commit  hostilities  without  the  soverdgn's  order 399

224  That  order  may  be  general  or  particular •  •  •  • ib.

225  Source  of  the  necessity  of  such  an  order  •  •  .  ib.

226  Why  the  law  of  nations  should  have  adopted  this  rule •  . t^.

227  Precise  meaning  of  the  order .  .  •  •  . 400

228  'What  may  be  undertaken  by  private  persons,  presuming  on  the

sovereign's  will •••••.  ib.

229  Privateers  •  •  •  •  •'  .  . tb.
280  Volunteers •.•••«.. 401


klir


OOKTEKTS.


Sect,


2tSl  What  soldiers  and  subalterns  may  do  . • •  •  .  401

232  Whether  the  state  is  bound  to  indemnify  the  subjects  for  damages

sustained  in  war .....  402


233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245


246

247

248
249
250
251

252
253

254
255
256
257
258

259
260

261
262
263
264


CHAP.  XVI.
0/ various  Conveniiofu  made  during  the  Course  of  the  Waur.

Truce  and  suspension  of  arms  .  •  •  •

»-  does  not  terminate  the  war .

A  truce  is  either  partial  or  general

Q-eneral  truce  for  many  years

By  whom  those  agreements  may  be  concluded

The  sovereign's  mth  engaged  in  them

When  the  truce  begins  to  be  obligatory'

Publication  of  the  truce

Subjects  contravening  the  truce

Yiolation  of  the  truce .

Stipulation  of  a  penalty  against  the  infractor

Time  of  the  truce

Effects  of  a  truce :  what  is  allowed  or  not,  during  its  continuance. —
First  rule — ^Each  party  may  do  at  home  what  they  have  a  right  to
do  in  time  of  peace  .  .  .

Second  rule — ^not  to  take  advantage  of  the  truce  in  doing  what  hos-
tilities would  have  prevented  ....

for  instance^  continuing  the  works  of  a  siege,  or  repairing


breaches


or  introducing  succours


Distinction  of  a  particular  case

Retreat  of  an  army  during  a  suspension  of  hostilities

Third  rule-^Nothing  to  be  attempted  in  contested  places,  but  every

thing  to  be  left  as  it  was  .....

Places  quitted  or  neglected  by  the  enemy
Subjects  inclined  to  revolt  against  their  prince  not  to  be  received

during  the  truce  ......

much  less  to  be  solicited  to  treason

Persons  or  effects  of  enemies  not  to  be  seized  during  the  truce
Kight  of  postliminium  during  the  truce

Intercourse  allowed  during  a  truce  ....

Persons  detained  by  unsurmountable  obstacles  after  the  expiration  of

the  truce •..••..
Particular  conditions  added  to  truces  ....

At  the  expiration  of  the  truce  the  war  recommences  without  any  new

declaration .......

Capitulations ;  and  by  whom  they  may  be  concluded  •

Clauses  contained  in  them .  .  •  •  •

Observance  of  capitulations,  and  its  utility  •

Promises  made  to  the  enemy  by  individuals


404

ih.

%b.

Hb.
405
406

i&.

f^.

ih.
407

i6.

ih.


408

409

ih.

ih,

410

ib,

411
ib.

ib.
ib.
ih.

ib.
ib.

412

ib.

lb.
ib.

413

414

ib.


CHAP.  xvn.

0/  Safe-conducts  and  Passports,  and  Questions  on  the  Ransom  ^f  JMsoners

of  War.

265  Nature  of  safe-conducts  and  passports  •  .  •  •  416

266  From  what  authority  they  emanate .•••»&.

267  Not  transferable  from  one  person  to  another  •  •  • t&


CONTENTS.


zir


i!7eef.  Pag€

268  Extent  of  the  promised  security . • . •  •  41G

269  How  to  judge  of  the  right  derived  from  a  safe  conduct  . .  41 7

270  Whether  it  includes  baggage  and  domestics . •  . ih.

271  Safe  conduct  granted  to  the  father  does  not  include  his  family •  ih,

272  Safe  conduct  giyen  in  general  to  any  one  and  his  retinue •  • ih.

273  Term  of  the  safe  conduct .....  418

274  A  person  unayoidably  detained  beyond  the  term • .  %b
215  The  safe  conduct  does  not  expire  at  the  death  of  him  who  gave  it  tb.

276  How  it  may  be  revoked . . . . .  , ib.

277  Safe  conduct,  with  the  clause  '^  for  such  time  as  we  shall  think  fit'' ib.

278  Conventions  relating  to  the  ransom  of  prisoners . .  .  419

279  The  right  of  demanding  a  ransom  may  be  transferred . .  ib

280  What  may  annul  the  convention  made  for  the  rate  of  the  ransom  . tb.

281  A  prisoner  dyiuff  before  payment  of  ransom . . .  tb,

282  Prisoner  released  on  condition  of  procuring  the  release  of  another  .  420

283  Prisoner  retaken  before  he  has  paid  his  former  ransom •  ib.

284  Prisoner  rescued  before  he  has  received  his  liberty .  . ib,

285  Whether  the  things  which  a  prisoner  has  found  means  to  conceal^

belong  to  him . . . • . •  *  421

286  Hostage  given  for  the  release  of  a  prisoner . • •  , %b.


CHAP.  xvm.

0/  OwU  War.

287  Foundation  of  the  sovereign's  rights  against  the  rebels

288  Who  are  rebels  .....

289  Popular  commotion,  insurrection,  sedition  .

290  How  the  sovereign  is  to  suppress  them

291  He  is  boxmd  to  perform  the  promises  he  has  made  to  the  rebels

292  Civil  war  .....  .

293  A  civil  war  produces  two  independent  parties  •  •

294  They  are  to  observe  the  common  laws  of  war .

295  The  effects  of  civil  war  distinguished  according  to  cases

296  Conduct  to  be  pursued  by  foreign  nations


421

422

ih.

ib.

423

424

425

ib.

426

427


BOOK  lY.

OF  THS  BESTORATION  OF  PEACE ;  AND  OF  EMBASSIES.

CHAP.  I.
0/ Peace,  and  the  Obligation  to  cidtivate  it.

1  What  peace  is  .....  •

2  Obligation  of  cultivating  it  ...  •

3  The  sovereign's  obligation  in  that  respect

4  Extent  of  that  duty
^  Disturbers*  of  the  public  peace  •
O  How  far  war  mav  be  continued •
T  Peace  the  end  of  war
8  General  effects  of  peaoe •


•  •  •


.  429

430

. ib,

ib
.  431

ib
.  43S

»6


Xlvi  CONTENTS.

CHAP.  n.

Treatiet  of  Peace,

9  Definition  of  a  treaty  of  peace  •  •  ,  .  .  432

10  By  whom  it  may  be  concluded •  •  •  •  .  i6.

11  Alienations  made  by  a  treaty  of  peace  ....  433

12  How  the  sovereign  may,  in  a  treaty,  dispose  of  what  concerns  individuals  435

13  Whether  a  king  who  is  a  prisoner  of  war  can  make  a  peace •  • ih.

14  Whether  peace  can  be  made  with  an  usurper •  •  • 436

15  Allies  included  in  the  treaty  of  peace  •  •  •  • i&.

16  Associates  to  treat,  each  for  himself •  •  •  • 437

17  Mediation .  .  .  .  •  •  •  » ih,

18  On  what  footing  peace  may  be  concluded  •  •  •  i6.

19  General  efifeot  of  the  treaty  of  peace  •  •  •  •  438

20  Amnesty  ..*•••• 439

21  Things  not  mentioned  in  the  treaty  •  •  •  * %b.

22  Things  not  included  in  the  compromise  or  amnesty  •  .  tb.
28  Former  treaties,  mentioned  or  confirmed  in  the  new,  are  a  part  of  it 440

CHAP.  HL
0/ the  Execution  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace,

24  When  the  obligation  of  the  treaty  commences  •  •  •  440

25  Publication  of  the  peace  •  •  •  •  •  ti.

26  Time  of  the  execution  .••••.  441

27  A  lawful  excuse  to  be  admitted  .  .  •  .  t&.

28  The  promise  is  void  when  the  party  to  whom  it  was  made  has  himself

hindered  the  performance  of  it •  •  •  .  . t&.

29  Cessation  of  contributions  •  •  •  •  • 442
SO  Products  of  the  thing  restored  or  ceded • • •  . ib.

81  In  what  condition  things  are  to  be  restored  •  •  •  t^-

82  The  interpretation  of  a  treaty  of  peace  is  to  be  against  the  superior  party  443

83  Names  of  ceded  countries  ...  .  •  ,  ib.

84  Restoration  not  to  be  understood  of  those  who  have  voluntarily  given

themselves  up •••••.'.  444

CHAP.  IV.
Of  the  Ohsenfance  and  Breach  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace,

85  The  treaty  of  peace  binds  the  nation  and  successors  •  .  .  444
36  It  is  to  be  faithfully  observed . . . . .  t?;.

87  The  plea  of  fear  or  force  does  not  dispense  with  the  observance  .  445

88  How  many  ways  a  treaty  of  peace  may  be  broken  .  . 446

89  -^^-^—  by  a  conduct  contrary  to  the  nature  of  every  treaty  of  peace ib.

40  To  take  up  arms  for  a  fresh  cause  is  no  breach  of  the  treaty  of  peace ib

41  A  subsequent  alliance  with  an  enemy  is  likewise  no  breach  of  the  treaty  447

42  Why  a  distinction  is  to  be  made  between  a  new  war  and  a  breach  of

the  treaty . . . . . . »  ib

43  Justifiable  self-defence  is  no  breach  of  the  treaty . .  44S

44  Causes  of  rupture  on  account  of  allies ....  449

45  The  treaty  is  broken  by  what  is  contrary  to  its  particular  nature  ib.

46  ]yj  the  violation  of  any  article .  .  .  • ib.

47  The  violation  of  a  single  article  breaks  the  whole  treaty  •  •  f6.


CONTENTS.


zlyii


iSteC.  Poff

48  Whether  a  distinction  may  here  be  made  between  the  more  and  the  less

important  articles  ...«••  450

49  Penalty  annexed  to  the  violation  of  an  article •••$&.

50  Studied  delays  .  •  •  •  •  •  • i&.

51  Unsarmountable  impediments •  •  •  •  »  ih,

52  Infractions  of  the  treaty  of  peace  by  the  subjects •  •  •  451

53  or  by  allies ......  i&.

54  Right  of  the  offended  party  against  him  who  has  violated  the  treaty 452


CHAP.  V.

Of  ike  Right  of  Embassy ,  or  the  Right  of  sending  cmd  receiving  Public  Ministers^

55  It  is  necessary  that  nations  be  enabled  to  treat  and  communicate  together  452

56  They  do  that  by  the  agency  of  public  ministers  .  .  .  453

57  Every  sovereign  state  has  a  right  to  send  and  receive  public  ministers ib.

58  An  unequal  alliance^  or  a  treaty  of  protection,  does  not  take  away  that

ib,
ib.

454
455

ib.

ib,

ib.
456

ib.
457

ib.


right

59  Right  of  the  princes  and  states  of  the  empire  in  that  respect

60  Cities  that  have  the  right  of  banner

61  Ministers  of  viceroys .  .  . ' .

62  Ministers  of  the  nation  or  of  the  regents  during  an  interregnum

63  Sovereign  molesting  another  in  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  embassy

64  What  is  allowable  in  that  respect  in  time  of  war

65  The  minister  of  a  friendly  power  is  to  be  received •

66  Resident  ministers  ..••••

67  Admission  of  an  enemy's  ministers

68  Whether  ministers  may  be  received,  from  or  sent  to  an  usurper •


CHAP.  VL


Of  the  several  Orders  of  Public  Ministers, — of  the  Representative  Character^

and  of,  the  Honours  due  to  Ministers,

69  Ori^n  of  the  several  orders  of  public  ministers • •  •  459

70  Representative  character . • • • •  t&.

71  Ambassadors • • • • • •  » ib.

72  Envoys .......  460

73  Residents • • . • 4 • •  . ib.

74  Ministers .......  i&.

75  Consuls,  agents,  deputies,  commissioners,  fto. • •  .  461

76  Credentials . ... • • • .  ib.

77  Instructions . . . • • •  • ib

78  Right  of  sending  ambassadors . . • • •  t6.

79  Honours  due  to  ambassadors ... • •  .  462


CHAP.  vn.

Of  the  Rights,  Privileges,  and  Immunities  of  Ambassadors,  and  other  Public

Ministers,

80  Respect  due  to  public  ministers , . * . .  ,  464

81  Their  persons  sacred  and  inviolable • • • ^  ib

82  Particular  protection  due  to  them . . . .  465

83  When  it  commences ......  466

84  What  is  due  to  them  in  the  countries  through  which  they  pass  ib.


jdviii


COHTENTS.


85  Ambassadors  going  to  an  enemy's  ooontiy  .  •  .  .  467

86  Embassies  between  enemies .  .  •  •  •  tZ^.

87  Heralds,  trumpeters^  and  drummers  .  •  ...  468

88  Ministers,  trumpeters;  &c.,  to  be  respected  even  in  a  civil  war .  il

89  Sometimes  tbej  may  be  refused  admittance  .  .  .  46P

90  Every  thing  which  has  the  appearance  of  insult  to  them  must  be  avoided xb

91  By  and  to  whom  they  may  be  sent  ....  470

92  Independence  of  foreign  ministers  ....  ih,

93  How  the  foreign  minister  is  to  behave ....  472

94  How  he  may  be  punished  for  ordinary  transgressionB .  • 475
96  for  faults  committed  against  the  prince .  . ti.

96  Bight  of  ordering  away  an  ambassador  who  is  guilty  or  justly  suspected t6.

97  Right  of  repressmg  him  by  force,  if  he  behaves  as  an  enemy  .  476

98  Ambassador  forming  dangerous  plots  and  conspiracies  * .  .  ib,

99  What  may  be  done  to  him  according  to  the  exigency  of  the  case  .  478
100  Ambassador  attempting  against  the  sovereign's  life  .  .  479
"  01  Two  remarkable  instances  respecting  the  immunities  of  public  ministers  480

02  Whether  reprisals  may  be  made  on  an  ambassador .  • 481

03  Agreement  of  nations  concerning  the  privileges  of  ambassadors .  482

04  Free  exercise  of  religion  ..... 483

05  Whether  an  ambassador  be  exempted  from  all  imposts •  •  484

06  Obligation  founded  on  use  and  custom  •  •  . 485

07  A  minister  whose  character  is  not  public •  •  •  . ib.

08  A  sovereign  in  a  foreign  countiy  .  •  •  486

09  Deputies  to  the  states  .••••.  487


CHA?.  vm.

0/the  Judge  of  Ambastadon  in  OivU  Cases.

110  The  ambassador  is  exempt  from  the  civil  jurisdiction  of  the  country

where  he  resides  ......  488

111  How  he  may  voluntarily  subject  himself  to  it .  .  . 489

112  A  minister  who  is  a  subject  of  the  state  where  he  is  employed  .  490
118  Immunity  of  the  minister  extends  to  his  property . . 491

114  The  exemption  cannot  extend  to  effects  belonging  to  any  trade  the

minister  may  carry  on .  .  .  .  .  .  492

115  nor  to  immovable  property  which  he  possesses  in  the  country  493

116  How  justice  may  be  obtained  against  an  ambassador  .  • ib.


CHAP.  IX.
0/ the  Ambiissador^s  House  and  Domestics

117  The  ambassador's  house .  •  •

118  Right  of  asylum  .  .  •  •

119  Exemption  of  an  ambassador's  carriages

120  of  his  retinue  .  .  . ,

121  of  his  wife  and  family .

122  of  the  secretary  of  the  embassy

123  of  the  ambassador's  couriers  and  despatches

124  The  ambassador's  authority  over  his  retinue

125  When  the  rights  of  an  ambassador  expire •  •

126  Cases  when  new  credentials  are  necessary

127  Conclusion  •  •  •  •  •


.  494

495

.  496

497

. ib.

ih.
.  498

ib.
.  50C

ib
. ib.


LAW  OF  NATIONS.


PRELIMINARIES.


IDBA  AND GENERAL  PBINGIPLSS  OF  THE  LAW  OF  NATIONS.

JN  ATIONS  or  states  are  bodies  politic,  societies  of  men  J  l  Wh»t
united  together  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  their  mutual  ^  ™e»nt  bj
safety  and  advantage  by  the  joint  efforts  of  their  combined  g^^^^"^'
strength.

Such  a  society  has  her  affairs  and  her  interests ;  she  de-  ?  2. it  u  a
liberates  and  taKes  resolutions  in  common ;  thus  becoming  a  ™**'*^  P*''
moral  person,  who  possesses  an  understanding  and  a  will  pe-  ^^^
culiar  to  herself,  and  is  susceptible  of  obligations  and  rights.

To  establish  on  a  solid  foundation  the obligations  and  §  3.  DefinU
rights  of  nations^  is  the  design  of  this  wor^.  ^^^  ^j  ^®

. The  Law  of  Nations  is  the  science  which  teaches  the  rights  ^^  "*"
subsisting  between  ncUions  or  states,  and  the  obligations  cor-
respondent to  those  rights.{l)

»

(I) The Law of Nationi modifies  fare  of  all  mankind. (Po«(,  J  13, 14 ;  General

tbe interconne of  independent  com-  Mackintosh, Dis.  3,  4 ; Montesq. de  views  of  tha

mon wealths in  peace, and prescribes  I'Esprit  des  Lois,  liv.  1,  o.  3 ;  and  see  law  of  na-

limits to their  hostilities in  war. It  1  Bla.  Com.  34  to  44 ;  4  Bla.  Com.  66,  tions,  and

prescribes,  that  in  peace  nations  should  67.) In  cases  of  donbt  arising  upon  how  it  is  to

do  each  other  eu  much  goodj  and  in  time  what  is  the  Law  of  Nations,  it  is  now  be  ascer-

of  war  ae  little  harm,  as  may  be  possi-  an admitted rale among all Euro-  tained.

ble,  without  injuring  their  own  proper  pean nations,  that  our  common  reli-

real  interests. The  laws  of  nations,  in  gion, Chrietiwnity, pointing out the

short,  establish  that  principle  and  rule  principles  of  natural  Juettee,  ehould  be

of  conduct  which  should  prevent  the  equally  appealed  to  and  observed  by

§tronge»t  nation  from  abusing  its  power,  all  as an  unfailing  rule  of construo-

snd  induce  it  to  act  jusUy  and  gene-  tion. (2  Ward's  Law  of  Nations,  pp.

rously  towards  other  states,  upon  the  11,  339,  340.) The  difficulty  is,  that \

broad  principle that true happiness,  Uiere  is  no  general  moral  international

whether  of  a  single  individual  or  of  code  framed  by  the  consent  of  the  Eu-

several, can only result from each  ropean  powers,  so  desirable  **»  be  fixed,  .

adopting  conduct  influenced  by  a  sin-  especially  at  this  period,  when  harmony

oere  desire  to  increase  Uie  general  wel-  liappily  appears  to  subsist^  and  most

N.  B.  The  notes  numbered  as  1,  2,  3,  4,  Ac,  and  in  general  concluding  with
0  f  are  by  the  present  Editor.

7  B  49


Iv  IDEA  AND  GENERAL  PBINOIPLES '


pBBuin. Iq  this  treatise  it  will  appear,  in  what  manner  States^  as
w^tt'g' such,  ought  to  regulate  all  their  actions. We  shall  examine

of  the  nationfl  of  Europe  have,  by  re-  mony  and  opinion,  declared  what  \b  tht

cent experience, become practically  existing  international  jurisprudence,

conrinced  of  the  advantages  that  would  Thn«  Lord  ManMfield,  in Trtqmet  t.

result  from  the  establishment  of  fixed  Bath,  (3  Burr.  Rep.  1481,)  stated  as  the

general  rulee,  so  as  to  reconcile  the  fre-  declaration of  Lord Talboi,  that the

qnent  discordancy  of  the  decisions  of  law  of  nations  is  to  be  collected from

their  various  prize  tribunals  and  upon  ihQ  praettee  of  different  natioH«,{BiidiWm

other  contests. The  statesmen  of  the  per  Sir  William  Scott,  in  The  Fladvyem,

higher  powers  of  Europe  would  inunor-  1  Rob.  Rep.  115,  poet,  Ixiii.  n.  (7),)  and

talize themselves  by  introducing  such  the  authority  of  toritertf  such  a«  Gro-

a  code,  and  no  period  of  history  for  the  tins, Barbeyrac, Bijnkershock, Wic-

purpose  has  been  so  favourable  and  op-  quefort, Ac., there being  no English

portuntf. (See Atcheson's  Report  of  writer  of  eminence  upon  the  subject,

the  case  of  Havelock  v.  Roehwood,  Pre-  and  English  elementary  writers  of  high

face  i.)  authority  have  also  acknowledged  tiiat

The  law  of  nations  is adopted in  such  foreign  authors  are  authorities  to

Great  Britain  in  its  full  and  most  liberal  ascertain  the  law  of  nations. (Comyn's

extent  by  the  common  law,  and  is  held  Digest,  tit.  "  Ambassador,"  B. ;  Viner's

to  be  part  of  the  law  of  the  land ;  and  Ab. **  Merchant,"  A. 1 ; and  3 BU.

all  statutes  relating  to  foreign  afiairs  Com.  273.) To  these  are  to  bo  addedj

should  be  framed  with  reference  to  that  Puffendorf,  Wolf,  Selden,  Valen, Cle-

rule.  (4  Bla.  Com.  67.) But  still  there  rac, Pothier, Buriamaqui, Emerigon,

is  no  general  code;  and  to  the  regret  Roccus,  Casegis, Loecenius,  Santema,

that  none  has  been  introduced^ may  Maline,  Molloy,  and  above  all,  the  pre-

be  also  added,  the  want  of  an  ttttema-  sent  work  of  Vattel;  to  which  may  be

tional  court  or  tribunal,  to  decide  upon  added some modem works of  great

and  enforce  the  law  of  nations  when  ability,  but  not  yet  acknowledged  to  be

disputed ; and  consequently,  although  such  high  general  authority  as  the  for-

when states  are temperately  inclined  mer, vis. Ward's and Marten's  Lav

to  a^oertkin and  be governed  by  the  of  Nations, and the recent valuable

law  of  nationa,  there  will  be  little  doubt  French publication, Cours de Droit

upon the  decision,  or  of  the  adoption  Public  Literne  et  Exteme,  par  le  Com-

of  measures  the  most  just ; yet,  if  a  mandeur  Silvestre Piuheiro Ferreira,

state  will  not  listen  to  the  immutable  Ministre  D'Etat  an  Paris,  1830,  which

principles  of  reaaonf  upon  the  basis  of  embraces  the  French  modem  view  of

which  the  imperfect  law  of  nations  is  the  law  of  nations  upon most  of  the

founded, then  the  only  remedy  is  to  subjects  discussed  in  Vattel  and  some

appeal  to  arms;  and  hence  frequently  others.

the  just  cause  of  war,  which,  if  there  It  was  from  the  more  ancient  of  these
were  a  fixed  code,  with  a  proper  tribu-  several  authors,  and  other  similar  re-
nal to  construe  it,  would  in  general  be  sources, that Lord Mansfield  framed
prevented.  the  celebrated  letter  of  the  Duke  of
The  pre- The  •otiree*  from  whence  is to  be  Newcastle to  the King of Prusna'a
sent  sources  gathered  information — what  i»  the  pan-  Secretary,  which  is  considered  a  stand-
of  informa- tive  Law  of  Nations  generally  and  per-  ard of authority,  upon the laws  of
tion  upon manently  binding  upon  all  independent  nations, as far  as  respects  the then
the  law  of ttateeT  are  acknowledged  to  be  of  three  disputed  right  to  search  for  and  seiae
nations. descriptions :  First,  the  long  and  ordi-  enemies' property on board neutra*
nary  practicb  of  nations,  which  afibrds  ships in certain cases in time of
evidence  of  a  general  custom,  tacitly  war. (See Holliday's Life of  Lord
agreed  to  be  observed  until  expressly  Mansfield,  voL  2,  p.  424,  Ac,  and  Col-
abrogated. Secondly,  the  Recitals  of  lectanea  Jnridica,  1  vol.  129^  see  ala«
what  is acknowledged to have been  Viveash  v.  Becker,  3  Manle  A  Selwyn,
the  law  or practice of nations,  and  284, in which Lord EUenboroug^k
which  recitals  will  frequently  be  found  quotes  several  of  the  above  authors,  ta
in  modem  treaties. Thirdly,  the  Warr-  ascertain  the  law  of  nations  upon  <h«
1HOS  of  eminent  authors,  who  have  long,  privilege  of  consuls.)
as  it  were  by  a  concurrence  of  tesd-  Upon some jpcutt of  the  law  •€
M


OP  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS


the  0hligation9  of  a  people,  as  well  towards  themselves  as prbwj'J-
towards  other  nations ;  and  by  that  means  we  shall  discover ^^'^"'*'


nations,  especially  that  relating  to  mart-  the  other  evidence  of  what  is  the  law  of
time  affairtf  there  are  ancient  codet,  nationB,  viz.  ihe  previous  ordinary  and
which  either  originated  in  authority,  general  or  particular  practice,  or  the
or  were  afterwards  acknowledged  to  opinion  of  the  authors  before  alluded  to.
have  become  such ;  but  still  those  codes  In  the  latter  part  of  the  last,  and  in
in  the  present  state  of  commercial  in-  the  present  century,  a  great  accession
tercourse  are  imperfect.  Of  those  are  of  learning,  information,  and  authority
the  Ehodiau  Zcim,  being  one  of  the  upon  the  law  of  nations  has  been  af-
earliest  systems  of  marine  law,  but  forded  by  the  valuable  decisions  of  Sir
which  was  superseded  by  the  coUeo-  W.  Scott»  (afterwards  Lord  Btowell,)
tion  entitled  Cotuolato  del  Mare,  Gro-  and  Sir  J.  NichoU  in  the  Court  of  Ad-
tius.  Book  3,  ch.  1,  s.  5,  n.  6.  Next  miralty  and  Prize  Court,  and  by  seve-
in  order  are  the  Laws  of  Oleron,  pro-  ral  decisions  in  our  Courts  of  Law
mnlgated  about  the  thirteenth  century,  and  Equity.  The  known  learning
Another  system  of  international  law  and  scrupulous  justice  evinced  in  those
was  framed  by  the  deputies  of  Uie  decisions,  have  commanded  the  respect,
Hanseatxc  League  in  1597,  and  which  the  admiration  and  adoption,  of  all  the
was  confirmed  with  additions  in  1614,  European  states,  and  of  that  modem,
and  has  obtained  much  consideration  enlightened,  and  energetic  nation,
in  the  maritime  jurisprudence  of  na-  America.  To  these  may  be  added,
tions.  (See  remarks  on  that  code,  2  Chalmer's  Collection  of  Opinions,  which
Ward's  Baw  of  Nations,  270  to  290).  contain  great  learning  upon  many  sub-
But  the  most  complete  and  eompre-  jects  of  the  public  affairs  of  nations,
hensive  system  of  the  marine  law  of  These  have  been  fully  published  since
nations  is  the  celebrated  Ordinance  of  Vattel  wrote  ,*  and  the  editor  has  at-
Marine  of  Louis  XIV.,  published  in  tempted  to  improve  this  edition,  by
1681,  and  which,  coupled  with  the  occasionally  referring  in  the  notes  to
eommentary  of  Valin,  Lord  Mansfield  the  reports  and  work  alluded  to.  The
always  treated  as  of  the  highest  au-  editor  has  also,  in  his  Treatise  on  Com-
thority.  (See  1  Marshall  on  Insurance,  mercial  Law,  and  in  a  Summary  of  the
Prelim.  Dis.  18.)  Law  of  Nations,  endeavoured  to  take
In  modem  times,  in  order  to  pre-  a  more  extended  view  of  some  of  those
vent  any  dispute  upon  the  existence  branches  of  the  law  of  nations,  princi-
or  application  of  the  general  law  of  pally  as  it  affects  foreign  commerce,
nations,  either  pending  peace,  or  at  or  and  of  the  decisions  and  works  subse-
after  the  subsequently  breaking  out  of  quent  to  the  publication  of  Vattel.
war  between  two  or  more  independent  If  the  perfect  general  rigKta  or  laxo  of  Violation
States,  it  has  become  the  practice  to  nations  be  violated,  then  it  appears  to  Qf  ^jaw  of
enter  into  express  treaties,  carefully  pro-  be  conceded,  that  such  violation  may  Xations,
Tiding  for  every  contingency,  and  be  the  actual  and  avowed  ground  of  a  when  a
especiaHy  modifying  and-  softening  the  Just  war ;  and  it  is  even  laid  down  that  ground  of
injurious  consequences  of  sudden  war  it  is  the  duty  of  every  nation  to  chas-  ^g^^
upon  the  commercial  and  other  inter-  tise  the  nation  guilty  of  the  aggression,
course  between  the  two  states,  and  (Vattel,  post,  Book  I.  chap,  xxiii.  J  283,
fometimes  even  wholly  changing  the  p.  126;  Book  II.  chap.  ii.  {  24,  p.  144;
eharacter  of  war  or  of  alienage,  and  even  J  65,  66,  67,  p.  160,  161.)
enabling  a  foreign  alien  enemy  during  Unhappily,  especially  in  modem
war  to  retain  his  interest  in  land  in  the  times,  we  have  found  that  the  law  of
opponent  country.  (See  an  illustrating  nations  has  sometimes  been  set  at
instance  in  Sutton  v.  Sutton,  X  Russ.  A  naught  by  overpowerful  states,  adher-
My.  Rep.  663.)  { Society,  Ac.  v.  New  Ha'  ing  (to  use  the  words  of  an  English
9en,  8  Wheat  R.  464. }  In  these  cases,  monarch)  rather  to  Common  Law  than
the  treaty  between  the  two  contract-  stopping  to  inquire  whether  the  law  of
ing  states  either  alters,  or  expressly  ef«-  nature  and  of  justice  had  not  become,
dares  the  law  of  nations,  and  binds  each,  and  been  declared  in  that  instance.
But  still  questions  upon  the  general  law  part  of  the  law  of  nations.  It  may
of  nations  will  frequently  arise,  and  it  therefore  be  asked,  of  what  utility  is
will  then  become  necessary  to  recur  la  the  law  of  nations,  since  it  is  of  such


IDEA  AND  GENERAL  PKHTCIPLES


nsLiMi- the  Rights  which  result  from  these  ohligations. For,  tk«
right  being  nothing  more  than  the  power  of  doing  what  ia


L  Ivi  j  morally  possible,  that  is  to  say,  what  is  proper  and  consist-
ent with  duty, — ^it  is  evident  that  right  is  deriyed  from  dttty^
or  passive  obligation, — the  obligation  we  lie  under  to  apt  in
such  or  such  manner.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  a  Na-
tion should  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  obligations  incumbent
on  her,  in  order  that  she  may  not  only  avoid  all  violation  of
her  dnty^  but  also  be  able  distinctly  to  ascertain  her  rightij  .
or  what  she  may  lawfully  require  from  other  nations.
1 4. In  Nations  being  composed  of  men  naturally  free  and  inde-

wiiAt  light  pendent,  and  who,  before  the  establishment  of  civil  societies,
•totes*  are  to  ^^^^  together  in  the  state  of  nature, — Nations^  or  sovereign
be  oonai-  States,  are  to  be  considered  as  so  many  free  persons  living
^or«<L together  in  the  state  of  nature.


imperfect  and  inefficient  obligation?
The  answer  is,  that  aU  nations,  al-
though (fit  a  lime  astounded  and  sur-
prised by  the  unexpected  aggression  of
an  oppressive  and  ambitious  conqueror,
wiU  yet  ulUmately  feel,  and  endeavour
to  give  effect  to,  the  true  Uw  of  na-
tions, lest,  by  suffering  its  continued
riolaUons,  they  may  individttally  be
sacrificed ;  and  consequently,  as  in  the
instance  alluded  to,  they  will  ulti-
mately coalesce  and  associate  in  one
common  cause,  to  humiliate  and  over-
come the  proud  invader  of  aU  just
rights  uid  principles.  It  is  therefore
of  the  highest  importance  to  coUect  aU
the  principles  and  rules,  which,  in
cases  of  doubt,  must  ever  be  consulted,
at  least  by  statesmen,  in  endeavouring
to  settle  differences  between  differing
states;  and  no  authority  stands  higher
in  this  respect  than  Vattel.

There  is  no  permanent  and  general
iniemational  eourtf  and  it  will  be  found,

•«ro/  court  ****^  ^°  general  the  sovereign,  or  go-
vernment of  each  state,  who  has  the
power  of  declaring  war  and  peace,  has
also,  as  an  incident,  sole  power  of  de-
ciding upon  questions  of  booty,  cap-
ture, prize,  and  hostile  seizure,  though
sometimes  that  power  is  delegated,  as
in  Great  Britain,  as  respects  maritime
seizures,  by  commission  to  the  judge
of  the  Admiralty  Court,  with  an  ap-
peal from  his  decisions  to  the  Privy
Council.  In  these  cases  no  other  mu-
nicipal court  has  cognizance  in  case  of
any.  hostile  seizure.  Elphineton  v.  Be-
dreechundf  Enapp's  Rep.  316  to  361 ;
and  Hill  v.  Reardon,  2  Russ.  Rep.  608,
and  further,  pott,  p.  392.  So  there  is
no  general  international  court  in  which

63


Jfoperma-
or  ge'


a  treaty  can  be  directly  enforced,  al-
though, collaterally,  its  meaning  may
be  discussed  in  a  municipal  court;
therefore,  no  bill  to  enforce  a  treaty
can  be  sustained  in  equity.  Nabob  of
Camatte  V.  Eatt  India  Compaifjf,  2  Yes.
jun.  56 ;  and  Hill  v.  Heardon,  2  Sim.
A  Stu.  437 ;  2  Russ.  Rep.  608.

Sometimes,  however,  especially  in
modem  times,  treatietf  confirmed  by
temporary  statutes  in  each  country,  nip-
point  a  temporary  international  oourt,
with  limited  powers,  to  decide  upon
certain  claims,  and  to  be  satisfied  out
of  an  appointed  public  fund.  Thus,
in  the  treaty  of  peace  between  Great
Britain  and  France,  and  by  the  59  G.  3,
c.  31,  certain  commissioners  were  ap-
pointed to  carry  into  effect  the  eon-
ventions  for  liquidating  the  claims  of
British  subjects  on  the  French  govern-
ment, with  an  appeal  to  the  Privy
Council.  In  these  cases,  the  appointed
jurisdiction  is  exclusive,  and  no  other
municipal  court  has  any  power  as  re-
gards the  adjustment  of  the  claims  be-
tween the  two  subjects  of  each  coun-
try ; — ^though,  as  between  private  indi-
viduals, if  any  claimant  stand  in  the
situation  of  an  agent  or  trustee,  then,
in  a  court  of  equity,  he  may  be  com-
pelled to  act  as  a  trustee  of  the  sum
awarded  to  him.  Hill  v.  Seardon,  Jae.
Rep.  84;  2  Russ.  Rep.  608  to  633»
over-ruling  the  Vice-Chancellor's  de->
cision  in  2  Sim.  A  Stu.  437.-'C.  ( O^
megyt  v.  Vaece,  1  Meters  S.  C.  Rep^  193,
decided  upon  the  Treaty  with  Spain,
which  ceded  Florida  to  the  United
States,  dated  May  2d,  1819.  See  also
Lettapiee  v.  Tngrahamf  5  Barr,  ^1,  and
the  cases  cited,  j


OF  THE  LAW  OP  NATIONS.  It!

It  11  a  settled  point  with  writers  on  the  natural  law,  that  prblmi-
all  mon  inherit  from  nature  a  perfect  liberty  and  independ-  ^^^^
encCy  of  which  they  cannot  be  deprived  without  their  own
consent.  In  a  State,  the  individual  citizens  do  not  enjoy
them /wZ?y  and  absolutely,  because  they  have  made  s,  partial
surrender  of  them  to  the  sovereign.  But  the  body  of  the
nation,  the  State,  remains  absolutely  free  and  independent
with  respect  to  all  other  men,  and  all  other  Nations,  as  long
as  it  has  not  voluntarily  submitted  to  them.

As  men  are  subject  to  the  laws  of  nature, — and  as  their  g  5. To
union  in  civil  society  cannot  have  exempted  them  from  the  ^^»*  ^^"
obligation  to  observe  those  laws,  since  by  that  union  they°*^.^°'*"
do  not  cease  to  be  men, — the  entire  nation,  whose  common
will  is  but  the  result  of  the  united  wills  of  the  citizens,  re-
mains subject,  to  the  laws  of  nature^  and  is  bound  to  respect
them  in  all  her  proceedings. And  since  right  arises  from  ob-
ligation, as  we  have  just  observed  (§  8),  the  nation  possesses
also  the  same  rights  which  nature  has  conferred  upon  men  in
order  to  enable  them  to  perform  their  duties.

We  must  therefore  apply  to  nations  the  rules  of  the  law  j  e. in
of  nature,  in  order  to  discover  what  their  obligations  are,  and  wii»t  the
what  their  rights :  consequently,  the  law  of  Nations  is  origin-  If '^  ®^  ^■j'
ally  no  other  than  the  law  of  Nature  applied  to  Nations.  ^  ^^^
But  as  the  application  of  a  rule  cannot  be  just  and  reason-  sista.
able  unless  it  be  made  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  subject,  we
are  not  to  imagine  that  the  law  of  nations  is  precisely  and  in
every  case  the  same  as  the  law  of  nature,  with  the  difference
only  of  the  subjects  to  which  it  is  applied,  so  as  to  allow  of
our  substituting  nations  for  individuals. A  state  or  civil  so-
ciety is  a  subject  very  different  from  an  individual  of  the  hu-
man race ;  from  which  circumstance,  pursuant  to  the  law  of
nature  itself,  there  result,  in  many  cases,  very  different  obliga-
tions and  rights :  since  the  same  general  rule,  applied  to  two
subjects,  cannot  produce  exactly  the  same  decisions,  when
the  subjects  are  different ;  and  a  particular  rule  which  is  per-  [  Ivii j
fectly  just  with  respect  to  one  subject,  is  not  applicable  to
another subject of a  quite different  nature. There are
many  cases,  therefore,  in  which  the law  of  Nature  does
not  decide  between  state  and  state  in  the  same  manner  as
it  would  between  man  and  man. We  must  therefore  know
how  to  accommodate  the  application  of  it  to  different  sub-
jects ;  and  it  is  the  art  of  thus  applying  it  with  a  precision
founded  on  right  reason,  that  renders  the  law  of  Nations  a
distinct  science.(2)


(2)  M.  de  Yattel  then  proeeeds to  heads — FirH^  the  natural  law  o^  na-

etate the different  heads of  interna^  tions;  and  tecondly,  the  pontive. The

tional  law,  which  has  been  yarionslj  former is  that  of  God and  our  con-

BoUdiyided bj other writers. The  scienoe, and  consequently  Immntable,

elearesl  diylsion  is  under  ttoo  principal  and  ought  to  be  the  basis  of  the  pod-


bm  IDEA  AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES


^«^^- We  call  that  the  Ifecessary  Law  of  Nations  which  consisti
in  the  application  of  the  law  of  nature  to  Nations. It  is


NARI38.


tf^ ^^°*"  iVg<?^«ary  because  nations  are  absolutely  bound  to  observe  it-
twL»ary  ^ ^^^  law  contains  the  precepts  prescribed  by  the  lato  of  nature

law  of  na- to  States^  on  whom  that  law  is  not  less  obligatory  than  on  in-

Hods.

tive  laws  of  natione.  The  positive  is  forming  creatures  susceptible  of  bap-
threefold;  Firatf  the  tmivertal  volun-  piness.  It  is  then  his  wish  that  his
tary  lato  or  uniform  practice  of  nations  creatures  should  be  as  happy  as  is  con-
in  general ;  $eeondly,  the  eu»tomary  sistent  with  their  nature  :  consequentij,
law ;  and  thirdly ,  the  conventional  law  it  is  his  will  that  thej  should,  in  tbeir
or  treatiet.  (See  1  Chitty's  Commer-  whole  conduct,  follow  the  rules  which
oial  Law,  25  to  47.) — 0.  that  same  nature  lays  down  for  them.

The  following  note  of  a  former  edi-  as  the  most  certain  road  to  happinesji.

tor  is  deservedly  retained.  Thus  the  will  of  the  Creator  perfectly

The  study  of  the  science  of  the  law  coincides  with  the  simple  indications
of  nations  presupposes  an  acquaint-  of  nature ;  and  those*  two  sources  pro-
anoe  with  the  ordinary  law  of  nature,  dncing  the  same  law,  unite  in  forming
of  which  human  individuals  are  the  the  same  obligation.  The  whole  re-
objects.  Nevertheless,  for  the  sake  of  verts  to  the  first  great  end  of  man,
those  who  have  not  systematically  which  is  happiness.  It  was  to  con-
studied  Uiat  law,  it  will  not  be  amiss  duct  him  to  that  great  end  that  the
to  give  in  this  place  a  general  idea  of  laws  bf  nature  were  ordained :  it  is  from
it.  The  natural  law  is  the  •dence  o/  the  desire  of  happiness  that  his  obliga-
ihe  law»  of  nature,  of  those  laws  which  tion  to  observe  those  laws  arises,
nature  imposes  on  mankind,  or  to  There  is^  therefore,  no  man — what-
which  they  ure  subject  by  ihe  very  cir-  ever  may  be  his  ideas  respecting  tho
cumstance  of  their  being  men  ]  a  sci-  origin  of  the  universe — even  if  he  hart
enoe,  whose  first  principle  is  this  axiom  Uie  misfortune  to  be  an  atheist — who
of  incontestable  truth — "  The  groat  is  not  bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  na-
end  of  every  being  endowed  with  in-  ture.  They  are  necessary  to  the  gene-
tellect  and  sentiment,  is  happiness."  ral  happiness  of  mankind;  and  wbo-
It  is  by  the  desire  alone  of  that  happi-  over  should  reject  them,  whoever  should
ness,  that  we  can  bind  a  creature  pos-  openly  despise  them,  would  by  such
sessed  of  the  faculty  of  thought,  and  conduct  alone  declare  himself  an  ene-
form  the  ties  of  that  obligation  which  my  to  the  human  race,  and  deserve  to
shall  make  him  submit  to  any  rule,  be  treated  as  such.  Now,  one  of  the
Now,  by  studying  the  nature  of  things,  first  truths  which  the  study  of  man  re-
and  that  of  man  in  partiouUr,  we  may  veals  to  us,  and  which  is  a  necessary
thcnoe  de4uoe  the  rules  which  man  consequence  of  his  nature,  is,  that  in
must  follow  in  order  to  attain  his  great  a  state  of  lonely  separation  fn>m  the
end, — ^to  obtain  the  most  perfect  hap-  rest  of  his  species,  he  cannot  attain
piness  of  which  he  is  susceptible.  We  his  great  end — ^happiness :  and  the
call  those  rules  the  natund  laws,  or  reason  is,  that  he  was  intended  to  live
the  laws  of  natore.  They  are  certain,  in  society  with  his  fellow-creatures,
they  are  sacred,  and  obligatory  on  Nature,  herself,  therefore,  has  esta-
every  man  possessed  of  reason,  inde-  blished  that  society,  whose  great  end
pendently  of  every  other  considera-  is  the  common  advantage  of  all  its
tion  than  that  of  his  nature,  and  even  members;  and  the  means  of  attaining
though  we  should  suppose  him  totally  that  end  constitute  the  rules  that  each
ignorant  of  tho  existence  of  a  God.  individual  is  bound  to  observe  in  his
But  the  sublime  consideration  of  an  whole  conduct.  Such  are  the  nataral
eternal,  necessary,  infinite  Being,  the  laws  of  human  society.  Having  thus
author  of  the  universe,  adds  the  most  given  a  general  idea  of  them,  which  is
lively  energy  to  the  law  of  nature,  and  sufficient  for  any  intelligent  reader,
earries  it  to  the  highest  degree  of  per-  and  is  developed  at  large  in  several
fection.  That  necessary  Being  ne-  valuable  works,  let  us  return  to  the  par-
cessarily  unites  in  himself  all  perfeo-  ticular  object  of  this  treatise. — Note
tion :  he  is,  therefore,  superlatively  ed.  A.  D.  1797.
goody  and  displays his goodness by


or  THE LAW  OF  NATIONS.  Iviil


dividuals,  since  states  are  composed  of  men,  their  resolutions  piuBLnn-
are  taken  by  men,  and  the  law  of  nature  is  binding  on  all  -  ^^^^^'
men,  under  whatever  relation  they  act.  This  is  the  law
Trhich  Grotius,  and  those  who  follow  him,  call  the  Internal
law  of  Nations,  on  account  of  its  being  obligatory  on  nations
in  point  of  cons(nen€e.{Sy  Several  writers  term  it  the  H'o^
tural  law  of  Nations.

Since  therefore  the  necessary  law  of  nations  consists  in  the  j  s. It  la
application  of  the  law  of  nature  to  states, — which  law  is  im-  immuubie.
mutable,  as  being  founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  and  par-
ticularly on  the  nature  of  man, — it  follows  that  the  Necessary
law  of  nations  is  immutable.

Whence,  as  this  law  is  immutable,  and  the  obligations  that  j  9.  Nationf
arise  from  it  necessary  and  indispensable,  nations  can  neither  can  make
make  any  changes  in  it  by  their  conventions,  dispense  with  it  J*^/^**"*!®
in  their  own  conduct,  nor  reciprocally  release  each  other  from  ^^^^^8^
the  observance  of  it.  with  the  oU

This  is  the  principle  by  which  we  may  distinguish  Zat^wZiigationa
conventions  or  treaties  from  those  that  are  not  lawful,  and  *"8ixig  from
innocent  and  rational  customs  from  those  that  are  unjust  or
censurable.

There  are  things,  just  in  themselves^  and  allowed  by  the
necessary  law  of  nations,  on  which  states  may  mutually  agree
with  each  other,  and  which  they  may  consecrate  and  enforce
by  their  manners  and  customs.  There  are  others  of  an  in-  [  lix  ]
different  nature,  respecting  which,  it  rests  at  the  option  of
nations  to  make  in  their  treaties  whatever  agreements  they
please,  or  to  introduce  whatever  custom  or  practice  they
think  proper.  But  every  treaty,  every  custom,  which  con-
travenes the  injunctions  or  prohibitions  of  the  Necessary  law
of  nations  is  unlawful.  It  will  appear,  however,  in  the  sequel,
that  it  is  only  by  the  Internal  law,  by  the  law  of  Conscience,
such  conventions  or  treaties  are  always  condemned  as  unlaw-
ful, and  that,  for  reasons  which  shall  be  given  in  their  pro-
{>er  place,  they  are  nevertheless  often  valid  by  the  external
aw.  Nations  being  free  and  independent,  though  the  con-
duct of  one  of  them  be  illegal  and  condemnable  oy  the  laws
of  conscience,  the  others  are  bound  to  acquiesce  in  it,  when
it  does  not  infringe  upon  their  perfect  rights.  The  liberty
of  that  nation  would  not  remain  entire,  if  the  others  were  to
arrogate  to  themselves  the  right  of  inspecting  and  regulating
her  actions ;  an  assumption  on  their  part,  that  would  be  con-
trary to  the  law  of  nature,  which  declares  every  nation  free
and  independent  of  all  the  others.

Man  is  so  formed  by  nature,  that  he  cannot  supply  all  his  §  10.  8u>
own  wants,  but  necessarily  stands  in  need  of  the  intercourse  ^^^^7  wta-
and  assistance  of  his  fellow-creatures,  whether  for  his  imme-  ^^"^®^  ^^

'  nature

between  all


(8) See this position iUoatratedy mereial  Law,  28,  and  n.  {4),  pawt,  Iz.  mankind,
Maokintoah, DIb.  7;  1  Chittj't  Com- —a

M


bx  IDEA  AND  GENERAL  P&INaPLES


FBELiin- diate  preservation,  or  for  the  sake  of  perfectinff  his  nature,

MARIES  ^

'—  and  enjoying  such  a  life  as  is  suitable  to  a  rational  being.

This  is  sufficiently  proved  by  experience.  We  have  in-
stances of  persons,  who,  having  grown  up  to  manhood  among
the  bears  of  the  forest,  enjoyed  not  the  use  of  speech  or  of
reason,  but  were,  like  the  brute  beasts,  possessed  only  of  sen*
sitive  faculties.  We  see  moreover  that  nature  has  refused  to
bestow  on  men  the  same  strength  and  natural  weapons  of  de-
fence with  which  she  has  furnished  other  animals — having,  iu
lieu  of  those  advantages,  endowed  mankind  with  the  faculties
of  speech  and  reason,  or  at  least  a  capability  of  acquiring
them  by  an  intercourse  with  their  fellow-creatures.  Speech
enables  them  to  communicate  with  each  other,  to  give  each
other  mutual  assistance,  to  perfect  their  reason  and  know-
ledge ;  and  having  thus  become  intelligent,  they  find  a  thou-
sand methods  of  preserving  themselves,  and  supplying  their
wants.  Each  individual,  moreover,  is  intimately  conscious
that  he  can  neither  live  happily  nor  improve  his  nature  with-
out the  intercourse  and  assistance  of  others.  Since,  there-
fore, nature  has  thus  formed mankind,  it  is  a  convincing

[  Ix  ] proof  of  her  intention  that  they  should  communicate  with,
and  mutually  aid  and  assist  each  other.

Hence  is  deduced  the  establishment  of  natural  society  among
men.  The  general  law  of  that  society  w,  that  each  indivi-
dual should  do  for  the  others  every  thing  which  their  necessities
require^  and  which  he  can  perform  without  neglecting  the  duty
that  he  owes  to  himself:  (4)  a  law  which  all  men  must  observe
in  order  to  live  in  a  manner  consonant  to  their  nature,  and
conformable  to  the  views  of  their  common  Creator, — a  law
which  our  own  safety,  our  happiness,  our  dearest  interests,
ought  to  render  sacred  to  every  one  of  us.  Such  is  the  gene-
ral obligation  that  binds  us  to  the  observance  of  our  duties:
let  us  fulfil  them  with  care,  if  we  would  wisely  endeavour  to
promote  our  own  advantage.(5)

(4)  Ante,  \y\\,  n.  (2),  poH,  Ix.  n.  (4).  whether  the  precise  aets  required  of
(6)  See  Uie  same  position,  pawt,  him  be  or  be  not  such  as  their  own
{  13,  and  pott,  chap.  ii.  {  2  and  88.  municipal  law  will  eo force ;  jufit  so  a
The  natural,  or  primary  law,  is  that  ttate,  in  its  relations  with  other  states,
of  God  and  onr  oonsoience,  the  law  is  bound  to  conduct  herself  in  the
which  enjoins  us  to  do  good  to  our  spirit  of  jueUoe,  benerolencey  and  good
neighbour,  whether  in  literal  strictness  faith,  even  though  there  be  no  podtivo
he  may  have  a  perfect  right  to  demand  rules  of  international  law,  by  the  let-
such  treatment  from  us  or  not  This  tor  of  which  she  may  be  actually  tied
is  a  law  that  oxight  to  be  as  strong  in  down.  The  same  rules  of  morality
obligation  as  the  most  distinct  and  which  hold  together  men  in  families,
positive  rule,  though  it  may  not  al-  and  which  form  families  into  a  oom-
ways  be  capable  of  the  same  precise  monwealth,  also  link  together  several
definition,  nor  consequently  may  al-  commonwealths  as  members  of  the
low  the  same  remedies  to  enforce  its  ob-  great  society  of  mankind.  Common-
servance.  As  an  individual  is  bound  wealths,  as  well  as  private  men,  are
by  the  law  of  nature  to  deal  honour-  liable  to  injury,  and  capable  of  benefit
•biy  and  truly  with  other  individuals,  from  each  other;  it  is  therefore  th«:ur


OF  THB  LAW  OF  KATlONb.  Is

It  is  easy  to  conceive  what  exalted  felicity  the  world  would  frblihi.
enjoy,  were  all  men  willing  to  observe  the  rule  that  we  have  "^^""'
just  laid^  down.  On  the  contrary,  if  each  man  wholly  and
immediately  directsJ  all  his  thoughts  to  his  own  interest^  if  he
does  nothing  for  the  sake  of  other  men,  the  whole  human  race
together  will  be  immersed  in  the  deepest  wretchedness.  Let
us  therefore  endeavour  to  promote  the  general  happiness  of
mankind :  all  mankind,  in  return,  will  endeavour  to  promote
ours,  and  thus  we  shall  establish  our  felicity  on  the  most  solid
foundations.

The  universal  society  of  the  human  race  being  an  institu-?^^-  ^*
tion  of  nature  herself,  .that  is.  to  say,  a  necessary  consequence  ^^^
of  the  nature  of  man, — all  men,  in  whatever  stations  they
are  placed,  are  bound  to  cultivate  it^  and  to  discharge  its
duties.  They  cannot  liberate  themselves  from  the  obligation
by  any  convention,  by  any  private  association.  When,  there-
fore, they  unite  in  civil  society  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a
separate  state  or  nation,  they  may  indeed  enter  into  particu-
lar engagements  towards  those  with  whom  they  associate
themselves ;  but  they  remain  still  bound  to  the  performance
of  their  duties  towards  the  rest  of  mankind.  All  the  differ-
ence consists  in  this,  that  having  agreed  to  act  in  common,
and  having  resigned  their  rights  and  submitted  their  will  to
the  body  of  the  society,  in  every  thing  that  concerns  their
common  welfare,  it  thenceforward  belongs  to  that  body,  that
state,  and  its  rulers,  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  humanity  towards  [  1^  ]
strangers,  in  every  thing  that  no  longer  'depends  on  the
liberty  of  individuals ;  and  it  is  the  state  more  particularly
that  is  to  perform  those  duties  towards  other  states.  We  have
already  seen,  (§  5),  that  men  united  in  society  remain  subject
to  the  obligations  imposed  upon  them  by  human  nature.
That  society,  considered  as  a  moral  person,  since  possessed
of  an  understanding,  volition,  and  strength  peculiar  to  itself,
is  therefore  obliged  to  live  on  the  same  terms  with  other  sodc'
ties  or  states,  as  individual  man  was  obliged,  before  those
egtcAlishments,  to  live  with  other  men,  that  is  to  say,  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  the  natural  society  established  among  the
human  race,,  with  the  difference  only  of  such  exceptions  as
may  arise  from  the  different  nature  of  the  subjects.


duty  to  rereronoe,  to  practise,  and  to  tj's Commercial Law, 28; Maekin-

onforoe,  tiiose  rules of  jastice  which  tosh, Disc. 7; Peake's  Rep. 116; 2

control and restrain injury, which  Hen.  Bla.  259 ;  and  see  onto,  ^  7 ;  and

regulate  and  augment  benefit, which  see  extract  from  Mr.  Pitt's  celebrated

preserve  civilized  states  in  a  tolerable  speech  on  concluding  the commercial

condition  of  security  from  wrong,  and  treaty between Great Britain and

wliich, if they could be generally  France  in  a.  d.  1786,  and  in  which  he

tteyed,  would establish, and  perma-  powerfully  refuted  the  doctrine  of  no-

nently  maintain,  the  well-being  of  the  tional  and  hereditary  antipathy  between

unirersai  commonwealth  of  the  human  England  and  France,  postf  book  IL  chap.

,  ace. (See ObseryationB  in 1 Chit-  ii.  g  21,  p.  144. — C.

8  67


Ixi  IDEA  AND  GENERAL  PBINCIPLE8

pupLwi- Since  the  object  of  the  natural  society  established  between
KARiEs. ^Y[  mankind  is — that  they  should  lend  each  other  mutual


object  ^^*  sistance,  in  order  to  attain  perfection  themselves,  and  to
thif  3oci-  render  their  condition  as  perfect  as  possible, — ^and  since  na-
ety  >(  n»-  ti<5n8,  Considered  as  so  many  free  persons  living  together  in
tioca.  a  state  of  nature,  are  bound  to  cultivate  human  society  with

each  other, — the  object  of  the  great  society  established  by
nature  between  all  nations  is  also  the  interchange  of  mutual
assistance  for  their  own  improvement,  and  that  of  their  con-
dition.
i  13. First' The  first  general  law  that  we  discover  in  the  very  obje<;t
general  ob-  of  the  society  of  nations,  is  that  each  individual  nation i»
bonefiT^***  JoMwd  to  Contribute  every  thing  in  her  power  to  the  happiness
nations,  but  ^^^  perfection  of  all  the  others.*

not  to  pre- But  the  duties  that  we  owe  to  ourselves  being  unquestion-
Judioe  itself,  ably  paramount  to  those  we  owe  to  others, — a  nation  owes
herself  in  the  first  instance,  and  in  preference  to  all  other
nations,  to  do  every  thing  she  can  to  promote  her  own  hap*
2  14.  Ex- piiiess  and  perfection, (I  say,  every  thing  she  can^  not  only
pianation in  a  physical  but  in  a  moral  sense, — ^that  is,  every  thing
of  this  ob- that  she  can  do  lawfully ^  and  consistently  with  justice  and
serration. Jionour.) When,  therefore,  she  cannot  contribute  to  the  wel-
fare of  another  nation  without  doing  an  essential  injury  to
[  Ixii  ]  herself,  her  obligation  ceases  on  that  particular  occasion,  and
she  is  considered  as  lying  under  a  disability  to  perform  the
office  in  question.  (6)  ^^

1 16. The Nations  being  free  and  independent  of  each  other,  in  the]
leoond  ge- same  manner  as  men  are  naturally  frea  and  independent,  the  I
?*™^  ^TK ^^cond  general  law  of  their  society  is,  that  each  nation  should  \
^  and\n' ^^  ^fi  *^  ^^^  peaceable  enjoyment  of  that  liberty  which  she  in^  I
dependence  herits  from  nature. The  natural  society  of  nations  cannot  \
of  nations, subsist,  uuless  the  natural  rights  of  each  be  duly  respected. \
No  nation  is  willing  to  renounce  her  liberty ;  she  will  rather  J
break  off  all  commerce  with  those  states  that  should  attcmpt<'''^
to  infringe  upon  it.
{ i«.  Effect As  a  consequence  of  that  liberty  and  independence,  it  ex-
of  that  liber-  clusivcly  belongs  to  each  nation  to  form  her  own  judgment  of
•y*  what  her  conscience  prescribes  to  her, — of  what  she  can  or

cannot  do,^-of  what  it  is  proper  or  improper  for  her  to  do :  and


*  Xenophon  points  out -the  tme  rea-  n.  (l),  Iz.  n.  (5) ;  Book  ii.  ohap.  ii.  J  21,

son  of  this  first  of  aU  duties,  and  esta-  p.  144,  potU — 0.

blishes  its  necessity,  in  the  following (6)  Puffendorf,  b.  iii.  o.  3,  s.  6,  p.  29,

words: — ''If  we  see  a  man  who  is  nni-  writes  clearly  and decidedly on  this

formly  eager  to  pnrsne  his  own pri-  important  subject; — ^he  observes  '*Th6

rate  advantage,  without  regard  to  the  law  of  humanity  does  not  seem  to  oblige

rules  of  honour  or  the  duties  of  fKend-  ns to grant passage to any otlier

ship,  why should we in any  emer-  goods,  except  such as are absolutely

gency  think of sparing  him?" Note  necessary for tiie support of thrir

edit.  A,  D.  1797. See  modem  authori-  life  to  whom  they  are  thus  conYoye<L^

ties  in  support  of  that  position,  ante,  Xr.  — C.
68


07  THE  LAW OF  NATIONS.  Ixu

of  course  it  rests  solely  with  her  to  examine  and  determine ^^^^w-

whether  she  can  perform  any  office  for  another  nation  without

neglecting  the  duty  which  she  owes  to  herself  In  all  cases,
therefore,  in  which  a  nation  has  the  right  of  judging  what
her  duty  requires,  no  other  nation  can  compel  her  to  act  in
such  or  such  particular  manner :  for  any  attempt  at  such
compulsion  would  be  an  infringement  on  the  liberty  of  nations*
We  have  no  right  to  use  constraint  against  a  free  person,  ex-
cept in  those  cas^s  where  such  person  is  bound  to  perform
some  particular  thing  for  us,  and  for  some  particular  retison
which  does  not  depend  on  his  judgment, — ^in  those  cases,  in
short,  where  we  have  a  perfect  right  against  him.

In  order  perfectly  to  understand  this,  it  is  necessary  to  ob-  ?  17.  Dis-
serve, that  the  obligation,  and  the  right  which  corresponds  *»»»c*io'j»  ^«-
to  or  is  derived  from  it,  are  distinguished  into  external  aJ^d^J®^™^^^
internal. The  obligation  is  internal,  as  it  binds  the  con- ternai,  per-
seience,  and  is  deduced  from  the  rules  of  our  duty :  it  is  ex-  feet  and  im.
temal,  as  it  is  considered  relatively  to  other  men,  and  pro-  P«rf^«*  ^^i^-
duces  some  right  between  them. The  internal  obligation  is  ^ghti.'  *"
always  the  same  in  its  nature,  though  it  varies  in  degree ;  but
the  external  obligation  is  divided  into  perfect  and  imperfect ;
and  the  right  that  results  from  it  is  also  perfect  or  imperfect.
The  perfect  right  is  that  which  is  accompanied  by  the  right
of  compelling  those  who  refuse  to  fulfil  the  correspondent  ob-
ligation ;  the  imperfect  right  is  unaccompanied  by  that  right
of  compulsion. The  perfect  obligation  is  that  which  gives  to  [  Ixiii  ]
the  opposite  party  the  right  of  compulsion;  the  imperfect
gives  him  only  a  right  to  ask.

It  is  now  easy  to  conceive  why  the  right  is  always  imper-
fect, when  the  correspondent  obligation  depends  on  the  judg-
ment of  the  party  in  whose  breast  it  exists ;  for  if,  in  such  a
ease,  we  had  a  right  to  compel  him,  he  would  no  longer  enjoy
the  freedom  of  determination  respecting  the  conduct  he  is  to
pursue  in  order  to  obey  the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience.
Our  obligation  is  always  imperfect  with  respect  to  other
people,  while  we  possess  the  liberty  of  judging  how  we  are
to  act :  and  we  retain  that  liberty  on  all  occasions  where  we
ought  to  be  free.

Since  men  are  naturally  ^qual,  and  a  perfect  equality  pre-  §  is.  Equal*
vails  in  their  rights  and  obligations,  as  equally  proceeding  J^  ®^  "*"
from  nature — ^Nations  composed  of  men,  and  considered  as
80  many  free  persons  living  together  in  a  state  of  nature,  are
naturally  equal,  and  inherit  from  nature  the  same  obligations
and  rights.  Power  or  weaknesff  dnpH  pnfc  in  t.^jfi  respect  pro-
duce^jxy  diflfej^ence.  A  dwarf  is  as  much  a  man  as  a  giant ;
a'  small  republicTS^no  less  a  sovereign  state  than  the  most
powerful  kingdom.

By  a  necessary  consequence  of  that  equality,  whatever  is  1 1^-  EARnji
lawful  for  one  nation  is  equally  lawful  for  any  other;  and®^*^**^
whatever  is  unjustifiable  in  the  one  is  equally  so  in  the  other.

69


txia  IDEA  ANT) GENERAL  PBINCIPIES


pRBLiMi- A  nation  then  is  mistress  of  her  own  actions  so  long  aa
they  do  not  affect  the  proper  and  perfect  rights  of  '^ny  other


MARIRS.


§  20. Each  nation — so  long  as  she  is  only  internally  bound,  and  does  not


Tiabon  15


luistresa  of  ^^®  under  any  external  and  perfect  obligation. If  she  makes
her  own  ao-  ^^  ^  ^s©  of  ^^^  liberty,  sho  is  guilty  of  a  breach  of  duty ;
tions  when but  Other  nations  are  bound  to  acquiesce  in  her  conduct,
they  do  not  gincc  they  have  no  right  to  dictate  to  her.
uerfe*ct  Since  nations  are  free^  independent^  and  equal — ^and  since

rights  of ^*ch  possesses  the  right  of  judging^  according  to  the  dictates
others. of  her  conscience,  what  conduct  she  is  to  pursue  in  order  to
fulfil  her  duties ;  the  effect  of  the  whole  is,  to  produce,  at
Ltion^f'^^®*®* externally and in the eyes of  mankind, a perfect
the  voiun- equality  of  rights  between  nations,  in  the  administration  of
tary  law  of  their  affairs  and  the  pursuit  of  their  pretensions,  without  re-
Dadona. gard  to  the  intrinsic  justice  of  their  conduct,  of  which  others
have  no  right  to  form  a  definitive  judgment ;  so  that  what-
ever may  be  done  by  any  one  nation  may  be  done  by  any
[  Ixiv  ]  other ;  and  they  ought,  in  human  society,  to  be  considered
as  possessing  equal  rights.

Each  nation  in  fact  maintains  that  she  has  justice  on  her
side  in  every  dispute  that  happens  to  arise ;  and  it  does  not
belong  to  either  of  the  parties  interested,  or  to  other  nations,
to  pronounce  a  judgment  on  the  contested  question.  The
party  who  is  in  the  wrong  is  guilty  of  a  crime  agamst  her
own  conscience  ;  but  as  there  exists  a  possibility  that  she  may
perhaps  have  justice  on  her  side,  we  cannot  accuse  her  of
violating  the  laws  of  society.

It  is  therefore  necessary,  on  many  occasions,  that  nations
should  suffer  certain  things  to  be  done,  though  in  their  own
nature  unjust  and  condemnable ;  because  they  cannot  oppose
them  by  open  force,  without  violating  the  liberty  of  some
particular  state,  and  destroying  the  foundations  of  their
natural  society.  And  since  they  are  bound  to  cultivate  that
society,  it  is  of  course  presumed  that  all  nations  have  con-
sented to  the  principle  we  have  just  established.  The  rules
that  are  deduced  from  it  constitute  what  Monsieur  Wolf  calls
"^Ac  voluntary  law  of  nations  ;*^  and  there  is  no  reason  why
we  should  not  use  the  same  term,  although  we  thought  it
necessary  to  deviate  from  that  great  man  in  our  manner  of
establishing  the  foundation  of  that  law.  (7)


(7)  The  natural  primary  or  internal  voluntary  latOf  or  those  mles  which  are

law  of  nations  which  is  thus  binding  considered  to  have  become  law  by  the

in  conscience,  and  immutable,  it  most  uniform  practice  of  nations  in  ffenertUj

be  admitted,  is  mere  theory,  ontil  it  has  and  by  the  manifest  utility  of  the  mlet

been  assented  to  by  a  state  as  binding  themselves ; — teeondly, the cuaiomary

on  her:  but  besides  that  law  of  con-  law,  or  that  which,  from  motires of

science,  which,  until  so  assented  to,  is  convenience,  has  by  tacit  but impli^

imperfecty  there  is  what  is  termed  the  agreement  prevailed,  not  generally  in-

jx>n<toe  or  «eeon(£ary  law  of  nations,  and  deed  among all nations,  nor  with M

which  is  threefold;  Jiretf  the  univereal  paramount  utility  aa  to  become  a  |m^v.

«0


OF  THB  LAW  OF  STATIONS.  Ld?


The  laws  of  natural  society  are  of  such  importance  to  the ™""?"
Bafety  of  all  Ptates,  that,  if  the  custom  once  prevailed  of


NARIES.


trampling  them  under  foot,  no  nation  could  flatter  herself  ^^^*  .^**^'
with  the  hope  of  preserving  her  national  existence,  and  en-  ^^inat^^e
joying domestic tranquillity,  however attentive  to  pursue  ini^acton
every  measure  dictated  by  the  most  consummate  prudence,  o^  **»«  i»^
justice,  and  moderation.* Now  all  men  and  all  states  have  °^  °**^®°*'
a  perfect  right  to  those  things  that  are  necessary  for  their
preservation,  since  that  right  corresponds  to  an  indispensa- Rigbt  of  d«*
ble  obligation. All  nations  have  therefore  a  right  to  resort  «^*"»K  ^»*'-
to  forcible  means  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  any  one  par-
ticular nation  who  openly  violates  the  laws  of  the  society
which  Nature  has  established  between  them,  or  who  directly
attacks  the  welfare  and  safety  of  that  society.

But  care  must  be  taken  n6t  to  extend  that  right  to  the ;  23. M6«>
prejudice  of  the  liberty  of  nations. They  are  all  free  and  **»"  ^^  *^»»
independent,  but  bound  to  observe  the  laws  of  that  society '^^^^^
which  Nature has established  between them;  and  so  far
bound,  that,  when  any  of  them  violates  those  laws,  the  others
have  a  right  to  repress  her. The  conduct  of  each  nation,  [  Izv  ]
therefore,  is  no  further  subject  to  the  control  of  the  others,
than  as  the  interests  of  natural  society  are  concerned. The
general  and  common  right  of  nations  over  the  conduct  of  any
sovereign  state  is  only  commensurate  to  the  object  of  that
society  which  exists  between  them.

tion of univenal voluntary  law,  but  bear  yon  out in a fnrUier  progress;

enougb  to  have  acquired  a  pre*eripHv€  tbus,  for instance,  on mere general

obligation among certain states, so  principles,  it  is  lawful  to  destroy  your

■itnated  as  to  be  mutually  benefited  by  enemy,  and mere genend principles

it»  as the customary  law proyailing  make no great difterenoe  as to  the

among  different  nations  in  the  whale  manner  by  which  this  is  to  be  effected ;

fishery,  and  illustrated  by  the  decision  but  the  eonrentional  lai^  of  mankind,

in  Fenningt  y.  Lord  GrenvtlU,  1  Taunt  which  is  eyidenocd in  their  practice,

Bep.  241,  248,  upon  the  division  of  the  does make  a distinction,  and  allows

profits  arising  from  a  whale  when  killed  some  and  prohibits  other  modes  of  de-

by the  crews  of  several boats; and  struction; and  a  belligerent  is  bound

thirdltff  the conventional  law, or  that  to confine himself to those modes

which  is  agreed  between  particular  states  which  the  common  practice  of  mankind

by  exprcee  treaties,  a  law  binding  only  has  employed,  and  to  relinquish  "  those

ipon the parties  among  whom such  which the same practice has not

treaties  are  in  force. See 1  Chitty's  brought  within  ihe  ordinary  exercise

Commercial  Law,  28,  29,  and  see  pott,  of  war,  however  sanctioned  by  its  prin-

2  27,  p.  66.  ciples  and  purposes :"  so  it  has  ever

In  the  case  of  the  ship,  Flad  Oycn,  been  ihe  practice  of  nations  to  bring

1  Rob.  Rep.  115,  Sir  William  Scott  ob-  vessels  captured  by  them  into  their  own

served, "  A  great  part  of  the  law  of  ports,  and  to  condemn  them  as  prize  In

nationa  stands  on  the  usage  and  prac-  their  oton  Admiralty  Courts ;  and  there-

tiee  of  nation*,  and  on  no  other  founda-  fore  a  sentence  of  condemnation  in  the

Hon :  it  is  introduced,  indeed,  by  gene-  neutr<U  country  would  be  illegal  and

ral  principles,  but  it  travels  with  those  void. Ibid, — G.

general  principles  only  to  a  certain  ex-  *  Btenim  si hsso pertubare  omnia

tent; and  if it  stops  there,  you  are  et permiaoere  volumna,  totam  vitam,

.not  at  liberty  to  go  farther  and  to  say,  periculo«am, insidiosam, infestamqua

that  man  general  speculations  would  reddemua. Ciceroin  Verr.  IL  15.

F  ii


aXY  idea  and 6EKEBAL FRmCIPLBS

pRBLixi. The  several  engagementB  into  which  nations  may  enter
wABiBs^^  produce  a  new  kind  of  law  of  nations,  called  Oonventionaly
1 24. Con-  Qj.  QJ^  Treaties, As  it  is  evident  that  a  treaty  binds  none
lotTof  na. ^^*  ^^®  contracting  parties,  the  conventional  law  of  nations
tiona,  or  law  is  ^ot  a  Universal  but  a  particular  law. All  that  can  be  done
of  treaties, on  this  Subject,  in  a  treatise  on  the  Law  of  Nations^  is  to  lay
down  those  general  rules  which  nations  are  bound  to  obser^^e
with  respect  to  their  treaties. A  minute  detail  of  the  various
agreements made between particular nations,  and  of  the
rights  and  obligations  thence  resulting,  is  matter  of  fact,  and
belongs  to  the  province  of  history.
{  25.  Cub- Certain  maxims  and  customs^  consecrated  by  long  use,  and
tomaryiaw  observed  by  nations  in  their  mutual  intercourse  with  each
other  as  a  Kind  of  law,  form  the  Custx>mary  Law  of  Nations^
or  the  Custom  of  Nations,  (8) This  law  is  founded  on  a  tacit
consent,  or,  if  you  please,  on  a  tacit  convention  of  the  nations,
that  observe  it  towards  each  other. Whence  it  appears  that
it  is  not  obligatory  except  on  those  nations  who  have  adopted
it,  and  that  it  is  not  universal,  any  more  than  the  conven-
tional law. The  same  remark,  therefore,  is  equally  applica-
ble to  this  customary  law,  viz.  that  a  minute  detail  of  its  par
ticulars  does  not  belong  to  a  systematic  treatise  on  the  law
of  nations,  but  that  we  must  content  ourselves  with  giving  a
general  theory  of  it ;  that  is  to  say,  the  rules  which  are  to
be  observed  in  it,  as  well  with  a  view  to  its  eflFects,  as  to  its
substance:  and  with  respect  to  the  latter,  those  rules  will
serve  to  distinguish  lawful  and  innocent  customs  from  those
that  are  unjust  and  unlawful.
<  26.  Gene- When  a  custom  or  usage  is  generally  established,  either
rsi  laie  re-  |)etween  all  the  civilized  nations  in  the  world,  or  only  between
Sat  law. those  of  a  certain  continent,  as  of  Europe,  for  example,  or
between  those  who  have  a  more  frequent  intercourse  with
^ach  other ;  if  that  custom  is  in  its  own  nature  indifferent,
f  Ixvi  1  \nd  much  more,  if  it  be  useful  and  reasonable,  it  becomes  ob-
ligatory on  all  the  nations  in  question,  who  are  considered
as  having  given  their  consent  to  it,'  and  are  bound  to  observe
it  towards  each  other,  as  long  as  they  have  not  expressly  de-
clared their  resolution  of  not  observing  it  in  future.  (9) But
if  that  custom  contains  any  thing  unjust  or  unlawful,  it  ia
not  obligatory ;  on  the  contrary,  every  nation  is  bound  to  re-
linquish it,  since  nothing  can oblige or  authorize her  to
violate  the  law  of  nature.

(8)  From  the authorities cited in  (9)  As  to  this  position,  see  further,

Btneat  v.  Pipofty  Knapp's Rep.  67>  it  Marten's  lu  N. 356,  and Fenui^m  t.

seems, that  most  nations  agree,  that  Lord  OrtnviHe,  1  Taunton's  Rep. 24Si.

twenty  years'  uninterrupted  usage  (tor  There  must  be  a  reasonable  notification,

twenty  tfeart  is  evidence  as  well  of  pw6-  in  point  of  time,  of  the  intention  not  to

lie  and  general  euitoma  or  practices  as  be  bound  by  tiie  customary  law. fbidm

of  private  rights)  \A  sufficient  to  sustain  and  1  Ghitty's  Criminal  Law  29,  35,  92.

the  same. — C.  — C
62


OF  THB  LAW  OF  NATIONS.  Ixvi

These  three  kinds  of  law  of  nations,  the  Voluntary^  the mtuxt-
Conventional^  and the  Cvstomary^  together constitute the *^*""-


Positive  Law  of  Nation9.{\0) For  they  all  proceed  from?. 27. Potu
the  will  of  Nations ;  the  Voluntary  from  their  presumrrl  con-^*^^^^^^^
Bent,  the Conventional  from an  express consent,  ami  the
Customary  from  tacit  consent ;  and  as  there  can  be  no  other
mode  of  deducing  any  law  from  the  will  of  nations,  there  are
only  these  three  kinds  of  Positive  Law  of  Nations,

We  shall  be  careful  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Natural
or  Necessary  law  of  nations,  without,  however,  treating  of
them  separately.  But  after  having,  under  each  individual
head  of  our  subject,  established  what  the  Necessary  law  pre-
scribes, we  shall  immediately  add  how  and  why  the  decisions
of  that  law  must  be  modified  by  the  Voluntary  law ;  or  (which
amounts  to  the  same  thing  in  other  terms)  we  shall  explain
how,  in  consequence  of  the  liberty  of  nations,  and  pursuant
to  the  rules  of  their  natural  society,  the  external  law  which
they  are  to  observe  towards  each  other  differs  in  certain  in-
stances from  the  maxims  qf  the  Internal  law,  which  never-
theless remains  always  obligatory  in  point  of  conscience.  As
to  the  rights  introduced  by  Treaties  or  by  Custoniy  there  is
no  room  to  apprehend  that  any  one  will  confound  them  with
the  Natural  law  of  nations.  They  form  that  species  of  law
of  nations  which  authors  have  distinguished  by  the  name  of
Jirbitrary,

To  furnish  the  reader  beforehand  with  a  general  direction  ?  28.  Gene.
respecting  the distinction between the  Necessary  and  the"^™^™
Voluntary  law,  let  us  here  observe,  that,  as  the  Necessary  ^^^^^^
law  is  always  obligatory  on  the  conscience^  a  nation  ought  the  neces-
never  to  lose  sight  of  it  m  deliberating  on  the  line  of  conduct  eary  and
she  is  to  pursue  in  order  to  fulfil  her  duty ;  but  when  there  *^®  voiwn-
is  question  of  examining  what she  may  demand  of  other  **^ ^*
states,  she  must  consult  the  Voluntary  law,  whose  maxims
are devoted  to  the  safety  and  advantage  of  the  universal
society  of  mankind.

(10)  See  Diridon  of  Lawi  of  Nations,  omf,  IvU.  n.  (2).— C.


BOOK  I.


OF  NATIONS  CONSIDERED  IN  THEMSELVKa


CHAP.  I.

OF  NATIONS  OB  SOVBBBIGN  8TAT]S8.(10)

A  NATION  or  a  state  is,  as  has  been  said  at  the  beginning  { i.  Of  tb«
of  this  work,  a  body  politic^  or  a  society  of  men  united  to-  ■****  "f*^  ®'
gether  for  the  pnrpose  of  promoting  their  mutnal  safety  and!JJ?"^*"*'*
advantage  by  their  combined  strength.

From  the  very  design  that  induces  a  number  of  men  to  form
a  society  which  has  its  common  interests,  and  which  is  to  act
in  concert,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  established  a
Public  Authority^  to  order  and  direct  what  is  to  be  done  by
each  in  relation  to  the  end  of  the  association.  This  political
authority  is  the  Sovereignty ;  and  he  or  they  who  are  in-
vested with  it  are  the  Sovereign^QSi)

It  is  evident,  that,  by  the  very  act  of  the  civil  or  political  i  2. The
association,  each  citizen  subjects  himself  to  the  authority  of  a«ti>ority  o'
the  entire  body,  in  every  thing  that  relates  to  the  common  *^^Jj^^^^^^^^
welfare. The  authority  of  all  over  each  member,  therefore,  the  mem-
essentially  belongs  to  the  body  politic,  or  state ;  but  the  ex-  ben.
ercise  of  that  authority  may  be  placed  in  different  hands,  ac-
cording as  the  society  may  have  ordained.  L  "  J

If  the  body  of  the  nation  keep  in  itB  own  hands  the  em-  i  5- ^^  ^
pire,  or  the  right  to  command,  it  is  a  Popular  government,  a  ^^^  ^^
Democracy ;  tf  it  intrust  it  to  a  certain  number  of  citizens^  vernment.
to  a  senate,  it  establishes  an  Aristocratic  republic ;  finally,
if  it  confide  the  government  to  a  single  person^  the  state  be-
comes a  Monarehg.{ll.)  y^

These  three  kinds  of  government  may  be  variously  com-
bined and  modified. We  shall  not  here  enter  into  the  par-

(10)  The  stadent  desirous  of  enlarg-  ferent  Goremments ;  and  see  Cours  de

iug  his  knowledge  apon this subject  Droit  Public  Interne  et  Exteme,  Paris,

flhonld  read  Locke  on  Government,*  De  A.  d.  1830. — C.

Lolme  on  the  Constitution ;  1  Bla.  Com.  (11)  See  the  advantages  and  disad-

47  ;  Sedgwick's  Commentaries  thereon ;  vantages  of  each  of  those  forms  of  go-

and  Chitty  Junior's  Prerogatives  of  the  vernment  shortly considered. 1  BIjl

Crown  as  regards  Sovereignty  «nd  dif-  Com.  49,  50. — G.

^ v2  ^


2  OF  NATIONS, OB

BOOK  I. ticolars ;  this  subject  belonging  to  the  public  univerml  law  :♦
CHAP.  I. £^j.  ^jj^  object  of  the  present  work,  it  is  sufficient  to  establish
the  general  principles  necessary  for  the  decision  of  those  dis-
putes that  may  arise  between  nations.
2  i. What Every  nation  that  governs  itself,  under  what  form  soever,
are  SOTO- without  dependence  on  any  foreign  power,  is  a  Sovereign
reign  states.  State. Its  rights  are  naturally  the  same  as  those  of  any  other
state. Such  are  the  moral  persons  who  live  together  in  a
natural  society,  subject  to  the  law  of  nations. To  give  a  na-
tion a  right  to  make  an  immediate  figure  in  this  grand  society,
it  is  sufficient  that  it  be  really  sbvereign  and  independent,
that  is,  that  it  govern  itself  by  its  own  authority  and  laws.
J  6. Of  We  ought,  therefore,  to  account  as  sovereign  states  those

states  bound  which  have  united  themselves  to  another  more  powerful,  by
by  unequal  j^jj  unequal  dlliaTice^  in  which,  as  Aristotle  says,  to  the  more
^' powerful  is  given  more  honour,  and  to  the  weaker,  more  as-
sistance.

The  conditions  of  those  unequal  alliances  may  be  infinitely
varied. But  whatever  they  are,  provided  the  inferior  ally
reserve  to  itself  the  sovereignty,  or  the  right  of  governing  its
own  body,  it  ought  to  be  considered  as  an  independent  state,
that  keeps  up  an  intercourse  with  others  under  the  authority
of  the  law  of  nations.
{0. Or  by Consequently  a  weak  state,  which,  in  order  to  provide  for
treaUes  of its  Safety,  places  itself  under  the  protection  of  a  more  powor-
proteotion. f^j  ^^^^  ^nd  engages,  in  return,  to  perform  several  offices
[  8  ] equivalent  to  that  protection,  without  however  divesting  itself
of  the  right  of  government  and  sovereignty, — that  state,  I
say,  does  not,  on  this  account^  cease  to  rank  among  the  sove-
reigns who  acknowledge  no  other  law  than  that  of  nations.  (12)

*  Kor shall  we  examine  which  of  minished  through  your  fault" "  True.*

those  different  kinds  of  goyemment  is  replied  the  king :  '<  I  shall  leare  thea

the  best It  will  be  suffioient  to  say  a  smaller  portion of  it; but it  wi&

in  general,  that  the  monarchical  form  rest  upon  a  firmer  basis/' The  Lace-

appears  preferable  to  every  other,  pro-  dsBmonians, during a  certain p>eriod.

Tided  the  power  of  the  sovereign  be  had  two  chiefe  to  whom  they  very  iot-

limited,  and  not  absolute, — qui  [prin-  properly  gave  the  title  of  kings. Tb«T

cipatu9\  turn  demum  regius  est»  si  in-  were  magistrates,  who  possessed  a  v^ry

tra  modestisB  et  mediooritatis  fines  se  limited  power, and  whom  it  was  cox

contineat,  excessu  potestatis,  quam  im-  unusual  to  cite  before  the  tribunal  cf

prudentes In dies augere satagunt>  justice, — to arrest, — ^to condemn te

minuitnr,  penitusqne  oormmpitur. Nos  death. — Sweden  acts  with  less impra-

Btulti,  majorisi  potentisB  specie  deoepti,  priety  in  continuing  to  bestow  on  be*

dilabimur in contrarium, non satis  chief  the  tiUe  of  king,  although  she  has

considerantes  eam  demum  tutam  esse  circumscribed his power  wtthin very

potentiam  quas  viribus  modum  imponit  narrow  bounds. He shares not bis

The  maxim  has  both  truth  and  wisdom  authority wiUi a colleague, — he is

on  its  side. The  author  here  quotes  hereditary, — and the  state  has, fraia

the saying of  Theopompus,  king  of  time  immemorial,  borne  the  title  of  a

Sparta, who, returning  to  his  house  kingdom. — Edit  A.  n.  1797.
amidst  the acclamations  of  the  peo- (12)  This and other  rules  reiipect-

ple, after the establishment  of the  ing  smaller  states  sometimes  fonu  tbt

Bphori— ''Ton  will  leave  to  your  ohil-  subject of consideration even in  tli«

Aran (said  his  wife)  an  aiUiority  di-  Municipal  Courts. In  oaae  of  a  ra>


BOYBRBIGK  STATES.  8

There  occurs  no  greater  difficulty  with  respect  to  tributary boo«  l
states ;  for  though  the  payment  of  tribute  to  a  foreign  power ^^^'  ^


doe8  in  some  degree  diminish  the  dignity  of  those  states,  from  i  J'  ^
its  being  a  confession  of  their  weakness, — ^yet  it  suffers  their  jtatefc
sovereignty  to  subsist  entire.  The  custom  of  paying  tribute
was  formerly  very  common, — the  weaker  by  that  means  pur-
chasing of  their  more  powerful  neighbour  an  exemption  firom
'  oppression,  or  at  that  price  securing  his  protection,  without
ceasing  to  be  sovereigns.

The  Grermanic  nations  introduced another  custom — ^that ;  8. Of
of  requiring  homage  from  a  state  either  vanquished,  or  too  feodatoiy
weak  to  make  resistance. Sometimes  even,  a  prince  has'***^
given  sovereignties  in  fee,  and  sovereigns  have  voluntarily
rendered  themselves  feudatories  to  others.

When  the  homage  leaves  independency  and  sovereign  au-
thority in  the  administration  of  the  state,  and  only  means
certain  duties  to  the  lord  of  the  fee,  or  even  a  mere  honorary
acknowledgment,  it  does  not  prevent  the  state  or  the  feuda-
tory prince  being  strictly  sovereign.  The  Icing  of  Naples
pays  homage  for  his  kingdom  to  the  pope,  and  is  nevertheless
reckoned  among  the  principal  sovereigns  of  Europe.

Two  sovereign  states  may  also  be  subject  to  the  same  {9. Oftiro
prince,  without  any  dependence  on  each  other,  and  each  may  ■*•*•■  ™^-
retain  all  its  rights  as  a  free  and  sovereign  state. The  l^ij^g^e***r^oe
of  Prussia  is  sovereign  prince  of  Neufchatel  in  Switzerland,
without  that  principality  being  in  any  manner  united  to  his
other  dominions ;  so  that  the  people  of  Neufchatel,  in  virtue
of  their  franchises,  may  serve,  a  foreign  power  at  war  with
the  king  of  Prussia,  provided  that  the  war  be  not  on  account
of  that  principality.

Finally,  several  sovereign and  independent  states  mayjio. Of
unite  themselves  together  by  a  perpetual  confederacy,  with-  f**^»  'o™
out  ceasing  to  be,  each  individually,  a  perfect  state. They  j^*  ^u^*'**
will  together  constitute  a  federal  republic:  their  joint  de-  **

liberations  will  not  impair  the  sovereignty  of  each  member,
though  they  may,  in  certain  respects,  put  some  restraint  on
the  exercise  of  it,  in  virtue  of  voluntary  engagements.  A  per-
son does  not  cease  to  be  free  and  independent,  when  he  is  obliged
to  fulfil  engagements  which  he  has  voluntarily  contracted.

Such  were  formerly  the  cities  of  Greece ;  such  are  at  present
the  Seven  United  Provinces  of  the  Netherlands,(13)  and  such
the  members  of  the  Helvetic  body.


Tolted  colony,  or  part  of  a  parent  or  Thompton  y.  Powlet,  2  Sim.  Rep.  202 ;

principal  state, no  subjeet  of  another  Yritarrt  y.  Clemeitt,  2  Car.  A  P.  223;

state  can  legally  make  a  eon  tract  with  11  B.  Moore,  308 ;  8  Bing.  432 ;  and

it  or  assist  the  same  without  leaye  of  poH, — G.  {  The  United  Staieer.  Paimer,

his  own goyemmenty  before  its  sepa-  3  Wheat  010. See  Okerrwt  y.  Faueeui,

rate independence has been reoog-  3Binn.252.}

Aiscd  by  his  own  goyemment Jonee  (13)  Of  oonne,  the  words  "eti  jht^

y  Gi  reia  <iei  Sio,  1  Turn,  k  Boas. 297;  eemf' refer only to  the  time  when

•7


8  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF

sooK  T. But  a  people  that  has  passed  under  the  dominion  of  an*
CHAP.  I. Q^ii^r  is  no  longer  a  state,  and  can  no  longer  avail  itself  directly


§  iL Of  »  of  the  law  of  Rations. Such  were  the  nations  and  kingdoms

JlJjJ^^^J*^ which  the  Romans  rendered  subject  to  their  empire;  the

under  the generality  even  of  those  whom  they  honoured  with  the  name

dominion  of  of  friends  and  allies  no  longer  formed  real  states. Within

another. themselves  they  were  governed  by  their  own  laws  and  magis-

[  4  ] trates ;  but  without,  they  were  in  every  thing  obliged  to  follow

the  orders  of  Rome ;  they  dared  not  of  themselves  either  to

make  war  or  contract  alliances ;  and  could  not  treat  with

nations.

;  12. The The  law  of  nations  is  the  law  of  sovereigns ;  free  and  inde-

objeoto  of pendent  states  are  moral  persons,  whose  rights  and  obligations

this  treatise.  ^^  ^^  ^^  establish  in  this  treatise.


CHAP.  n.

CHAP,  n, GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  A  NATION  TOWARDS


ITSELF.

;  18.  A  na.  IF  the  rights  of  a  nation  spring  from  its  obligations,  it  is
to  Lri^^*  principally  from  those  that  relate  to  itself.  It  will  further
greeabiy  to  appear,  that  its  duties  towards  others  depend  very  much  on
its  natore.  its  duties  towards  itself,  as  the  former  are  to  be  regulated
<^^)  and  measured  by  the  latter. As  we  are  then  to  treat  of  the

obligations  and  rights  of  nations,  an  attention  to  order  re-
quires that  we  should  begin  by  establishing  what  each  nation
owes  to  itself.

The  general  and  fundamental  rule  of  our  duties  towards
ourselves  is,  that  every  moral  being  ought  to  live  in  a  manner
conformable  to  his  nature,  naturce  convenienter  vtvere.{14)
A  nation  is  a  being  determined  by  its  essential  attributes,
that  has  its  own  nature,  and  can  act  in  conformity  to  it.
There  are  then  actions  of  a  nation  as  such,  wherein  it  is  con-
cerned in  its  national  character,  and  which  are  either  suitable

Vattel  wrotOi  and  it  is  nnnecessary  to  has  acquired  powers  far  bejond  its
mention  otherwise  than  thns  onrsorily  diminutire  extenk  These  being  e? la-
the notorions  recent  changes. — 0.  bliahed,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  snch
(14)  If  to  particularize  may  be  a  state,  and  of  those  exercising  the
aUowed,  we  may  instance  Great  Bri-  powers  of  govemment»  to  cultivate  and
tain.  Oomparatiyely,  with  regard  to  improre  these  natural  advantages ;  ami
dimensions,  it  would  be  but  an  insig-  in  that  view  the  ancient  esdusire
ni&oant  state;  but  with  regard  to  its  navigation  system,  oonstitating  £dj;>
insular  situation  and  excellent  ports,  land  the  carrier  of  Europe  and  the
and  its  proximity  to  Europe,  and  above  world,  were  highly  laudable ;  and  it  is
all  the  singularly  manly,  brave,  and  to  be  hoped  that  a  return  of  the  sy^toni,
adventurous  character  of  its  natives,  injudiciously  abandoned,  will  ere  lon^
it  has  been  capable  of  acquunag  and  take  place. — 0.
08


IBE  DUTISS  OV  A  NATION^ ETC.  4

JT  opposite  to  i?hat  constitutes  it  a  nation ;  so  that  it  is  nof  book  i.
a  matter  of  indifference  whether  it  performs  some  of  those  ^^^'  "*
actions,  and  omits  others.  In  this  respect,  the  Law  of  Nature
prescribes  it  certain  duties.  We  shall  see,  in  this  first  book^
what  conduct  a  nation  ought  to  observe,  in  order  that  it  may
not  be  wanting  to  itself.  But  we  shall  first  sketch  out  a
general  idea  of  this  subject.

He  who  no  longer  exists  can  have  no  duties  to  perform :  and  ?  14. Of
a  moral  being  is  charged  with  obligations  to  himself,  only  with  the  preaer-
a  view  to  his  perfection  and  happiness :  for  to  preserve  and  ^o^l^^^^
perfect  hts\aton  nature^  is  the  sum  of  all  his  duties  to  himself,  of  a  nation.

The  preservation  of  a  nation  consists  in  the  duration  of  the
political  association  by  which  it  is  formed.  If  a  period  is
put  to  this  association,  the  nation  or  state  no  longer  subsists,
though  the  individuals  that  composed  it  still  exist.

The  perfection  of  a  nation  is  found  in  what  renders  it
capable  of  obtain^ig  the  end  of  civil  society ;  and  a  nation  is
in  a  perfect  state,  when  nothing  necessary  is  wanting  to  arrive
at  that  end.  We  know  that  the  perfection  of  a  thing  con-
sists, generally,  in  the  perfect  agreement  of  all  its  constituent
parts  to  tend  to  the  same  end.  A  nation  being  a  multitude
of  men  united  together  in  civil  society — if  in  that  multitude
all  conspire  to  attain  the  end  proposed  in  forming  a  civil
society,  the  nation  is  perfect;  and  it  is  more  or  less  so,
according  as  it  approaches  more  or  less  to  that  perfect  agree-  [51
xnent.  In  the  same  manner  its  external  state  will  be  more
or  less  perfect,  according  as  it  concurs  with  the  interior  per-
fection of  the  nation.

The  end  or  object  of  civil  society  is  to  procure  for  the  ?  is. What
citizens  whatever  they  stand  in  need  of  for  the  necessities,  *^*||®*°^^'
the  conveniences,  the  accommodation  of  life,  and,  in  general,  ^* ■^^^^•v'
whatever  constitutes  happiness, — ^with  the  peaceful  possession
of  property,  a  method  of  obtaining  justice  with  security,  and,
finally,  a  mutual  defence  against  all  external  violence.

It  is  now  easy  to  form  a  just  idea  of  the  perfection  of  a
state  or  nation : — every  thing  in  it  must  conspire  to  promote
the  ends  we  have  pointed  out.

In  the  act  of  association,  by  virtue  of  which  a  multitude  j  16.  A  na.
of  men  form  together  a  state  or  nation,  each  individual  hast»on"™*«'
entered  into  engagements  with  all,  to  promote  the  general  ^  ®^i*«^
welfare ;  and  all  have  entered  into  engagements  with  each  J^^^  j^JJ^
individual,  to  facilitate  for  him  the  means  of  supplying  his
necessities,  and  to  protect  and  defend  him. It  is  manifest
that  these  reciprocal  engagements  can  no  otherwise  be  fulfilled
than  by  maintaining  the  political  association. The  entire
nation  \b  then  obliged  to  maintain  that  association ;  and  as
their preservation depends on its continuance,  it thence
follows  that  every  nation  is  obliged  to  perform  the  duty  of
(jel  i- preservation.

This  obligation,  so  natural  to  each  individual  of  God't

09


b  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF

BOOK  I.  creation,  is  not  deriyed  to  nations  immediately  from  nature^
CHAP.  11.  ^^^  £^^^  ^j^^  agreement  by  which  civil  society  is  formed:  it
is  therefore  not  absolute,  but  conditional, — ^that  is  to  say,  it
sapposes  a  human  act,  to  wit,  the  social  compact.  And  as
compacts  may  be  dissolved  by  common  consent  of  the  parties
— ^if  the  individuals  that  compose  a  nation  should  unanimously
agree  to  break  the  link  that  binds  them,  it  would  be  lawfid
for  them  to  do  so,  and  thus  to  destroy  the  state  or  nation ;
but  they  would  doubtless  incur  a  degree  of  guilt,  if  they  took
this  step  without  just  and  weighty  reasons ;  for  civil  societies
are  approved  by  the  Law  of  Nature,  which  recommends  them
to  mankind,  as  the  true  means  of  supplying  all  their  wants,
and  of  effectually  advancing  towards  their  own  perfection.
Moreover,  civil  society  is  so  useful,  nay  so  necessary  to  all
citizens,  that  it  may  well  be  considered  as  morally  impossible
for  them  to  consent  unanimously  to  break  it  without  necessity.
But  what  citizens  may  or  ought  to  do— what  the  majority  of
them  may  resolve  in  certain  cases  of  necessity  or  of  pressing
exigency — are  questions  that  will  be  treated  of  elsewhere:
they  cannot  be  solidly  determined  without  some  principles
which  we  have  not  yet  established.  For  the  present,  it  is
su£Scient  to  have  proved,  that,  in  general,  as  long  as  the  poli*
tical  society  subsists,  the  whole  nation  is  obliged  to  endeaTour
to  maintain  it.
{  ir.  And  If  a  nation  is  obliged  to  preserve  itself,  it  is  no  less  obliged
u»  preserve  carefully  to  preserve  all  its  members.  The  nation  owes  this
to  itself,  since  the  loss  even  of  one  of  its  members  weakens  it,
and  is  injurious  to  its  preservation.  It  owes  this  also  to  the
members  in  particular,  in  consequence  of  the  very  act  of  asso-
ciation ;  for  those  who  compose  a  nation  are  united  for  their
[  6  ]  defence  and  common  advantage ;  and  none  can  justly  be  de-
prived of  this  union,  and  of  the  advantages  he  expects  to  de-
rive from  it,  while  he  on  his  side  fulfils  the  conditions.(15)

The  body  of  a  nation  cannot  then  abandon  a  province,  a

town,  or  even  a  single  individual  who  is  a  part  of  it,  unless

compelled  to  it  by  necessity,  or  indispensably  obliged  to  it  by

the  strongest  reasons  founded  on  the  public  safety.(16)

;  18.  A  na- Since  then  a  nation  is  obliged  to  preserve  itself,  it  has  a

tion  has  a right  to  every  thing  necessary  for  its  preservation. For  the

^^^  Ain ^*^  ^^  Nature  gives  us  a  right  to  every  thing  without  which

necessary '^^  Cannot  fulfil  our  obligation ;  otherwise  it  would  oblige  us

aarvation. (^^^  '^^  prinoiple is in erery  re-  self. This  is  the  principle  upon  which

speot  recognised and acted upon bj  is  founded  the  rale  ''  Nemo  potest  eruer^

our  munioipal  law. It  is  in  respect  of,  pairiam,*' Calvin't  ease,  7 Coke,  25  •

and  M  a  due  retnm  for,  the  protection  Co.  Lit  129,  a ;  and  see  an  interest-

erery  natural  bora  subject  is  entitled  ing  application  of  that  rule in  Mac-

to,  and  actually  does,  by  law,  receive  donald't case,  Forster's Crown Law.

firom  the  instant  of  his  birth,  that  aU  69. — ^C.

the obligations of allegiance attach  (16)  In  tracing  the  conseqnenees  of

upon  him,  and  fh>m  which  he  cannot  this  rule,  we  shall  hereafter  pereeiTe  hov

by  any  act  of  his  own  emancipate  him-  important  is  the  rule  itael^. — C
70


THB  BUTIBS  OF  A  NATION,  ETC.  (S

to  do  impossibilities,  or  rather  would  contradict  itself  in  pre-  book  u
scribing  us  a  duty,  and  at  the  same  time  debarring  us  of  the  ^°^^'  °'
only  means  of  fcdfilling  it.  It  will  doubtless  be  here  under-
stood, that  those  means  ought  not  to  be  unjust  in  themselves,
or  such  as  are  absolutely  forbidden  by  the  Law  of  Nature.
As  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  ever  permit  the  use  of  such
means, — ^if  on  a  particular  occasion  no  other  present  them-
selves for  fulfilling  a  general  obligation,  the  obligation  must,
in  that  particular  instance,  be  looked  on  as  impossible,  and
consequently  void.

By  an  evident  consequence  from  what  has  been  said,  a  na-  { 19.  it
tion  ought  carefully  to  avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  whatever  onght  to
might  cause  its  destruction,  or  that  of  the  state,  which  is  the  *T.^*^  •J®''

^ ° .1.  '  '  »  thing  that

same  thing.  might  ooca.

A  nation  or  state  has  a  right  to  every  thing  that  can  help  sion  iu  de-
to  ward  off  imminent  danger,  and  keep  at  a  distance  whatever  stmction.
is  capable  of  causing  its  ruin ;  and  that  from  the  very  same  |  ^^'  /^^
reasons  that  establish  its  right  to  the  things  necessary  to  its  every  thing
preservation.  (17)  that  may

The  second  general  duty  of  a  nation  towards  itself  is  to  promote
labour  at  its  own  perfection  and  that  of  its  state. It  is  this  ^^  ®°^*
double  perfection  that  renders  a  nation  capable  of  attaining  ^^^'^^^**
the end  of  civil  society: it  would be  absurd  to  unite  in  to  perfect
society,  and  yet  not  endeavour  to  promote  the  end  of  that  itaeif  and
union.  *^«  ■*»*••

Here  the  entire  body  of  a  nation,  and  each  individual  citi-
zen, are  bound  by  a  double  obligation,  the  one  immediately
proceeding  from  nature,  and  the  other  resulting  from  their
reciprocal  engagements.  Nature  lays  an  obligation  upon  each
man  to  labour  after  his  own  perfection ;  and  in  so  doing,  he
labours  after  that  of  civil  society,  which  could  not  fail  to  be
very  flourishing,  were  it  composed  of  none  but  good  citizens.
But  the  individual  finding  in  a  well-regulated  society  the  most
powerful  succours  to  enable  him  to  fulfil  the  task  which  Na-
ture imposes  upon  him  in  relation  to  himself,  for  becoming
better,  and  consequently  more  happy — ^he  is  doubtless  obliged
to  contribute  all  in  his  power  tb  render  that  society  more
perfect.

All  the  citizens  who  form  a  political  society  reciprocally
engage  to  advance  the  common  welfare,  and  as  far  as  possi-  [  7  1
ble  to  promote  the  advantage  of  each  member.  Since  then
the  perfection  of  the  society  is  what  enables  it  to  secure
equally  the  happiness  of  the  body  and  that  of  the  members,
the  grand  object  of  the  engagements  and  duties  of  a  citizen
is  to  aim  at  this  perfection. This  is  more  particularly  the

(17)  Saint  pojntli  wprevM  Mt  lex,  the  property  of  any  private  IndiTidoaL

Upon  thi«  principle  it  has  been  esta-  See  Oovemor;  Ac  r.  MwedUh,  4  lemi

bUahed,  that  for  national  defence in  Bep.  799-7. — C.
war,  it  ifl  legal  to  poll  down  or  ix\jiir»

n


OBHHRAL  P&I]fGIFLB8  OF


BOOK  I.

{  22.  And  to

avoid  every
thing  con-
trary to  its
porfecdon.
^  23. The
rights  it  de-
rives  from
these  obli-
gations.
{24 Bz-
amples.


dnty  of  the  body  collective  in  all  their  common  deliberations^
and  in  every  thing  they  do  as  a  body.  (18)

A  nation  therefore  ought  to  prevent,  and  carefully  to  avoid,
whatever  may  hinder  its  perfection  and  that  of  the  Btate,  or
retard  the  progrees  either  of  the  one  or  the  other.(19)
*  We  may  then  conclude,  as  we  have  done  above  in  regard  to
the  preservation  of  a  state  (§  18),  that  a  nation  has  a  right  to
every  thing  without  which  it  cannot  attain  the  perfection  of
the  members  and  of  the  state,  or  prevent  and  repel  whatever
is  contrary  to  this  double  perjfection.

On  this  subject,  the  English  furnish  us  an  example  highly
worthy  of  attention.  That  illustrious  nation  distinguishes
itself  in  a  glorious  manner  by  its  application  to  every  thing
that  can  render  the  state  more  flourishing.  An  admirable
constitution  there  places  every  citizen  in  a  situation  that  ena-
bles him  to  contribute  to  this  great  end,  and  everywhere  dif-
fuses that  spirit  of  genuine  patriotism  which  zealously  exerts
itself  for  the  public  welfare.  We  there  see  private  citisens
form  considerable  enterprises,  in  order  to  promote  the  glory
and  welfare  of  the  nation.  And  while  a  bad  prince  would
find  his  hands  tied  up,  a  wise  and  moderate  king  finds  the
most  powerful  aids  to  give  success  to  his  glorious  designs.
The  nobles  and  the  representatives  of  the  people  form  a  link
of  confidence  between  the  monarch  and  the  nation,  and,  con*
curring  with  him  in  every  thing  that  tends  to  promote  the
public  welfare,  partly  ease  him  of  the  burden  of  government,
give  stability  to  his  power,  and  procure  him  an  obedience  the
more  perfect,  as  it  is  voluntary.  Every  good  citizen  sees  that
the  strength  of  the  state  is  really  the  advantage  of  all,  and
not  that  of  a  single  person.(20j  Happy  constitution  !  which
they  did  not  suddenly  obtain :  it  has  cost  rivers  of  blood ;  but
they  have  not  purchased  it  too  dear.  May  luxury,  that  pest
so  fatal  to  the  manly  and  patriotic  virtues,  that  minister  of
corruption  so  dangerous  to  liberty,  never  overthrow  a  monu-
ment that  does  so  much  honour  to  human  nature — a  monu-
ment capable  of  teaching  kings  how  glorious  it  is  to  rule  over
a  free  people !


(18)  In  a  highly  intelligent  and  oiil-
tivatod  society  like  England,  this  prin-
ciple is  exemplified  in  an  extraordinary
degree ;  for  in  the  legislative  assembly,
members  of  parliamenti  without  any
private  interest  excepting  the  approba-
tion of  their  coantrymen,  almost  de-
stroy themselves  by  exertion  in  disons-
sing  the  improvement  of  existiiig  regn-
lations ;  and  this  indeed  even  to  excess
as  regards  long  speeches,  sometimes
even  counteracting  their  own  laudable
endeavours. — 0.

(19)  See  Book  L  chap.  zxiU.  {  38S,
7S


as  to  the  duty  of  all  nations  to  prevent
the  violation  of  the  law  of  nations. — C.
(20)  Thia  is  indeed  a  flattering  eom-
pliment  firom  Vattel,  a  foreigner;  but
certainly  it  is  Just;  for  although,  as  a
commercial  nation,  it  might  be  sup-
posed that  each  individual  principaUy
labours  for  his  own  individual  gain;
yet  when  we  refer  to  the  spirited  em-
ployment of  capital  in  building  n».
tional  bridges,  canals,  rail-roads,  Ac
not  yielding  even  tL  per  eeni.,  it  must
be  admitted  that  great  public  spirit  ibi
national  good  very  generally  preva£s
— 0.


THE  DtFTIES  OF  A  NATION,  HTC,  T

•

There  is  another  nation  illustrious  by  its  bravery  and  its  book  u
victories.  Its  numerous  and  valiant  nobility,  its  extensive  -£Ei^iJ*: .
and  fertile  dominions,  might  render  it  respectable  throughout
all  Europe,  and  in  a  short  time  it  might  be  in  a  most  flourish-
ing situation,  but  its  constitution  opposes  this ;  and  such  is
its  attachment  to  that  constitution,  that  there  is  no  room  to
expect  a  proper  remedy  will  ever  be  applied.  In  vain  might
a  magnanimous  king,  raised  by  his  virtues  above  the  pursuits
of  ambition  and  injustice,  form  the  most  salutary  lesigns  for  [  °  J
promoting  the  happiness  of  his  people ; — ^in  vain  might  those
designs  be  approved  by  the  more  sensible  part,  by  the  ma-
jority of  the  nation ; — a  single  deputy,  obstinate,  or  corrupted
by  a  foreign  power,  might  put  a  stop  to  all,  and  disconcert
the  wisest  and  most  necessary  measures.  From  an  excessive
jealousy  of  its  liberty,  that  nation  has  taken  such  precautions
as  must  necessarily  place  it  out  of  the  power  of  the  king  to
make  any  attempts  on  the  liberties  of  the  public.  But  is  it
not  evident  that  those  precautions  exceed  the  end  proposed,
' — ^that  they  tie  the  hands  of  the  most  just  and  wise  prince,
and  deprive  him  of  the  means  of  securing  the  public  freedom
against  the  enterprises  of  foreign  powers,  and  of  rendering
the  nation  rich  and  happy  ?  Is  it  not  evident  that  the  nation
has  deprived  itself  of  the  power  of  acting,  and  that  its  coun-
cils are  exposed  to  the  caprice  or  treachery  of  a  single  member  ?

We shall  conclude  this chapter,  with observing  that  a  J  25.  Ana
nation  ought  to  know  itself. {21) Without  this  knowledge  it  tion  ought
cannot  make  any  successful  endeavours  after  its  own  per-  ^^j^/ji)  -•
fection. It  ought  to  'have  a  just  idea  of  its  state,  to  enable
it  to  take  the  most  proper  measures ;  it  ought  to  know  the
progress  it  has  already  made,  and  what  further  advances  it
has  still  to  make, — ^what  advantages  it  possesses,  and  what
defects  it  labours  under,  in  order  to  preserve  the  former,  and
correct  the  latter. Without  this  knowledge  a  nation  will  act
at  random,  and  often  take  the  most  improper  measures. It
will  think  it  acts  with  great  wisdom  in  imitating  the  conduct
of  nations  that  are  reputed  wise  and  skilful, — ^not  perceiving
that  such  or  such  regulation,  such  or  such  practice,  though
salutary  to  one  state,  is  often  pernicious  to  another. Every •
thing  ought  to  be  conducted  according  to  its  nature. Nations
cannot be  well governed  without such regulations  as  are
suitable  to  their  respective  characters ;  and  in  order  to  this,
their  characters  ought  to  be  known.

(21)  This  is  one  of  the  toiiDdest  and  trae  wisdom. Ereiy  moral  and  wise

most  important  principles  that  can  be  man  should  enlarge  on  this  principle,

advaneo^t  whether  it  refers  to  indiyidu-  and  among  others  stody  that  excellent,

als  or  to  nations,  and  is  essential  eyen  but  too  little  known,  work,  Mason  ob

to  the  attainment  of  the  rudiments  of  Self-Enowledge.


10  e .  78


07  THB  COHfifXITVTION  07  A  8TATB.


BOOK  L
CHAP.  in.


CHAP.  III.

OP THB CONSTITUTION OF A STATE, AND THB BUTDSS AND
•  RIGHTS  07  THE  NATION  IN  THIS  RESPECT.

WE  were  unable  to  avoid,  in  the  first  chapter,  anticipating
something  of  the  subject  of  this.
1 26. Of We  have  seen  aLreadj  that  every  political  society  must
public  an- necessarily  establish  a  public  authority  to  regulate  their  com-
^'^* mon  affairs, — ^to  prescribe  to  each  individual  the  conduct  he
ought  to  observe  with  a  view  to  the  public  welfare,  and  to
possess  the  means  of  procuring  obedience. This  authority
essentially  belongs  to  the  body  of  the  society ;  but  it  may  be
exercised  in  a  variety  of  ways ;  and  every  society  has  a  right
to  choose  that  mode  which  suits  it  best.
2  27. What The  fundamental  regulation  that  determines  the  manner  in
is  the  eon- which  the  public  authority  is  to  be  executed,  is  what  forms
Btitndonof  f}^Q  constitution  of  the  state. In  this  is  seen  the  form  in
*  ■****• which  the  nation  acts  in  quality  of  a  body  politic, — ^how  and
[  9  ] by  whom  the  people  are  to  be  governed, — and  what  are  the
rights  and  duties  of  the  governors. This  constitution  is  in
fact  nothing  more  than  the  establishment  of  the  order  iu
which  a  nation  proposes  to  labour  in  common  for  obtaining
those  advantages  with  a  view  to  which  the  political  society
was  established.
2  28. The The  perfection  of  a  state,  and  its  aptitude  to  attain  the  ends
nation of  society,  must  then  depend  on  its  constitution :  consequently
ohooBe*ttie *^®  °^^®*  important  concern  of  a  nation  that  forms  a  political
best  ctmsti-  society,  and  its  first  and  most  essential  duty  towards  itself,  is
tation. to  choose  the  best  constitution  possible,  and  that  most  suita-
ble to  its  circumstances. When  it  makes  this  choice,  it  lays
the  foundation  of  its  own  preservation,  safety,  perfection,  and
happiness : — ^it  cannot  take  too  much  care  in  placing  these  on
a  solid  basis.
2  29. Of The  laws  are  regulations  established  by  public  authority,
poUUcai, to  be  observed  in  society. All  these  ought  to  relate  to  the

taX  aad  dvii  ^^^^^^^  ^^  *^®  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^  *^®  citizens. The  laws  made  di-
l^^j^  rectly  with  a  view  to  the  public  welfare  are  political  laws;  and

in  this  class,  those  that  concern  the  body  itself  and  the  being
of  the  society,  the  form  of  government,  the  manner  in  which
the  public  authority  is  to  be  exerted, — those,  in  a  word,  which
together  form  the  constitution  of  the  state,  are  the  fundor
mental  laws.

The  civil  laws  are  those  that  regulate  the  rights  and  con*
duct  of  the  citizens  among  themselves.

Every  nation  that  would  not  be  wanting  to  itself,  ought  to
apply  its  utmost  care  in  establishing  these  laws,  and  princi-
pally i\A  fundamental  laws, — ^in  establishing  them,  I  say,  with

u


OF  THE  OONSTrrUTION  OF  A  6TATB.  9

•

wisdom,  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  genius  of  the  people,  and  ><><»■  <
to  all  the  circumstances  in  which  they  may  be  placed :  they .  '^"^•V'.
ought  to  determine  them  and  make  them  known  with  plain-
ness and  precision,  to  the  end  that  they  may  possess  stability,
that  they  may  not  be  eluoled,  and,  that  they  may  create,  if
possible,  no  dissension — that,  on  the  one  hand,  ne  or  they
to  whom  the  exercise  of  the  sovereign  power  is  committed,
and  the  citizens,  on  the  other,  may  equally  know  their  duty
and  their  rights.  It.  is  not  here  necessary  to  consider  in  de-
tail what  that  constitution  and  those  laws  ought  to  be :  that
discussion  belongs  to  public  law  and  politics.  Besides,  the
laws  and  constitutions  of  different  states  must  necessarily
vary  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  people,  and  other  cir-
cumstances. In  the  Law  of  Nations  we  must  adhere  to  gene-
rals. We  here  consider  the  duty  of  a  nation  towards  itself,
principally  to  determine  the  conduct  that  it  ought  to  observe
in  that  great  society  which  nature  has  established  among  all
nations.  These  duties  give  it  rights,  that  serve  as  a  rule  to
establish  what  it  may  require  from  other  nations,  and  recipro-
cally what  others  may  require  from  it.

The  constitution  and  laws  of  a  state  are  the  basis  of  the  i  30.  Of  th«
public  tranquillity,  the  firmest  support  of  political  authority,  ^pp^^  of
and  a  security  for  the  liberty  of  the  citizens. But  this  con-  tution'wid
stitution  is  a  vain  phantom,  and  the  best  laws  are  useless,  if  obedienoe
they  be  not  religiously  observed :  the  nation  ought  then  to  to  the  laws,
watch  very  attentively,  in  order  to  render  them  equally  re- [  10  ]
spected  by  those  who  govern,  and  by  the  people  destined  to
obey. To  attack  the  constitution  of  the  state,  and  to  violate
its  laws,  is  a  capital  crime  against  society ;  and  if  those  guilty
of  it  are  invested  with  authority,  they  add  to  this  crime  a
perfidious  abuse  of  the  power  with  which  they  are  intrusted.
The  nation  ought  constantly  to  repress  them  with  its  utmost
vigour  and  vigilance,  as  the  importance  of  the  case  requires.

It  is  very  uncommon  to  see  the  laws  and  constitution  of  a
state  openly  and  boldly  opposed:  it  is  against  silent  and
gradual  attacks  that  a  nation  ought  to  be  particularly  on  its
guard.  Sudden  revolutions  strike  the  imaginations  of  men :
they  are  detailed  in  history ;  their  secret  springs  are  deve*
loped.  But  we  overlook  the  changes  that  insensibly  happen
by  a  long  train  of  steps  that  are  but  slightly  marked.  It
would  be  rendering  nations  an  important  service  to  show  from
history  how  many  states  have  thus  entirely  changed  their  na-
ture, ^nd  lost  their  original  constitution.  This  would  awaken
the  attention  of  mankind: — ^impressed  thenceforward  with
this  excellent  maxim  (no  less  essential  in  politics  than  in
morals)  principtis  obsta^ — ^they  would  no  longer  shut  theii
eyes  against  innovations,  which,  though  inconsiderable  in  them-
selves, may  serve  as  steps  to  mount  to  higher  and  more  per
nicious  enterprises.

The  consequences  of  a  good  or  bad  constitution  being  ol

n


10  Oir  THB  OONSTITUTIOK  OF  A  STATI.

BOOK  I. sucli  importance,  and  the  nation  being  Btrictly  obliged  to  pio^
CHAP.  ni.  Quj.^^  i^g  f^Y  33  possible,  the  best  and  most  convenient  one,  it


§31.  The  hg^  a  right  to  every  thing  necessary  to  enable  it  to  fulfil  thia
nation  wiSi  obligation  (§  18).  It  is  then  manifest  that  a  nation  has  an
respect  to  indisputable  right  to  form,  maintain,  and  perfect  its  constita-
its  oonsti-  tion,  to  regulate  at  pleasure  every  thing  relating  to  the  go«
tution  and  vernment,  and  that  no  person  can  have  a  just  right  to  hinder
rne^™"  ^^'  Government  is  established  only  for  the  sake  of  the  na-
tion, with  a  view  to  its  safety  and  happiness.
§  32. It  If  any  nation  is  dissatisfied  with  the  public  administration,

may  reform  jt  may  apply  the  necessary  remedies,  and  reform  the  govern-
ment!*^*™ ment. But  observe  that  I  say  "the  nation;**  for  I  am  very
far  from  meaning  to  authorize  a  few  malcontents  or  incendia-
ries to  give  disturbance  to  their  governors  by  exciting  mur-
murs and  seditions. None  but  the  body  of  a  nation  have  a
right  to  check  those  at  the  helm  when  they  abuse  their  power.
When  the  nation  is  silent  and  obeys,  the  people  are  con-
sidered as  approving  the  conduct  of  their  superiors,  or  at  least
finding  it  supportable ;  and  it  is  not  the  business  of  a  small
number  of  citizens  to  put  the  state  in  danger,  under  the  pre«
tence  of  reforming  it.
;  33. And In  virtue  of  the  same  principles,  it  is  certain  that  if  the
may  change  nation  is  uucasy  under  its  constitution,  it  has  a  right  to

taLr"^' change  it.

*  /  There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  the  case,  if  the  whole  nation

be  unanimously  inclined  to  make  this  change.  But  it  is
asked,  what  is  to  be  done  if  the  people  are  divided  ?  In  the
[  11  ]  ordinary  management  of  the  state,  the  opinion  of  the  majority
must  pass  without  dispute  for  that  of  the  whole  nation;
otherwise  it  would  be  almost  impossible  for  the  society  ever
to  take  any  resolution.  It  appears  then,  by  parity  of  rea-
soning, that  a  nation  may  change  the  constitution  of  the  state
by  a  majority  of  votes ;  and  whenever  there  is  nothing  in  this
change  that  can  be  considered  as  contrary  to  the  act  of  civil
association,  or  to  the  intention  of  those  united  under  it,  the
whole  are  bound  to  conform  to  the  resolution  of  the  major-
ity. (22)  But  if  the  question  be,  to  quit  a  form  of  govern-
ment, to  which  alone  it  appeared  that  the  people  were  willing
to  submit  on  their  entering  into  the  bonds  of  society, — if  the
greater  part  of  a  free  people,  after  the  example  of  the  Jews
in  the  time  of  Samuel,  are  weary  of  liberty,  and  resolved  to
submit  to  the  authority  of  a  monarch, — ^those  citizens  who  are
more  jealous  of  that  privilege,  so  invaluable  to  those  who


(22)  In  1  BIa.  Com.  51-2,  it  is  oon-  bat  that  doctrine,  as  regards  the  moral

tended, that^ unless  in oases where  duty  to  obsenre  laws,  has  been  juslij

the  natural  law  or  conacienee  dictates  refuted. See Sedgwick's Oommen-

the observance  of  municipal  laws,  it  taries,  61;  2  Bos.  A  PuL  375;  5  Bar.

is  optional,  in  a  moral  view,  to ob-  A  Aid.  341 ;  9ed  ffide  1^  Ves.  >nn.  Z\%

serve  the  positive  law,  or  to  pay  the  316. — 0.
penalty  when  detected  in  the  breaeh;
76


OF  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  A  STATE.


BOOK  I.
OHAP.  in.


kaye  tasted  it,  though  obliged  to  saffer  the  majority  to  do  as
they  please,  are  under  no  obligation  at  all  to  submit  to  the
new  government :  they  may  quit  a  society  which  seems  to
have  dissolved  itself  in  order  to  unite  again  under  another
form:  they  have  a  right  to  retire  elsewhere,  to  sell  their
lands,  and  take  with  them  all  their  effects.

Here,  again,  a  very  important  question  presents  itself. It  J  34. Of
essentially  belongs  to  the  society  to  make  laws  both  in  rela-  *{»«  logwia-
tion  to  the  manner  in  which  it  desires  to  be  goremed,  and  to  ^J|  ^^Jber
the  conduct  of  the  citizens :  this  is  called  the  legulative  power,  it  oan
The  nation  may  intrust  the  exercise  of  it  to  the  prince,  or  to  change  the
an  assembly;  or  to  that  assembly  and  the  prince  jointly ; ^^^^'^^^^^^^^"^
who  have  then  a  right  to  make  new  laws  and  to  repeal  old  ^^^^
ones.  (23) -  It  is  asked,  whether  their  power  extends  to  the
fvmdameTUal  laws — ^whether  they  may  change  the  constitution
of  the  state  ? The  principles  we  have  laid  down  lead  us  to
decide  with  certainty,  that  the  authority  of  these  legislators
does  not  extend  so  far,  and  that  they  ought  to  consider  the
fundamental  laws  as  sacred,  if  the  nation  has  not,  in  very
express  terms,  given  them  power  to  change  them. For  the
eonstitution  of  the  state  ought  to  possess  stability :  and  since
that  was  first  established  by  the  nation,  which  afterwards
intrusted  certain  persons  with  the  legislative  power,  the  funr-
damental  laws  are  excepted  from  their  commission. It  is
visible  that  the  society  only  intended  to  make  provision  for
having  the  state  constantly  furnished  with  laws  suited  to
particular  conjunctures,  and,  for  that  purpose,  gave  the  legis-
lature the  power  of  abrogating  the  ancient  ovoil  and  political
laws  that  were  not  fundamental,  and  of  making  new  ones ;
but  nothing  leads  us  to  think  that  it  meant  to  submit  the  con-
stitution itself  to  their  will. In  short,  it  is  from  the  constitu-
tion that  those  legislators  derive  their  power :  how  then  can
they  change  it  without  destroying  the  foundation  of  their  own
authority  ? By  the  fimdamental  laws  of  England,  the  two
houses  of  parliament,  in  concert  with  the  king,  ex^cise  the
legislative  power :  but,  if  the  two  houses  should  resolve  to
suppress  themselves,  and  to  invest  the  king  with  full  and  ab-
solute authority,  certainly  the  nation  would  not  suffer  it. [  12  ]
And  who  would  dare  to  assert  that  they  would  not  have  a
right  to  oppose  it  ? But  if  the  parliament  entered  into  a
debate  on  making  so  considerable  a  change,  and  the  whole


(23)  Thus,  during  the  last  war,  Eng-  being  considered  unconstitutional  dele-
Hsh  acts  of  Parliament  delegated  to  gations  of  powers  of  altering  the /ttfl<2a-
tfie  king  in  council  the  power  of  making  mental  laws,  part  of  the  cosstilatioii
temporary  orders  and  laws  regulating  itself;  bat  even  then,  tlie  rules  or
commerce.  So  by  a  bill  of  3  Will.  4,  orders  so  made  are  not  absolutely  to
power  woe  proposed  to  be  given  to  become  law  until  they  haye  been  sub-
eight  of  the  judges  to  make  rules  and  mitted  to,  and  not  objected  against,
ttderi  respeoting  pleading,  these  not  in  parliament  dnxing  six  woeka.— G.

•  2  77


12  OF  THB  SOVXUEI0H.


BOOK  X.
CHAP.  m.


nation  was  Yolnntarily  silent  npon  it,  this  would  be  considered

as  an  approbation  of  the  act  of  its  representatires.

a  35. The -^^^  ^^  treating  here  of  the  change  of  the  constitntion,  wo

naaon treat  only  of  the  right :  the  question  of  expediency  belongs

ought  not to  politics. We  shall  therefore  only  observe  in  general,  that

to  attempt great  changes  in  a  state  being  delicate  and  dangerous  opern-

gMi  GM' ^^^^^y  *^^  frequent  changes  being  in  their  own  nature  pre-

Uon.  judicial,  a  people  ought  to  be  very  circumspect  in  this  point,

and  never  be  inclined  to  make  innovations  without  the  moat

pressing  reasons,  or  an  absolute  necessity. The  fickleness

of  the  Athenians  was  ever  inimical  to  the  happiness  of  the

republic,  and  at  length  proved  fatal  to  that  liberty  of  which

they  were  so  jealous,  without  knowing  how  to  enjoy  it.

{  36. It  is We  may  conclude  from  what  has  been  said  (§  31),  that  if

the  Judge  of  any  disputes  arise  in  a  state  respecting  the  fundamental

reii^'' U)  ^*^^>  ^^^  public  administration,  or  the  rights  of  the  different

the  goyern-  powers  of  which  it  is  composed,  it  belongs  to  the  nation  alone

ment. to  judge  and  determine  them conformably  to  its  political

constitution.

{  37. No In  short,  all  these  affairs  being  solely  a  national  concern,

foreign j^q  foreign  power  has  a  right  to  interfere  in  them,  nor  ought

•  ri^ht^ to  intermeddle  with  them  otherwise  than  by  its  good  offices,

interfere, nnless  requested  to  do  it,  or  induced  by  particular  reasons.

If  any  intrude  into  the  domestic  concerns  of  another  nation,

and  attempt  to  put  a  constraint  on  its  deliberations,  they  do

it  an  injury.


CHAP.  IV.

OTAP.  iT. OF  THE  SOVEREIGN, HIS OBLIGATIONS,  AND  HIS  BIGHTS.

;  38.  Of  tke  THE  reader  cannot  expect  to  find  here  a  long  deduction
f  »T6reigii.  ^f  ^jjg  rights  of  Sovereignty,  and  the  functions  of  a  prince.
These  are  to  be  found  in  treatises  on  the  public  law.  In  this
chapter  we  only  propose  to  show,  in  consequence  of  the  grand
principles  of  the  law  of  nations,  what  a  sovereign  is,  and  to
give  a  general  idea  of  his  obligations  and  his  rights.

We  have  said  that  the  sovereignty  is  that  public  authority
which  commands  in  civil  society,  and  orders  and  directs  what
each  citizen  is  to  perform,  to  ootain  the  end  of  its  institution.
This  authority  originally  and  essentially  belonged  to  the  body
of  the  society,  to  which  each  member  submitted,  and  ceded
his  natural  right  of  conducting  himself  in  every  thing  as  he
pleased,  according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own  understanding,
and  of  doing  himself  justice.  But  the  body  of  the  societj
does  not  always  retain  in  its  own  hands  this  sovereign  Ilu-
thority:  it  frequently  intrusts  it  to  a  senate,  or  to  a  single
person. That  senate,  or  that  person,  is  then  the  sovereign.

18


OF  THB  SOVBREiaN.  18

It  is  evident  that  men  form  a  political  society,  and  submit book  i. •
to  laws,  solely  for  their  own  advantage  and  safety. The  ^^^^'  ^'


Bovereign  authority  is  then  established  only  for  the  common  ?  J^* ^'  ^
good  of  all  the  citizens ;  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  think  tl^atShSfopflit
it  could  change  its  nature  on  passing  into  the  hands  of  a  safety  and
senate  or  a  monarch. Flattery,  therefore,  cannot,  without  advantage
rendering  itself  equally  ridiculous  and  odious,  deny  that  the  ^^  «o«i«^-
sovereign  is  only  established  for  the  safety  and  advantage  of
society.

A  good  prince,  a  wise  conductor  of  society,  ought  to  have
his  mind  impressed  with  this  great  truth,  that  the  sovereign
power  is  solely  intrusted  to  him  for  the  safety  of  the  state,
and  the  happiness  of  all  the  people ;  that  he  is  not  permitted
to  consider  himself  as  the  principal  object  in  the  administra-
tion of  affairs,  to  seek  his  own  satisfaction,  or  his  private
advantage ;  but  that  he  ought  to  direct  all  his  views,  all  his
steps,  to  the  greatest  advantage  of  the  state  and  people  who
have  submitted  to  him.*  What  a  noble  sight  it  is  to  see  a
king  of  England  rendering  his  parliament  an  account  of  his
principal  operations — assuring  that  body,  the  representatives
of  the  nation,  that  he  has  no  other  end  m  view  thair  the  glory
of  the  state  and  the  happiness  of  his  people — and  affection-
ately thanking  all  who  concur  with  him  in  such  salutary
views !  Certainly,  a  monarch  who  makes  use  of  this  lan-
guage, and  by  his  conduct  proves  the  sincerity  of  his  pro-
fessions, is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  wise,  the  only  great  man.
But,  in  most  kingdoms,  a  criminal  flattery  has  long  since
caused  these  maxims  to  be  forgotten.  A  crowd  of  servile
courtiers  easily  persuade  a  proud  monarch  that  the  nation
was  made  for  him,  and  not  he  for  the  nation.  He  soon  con-
siders the  kingdom  as  a  patrimony  that  is  his  own  property,
and  his  people  as  a  herd  of  cattle  from  which  he  is  to  derive
his  wealth,  and  which  he  may  dispose  of  to  answer  his  own
.views,  and  gratify  his  passions.  Hence  those  fatal  wars
undertaken  by  ambition,  restlessness,  hatred,  and  pride ; —
hence  those  oppressive  taxes,  whose  produce  is  dissipated  by
ruinous  luxury,  or  squandered  upon  mistresses  and  favourites ;
— hence,  in  fine,  are  important  posts  given  by  favour,  while
public  merit  is  neglected,  and  every  thing  that  does  not  im-
mediately interest  the  prince  is  abandoned  to  ministers  and
subalterns.  Who  can,  in  this  unhappy  government,  discover
an  authority  established  for  the  public  welfare  ? A  great

^ ■ ■■ I ■  I^^^^M ■ ■ ■  I ■■ ■ ^ —1 r  - - T I I I I  ■ I  Bill I ■ ■  11 IW^^MI I M^l

*  The last  worda  of  Louts  VL  to  fore  had  done  on  similar  occasions)  that

his  son I^nis  VII.  were^<<  Remem-  '<  a  single  hour's  attention  devoted  by  a

k»*r,  m  J  son,  that  royalty  is  but  a  public  prince  to  the  care  of  his  state,  is  of

«mployment»  of  which  you  must  render  more  use  and  consequence  than  all  the

a  rigorous  account  to  him  who  is  the  homage  and  prayers  he  could  olTer  up

anle  disposer  of  crowns  and  sceptres/'  to  Qod ,  during  his  whole  life." The

*n.ht  Volley's  Hist  of  France,  VoL  XIL  same  sentiment  is  found  in  the  Eoraiu

1^-  05-  Hist  of  Timv-Bec,  Book  XL  ch.  xlL

Xifflv-Beo  derlaied  (as  he  often  Im*

Tff


14  OF  THB  SOVSBBiaN.

BOOK  I. prince  will  be  on  his  guard  even  againat  his  virtues. Let  as
^HAP.  lY. jjQ^  g^y^  ^j^jj  gQmg  writers,  that  private  virtues  are  not  the

virtues  of  kings — a  maxim  of  superficial  politicians,  or  of
[  14  ]  those  who  are  very  inaccurate  in  their  expressions.  Good-
ness, friendship,  gratitude,  are  still  virtues  on  the  throne ;
and  would  to  God  they  were  always  to  be  found  there !  But
a  wise  king  does  not  yield  an  undisceming  obedience  to  their
impulse.  He  cherishes  them,  he  cultivates  them  in  his  private
life ;  but  in  state  affairs  he  listens  only  to  justice  and  sound
policy.  And  why  ?  because  he  knows  that  the  govemmen  t
was  intrusted  to  him  only  for  the  happiness  of  society,  and
that,  therefore,  he  ought  not  to  consult  his  own  pleasure  in
the  use  he  makes  of  his  power.  He  tempers  his  goodness
with  wisdom;  he  gives  to  friendship  his  domestic  and  private
favours ;  he  distributes  posts  and  employments  according  to
merit ;  public  rewards  to  services  done  to  the  state.  In  a
word,  he  uses  the  public  power  only  with  a  view  to  the  public
welfare.  All  this  is  comprehended  in  that  fine  saying  of
Lewis  Xn. : — "  A  king  of  France  does  not  revenge  the  in-
juries of  a  duke  of  Orleans."
1 40.  Of  hii  A  political  society  is  a  moral  person  (Prelim.  §  2)  inasmuch
wpresenta-  ^s  it  has  an  Understanding  and  a  will,  of  which  it  makes  ase
tive  ebftrao-  j^j.  ^^^  conduct  of  its  affairs,  and  is  capable  of  obligations
and  rights.  When,  therefore,  a  people  confer  the  sovereignty
on  any  one  person,  they  invest  him  with  their  understanding
and  will,  and  make  over  to  him  their  obligations  and  rights,
BO  far  as  relates  to  the  administration  of  the  state,  and  to  the
exercise  of  the  public  authority.  The  sovereign,  or  conductor
of  the  state,  thus  becoming  the  depositary  of  the  obligations
and  rights  relative  to  government,  in  him  is  found  the  moral
person,  who,  without  absolutelv  ceasing  to  exist  in  the  nation,
acts  thenceforwards  only  in  him  and  by  him.  Such  is  the
origin  of  the  representative  character  attributed  to  the  sove-
reign. He  represents  the  nation  in  all  the  affairs  in  which
he  may  happen  to  be  engaged  as  a  sovereign.  It  does  not
debase  the  dignity  of  the  greatest  monarch  to  attribute  to
him  this  representative  character ;  on  the  contrary,  nothing
sheds  a  greater  lustre  on  it,  since  the  monarch  thus  unites  iu
Ltrart^^  ^  ^'*  ^'^  person  all  the  majesty  that  belongs  to  the  entire  body
with  the  ob. of  *l»e  nation.

ligationi  of  The  Sovereign,  thus  clothed  with  the  public  authority,  with
the  nation,  every  thing  that  constitutes  the  moral  personality  of  the
Jnth^tl*'^^  nation,  of  course  becomes  bound  by  the  obligations  of  that
rights. nation,  and  invested  with  its  rights.

;  42.  HiB  All  that  has  been  said  in  Chap.  II.  of  the  genei«ii  craties
duty  with  of  a  nation  towards  itself  particularly  regards  the  sovereign,
nspeot  to  jJq  jg  |.|j^  depositary  of  the  empire,  and  of  the  power  of  com-
▼ationand  ^landing  whatever  conduces  to  the  public  welfare ;  he  ought,
perfection  of  therefore,  as  a  tender  and  wise  father,  and  as  a  faithful  ad-
the  nation,  ministrator,  to  watch  for  the  nation,  and  take  care  to  preserve

80


07  THB  SOYSBSias;  14

ft,  and  render  it  more  perfect ;  to  Ibetter  its  state,  and  to book  i.
secure  it,  as  far  as  possible,  against  every  thing  that  threatens  -^E^^iill
its  safety  or  its  happiness.

Hence  all  the  rights  which  a  nation  derires  from  its  obli-  j  43. nu
gstion  to  preserve  and  perfect  itself,  and  to  improve  its  state,  rights  m  Uiii
(see  §§  18,  2e,  and  2§,  of  this  book) ;  all  these  rights,  I  say,  '««p««^
reside  in  the  sovereign,  who  is  therefore  indifferently  called [  15  ]
the  conductor  of  the  society,  superior,  prince,  Ac.

We  have  observed  above,  that  every  nation  ought  to  know  ;  44.  He
Itself. This  obligation  devolves  on  the  sovereign,  since  it  is  ought  to
he  who  is  to  watch  over  the  preservation  and  perfection  of  ^^^^  ^^
the  nation. The  duty  which  the  law  of  nature  here  imposes  "*  ^"*
on  the  conductors  of  nations  is  of  extreme  importance,  and
of  considerable  extent. They  ought  exactly  to  know  the
whole  country  subject  to  their  authority ;  its  qualities,  de-
fects, advantages,  and  situation  with  regard  to  the  neigh-
bouring states ;  and  they  ought  to  acquire  a  perfect  know-
ledge of  the  manners  and  general  inclinations  of  their  people,
their  virtues,  vices,  talents,  &c. All  these  branches  of  know-
ledge are  necessary  to  enable  them  to  govern  properly.

The  prince  derives  his  authority  from  the  nation ;  he  pos- ;  45. The
sesses  just  so  much  of  it  as  they  have  thought  proper  to  intrust  extent  of  bi«
him  with.* If  the  nation  has  plainly  and  simply  invested  ^^®''
him  with  the  sovereignty,  without  limitation  or  division,  he  is
supposed  to  be  invested  with  all  the  prerogatives,  without  Preroga-
which  the  sovereign  command  or  authority  could  not  be  ex-  ^}'^^^  ^^  ™*'
erted  in  the  manner  most  conducive  to  the  public  welfare.  ^®"'^'
These  are  called  regal  prerogatives^  or  the  prerogatives  of
majesty.

But  when  the  sovereign  power  is  limited  and  regulated  by  j  46. The
the  fundamental  laws  of  the  state,  those  laws  show  the  prince  prince *
the  extent  and  bounds  of  his  power,  and  the  manner  in  which  ®"^^*  ^
he  is  to  exert  it. The  prince  is  therefore  strictly  obliged  not[^p^°j^^*]J^
onlv  to  respect,  but  also  to  support  them. The  constitution  funda-
and  the  fundamental  laws  are  the  plan  on  which  the  nation  mental
has  resolved  to  labour  for.  the  attainment  of  happiness ;  the  ^*''*-
execution  is  intrusted  to  the  prince. Let  him  religiously
follow  this  plan ;  let  him  consider  the  fundamental  laws  m
inviolable  and  sacred  rules ;  and  remember  that  the  moment
he  deviates  from  them,  his  commands  become  unjust,  and  are
but  a  criminal  abuse  of  the  power  with  which  he  is  intrusted.
He  is,  by  virtue  of  that  power,  the  guardian  and  defender  of

*  Keque  enim  se  pnneeps  reipahlics  the sorereign. Qnod  caput est, tit

ct  fiagalomm dominum arbitrabitor,  prinoipi penmasuni,  totius reipublioee

qaaiBTifl a^scntatoribnfl id  in anrem  mi^orem  qnam  ipsius  nnins  anctorita-

iMUMtimntibag,  sed  reotorem  mercede  tern  esse: neque  pessimis hominibus

a  ciribos  designata,  qnam  angere,  nisi  oredat  diTersam  affinnantibus  gratifi-

ipds rolentibns, nefas ezistimabit.  oandi  etadio ;  qa«  magna  peniieiee  eit.

Ibid.  e.  r. — From  this  principle  it  fol-  Ibid,
levi  that  the nation ii  superior to

11  n


li  OF  THB  SOVBRBiaN*

BOOK  I. the  laws :  and  while  it  is  his  duty  to  restrain  each  daring
-CHAP.  IT.  YiQiator  of  them,  ought  he  himself  to  trample  them  under

foot?*
{  47. He If  the  prince  be  invested  with  the  legislative  power,  he  may,
may  change  according  to  his  wisdom,  and  when  the  public  advantage  re-
fundamen- q^ircs  it,  abolish  those  laws  that  are  not  fundamental,  and
taL  make  new  ones. (See  what  we  have  said  on  this  subject  in

the  preceding  chapter,  §  34.)
i  48.  H«  But  while  these  laws  exist,  the  sovereign  ought  religiously
ought  to  to  maintain  and  observe  them.  They  are  the  foundation  of
anTobsorve  *^®  P^hlic  tranquillity,  and  the  firmest  support  of  the  sove-
the  existing  reigi^  authority.  Every  thing  is  uncertain,  violent,  and  «abject
laws.  to  revolutions,  in  those  unhappy  states  where  arbitrary  power

has  placed  her  throne.  It  is  therefore  the  true  interest  of  the
prince,  as  well  as  his  duty,  to  maintain  and  respect  the  laws ;
he  ought  to  submit  to  them  himself.  We  find  this  truth  esta-
blished in  a  piece  published  by  order  of  Lewis  XIV.,  one  of
the  most  absolute  princes  that  ever  reigned  in  Europe.  ^'  Let
it  not  be  said  that  the  sovereign  is  not  subject  to  the  laws  of
his  state,  since  the  contrary  proposition  is  one  of  the  truths
of  the  law  of  nations,  which  flattery  has  sometimes  attacked,
and  which  good  princes  have  always  defended,  as  a  tutelar
divinity  of  their  states."t
{  49.  In  But  it  is  necessary  to  explain,  this  submission  of  the  prince
what  sense  ^o  the  laws.  First,  he  ought,  as  we  have  just  seen,  to  follow
to  Se'iaw^  t^^i'^  regulations  in  all  the  acts  of  his  administration.  In  the
second  place,  he  is  himself  subject,  in  his  private  affairs,  to
all  the  laws  that  relate  to  property.  I  say,  ''  in  his  private
affairs;*'  for  when  he  acts  as  a  sovereign  prince,  and  in  the
name  of  the  state,  he  is  subject  only  to  the  fundamental  laws,
and  the  law  of  nations.  In  the  third  place,  the  prince  is  sub-
ject to  certain  regulations  of  general  polity,  considered  by  the
state  as  inviolable,  unless  he  be  excepted  in  express  terms  by
the  law,  or  tacitly  by  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  dignity.

*  In some countries, formal pre-  past  generations,  who  formerlj  oaado

cautions  are  taken against  the abuse  effectual  use of  arms  and  decrees  to

of  power. — '' Reflecting among other  reduce  within  proper  bounds  such  of

things  (says  Qrotius),  that  princes  are  their  soyereigns  as had transgressed

often  found  to  make  no  scruple  of  vio-  the  line  of  duty,  whether  through  their

lating their  promises  under  the  stale  own  licentiousness  or  the  artifices  of

pretext  of  the  public  good,  the  people  their  flatterers. Thus  it  happened  to

of  Brabant,  in order  to obviate  that  John  the  Second;  nor  would  Uiey  con-

inconyenience,  established  the  custom  sent  to  make  peace  with  him  or his

of  never  admitting  their  prince  to  the  successors,  until  those  princes  bad  en-

possession  of  the  government  without  tered into a  solemn engagement to

having previously  made  with  him  a  secure  the  citisens in  the enjoyment

covenant,  that»  whenever  he  may  hap-  of their  privileges." Annals of tZiA

pen  to  violate  the  laws  of  the  countiy,  Netherlands,  Book  IL  note,  edit  a^  i».

they  shall  be  absolved  from  the  oath  1707.

of  obedience  they  had sworn  to  him, f  A  treatise  on^  the  right  of  the  queen

until ample reparation  be  made  for  to  several  states  '^f  the  Spanbh  moo-

the outrages committed. The truth  archy,  1667,  in  12mo,  Part  IL  p.  19X,
of  this  is  confirmed  by  the  example  of
9%


OF  THE  SOYBBEIOK,  ^f 6


There  speak  of  the  laws  that  relate  to  the  situation  of  indi-  book  i.
viduals,  and  particularly  of  those  that  regulate  the  validity  ^"*'''  ^'
of  marriages.  These  laws  are  established  to  ascertain  the
state  of  families :  now  the  royal  family  is^  that  of  all  others
the  most  important  to  be  certainly  known.  But,  fourthly,  we
shall  observe  in  general,  with  respect  to  this  question,  that,
if  the  prince  is  invested  with  «  full,  absolute,  and  unlimited
sovereignty,  he  is  above  the  laws,  which  derive  from  him  all
their  force;  and  he  may  dispense  with  his  own  observance  of  [  17  ]
them,  whenever  natural  justice  and  equity  will  permit  him.
Fifthly,  as  to  the  laws  relative  to  morals  and  good  order,  the
prince  ought  doubtless  to  respect  them,  and  to  support  them
by  his  example.  But,  sixthly,  he  is  certainly  above  all  civil
penal  laws.  The  majesty  of  a  sovereign  will  not  admit  of  his
being  punished  like  a  private  person ;  and  his  functions  are
too  exalted  to  allow  of  his  being  molested  under  pretence  of
a  fault  that  does  not  directly  concern  the  government  of  the
state.

It  is  not  sufficient  that  the  prince  be  above  the  penal  laws :  ?  so.  Hia
even  the  interest  of  nations  requires  that  we  should  go  some-  p®"®**  "  f*-
thing  farther.  The  sovereign  is  the  soul  of  the  society;  if  yioiaWe.  *"
he  be  not  held  in  veneration  by  the  people,  and  in  perfect
security,  the  public  peace,  and  the  happiness  and  safety  of  the
state,  are  in  continual  danger.  The  safety  of  the  nation  then
necessarily  requires  that  the  person  of  the  prince  be  sacred
and  inviolable.  The  Roman  people  bestowed  this  privilege
on  their  tribunes,  in  order  that  they  might  meet  with  no  ob-
struction in  defending  them,  and  that  no  apprehension  might
disturb  them  in  the  discharge  of  their  office.  The  cares,  the
employments  of  a  sovereign,  are  of  much  greater  importance
than  those  of  the  tribunes  were,  and  not  less  dangerous,  if  he
be  not  provided  with  a  powerful  defence.  It  is  impossible
even  for  the  most  just  and  wise  monarch  not  to  make  mal-
contents ;  and  ought  the  state  to  continue  exposed  to  the  dan-
ger of  losing  so  valuable  a  prince  by  the  hand  of  an  assassin  ?
The  monstrous  and  absurd  doctrine,  that  a  private  person  is
permitted  to- kill  a  bad  prince,  deprived  the  French,  in  the
beginning  of  the  last  century,  of  a  hero  who  was  truly  the
father  of  his  people.*  Whatever  a  prince  may  be,  it  is  an
enormous  crime  against  a  nation  to  deprive  them  of  a  sove-
reign whom  they  think  proper  to  obey.f

*  Since  the  abore  was  written,  France  made  hy  Damien  to  (unaanntUe  Loui$

has  witnessed  a  renewal  of  those  hor-  XV.] Note,  edit.  a.d.  1797.
rors. She  sighs  at  the  idea  of  having f  In  Mariana's  work,  abore  quoted,

^ven  birt^  to  a  monster  capable  of  I  find  (chap.  viL  towards the  end)  a

violating  the  majesty  of  kings  in  the  remarkable  instance  of  the  errors  into

person  of  a  prince,  whom  the  qualities  which  we  are  apt  to  be  led  by  a  subtle  v

of  his  heart  entitle  to  the  love  of  his  sophistry  destitute  of  sound  prinoiplesb

subjects  and  the  yenerati<>n  of  foreign-  That author allows  us  to  poison a

ers. ITIu  author  alludet  to  the  attempt  tyrant^  and  eTcn  a  public  enemy,  pro-

83


37  w  TEE  soymusioN.

BOOK  z. But  tkis  high  aitribnte  of  floverfeignty  u  no  reason  whj  the
oHAP.  IT.  q|^|;j[qq  should  not  curb  an  insupportable  tyrant,  pronoonee


{51.  But  gentence  on  him  (still  respecting  in  his  person  the  majesly  of
mlymrh  ^^  rank)  and  withdraw  itself  from  his  obedieuce.  To  this
atyraaty  indisputable  right  a  powerful  republic  owes  its  birth.  The
ftnd  with,  tyranny  exercised  by  Philip  II.  in  the  Netherlands  excited
iraw  itaeif  those  proviuoes  to  rise :  seven  of  them,  closely  confed^mted,
cb^^ionce.  ^'"^^^Ij  mwntained  their  liberties,  under  the  conduct  of  the
heroes  of  the  House  of  Orange  ;  and  Spain,  after  sereral  rain
f  18  ]  and  ruinous  efibrts,  acknowledged  them  sovereign  and  inde-
pendent states.  If  the  authority  of  the  prince  is  limited  and
regulated  by  tVe  fundamental  laws,  the  prince,  on  exceeding
the  bounds  prescribed  him,  commands  without  any  right  and
even  without  a  just  title:  the  nation  is  not  obliged  to  obey
him,  tat  may  resist  his  unjust  attempts.  As  soon  as  a  prince
attacks  the  constitution  of  the  state,  he  breaks  the  contract
which  bound  the  people  to  him ;  the  people  become  free  by
the  act  of  the  sovereign,  and  can  no  longer  view  him  but
as  a  usurper  who  would  load  them  with  oppression.  This
truth  is  acknowledged  by  every  sensible  writer,  whose  pen  is
not  enslaved  by  fear,  or  sold  for  hire.  But  some  celebrated
authors  maintain,  that  if  the  prince  is  invested  with  the
supreme  command  in  a  full  and  absolute  manner,  nobody  has
a  right  to  resist  him,  much  less  to  curb  him,  and  that  naught
remains  for  the  nation  but  to  suffer  and  obey  with  patience.
This  is  founded  upon  the  supposition  that  such  a  sovereign  is
not  accoimtable  to  any  person  for  the  manner  in  which  he
governs,  and  that  if  the  nation  might  control  his  actions  and
resist  him  where  it  thinks  them  unjust,  his  authority  would
no  longer  be  absolute;  which  would  be  contrary  to  this
hypothesis.  They  say  that  an  absolute  sovereign  completely
possesses  all  the  political  authority  of  the  society,  which  no-
body can  oppose ;  that,  if  he  abuses  it,  he  does  ill  indeed,  and
wounds  his  conscience ;  but  that  his  commands  are  n6t  the
Jess  obligatory,  as  being  founded  on  a  lawful  right  to  com-
mand ;  that  the  nation,  by  giving  him  absoulte  authority,  has
reserved  no  share  of  it  to  itself,  and  has  submitted  to  his
discretion,  &c. We  might  be  content  with  answering,  that

Tided  it  be  done  without  obliging  him,  person  who  adminiBtered  the  poison. —

either  by  foroe  or  through  mistake  or  Ne  oogator  tantom  seiens  saU  impra*

ignorance,  to concur  in  the act  that  dens  sibi  conecire  mortom;  qnod  esse

causes  his  own  death, — ^whioh  would  be  nefos  judicamns,  yeneno  in potu  aal

the  case,  for  instance,  in  presenting  him  cibo,  quod  hauriat  qui  perimendos  est,

a  poisoned  draught. For  (says  he),  in  aut  simili  alia retemperato. A  fine

thus  leading  him  to  an  act  of  suicide,  reason,  truly  I Was  Mariana  disposed

although  committed  through  ignorance,  to  insult  the  understandings  of  his  read-

wo  make  him  violate  the  natural  law  ers,  or only  desirous of  throwing  a

which  forbids  each  individual  to  take  slight  varnish  over  the  detestable  doc-

»way  his  own  life ;  and  the  crime  of  trine  contained  in  that  chapter  t — ^KoU^

him  who  thos  nnknowingly  poisons  him-  edit  a.  d.  17I>7,
•elf  redounds  on  the  veal  author, — Uie
S4


OV  TBX  SOYE&SIGH.  it

ED  t1u8  light  there  is  not  any  sovereign  who  is  complete.ly  and  nwm  t.
fully  absolute.  Sat  in  order  to  remove  all  these  vaiii  subtle-  ^^^•■■'^•.
ties,  let  us  remember  the  essential  end  of  civil  society.  Is  it
not  to  labour  in  concert  for  the  common  happiness  of  all  ?
Was  it  not  with  this  view  that  every  citizen  divested  himself
of  his  rights,  and  resigned  his  liberty  ?  Could  the  society
make  such  use  of  its  authority  as  irrevocably  to  surrender
itself  and  all  its  members  to  the  discretion  of  a  cruel  tyrant  ?
JSoy  certainly,  since  it  would  no  longer  possess  any  right
itself,  if  it  were  disposed  to  oppress  a  part  of  the  citizens.
When,  therefore,  it  confers  the  supreme  and  absolute  govern-
ment, without  an  express  reserve,  it  is  necessarily  with  the
tacit  reserve  that  the  sovereign  shall  use  it  for  the  safety  of
the  people,  and  not  for  their  ruin.  If  he  becomes  the  scourge
of  the  state,  be  degrades  himself;  he  is  no  better  than  a
public  enemy,  against  whom  the  nation  may  and  ought  to
defend  itself;  and  if  he  has  carried  his  tyranny  to  the  utmost
height,  why  should  even  the  life  of  so  cruel  and  perfidious  an
enemy  be  spared  ?  Who  shall  presume  to  blame  the  conduct
of  the  Roman  senate,  that  declared  Nero  an  enemy  to  his
country  ?

But  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  observe,  that  this  [  19  3
judgment  can  only  be  passed  by  the  nation,  or  by  a  body
which  represents  it,  and  that  the  nation  itself  cannot  make
any  attempt  on  the  person  of  the  sovereign,  except  in  cases
of  extreme  necessity,  and  when  the  prince,  by  violating  the
laws,  and  threatening  the  safety  of  his  people,  puts  himself
in  a  state  of  war  against  them.  It  is  the  person  of  the  sove-
reign, not  that  of  an  unnatural  tyrant  and  a  public  enemy,
that  the  interest  of  the  nation  declares  sacred  and  inviolable.
We  seldom  see  such  monsters  as  Nero.  In  the  more  common
cases,  when  a  prince  violates  the  fundamental  laws;  when  he
attacks  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  his  subjects ;  or  (if  he
be  absolute)  when  his  government,  without  being  carried  to
extreme  violence,  manifestly  tends  to  the  ruin  of  the  nation ;
it  may  resist  him,  pass  sentence  on  him,  and  withdraw  from
his  obedience ;  but  though  this  may  be  done,  still  his  person
should  be  spared,  and  that  for  the  welfare  of  the  state.'*' It

*  Diflsimalandum oensdo qnatenuB  Henrico  hujus abnepote  ob  ignaTiam

saloj publica patiatar, privstimqne  prayoflqne mores abdicate procenua

oomiptis  moribvfl  prinoeps  contingat;  euffragiifl,  primam  Alfonaus  ejus  frater,

alioqoin  si  rempablicam  in  perioulum  reote  an  secus  non  dispnto,  sed  famen

Tocaty  St  patrin  religionis  eontemptor  in  tenera  tetate  rex est  proolamatna :

ezistity.  neque medicinam ullam,  re-  deinde defuncto AUTonso, Elisdbetha

tapit,  abdicaadam  jndico,  aUum 8ab»  ejus  sorer,  Henrico  invito,  reram  sum^- *

stitnendnm ; qnod in Hispania non  mam  ad  se  traxity  regie  tantam  nomine

semel  fuisse  factum  soimus :  quasi  fera  abstinens  dam  ille  vixit Mariana,  de

irritata,  omniam  telis  peii  debet,  cam,  Eege  et  Regis  Instktat.  Lib.  I.  e.  iii.
bamanitate  abdioata»  tyrannnm  induiC. To  this  authoritjr,  fhraished  bj  Spaii^

Sic  Petro  rege  ob  immaaitatem  dejeeto  join  that  of  Scotland,  proved  bj  the

pubiiee,  Henriens  ejus  frater,  qoamvis  letter  of  the  barons  to  the  pope,  dated

•z  impari  matre,  regnum  obtinait. Sio  AprU  6^  1320,  ze<|n«Bting  him  to  pr»-

H  S6


20  09  THfl  SOVB&EIGV.


OHiP.  IT*


j^oK  i^  is  above  a  centary  since  the  English  took  up  arms  againsft
""*""'  their  king,  and  obliged  him  to  descend  from  the  thr*  ne.  A
set  of  able,  enterprising  men,  spurred  on  by  ambiti/m,  took
advantage  of  the  terrible  ferment  caused  by  fanaticism  and
party  spirit ;  and  Great  Britain  suffered  her  sovereign  to  die
unworthily  on  a  scaffold.  The  nation  coming  to  itself  dis-
covered its  former  blindness.  If,  to  this  day,  it  still  annually
makes  a  solemn  atonement,  it  is  not  only,  from  the  opinion
that  the  unfortunate  Charles  I.  did  not  deserve  so  cruel  a
fate,  but,  doubtless,  from  a  conviction  that  the  very  safety
of  the  state  requires  the  person  of  the  sovereign  to  be  held
sacred  and  inviolable,  and  that  the  whole  nation  ought  to
render  this  maxim  venerable,  by  paying  respect  to  it  when
the  care  of  its  own  preservation  will  permit

One  word  more  on  the  distinction  that  is  endeavoured  to
be  made  here  in  favour  of  an  absolute  sovereign.  Whoever
has  well  weighed  the  force  of  the  indisputable  principles  we
have  established,  will  be  convinced,  that  when  it  is  necessary
to  resist  a  prince  who  has  become  a  tyrant,  the  riffht  of  the
people  is  still  the  same,  whether  that  prince  was  made  abso-
lute by  the  laws,  or  was  not ;  because  that  right  is  derived

rail  on  the  king  of  England  to  desist  qoam  nemo,  bonus  nisi  simnl  eam  rita

from  his  enterprises  against  Scotland,  amittit.

After  haying  spoken  of  the  evils  they  "  In  the  year  1581"  (says  (Jrotias,

had  suffered  from  him,  they  add — A  Ann. Book III.) "the confedemted

qulbns  mails  innumeris,  ipso  Jarante  provinces of the Netheriands — after

qui post  vulnera medetor e( sanat,  having for nine  years continned to

liberati  sumus  per  serenissimum  prin-  wage  war  against  Philip  the  Second,

oipem regem et dominum nostrum,  without  ceasing  to  acknowledge him

dominnm  Robertnm,  qui  pro  populo  et  as  their  sovereign — at  length  solemnly

hflsreditate  snis  de  manibns  inimicomm  deprived  him  of  the  aaUiority  he  had

liberandis,  quasi  alter  Maccabssus  aut  possessed  over  their  oonntry,  beeausa

Josue,  labores  et  tadia,  inedias  et  pe-  he  had  violated  their  laws  and  priri-

ricula, laato sustinuit animo. Quem  leges." The author afterwards ob-

etiam  divina  dispositio,  et  (juxta  leges  serves,,  that '<  France, Spain herself^

et  oonsuetndines  nostras,  quas  usque  England, Sweden, Denmark,  furnish

ad mortem sustinere volnmus)  juris  instances  of kings  deposed  by their

successio, et debitus nostrorum  con-  people; so  that  there  are  at  present

sensus  et  assensus nostrum fecerunt  few  sovereigns  in  Europe  whose  right

prinoipem  atque  regem :  cui,  tanquam  to  the  crown  rests  on  any  other  fonnd&-

illi  per  quem  salus  in  populo  fkcta  es<»  tion  than  the  right  which  the  people

pro  nostra  libertate  tuenda,  tarn  jure  •  possess  of  divesting  their  sovereign  of

quam  meritis  tenemur,  et  volumus  in  his  power  when  he  makes  an  ill  us^

omnibus  adhssrere. Quem, si  ab  in-  of it." Pursuant to this idea, the

oeptis desistet, regi Anglorum ant  United  Provinces,  in  their  justSficatory

Anglis  nos  aut  regnum  noslxiim  volens  letters  on  that subject,  addressed to

Bubjicere,  tanquam inimicum  nostrum  the  princes  of  the  empire  and  the  king

et sni nostrique juris subversorenf,  of  Denmark — after  having  enumerate

statim expellere nitemur, et alium  the  oppressive  acts  of  the  king  of  Spain,

regem nostrum,  qui ad defensionem  added — "Then,  by  a  mode  which  has

nostram sufficiet, faciemus: quia,  been  often  enough adopted  even by

quamdiu  eentum  viri  remanserint,  nun-  those nations that now live under

quam Anglorum dominio  aliquatenus  kingly government, we wrested the

Tolumns  subjngari. Non  enim  propter  sovereignty fW>m him  whose actions

gloriam,  divitias,  ant  honores  pugna-  were all contrary  to the  duty of  ■

Bins,  sed  propter  Ubertatem  solummodo,  prince." Ibid. — ^Note,  edik  A.  d.  1797.

8e


OF  IHB  SOVEBEIGN.  20

from  what  is  the  object  of  all  political  society — the  safety  of  book  i.
the  nation,  which  is  the  supreme  law.*  But,  if  the  distino-  ^^^^'  '^'.
tion  of  which  we  are  treating  is  of  no  moment  with  respect  to
the  right,  it  can  be  of  none  in  practice,  with  respect  to  expe-
diency. As  it  is  very  diflScult  to  oppose  an  absolute  prince,
and  it  cannot  be  done  without  raising  great  disturbances  in
the  state,  and  the  most  violent  and  dangerous  commotions,  it
ought  to  be  attempted  only  in  cases  of  extremity,  when  the  <

public  miseries  are  raised  to  such  a  height  that  the  people  may
Bay  with  Tacitus,  miseram  pacem  vel  belh  bene  mtUariy  that
it  is  better  to  expose  themselves  to  a  civil  war  than  to  endure
them.  But  if  the  prince's  authority  is  limited,  if  it  in  some
respects  depends  on  a  senate,  or  a  parliament  that  represents
the  nation,  there  are  means  of  resisting  and  ^curbing  him,
without  exposing  the  state  to  violent  shocks.  When  mild  and
innocent  remedies  can  be  applied  to  the  evil,  there  can  be  no
reason  for  waiting  until  it  becomes  extreme. "*

But  however  limited  a  prince's  authority  may  be,  he  is  1 62. Arbi-
commonly  very  jealous  of  it ;  it  seldom  happens  that  he  pa-  tration  be.
tiently  suffers  resistance,  and  peaceably  submits  to  the  judg-  f^®®**  ^*
ment  of  his  people. Can  he  want  support,  while  he  is  the  hil  subjer-r*
distributor  of  favours  ? We  see  too  many  base  and  ambitious f  21  1
souls,  for  whom  the  state  of  a  rich  and  decorated  slave  has
more  charms  than  that  of  a  modest  and  virtuous  citizen. It
is  therefore  always  di£Scult  for  a  nation  to  resist  a  prince  and
pronounce  sentence  on  his  c(teduct,  without  exposing  the  state
to  dangerous  troubles,  and  to  shocks  capable  of  overturning
it. This  has  sometimes  occasioned  a  compromise  between  the
prince  and  the  subjects,  to  submit  to  the  decision  of  a  friendly
power  all  the  disputes  that  might  arise  between  them. Thus
the  kings  of  Denmark,  by  solemn  treaties,  formerly  referred
to  those  of  Sweden  the  differences  that  might  arise  between
them  and  their  senate ;  and  this  the  kings  ef  Sweden  have
also  done  with  regard  to  those  of  Denmark. The  princes  and
states  of  West  Friesland,  and  the  burgesses  of  Embden,  have
in  the  same  manner  constituted  the  republic  of  the  United
Provinces  the  judge  of  their  differences. The  princes  and  the
city  of  Neufchatel  established,  in  1406,  the  canton  of  Berne
perpetual  judge  and  arbitrator  of  their  disputes. Thus  also,
according  to  the  spirit  of  the  Helvetic  confederacy,  the  entire
body  takes  cognisance  of  the  disturbances  that  arise  in  any

*  Po|uli  patroni  non  pauciora  neque  Est  tamen  salntaris  oogitatio,  nt  sit

minora  pnBsidia  habent. Certearepub>  prinoipibiu  perauasum,  si  rempablicann

lica,  ande  ortam  habet  regia  potostas,  oppresserint,  si  vitiis  et  foeditatc  intole-

rebns  exigoDtibus,  rogens  in  jas  yocari  randi  erant»  ea  se  oonditione  vivere,  ut

potest,  et,  si  sanitatem  respuat^  prinoi-  non  jare  tantnm,  sod cum  laude ot

pata  spoliari ;  neqfao  ita  in  prinoipem  gloria,  perimi  poesiiit.  Ibid^ — ^Nofee,  edit

Jura  potestaUs  tnui8Uilii»  at  non  sibi  ▲•  d.  1797.
majorem  reservftrit  potestatem. Ibid,

eap.  tL  9S[


21  09  THB  fiOTBBfitQir.


BO0K  I. of  the  eonfederated  stateB,  though  each  of  Aem  is  truly  80Te»
CHAP.  IT.  f  Q]^Q  g^Q^  independent.

^  53.  The  As  soon  08  a  nation  acknowledges  a  prince  for  its  lawfol
obedience  sovereign,  all  the  citizens  owe  him  a  faithful  obedience.  He
H  1!  «!!!  *«  can  neither  fforem  the  state,  nor  perform  what  the  nation  ex-

jecta  owe  to  o. ._,  ^  ^  _ ,  _ cmi_-.

a  sovereign,  pects  iTom  him,  if  he  be  not  punctually  obeyed,  bubjects
then  have  no  right,  m  doubtful  cases,  to  examine  the  wisdom
or  justice  of  their  sovereign's  commands ;  this  examination
belongs  to  the  prince :  his  subjects  ought  to  suppose  (if  there
be  a  possibility  of  supposing  it)  that  all  his  orders  are  just  and
salutary :  he  alone  is  accountable  for  the  evil  that  may  result
from  them.
{  64.  In  Nevertheless  this  ought  not  to  be  entirely  a  blind  obedi-
what  oaees  euce.  No  engagement  can  oblige,  or  even  authorize,  a  man
resUthim.  ^  violate  the  law  of  nature.  AH  authors  who  have  any  re-
gard to  conscience  or  decency  agree  that  no  one  ought  to
obey  such  commands  as  are  evidently  contrary  to  that  sacred
law.  Those  governors  of  places  who  bravely  refused  to  exe-
cute the  barbarous  orders  of  Charles  IX..  on  the  memorable
day  of  St.  Bartholomew,  have  been  universally  praised ;  and
the  court  did  not  dare  to  punish  them,  at  least  openly.
^'Sire,''  said  the  brave  Orte,  governor  of  Bayonne,  in  lus
letter,  ^^I  have  communicated  your  majesty's  command  to
your  faithful  inhabitants  and  warriors  in  the  garrison ;  and  I
have  found  there  only  good  citizens  and  brave  soldiers,  but
not  a  single  executioner:  wherefore  both  they  and  I  most
humbly  entreat  your  majesty  to  be  pleased  to  employ  our
hands  and  our  lives  in  things  that  are  possible,  however
hazardous  they  may  be ;  and  we  will  exert  ourselves  to  the
last  drop  of  our  blood  in  the  execution  of  them."*  The  Count
f  22  ]  de  Tende,  Chamy,  and  others,  replied  to  those  who  brought
them  the  orders  of  the  court,  "  that  they  had  too  great  a  re-
spect for  the  king,  to  believe  that  such  barbarous  orders  came
from  him."

It  is  more  difficult  to  determine  in  what  cases  a  subject  may
not  only  refuse  to  obey,  but  even  resist  a  sovereign,  and  op-
pose his  violence  by  force.  When  a  sovereign  does  injury  to
any  one,  he  acts  without  any  real  authority ;  but  we  ought
not  thence  to  conclude  haatily  that  the  subject  may  resist
him.  The  nature  of  sovereignty,  and  the  welfare  of  the  state,
will  not  permit  citizens  to  oppose  a  prince  whenever  his  com-
mands, appear  to  them  unjust  or  prejudicial.  This  would  be
falling  back  into  the  state  of  nature,  and  rendering  govern-
ment impossible.  A  subject  ought  patiently  to  suffer  from
the  prince  doubtful  wrongs,  and  wrongs  that  are  supportable  ;
the  former,  because  whoever  has  submitted  to  the  decision  of
a  judge,  is  no  longer  capable  of  deciding  his  own  pretensions;
and  as  to  those  that  are  supportable,  niey  ought  to  be  sacri-

*  Meieray's  History  of  Franoe,  toL  IL  f  1107.


OF  THB  SOVEEEIGN.  i2

ficed  to  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  state,  on  accoutit  of  the ^^^  '•

r  _ . _ y _. . . ' .  _ .  CHAP. IV.


great  advantages  obtained  by  living  in  society.  It  is  pre-
sumed, as  matter  of  course,  that  every  citizen  has  tac\tly  en-
gaged to  observe  this  moderation ;  because,  without  it,  society
could  not  exist.  But  when  the  injuries '  are  manifest  and
atrocious, — when  a  prince,  without  any  apparent  reason,
attempts  to  deprive  us  of  life,  or  of  those  things  the  loss  of
which  would  render  life  irksome,  who  can  dispute  our  right  to
resist  him  ?  Self-preservation  is  not  only  a  natural  right,
but  an  obligation  imposed  by  nature,  and  no  mail  can  entirely
and  absolutely  renounce  it.  And  though  he  might  give  it  up,
can  he  be  considered  as  having  done  it  by  his  political  en-
gagements, since  he  entered  into  society  only  to  establish  his
own  safety  upon  a  more  solid  basis  ?  The  welfare  of  society
does  not  lequire  such  a  sacrifice;  and,  as  Barbeyrac  well
observes  in  his  notes  on  Grotius,  "If  the  public  interest  re-
quires that  those  who  obey  should  suffer  some  inconvenience,
it  is  no  less  for  the  public  interest  that  those  who  command
should  be  afraid  of  driving  their  patience  to  the  utmost  ex-
tremity."* Th(B  prince  who  violates  all  laws,  who  no  longer
observes  any  measures,  and  who  would  in  his  transports  of
fury  take  away  the  life  of  an  innocent  person,  divests  himself
of  his  character,  and  is  no  longer  to  be  considered  in  any
other  light  than  that  of  an  unjust  and  outrageous  enemy,
against  whom  his  people  are  allowed  to  defend  themselves.
The  person  of  the  sovereign  is  sacred  and  inviolable :  but  he
who,  after  having  lost  all  the  sentiments  of  a  sovereign,  divests
himself  even  of  the  appearances  and  exterior  conduct  of  a
monarch,  degrades  himself:  he  no  longer  retains  the  sacred
character  of  a  sovereign,  and  cannot  retain  the  prerogatives
attached  to  that  exalted  rank.  However,  if  this  prince  is  not
a  monster, — ^if  he  is  furious  only  against  us  in  particular,  and  [  28  1
from  the  effects  of  a  sudden  transport  or  a  violent  passion,
and  is  supportable  to  the  rest  of  the  nation,  the  respect  we
ought  to  pay  to  the  tranquillity  of  the  state  is  such,  and  the
respect  due  to  sovereign  majesty  so  powerful,  that  we  are
strictly  obliged  to  seek  every  other  means  of  preservation,
rather  than  to  put  his  person  in  danger.  Every  one  knows
the  example  set  by  David :  he  fled, — he  kept  himself  con-
cealed, to  secure  himself  from  SauFs  fury,  and  more  than
once  spared  the  life  of  his  persecutor.  When  the  reason  of
Charles  VI.  of  France  was  suddenly  disordered  by  a  fatal
accident,  he  in  his  fury  killed  several  of  those  who  surrounded
him :  none  of  them  thought  of  securing  his  own  life  at  the  ex-
pense of  that  of  the  king ;  they  only  endeavoured  to  disarm
and  secure  him.  They  did  their  duty  like  men  of  honour  and
faithful  subjects,  in  exposing  their  lives  to  save  that  of  this
anfortunate  monarch :  such  a  sacrifice  is  due  to  the  state  and  .


^  De  Jure  BelB  A  Pacis,  lib.  L  osp.  ir.  {  11,  il  2.

12  B  2  8^


23


BOOK  L
CHAP. lY.


§55 Of

minuters.


OF  STATES  ELBCTIVB9

to  sovereign  majestj :  furious  from  the  derangement  of  hltf
faculties,  Charles  was  not  guilty :  he  might  recover  his  health,
and  again  become  a  good  king.

What  has  been  said  is  sufficient  for  the  intention  of  this
work :  tne  reader  ml^y  see  these  questions  treated  more  at
large  in  many  books  that  are  well  known.  We  shall  conclude
this  subject  with  an  important  observation.  A  sovereign  is
undoubtedly  allowed  to  employ  ministers  to  ease  him  in  the
painful  offices  of  government ;  but  he  ought  never  to  surren-
der his  authority  to  them.  When  a  nation  chooses  a  con-
ductor, it  is  not  with  a  view  that  he  should  deliver  up  his
charge  into  other  hands.  Ministers  ought  only  to  be  instru-
ments in  the  hands  of  the  prince ;  he  ought  constantly  to
direct  them,  and  continually  endeavour  to  know  whether  they
act  according  to  his  intentions.  If  the  imbecility  of  age,  or
any  infirmity,  render  him  incapable  of  governing,  a  regent
ought  to  be  nominated,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  state :
but  when  once  the  sovereign  is  capable  of  holding  the  reins,
let  him  insist  on  being  served,  but  never  suffer  himself  to  be
superseded:  The  last  kings  of  France  of  the  first  race  sur-
rendered the  government  and  authority  to  the  mayors  of  the
palace :  thus  becoming  mere  phantoms,  they  justly  lost  the
title  and  honours  of  a  dignity  of  which  they  bad  abandoned
the  functions.  The  nation  has  every  thing  to  gain  in  crown-
ing an  all-powerful  minister,  for  he  will  improve  that  soil  as
his  own  inheritance,  which  he  plundered  whilst  he  only  reaped
precarious  advantages  from  it.


CHAP.  V.


€HAP.  y. OF STATES ELECTIVB, SUCCESSIVE OR HEREDITARY, AXD OP

THOSE  CALLED  PATRIMONIAL.


i  6«. Of WE  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  it  originally

elective belongs  to  a  nation  to  confer  the  supreme  authority,  and  to

choose  the  person  by  whom  it  is  to  be  governed.  If  it  confers

[  24  ] the  sovereignty  on  him  for  his  own  person  only,  reserving  to

itself  the  right  of  choosing  a  successor  after  the  sovereign's

death,  the  state  is  elective. As  soon  as  the  prince  is  elected

according  to  the  laws,  he  enters  into  the  possession  of  all  the

prerogatives  which  those  laws  annex  to  his  dignity.

{  57. Whe- It  has  been  debated,  whether  elective  kings  and  princes  are

ther  electire  real  sovereigns. But  he  who  lays  any  stress  on  this  circmn-

kings  are gtance  must  have  only  a  very  confused  idea  of  sovereignty.

The  manner  in  which  a  prince  obtains  his  dignity  haa  nothing

to  do  with  determining  its  nature. We  must  consider,  first,

whether  the  nation  itself  forms  an  independent  society  (see
00


real  love-
idgni.


SUGGKSSIVEy  OB  HHSBDITABY,  ETC.  21


chap.  1),  and  secondly,  what  is  the  extent  of  the  power  it  has book  i.
introsteid  to  the  prince. Whenever  the  chief  of  an  independ« °°^^'  ^'
ent  state  really  represents  his  nation,  he  ought  to  be  consid-
ered as  a  true  soyereign  (§  40),'eyen  though  his  authority  should
he  limited  in  several  respects.

When  a  nation  would  avoid  the  troubles  which  seldom  fail  i  58. Of
to  accompany  the  election  of  a  sovereign,  it  makes  its  choice  "'»®|'®"*'^«
for  a  long  succession  of  years,  by  establishing  the  right  of  ^^^^^
suecesswriy  or  by  rendering  the  crown  hereditary  in  a  family,  statei.
according  to  the  order  and  rules  that  appear  most  agreeable  7^^  <>ngm
to  that  nation. The  name  of  an  Hereditary  State  or  Kingdom  ®  J  ^^^  "^^*
is  given  to  that  where  the  successor  is  appointed  by  the  same  ^^^^
law  that  regulates  the  successions  of  individuals. The  Sue-
eessive  Kingdom  is  that  where  a  person  succeeds  according  to  a
particular  fundamental  law  of  the  state. Thus  the  lineal  suc-
cession, and  of  males  alone,  is  established  in  France.

The  right  of  succession  is  not  always  the  primitive  esta-  j  60. other
blishment  of  a  nation ;  it  may  have  been  introduced  by  the  ongi^»  of
concession  of  another  sovereign,  and  even  by  usurpation. But  **^  "**^*"
when  it  is  supported  by  long  possession,  the  people  are  con-
sidered as  consenting  to  it ;  and  this  tacit  consent  renders  it
lawful,  though  the  source  be  vicious. It  rests  then  on  the
foundation  we  have  already  pointed  out — a  foundation  that
alone  is  lawful  and  incapable  of  being  shaken,  and  to  which
we  must  ever  revert.

The  same  right,  according  to  Orotius  and  the  generality  i  oo. othei
of  writers,  may  be  derived  from  other  sources,  as  conquest,  **l^^'  ..,
or  the  right  of  a  proprietor,  who,  being  master  of  a  country,  JJ^q^J  ^
should  invite  inhabitants  to  settle  there,  and  give  them  lands,  the  same
on  condition  of  their  acknowledging  him  and  his  heirs  for  thing,
their  sovereigns. But  as  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  society
of  men  can  place  themselves  in  subjection  otherwise  than  with
a  view  to  their  own  safety  and  welfare,  and  still  more  that
they  can  bind  their  posterity  on  any  other  footing,  it  ulti-
mately amounts  to  the  same  thing ;  and  it  must  still  be  said
that  the  succession  is  established  by  the  express  will,  or  the
tacit  consent  of  the  nation,  for  the  welfare  and'safety  of  the
state.

It  thus  remains  an  undeniable  truth,  that  in  all  cases  the  j  61.  A  na-
succession  is  established  or  received  only  with  a  view  to  the  *ion  may
public  welfare  and  the  general  safety. If  it  happened  then  *J|J^/^/^h#
that  the  order  established  in  this  respect  became  destructive  BnocesBion.
to  the  state,  the  nation  would  certainly  have  a  right  to  change
it  by  a  new  law. Salus  populi  suprema  lexy  the  safety  of [  25  ]
the  people  is  the  supreme  law ;  and  this  law  is  agreeable  to
the  strictest  justice,  the  people  having  united  in  society  only
with  a  view  to  their  safety  and  greater  advantage.'*'

*  Nimirom, quod pnbUosB ■alntU dub  ezigentibnt,  immittajri  quid  obstat?
4aiisa  et  oommiuii  oonsensii  statutam Hakiaha,  ibid.  o.  ir.
•Biy  eadem  multitadinis  Toluntatoj  re-  tl


2&  OF  STATES  ELBCTIVB).


vo<nc  r.  This  pretended  proprietary  right  attributed  to  princes  is  m
c^P'  y«  chimera^  produced  by  act  abuse  which  its  supporters  would
fain  make  of  the  laws  respecting  private  inheritances.  The
state  neither  is  nor  can  be  a  patrimony,  unce  the  end  of
'  patrimony  is  the  advantage  of  the  possessor,  whereas  the
prince  is  established  only  for  the  advantage  of  the  state.  ^
The  consequence  is  evident :  if  a  nation  plainly  perceives  that
the  heir  of  her  prince  would  be  a  pernicious  sovereign,  she  haa
a  right  to  exclude  him.

The  authors,  whom  we  oppose,  grant  tius  right  to  a  des-
potic prince,  while  they  refuse  it  to  nations.  This  is  because
they  consider  such  a  prince  as  a  real  proprietor  of  the  empire^
and  will  not  acknowledge  that  the  care  of  their  own  safety^
and  the  right  to  govern  themselves,  still  essentially  belong  to
the  society,  although  they  have  intrusted  them,  even  without
any  express  reserve,  to  a  monarch  and  his  heirs»  In  their
opinion,  the  kingdom  is  the  inheritance  of  the  prince,  in  the
same  manner  as  his  field  and  his  flocks — ^a  maxim  injurious,
to  human  nature,  and  which  they  would  not  have  dared  tO'
advance  in  an  enlightened  age,  if  it  had  not  the  support  of
an  authority  which  too  often  proves  stronger  than  reason  and
justice.
I  «2.  Of  re-  A  nation  may,  for  the  same  reason,  oblige  one  branch  who
Donoiadons.  jemoves  to  another  country,  to  renounce  all  claim  to  the
crown,  as  a  daughter  who  marries  a  foreign  prince.  These
renunciations,  required  or  approved  by  tibe  state,  are  per-
fectly valid,  since  they  are  equivalent  to  a  law  that  suck
persons  and  their  posterity  should  be  excluded  from  the
throne.  Thus  the  laws  of  England  have  for  ever  rejected
every  Roman  Catholic.  ^^  Thus  a  law  of  BAissia,  made  at
[  26  ]  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  most  wisely  excludes
from  the  possession  of  the  crown  every  heir  possessed  of


*  When  Philip  IL  reoigned  the  been  nadons  who  gorenied  themseWe^
Netherlands  to  hifl  daughter  Isabella  by  popular  assemblies,  or  by  a  senate ;
Clara  Eugenia^  it  was  said  (acoording  there  have  been  others  who  intrusted
to  the  testimony  ^  Grotius)  that  it  was  the  general  management  of  their  con-
setting  a  dangerous  precedent,  fbr  a  oems  to  prlnoes.  For  it  is  not  to  be
prince  to  treat  free  citizens  as  his  pro-  imagined,  it  was  added,  that  legitimats
perty,  and  barter  them  away  like  do-  soTerftlgnties  have  originated  &om  any
mestio  slaves;  that,  among  barbari-  other  source  than  the  consent  of  the
ans,  indeed,  the  extraordinary  practice  people,  who  gave  themselves  all  up  to
sometimee  obtained  of  transferring  go-  a  single  person,  or,  for  the  sake  ni
▼ernmente-  by  will  or  donation,  because  avoiding  the  tnmnlfii  and  dtaeord  of
thoae  people  were  incapable  of  discern-  elections,  to  a  whole  family ;  and  those
ing  the  difference  between  a  prinoe  to  whom  they  thus  committed  them*
and  a  master;  but  that  those,  whom  selves  were  induced,  by  the  prospect
superior  knowledge  enabled  to  distin-  of  honourable  pre-eminence  alone,  to
gnish  between  what  is  lawful  and  what  accept  a  dignity  by  which  they  wer«
Sa  not,  could  plainly  perceive  that  the  bound  to  promote  the  general  we^Awe
administration  of  a  state  is  the  pro-  of  their  fellow-citizens  in  preference  to
perty  of  the  people  (thenoA  usually  de>  iheUr  own  private  advantage.  Grot*vs.
nominated  ret-pttbliea) ;  and  thai,  ba  in  Hist,  of  tiie  Disiurbanees  in  the  H^
every  ^riod  of  the  world  tkere  have  tberlaadB,  book  iL^Bdit  a.  b.  1797.
92


8U00B8SI7B,  OR  HSEBDITABY,  BTO.  29

motlier  monftrclij;  and1;hnfl  th«  law  of  Fbrtogal  disqiialifies boos  i.
every  foreigner  -who  lays  claim  to  the  crown  by  right  of  blood. *  '♦  -S5±£lJ:

Some  celebrated  authc^rs,  in  other  respects  very  lewrned
and  judicious,  haye  then  deviated  from  the  true  principles  ia
treating  of  renunciations.  They  have  largely  expatiated  oa
the  rights  of  children  born  or  to  be  born,  of  the  transmission
of  those  rights,  &c.  But  they  ought  to  have  considered  the
succession  less  as  a  property  of  the  reigning  family,  than  as
a  law  of  the  state.  From  this  clear  and  incontestable  prin-
ciple, we  easily  deduce  the  whole  doctrine  of  renunciations.
Those  required  or  approved  by  the  state  are  valid  and  sacred:
they  are  fundamental  laws :  those  not  authorized  by  the  state
can  only  be  obligatory  on  the  prince  who  made  them.  They
cannot  injure  his  posterity,  and  he  himself  may  recede  from
them  in  case  the  state  stands  in  need  of  him  and  gives  him
an  invitation :  for  he  owes  his  services  to  a  people  who  had
committed  their  safety  to  his  care.  For  the  same  reason9
the  prince  cannot  lawfully  resign  at  an  unseasonable  junc-
ture, to  the  detriment  of  the  state,  and  abandon  in  imminent
danger  a  nation  that  had  put  itself  under  his  care.f

In  ordinary  cases,  when  the  state  may  follow  the  established  i  <^S- Tbo
rule  without  being  exposed  to  very  great  and  manifest  danger,  o«^«'o^«>o
it  is  certain  that  every  descendant  ought  to  succeed  when  the  l^^^^  ^^g,.
order  of  succession  calls  him  to  the  throne,  however  great  moniy  to  b«
may  appear  his  incapacity  to  rule  by  himself. This  is  a  con-  kept  (23)
sequence  of  the  spirit  of  the  law  that  established  the  succession :
for  the  people  had  recourse  to  it  only  to  prevent  the  troubles
which  would  otherwise  be  almost  inevitable  at  every  change.
Now  little  advances  would  have  been  made  towards  obtaining
this  end,  if,  at  the  death  of  a  prince,  the  people  were  aJlowed
to  examine  the  capacity  of  his  heir,  before  they  acknowledged
him  for  their  sovereign. ''  What  a  door  would  this  open  for
usurpers  or  malcontents! It  was  to  avoid  these  inconve-
niences that  the  order  of  succession  was  established;  and
nothing  more  wise  could  have  been  done,  since  by  this  means
no  more  is  required  than  hiB  being  the  king's  son,  and  his
being  actually  alive,  which  can  admit  of  no  dispute :  but,  on
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  rule  fixed  to  judge  of  the  capacity
or  incapacity  to  reign.^t Though  the  succession  was  not
established  for  the  particular  advantage  of  the  sovereign  and
his  family,  but  for  that  of  the  state,  the  heir-apparent  has
nevertheless  a  right,  to  which  justice  requires  that  regard
should  be  paid. His  right  is  subordinate  to  that  of  the
nation,  and  to  the  safety  of  the  state ;  but  it  ought  to  take
place  when  the  public  welfare  does  not  oppose  it.  (28)

*  Spirit  of  Laws,  book  xxyi.  chap.  ^  Memorial  in  behalf  of  Madame  de
zziii.,  where  may  be  seen  yerj  good  po-  Longaeyille,  concerning  the  principalitj
KCloal  reasons  for  these  regnlations.  of  Neufohatel,  in  1672.

t  See  farther  on.  (23)  See  this  doctrine  iUastratod  in  1

Bla.  Oom.  247-^.-0.  «


27  01*  STATBS  KLBCnVB,


BOOK  I. These^  reasons  have  tbe  greater  weight,  since  the  law  or
^^^^'  ^' the  state  may  remedy  the  incapacity  of  the  prince  by  nomi-
j  64 Of nating  a  regent^  as  is  practised  in  cases  of  minority. This
regents. regent  is,  during  the  whole  time  of  his  administration,  invested
with  the  royal  authority;  but  he  exercises  it  in  the  king's
name.  (24^
i «5. indi- The  prmciples  we  have  just  established  ns|>ecting  the  suc-
TisibUityof  cessive  or  hereditary  right,  manifestly  show  that  a  prince
Mvereign- j^^^  j^^  right  to  divide  his  state  among  his  children. Every
sovereignty,  properly  so  called,  is,  in  its  own  nature,  one  and
indivisible,  since  those  who  have  united  in  society  cannot  be
separated  in  spite  of  themselves. Those  partitions,  so  con-
trary to  the  nature  of  sovereignty  and  the  preservation  of
states,  have  been  much  in  use ;  but  an  end  has  been  put  to
them,  wherever  the  people,  and  princes  themselves,  have  had
a  clear  view  of  their  greatest  interest,  and  the  foundation  of
their  safety.

But  when  a  prince  has  united  several  different  nations
under  his  authority,  his  empire  is  then  properly  an  assem-
blage of  several  societies  subject  to  the  same  head ;  and  there
exists  no  natural  objection  to  his  dividing  them  among  his
children :  he  may  distribute  them,  if  there  be  neither  law  nor
compact  to  the  contrary,  and  if  each  of  those  nations  consents
to  receive  the  sovereign  he  appoints  for  it. For  this  reason,
France  was  divisible  under  the  first  two  races.* But  being
entirely  consolidated  under  the  third,  it  has  since  been  con-
sidered as  a  single  kingdom ;  it  has  become  indivisible,  and  a
fundamental  law  has  declared  it  so. That  law,  wisely  pro-
viding for  the  preservation  and  splendour  of  the  kingdom,
irrevocably  unites  to  the  crown  all  the  acquisitions  of  its  kings.
(  66. Who The  same  principles  will  also  furnish  us  with  the  solution
are  to  de- of  a  Celebrated  question. When  the  right of  succession
cidedia- becomes  uncertain  in  a  successive  or  hereditary  state,  and
BpectinKthe*^^  ^^  three  competitors  lay  claim  to  the  croWn,  it  is  asked,
suecoBBion "Who  shall  be  the  judge  of  their  pretensions?" Some
to  ft  Bove- learned  men,  resting  on  the  opinion  that  sovereigns  are  sub-
reignty. jqq^^  ^  jjo  Other  judge  but  God,  have  maintained  that  the
competitors  for  the  crown,  while  their  right  remains  uncer-
tain, ought  either  to  come  to  an  amicable  compromise,  enter
into  articles  among  themselves,  choose  arbitrators,  have  re-
course even  to  the  drawing  of  lots,  or,  finally,  determine  the
dispute  by  arms ;  and  that  the  subjects  cannot  in  any  manner
decide  the  question. One  might  be  astonished  that  celebrated
authors  should  have  maintained  such  a'  doctrine. But  since*
even  in  speculative  philosophy,  there  is  nothing  so  absurd  as
not  to  have  been  advanced  by  one  or  other  of  the  philoso-


(24)  Anu,  p.  26,  n. — ^C.  ftpprobaUon  and  consent  of  the  reipeet>

*  Bat  it  is  to  be  obserTed  that  those ive  states,
partitions  were  not  made  without  tha

H


SUCCEgSIYE, OR  HEREniTAKT,  ETC*  28

phers,*  what  can  be  expected  from  the  human  mind,  when *^^^  »•

seduced  by  interest  or  fear  ? What !  in  a  question  that  con ^— ^

cerns  none  so  much  as  the  nation — that  relates  to  a  power
established  only  with  a  view  to  the  happiness  of  the  people —
in  a  quarrel  that  is  to  decide  for  ever  their  dearest  interests,
and  their  very  safety — ^are  they  to  stand  by  as  unconcerned
spectators  ?  Are  they  to  allow  strangers,  or  the  blind  decision
of  arms,  to  appoint  them  a  master,  as  a  flock  of  sheep  are  to
wait  till  it  be  determined  whether  they  are  to  be  delivered
up  to  the  butcher,  or  restored  to  the  care  of  their  shepherd  ?

But,  say  they,  the  nation  has  divested  itself  of  all  juris-
diction, by  giving  itself  up  to  a  sovereign ;  it  has  submitted  to
the  reigning  family ;  it  has  given  to  those  who  are  descended
from  that  family  a  right  which  nobody  can  take  from  them ;
it  has  established  them  its  superiors,  and  can  no  longer  judge
them.  Very  well ! '  But  does  it  not  belong  to  that  same
nation  to  acknowledge  the  person  to  whom  its  duty  binds  it,
and  prevent  its  being  delivered  up  to  another  ?  And  since
it  has  established  the  law  of  succession,  who  is  more  capable
or  has  a  better  right  to  identify  the  individual  whom  the
fundamental  law  had  in  view,  and  has  pointed  out  as  the  suc-
cessor ?  We  may  aflirm,  then,  without  hesitation,  that  the
decision  of  this  grand  controversy  belongs  to  the  nation,  and
to  the  nation  alone.  Even  if  the  competitors  have  agreed
among  themselves,  or  have  chosen  arbitrators,  the  nation  is
not  obliged  to  submit  to  their  regulations,  unless  it  has  con-
sented to  the  transaction  or  compromise — ^princes  not  acknow-
ledged, and  whose  right  is  uncertain,  not  being  in  any  manner
able  to  dispose  of  its  obedience.  The  nation  acknowledges
no  superior  judge  in  an  affair  that  relates  to  its  most  sacred
duties  and  most  precious  rights.

Grotius  and  Puffendorf  differ  in.  reality  but  little  from  our
opinion ;  but  would  not  have  the  decision  of  the  people  or
state  called  a  juridical  sentence  {judicium  jurisdictionis)*
Well !  be  it  so :  we  shall  not  dispute  about  words.  However,
there  is  something  more  in  the  case  than  a  mere  examination
of  the  competitors'  rights,  in  order  to  submit  to  him  who  has
the  best.  All  the  disputes  that  arise  in  society  are  to  be
judged  and  decided  by  the  public  authority.  As  soon  as  the
right  of  succession  is  found  uncertain,  the  sovereign  authority
returns  for  a  time  to  the  body  of  the  state,  which  is  to  exer-
cise it,  either  by  itself  or  by  it  repFCsentatives,  till  the  true
sovereign  be  known.  "The  contest  on  this  right  suspending
the  functions  in  the  person  of  the  sovereign,  the  authority
naturally  returns  to  the  subjects,  not  for  them  to  retain  it,  but
to  prove  on  which  of  the  competitors  it  lawfully  devolves,  and
then  to  commit  it  to  his  hands. It  would  not  be  difficult  to

*  Xesioo  quomodo  nihil  tarn  abaurde philosophoinm. Cio«ro^ do Divinatb
iioi  potest^  quod  non  dicator  ab  aUquo Ub.  iL


S8  09  fiTATSB  BLECTIYSy

MOK  1.  Bnpport,  bj  an  infinite  number  of  examples,  a  iamth  so  en-
J^±^L_Ii_  dent  by  the  light  of  reason :  it  is  sufficient  to  remember  that
the  states  of  France,  after  the  death  of  Charles  the  Fair,
terminated  the  famous  dispute  between  Philip  de  Yalois  and
[  2^  ]  the  king  of  England  ^Edward  III.),  and  that  those  states,
though  subject  to  him  in  whose  favour  they  granted  the  de*
cision,  were  nevertheless  the  judges  of  the  dispute."'*'

Guicciardini,  book  xii.,  also  shows  that  it  was  the  states
of  Arragon  that  decided  the  succession  to  that  kingdom,  in
favour  of  Ferdinand,  grandfather  of  Ferdinand  the  husband
of  Isabella,  queen  of  Castile,  in  preference  to  the  other  re-
lations of  Martin,  king  of  Arragon,  who  asserted  that  the
kingdom  belonged  to  them.f

In  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  also,  it  was  the  states  that
decided  the  disputes  of  those  who  made  pretensions  to  it ;  as
is  proved  by  several  examples  in  the  foreign  political  history. J
The  states  of  the  principality  of  Neufchatel  have  often,  in
the  form  of  a  juridical  sentence,  pronounced  on  the  succes-
sion to  the  sovereignty. In  the  year  1707,  they  decided  be-
tween a  great  number  of  competitors,  and  their  decision  in
favour  of  the  king  of  Prussia  was  acknowledged  by  all  Europe
in  the  treaty  of  Utrecht.
;  07. That The  better  to  secure  the  succession  in  a  certain  and  inva-
the  right  to  riable  order,  it  is  at  present  an  established  rule  in  all  Christian
the  roocea-  gtates  (Portugal  excepted),  that  no  descendant  of  the  sovereign
noTto^de- ^*^  succced  to  the  crown,  unless  he  be  the  issue  of  a  marriage
pend  on  the  that  is  Conformable  to  the  laws  of  the  country.  As  the  nation
jndgment has  established  the  succession,  to  the  nation  alone  "belongs  the
of  a  foreign  power  of  acknowledging  those  who  are  capable  of  succeeding;
power. ^^^  consequently,  on  its  judgment  and  laws  alone  must  de-
pend the  validity  of  the  marriage  of  its  sovereigns,  and  the
legitimacy  of  their  birth.

If  education  had  not  the  power  of  familiarizing  the  human
mind  to  the  greatest  absurdities,  is  there  any  man  of  sense
who  would  not  be  struck  with  astonishment  to  see  so  many
nations  suffer  the  legitimacy  and  right  of  their  princes  to  de-
pend on  a  foreign  power  ?  The  court  of  Rome  has  invented
an  infinite  number  of  obstructions  and  cases  of  invalidity  in
marriages,  and  at  the  same  time  arrogates  to  itself  the  right
of  judging  of  their  validity,  and  of  removing  the  obstruc-
tions ;  so  that  a  prince  of  its  communion  cannot  in  certain
cases  be  so  much  his  own  master  as  to  contract  a  marriage
necessary  to  the  safety  of  the  state.  Jane,  the  only  daughter
of  Henry  IV.,  king  of  Castile,  found  this  true  by  cruel  expe-
rience. Some  rebels  published  abroad  that  she  owed  her  birth
to  Bertrand  de  la  Cueva,  the  king's  favourite ;  and  notwith-

*  Answer  in  behalf  of  Madame  de  {  See Uio same memorial, irhich

Longueville  to  a  memorial  in  behalf  of  qnotes  P.  Labbe's  Royal  Abridgment

Madame  de  Nemoun. f  Ibid.  page  501,  Ac.
•6


SUCCESSIVlSy  0^  HEREDITABT,  ETC.  2^

standing  the  declarations  and  last  will  of  that  prince,  who book  i.
explicitly  and  invariably  acknowledged  Jane  for  his  daughter,  -2!£!il:.
and  nominated  her  his  heiress,  they  called  to  the  crown  Isa-
bella, Henry's  sister,  and  wife  to  Ferdinand,  heir  of  Arragon.
The  grandees  of  Jane's  party  had  provided  her  a  powerful [  80  ]
resonrce,  by  negotiating  a  marriage  between  her  and  Alphon-
Bus,  king  of  Portugal :  but  as  that  prince  was  Jane's  uncle,
it  was  necessary  to  obtain  a  dispensation  from  the  pope ;  and
Pius  II.,  who  was  in  the  interest  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,
refused  to  grant  the  dispensation,  though  such  alliances  were
then  very  common. These  difficulties  cooled  the  ardour  of
the  Portuguese  monarch,  and  abated  the  zeal  of  the  faithful
Castilians. Every  thing  succeeded  with  Isabella,  and  the  un-
fortunate Jane  took  the  veil,  in  order  to  secure,  by  this  heroic
sacrifice,  the  peace  of  Castile.'*'

If  the  prince  proceeds  and  marries,  notwithstanding  the
pope's  refusal,  he  exposes  his  dominions  to  the  most  fatal
troubles.  What  would  have*  become  of  England,  if  the  Re-
formation had  not  been  happily  established,  when  the  pope
presumed  to  declare  Queen  Elizabeth  illegitimate,  and  incapa-
ble of  wearing  the  crown  ?

A  great  emperor,  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  boldly  asserted  the
rights  of  his*  crown  in  this  respect.  In  the  diplomatic  code
of  the  law  of  nations  by  Leibnitz,  we  findf  two  afcts,  in  which
that  prince  condemns,  as  an  invasion  of  the  imperial  autho-
rity, the  doctrine  that  attributes  to  any  other  power  but  his
own,  the  right  of  granting  dispensations,  and  of  judging  of
the  validity  of  marriages,  in  the  places  under  his  jurisdiction :
but  he  was  neither  well  supported  in  his  lifetime,  nor  imitated
by  his  successors.

Finally,  there  are  states  whose  sovereign  may  choose  his  J  •s* Of
successor,  and  even  transfer  the  crown  to  another  durins  his  ■***^"  ^•^

[ __^ ° jiatnmonLaL

*  I  take  this  historical- passage  from  says  he,  nobis  rite  dehiitam  et  oonces-

M. Da  Port  de  Tertre's Conspiracies,  sam.

To  him  I  refer;  for  I  have  not  the  ori-  P.  150. Forma  dispensationis  super

ginal  historians  by  me. Howerer,  I  do  affinitate consangfninitatis inter La-

not  enter  into  the  question  relating  to  doyieom  marohionem  Brandenburg  et

the  birth  of  Jane :  this  would  here  be  Margaretham  ducissam  KarinthisB,  neo

of  no  use. The  princess  had  not  been  non  legitimatio  liberorum  procreando-

declared  a  bastturd according  to  the  rum,  factss  per  dom.  LndoTic.  IV.  Rom.

laws; the  king  acknowledged  her  for  imper.

his  daughter ;  and  besides,  whether  she  It  is  only  human  law,  says  the  empe-

was  or  was  not  legitimate,  the  incon-  ror,  that  hinders  these  marriages  intra

Teniences  resulting  from  the  pope's  re-  gradus  affinitatis sanguinis,  prsesertim

Aisal  still  remained  the  same  with  re-  intra  fratres  et  sorores. De  cujus  legis

spect  to  her  and  the  king  of  Portugal! —  prseceptis  dispensare  solummodo  pertinet

Notei,  edit.  1797.  ad  auctoritatem  imperatoris  sen  princi-

f  P.  15 1. Forma  diyortii matrimo-  pis  Romanorum. He  then  opposes  and

aialis  inter  Johannem  l&lium  regis  Bo-  condemns  the  opinion  of  those  who  dare

homis  et  Margaretham  ducissam  Ka-  to  say  that  these  dispensations  depend

rinlhiad. This  divorce  is  given  by  the  on  ecclesiastics. Botli  this  act  and  the

emperor  oa  account  of  the  impoteiv>  former  are  dated  in  the  year  1341.—

oy  of  the  husband^  per  auctoritatem.  Note,  edit  A.  D.  1797*

IS  I W


80  OF  STATES  ELECnVBy

BOOK  L life :  these  are  commonly  called  patrimonial  kingdoms  or
CHAP.  y. gi^iQQ .  but  let  hb  reject  so  unjust  and  so  improper  an  epithet,


which  can  only  serve  to  inspire  some  sovereigns  with  ideas
very  opposite  to  those  they  ought  to  entertain.  We  have
shown  (§  61)  that  a  state  cannot  be  a  patrimony.  But  it  may
happen  that  a  nation,  either  through  unbounded  confidence  in
its  prince,  or  for  some  other  reason,  has  intrusted  him  with
the  care  of  appointing  his  successor,  and  even  consented  to
[  31  ]  receive,  if  he  thinks  proper,  another  sovereign  from  his  hands.
Thus  we  see  that  Peter  I.,  emperor  of  Russia,  nominated  his
wife  to  succeed  him,  though  he  had  children.
I  69.  Every  But  when  a  prince  chooses  his  successor,  or  when  he  cedes
true  8ove.  the  crown  to  another, — properly  speaking,  he  only  nominates,
reignty  u  ]yj  yirtuc  of  the  powor  with  which  he  is,  either  expressly  or
^  ®°*  ®'  by  tacit  consent,  intrusted — ^he  only  nominates,  I  say,  the
person  who  is  to  govern  the  state  after  him.  This  neither  is
nor  can  be  an  alienation,  properly  so  called.  Every  true
sovereignty  is,  in  its  own  natuve,  unalienable.  We  shall  be
easily  convinced  of  this,  if  we  pay  attention  to  the  origin  and
end  of  political  society,  and  of  the  supreme  authority.  A
nation  becomes  incorporated  into  a  society,  to  labour  for  the
common  welfare  as  it  shall  think  proper,  and  to  live  accord-
ing to  its  own  laws.  ,  With  this  view  it  establishes  a  public
authority.  If  it  intrusts  that  authority  to  a  prince,  even
with  the  power  of  transferring  it  to  other  hands,  this  can
never  take  place  without  the  express  and  unanimous  consent
of  the  citizens,  with  the  right  of  really  alienating  or  subject-
ing the  state  to  another  body  politic :  for  the  individuals  who
have  formed  this  society,  entered  into  it  in  order  to  live  in
an  independent  state,  and  not  under  a  foreign  yoke.  Let
not  any  other  source  of  this  right  be  alleged  in  objection  to
our  argument,  as  conquest,  for  instance ;  for  we  have  already
shown  (§  60)  that  these  different  sources  ultimately  revert  to
the  true  principles  on  which  all  just  governments  are  founded.
While  the  victor  does  not  treat  hi*  conquest  according  to
those  principles,  the  state  of  war  still  m  some  measure  sub-
sists :  but  the  moment  he  places  it  in  a  civil  state,  his  rights
are  proportioned  by  the  principles  of  that  state.

I  know  that  many  authors,  and  particularly  Grotius,*  give
long  enumerations  of  the  alienations  of  sovereignties,  nui
the  examples  often  prove  only  the  abuse  of  power,  not  the
right.  And  besides,  the  people  consented  to  the  alienation,
either  willingly  or  by  force.  What  could  the  inhabitants  of
Pergamus,  Bithynia,  and  Cyrene  do,  when  their  kings  gave
them,  by  their  last  wills,  to  the  Roman  people  ?  Nothing
remained  for  them,  but  to  submit  with  a  good  grace  to  so
powerful  a  legatee.  To  furnish  an  example  capable  of  serving
as  an  authority,  they  should  have  produced  an  instance  of  a

•  Grotiiis  De  Jure  BelU  et  PaciB,  lib.  L  eap.  iiL  J  12.
98


BUCGESSIVE, OR  HEREDITABT, ETC.  81

people  resisting  a  similar  bequest  of  their  soyereign,  and book  i.
whose  resistance  had  been  generally  condemned  as  unjust  and ^"^^'  ^
rebellious. Had  Peter  I.,  who  nominated  his  wife  to  succeed
him,  attempted  to  subject  his  empire  to  the  grand  seignior,  or
to  some  other  neighbouring  power,  can  we  imagine  that  the
Russians  would  have  suffered  it,  or  that  their  resistance  would
have  passed  for  a  revolt  ? We  do  not  find  in  Europe  any
great  state  that  is  reputed  alienable. If  some  petty  princi-
palities  have been considered  as such,  it  is  because  they
were  not  true  sovereignties. They  were  fiefs  of  the  empire,
enjoying  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  liberty :  their  masters L  *^2  J
made  a  traffic  of  the  rights  they  possessed  over  those  terri-
tories :  but  they  could  not  withdraw  them  from  a  dependence
on  the  empire.

Let  us  conclude  then,  that,  as  the  nation  alone  has  a  right
to  subject  itself  to  a  foreign  power,  the  right  of  really  alien-
iting  the  state  can  never  belong  to  the  sovereign,  unless  it
be  expressly  given  him  by  the  entire  body  of  the  people.*
Neither  are  we  to  presume  that  he  possesses  a  right  to  nomi-
nate his  successor  or  surrender  the  sceptre  to  other  hands, — a
right  which  must  be  founded  on  an  express  consent,  on  a  law
of  the  state,  or  on  long  custom,  justified  by  the  tacit  consent
of  the  people.

If  the  power  of  nominating  his  successor  is  intrusted  to  the  j  70. Du^
sovereign,  he  ought  to  have  no  other  view  in  his  choice  but  ^^  » prince
the  advantage  and  safety  of  the  state. He  himself  was  es-  ^^^  "  V^'
tablished  only  for  this  end(§  39);  the  liberty  of  transferring  n°^*^t^
his  power  to  another  could  then  be  granted  to  him  only  with  his  sue-
the  same  view. It  would  be  absurd  to  consider  it  as  a  prero-  ceaaor.
gative  useful  to  the  prince,  and  which  he  may  turn  to  his  own
private  advantage.  Peter  the  Great  proposed  only  the  welfare
of  the  empire  when  he  left  the  crown  to  his  wife. He  knew
that  heroine  to  be  the  most  capable  person  to  follow  his  views,
and  perfect  the  great  things  he  had  begun,  and  therefore
preferred  her  to  his  son,  who  was  still  too  young.  If  we  often
found  on  the  throne  such  elevated  minds  as  Peter's,  a  nation
could  not  adopt  a  wiser  plan,  in  order  to  ensure  to  itself  a  good
government,  than  to  intrust  the  prince,  by  a  fundamental  law,
with  the  power  of  appointing  his  successor. This  would  be  a
much  more  certain  method  than  the  order  of  birth. The  Ro-
man emperors,  who  had  no  male  children,  appointed  a  succes-
sor by  adoption. To  this  custom  Rome  was  indebted  for  a

*  The  pope,  opposing  the  attempt  them."  On  which  occasion  the  French
made  upon  England  by  Louis,  the  son  nobles  unanimously  exclaimed,  that  they
of  Philip  Augustus,  and  alleging,  as  his  would,  to  their  last  breath,  maintain
pretext,  tnat  John  had  rendered  himself  this  truth,  "  that  no  prince  can,  t»f  his
a  rassai  of  the  holy  see,  receired  for  own  private  wiU,  give  away  his  king-
answer,  among  other  arguments,  "  that  dom,  or  render  it  tributary,  and  thus
a  sovereign  had  no  right  to  dispose  of  enslave  the  nobility."  Velly's  Hist,  of
his  states  without  the  consent  of  his  Franoe,  toL  ilL  p.  491.
baxQBB,  who  i»ere bound to defend


^  PRINCIPAL  OBJECTS  OV

BOOK  t series  of  sovereigns  unequalled  in  history,— Nerva,  Trajan,
CHAP.  T. ^drjan,  Antoninus,  Marcus  Aurelius. What  princes  I Does
the  right  of  birth  often  place  such  on  the  throne  ?
{  n.  He We  may  go  still  farther,  and  boldly  assert,  that,  as  the
mMt  have Safety  of  the  whole  nation  is  deeply  interested  in  so  import-
»t  loMt  a nij^  a  transaction,  the  consent  and  ratification  of  the  people
ficatioih  " ^^  State  is  necessary  to  give  it  full  and  entire  effect, — ^at  least
their  tacit  consent  and  ratification. If  an  emperor  of  Russia
thought  proper  to  nominate  for  his  successor  a  person  noto-
riously unworthy  of  the  crown,  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that
vast  empire  woidd  blindly  submit  to  so  pernicious  an  appoint-
[  38  ]  ment. And  who  shall  presume  to  blame  a  nation  for  refus-
ing to  run  headlong  to  ruin  out  of  respect  to  the  last  orders
)f  its  prince  ? As  soon  as  the  people  submit  to  the  sovereign
appointed  to  rule  over  them,  they  tacitly  ratify  the  choice
made  by  the  last  prince ;  and  the  new  monarch  enters  into
all  the  rights  of  his  predecessor.


CHAP.  VI.

CHAP.  VI. PRINCIPAL OBJECTS OF A GOOD GOVERNMENT; AND FIB8T

TO PROVIDE  FOR  THE  NECESSITIBS OF  THE  NATION.

}  73. The AFTER  these  observations  on  the  constitution  of  the  state,

object  of  80- let  us  now  proceed  to  the  principal  objects,  of  a  good  govem-

^^%h^d^  ment. We  have  seen  above  (§§  41  and  42^  that  the  prince,

ties  o/the*  ^^  ^^®  being  invested  with  the  sovereign  authority,  is  charged

•oYereign. with  the  duties  of  the  nation  in  relation  to  government. In

treating  of  the  principal  objects  of  a  wise  administration,  we

at  once  show  the  duties  of  a  nation  towards  itself,  and  those

of  the  sovereign  towards  his  people.

A  wise  conductor  of  the  state  will  find  in  the  objects  of

civil  society  the  general  rule  and  indication  of  his  duties.

The  society  is  established  with  the  view  of  procuring,  to  those

who  are  its  members,  the  necessaries,  conveniences,  and  even

pleasures  of  life,  and,  in  general,  every  thing  necessary  to

their  happiness,-— of  enabling  each  individual  peaceably  to

enjoy  his  own  property,  and  to  obtain  justice  with  safety  ajid

certainty, — and,  finally,  of  defending  themselves  in  a  body

He  onght  to  against  all  external  violence  ^§  15). The  nation,  or  its  con-

proonre ductor,  should  first  apply  to  tne  business  of  providing  for  all

plenty. the  wants  of  the  people,  and  producing  a  happy  plenty  of  all

the  necessaries  of  life,  with  its  conveniences  and  innnocent

and  laudable  enjoyments.  (25) As  an  easy  life  without  lux-

(25)  See  the  general  doctrine,  that  the  at  largo,  2  Malthas,  433 ;  2  Smith,  W.  jf.

happiness  of  a  people  depends  on  the  200 ;  2  Paley,  Mor. PhiL  345 ; Sir  J.

quantity  of  productive  labour  and  em-  Child  on  Trade,  167-8  ;  and  Tucker  oo

ployment,  and  the  consequent  return  Trade,  part  ii.  sections  4,  7,  8 ;  1  Chii-

of  produce  and  remuneration,  discussed  tj^s  Commercial  Iaw,  1,  Ac — C.
100


A  QOOD  aOVSBNMSKT.  88

Hrj  contributes  to  the  happiness  of  men,  it  likewise  enables book  i«
them  to  labour  with  greatQr  safety  and  success  after  their  ^^\  ^
own  perfection,  which  is  their  ^rand  and  principal  duty,  and
one  of  the  ends  they  ought  to  have  in  view  when  they  unite
in  society..

To  succeed  in  procuring  this  abundance  of  every  thing,  it ;  rs. To
is  necessary  to  take  care  that  there  be  a  sufficient  number  of  take  care
able  workmen  in  every  useful  or  necessary  profession.  (26)  ^*^*  *^^
An  attentive  application  on  the  part  of  government,  wise  re-  cient  num-
gulations,  and  assistance  properly  granted,  will  produce  this  ber  of  work*
effect,  without  using  constraint,  which  is  always  fatal  to  in-  men.
dustry.

Those  workmen  that  are  useful  ought  to  be  retained  in  J  74. To
the  state ;  to  succeed  in  retaining  them,  the  public  authority  prevent  the
haa  certainly  a  right  to  use  contraint, if  necessary.  (27)  :f»^^-
!Every  citizen  owes  his  personal  services  to  his  country ;  and  a  that  are
mechanic,  in  particular,  who  has  been  reared,  educated,  andnsefuL
instructed  in  its  bosom,  cannot  lawfully  leave  it,  and  carry  to
a  foreign  land  that  industry  which  he  acquired  at  home,  un-
less his  country  has  no  occasion  for  him,  (27)  or  he  cannot
there  obtain  the  just  fruit  of  his  labour  and  abilities. Em- [  34  ]
ployment  must  then  be  procured  for  him ;  and,  if,  while  able
to  obtain  a  decent  livelihood  in  his  own  country,  he  would
without  reason  abandon  it,  the  state  has  a  right  to  detain
him.  (2S) But  a  very  moderate  use  ought  to  be  made  of  thiB
right,  and  only  in  important  or  necessary  cases. Liberty
is  the  soul  of  abilities  and  industry :  frequently  a  mechanic
or  an  artist,  after  having  long  travelled  abroad,  is  attracted
home  to  his  native  soil  by  a  natural  affection,  and  returns
more  expert  and  better  qualified  to  render  his  country  usefu'
services. If  certain  extraordinary  cases  be  excepted,  it  is  best
in  this  affair  to  practise  the  mild  methods  of  protection,  en-  '

couragement,  &;c.,  and  to  leave  the  rest  to  that  natural  love
felt  by  all  men  for  the  places  of  their  birth.

As  to  those  emissaries  who  come  into  a  country  to  entice  1 75.  Emii.
away  useful  subjects,  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  punish  them  8ari«8  who
severely,  and  has  just  cause  of  complaint  against  the  power  ®"^®*  ^*^*'*
by  whom  they  are  employed.*  *^*^'  ^

In  another  place,  we  shall  treat  more  particularly  of  the
general  question,  whether  a  citizen  be  permitted  to  quit  the


(26)  There  were  in  England  many  this  mlo,  5  Geo.  I.  0.  27  ,*  23  Geo.  IL
enaotmentfl  enforcing  this  supposed  e.  13 ;  14  Geo.  IIL  0.  71 ;  4  Bla.  Com.
polioy,  and  prohlhiting  rarioas  work-  160;  hut  repealed  by  5  Geo.  IV.  o.  97.
men  from  leaving  the  kingdom. See  b  -  -0.

9eo.  L  0.  27 ;  23  Geo.  II.  e.  13 ;  14 (28)  See  also  the  power  of  prerent-

Geo.  in.  e.  71 ;  4  Bla.  Com.  160. But,  ing  a  subject^  or  even  a  foreigner,  going

according  to  more  modem  policy,  these  abroad. Flack  T.  iTobi,  1  Jao.  A  Walk,

enactments  were  repealed,  by  6  Geo.  IV.  Rep.  405,  and  post,  j  222,  and  Book  IL

.-.  97.— C.  ;  108.— C.

(27)  See  the  English  acts  enforcing

I  101


ti  OF  THE CULTIVATION  OF  THB  SOIL.

BOOK  I. society  of  which  he  is  a  member. The  particular  reasons
CHAP.  Yi.  concerning  useful  workmen  are  sufficient  here.


;  76. La- The  state  ought  to  encourage  labour, to  animate  Indus-
boar  and try,  (29)  to  excite  abilities,  to  propose  honours,  rewards,  privi
*°uBt^b(f  en '^S^*^'  *^^  ^^  *^  order  matters  that  every  one  may  live  by  his
eouraged. inlustry. In  this  particular,  England  deserves  to  be  held  up
as  an  example. The  parliament  incessantly  attends  to  these
important affairs, in which neither care nor expense i^
spared.  (30) And  do  we  not  even  see  a  society  of  excellent
citizens  formed  with  this  view,  and devoting considerable
sums  to  this  use,  ? Premiums  are  also  distributed  in  Ireland
to  the  mechanics  who  most  distinguish  themselves  in  their  pro-
fession. Can  such  a  state  fail  of  being  powerful  and  happy  t


CHAP  VII.

CHAP,  vn.  OF  THE  CULTIVATION OF  THE  SOIL.  (31)

;  77. The OF  all  the  arts,  tillage,  or  agriculture,  is  doubtless  the  most
utUity  of useful  and  necessary,  as  being  the  source  whence  the  nation
'^^^^  (31)  derives  its  subsistence. The  cultivation  of  the  soil  causes  it
to  produce  an  infinite  increase ;  it  forms  the  surest  resource
and  the  most  solid  fund  of  riches  and  commerce,  for  a  nation
that  enjoys  a  happy  climate.
J  78.  Regu- This  object  then  deserves  the  utmost  attention  of  the  go-
lationa  ne- yernment. The  sovereign  ought  to  neglect  no  means  of  ren-
this  reapect.  <^®ring  the  land  under  his  jurisdiction  as  well  cultivated  as
possible. He  ought  not  to  allow  either  communities  or  pri-
vate persons  to  acquire  large  tracts  of  land,  and  leave  them
For  the  dia-  uncultivated. Those  rights  of  common^  which  deprive  the  pro-
tribution  of  prietor  of  the  free  liberty  of  disposing  of  his  land — which  will
land.  j^Q^  allow  him  to  enclose  and  cultivate  it  in  the  most  advan-

[  35  ]  tageous  manner ;  those  rights,  I  say,  are  inimical  to  the  wel-
fare of  the  state,  and  ought  to  be  suppressed,  or  reduced  to
just  bounds.  Notwithstanding  the  introduction  of  private
property  among  the  citizens,  the  nation  has  still  a  right  to
take  the  most  effectual  measures  to  cause  the  aggregate  soil
of  the  country  to  produce  the  greatest  and  most  advantageous
revenue  possible.  (32)

(29)  Ante,  ^  12,  note  (25). — C.  gislatiye  enactments  respecting  the  cul

(30)  How  far  the  interference  of  the  tivation  of  the  soil  or  employment  of
legislature  is  advisable,  and  when — see  its  produce,  each  individual  being  lefl
the  authorities  and  arguments  collected,  to  his  own  discretion ;  but  to  prevent
1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  4  to  7,  and  the  injurious  sale  of  fanning  produce,
poMtf  J  98. — C.  thereby  impoverishing  the  land,  there  is

(31)  As  to  the  subject  of  this  chapter,  an  express  enactment  enforcing  public
see  further  authorities,  Chitty's  Com-  policy  in  that  respect  See  56  Geo.  IIL
xnercial  Law,  vol.  i.  chap.  1. — C.  c.  50,  and  its  recitals. In  France  there

(32)  In  England there  are  few  le- are  express  provisions  punishing  indi
102


OF  THE  CULTIVATION  OF  THE  SOIL.  85

«

The  government  ought  carefully  to  ayoid  every  thing  ca- book  t

{)able  of  discouraging  the  husbandman,  or  of  diverting  him  J^^^-  V!:
rom  the  labours  of  agriculture. Those  taxes — ^those  excessive  2J®' ^^
and  ill-proportioned  impositions,  the  burden  of  which  falls  ti^n^^  j^a,.
almost  entirely  on  the  cultivators — ^and  the  oppressions  they  bandmen.
3uflFer  from  the  officers  who  levy  them— deprive  the  unhappy
peasant  of  the  means  of  cultivating  the  earth,  and  depopulate
the  country. Spain  is  the  most  fertile  and  the  worst  culti-
vated country  in  Europe. The  church  there  possesses  too
much  land;  and  the  contractors  for  the  royal  magazines,
being  authorized  to  purchase,  at  a  low  price,  all  the  corn  they
find  in  the  possession  of  a  peasant,  above  what  is  necessary
for  the  subsistence  of  himself  and  his  family,  so  greatly  dis-
courage the  husbandman,  that  he  sows  no  more  corn  than  is
barely,  necessary for the support of his own household.
Hence  the  frequent  scarcity  in  a  country  capable  of  feeding
its  neighbours.

Another  abuse  injurious  to  agriculture  is  the  contempt} so. Hcj-
cast  upon  the  husbandman. The  tradesmen  in  cities — even  ^*«»^ry
the  most  servile  mechanics — ^the  idle  citizens— consider  him  p^^^  jn  ^n
that  cultivates  the  earth  with  a  disdainful  eye ;  they  humble  honourable
and  discourage  him ;  they  dare  to  despise  a  profession  that  Ugbt
feeds  the  human  race— the  natural  employment  of  man. A
little  insignificant  haberdasher,  a  tailor,  places  far  beneath
him  the  beloved  employment  of  the  first  consuls  and  dictators
of  Rome ! China  has  wisely  prevented  this  abuse :  agricul-
ture is  there  held  in  honour ;  and  to  preserve  this  happy  *
mode  of  thinking,  the  emperor  himself,  followed  by  his  whole
court,  annually,  on  a  solemn  day,  sets  his  hand  to  the  plough,
and  sows  a  small  piece  of  land. Hence  China  is  the  best
cultivated  country  in  the  world ;  it  feeds  an  immense  multi-
tude of  inhabitants  who  at  first  sight  appear  to  the  traveller
too  numerous  for  the  space  they  occupy.

The  cultivation  of  the  soil  deserves  the  attention  of  the  J  81. The
government,  not  only  on  account  of  the  invaluable  advantages  cuiuvation
that  flow  from  it,  but  from  its  being  an  obligation  imposed  hy^^^^^^j^^
nature  on  mankind. The  whole  earth  is  destined  to  feed  its  obUgation,
inhabitants ;  but  this  it  would  be  incapable  of  doing  if  it  were
uncultivated. Every  nation  is  then  obliged  by  the  law  of
nature  to  cultivate  the  land  that  has  fallen  to  its  share ;  and
it  has  no  right  to  enlarge  its  boundaries,  or  have  recourse  to
the  assistance  of  other  nations,  but  in  proportion  as  the  land '
in  its  possession  is  incapable  of  furnishing  it  with  necessaries.
Those  nations  (such  as  the  ancient  Germans,  and  some  modern [  86  ]
Tartars)  who  inhabit  fertile  countries,  but  disdain  to  culti-
vate their  lands,  and  choose  rather  to  live  by  plunder,  are
wanting  to  themselves,  are  injurious  to  all  their  neighbours,

fidnals  who  suffer  injnrioiu  weeds  to oeedinglj  salatary  if  introduced  into

.eed  on  hmd  to  the  ix^ary  of  their  neigh- this  ooontry.— ^.

4  ours,  a  regulation  which  would  be  ex-  103


86  OF  THE  CULTIVATION  OP  THE  SOIL.

BOOK  i;  atid  deserve  to  be  extirpated  as  savage  and  pemicions  beast?
CHAP.  vn.  rp^^^^jpQ  ^Ye  others,  who,  to  avoid  labour,  choose  to  live  only
by  hunting,  and  their  flocks.  This  might,  doubtless,  be
allowed  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  when  the  earth,  without
cultivation,  produced  more  than  was  sufficient  to  feed  its
small  number  of  inhabitants.  But  at  present,  when  the  hu-
nyin  race  is  so  greatly  multiplied,  it  could  not  subsist  if  all
nations  were  disposed  to  live  in  that  manner.  Those  who
still  pursue  this  idle  mode  of  life,  usurp  more  extensive  terri-
tories than,  with  a  reasonable  share  of  labour,  they  would
have  occasion  for,  and  have,  therefore,  no  reason  to  complain,
if  other  nations,  more  industrious  and  too  closely  confined,
come  to  take  possession  of  a  part  of  those  lands.  Thus,
though  the  conquest  of  the  civilized  empires  of  Peru  and
Mexico  was  a  notorious  usurpati(m,  the  establishment  of  many
colonies  on  the  continent  of  North  America  might,  on  theii
confining  themselves  within  just  bounds,  be  extremely  lawful.
The  people  of  those  extensive  tracts  rather  ranged  through
than  inhabited  them.
f  •?.  Of  The  establishment  of  public  granaries  is  an  excellent  re-
pV  Vie  gm-  gulation  for  preventing  scarcity.  But  great  care  should  be
•^^''  taken  to  prevent  their  being  managed  with  a  mercantDe
spirit,  and  with  views  of  profit.  This  would  be  establishing  a
monopoly,  which  would  not  be  the  less  unlawful  for  ita  be-
ing carried  on  by  the  magistrate.  These  granaries  should
be  filled  in  times  of  the  greatest  plenty,  and  take  off  the  ^
*  com  that  would  lie  on  the  husbandman's  hands,  or  be  car-

ried in  too  great  quantities  to  foreign  countries :  they  should
be  opened  when  com  is  dear,  and  keep  it  at  a  reasonable
price.  If  in  a  time  of  plenty  they  prevent  that  necessary
commodity  from  easily  falling  to  a  very  low  price,  this  incon-
venience is  more  than  compensated  by  the  relief  they  afford
in  times  of  dearth :  or  rather,  it  is  no  inconvenience  at  all ;
for,  when  com  is  sold  extremely  cheap,  the  manufacturer,
in  order  to  obtain  a  preference,  is  tempted  to  undersell  his
neighbours,  by  offering  his  goods  at  a  price  which  he  is  after-
wards obliged  to  raise  (and  this  produces  great  disorders
in  commerce,  by  putting  it  out  of  its  course) ;  or  he  accus-
toms himself  to  an  easy  life,  which  he  cannot  support  in
harder  times.  It  would  be  of  advantage  to  manufactures
and  to  commerce  to  have  the  subsistence  of  workmen  regu-
larly kept  at  a  moderate  and  nearly  equal* price.  In  short,
public  granaries  keep  in  the  state  quantities  of  corn  that .
would  be  sent  abroad  at  too  cheap  a  rate,  and  must  be  pur-
chased again,  and  brought  back  at  a  very  ereat  expense  after
a  bad  harvest,  which  is  a  real  loss  to  the  nation.  These
establishments,  however,  do  not  hinder  the  com  trade.  If  the
country,  one  year  with  another,  produces  more  than  is  sufficient
for  the  support  of  her  inhabitants,  the  superfluity  will  still  be
sent  abroad ;  but  it  will  be  sent  at  a  higher  and  fairer  price.


ijkl


OF  COMMBRCS.  Vt


Boom  &

OBAP.  YTOs


CHAP.  Vm.  [•  87  J

07  COMMBBCE.  (33)

IT  is  commerce  that  enables  individuals  and  whole  nations  >  33^ Qf
to  procure  those  commodities  which  they  stand  in  need  of,  home  and
but  cannot  find  at  home. Commerce  is  divided  into  home^oreiga
^ni  foreiffn  trade.  (34) The  former  is  that  carried  on  in  the*"^**
state  between  the  several  inhabitants ;  the  latter  is  carried' on
with  foreign  nations.

The  home  trade  of  a  nation  is  of  great  use ;  it  furnishes  all  j  84.  trtiU^
the  citizens  with  the  means  of  procuring  whatever  they  want,  of  the  home
as  either  necessary,  useful,  or  agreeable ;  it  causes  a  circu-  ^^^^
lation  of  money,  excites  industry,  animates  labour,  and,  by
affording  subsistence  to  a  great  number  of  people,  Contributes
to  increase  the  population  and  power  of  the  state.

The  same  reasons  show  the  use  of  foreign  trade,  which  is  j  86.  utffl^
moreover  attended  with  these  two  advantages : — 1.  By  trad-  of  foreign
ing  with  foreigners,  a  nation  procures  such  things  as  neither  *'*^'
nature  nor  art  can  furnish  in  the  country  it  occupies.  And
secondly,  if  its  foreign  trade  be  properly  directed,  it  increases
the  riches  of  the  nation,  and  may  become  the  source  of  wealth
and  plenty.  Of  this  the  example  of  the  Carthaginians  among
the  ancients,  and  that  of  the  English  and  Dutch  among  the
» moderns,  afford  remarkable  proofs.  Carthage,  by  her  riches,
counter-balanced  the  fortune,  courage,  and  greatness  of  Rome.
Holland  has  amassed  immense  sums  in  her  marshes ;  a  com-
pany of  her  merchants  possesses  whole  kingdoms  in  the  East,
and  the  governor  of  Batavia  exercises  command  over  the
monarchs  of  India.  To  what  a  degree  of  power  and  glory
has  England  arrived !  Formerly  her  warlike  princes  and  in-
habitants made  glorious  conquests,  which  they  afterwards  lost
by  those  reverses  of  fortune  so  frequent  in  war ;  at  present,
it  is  chiefly  commerce  that  places  in  her  hand  the  balance  of
Europe.

Nations  are  obliged  to  cultivate  the  home  trade, — ^first,  ?  86. OMU
because  it  is  clearly  demonstrated  from  the  law  of  nature,  «***?^  ***
that  mankind  ought  mutually  to  assist  each  other,  and,  as^^^J^J^T*
far  as  in  their  power,  contribute  to  the  perfection  and  hap-
piness of  their  fellow-creatures :  whence  arises,  after  the  in-
troduction of  private  property,  the  obligation  to  resign  to
•  Others,  at  a  fair  price,  those  things  which  they  have  occasion
for,  and  which  we  do  not  destine  for  our  own  use. Secondly,


(33)  See  the  aa&orities  and  doetiineB  canning  trade,  formerly  one  of  the  prin-

911  the  advantage  of  oommeree  and  com-  dpal eonrees of  British  wealth and

•nercial  regulation!,  1  Chitty'i  Commer-  power. See  anthorities,  1  Ohitty'e  Oom-

•4al  Law,  1  to  106.— C.  meroial  Law,  7,  8,  Ac— C.

(94)  To  these  are  t)  be  added  the

U  106


87  OF  COMMERCE.

BOOK  I. society  being  established  with  the  view  that  each  may  pro-
CHAP,  ^'^^-.care  whatever  things  are  necessary  to  his  own  perfection  and
happiness — and  a  home  trade  being  the  means  of  obtaining
them — the  obligations  to  carry  on  and  improve  this  trade  are
derived  from  the  very  compact  on  which the society  was
L  '^^  J formed. Finally,  being  advantageous  to  the  nation,  it  is  a
duty  the  people  owe  to  themselves,  to  make  this  commerce
flourish.
1 87. Obii- For  the  same  reason,  drawn  from  the  welfare  of  the  state,
gstion  to and  also  to  procure  for  the  citizens  every  thing  they  want,  a
w'J^  ^^ nation  is  obliged  to  promote  and  carry  on  a  foreign  trade,
foreign Qf  ^y[  the  modem  states,  England  is  most  distinguished  in
this  respect. The  parliament have  their  eyes  constantly
fixed  on  this  important  object ;  they  effectually  protect  the
navigation  of  the  merchants,  and,  by  considerable  bounties,
favour  the  exportation  of  superfluous  commodities  and  mer-
chandises. In  a  very  sensible  production,*  may  be  seen  the
valuable advantages  that  kingdom has  derived  from  such
judicious  regulations.
{  88.  Fonn. Let  US  now  sec  what  are  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  rights
dation  of of  nations  in  respect  to  the commerce  they  carry  on  with
the  laws  of  ^^^^^  other. Men  are  obliged  mutually  to  assist  each  other
as  much  as  possible,  and  to  contribute  to  the  perfection  and
happiness  of  their  fellow-creatures  (Prelim.  §  10) ;  (35)  whence
it  follows,  as  we  have  said  above  (§  86),  that,  after  the  intro-
duction of  private  property,  it  became  a  duty  to  sell  to  each
other,  at  a  fair  price,  what  the  possessor  himself  has  no  occa-
sion for,  and  what  is  necessary  to  others ;  because,  since  that
introduction  of  private  property,  no  one  can,  by  any  other
means,  procure  the  different  things  that  may  be  necessary  or
useful  to  him,  and  calculated  to  render  life  pleasant  and  agree-
Right  of able. Now,  since  right  springs  from  obligation  (Prelim.  §  3),
buying. the  obligation  which  we  have  just  established  gives  every  man
the  right  of  procuring  the  things  he  wants,  by  purchasing
them  at  a  reasonable  price  from  those  who  have  themselves
no  occasion  for  them.  (36)

We  have  also  seen  (Prelim.  §  5)  that  men  could  not  free
themselves  from  the  authority  of  the  laws  of  nature  by  uniting
in  civil  society,  and  that  the  whole  nation  remains  equally


*  Remftrks  on  the  Adyantages  and  in  concluding the commercial treatj

Disadvantages of France and Great  with  France  in  1786,  &c.,  2  Smith's  W.

Britain  with  respect  to  Commerce.  of  N.,  226  to  252 ;  Tucker's  Pamphlet

(35)  See  also  8.  13,  and  Id.  note,  Cui  Bono,  and  1  Chitty's  Commercial
anU, — C.  Law,  73  to  79. This  seems  to  be  cod-

(36)  The  moral  obligation  of  a  na-  sidered  by  the  ablest  writers  on  the  law
tion,  in  time  of  peace,  to  permit  com-  of  nations,  to  be  a  moral  duty  but  of
mercial  intercourse  with  other  states,  imperfect  obligation,  so  that  in  truth
and  to  allow  other  states  to  buy  her  each  state  has  a  right,  when  so  disposed,
surplus  produce,  or  to  sell  or  exchange  to  decline  any  commercial  intercourse
£beir  own  surplus  produce,  is  illus-  with  other  states.  Id.  ibid  et  tupra.-^
tzmted  in  Mr.  Pitt's  celebrated  speech  0.

106


09  OOMMBRCB.  88


finbject  to  those  laws  in  its  national  capacity ;  so  that  the  Bocr  l
natural  and  necessary  law  of  nations  is  no  other  than  the  law  ^°^"  "'"'
of  nature  properly  applied  to  nations  or  sovereign  states
(Prelim.  §  6) :  from  all  which  it  follows,  that  a  nation  has  a
right  to  procure,  at  an  equitable  price,  whatever  articles  it
wants,  by  purchasing  them  of  other  nations  who  have  no  oc-
casion for  them.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the  right  of  com*
merce  between  different  nations,  and,  in  particular,  of  the
right  of  buying.  (36)

We  cannot  apply  the  same  reasoning  to  the  right  of  selling  j  89.  Right
such  things  as  we  want  to  part  with.  Every  man  and  every  of  wiling,
nation  being  perfectly  at  liberty  to  buy  a  thing  that  is  to  be
sold,  or  not  to  buy  it,  and  to  buy  it  of  one  rather  than  of
another — ^the  law  of  nature  gives  to  no  person  whatsoever  any
kind  of  right  to  sell  what  belongs  to  him  to  another  who  does
not  wish  to  buy  it ;  neither  has  any  nation  the  right  of  selling
her  commodities  or  merchandise  to  a  people  who  are  unwilling
to  have  them.  [  89  ]

Every  state  has  consequently  a  right  to  prohibit  the  en-  2  90. Pro-
trance  o{  foreign  merchandises;  and  the  nations  that  are iiiwtion of
affected  by  such  prohibition  have  no  right  to  complain  of  it,  ^?^?^™*'''
as  if  they  had  been  refused  an  office  of  humanity.  (37) Their  ^
complaints  would  be  ridiculous,  since  their  only  ground  of
complaint  would  be,  that  a  profit  is  refused  to  them  by  that
nation,  who  does  not  choose  they  should  make  it  at  her  ex-
pense. It  is,  however,  true,  that  if  a  nation  was  very  certain
that  the  prohibition  of  her  merchandises  was  not  founded  on
any  reason  drawn  from  the  welfare  of  the  state  that  prohibited
them,  she  would  have  cause  to  consider  this  conduct  as  a
mark  of  ill-will  shown  in  this  instance,  and  to  complain  of  it
on  that  footing. But  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  the  ex-
cluded nation  to  judge  with  certainty  that  the  state  had  no
solid  or  apparent  reason  for  making  such  a  prohibition.

By  the  manner  in  which  we  have  shown  a  nation's  right  to  j  91. N»-
buy  of  another  what  it  wants,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  right  ^^  of  ^^
is  not  one  of  those  called  perfect^  and  that  are  accompanied  "^^.*  °^
with  a  right  to  use  constraint. Let  us  now  distinctly  explain  ^^^*"
the  nature  of  a  right  which  may  give  room  for  disputes  of  a
very  serious  nature. You  have  a  right  to  buy  of  others  such
things  as  you  want,  and  of  which  they  themselves  have  no
need ;  you  make  application  to  me :  I  am  not  obliged  to  sell
them  to  you,  if  I  myself  have  any  occasion  for  them. In
virtue  of  the  natural  liberty  which  belongs  to  all  men,  it  is  I
who  am  to  judge  whether  I  have  occasion  for  them  myself,  or

(36)  See  note  (36)  preceding  page.  porting  prohibited  goods,  or  permitted

(37)  When  sncb  a  prohibition  has  goods  without  paying  imposed  duties,
been  established,  any  violation  of  it  in  Bird  r.  Appleton,  8  Torm  Rep.  562 ;
general  subjects  the  ship  and  goods  to  Wigmore  y.  Beed,  6  Term  Rep.  599 ;
•oizure  and  confiscation,  as  in  case  of  Holman  ▼.  JoJvMony  Gowp.  344.— ^1,
■maggUng,  whether  by  exporting  or  im-  }  Church  y.  Hvhhart^  2  Cranch^  187. }

107


t»


OV  COMMSmCB.


BOOK  I.
CHJLP.  Tin.


2  92.  Every
nation  is  to
choose  how
far  it  will
engage  in
oommeroe.


[40]


{  93. How
a  nation  ac-
quires a  per-
fect right  to
A  foreign
trade.


2  94.  Of  the

simple  per-
mission of
sommeroe.


can  oonveniently  sell  them  to  you ;  and  jon  hare  no  right  to
determine  whether  I  jndee  well,  or  ill,  because  you  have  no
authority  over  me.  If  ly  improperly,  and  without  any  good
reason,  refuse  to  sell  you  at  a  fair  price  what  you  want,  I
offend  against  my  duty :  you  may  complain  of  this,  but  yon
must  submit  to  it :  and  you  cannot  attempt  to  force  me,  with-
out violating  my  natural  right,  and  doing  me  an  injury.  The
right  of  buying  the  things  we  want  is  then  only  an  imperfect
right,  like  that  of  a  poor  man  to  receive  alms  of  the  rich  man ;
if  the  latter  refuses  to  bestow  it,  the  poor  man  may  justly
complain :  but  he  has  no  right  to  take  it  by  force.

If  it  be  asked,  what  a  nation  has  a  right  to  do  in  case  of
extreme  necessity, — this  question  will  be  answered  in  its  pro-
per place  in  the  following  book,  Chap.  IX.

Since  then  a  nation  cannot  have  a  natural  right  to  sell  her
merchandises  to  another  that  is  unwilling  to  purchase  them,
since  she  has  only  an  imperfect  right  to  buy  what  she  wants
of  others,  since  it  belongs  only  to  these  last  to  judge  whether
it  be  proper  for  them  to  sell  or  not ;  and  finally,  since  com-
merce consists  in  mutually  buying  and  selling  all  sorts  of
commodities,  it  is  evident  that  it  depends  on  the  will  of  any
nation  to  carry  on  commerce  with  another,  or  to  let  it  alone^
If  she  be  willing  to  allow  this  to  one,  it  depends  on  the  nation
to  permit  it  under  such  conditions  as  she  shall  think  proper.
For  in  permitting  another  nation  to  trade  with  her,  she  grants
that  other  a  right ;  and  every  one  is  at  liberty  to  affix  what
conditions  he  pleases  to  a  right  which  he  grants  of  his  own
accord.  (37)

Men  and  sovereign  states  may,  by  their  promises,  enter
into  a  perfect  obligation  with  respect  to  each  other,  in  things
where  nature  has  imposed  only  an  imperfect  obligation.  A
nation,  not  having  naturally  a  perfect  right  to  carry  on  a
commerce  with  another,  may  procure  it  by  an  agreement  or
treaty.  This  right  is  then  acquired  only  by  treaties,  and  re-
lates to  that  branch  of  the  law  of  nations  termed  conventional
(Prelim.  §  24).  The  treaty  that  gives  the  right  of  commerce,
is  the  measure  and  rule  of  that  right.

A  simple  permission  to  carry  on  commeroe  with  a  nation


(37)  With  respect  to  commeroial
interoonrse  with  the  eolomsa  of  a  parent
state  of  Europe,  aU  the  European  nations
which  have  formed  settlements  abroad
have  so  appropriated  the  trade  of  those
settlements  to  themselves,  either  in  «x-
dmnv^ly  permitting  their  own  subjects
to  partake  of  it»  or  In  granting  a  mo-
nopoly to  trading  eompanies,  that  the
eolonies  themselves  cannot  legally  carry
on  hardly  any  dir0ct  trade  with  other
powers  ■^oonsequently  the  oommeroe  in
those  possessions  is  not  flree  to  foreign

108


nations;  and  they  are  not  even  per-
mitted to  land  in  the  country,  or  to
enter  with  their  vessels  within  cannon
shot  of  the  shore,  except  only  in  oases
of  urgent  necessity.  This  has  now  be-
come generally  the  nnderstanding  %Bd
law  of  nations  as  regards  colonies ;  and
the  ships,  Ac  violating  the  rule  are
liable  to  seizure.  Marten's  Law  of
Nations,  150  to  152 ;  Bird  v.  Appletom,
8  Term  Rep.  562 ;  1  Chitty's  Commeroial
Law,  70,  211  to  2H  ^70,  63L— a


OV  COHMSROl.  49

^^es  no  perfect  right  to  that  commerce.  For  if  I  merely  book  l
and  simply  permit  you  to  do  any  thing,  I  do  Hot  give  yon  ^°^'  — .
any  right  to  do  it  afterwards  in  spite  of  me :— you  may  make
use  of  my  condescension  as  long  as  it  lasts ;  but  nothing  pre-
vents me  from  changing  my  will.  As  then  every  nation  has
a  right  to  choose  whether  she  will  or  will  not  trade  with  an^
other,  and  on  what  conditions  she  is  willing  to  do  it  (§  02),  if
one  nation  has  for  a  time  permitted  another  to  come  and
trade  in  the  countiy,  she  is  at  liberty,  whenever  she  thinks
proper,  to  prohibit  that  commerce — ^to  restrain  it — ^to  subject
It  to  certain  regulations;  and  the  people  who  before  carried
it  on  cannot  complain  of  injustice.

Let  us  only  observe,  that  nations,  as  well  as  individuals,
are  obliged  to  trade  together  for  the  common  benefit  of  the
human  race,  because  mankind  stand  in  need  of  each  other*s
assistance  (Prelim.  §§  10, 11,  and  Book  I.  §  88) :  still,  however,
each  nation  remains  at  liberty  to  consider,  in  particular  casesy
whether  it  be  convenient  for  her  to  encourage  or  permit  com-
merce ;  and' as  our  duty  to  ourselves  is  paramount  to  our  duty
to  others,  if  one  nation  finds  herself  in  such  circumstances
that  she  thinks  foreign  commerce  dangerous  to  the  state,  she
may  renounce  and  prohibit  it.  This  the  Chinese  have  done
for  a  long  time  together.  But,  again,  it  is  only  for  very
serious  and  important  reasons  that  her  duty  to  herself  should
dictate  such  a  reserve ;  otherwise,  she  could  not  refuse  to
43omply  with  the  general  duties  of  humanity.

We  have  seen  what  are  the  rights  that  nations  derive  from  I  ^5« "^••
nature  with  regard  to  commerce,  and  how  they  may  acquire  ^^^  *^*
others  by  treaties :  let  us  now  examine  whether  they  can  |,jg  ^  eomp
found  any  on  long  custom. To  determine  this  question  in  a  meree  are
solid  manner,  it  is  necessary  first  to  observe,  that  there  are  rai>j««t  to
rights  wfeich  consist  in  a  simple  power : they  are  called  in  E'^^^sai
Latin,  jura  merce  facultatis^  rights  of  mere  ability. They  ^^
are  such  in  their  own  nature  that  he  who  possesses  them  may
use  them  or  not,  as  he  thinks  proper — being  absolutely  free
from  all  restraint  in  this  respect ;  so  that  the  actions  that
relate  to  the  exercise  of  these  rights  are  acts  of  mere  free
will,  that  may  be  done  or  not  done,  according  to  pleasure.  It
is  manifest  that  rights  of  this  kind  cannot  be  lost  by  pre- [  41  3
6cription,  on  account  of  their  not  being  used,  since  prescription
is  only  founded  on  consent  legitimately  presumed ;  and  that,
if  I  possess  a  right  which  is  of  such  a  nature  that  I  may  or
may  not  use  it,  as  I  think  proper,  without  any  person  having
a  right  to  prescribe  to  me  on  the  subject,  it  cannot  be  pre-
sumed, from  my  having  long  forborne  to  use  it,  that  I  there-
fore intend  to  abandon  it. This  right  is  then  imprescriptible,
unless  I  have  been  forbidden  or  hindered  from  making  use

(38)  Setf  further,  Grotiujs,  168 ;  Puffendorf,  B.  4,  chap.  5,  s.  10,  p.  168;  1  Chit.
Com.  Law,  80,  81^-0.

K  109


41  OF  COMMERCE.

BOOK  L  of  it,  and  have  obeyed  with  sufficient  marks  of  consent.  Let
CHAP,  vni^  ^g  guppQge^  for  instance,  that  I  am  entirely  at  liberty  to  grind
my  com  at  any  mill  I  please,  and  that  during  a  very  con-
siderable time,  a  century  if  you  please,  I  have  made  use  of
the  same  mill :  as  I  have  done  in  this  respect  what  I  thought
proper,  it  is  not  to  be  presumed,  from  this  long-continued  use
of  the  same  mill,  that  I  meant  to  deprive  myself  of  the  right
of  grinding  at  any  other ;  and,  consequently,  my  right  cannot
be  lost  by  prescription.  But  now  suppose,  that,  on  my  re-
solving to  make  use  of  another  mill,  the  owner  of  the  former
opposes  it,  and  announces  to  me  a  prohibition ;  if  I  obey  his
prohibition  without  necessity,  and  without  opposition,  though
I  have  it  in  my  power  to  defend  myself,  and  know  my  right,
this  right  is  lost,  because  my  conduct  affords  grounds  for  a
legitimate  presumption  that  I  chose  to  abandon  it. — Let  us
apply  these  principles. — Since  it  depends  on  the  will  of  each
nation  to  carry  on  commerce  with  another,  or  not  to  carry  it
on,  and  to  regulate  the  manner  in  which  it  choosfes  to  carry  it
on  (§  92),  the  right  of  commerce  is  evidently  a  right  of  mere
ability  {jtm  merae  facultatis)^  a  simple  power,  and  consequently
is  imprescriptible.  Thus,  although  two  nations  have  treated
together,  without  interruption,  during  a  century,  this  long
usage  does  not  give  any  right  to  either  of  them ;  nor  is  the
•  one  obliged  on  this  account  to  suffer  the  other  to  come  and
sell  its  merchandises,  or  to  buy  others : — ^they  both  preserve
the  double  right  of  prohibiting  the  entrance  of  foreign  mer-
chandise, and  of  selling  their  own  wherever  people  are  willing
to  buy  them.  Although  the  English  have  from  time  imme-
morial  been  accustomed  to  get  wine  from  Portugal,  they  are
not  on  that  account  obliged  to  continue  the  trade,  and  have
not  lost  the  liberty  of  purchasing  their  wines  elsewhere.  (40)
Although  they  have,  in  the  same  manner,  been  long  accustomed
to  sell  their  cloth  in  that  kingdom,  they  have,  nevertheless,
a  right  to  transfer  that  trade  to  any  other  country :  and  the
Portuguese,  on  their  part,  are  not  obliged  by  this  long  custom,
either  to  sell  their  wines  to  the  English,  or  to  purchase  their
cloths.  If  a  nation  desires  any  right  of  commerce  which  shall
no  longer  depend  on  the  will  of  another,  she  must  acquire  it
by  treaty.  (40)
1 96.  impre-  What  has  been  just  said  may  be  applied  to  the  rights  ol
Bcriptibiiity  commcrcc  acquired  by  treaties.  If  a  nation  has  by  this  method
It  "d^d"  procured  the  liberty  of  selling  certain  merchandises  to  another,
treaty!  ^ 8^®  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^®®  "®^  right,  though  a  great  number  of  years

(40)  The perpetual obligation to  oensored  by  some  as  eyidcntiy  advan-

parchase  Port  wines  fh>m  Portugal  in  tageous  to  Portugal  and  disadvuntage-

exchange  for  British  woollen  cloths  was  ous  to  Great  Britain. 2  Smith,  W.  N.

established  by  Uie  celebrated  treaty  of  338  to  341 ; Tucker on Trade,  356 ;

Methnen,  a.  d.  1703  (  so  called  because  and  1  Chitty's Commercial  Law,  619,

concluded  by  Sir P. Methuen),  with  —0.
Portugal: a treaty which  has been
110


il.


OF  COMMEBCB.  42


are  suffered  to  elapse  without  its  being  used ;  because  this book  i.
right  is  a  simple  power,  jv^  meroB  facvJtatiSy  which  she  is  at  ^^^^'  ^^°'.
liberty  to  use  or  not,  whenever  she  pleases.

Certain  circumstances,  however,  may  render  a  different
decision  necessary,  because  they  imply  a  change  in  the  nature
of  the  right  in  question.  For  instance,  if  it  appears  evident,
that  the  nation  granting  this  right  granted  it  only  with  a  view
of  procuring  a  species  of  merchandise  of  which  she  stands  in
need,  ^nd  if  the  nation  which  obtained  the  right  of  selling
neglects  to  furnish  those  merchandises,  and  another  offers  to
bVing  them  regularly,  on  condition  of  having  an  exclusive
privilege, — ^it  appears  certain  that  the  privilege  may  be
granted  to  the  latter.  Thus  the  nation  that  had  the  right  of
Belling  would  lose  it,  because  she  had  not  fulfilled  the  tacit
condition.

Commerce  is  a  common  benefit  to  a  nation ;  and  all  her  {  97. Of
members  have  an  equal  right  to  it. Monopoly ^  therefore,  in  ™*?!^*^
general,  is  contrary  to  the  rights  of  the  citizens. However,  companiei*
this  rule  has  its  exceptions,  suggested  even  by  the  interest  of  with  «xciu-
the  nation :  and  a  wise  government  may,  in  certain  cases,  sive  privi-
justly  establish  monopolies. There  are  commercial  enter- ^®*^®'' (*^)
prises  that  cannot  be  carried  on  without  an energy  that

(41)  See  the  adyantages  and  die-  place  for  the  diteontented  is  assuredly
advantages  resnlUng  from  eommercial  the  mott  dijffieult;  and  the  presenting
oompaniM  and  foreign  monopoltety  and  to  their  imagination  in  a  distant  coun-
upon  colonization  in  general,  1  Chit-  try,  perspectiye  views,  on  which  their
ty's  Commercial  Law,  631  to  689 ;  and  thoughts  and  desires  may  fix  them-
Bee  some  sensible  observations  on  the  selves,  is  one  of  the  solutions  of  this
Impolicy  of  Exclusive  Companies,  di£Bculty.  In  the  development  of  the
Brans  on  Statutes,  Class  III.  title  In-  motives  which  determined  the  estab-
surance,  p.  231.  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  lishment  of  the  ancient  eoloniet  we
his  Wealth  of  Nations,  book  iv.  o.  7,  easily  remark,  that,  at  the  very  time
p.  379,  Ac.  and  Dean  Tucker,  in  his  they  were  indispensable,  they  were
Essay  on  Trade,  67  to  71  (but  see  Id.  voluntary ;  that  they  were  presented
40,  41),  admit,  that,  to  induce  specu-  by  the  governments  as  an  allurement,
lating  and  enterprising  individuals  to  not  as  a  punishment.  Bodies  politio
embark  their  capitals  in  expensive  un-  ought  to  reserve  to  themselves  the
dertakings,  probably  generally  bene-  means  of  placing  to  advantage,  at  a
ficial  in  the  result,  but  which  could  distance  from  their  immediate  seat,
not  be  pursued  by  single  individuals,  that  superabundance  of  citizens  who
It  may  be  expedient  originally  to  afford  from  time  to  time  tkrecUen  their  tran-
ihem  a  monopoly ;  but  that,  after  they  quiUity.  Thus,  with  new  view*  of  life,
have  acquired  a  liberal  profit,  the  trade  and  the  content  springing  from  the
oaght  to  be  thrown  open.  Again,  full  employment  of  the  aspiring  mind
when  a  country  becomes  too  densely  of  man,  and  under  the  influence  of  re-
populatod,  and  many  subjects  are  out  newed  hope,  the  bad,  the  idle,  and  the
of  employ  and  restless,  then  there  turbulent  may  be  rendered  useful  mem-
nay  be  another  reason  for  eneourag-  bers  of  society.  Our  eoloniee,  then,  pre-
ing  the  creation  of  foreign  companies,  sent  such  a  field  for  the  promotion  of
A  celebrated  diplomatist,  and  an  acute  human  happiness,  such  a  scope  for  the
observer  of  human  nature  (M.  Talley-  noblest  purposes  of  philanthropy,  that
rand),  has  jusUy  said,  that  the  art  of  we  cannot  be  led  to  think  their  into-
piuting  men  into  their  proper  places  is,  rests  wiU  be  overlooked  by  a  wise  legi*-
perhaps,  the  first  science  of  govern-  lature  or  government — C.
nient;  but  that  of  finding  the  proper

m


1


42  OF  COMMEBOS.

BOOK  I.  requires  considerable  funds,  which  surpass  the  ability  of  in-
CHAP.  vm.  (iiyi(juals.  There  are  others  that  would  soon  become  ruinous,
were  they  not  conducted  with  gre&t  prudence,  with  one  regu-
lar spirit,  and  according  to  well-supported  maxims  and  rules.
These  branches  of  trade  cannot  be  indiscriminatelj  carried
on  by  individuals :  companies  are  therefore  formed,  under  the
authority  of  government ;  and  these  companies  cannot  subsist
without  an  exclusive  privilege.  It  is  therefore  advantageous
to  the  nation  to  grant  them :  hence  have  arisen,  in  different
countries,  those  powerful  companies  that  carry  on  commerce
with  the  East.  When  the  subjects  of  the  United  Provinces
established  themselves  in  the  Indies  on  the  ruin  of  their  ene-
mies the  Portuguese,  individual  merchants  would  not  have
dared  to  think  of  «uch  an  arduous  enterprise ;  and  the  state
itself,  wholly  taken  up  with  the  defence  of  its  liberty  against
the  Spaniards,  had  not  the  means  of  attempting  it.

It  is  also  certain  beyond  all  doubt,  that,  whenever  any  in-
dividual offers,  on  condition  of  obtaining  an  exclusive  privilege,
to  establish  a  particular  branch  of  commerce  or  manufacture
which  the  nation  has  not  the  means  of  carrying  on,  the  sove-
reign may  grant  him  such  privilege.

But  whenever  any  branch  of  commerce  may  be  left  open
to  the  whole  nation,  without  producing  any  inconvenience  or
being  less  advantageous  to  the  state,  a.  restriction  of  that
commerce  to  a  few  privileged  individuals  is  a  violation  of  the
rights  of  all  the  other  citizens. And  even  when  such  a  com-
merce requires  considerable  expenses  to  maintain  forts,  men
of  war,  &c.,  this  being  a  national  affair,  the  state  may  defray
those  expenses,  and,  as  an  encouragement  to  industry,  leave
the  profits  of  the  trade  to  the  merchants. This  is  sometimes
[  43  ] done  in  England.
J  98. Ba- The  conductor  of  a  nation  ought  to  take  particular  care  to
^**^  ^^ encourage  the  commerce  that  is  advantageous  to  his  people,
attention  of  ^^^^  ^  suppress  or  lay  restraints  upon  that  which  is  to  their
goyemment  disadvantage.  (42) Gold  and  silver  having  become  the  corn-
in  thU  . —

respect  ^42) This  is a  quetHonahle  poUey. 125^  201,  204; 3 Id. 183; Malthas,

It  has  been  laid  down  by  some  of  the  196;  2  Palej,  Mor.  PhiL  400,  402;
most  eminent  writers  on  politieal  econo-  8  Hume,  Hist  403 ;  Sir  J.  Child  on
my,  that  every  active  interference  of  Trade,  2d  part,  46,  81,  86,  132,  164  to
the  legislature  with  its  sabjects,  by  164;  and  Buchanan's  Observations  on
prohibiting  or  restraining  any  partica-  Smith's  W.  of  N.  2d  ed.  vol.  4,  page
lar  branch  of  honest  labour,  or  by  en-  156,  167 ;  Introdnc.  3  Lord  Sheffield's
oouraging  any  particular  branch  at  the  Strictures  on  Navigation  System,  3
expense  qf  the  others,  whether  in  agri-  Adolph.  163,  and  see  anu,  chap.  6,
culture  or  commeree,  has  uniformly  re-  and  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  4
tarded  the  advances  of  public  opulence, to  7.

and  that  the  sound  policy  of  a  legislator  But  as  regards  the  encouragement
is  not  to  impose  restrictions  or  regula-  or  discouragement  of  any  particular
tions  upon  domestic  industry,  but  r»-  branch  of  trade,  there  is  another  mo-
ther to  prevent  them  from  being  im-  tive  for  interference  which  powerfully
posed  by  the  contrivance  or  folly  of  influences,  vis.  the  increase  of  rereMue,
others.  See  2  Smith,  W.  N.  118,  for  whenever  the  luxury  or  other  wish
112


PUBLIC  W^TS.  43

mon  standard  of  the  value  of  all  the  articles  of  commerce,  the "^'^^  »•

trade  that  brings  into  the  state  a  greater  quantity  of  these

metals  than  it  carries  out,  is  lan  advantageous  trade ;  and,  on
the  contrary,  that  is  a  ruinous  one,  which  causes  more  gold
and  silver  to  be  sent  abroad,  than  it  brings  home.  This  is
what  is  called  the  balance  of  trade.  The  ability  of  those  who
have  the  direction  of  it,  consists  in  making  that  balance  turn
in  favour  of  the  nation.

Of  all  the  measures  that  a  wise  government  may  take  with  I  »^«  la-
this view,  we  shall  only  touch  here  on  import  duties. When  J^5*  duties
the  conductors  of  a  state,  without  absolutely  forcing  trade,  ^
are  nevertheless  desirous  of  diverting  it  into  other  channels,
they  lay  such  duties  on  the  merchandises  they  would  discou-
rage as  will  prevent  their  consumption. Thus,  French  wines
are  charged  with  very  high  duties  in  England,  while  the
duties  on those  of  Portugal are  very  moderate, — because
England  sells  few  of  her  productions  to  France,  while  she  sells
large  quantities  to  Portugal. There  is  nothing  in  this  con-
duct that  is  not  very  wise  and  extremely  just;  and  France
has  no  reason  to  complain  of  it^— every  nation  having  An  un-
doubted right  to  make  what conditions  she  thinks  proper,
with  respect  to  receiving  foreign  merchandises,  and  being  even
at  liberty  to  refuse  takmg  them  at  all.


CHAP.  IX.

OF  THE  CAEE  OF  THE  PUBLIC  WATS  OF  COMMUNICATION, chap.  «.

AND THE RIGHT OP  TOLL.

THE  Utility  of  highways,  bridges,  canals,  and,  in  a  word,  ?  lOO. ua-
of  all  safe  and  commodious  ways  of  communication,  cannot  ^^*y  °^  ^^sk
be  doubted. They  facilitate  the  trade  between  one  place  and  ^y^'^*"
another,  and  render  the  conveyance  of  merchandise  less  ex-
pensive, as  well  as  more  certain  and  easy. The  merchants
are  enabled  to  sell  at  a  better  price,  and  to  obtain  the  pre-
ference ;  an  attraction  is  held  out  to  foreigners,  whose  mer-
chandises are  carried  through  the  country,  and  diffuse  wealth
in  all  the  places  through  which  they  pass. France  and  Hol-
land feel  the  happy  consequences  of  this  from  daily  expe-
rience. (44)

of  the  people  introduoes  a  foreign,  or  and  export  dntiee,  bounties  and  draw-
even  a  domestic  article  to  greater  con-  backs,  which,  since  Vattel  wrote,  have
sumption,  a  moderate  charge  upon  the  become  extensive  branches  of  law,
same,  though  in  a  degree  restrictive  npon  highly  important  to  be  studied.  See  an
the  consumption,  will  in  general  be  a  attempt  of  the  editor  to  arrange  them,
proper  tax. Ibid.— C.  in  1  Chitty*8  Commercial  Law,  Index,

(43)  This  is  a  very  slight  allusion  to  titles  Import  and  Export. — C.
Che  Toiy  important  regulation  of  import (44)  But although, since Vattel

16  k2  lis


43  PUBLIC  WAYS.

BOOK  L One  of  the  principal  things  that  ought  to  employ  the  »t-
CHAP.  IX.  ^gjj|;;Q^  q(  ^jjg  government  with  respect  to  the  welfare  of  the


{  101.  Duty  public  in  general,  and  of  trade  in  particular,  must  then  relate
®^  *^T®™r.  to  the  highways,  canals,  &c.,  in  which  nothing  ought  to  be
reapect. **  neglected  to  render  them  safe  and  commodious. France  is
one  of  those  states  where  this  duty  to  the  public  is  discharged
with  the greatest attention  and magnificence. Numerous
[  44  ] patroles  everywhere  watch  over  the  safety  of  travellers :  mag-
nificent roads,  bridges,  and  canals,  facilitate  the  communica-
tion between  one  province  and  another : — Lewis  XIV.  joined
the  two  seas  by  a  work  worthy  of  the  Romans.
i  102. Tu The  whole  nation  ought,  doubtless,  to  contribute  to  such
nghta  in  *iii8  ^g^f^j  undertakings. When  therefore  the  laying  out  and
repairing  of  highways,  bridges, and  canals,  would  be  too
great  a  burden  on  the  ordinary  revenues  of  the  state,  the
government  may  oblige  the  people  to  labour  at  them,  or  to
contribute  to  the  expense.  (45) The  peasants,  in  some  of  the
provinces  of  France,  have  been  heard  to  murmur  at  the  labours
imposed  upon  them  for  Ihe  construction  of  roads: but  ex-
perience had  no  sooner  made  them  sensible  of  their  true
interest,  than  they  blessed  the  authors  of  the  undertaking.
i  1^3.  Voun- The  construction  and  preservation  of  all  these  works  being
^*^^-*bt  f  *''^^®'^^®^  ^^^^  great expense,  the nation may  very  justly
feoa  (4^) oblige  all  those  to  contribute  to  them,  who  receive  advantage
from  their  use :  this  is  the  legitimate  origin  of  the  right  of
toll. It  is  just  that  a  traveller,  and  especially  a  merchant,
who  receives  advantage  from  a  bridge,  a  canal,  or  a  road,  in
his  own  passage,  and  in  the  more  commodious  conveyance  of

wrote,  France  greatly  adyanced  in  the  ply  of  proper  food  in  retnm for  kifl

improvement  of  her  roads,  yet  England  labour. — C.

has  surpassed  aU  other  nations  in  the  (46)  As  to  the  right  to  iollf  Ac,  see
facilities  of  internal  intercourse  by  new  Grotius,  b.  iL  chap.  2,  ^  14,  p.  154 ;
canals,  railways,  and  other  improve-  Puffendorff,  book  iiL  chap.  3,  §  6,  p.
ments  sanctioned  by  the  legislature.  29,  30;  1  Bla.  Com.  2S7;  1  Chittv's
With  respect  to  which,  see  the  enact-  Commercial  Law,  103  to  106;  2  Id.
ments  and  decisions,  2  Chitty's  Commer-  139,  140.  It  has  been  observed,  that
oial  Law,  127  to  141. — C.  of  all  the  taxes  with  which  the  inhabi-
(46)  This  position  of  a  government's  tants  of  this  country  are  burdened,
right  to  oblige  the  people  to  labour  on  there  is  perhaps  none  so  odious  as  th
the  roads  as  thus  stated,  would  startle  turnpike  duty.  On  the  continent  no
an  Englishman,  In  England  there  is  such  interrupUon  in  travelling  is  ex-
no  such  direct  power.  The  34  Geo.  3,  perienced,  and  tolls  have  been  abolished
0.  74,  s.  4,  it  is  true,  requires  each  oo-  on  the  northern  side  of  the  me&t>poIls,
cnpier  to  send  his  carts  and  horses,  and  London.  Lord  Byron,  in  his  eulogy
labourers,  to  work  on  the  roads;  but  upon  English  roads,  humorously  ob-
then,  if  he  neglect  to  do  so,  he  is  sub-  serves —

ject  only  to  a  moderate  penalty,  just «wittt*dei.fbtftiiihiiiri»tw«pto«.d.
sufficient  to  enable  the  surveyor  to  hire 8onnoo(h,«>i«vei,tachftiiiodtoriittriaf
the  like  assisUnce  elsewhere: and  as Thee.rth,M«»r«tb.  «K»-i»»»«bn«i

.  •  1  • X A  ^'i*  ***>  aceonplah  with  hn  wid*  winfi  wivtag

to  men,  even  a  pauper  is  subject  to  no  ii.dwchb6«ciiHoPbM«oa%tiiB€.ih«,od

penalty  for  refusing  to  work,  excepting Hadtoidbhtontontirfyhnonvioc
that,  if  he  do  80,  he  will  not  then  be wi,h.b.York«ii-^io«rjrd«w.K>iv-

enUUed  to  parochial  relief. If  he  work,  CteLz.n.-4k

be  is  entitled  to  pay  in  money,  or  sup-  •

lU


PUBLIC WATS.  44

his  merchandise,  should  help  to  defray  the  expense  of  these book  i.
useful  establishments,  by  a  moderate  contribution :  and  if  the ^°^'  "•.
Btate  thinks  proper  to  exempt  the  citizens  from  paying  it,  she
is  under  no  obligation  to  gratify  strangers  in  this  particular.

But  a  law  so  just  in  its  origin  frequently  degenerates  into  ;i04.  AlmM
great  abuses. There  are  countries  where  no  care  is  taken  <>^*^^«"«^^^
of  the  highways,  and  where  nevertheless  considerable  tolls  ^*^^
are  exacted. A  lord  of  a  manor,  who  happens  to  possess  a
stripe  of  land  terminating  on  a  river,  there  establishes  a  toll,
though  he  is  not  at  a  farthing's  expense  in  keeping  up  the
navigation  of  the  river,  and  rendering  it  convenient. This
is  a  manifest  extortion,  and  an  infringement  of  the  natural
rights  of  mankind. For  the  division  of  lands,  and  their  be-
coming private  property,  could  never  deprive  any  man  of  the
right  of  passage,  when  not  the  least  injury  is  done  to  the

Eerson  through  whose  territory  he  passes. Every  man  in-
erits  this  right  from  nature,  and  cannot  justly  be  forced  to
purchase  it.  (47)

But  the  arbitrary  or  cuitomary  law  of  nations  at  present
tolerates  this  abuse,  while  it  is  not  carried  to  such  an  excess
as  to  destroy  commerce.  People  do  not,  however,  submit
without  diflSculty,  except  in  the  case  of  those  tolls  which  are
established  by  ancient  usage :  and  the  imposition  of  new  ones
is  often  a  source  of  disputes.  The  Swiss  formerly  made  war
on  the  Dukes  of  Milan,  on  account  of  some  oppressions  of
this  nature.  This  right  of  tolls  is  also  further  abused,  when
the  passenger  is  obliged  to  contribute  too  much,  and  what
bears  no  proportion  to  the  expense  of  preserving  these  public
passages.  (48)

At  present,  to  avoid  all  difBculty  and  oppression,  nations,
settle  these  points  by  treaties.

(47)  Thifl  poaiUon  reqnirea  explana-  1  Burr.  292. In  the  absenee  of  raoh

(ion  and  qualification. As  respects  a  custom  or  prescription,  no  right  to  ap-

public  narigable  river,  every  part  of  proach  a  river  over  private grounds

the  navigable  stream  must  ever  remain  exists. Parthericke  v.  Maaon,  2  Chitty's

free  and  open  from  Its  oommunioation  Rep.  658 ; WifcUt  y.  Tkompton,  1  Esp.

with  the  sea  to  its  extreme  navigable  Rep.  252. {  Cheta  v.  Manovon,  3  Watts,

point; but  the absolute  righi  to ap-  Rep.  219 j  Cooper  v.  Smithf  9  Serg.  k

proach it  on each side,  can only  be  Rawle,  26. } So,  if  a  private  individual

by  public  and  general  ways. Conse-  make  and  repair  a  bridge  over  a  river,

qnently,  if  an  individual  have  land  ad-  he  may  insist  upon  any  person  using

joining a  river, he may  reasonably  it  paying  him  a  toll,  as  in  the  instance

refuse  permission  to  any  person  to  go  of Putney and Fulham bridge. In

over  it  to  approach  the  river,  and  de>  these  cases  the  demand  of  an  exorbi- .

mand  any  sum  he  thinks  fit  for  the  tant toll  may be  illiberal,  but  is  no

permission,  unless  there be  a  public  more  illegal  than  a  nation's  refusing

way over  it Nor^  have the public  to  sell its superiluous  produce,  or  to

any  right  at  eommon  law  to  tow  on  admit  free  passage  through  its  country,

the banks of an ancient navigable  The  right  to pass at  a  moderate  toU

river  J  Ball  V.  fferb^rt,  3  Term Rep.  is  a  moral  but  imperfect  right,  anU,

263 ', though  it  may  exist  by  custom  2  91.— C.
•r  prescription. Pierce  t.  Faueonberge, (48)  See  n.  47,  ante,

115


45  OF  MONET  AKD  EXOHANaE.


BOOK  I.
CHAP.  Z.


i


CHAP.  X.

OF  MONET  Ain>  EXOHANaE.  (49)

J 105. Es- IN  the  first  ages,  after  the  introduction  of  private  property,
tabiiflhment  people  exchanged  their  superfluous  commodities  and  effects
o  money. ^^^  those  they  wanted. Afterwards  gold  and  silver  became
the  common  standard  of  the  value  of  all  things :  and  to  pre-
vent the  people  from  being  cheated,  the  mode  was  introduced
of  stamping  pieces  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  name  of  the  state,
with  the  figure  of  the  prince,  or  some  other  impression,  as  the
seal  and  pledge  of  their  value. This  institution  is  of  great
use  and  infinite  convenience :  it  is  easy  to  see  how  much  it
facilitates  commerce. — Nations  or  sovereigns  cannot  therefore
bestow  too  much  attention  on  an  affair  of  such  importance.
;  106.  Duty The  impression  on  the  coin  becoming  the  seal  of  its  stand-
»f  the  nation  g^j,^  and  Weight,  a  moment's  reflection  will  convince  us  that
^tturospect  *^®  coinage  of  money  ought  not  to  be  left  indiscriminately
to  the  coin,  free  to  every  individual ;  for,  by  that  means,  frauds  would
become  too common — the  coin  would  soon  lose  the  public
confidence ;  and  this  would  destroy  a  most  useful  institution.
Hence  money  is  coined  by  the  authority  and  in  the  name  of
the  state  or  prince,  who  are  its  surety ;  they  ought,  therefore,
to  have  a  quantity  of  it  coined  suflScient  to  answer  the  neces-
sities of  the  country,  and  to  take  care  that  it  be  good,  that  is
to  say,  that  its  intrinsic  value  bear  a  just  proportion  to  its
extrinsic  or  numerary  value.

It  is  true,  that,  in  a  pressing  necessity,  the  state  would  have
a  right  to  order  the  citizens  to  receive  the  coin  at  a  price
superior  to  its  real  value :  but  as  foreigners  will  not  receive
it  at  that  price,  the  nation  gains  nothing  by  this  proceeding ;
it  is  only  a  temporary  palliative  for  the  evil,  without  effecting
a  radical  cure.  This  excess  of  value,  added  in  an  arbitrary
manner  to  the  coin,  is  a  real  debt  which  the  sovereign  con-
tracts with  individuals :  and,  in  strict  justice,  this  crisis  of
affairs  being  over,  that  money  ought  to  be  called  in  at  the
expense  of  the  state,  and  paid  for  in  other  specie,  according  to
the  natural  standard :  otherwise,  this  kind  of  burden,  laid  oq
in  the  hour  of  necessity,  would  fall  solely  on  those  who  r^
ceived  this  arbitrary  money  in  payment,  which  would  be  unjust.
Besides,  experience  has  shown  that  such  a  resource  is  destruc-
tive to  trade,  by  destroying  the  confidence  both  of  foreigners
and  citizens — raising  in  proportion  the  price  of  every  thing —

(49)  The  modern  law  of  nations,  and  Id.  84  to 120 ;  1  Chitty's  CommeFoial

the municipal law  of  England,  as to  Law,  583;  2  Id.  179  to  187,  and  statutei

coin,  bullion,  and  money,  will  be  found  and  decisions  there  ooUeeted. — C.
eoUeoted  in  1  Bla.  Com.  276  to  280;  4
116


ika.


07  MONEY  AKD  EXCHAKaiS.  46

and  ioducing  every  one  to  lock  up  or  send  abroad  the  good boos  x.

old  specie ;  whereby  a  temporary  stop  is  put  to  the  circulation *"P:  ^  .

of  money. So  that  it  is  the  duty  of  every  nation  and  of  every

sovereign  to  abstain,  as  much  as  possible,  from  so  dangerous

an  experiment,  and  rather  to  have  recourse  to  extraordinary [  46  ]

taxes  and  contributions  to  support  the  pressing  exigencies  of

the  state.*

Since  the  state  is  surety  for  the  goodness  of  the  money  j  107.  Theit
and  its  currency,  the  public  authority  alone  has  the  right  01  rights  in  cua
coining  it. Those  who  counterfeit  it,  violate  the  rights  of  >"««?««*•
the  sovereign,  whether  they  make  it  of  the  same  standard
and  value  or  not. These  are  called  false-coiners,  and  their
crime  is  justly  considered  as  one  of  the  most  heinous  nature.
For  if  they  coin  base  money,  they  rob  both  the  public  and
the  prince ;  and  if  they  coin  good,  they  usurp  the  preroga-
tive of  the  sovereign. They  will  never  be  inclined  to  coin
good  money  unless  there  be  a  profit  on  the  coinage :  and  in
this  case  they  rob  the  state  of  a  profit  which  exclusively  be-


*  In  Boizard's  Treatise  on  Coin,  we  riooB  modes  of  reducing  its  intrinsic
find  the  following  ohserrations :  "  It  is  value,  says — "  These  ezpedienti  are
worthy  of  remark,  that»  when  our  kings  bat  rarely  resorted  to,  because  they  give
debased  the  coin,  they  kept  the  circnm-  occasion  to  the  exportation  or  melting
stance  a  secret  from  the  people : — wit-  down  of  the  good  specie,  and  to  the  in-
ness  the  ordinance  of  Philip  de  Yalois  troduction  and  circulation  of  foreign
in  1350,  by  which  he  ordered  Toumois  coin — raise  the  price  of  every  thin^—
I^ubU$  to  be  coined  2d,  6^gr,  fine,  impoverish  individuals — diminish  the
which  was,  in  faot^  a  debasement  of  revenue,  which  is  paid  in  specie  of  in-
the  coin.  In  that  ordinance,  address-  ferior  value — and  sometimes  put  a  total
ing  the  officers  of  the  mint»  he  says-^  stop  to  commerce.  This  truth  has  been
'  Upon  the  oath  by  which  you  are  bound  so  weU  understood  in  all  ages,  that
to  the  king,  keep  this  affair  as  secret  as  those  princes  who  had  recourse  to  one
you  possibly  can,  that  neither  the  bank-  or  other  of  these  modes  of  debasing  the
ers  nor  others  may,  by  your  means,  ao-  coin  in  -difficult  times,  ceased  to  prao-
quire  any  knowledge  of  it;  for  if,  through  tise  it  the  moment  the  necessity  ceased
you,  it  comes  to  be  known,  yon  shall  be  to  exist."  We  have,  on  this  subject,  an
punished  for  the  offence  in  such  man-  ordinance  of  Philip  the  Fair,  issued  in
ner  as  shall  serve  as  an  example  to  May,  1295,  which  announces,  Uiat,
others.' '' — The  same  author  quotes  ''The  king  having  reduced  the  coin
other  similar  ordinances  of  the  same  both  in  fineness  and  weight,  and'  ex-
king,  and  one  issued  by  the  Dauphin,  pectlng  to  be  obliged  to  make  a  further
who  governed  the  kingdom  as  regent  reduction  in  order  to  retrieve  his  affairs,
during  the  captivity  of  King  John,  dated  — ^but  knowing  himself  to  be,  in  con-
June  27,  1360,  by  vii*tue  of  which  the  science,  responsible  for  the  injury
mint-masters,  directing  the -officers  en-  caused  to  the  state  by  such  reduction,
gaged  in  the  coinage  to  coin  white  — ^pledges  himself  to  the  people  of  his
Dtniert  Id.  \2gr.  fine,  at  the  same  time  kingdom,  by  solemn  charter,  that»  as
expressly  command  them  to  keep  this  soon  as  his  affairs  are  retrieved,  he  wiU
order  secret^  and,  "  if  any  persons  should  restore  the  coin  to  its  proper  standard
make  inquiry  respecting  their  standard,  and  value,  at  his  own  private  cost  and
to  maintain  that  they  were  2d,  fine."  expense,  and  will  himself  bear  all  the'
Chap.  xxix.  loss  and  waste. And,  in  addition  to  this

The  kings  [of  France]  had  recourse  engagement^ Dame Joan, Queen of

to  this  strange expedient  in  cases  of  France  and  Navarre,  pledges  her  reve»

ni  gent  necessity ;  but  they  saw  its  in-  nues  and  dower  for  the  same  purpose."

justice. — The same author, speaking  Note,  edit  ▲.  n.  1797.
of  iUa  debasement  of  o^in,  or  the  va-
in


to  the  stnre-
iDoney,  tbo
For  thiB  res-
Togativea  of
1  Augustus,
to  the  duke
untry  p&ssol
g  could  not
the  croirn.
y  lords  and
coining  mo-
's  authoritj:
le  privileges,

to  conclude,
aother,  or  if
ime  to  do  it,
ily  crimiuals
rinces  being

no  less  use
i\j  exchange^
merchant  re-
to  the  other,
irithont  risk.
;d  to  protect
torn,  by  good
or  foreigner,
■■  interest  and
able  c


ncorti  daiDBKU
h  paper  purtuuit
Lterafu  EagU'li
i  lo ncoi«r  sal.


London. S  Dud


A  OOOD  aOVBBNMBNT,  BTO.  47


BOOK  I.
CHA.P.  XL


CHAP.  XL

SECOND  OBJECT  OP  A  GOOD  GOVERNMENT, — ^TO PROCURE  THE

TRUE HAPPINESS OF THE NATION.

LET  US  continue  to  lay  open  the  principal  objects  of  a  good  §  no.  A  na
government. What  we  have  said  in  the  five  preceding  chap-  ^^^  °™«^*
ters  relates  to  the  care  of  providing  for  the  necessities  of  the  ^^^  it^  ©wa
people,  and  procuring  plenty  in  the  state :  this  is  a  point  of  happinew.
necessity ;  but  it  is  not  sufficient  for  the  happiness  of  a  na-
tion. Experience  shows  that  a  people  may  be  unhappy  in
the  midst  of  all  earthly  enjoyments,  and  in  the  possession  of
the  greatest  riches. Whatever  may  enable  mankind  to  enjoy
a  true  and  solid  felicity,  is  a  second  object  that  deserves  the
most  serious  attention  of  the  government. Happiness  is  the
point  where  centre  all  those  duties  which  individuals  and  na-
tions owe  to  themselves';  and  this  is  the  great  end  of  the  law
of  nature. The  desire  of  happiness  is  the  powerful  spring
that  puts  man  in  motion :  felicity  is  the  end  they  all  have  in
view,  and  it  ought  to  be  the  grand  object  of  the  public  will
(Prelim.  §6). It  is  then  the  duty  of  those  who  form  this
public  will,  or  of  those  who  represent  it — the  rulers  of  the
nation — to  labour  for  the  happiness  of  the  people,  to  watch
continually  over  it,  and  to  promote  it  to  the  utmost  of  their
power.

To  succeed  in  this,  it  is  necessary  to  instruct  the  people  to  ?  in.  In-
seek  felicity  where  it  is  to  be  found ;  that  is,  in  their  own  struction.
perfection, — ^and  to  teach  them  the  means  of  obtaining  it.
The  sovereign  cannot,  then,  take  too  much  pains  in  instruct-  f  48  1
ing  and  enlightening  his  people,  and  in  forming  them  to  use-
ful knowledge  and  wise  discipline.  Let  us  leave  a  hatred  of
the  sciences  to  the  despotic  tyrants  of  the  east:  they  are
afraid  of  having  their  people  instructed,  because  they  choose
to 'rule  over  slaves.  But  though  they  are  obeyed  with  the
most  abject  submission,  they  frequently  experience  the  effects
of  disobedience  and  revolt.  A  just  and  wise  prince  feels  no
apprehensions  from  the  light  of  knowledge  :  he  knows  that  it
is  ever  advantageous  to  a  good  government.  If  men  of  learn-
ing know  that  liberty  is  the  natural  inheritance  of  mankind ;
on  the  other  hand  they  are  more  fully  sensible  than  their
neighbours,  how  necessary  it  is,  for  their  own  advantage,  that
this  liberty  should  be  subject  to  a  lawful  authority: — in-
capable of  being  slaves,  they  are  faithful  subjects.

The  first  impressions  made  on  the  mind  are  of  the  utmost  j  112.  Eda.

importance  for  the  remainder  of  life. In  the  tender  years  cation  of

of  infancy  and  youth,  the  human  mind  and  heart  easily  re-  y^^^^-

ceive  the  seeds  of  good  or  evil. Hence  the  education  of

youth  is  one  of  the  most  im2)ortant  affairs  that  deserve  the

119


OITD  OBJECT  OP

ment.  It  oaght  not  to  be  entirely
ist  certain  way  of  fonning  good  citi-
tabliehments  for  public  edncatioD,  to
masters— direct  them  with  prudence

and  suitable  measures,  that  the  citi*

take  advantage  of  them.  How  ad-
on  of  the  Romans,  in  the  flourishing
id  how  admirably  waa  it  calculated  to
roung  men  put  themselvea  under  the
itrious  person ; they  frequented  hia

wherever  he  went,  and  equally  im-
)ns  and  example :  their  very  sports
erciseB  proper  to  form  soldiers. The

at  Sparta ;  and  this  whs  one  of  the
incomparable  Lycurgus.  That  legis-
itered  into  the  moat  minute  details

of  youth,*  being  persuaded  that  on
erity  and  gloj-y  of  his  republic,

the  sovereign — the  whole  nation —
rta  and  sciences  ?  To  say  nothing  of
ins  that  strike  the  eye  of  every  be-
the  polite  arts  enlighten  the  mind

and  if  study  does  not  always  inspire
because  it  sometimes,  and  even  too
with  an  incorrigibly  vicious  heart,
actors  ought  then  to  protect  men  of
I,  and  to  call  forth  talents  by  honours
friends  of  barbarism  declaim  against
rts ; — let  us,  without  deigning  to  an-
gs,  content  ourselves  with  appealing
compare  England,  France,  Holland,
itzerland  and  Germany,  to  the  many
in  ignorance,  and  see  where  we  can
of  honest  men  and  good  citizens.  It
to  oppose  against  us  the  example  of
nt  Rome. They,  it  is  true,  neglected

those  branches  of  knowledge  and  art
lent  to  pleasure  and  amusement ;  but
I  sciences — morality,  jurisprudence,
cultivated  by  them,  especially  by  the
of  attention  superior  to  what  we  be-

le  utility  of  literature  and  the  polite
cknowledged,  as  is  likewise  the  neces-
oa.  The  immortal  Peter  I.  thought
tance  he  could  not  entirely  civilize
urishing.  In  England,  learning  and
and  riches. Newton  was  honoured,

hoB,  Lactdanvm.  SitpuHicm.


A  QOOD  GOTERNMBNT,  ETO.  49

*  •

protected,  and  rewarded  while  living,  and  after  his  death,  his ^^^^  ^

tomb  was  placed  among  those  of  kings. France  also,  in  this

respect,  deserves  particular  praise ;  to  the  munificence  of  her
kings  she  is  indebted  for  several  establishments  that  are  no
less  useful  than  glorious.  The  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences
diffuses  on  every  side  the  light  of  knowledge  and  the  desire
of  instruction.  Louis  XV.  furnish<^H  the  means  of  sending
to  search,  under  the  equator  and  the  polar  circle,  for  the  proof
of  an  important  truth ;  and  we  at  present  know^  what  was  be-
fore ,only  believed  on  the  strength  of  Newton's  calculations.
Happy  will  that  kingdom  be,  if  the  too  general  taste  of  the
age  does  not  make  the  people  neglect  solid  knowledge,  to  give
themselves  up  to  that  which  is  merely  amusing,  and  if  those
who  fear  the  light  do  not  succeed  in  extinguishing  the  blaze  of
science !

I  speak  of  the  freedom  of  philosophical  discussion,  which  j  114.  Free-
is  the  soul  of  the  republic  of  letters.  What  can  genius  pro-  ^om  of  phi-
duce,  when  trammelled  by  fear  ?  Can  the  greatest  man  that  ^^^^P^J^^
ever  lived  contribute  much  towards  enlightening  the  minds  of
his  fellow-citizens,  if  he  finds  himself  constantly  exposed  to
the  cavils  of  captious  and  ignorant  bigots — ^if  he  is  obliged  to
be  continually  on  his  guard,  to  avoid  being  accused  by  innu-
endo-mongers of  indirectly  attacking^the  received  opinions  7
I  know  that  liberty  has  its  proper  bounds — ^that  a  wise  govern-
ment ought  to  have  an  eye  to  the  press,  and  not  to  allow  the
publication  of  scandalous  productions,  which  attack  morality,
government,  or  the  established  religion.  But  yet,  great  care
should  be  taken  not  to  extinguish  a  light  that  may  afford  the
state  the  most  valuable  advantages.  Few  men  know  how  to  ^
keep  a  just  medium ;  and  the  office  of  literary  censor  ought
to  be  intrusted  to  none  but^hose  who  are  at  once  both  prudent
and  enlightened.  Why  should  they  search  in  a  book  for  what
the  author  does  not  appear  to  have  intended  to  put  into  it?
And  when  a  writer's  thoughts  and  discourses  are  wholly  em-  [  60  l
ployed  on  philosophy,  ought  a  malicious  adversary  to  be  list-
ened to,  who  would  set  him  at  variance  with  religion  ?  So
far  from  disturbing  a  philosopher  on  account  of  his  opinions,
the  magistrate  ought  to  chastise  those  who  publicly  charge
him  with  impiety,  when  in  his  writings  he  shows  respect  to  the
religion  of  the  state.  The  Romans  seem  to  have  been  formed
to  give  examples  to  the  universe.  That  wise  people  carefully
supported  the  worship  and  religious  ceremonies  established  by
law,  and  left  the  field  open  to  the  speculations  of  philosophers.
Cicero — a  senator,  aconsul,  an  augur — ridicules  superstition,
attacks  it,  and  demolishes  it  in  his  philosophical  writings ;  and,
in  so  doing,  he  thought  he  was  only  promoting  his  own  hap-
piness and  that  of  his  fellow-citizens :  but  he  observes  that
"to  destroy  superstition  is  not  destroying  religion ;  for,"  says
he,  "it  becomes  a  wise  man  to  respect  the  institutions  and

religious  ceremonies  of  his  ancestors : md  it  is  sufficient  to

1'  L  121


SECOND  OBJECT  07


BOOK  T.
CHAP. XI.


contemplate  the  beauty  of  the  world,  and  the  admirable  order
of  the  celestial  bodies,  in  order  to  be  convinced  of  the  exist-
ence of  an  eternal  and  all-perfect  being,  who  is  entitled  to  the
veneration  of  the  human  race/'*  And  in  his  Dialogues  on
the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  he  introduces  Cotta  the  academic,
who  was  high-priest,  attacking  with  great  freedom  the  opinions
of  the  stoics,  and  declaring  that  he  should  always  be  ready  to
defend  the  established  religion,  from  which  he  saw  the  republic
had  derived  great  advantages ;  that  neither  the  learned  nor
the  ignorant  should  make  him  abandon  it :  he  then  says  to  his
adversary,  "  These  are  my  thoughts,  both  as  pontiff  and  as
Cotta.  But  do  *  you,  as  a  philosopher,  bring  me  over  to  your
opinion  by  the  strength  of  your  arguments :  for  a  philosopher
ought  to  prove  to  me  the  truth  of  the  religion  he  would  have
me  embrace,  whereas  I  ought  in  this  respect  to  believe  our
forefathers,  even  without  proof,  "f

Let  us  add  experience  to  these  examples  and  authorities.
Never  did  a  philosopher  occasion  disturbances  in  the  state,
or  in  religion,  by  his  opinions:  they  would  make  no  noise
among  the  people,  nor  ever  offend  the  weak,  if  malice  or  in-
temperate zeal  did  not  take  pains  to  discover  a  pretended
venom  lurking  in  them. It  is  by  him  who  endeavours  to  place
[  51  ] the  opinions  of  a  great  man  in  opposition  to  the  doctrines  and
worship  established  by  law,  that  the  state  is  disturbed,  and
religion  brought  into  danger.
;  116.  Love To  instruct  the  nation  is  not  sufficient : — ^in  order  to  conduct
of  virtue, i^  ^o  happiness,  it  is  still  more  necessary  to  inspire  the  people
rence  of*'"  ^^^^  *^®  ^^^®  ^^  virtue,  and  the  abhorrence  of  vice. Those
vice,  to  be  '  ^ho  are  deeply  versed  in  the  study  of  morality  are  convinced
excited. that  virtue  is  the  true  and  only  path  that  leads  to  happiness ;
so  that  its  maxims  are  but  the  art  of  living  happily ;  and  he
must  be  very  ignorant  of  politics,  who  does  not  perceive  how
much  more  capable  a  virtuous  nation  will  be,  than  any  other,
of  forming  a  state  that  shall  be  at  once  happy,  tranquil,
flourishing,  solid,  respected  by  its  neighbours,  and  formidable
to  its  enemies. The  interest  of  the  prince  must  then  concur


♦  Nam,  at  vere  loquamnr,  snperstitio
fasa  per  gentes  oppressit  omnium  fere
animoa,  atque  omnium  imbecillitatem
occupavit. . . .  multum  enim  ct  nobismet
ipsis  et  nostris  profuturi  videbamur,  si
earn  funditus  sustulissemus.  Nco  vero
(id  enim  diligenter  intelligi  vole)  su-
perstitione  tollendfil  religio  tollitnr.
Nam  et  m^orum  instituta  tueri,  sacris
cseremoniisque  retinendis,  sapientis  est :
et  esse  prsestantem  aliquam  setemamque
naturam,  et  eam  suspiciendam,  admi-
randamque  hominum  generi,  pulchritudo
mundi,  ordoque  ccelestium  cogit  ooufi-
terL Be  XHoinatione,  lib.  li.

122


f  Harum  ego  religionem  nullam  nn-
quam  cpntemnendam  putavi:  mihiqiM
ita  persuasi,  Romulum  auspiciis,  Na>
mam  sacris  constitutis,  fundamenta
jocisse  nostrsB  civitAtis,  quas  nunqaam
profecto  sine  sumuia  placatione  Deo-
rum  immortalium  tauta  esse  potnisset
Habes,  Balbe,  quid  Cotta,  quid  pontifez
sentiat  Fao  nunc  ego  intelligam,
quid  tu  sentias:  a  te  enim  pbilosopho
rationem  accipere  debeo  religionis ;  ma*
Joribus  autem  nostris,  etiam  nulla  re*
tione  reddita,  credere.  De  Natura  D^o*
rum,  lib.  iiL


A  GOOD  GOVBEKMENT,  ETC.  u1

with  his  duty  and  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  in  engaging  ><x^  >•
him  to  watch  attentively  over  an  affair  of  such  importance.  ^"^**'--—
Let  him  employ  all  hi^  authority  in  order  to  encourage  virtue,
and  suppress  vice :  let  the  public  establishments  be  all  directed
to  this  end :  let  his  own  conduct,  his  example,  and  the  distri-
bution of  favours,  posts,  and  dignities,  all  have  the  same  ten-
dency. Let  him  extend  his  attention  even  to  the  private  life
of  the  citizens,  and  banish  from  the  state  whatever  is  only
calculated  to  corrupt  the  manners  of  the  people.  It  belongs
to  politics  to  teach  him  in  detail  the  different  means  of  attain-
ing this  desirable  end — ^to  show  him  those  he  should  prefer,
and  those  he  ought  to  avoid,  on  account  of  the  dangers  that
might  attend  the  execution,  and  the  abuses  that  might  be
made  of  them.  We  shall  here  only  observe,  in  general,  that
vice  may  be  suppressed  by  chastisements,  but  that  mild  and
gentle  methods  alone  can  elevate  men  to  the  dignity  of  virtue ;
it  may  be  inspired,  but  it  cannot  be  commanded.

It  IS  an  incontestable  truth,  that  the  virtues  of  the  citizens  i  110.  Th«
constitute  the  most  happy  dispositions  that  can  be  desired  })jT^^onma.y
a  just  and  wise  government. Here  then  is  an  infallible  c"- cover  thr
terion,  by  which  the  nation  may  judge  of  the  intentions  of  intontion  of
those  who  govern  it. If  they  endeavour  to  render  the  great  its  mien.
and  the  common  people  virtuous,  their  views  are  pure  and
upright ;  and  you  may  rest  assured  that  they  solely  aim  at
the  great  end  of  government — the  happiness  and  glory  of  the
nation. But  if  they  corrupt  the  morals  of  the  people,  spread
a  taste  for  luxury,  effeminacy,  a  rage  for  licentious  pleasures
— ^if  they  stimulate  the  higher  orders  to  a  ruinous  pomp  and
extravagance — ^beware,  citizens !  beware  of  those  corrupters  !  '
they  only  aim  at  purchasing  slaves  in  order  to  exercise  over
them  an  arbitrary  sway.

K  a  prince  has  the  smallest  phare  of  moderation,  he  will
never  have  recourse  to  these  odious  methods.  Satisfied  with  ,
his  superior  station  and  the  power  given  him  by  the  laws,  he
proposes  to  reign  with  glory  and  safety ;  he  loves  his  people,
and  desires  to  render  them  happy.  But  his  ministers  are  in
general  impatient  of  resistance,  and  cannot  brook  the  slightest  '
opposition :  if  he  surrenders  to  them  his  authority,  they  are  [  52  ]
more  haughty  and  intractable  t^an  their  master:  they  feel
not  for  his  people  the  same  love  that  he  feels :  ^4et  the  na-
tion be  corrupted  (say  they)  provided  it  do  but  obey.**  They
dread  the  courage  and  firmness  inspired  by  virtue,  and  know
that  the  distributor  of  favours  rules  as  he  pleases  over  men
whose  hearts  are  accessible  to  avarice.  Thus  a  wretch  who
exercises  the  most  infamous  of  all  professions,  perverts  the
inclinations  of  a  young  victim  of  her  odious  traffic;  she
prompts  her  to  luxury  and  epicurism ;  she  inspires  her  with
voluptuousness  and  vanity,  in  order  the  more  certainly  to
betray  her  to  a  rich  seducer.  This  base  and  unworthy  crea-
ture is  sometimes  chastised  by  the  magistrate ;  but  the  minis-

12$


SECOND  OBJECT  OF


BOOK  L
OHAP.  ZI.


?11T.


ter,  who  is  infinitely  more  guilty,  wallows  in  wealth,  and  is

invested  with  honour  and  authority. Posterity,  however,  will

do  him  justice,  and  detest  the  cornipt'oi^of  a  respectable  nation.

The If  governors  endeavoured  to  fulfil  the  obligations  which  the


to  perfect
iti  onder-
itanding
and  wilL


state,  or  the  j^^^  ^  nature  lays  upon  them  with  respect  to  themselves,  and
Bon,  ought  ^^  *^®^^  character  of  conductors  of  the  state,  they  would  b6
incapable  of  ever  giving  into  the  odious  abuse  just  mentioned.
Hitherto  we  .have  considered  the  obligation  a  nation  is  under
to  acquire  knowledge  and  virtue,  or  to  perfect  its  understand-
ing and  will ; — ^that  obligation,  I  say,  we  have  considered  in  re-
lation to  the  individuals  that  compose  a  nation ;  it  also  belongs
in  a  proper  and  singular  manner  to  the  conductors  of  the  state.
A  nation,  while  she  acts  in  common,  or  in  a  body,  is  a  moral
person  (Prelim.  §  2)  that  has  an  understanding  and  will  of  her
own,  and  is  not  less  obliged  than  any  individual  to  obey  the
laws  of  nature  (Book  I.  §  5),  and  to  improve  her  faculties
(Book  I.  §  21).  That  moral  person  resides  in  those  who  are
invested  with  the  public  authority,  and  represent  the  entire
nation.  Whether  this  be  the  common  council  of  the  nation,
an  aristocratic  body,  or  a  monarch,  this  conductor  and  repre-
sentative of  the  nation,  this  sovereign,  of  whatever  kind,  is
therefore  indispensably  obliged  to  procure  all  the  knowledge
and  information  necessary  to  govern  well,  and  to  acquire  the
practice  and  habit  of  all  the  virtues  suitable  to  a  sovereign.

And  as  this  obligation  is  imposed  with  a  view  to  the  public
welfare,  he  ought  to  direct  all  his  knowledge,  and  all  his  vir-
tues, to  the  safety  of  the  state,  the  end  of  evil  society.
{ 118.  And He  ought  even  to  direct,  as  much  as  possible,  all  the  abili-
to  direct  the  ties,  the  knowledge,  and  the  virtues  of  the  citizens  to  this

and^tuos  S^®**  ^^^  >  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^V  ^^7  ^^^  ^^"j  ^®  uscful  to  the  indi-
viduals who  possess  them,  but  also  to  the  state.  This  is  one
of  the  great  secrets  in  the  art  of  reigning.  The  state  will  be
powerful  and  happy,  if  the  good  qualities  of  the  subject,  passr
ing  beyond  the  narrow  sphere  of  private  virtues,  become  civic
virtues.  This  happy  disposition  raised  the  Roman  republic
to  the  highest  pitch  of  power  and  glory.
2 119.  Love  The  grand  secret  of  giving  to  the  virtues  of  individuals  a
for  their  ^urn  SO  advantageous  to  the  state,  is  to  inspire  the  citizens
•ountry.  ^j^j^  ^^  ardent  love  for  their  country.  It  will  then  naturally
[  t53  ]  follow,  that  each  will  endeavour  to  serve  the  state,  and  to
apply  all  his  powers  and  abilities  to  the  advantage  and  glory
of  the  nation.  This  love  of  their  country  is  natural  to  all
men.  The  good  and  wise  Author  of  nature  has  taken  care  to
bind  them,  by  a  kind  of  instinct,  to  the  places  where  they
received  their  first  breath,  and  they  love  their  own  nation,  as
a  thing  with  which  they  are  intimately  connected.  But
often  happens  that  some  causes  unhappily  weaken  or  destroy
this  natural  impression.  The  injustice  or  the  severity  of  the
government  too  easily  ^fiaces  it  from  the  hearts  of  the  sub-
jects ;  can  self-love  attach  an  individual  to  the  affairs  of  a

124


of  the  oiti-
sens  to  the
welfare  of
the  society.


A  6001)  aOVERKMBKT, ETC.  68

ooimtry  where  every  thing  is  done  with  a  view  to  a  single  per- book  l
son  ? — far  from  it : — ^we  see,  on  the  contrary,  that  free  nations ^^^^'  "'■
are  passionately  interested  in  the  glory  and  the  happiness  of
their  country. Let  us  call  to  mind  the  citizens  of  Rome  in
the  happy  days  of  the  republic,  and  consider,  in  modern  times,
the  English  and  the  Swiss.

The  love  and  affection  a  man  feels  for  the  state  of  which  j  120.  In
he  is  a  member,  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  wise  and  indindualfl,
rational  love  he  owes  to  himself,  since  his  own  happiness  is
connected  with  that  of  his  country.  This  sensation  ought
also  to  flow  from  the  engagements  he  has  entered  into  with
society.  He  has  promised  to  procure  its  safety  and  advan-
tage as  far  as  in  his  power :  and  how  can  he  serve  it  with  zeal,
fidelity,  or  courage,  if  he  has  not  a  real  love  for  it  ?

The  nation  in  a  body  ought  doubtless  to  love  itself,  and  desire  j  121. in
its  own  happiness  as  a  nation. The  sensation  is  too  natural  the  nation
to  admit  of  any  failure  in  this  obligation :  but  this  duty  relates  or  "tate  it-
more  particularly  to  the  conductor,  the  sovereign,  who  repre- J^^'^^^*
,  sents  the  nation,  and  acts  in  its  name. He  ought  to  love  it  reign.
as  what  is  most  dear  to  him,  to  prefer  it  to  every  thing,  for
it  is  the  only  lawful  object  of  his  care,  and  of  his  actions,  in
every  thing  he  does  by  virtue  of  the  public  authority. The
monster  who  does  not  love  his  people  is  no  better  than  an  «

odious  usurper,  and  deserves,  no  doubt,  to  be  hurled  from  the
throne.  There  is  no  kingdom  where  the  statue  of  Godrus
ought  not  to  be  placed  before  the  palace  of  the  sovereign.
That  magnanimous  king  of  Athens  sacrificed  his  life  for  his
people.'*'  That  great  prince  and  Louis  XII.  are  illustrious
models  of  the  tender  love  a  sovereign  owes  to  his  subjects.

The  term,  Country^  seems  to  be  pretty  generally  known :  j  122. Da*
bat  as  it  is  taken  in  different  senses,  it  may  not  be  unuseful  finition  of
to  give  it  here  an  exact  definition. It  commonly  signifies  the  *^®  **'™
State  of  which  one  is  a  member :  in  this  sense  we  have  used  ^^^^'
it  in  the  preceding  sections ;  and  it  is  to  be  thus  understood [  54  ]
in  the  law  of  nations.

In  a  more  confined  sense,  and  more  agreeably  to  its  ety-
mology, this  term  signifies  the  state,  or  even  more  particularly  .
the  town  or  place  where  our  parents  had  their  fixed  residence
at  the  moment  of  our  birth.  In  this  sense,  it  is  justly  said,
that  our  country  cannot  be  changed,  and  always  remains  the
same,  to  whatsoever  place  we  may  afterwards  remove.  A
man  ought  to  preserve  gratitude  and  affection  for  the  state
to  which  he  is  indebted  for  his  education,  and  of  which  his
parents  were  members'when  they  gave  him  birth.  But  as
various  lawful  reasons  may  oblige  him  to  choose  another  coun-
try,— that  is,  to  become  a  member  of  another  society;  so,

*  His  country  being  attacked  by  the  thonld  remidn  victoiionS)  Godrus  dis-
Henu'lidte,  he  conralted  the  oracle  of  guised  himself,  and,  rushing  into  the
Apollo ;  and  being  answered,  that  the  battle,  was  killed  by  one  of  the  enemy'i
people  whose ohiaf  should be slain soldiers.

l2  •  125


54


OBJBCT OF  A GOOD GOVEENMBNT.


and  crimi-
nal to  in-
jure our
coon  try.


i  124.  The
glory  of
good  citi-
sens.  (tfl)


BOOK  T. when  we  speak  in  general  of  the  duty  to  our  country,  the

^^^'  "•  term  is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  the  state  of  which  a  man

is  an  actual  member ;  since  it  is  the  latter,  in  preference  to

every  other  state,  that  he  is  bound  to  serve  with  his  utmost

eflforts.

/f  123.  How  If  every  man  is  obliged  to  entertain  a  sincere  love  for  hi«
ittftneM  country,  and  to  promote  its  welfare  as  far  as  in  his  power,  it
is  a  shameful  and  detestable  crime  to  injure  that  very  country.
He  who  becomes  guilty  of  it,  violates  his  most  sacred  en-
gagements, and  sinks  into  base  ingratitude:  he  dishonours
himself  by  the  blackest  perfidy,  since  he  abuses  the  confidence
of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  treats  as  enemies  those  who  had  a
right  to  expect  his  assistance  and  services.  We  see  traitors
to  their  country  only  among  those  men  who  are  solely  sensi-
ble to  base  interest,  who  only  seek  their  own  immediate  ad-
vantage,  and  whose  hearts  are  incapable  of  every  sentiment
of  affection  for  others.  They  are,  therefore,  justly  detested
by  mankind  in  general,  as  the  most  infamous  of  all  villains.

On  the  contrary,  those  generous  citizens  are  loaded  with
honour  and  praise,  who,  not  content  with  barely  avoiding  a
failure  in  duty  to  their  country,  make  noble  efforts  in  her
favour,  and  are  capable  of  making  her  the  greatest  sacrifices.

'Examples.  The  names  of  Brutus,  Gurtius,  and  the  two  Decii,  will  live
as  long  as  that  of  Rome.  The  Swiss  will  never  forget  Ar-
nold de  Winkelried,  that  hero,  whose  exploit  would  have
deserved  to  be  transmitted  to  posterity  by  the  pen  of  a  Livy.
He  truly  devoted  his  life  for  his  country's  sake :  but  he  de-
voted it  as  a  general,  as  an  undaunted  warrior,  not  as  a  su*
perstitious  visionary.  That  nobleman,  who  was  of  the  country
of  Underwald,  seeing,  at  the  battle  of  Sempach,  that  his
countrymen  could  not  break  through  the  Austrians,  because
the  latter,  armed  cap-a-pie,  had  dismounted,  and,  forming  a
close  battalion,  presented  a  front  covered  with  steel,  and
bristling  with  pikes  and  lances, — formed  the  generous  design
of  sacrificing  himself  for  his  country.  "My  friends,"  said
he  to  the  Swiss,  who  began  to  be  dispirited,  "  I  will  this  day
give  my  life  to  procure  you  the  victory :  I  only  recommend
to  you  my  family :  follow  me,  and  act  in  consequence  of  what
[  65  ]  you  see  me  do."  At  these  words  he  ranged  them  in  that  form
which  the  Romans  called  cunevSj  and  placing  himself  in  the
point  of  the  triangle,  marched  to  the  centre  of  the  enemy ,
when,  embracing  Jbetween  his  arms  as  many  of  the  enemy's
pikes  as  he  could  compass,  he  threw  himself  to  the  ground,
thus  opening  for  his  followers  a  passage  to  penetrate  into  the
midst  of  this  thick  battalion.  The  Austrians,  once  broken,
were  conquered,  as  the  weight  of  their  armour  then  became
^^  fatal  to  them,  and  the  Swiss  obtained  a  complete  victory.*

(51)  See obserrations, post,  { 190,  1386. The Austrian  annj  oonaisted

p.  92. — G.  of  four  thousand  chosen  men,  among

•  This  afiair  happened  in  the  year  whom  were  a  great  number  of  princes
126


OF  PIBT7  AND  RBUGIOK.  65


BOOK  I.
CHAP.  XXL


CHAP.  xn.

OP  PIETY  AKD  RELIGION.

PIETY  and  religion  have  an  essential  influence  on  the  j  126.  Of
happiness  of  a  nation,  and,  from  their  importance,  deserve  a  piety,
particular  chapter.  Nothing  is  so  proper  as  piety  to  strength-
en virtue,  and  give  it  its  due  extent.  By  the  word  Piety ^  I
mean  a  disposition  of  soul  that  leads  us  to  direct  all  our
actions  towards  the  Deity,  and  to  endeavour  to  please  him
in  every  thing  we  do.  To  the  practice  of  this  virtue  all
mankind  are  indispensably  obliged :  it  is  the  purest  source
of  their  felicity;  and  those  who  unite  in  civil  society  are
under  still  greater  obligations  to  practise  it.  A  nation  ought
then  to  be  pious.  The  superiors  intrusted  with  the  public
affairs  should  constantly  endeavour  to  deserve  the  approba-
tion of  their  divine  Master ;  and  whatever  they  do  in  the
name  of  the  state,  ought  to  be  regulated  by  this  grand  view.
The  care  of  forming  pious  dispositions  in  all  the  people  should
be  constantly  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  their  vigilance,
and  from  this  the  state  will  derive  very  great  advantages.  A
serious  attention  to  merit,  in  all  our  actions,  the  approbation
of  an  infinitely  wise  Being,  cannot  fail  of  producing  excellent
citizens.  Enlightened  piety  in  the  people  is  the  firmest  sup-
port of  a  lawful  authority ;  and,  in  the  sovereign's  heart,  it
is  the  pledge  of  the  people's  safety,  and  excites  their  confi-
dence. Ye  lords  of  the  earth,  who  acknowledge  no  superior
here  below,  what  security  can  we  have  for  the  purity  of  your
intentions,  if  we  do  not  conceive  you  to  be  deeply  impressed
With  respect  for  the  common  Father  and  Lord  of  men,  and
animated  with  a  desire  to  please  him  ?  '

We  have  already  insinuated  that  piety  ought  to  be  at-  { 13c. it*
tended  with  knowledge. In  vain  would  we  propose  to  please  ^^^^^  ^  ^
God,  if  we  know  not  the  means  of  doing  it. But  what  a  »*^^*^.
deluge  of  evils  arises,  when  men,  heated  by  so  powerful  a  \^^^^,
motive,  are  prompted  to  take  methods  that  are  equally  false r  5Q  ]
and  pernicious ! A  blind  piety  only  produces  superstitious
bigots,  fanatics,  and  persecutors,  a  thousand  times  more  dan-
gerous and  destructive  to  society  than  libertines  are. There
have  appeared  barbarous  tyrants  who  have  talked  of  nothing
but  the  glory  of  God,  while  they  crushed  the  people,  and

eovnts,  and  nobilitjr  of  dUtingaished  noblemen  of  the  best  families  in  Ger-
rank,  all  armed  from  bead  to  foot  many.  History  of  the  Helvetic  Con-
The  Swiss  were  no  more  than  thirteen  /ederaejff  by  Db  Watteyille,  Vol.  i.  p.
hondred  mdn,  ill  armed.  In  this  battle,  - 188.  — Tschddi. — Etterlin.  —  Schodb-
the  dnke  of  Austria  perished,  with  two  ler.  —  R^bmah.  —  [See  the  national
thonsand  of  his  forces,  in  which  num-  consequences  of  this  yaloor,  stated  poei,
ber  were  six  hondred  and  aoTenty-six {  190,  pp.  92-3.]

127


56  OF PIETY  AND  RBLICHAN-

BOOK  I. trampled  under  foot  the  most  sacred  laws  of  nature. It  was
CHAP.  XII.  fj,^jjjj  ^  refinement  of  piety,  that  the  anabaptists  of  the  six-
*  teenth  century  refused  all  obedience  to  the  powers  of  the
earrh. James  Clement  and  Ravaillac,'*'  those  execrable  par-
ricides, thought  themselves  animated  by  the  most  sublime
devotion.
;  127. Of Religion  consists  in  the  doctrines  concerning  the  Deity  and
religion  in-  ^}^g  things  of  another  life,  and  in  the  worship  appointed  to
erteni^ the  honour  of  the  Supreme  Being. So  far  as  it  is  seated  in
the  hearty  it  is  an  affair  of  conscience^  in  which  every  one
ought  to  be  directed  by  his  own  understanding :  but  so  far  as
it  is  external^  and  publicly  estahlishedy  it  is  an  affair  of  state,
2 128.  Every  man  is  obliged  to  endeavour  to  obtain  just  ideas  of

Rights  of Q-qJ^  to  know  his  laws,  his  views  with  respect  to  his crea-
iadinduais.  ^ures,  and  the  end  for  which  they  were  created. Man  doubt-
less owes  the  most  pure  love,  the  most  profound  respect  to
his  Creator;  and  to  keep  alive  these  dispositions,  and  act  in
consequence  of  them,  he  should  honour  God  in  all  his  actions,
and  show,  by  the  most  suitable  means,  the  sentiments  that  fill
Liberty  of his  mind. This  short  explanation  is  suflScient  to  prove  that
oonscience.  j^an  IS  essentially  and  necessarily  free  to  make  use  of  his
own  choice  in  matters  of  religion. His  belief  is  not  to  be
commanded ;  and  what  kind  of  worship  must  that  be  which
is  produced  by  force  ? Worship  consists  in  certain  actions
performed  with  an  immediate  view  to  the  honour  of  God;
there  can  be  no  worship  proper  for  any  man,  which  he  does
not  believe  suitable  to  that  end. The  obligation  of  sincerely
endeavouring  to  know  God,  of  serving  him,  and  adoring  him
from  the  bottom  of  the  hearty  being  imposed  on  man  by  his
very  nature, — ^it  is  impossible  that,  by  his  engagements  with
society,  he  should  have  exonerated  himself  from  that  duty,
or  deprived  himself  of  the  liberty  which  is  absolutely  neces-
sary for  the  performance  of  it. It  must  then  be  concluded,
that  liberty  of  conscience  is  a  natural  and  inviolable  right.
It  is  a  disgrace  to  human  nature,  that  a  truth  of  this  kind
should  stand  in  need  of  proof.
J 129.  Pub- But  we  should  take  care  not  to  extend  this  liberty  beyond
.ic  establish- Jtg  jugt  bounds. In  religious afiairs  a  citizen  has  only  a
u^oii^r62)  right  to  be  free  from  compulsion,  but  can  by  no  means  claim
that  of  openly  doing  what  he  pleases^  without  regard  to  the
[  57  ] consequences  it  may  produce  on  societyT(52) The  establish-
ment of  religion  by  law,  and  its  public  exercise,  are  matters
of  state,  and  are  necessarily  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the


*  The  former  assassinated  Henry  TTT.  to  haye  been  an  impostor,  and  a  mur-

of  France ;  the  latter  murdered  his  sue-  derer  in  principle,  and  a  fanatic,  is  an

cessor,  Henry  IV.  indictable  misdemeanor  at  common  law.

(52)  With respect  to these  in Eng-  Rex  y.  Waddington^  1  Bam.  k  Cres«,  26.

land,  and punishments  for  the  riola-  And  as  to  modem  regulation,  see  4  Blik

tion,  see  4  Bla.  Com.  41  to  66. Bias-  Com.  443. — G.
phemy,  or  a  libe|»  stating  our  Saviour
128


09  PnSTT  AHD  BEUGIOV.  VI


political  authority. If  all  men  are  bound  to  eerve  God,  the ^*>^*^  »•

X  V  , '  CHAP XII

entire  nation,  in  her  national  capacity,  is  doubtless  obliged  to  — 7-^ — '-
serve  and  honour  him  (Prelim.  §  6). And  as  this  important  ^^^^'Jj^^
duty  is  to  be  discharged  by  the  nation  in  whatever  manner  n^^ion.
she  judges  best, — to  the  nation  it  belongs  to  determine  what
reHgion  she  will  follow,  and  what  public  worship  she  thinks
proper  to  establish.

If  there  be  as  yet  no  religion  established  by  public  autho-  j  130.  wheo
rity,  the  nation  ought  to  use  the  utmost  care,  in  order  to  there  is  as
know  and  establish  the  best.  That  which  shall  have  the  *?■?!** ^V***"
probation  of  the  majority  shall  be  received,  and  publicly  esta-  j.  ^'^^^  **"
blished  by  law ;  by  which  means  it  will  become  the  religion
of  the  state.  But  if  a  considerable  part  of  the  nation  is  ob-
stinately bent  upon  following  another,  it  is  asked^ — What  does
the-  law  of  nations  require  in  such  a  case  ?  Let  us  first  re-
member that  liberty  of  conscience  is  a  natural  right,  and  that
there  must  be  no  constraint  in  this  respect.  There  remain
then  but  two  methods  to  take,— either  to  permit  this  party
of  the  citizens  to  exercise  the  religion  they  choose  to  profess,
or  to  separate  them  from  the  society,  leaving  them  their
property,  and  their  share  of  the  country  that  belonged  to  the
nation  in  common, — and  thus  to  form  two  new  states  instead
of  one.  The  latter  method  appears  by  no  means  proper :  it
*  would  weaken  the  nation,  and  thus  would  be  inconsistent  with
that  regard  which  she  owes  to  her  own  preservation.  It  is
therefore  of  more  advantage  to  adopt  the  former  method,  and
thus  to  establish  two  religions  in  the  state.  But  if  these  re-
ligions are  too  incompatible ;  if  there  be  reason  to  fear  that
they  will  produce  divisions  among  the  citizens,  and  disorder
in  public  affairs^  there  is  a  third  method,  a  wise  medium  be-
tween the  two  former,  of  which  the  Swiss  have  furnished  ex-
amples. The  cantons  of  Glaris  and  Appenzel  were,  in  the
sixteenth  century,  each  divided  into  two  parts :  the  one  pre-
served the  Romish  religion,  and  the  other  embraced  the  Refor-
mation ;  each  part  has  a  distinct  government  of  its  own  for
domestic  affairs ;  but  on  foreign  affairs  they  unite,  and  form
but  one  and  the  same  republic,  one  and  the  same  canton.

Finally,  if  the  number  of  citizens  who  would  profess  a  dif-
ferent religion  from  that  established  by  the  nation  be  incon-
siderable ;  and  if,  for  good  and  just  reasons,  it  be  thought
improper  to  allow  the  exercise  of  several  religions  in  the  state
—those  citizens  have  a  right  to  sell  their  lands,  to  retire  with
their  families,  and  take  all  their  property  with  them.  For
their  engagements  to  society,  and  their  submission  to  the
public  authority,  can  never  oblige  them  to  violate  their  con-
sciences. If  the  society  will  not  allow  me  to  do  that  to  which
I  think  myself  bound  by  an  indispensable  obligation,  it  is
obliged  to  allow  me  permission  to  depart.

When  the  choice  of  a  religion  is  already  made,  and  there  is  i  131.  Wh«i
•one  established  by  law,  the  nation  ought  to  protect  and  sup-*^"*^**

17  129


h8  07  FIBTT  AHB  RKUOIOIT.

^*'  ^  port  that  religion,  and  preserre  it  as  an  establishment  of  the
~^^~-  greatest  importance,  without,  howerer,  blindly  rejecting  the
rriinoiL  changes  that  may  be  proposed  to  render  it  more  pure  and
useful :  for  we  ought,  in  all  things,  to  aim  at  perfection  (§  21).
But  as  all  innovations,  in  this  case,  are  full  of  danger,  and
can  seldom  be  produced  without  disturbances,  they  ought  not
to  be  attempted  upon  slight  grounds,  without  necessity,  or
Ttry  important  reasons.  It  solely  belongs  to  the  society,  the
state,  the  entire  nation,  to  determine  the  necessity  or  propriety
of  those  changes;  and  no  private  individual  has  a  right  to
attempt  them  by  his  own  authority,  nor  consequenj;ly  to  preach
to  the  people  a  new  doctrine.  Let  him  offer  his  sentiments  to
the  conductors  t>f  the  nation,  and  submit  to  the  orders  he  re-
ceives from  them.

But  if  a  new  religion  spreads,  and  becomes  fijced  in  the
minds  of  the  people,  as  it  commonly  happens,  independently
of  the  public  authority,  and  without  any  deliberation  in  com-
mon,  it  will  be  then  necessary  to  adopt  the  mode  of  reasoning
we  followed  in  the  preceding  section  on  the  case  of  choosing
a  religion ;  to  pay  attention  to  the  number  of  those  who  follow
the  new  opinions — ^to  remember  that  no  earthly  power  has
authority  over  the  consciences  of  men, — and  to  unite  the
maxims  of  sound  policy  with  those  of  justice  and  equity.
1 132.  Da- We  have  thus  given  a  brief  compendium  of  the  duties  and
ties  and rights  of  a  nation  with  regard  to  religion. Let  us  now  come
•overeien*  *  *^  those  of  the  Sovereign. These  caniiot  be  exactly  the  same
with  regard  AS  those  of  the  nation  which  the  sovereign  represents. The
to  religion,  nature  of  the  subject  opposes  it ;  for  in  religion  nobody  can
give  up  his  liberty. To  give  a  clear  and  distinct  view  of  tho^e
rights  and  duties  of  the  prince,  and  to  establish  them  on  a
solid  basis,  it  is  necessary  here  to  refer  to  the  distinction  we
have  made  in  the  two  preceding  sections :  if  there  is  question
of  establishing  a  religion  in  a  state  that  has  not  yet  receive<I
one,  the  sovereign  may  doubtless  favour  that  which  to  him
appears  the  true  or  the  best  religion, — may  have  it  announced
to  the  people,  and,  by  mild  and  suitable  means,  endeavour  to
establish  it: — ^he  is  even  bound  to  do  this,  because  he  is
obliged  to  attend  to  every  thing  that  concerns  the  happiness  of
the  nation. But  in  this  he  has  no  right  to  use  authority  and
constraint. Since  there  was  no  religion  established  in  the
society  when  hq  received  his  authority,  the  people  gave  bim
no  power  in  this  respect ;  the  support  of  the  laws  relating  to
religion  is  no  part  of  his  office,  and  does  not  belong  to  the  au-
thority with  which  they  intrusted  him. Kuma  was  the  foundei
of  the  religion  of  tne  ar.oient  Romans :  out  nc  persuaded  the
people  to  receive  it. If  he  had  been  able  to  command  in  that
instance,  he  would  not  have  had  recourse  to  the  revelations
of  the  nymph  Egeria. Though  the  sovereign  cannot  exert
any  authority  in  order  to  establish  a  religion  where  there  is
none,  he  is  authorized,  and  even  obliged,  to  employ  all  his

130


.OF  PIET7  AND  BSLIQION.  59

power  to  Under  the  introduction  of  one- which  he  judges  per-  book  i.
nicious  to  morality  and  dangerous  to  the  state.  For  he  ought  ^°^'  '"'
to  preserve  his  people  from  every  thing  that  may  be  injurious
to  them ;  and  so  far  is  a  new  doctrine  from  being  an  excep-
tion to  this  rule,  that  it  is  one  of  its  most  important  objects.
We  shall  see,  in  the  following  sections,  what  are  the  duties
and  rights  of  the  prince  in  regard  to  the  religion  publicly  es-
tablished.

The  prince,  or  the  conductor,  to  whom  the  nation  has  in- ;  133.
trusted  the  care  of  the  government  and  the  exercise  of  the  Where
sovereign  power,  is  obliged  to  watch  over  the  preservation  of  *^®^?i|"J^
tne  received  religion,  the  worship  established  by  law,  and  has  reUeion.
V  right  to  restrain  those  who  attempt  to  destroy  or  disturb  it.
Bat  to  acquit  himself  of  this  duty  in  a  manner  equally  just
%nd  wise,  he  ought  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  character  in
which  he  is  called  to  act,  and  the  reason  of  his  being  invested
trith  it.  Religion  is  of  extreme  importance  to  the  peace  and
welfare  of  society ;  and  the  prince  is  obliged  to  have  an  eye
to  every  thing  in  which  the  state  is  interested.  This  is  all
that  calls  him  to  interfere  in  religion,  or  to  protect  and  defend
it.  It  is  therefore  upon  this  footing  only  that  he  can  inter-
fere :  consequently,  he  ought  to  exert  his  authority  against
those  alone  whose  conduct  in  religious  matters  is  prejudicial
or  dangerous  to  the  state ;  but  he  must  not  extend  it  to  pre-
tended crimes  against  God,  the  punishment  of  which  exclu-
sively belongs  to  the  Sovereign  Judge,  the  searcher  of  hearts.
Let  us  remember  that  religion  is  no  farther  an  affair  of  state,
than  as  it  is  exterior  and  publicly  established :  that  of  the
heart  can  only  depend  on  the  conscience.  The  prince  has  no
right  to  punish  any  persons  but  those  that  disturb  society ;
and  it  would  be  very  unjust  in  him  to  inflict  pains  and  penal-
ties on  any  person  whatsoever  for  his  private  opinions,  when
that  person  neither  takes  pains  to  divulge  them,  nor  to  obtain
followers.  It  is  a  principle  of  fanaticism,  a  source  of  evils
and  of  the  most  notorious  injustice,  to  imagine  that  frail  mor-
tals ought  to  take  up  the  cause  of  God,  maintain  his  glory  by
acts  of  violence,  and  avenge  him  on  his  enemies.  Let  ti8  only
give  to  sovereigns^  said  a  great  statesman  and  an  excellent
citizen* — ^let  us  give  them,  for  the  common  advantage^  the
potoer  of  punishing  whatever  is  injurious  to  charity  in  so-
ciety^ It  appertains  not  to  human  justice  to  become  the  aven-
ger of  what  coT^ems  the  cause  of  Gf-od.f  Cicero,  who  was  as
able  and  as  great  in  state  affairs  as  in  philosophy  and  elo-
quence, thought  like  the  Duke  of  Sully.  In  the  laws  he  pro-
poses relating  to  religion,  he  says,  on  the  subject  of  piety
and  interior  religion,  "  if  any  one  transgresses,  God  will  re-
venge it:"  but  he  declares  the  crime  capital  that  should  be

*  The  Bake  de  Solly;  see  hiB  Me- f  Deonim  injorise  diis  oane. — TaeiL
moin  digested  by  M.  de  TBcliue,  y^L  y. Ann,  book  L  0.  73.
pp.  135,  136.

m
•4


59  OV  PIBTT  Am)  fiXLiaiON.

B?t«  J committed  against  the  religioiui  ceremonies  established  for  pub
CHAP.  xn.  jj^  affairs,  and  in  which  the  whole  state  is  concerned,* The
[  60  ]  wise  Romans  were  very  far  from  persecuting  a  man  for  his
creed ;  the j  only  required  that  people  should  not  disturb  the
public  order.
}  134. Ob. The  creeds  or  opinions  of  individuals,  their  sentiments  with
jecta  of  his  respect  to  the  Deity, — ^in  a  word,  interior  religion — should,
STmeans ^^^^  P^^^J*  be- the  object  of  the  prince's  attention :  he  should
he  ought  to  i^pglect  1^0  means  of  enabling  his  subjects  to  discover  the  truth,
employ and  of  inspiring  them  with  good  sentiments ;  but  he  should
employ  for  this  purpose  only  mild  and  paternal  methods.f
Here  he  cannot  command  (§  128). It  is  in  external  religion
and  its  public  exercise  that  his  authority  may  be  employed.
His  task  is  to  preserve  it,  and  to  prevent  the  disorders  and
troubles  it  may  occasion. To  preserve  religion,  he  ought  to
maintain  it  in  the  purity  of  its  institution,  to  take  care  that  it
be  faithfully  observed  in  all  its  public  acts  and  ceremonies,
and  punish  those  who  dare  to  attack  it  openly. But  he  can
require  nothing  by  force  except  silence,  and  ought  never  to
oblige  any  person  to  bear  a  part  in  external  ceremonies : — ^by
constraint,  he  would  only  produce  disturbances  or  hypocrisy.
A  diversity  of  opinions  and  worship  has  often  produced
disorders  and  fatal  dissensions  in  a  state :  and  for .  this  rea-
son, many  will  allow  but  one  and  the  same  religion. A  pru-
dent and  equitable  sovereign  will,  in  particular  conjunctures^
see  whether  it  be  proper  to  tolerate  or  forbid  the  exercise  of
several  different  kinds  of  worship.
1 185. Of But,  in  general,  we  may  boldly  affirm  that  the  most  cer-
toi^ratioiu tain  and  equitable  means  of  preventing  the  disorders  that  may
(*^)  be  occasioned  by  difference  of  religion,  is  a  universal  tolera-

tion of  all  religions  which  contain  no  tenets  that  are  danger-
ous either  to  morality  or  to  the  state.  Let  interested  priests
declaim !  they  would  not  trample  under  foot  the  laws  of  hu-
manity, and  those  of  God  himself,  to  make  their  doctrine
triumph,  if  it  were  not  the  foundation  on  which  are  erected
*  their  opulence,  luxury,  and  power.  Do  but  crush  the  spirit
of  persecution, — ^punish  severely  whoever  shall  dare  to  dis-
turb others  on  account  of  their  creed,  and  you  will  see  all
sects  livinc  in  peace  in  their  common  country,  and  ambitious
of  producmg  good  citizens.  Holland,  and  the  states  of  the
Eling  of  Prussia,  furnish  a  proof  of  this :  Galvinists,  Lutherans,
Catholics,  Pietists,  Socinians,  Jews,  all  live  there  in  peace,
because  they  are  equally  protected  by  the  sovereign ;  and  none
are  punished,  but  the  disturbers  of  the  tranquillity  of  others.

*  Qui  eeons  faxit»  Beus  ipse  vindez  gib,  lib.  L WhtA  a fine  lesson  doea

erit Qui  non  parueri^  capitale  thia  pagan  philosopher  give to  Chris-

esto. — De  Legib.  lib.  ii.  tians !

f  Quas (religiones)  non metn,  sed  . (53)  See  the  modem enactments,  i

ea  coiganctione  qtt»  est  homini oum  Bla.  Com.  440,  443;  Id.  52^  53.  in  ih»

DeO|  conservandas  puto. Cicero  de  Le-  notes. — C.
132


Of  PIETT  AND  BBUGION.  90

I

If,  in  spite  of  the  prince's  care  to  preserve  the  established book  r.
religion,  the  entire  nation,  or  the  greater  part  of  it,  should  ^^^^'  '"*
be  disgusted  with  it,  and  desire  to  have  it  changed,  the  sove-?^^^*.^"^^^
reign  cannot  do  viQlence  to  his  people,  nor  constrain  them  in  o^ighrto^o
an  affair  of  this  nature. The  public  religion  was  established  when  the
for  the  safety  and  advantage  of  the  nation :  and,  besides  its  nation  is  re-
proving inefficacious  when  it  ceases  to  influence  the  heart,  the  '^^^  ^
sovereign  has  here  no  other  authority  than  that  which  results  ^itgSn!
from  the  trust  reposed  in  him  by  the  people,  and  they  have
only  committed  to  him  that  of  protecting  whatever  religion .  [  ^1  ]
they  think  proper  to  profess.

But  at  the  same  time  it  is  very  just  that  the  prince  should  !  137. Dif-
have  the  liberty  of  continuing  in  the  profession  of  his  own  ^^^f^^  ^'
religion,  without  losing  his  crown. Provided  that  he  protect  not  deprive*
the  religion  of  the  state,  this  is  all  that  can  be  required  of  a  prince  of
him. In  general,  a  difference  of  religion  can  never  make  ii"  crown,
any  prince  forfeit  his  claims  to  the  sovereignty,  unless  a  fun-
damental law  ordain  it  otherwise. The  pagan  Romans  did
not  cease  to  obey  Gonstantine  when  he  embraced  Christian-
ity ;  nor  did  the  Christians  revolt  from  Julian  after  he  had
quitted  it.*

We  have  established  liberty  of  conscience  for  individuals  i  138. Dop
(§  128). However,  we  have  also  shown  that  the  sovereign  ^®"j^J^^^
has  a  right,  and  is  even  under  an  obligation,  to  protect  and  "overeign
support  the  religion  of  the  state,  and  not  suffer  any  person  reconciled
to  attempt  to  corrupt  or  destroy  it, — ^that  he  may  even,  ac-  ^i<^  ti^ose
cording  to  circumstances,  permit  only  one  kind  of  public  ?^  ^*  ^^
worship throughout the  whole country. Let  us  reconcile^*
those  different  duties  and  rights,  between  which  it  may  be
thought  that  there  is  some  contradiction :— let  us,  if  possible,
omit  no  material  argument  on  so  important  and  delicate  a
subject.

If  the  sovereign  will  allow  the  public  exercise  of  only  one
and  the  same  religion,  let  him  oblige  nobody  to  do  any  thing
con tr airy  to  his  conscience ;  let  no  subject  be  forced  to  bear  a
part  in  a  worship  which  he  disapproves,  or  to  profess  a  reli-
gion which  he  believes  to  be  false ;  but  let  the  subject  on
his  part  rest  content  with  avoiding  the  guilt  of  a  shameful
hypocrisy;  let  him,  according  to  the  light  of  his  own  know-
ledge, serve  God  in  private  and  in  his  own  house — ^persuaded
that  Providence  does  not  call  upon  him  for  public  worship,
since  it  has  placed  him  in  such  circumstances  that  he  cannot
perform  it  without  creating  disturbances  in  the  state.  God
would  have  us  obey  our  sovereign,  and  avoid  every  thing  that

•  When  fhe  chief  port  of  the  people  nevertheless  stiU  retained  all  her  rights.

in  the principality  of  Nenfchatel  and  The  state  counsel  enacted  ecclesiastical

Vallangin  embraced  the  reformed  re-  laws  and  constitutions  similar  to  those

ligion  in  the  sixteenth  century,  Joan  of  of  the  reformed  churches  in  Switzerland,

Hochberg,  their  spyereign,  continued  to  and  the  princess  gave  them  her  sano-

Uwe  in  the  Boman  CathoUo  faith,  and  tion.

H  183


61  OP  PEETT  AND  RELIGION.


BOOK  I.

CHAP.  xn.


may  be  pernicious  to  society. These  are  immutable  precepts
of  the  law  of  nature:  the  precept  that  enjoins  public  wor-
ship is  conditional,  and  dependent  on  the  effects  which  that
worship  may  piioduce. Interior  worship  is  necessary  in  its
own  nature ;  and  we  ought  to  confine  ourselves  to  it,  in  all
cases  in  which  it  is  most  convenient. Public  worship  is  ap-
pointed for  the  edification  of  men  in  glorifying  God :  but  it
counteracts  that  end,  and  ceases  to  be  laudable,  on  those  oe-
[  62  ] casions  when  it  only  produces  disturbances,  and  rives  offence.
,K  any  one  believes  it  absolutely  necessary,  let  him  quit  the
country  where  he  is  not  allowed  to  perform  it  according  to
the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience ;  let  him  go  and  join  those
who  profess  the  same  religion  with  himself.
{  139. The The  prodigioiis  influence  of  religion  on  the  peace  and  wel-
"^'^hT^to' fare  of  society  incontrovertibly  proves  that  the  conductor  of
have  the  in-*"^®  ^tatc  ought  to  have  the  inspection  of  what  relates  to  it,
spection  of  and  an  authority  over  the  ministers  who  teach  it. The  end
the  aSain of  Society  and  of  civil  government  necessarily  requires  that
^^d^^Oi*'*'  he  who  exercises  the  supreme  power  should  be  invested  with
rity  over  ' ^^^  ^^^  rights  without  which  he  could  not  exercise  it  in  a
those  who manner  the  most  advantageous  to  the  state. These  are  the
teaohit prerogatives  of  majesty  (§  45),  of  which  no  sovereign  can  ^-
vest  himself,  without  the  express  consent  of  the  nation. The
inspection  of  the  affairs  of  religion,  and  the  authority  over  its
ministers,  constitute,  therefore,  one  of  the  most  important  of
those  prerogatives,  since,  without  this  power,  the  sovereign
would  never  be  able  to  prevent  the  disturbances  that  religion
might  occasion  in  the  state,  nor  to  employ  that  powerful  en-
gine in  promoting  the  welfare  and  safety  of  the  society. It
would  be  certainly  very  strange  that  a  multitude  of  men  who
united  themselves  in  society  for  their  common  advantage,
that  each  might,  in  tranquillity,  labour  to  supply  his  necessi-
ties, promote  his  own  perfection  and  happiness,  and  live  as
becomes  a  rational  being :  it  would  be  very  strange,  I  say,
that  such  a  society  should  not  have  a  right  to  follow  their
own  judgment  in  an  affair  of  the  utmost  importance ;  to  de-
termine what  they  think  most  suitable  with  regard  to  religion ;
and  to  take  care  that  nothing  dangerous  or  hurtful  be  mixed
with  it. Who  shall  dare  to  dispute  that  an  independent  na-
tion has,  in  this  respect  as  in  all  others,  a  right  to  proceed
according  to  the  light  of  conscience  ?  and  when  once  she  has
made  choice  of  a  particular  religion  and  worship,  may  she  not
confer  on  her  conductor  all  the  power  sh^  possesses  of  regu
lating  and  directing  that  religion  and  worship,  and  enforcing
their  observance  ?

Let  us  not  be  told  that  the  management  of  sacred  things
belongs  not  to  a  profaAe  hand. Such  discourses,  when  brought
to  the  bar  of  reason,  are  found  to  be  only  vain  declamations
There  is  nothing  on  earth  more  august  and  sacred  than  a  sove-
reign ;  and  why  should  Qod,  who  calls  him  by  his  providence

134


OF  PIBTT  AND  ASLiaiOK.  fiS

to  watch  over  the  safety  and  happiness  of  a  whole  nation,  de-  ^^^^^^

prive  him  of  the  direction  of  the  most  powerful  spring  that •

actuates  mankind  ?  The  law  of  nature  secures  to  him  this
right,  with  all  others  that  are  essential  to  good  government ;
and  nothing  is  to  be  found  in  Scripture  that  changes  this  dis-
position. Among  the  Jews,  neither  the  king  nor  any  other
person  could  make  any  innovation  in  the  law  of  Moses ;  but
the  sovereign  attended  to  its  preservation,  and  could  check
the  high  priest  when  he  deviated  from  his  duty.  Where  is  it
asserted  in  the  New  Testament,  that  a  Christian  prince  has
nothing  to  do  with  religious  affairs?  Submission  and  obe-
dience to  the  superior  powers  are  there  clearly  and  expressly
enjoined.  It  were  in  vain  to  object  to  us  the  example  of  the  [  68  j
apostles,  who  preached  the  gospel  in  opposition  to  the  will  of
sovereigns : — whoever  would  deviate  from  the  ordinary  rules,
must  have  a  divine  mission,  and  establish  his  authority  by
miracles.

No  person  can  dispute  that  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  take
care  that  nothing  contrary  to  the  welfare  and  safety  of  the
state  be  introduced  into  religion ;  and,  consequently,  he  must
have  a  right  to  exaniine  its  doctrines,  and  to  point  out  what  is
to  be  taught,  and  what  is  to  be  suppressed  in  silence.

The  sovereign  ought,  likewise,  to  watch  attentively,  in  order  ?  ^*®- ^®
^  to  prevent  the  established  religion  from  being  employed  to  ^^^^j^^  ^^
'  sinister  purposes,  either  by  maEing  use  of  its  discipline  to  abuBe  of  th«
gratify  hatred,  avarice,  or  other  passions,  or  presenting  its  received  re-
doctrines  in  a  light  that  may  prove  prejudicial  to  the  state,  ^^e^^^
•  Of  wild  reveries,  seraphic  devotions,  and  sublime  speculations,
what  would  be  the  consequences  to  society,  if  it  entirely  con-
sisted of  individuals  whose  intellects  were  weak,  and  whose
hearts  were  easily  governed  ? — the  consequences  would  be  a
renunciation  of  the  world,  a  general  neglect  of  business  and
of  honest  labour. This  society  of  pretended  saints  would
become  an  easy  and  certain  prey  to  the  first  ambitious  neigh-
bour ;  or  if  suffered  to  live  in  peace,  it  would  not  survive  the
first  generation ; both  sexes,  consecrating  their  chastity  to
God,  would  refuse  to  co-operate  in  the  designs  of  their  Grea-
- tor,  and  to  comply  with  the  requisitions  of  nature  and  of  the
state. Unluckily  for  the  missionaries,  it  evidently  appears,
even  from  Father  Charlevoix*  History  of  New  France,  that
their  labours  were  the  principal  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  Hu-
rons. That  author  expressly  says,  that  a  great  number  of
those  ccnverts  would  think  of  nothing  but  the  faith — that  they
forgot  their  activity  and  valour— that  divisions  arose  between
them  and  the  rest  of  the  nation,  &;c. That  nation  was,  there-
fore, soon  destroyed  by  the  Iroquois,  whom  they  had  before
been  accustomed  to  conquer.'*'

To  the  prince's  inspection  of  the  affairs  and  concerns  of


*  History  of  New  Vnaxee,  books  t.  tL  tU.

1S6


68  Of  PIETT  AKD  RStiaiOK.

BOOK  I. religion  we  have  joined  an  authority  over  its  ministers :  with-
OHAP.  3cn.  ^^^  ^j^^  latter  power,  the  former  would  be  nugatory  and  inef-


g  141. The  factual  ^ — they  are  both  derived  from  the  same  principle. It
Milhority '^  ^^  absurd,  and  contrary  to  the  first  foundations  of  society,
over  the  mi-  that  any  citizens  should  claim  an  independence  of  the  sove-
msters  of reign  authority,  in  oflSces  of  such  importance  to  the  repose,
reUgion. ^.j^^  happiness,  and  safety  of  the  state. This  is  establishing
two  independent  powers  in  the  same  society — an  unfailing
source  of  division,  disturbance,  and  ruin. There  is  but  one
supreme  power  in  the  state ;  the  functions  of  the  subordinate
powers  vary  according  to  their  diflFerent  objects :— ecclesias-
tics, magistrates,  and  commanders of  the troops, are  all
[  64  ] ofiGcers  of  the  republic,  each  in  his  own  department ;  and  all
are  equally*  accountable  to  the  sovereign,
g  142. Na- A  prince  cannot,  indeed,  justly  oblige  an  ecclesiastic  to
*"™  °^.  *^'  preach  a  doctrine,  or  to  perform  a  religious  rite,  which  the
^"  ^' latter  does  not  think  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God. But  if
the  minister  cannot,  in  this  respect,  conform  to  the  will  of  his
sovereign,  he  ought  to  resign  his  station,  and  consider  himself
as  a  man  who  is  not  called  to  fill  it — ^two  things  being  neces-
sary for  the  discharge  of  the  duty  annexed  to  it,  viz.  to  teach
and  behaVe  with  sincerity,  according  to  the  dictates  of  his
own  conscience,  and  to  conform  to  the  prince's  intentions,  and
the  laws  of  the  state. Who  can  forbear  being  filled  with  in-
dignation, at  seeing  a  bishop  audaciously  resist  the  orders  of
the  sovereign,  and  the  decrees  of  the  supreme  tribunals,  so-
lemnly declaring  that  he  thinks  himself  accountable  to  God
alone  for  the  power  with  which  he  is  intrusted  ?
;  143.  Rule On  the  other  hand,  if  the  clergy  are  rendered  contempti-
to  be  ob- ble,  it  will  be  out  of  their  power  to  produce  the  fruits  for
respect  to "^^^^^  their  ministry  was  appointed. The  rule  that  should
ecciefliastics.  ^^  followed  with  respect  to  them  may  be  comprised  in  a  few
words : — ^let  them  enjoy  a  large  portion  of  esteem ;  but  let
them  have  no  authority,  and  still  less  any  claim  to  inde-
* pendence. In  the  first  place,  let  the  clergy,  as  well  as  every
other  order  of  men,  be,  in  their  functions,  as  in  every  thing
else,  subject  to  the  public  power,  and  accountable  to  the
sovereign  for  their  conduct. Secondly,  let  the  prince  take
care  to  render  the  ministers  of  religion  respectable  in  the
eyes  of  the  people ;  let  him  trust  them  with  the  degree  of
authority  necessary  to  enable  them  to  discharge  their  duty
with  success ;  let  lum,  in  case  of  need,  support  them  with  the
power  he  possesses. Every  man  in  office  ought  to  be  vested
with  an  authority  commensurate  to  his  functions ;  otherwise
he  will  be  unable  to  discharge  them  in  a  proper  manner. I
see  no  reason  why  the  clergy  should  be  excepted  from  this
general  rule;  only  the  prince  should  be  more  particularly
watchful  that  they  do  not  abuse  their  authority ;  the  affair
being  altogether  the  most  delicate,  and  the  most  fruitful  in
dangers. If  he  renders  the  character  of  churchmen  respecta^

136


exam-


OT  PIBTT  Am)  REUGIOlfr  64

ble,  he  should  take  care  that  this  respect  be  not  carried  to *^^^  ^

Buch  a  superstitious  veneration  as  shall  arm  the  hand  of  an '

ambitious  priest  with  a  powerful  engine  with  which  he  may
force  weak  minds  into  whatever  direction  he  pleases.  When
once  the  clergy  become  a  separate  body,  they  become  formida-
ble. The  Bomans  (we  shall  often  have  occasion  to  recur  to  -
them) — the  wise  Bomans  elected  from  among  the  senators
their  pontifex-maximus  and  the  principal  ministers  of  the
altar ;  they  knew  no  distinction  between  clerfftf  and  laitt/ ;
nor  had  they  a  set  of  gownsmen  to  constitute  a  separate  class
from  the  rest  of  the  citizens.

If  the  sovereign  be  deprived  of  this  power  in  matters  of  ?  l^ R«-
religion,  and  this  authority  over  the  clergy,  how  shall  he  pre-  «»pi*n^*<*o»
servQ  the  religion  pure  from  the  admixture  of  any  thing  con-  \^^  ^^^
trary  to  the  welfare  of  the  state  ? How  can  he  cause  it  to  be  establish  the
constantly  taught  and  practised  in  the  manner  most  conducive  soyereign's
to  the  public  welfare:  and,  especially,  how  can  he  prevent "^f^*" ^
the  disorders  it  may  occasion,  either  by  its  doctrines,  or  the  ™k^^  ^
manner  in  which  its  discipline  is  exerted  ? These  cares  and r  55  i
duties  can  only  belong  to  the  sovereign,  and  nothing  can  dis-
pense with  his  discharging  them.

Hence  we  see  that  the  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  in  eccle-Authontiei
siastical  affairs,  have  been  constantly  and  faithfully  defended  ^^  <
by  the  parliaments  of  France.  The  wise  and  learned  magis-^^®"'
trates,  of  whom  those  illustrious  bodies  a,re  composed,  are
sensible  of  the  maxims  which  sound  reason  dictates  on  this
subject.  They  know  how  important  it  is  not  to  suffer  an
affair  of  so  delicate  a  nature,  so  extensive  in  its  connections
and  influence,  and  so  momentous  in  its  consequences,  to  be
placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  public  authority. — What!.
Shall  ecclesiastics  presume  to  propose  to  the  people,  as  an
article  of  faith,  some  obscure  and  useless  dogma,  which  con-
stitutes no  essential  part  of  the  received  religion  ? — shall  they
exclude  from  the  church,  and  defame  those  who  do  not  show
a  blind  obedience  ? — shall  they  refuse  them  the  sacraments,
and  even  the  rites  of  burial  ? — and  shall  -not  the  prince  have
power  to  protect  his  subjects,  and  preserve  the  kingdom  from
a  dangerous  schism  ?

The  kings  of  England  have  asserted  the  prerogatives  of
their  crown :  they  have  caused  themselves  to  be  acknowledged
heads  of  the  church :  and  this  regulation  is  equally  approved
by  reason  and  sound  policy,  and  is  also,  conformable  to  ancient
custom.  The  first  Christian  emperors  exercised  all  the  func-
tions of  heads  of  the  church ;  they  made  laws  on  subjects
relating  to  it,* — summoned  councils,  and  presided  in  them, —
appointed  and  deposed  bishops,  &c.  In  Switzerland  there
are  wise  republics,  whose  sovereigns,  knowing  the  full  extent
of  the  supreme  authority,  have  rendered  the  ministers  of


*  See  the  Theodtman  Code.
18  x2  187


65  '  OF  PIETT  AND  BEUQIOK.

BOOK  L religiott  subject  to  it,  without  offering  violence  to  their  con-
CHAP.  XII.  g^ienceg, Thej  have  prepared  a  formulary  of  the  doctrines
that  are  to  be  preached,  and  published  laws  of  ecclesiastical
discipline,  such  as  thej  would  have  it  exercised  in  the  coun-
tries under  their  jurisdiction, — ^in  order  that  those  who  will
«  not  conform  to  these  establishments  may  not  devote  them-
selves to  the  service  of  the  church. They  keep  all  the  min-
isters of  religion  in  a  lawful  dependence,  and  suffer  no  exertion
of  church  discipline  but  under  their  own  authority. It  is  not
piobable  that  religion  will  ever  occasion  disturbances  in  these
republics.
{ 145. Per- If  Constantine  and  his  successors  had  caused  themselves
nioioofl  con-  to  be  formally  acknowledged  heads  of  the  church, — and  if
•  wQ"«'^ce8 Christian  kings  and  princes  had,  in  this  instance,  known  how
tntfy*opi- '  *^  maintain  the  rights  of  sovereignty, — would  the  world  ever
nion.  have  witnessed  those  horrid  disorders  produced  by  the  pride

and  ambition  of  some  popes  and  ecclesiastics,  emboldened  by
[  66  ]  the  weakness  of  princes,  and  supported  by  the  superstition
of  the  people, — rivers  of  blood  shed  in  the  quarrels  of  monks,
about  speculative  questions  that  were  often  unintelligible  and
•  almost  always  as  useless  to  the  salvation  of  souls  as  in  them-
selves indifferent  to  the  welfare  of  society — citizens  and  even
brothers  armed  against  each  other, — subjects  excited  to  revolt^
and  kings  hurled  from  their  thrones  ?  Tantum  religio  potuit
suadere  malorum  !  The  history  of  the  emperors  Henry  IV.,
Frederick  I.,  Frederick  II.,  and  Louis  of  Bavaria,  is  well  known.
Was  it  not  the  independence  of  the  ecclesiastics, — ^was  it  not
that  system  in  which  the  affairs  of  religion  are  submitted  to  a
foreign  power, — that  plunged  France  into  the  horrors  of  the
league,  and  had  nearly  deprived  her  of  the  best  and  greatest
of  her  kings  ?  Had  it  not  been  for  that  strange  and  danger-
ous system,  would  a  foreigner.  Pope  Sextus  Y.,  have  under-
taken to  violate  the  fundamental  law  of  the  kingdom,  and
declared  the  lawful  heir  incapable  of  wearing  the  crown  ?
Would  the  world  have  seen,  at  other  times  and  in  other
places,*  the  succession  to  the  crown  rendered  uncertain  by  a
bare  informality — the  want  of  a  dispensiition,  whose  validity
was  disputed,  and  which  a  foreign  prelate  claimed  the  sole
right  of  granting  ?  Would  that  same  foreigner  have  arro-
gated to  himself  the  power  of  pronouncing  on  the  legitimacy
of  the  issue  of  a  king  ?  Would  kings  have  been  assassinated
in  consequence  of  a  detestable  doctrine  ?t  Would  a  part  of
France  have  been  afraid  to  acknowledge  the  best  of  their
kings,!  until  he  had  received  absolution  from  Rome  ?  And,
would  many  other  princes  have  been  unable  to  give  a  solid

*  In  England  under  Henry  VIEL  %  Thoagh  Henry  IV.  returned  to  tiae

f  Henry  IIL  and  Henry  IV.  araas-  RomUh religion,  a  great number  of

sinated  by  fanatiosy  who  Uiought  they  Catholics  did  not  dare  to  acknowledge

were  serving  God  and  the  church  by  him  until  he  had  received  the  pope  <

•tabbing  their  king.  absolution.

13S


OP  PIETT  AND  BEUaiON.  30

peace  to  their  people,  because  no  decision  could  be  formed book  :.
within  their  own  dominions  on  articles  or  conditions  in  which  chap,  xn.
religion  was  interested  ?*

All  we  have  advanced  on  this  subject,  so  evidenljy  flows  ;i46.  The
from  the  notions  of  independence  and  sovereignty,  that  it  will  abusee  par-
never  be  disputed  by  any  honest  man  who  endeavours  to  rea-  *^«^J*"*®<^-
son  justly. If  a  state  cannot  finally  determine  every  thing ,,  ^mr"
relating  to  religion,  the  nation  is  not  free,  and  the  prince  ispopea.
but  half  a  sovereign.  There  is  no  medium  in  this  case ;  either
each  state  must,  within  its  own  territories,  possess  supreme
power  in  this  respect,  as  well  as  in  all  others,  or  we  must
adopt  the  system  of  Boniface  YIII.,  and  consider  all  Roman
Catholic  countries  as  forming  only  one  state,  of  which  the
pope  shall  be  the  supreme  head,  and  the  kings  subordinate
administrators  of  temporal  affairs,  each  in  his  province, —
nearly  as  the  sultanjs  were  formerly  under  the  authority  of  the
eaUphs. We  know  that  the  above-mentioned  pope  had  the
presumption  to  write  to  Philip  the  Fair,  king  of  France,  Scire
te  volumus,  quod  in  spiritiuilibtis  et  temporalihuB  nobis  svieslf [  67  ]
— "We  would  have  thee  know  that  thou  art  subject  to  us  as
well  in  temporals  as  in  spirituals." And  we  may  see  in  the
canon  law|  his  famous  bull  Unam  sanctam,  in  which  he  at-  4

tributes  to  the  church  two  swords,  or  a  double  power,  spiritual
and  temporal,— dondemns  those  who  think  otherwise,  as  men,
who,  after  the  example  of  the  Manicheans,  establish  two
principles, — and  finally  declares,  that  it  is  an  article  offaith^
necessary  to  salvation^  to  believe  that  every  human  creature  is
subject  to  the  Roman  pontiff. %

We  shall  consider  the  enormous  power  of  the  popes  as  the
first  abuse  that  sprung  from  this  system,  which  divests  sove-
reigns of  their  authority  in  matters  of  religion.  This  power
in  a  foreign  court  directly  militates  against  the  independence

*  Many  kings  of  France  in  the  civil  posed  him. In  short,  here  are  the  ex-
wars  on  account  of  religion.  pressions  he  made  use  of  in  addressing

f  Turretin.  HxH*  Eccle»ia»U  Compen-  ,  the  council  assembled  at  Rome  on  the

dium,  p.  182. Where may  also be  occasion :  <'Agite  nunc,  qusBso,  patres

seen  the  resolute  answer  of  the  king  et  principes  sanptissimi,  ut  omnis  mnn-

of  France.  dus  intelligat  et  cognoscaty  quia  si  po-

^  Extravag,  Oomvtun.  lib.  L  tit.  De  testis  in  coelo  ligare  et  solvere,  po testis

Majoritate  A  Obedientia.  in terra imperia,  regna, j)rincipatu8,

I  Gregory  VII.  endeavoured  to  ren-  ducatus,  marchias,  comitatus,  et  omni-

der  almost all  the  states of  Europe  um  hominum  possessiones,  pro  meritis

tributary  to  him. He  maintained  that  tollere  nnicuique  et  ooncedere." Ka-

Hungary, Dalmatia, Russia, Spain,  tal,  Alex.  DiuerU  HUU  Eccl.  s.  xi.  and

and  Corsica,  were  absolutely  his  pro-  xii.  p.  384.

perty,  as  successor  to  St  Peter,  or  were Tl\e canon law  boldly  decides  that

feudatory  dependencies  of  the  holy  see.  the  regU  power  is  subordinate  ta  the

GBsa. EpUu Coneil. vol. vi. Edit,  priesthood. <'Imperium non prseest

Harduin. — ^He  summoned  the  emperor  saeerdotio,  sed  subest,  et  el  obedire  te-

Henrjr  IV.  to  appear  before  him,  and  netur." Rubric,  ch.  vi.  De  Major,  et

make  his  defence  against  the  accusa-  Obed. "  Et  est  multum  allegabile,"  is

iions  of  some  of  his  subjects :  and,  on  the  complaisant  remark  of  the  write**
the  emperor's  non-compliance^  he  de- of  the  article.

IM


67  OF  PIETY  AKD  BBLIOIOK.

CHAP*  xii  ^^  nations  and  the  sovereignty  of  princes. It  is  capable  of
— '• — -  overturning  a  state ;  and  wherever  it  is  acknowledged,  the
sovereign  finds  it  impossible  to  exercise  his  authority  in  such
a  manner  as  is  most  for  the  advantage  of  the  nation. We
have  already,  in  the  last  section,  given  several  remarkable
instances  of  this ;  and  history  presents  others  without  number.
The  senate  of  Sweden  having  condemned  Trollius,  archbishop
of  Upsal,  for  the  crime  of  rebellion,  to  be  degraded  from  his
see,  and  to  end  his  days  in  a  monastery,  pope  Leo  X.  had  the
audacity  to  excommunicate  the  administrator  Steno  and  the
whole  senate,  and  sentenced  them  to  rebuild,  at  their  own  ex-
pense, a  fortress  belonging  to  the  archbishop,  which  they  had
caused  to  be  demolished,  and  pay  a  fine  of  a  hundred  thousand
ducats  to  th^e  deposed  prelate** The  barbarous  Christiern,
king  of  Denmark,  took  advantage  of  this  decree,  to  lay  waste
the  territories  of  Sweden,  and  to  spill  the  blood  of  the  most
illustrious  of  her  nobility. Paul  V.  thundered  out  an  inter-
dict against  Venice,  on  account  of  some  very  wise  laws  made
with  respect  to  the  government  of  the  city,  but  which  dis-
pleased that  pontiff,  who  thus  threw  the  republic  into  an  em*
barrassment,  from  which  all  the  wisdom  and  firmness  of  the
,  [  68  ] senate  found  it  difficult  to  extricate  it. Pius  V.,  in  his  bull,
In  Coma  Domini^  of  the  year  1567,  declares,  that  all  princes
who  shall  introduce  into  their  dominions  any  new  taxes,  of
what  nature  soever  they  be,  or  shall  increase  the  ancient  ones^
without  having  first  obtained  the  approbation  of  the  holy  see,
are  ipso  facto  excommunicated. Is  not  this  a  direct  attack
on  the  independence  of  nations,  and  a  subversion  of  the  au-
thority of  sovereigns  ?

In  those  unhappy  times,  those  dark  ages  that  preceded
the  revival  of  literature  and  the  Reformation,  the  popes  at-
tempted to  regulate  the  actions  of  princes,  under  the  pretence
of  conscience — ^to  judge  of  the  validity  of  their  treaties — to
break  their  alliances,  and  declare  them  null  and  void.  But
those  attempts  met  with  a  vigorous  resistance,  even  in  a
country  which  is  generally  thought  to  have  then  possessed
valour  alone,  with  a  very  small  portion  of  knowledge.  The
pope's  nuncio,  in  order  to  detach  the  Swiss  from  the  interests
of  France,  published  a  monitory  against  all  those  cantons
that  favoured  Charles  VIII.,  declaring  them  excommunicated,
if  within  the  space  of  fifteen  days  they  did  not  abandon  the
cause  of  that  prince,  and  enter  into  the  confederacy  which
was  formed  against  him ;  but  the  Swiss  opposed  this  act,  by
protesting  against  it  as  ai^  iniquitous  abuse,  and  caused  theii
protest  to  be  publicly  posted  up  in  all  the  places  under  their
jurisdiction :  thus  showing  their  contempt  for  a  proceeding
that  was  equally  absurd  and  derogatory  to  the  rights  of  sove-

•  EitUny  of  ikt  B&voluti4ma  m  Swtden.


OP  PDBTY  AND  BELiaiON«  6S

reigns.'*' We  shall  mention  sev^al  other  eimilar  attempts, book  l
when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  faith  of  treaties.  chap.  xn.

This  power  in  the  popes  has  given  birth  to  another  abuse,  i  I47.
that  deserves  the  utmost  attention  from  a  wise  government.  ^- impj>i*-
We  see  several  countries  in  which  ecclesiastical  dignities,  aJ^dmentaoonH
all  the  higher  benefices,  are  distributed  by  a  foreign  power — ferredbj*
by  the  pope — ^who  bestows  them  on  his  creatures,  and  very  foreign
often  on  men  who  are  not  subjects  of  the  state. This  practice  P^^*''^*
is  at  once  a  violation  of  the  nation's  rights,  and  of  the  prin-
ciples of  common  policy. A  nation  ought  not  to  suffer  fo-
reigners to  dictate  laws  to  her,  to  interfere  in  her  concerns,
or  deprive  her  of  her  natural  advantages ;  and  yet,  how  does
it  happen  that  so  many  states  still  tamely  suffer  a  foreigner
to  dispose  of  posts  and  employments  of  the  highest  importance
to  their  peace  and  happiness  ? The  princes  who  consented
to  the  introduction  of  so  enormous  an  abuse  were  equally
wanting  to  themselves  and  their  people. In  our  times,  the
court  of  Spain  has  been  obliged  to  expend  immense  stims,  in
order  to  recover,  without  danger,  the  peaceable  possession  of
a  right  which  essentially  belonged  to  the  nation  or  its  head.

Even  in  those  states  whose  sovereigns  have  preserved  so }  148.
important  a  prerogative  of  the  crown,  the  abuse  in  a  great  3-  Po^«rf«i ^
measure  subsists. The  sovereign  nominates,  indeed,  to  bishop-  '^^^^^  ^^
rics  and  great  benefices ;  but  his  authority  is  not  sufficient  to  a  foreign
enable  the  persons  nominated  to  enter  on  the  exercise  of  their  court
functions ;  they  must  also  have  bulls  from  Bome.f By  this [  69  ]
and  a  thousand  other  links  of  attachment,  the  whole  body  of
the  clergy  in  those  countries  still  depend  on  the  court  of
Bome ;  from  it  they  expect  dignities ;  from  it  that  purple,
which,  according  to  the  proud  pretensions  of  those  who  are
invested  with  it,  renders  them  equal  to  sovereigns. From  the
resentment  of  that  court  they  have  every  thing  to  fear ;  and
of  course  we  see  them  almost  invariably  disposed  to  gratify
it  on  every  occasion. On  the  other  hand,  the  court  of  Bome
supports  those  clergy  with  all  her  might,  assists  them  by  her
politics  and  credit,  protects  them  against  their  enemies,  and
against  those  who  would  set  bounds  to  their  power — nay,
often  against  the  just  indignation  of  their  sovereign ;  and  by
this  means  attaches  them  to  her  still  more  strongly. Is  it
not  doing  an  injury  to  the  rights  of  society,  and  shocking  the
.  first  elements  of  government,  thus  to  suffer  a  great  number
of  subjects,  and  even  subjects  in  high  posts,  to  be  dependent
on  a  foreign  prince,  and  entirely  devoted  to  him  ? Would  a

■_  _  - ■ -  ■_ —  —  _  _  __  _ -  _  -  ■ ^- —  -

*  VogeCt HiHorieal and Political  had  to  enoounter,  when  he  wished  to

Treatise  on  the  Allianeet  between  France  confer  the archbiahoprio of  Sens on

and  the  Thirteen  Cantone,  pp.  33  and  Renauld  de  Baone,  archbishop  of  Bour-

86.  gea,  who  had  sayed  France,  By  receiving

-f  We  may  800,  in  the  letters  of  Cardi-  that  great  prince  into  the  Boman  Oatho-

nal  d'Ossaty  what  difficultieSy  what  op-  lio  church,
position,  what  long  delays,  Henxy  IV.

141


«9


09  PIETT  AND  RBLIGION.


BOOK  I.

CHAP.  xn.


iU9.

4. Theoeti


prudent  sovereign  receive  men  ,who  preached  snch  doctrines  ?
There  needed  no  more  to  cause  all  the  missionaries  to  be
driven  from  China.

It  was  for  the  purpose  of  more  firmly  securing  the  attach-
b  of  the  ^^^^  ^^  churchmen  that  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  waa  in-
priesta.  vented:  A  priest,  a  prelate,  already  bound  to  the  see  of
Rome  by  his  functions  and  his  hopes,  is  further  detached  from
his  country,  by  the  celibacy  he  is  obliged  to  observe.  He  is
not  connected  with  civil  society  by  a  family :  his  grand  inte-
rests are  all  centred  in  the  church ;  and,  provided  he  has  the
pope's  favour,  he  has  no  further  concern :  in  what  country
soever  he  was  bom,  Rome  is  his  refuge,  the  centre  of  his
adopted  country.  Everybody  knows  that  the  religious  orders
are  a  sort  of  papal  militia,  spread  over  the  face  of  the  earth,
to  support  and  advance  the  interests  of  their  monarch.  This
is  doubtless  a  strange  abuse — ^a  subversion  of  the  first  laws
of  society.  But  this  is  not  all :  if  the  prelates  were  married,
they  might  enrich  the  state  with  a  number  of  good  citizens ;
rich  benefices  afibrding  them  the  means  of  giving  their  legiti-
Conventa.  mate  children  a  suitable  education.  But  what  a  multitude
of  men  are  there  in  convents,  consecrated  to  idleness  under
the  cloak  of  devotion  I  Equally  useless  to  society  in  peace
and  war,  they  neither  serve  it  by  their  labour  in  necessary
professions,  nor  by  their  courage  in  arms :  yet  they  enjoy
immense  revenues ;  and  the  people  are  obliged,  by  the  sweat
of  their  brow,  to  furnish  support 'for  these  swarms  of  slug-
gards. What  should  we  think  of  a  husbandman  who  pro-
[  70  ]  tected  useless  hornets,  to  devour  the  honey  of  his  bees  ?*  It
is  not  the  fault  of  the  fanatic  preachers  of  overstrained
sanctity,  if  all  their  devotees  do  not  imitate  the  celibacy  of
the  monks.  How  happened  it  that  princes  could  sufier  them
publicly  to  extol,  as  the  most  sublime  virtue,  a  practice
equally  repugnant  to  nature,  and  pernicious  to  society?
Among  the  Romans,  laws  were  made  to  diminish  the  number
of  those  who  lived  in  celibacy,  and  to  favour  marriage  rf  but
superstition  soon  attacked  such  just  and  wise  regulations;
and  the  Christian  emperors,  persuaded  by  churchmen,  thought
themselves  obliged  to  abrogate  them.^  Several  of  the  fa-
thers of  the  church  have  censured  those  laws  against  celi-
bacy— cUmbtless,  says  a  great  man,§  with  a  lavdable  zeal  for
the  things  of  another  life  ;  but  with  very  little  knowledge  of
the  affairs  of  this.  This  great  man  lived  in  the  church  of
Rome : — ^he  did  not  dare  to  assert,  in  direct  terms,  that  volun-
tary celibacy  is  to  be  condemned  even  with  respect  to  con-


*  This  reflection  has  no  relation  to
the  religions  houses  in  which  literature
is  caltivated.  Establishments  that  af-
ford to  learned  men  a  peaceful  retreat,
and  that  leisure  and  tranquillity  re-
paired in  deep  scientiflo  research,  are  hii  Spirit  of  Laws.
142


always  laudable,  and  may  become  very
useful  to  the  state.

f  The  Papia-Poppsean  law.

\  In  the  Theodosian  Ck>de.

J  The  president  de  Monteaquieq,  im


OP  PIETY  AND  BBLIGION.  70

Bcience  and  the  things  of  another  life : — ^but  it  is  certainly  a  book  l
conduct  well  becoming  genuine  piety,  to  conform  ourselves  to-55^ —
nature,  to  fulfil  the  views  of  the  Creator,  and  to  labour  for
the  welfare  of  society.  If  a  person  is  capable  of  rearing  a
family,  let  him  marry,  let  him  be  attentive  to  give  his  chil-
dren a  good  education: — ^in  so  doing,  he  will  discharge  his
duty,  and  be  undoubtedly  in  the  road  to  salvation.

The  enormous  and  dangerous  pretensions of  the clergy  ?  150,
are  also  another  consequence  of  this system,  which  places  ^-  ^°®'"
every  thing  relating  to religion beyond  the  reach  of  the  J^^j?^J[*J^
pivil  power. In  the  first  place,  the  ecclesiastics,  under  pre-  the  clergy.  •
tence  of  the  holiness  of  their  functions,  have  raised  them-
selves above  all  the  other  citizens,  even  the  principal  magis-  P"-«™*-
trates: and,  contrary  to  the express  injunctions  of  their '^®'^*^*
master,  who  said  to  his  apostles,  seek  not  the  first  places  at
feastSj  they  have  almost  everywhere  arrogated  to  themselves
the  first  rank. Their  head,  in  the  Roman  church,  obliges
sovereigns  to  kiss  his  feet ;  emperors  have  held  the  bridle  of
his  horse ;  and  if  bishops  or  even  simple  priests  do  not  at
present  raise  themselves  above  their  prince,  it  is  because  the
times  will  not  permit  it :  they  have  not  always  been  so  mo-
dest; and one  of  their  writers  has  had the assurance to
assert,  that  a  priest  is  as  much  above  a  king  as  a  man  is  above
a  beast.*  How  many  authors,  better  known  and  more  esteemed
than  the  one  just  quoted,  have  taken  a  pleasure  in  praising
and extollinff  that  silly  speech  attributed  to  the  emperor [  71  ]
Theodosius  the  First — Ambrose  has  taught  me  the  great  dif-
ference there  is  between  the  empire  and  the  priesthood  !

We  have  already  observed  that  ecclesiastics  ought  to  be
honoured:  but  moaesty,  and  even  humility,  should  charac-
terize them :  and  does  it  become  them  to  forget  it  in  their
own  conduct,  while  they  preach  it  to  others  ?  I  would  not
mention  a  vain  ceremonial,  were  it  not  attended  with  very
material  consequences,  from  the  pride  with  which  it  inspires
many  priests,  and  the  impressions  it  may  make  on  the  minds
of  the  people.  It  is  essentially  necessary  to  good  order,  that
subjects  should  behold  none  in  society  so  respectable  as  their
sovereign,  and,  next  to  him,  those  on  whom  he  has  devolved
a  part  of  his  authority.

Ecclesiastics  have  not  stopped  in  so  fair  a  path. Not  con-  j  151.  6.  In*
tented  with  rendering  themselves  independent  with  respect  to  dependence,
their  functions, — ^by  the  aid  of  the  court  of  Rome,  they  have  i™™""*»«*
even  attempted  to  withdraw  themselves  entirely,  and  in  every
respect,  from  all  subjection  to  the  political  authority. There
have  been  times  when  an  ecclesiastic  could  not  be  brought
before  a  secular  tribunal  for  any  crime  whatsoever.f The

*  Tantam  saoerdoB  pra&st&t  regi,  quan-  f  The  congregation  of  Immunities
tamhomobeetiflB.  ^anitlaua  Oridioviut.  has  decided  that  the  cognisance  of
^  'Vide  Tribbeehav.  Exere,  1,  ad  Baron,  causes  against  ecclesiastics,  even  for
Annal,Sect2f€t'I%0Maa,NaLad.L€mcelL the  crime  of  high  treason,  oxdnsivelj

143


71  OF  PIETT  AND  BELiaiON,


OHAP.  xn.


BooKj^  canon  law  declares  expressly,  It  is  indecent  far  laymen  to
judge  a  churchman.*  The  popes  Paul  III.,  Pius  V.,  and
Urban  YUL,  excommunicated  all  lay  judges  who  should
presume  to  undertake  the  trial  of  ecclesiastics.  E^en  the
bishops  of  Fic&nce  have  not  been  afraid  to  say  on  several
occasions,  that  they  did  not  depend  on  any  temporal  prince  ;
and,  in  1656,  the  general  assembly  of  the  French  clergy
had  the  assiurance  to  use  the  following  expressions — ''  The
decree  of  council  having  been  ready  was  disapproved  by  the
assembly y  because  it  leaves  the  king  judge  over  the  bishops^
and  seems  to  svhject  their  immunities  to  his  judges.'*  f  There
are  decrees  of  the  popes  that  excommunicate  whoever  im-
prisons a  bishop.  According  to  the  principles  of  the  church
of  Rome,  a  prince  has  not  the  power  of  punishing  an  eccle-
siastic with  death,  though  a  rebel  or  a  malefactor ; — he  must
first  apply  to  the  ecclesiastical  power ;  and  the  latter  will,  if
it  thinks  proper,  deliver  up  the  culprit  to  the  secular  arm,
after  having  degraded  him.t History  affords  us  a  thousand

belongs  to  the  spiritnal  court : — "  Gog-  fol  to  subject  the  ministers  of  God  to

nilio  canssB  contzm  eoolesiasticos,  etiam  the  decisions  of  the  temporal  power."

pro  delicto  Isesse  majestatis,  feri  debet  In  these  pretensions  he  was  sanctioiied

a  Judice  ecclesiastioo." Bicci  Sjfnopt,  by  the  approbation  of  the  pope's  nun.

JDeeret.  et  ReaoL  S. Congreg,  Immunit.  cio  and  the  court  of  Rome. But the

p.  105. — A constitution  of  pope Ur-  council  of  Lucerne  firmly  supported  the

ban  VI.  pronounces those soToreigns  rights  of  sovereignty,  and,  without  en-

or  magistrates  guilty  of  saorilege,  who  gaging  with  the  bishop  in  a  coDtroreFBy

shall  banish  an  ecclesiastic  from  their  which  would  have  been  derogatory  to

territories,  and  declares  them  to  hare  their dignity, answered him — "Your

ipto  facto  incurred  the  sentence  of  ez-  lordship  quotes  yarious  passages  from

communication. Cap. IL De Fora,  the  writings  of  the  fathers,  which  we,

Oampet in VIL To  this immunity  on  our  side,  might  also  quote  in  our

may  be  added  Uie  indulgence  shown  own  favour,  if  it  were  necessary,  or  if

by  the ecclesiastical  tribunals  to the  there  was  question  of  deciding  the  eon-

olergy,  on  whom  they  never  inflicted  test  by  dint  of  quotation. But  let  roar

any  but  slight  punishments,  even  for  lordship  rest  assured  that  we hare  a

the  most  atrocious  erimes. The  dread-  right  to  summon  before  us  a  priest,  our

fol  disorders  that  arose  from  this  cause,  natural  subject  who  encroaches  on  our

at  length  produced  their  own  remedy  prerogatives — to  point  out  to  him  his

In  France,  whore  the  clergy  were  at  error — to  exhort  him  to  a  reform  o(

length  subjected  to  the  temporal  juris-  his conduct — and,  in consequence of

diction  for  all  transgressions  that  are  in*  his  obstinate  disobedience,  after  repeat-

jurious  to  society. See  Papon  Arritt  ed  citations,  to  banish  him  from  our

ifotabletf  book  i.  tit  v.  act  34.  dominions. We have not the  least

*  Indecorum  est  laicos  homines  viros  doubt  that  this  right  belongs to  us ;

eoclesiasticos  judicare. Can,  in  nona  and  we  are determined  to defend  it

aetiotte  22,  xvi.  q.  7.  And  indeed  it  ought  not  to  be  proposed

f  See  the  Statement  of  FaeU  on  (Ae  to  any  sovereign  to  appear  as  party  in

8y9tem  of  Independence  of  Biahope,  •  a  contest  with  a  refra-ctory  subject  like

X  In  the  year  1725,  a  parish  pries^  him — ^to  refer  the  cause  to  the  decision

of  the  canton  of  Lucerne,  having  re-  of  a  third  party,  whoever  he  be — and

fused  to  appear  before the supreme  run  the  risk  of  being  condemned  to

council,  was,  for  his  contumacy,  ba-  tolerate  in  the  state  a  person  of  tuck

nished  from the canton. Hereupon  character,  with  what  dignity  soever  he

his  diocesan,  the  bishop  of  Constance,  might  be  invested,''  Ac. The  bishop

had  the  assurance  to  write  to  the  conn-  of  Constance  had  proceeded  so  far  as

oil  that  they  had  infringed  the  ecclesi-  to  assert,  in  his  'letter  to  the  eantottf

Mtioal  immonitiee—thai  «it  is  nnlaw-  dated  December  18th,  1726,  that
14i


OF  PIETY  AND  KBLIGIOlfi'  72

examples  of  bishops  who  remained  unpunished,  or  were  but  book  i.
alightly  chastised,  for  crimes  for  which  nobles  of  the  highest  ^"^^'  ^"'
-ank  forfeited  their  lives.  John  de  Braganza,  king  of  Portu-
gal, justly  injBicted  the  penalty  of  death  on  those  noblemen
who  had  conspired  his  destruction :  but  he  did  not  dare  to
put  to  death  the  archbiflhop  of  Braga,  the  author  of  that
detestable  plot.*

For  an  entire  body  of  men,  numerous  and  powerful,  to
stand  beyond  the  reach  of  the  public  authority,  and  be  de-
pendent on  a  foreign  court,  is  an  entire  subversion  of  order
:n  the  republic,  and  a  manifest  diminution  of  the  sovereignty.
This  is  a  mortal  stab  given  to  society,  whose  very  essence  it
is,  that  every  citizen  should  be  subject  to  the  public  autho-
rity. Indeed  the  immunity  which  the  clergy  arrogate  to
themselves  in  this  respect,  is  so  inimical  to  the  natural  and
necessary  rights  of  a  nation,  that  the  king  himself  has  not
the  power  of  granting  it.  But  churchmen  will  tell  us  they
derive  this  immunity  from  God  himself ;  but  till  they  have
furnished  some  proof  of  their  pretensions,  let  us  adhere  to
this  certain  principle,  that  God  desires  the  safety  of  states,
and  not  that  which  will  only  be  productive  of  disorder  and
destruction  to  them.

The  same  immunity  is  claimed  for  the  possessions  of  the  §  152.
ohurch. The  state  might,  no  doubt,  exempt  those  posses-  ^-  immuni-
sions  from  every  species  of  tax  at  a  time  when  they  were  *^  ®^  church
scarcely  suflScient  for  the  support  of  the  ecclesiastics ;  but,
for  that  favour,  these  men  ought  to  be  indebted  to  the  public
authority  alone,  which  has  always  a  right  to  revoke  it,  when-  .
ever  the  welfare  of  the  state  makes  it  necessary. It  being
one  of  the  fundamental  and  essential  laws  of  every  society,
that,  in  case  of  necessity,  the  wealth  of  all  the  members  ought [  73  3
to  contribute  proportionally  to  the  common  necessities — the
prince  himself  cannot,  of  his  own  authority,  grant  a  total
exemption  to  a  very  numerous  and  rich  body,  without  being
guilty  of  extreme  injustice  to  the  rest  of  his  subjects,  on
whom,  in  consequence  of  that  exemption,  the  whole  weight
of  the  burden  will  fall.

The  possessions  of  the  church  are  so  far  from  being  en-
titled to  an  exemption  on  aceount  of  their  being  consecrated
to  God,  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  for  that  very  reason  they
ought  to  be  taken  the  first  for  the  use  and  safety  of  the  state.  .
For  nothing  is  more  agreeable  to  the  common  Father  of  man-
kind than  to  save  a  state  from  ruin.  God  himself  having  no
need  of  anything,  the  consecration  of  wealth  to  him  is  but  a
dedication  of  it  to  such  uses  as  shall  be  agreeable  to  him.
Besides,  a  great  part  of  the  revenues  of  the  church,  by  the

''charchmen^ as soon as they  hare fore." Memorial  on  the  Dispute  between
reeeived  holy  orders,  oeased  to  be  nata- the  Pope  and  the  Canton  of  Lucerne,
ral  sabjectSy  and  are  thna  released  from p.  65.
the  bondage in  which  they  lived  be- *  Bovolnttons  of  PortagaL

19  K  14&


73


OF  PIETT  AND  REUaiON.


BOOK  I.
CHAP. XU.


2153.

8.  Excom-

niunioation

of  mea  in

office.


[74]


;  154.

9.  And  of
lovereignB
khemdolTM.


confession  of  the  clergy  themselves,  is  destined  for  the  poor.
When  the  state  is  in  necessity,  it  is  doubtless  the  first  and
principal  pauper,  and  the  most  worthy  of  assistance.  We
may  extend  this  principle  even  to  the  most  common  cas^
and  safely  assert  that  to  supply  a  part  of  the  current  ez«
penses  of  the  state  from  the  revenues  of  the  church,  and  thus
take  so  much  from  the  weight  of  the  people's  burden,  is  reaUy
giving  a  part  of  those  rtrenues  to  the  poor,  according  to  their
original  destination.  But  it  is  really  contrary  to  religion  and
the  intentions  of  the  founders  to  waste  in  pomp,  luxury,  and
epicurism,  those  revenues  that  ought  to  be  consecrated  to  the
relief  of  the  poor.*

Not  satisfied,  however,  itith  rendering  themselves  inde-
pendent, the  ecclesiastics  undertook  to  bring  mankind  under
their  dominion ;  and  indeed  they  had'  reason  to  despise  the
stupid  mortals  who  suffered  them  to  proceed  in  their  plan.
Excommunication  was  a  formidable  weapon  among  ignorant
and  superstitious  men,  who  neither  knew  how  to  keep  it
within  its  proper  bounds,  nor  to  distinguish  between  the  use
and  the  abuse  of  it.  Hence  arose  disorders  which  have  pre-
vailed in  some  protestant  countries.  Churchmen  have  pre-
sumed, by  their  own  authority  alone,  to  excommunicate  men
in  high  employments,  magistrates  whose  functions  were  daily
useful  to  society — ^and  have  boldly  asserted  that  those  officers
of-  the  state,  being  struck  with  the  thunders  of  the  churchf
could  no  longer  discharge  the  duties  of  their  posts.  What  a
perversion  of  order  and  reason !  What !  shall  not  a  nation
be  allowed  to  intrust  its  affairs,  its  happiness,  its  repose  and
safety,  to  the  hands  of  those  whom  it  deems  the  most  skilful
and  the  most  worthy  of  that  trust  ?  Shall  the  power  of  a
churchman,  whenever  he  pleases,  deprive  the  state  of  its
wisest  conductors,  of  its  firmest  supports,  and  rob  the  prince
of  his  most  faithful  servants  ?  So  absurd  a  pretension  has
been  condemned  by  princes,  and  even  by  prelates,  respect-
able for  their  character  and  judgment.  We  read  in  the  171st
letter  of  Ives  de  Chartres,  to  the  Archbishop  of  Sens,  that  the
royal  capitularies  (conformably  to  the  thirteenth  canon  of  the
twelfth  council  of  Toledo,  held  in  the  year  681)  enjoined  the
priests  to  admit  to  their  conversation  all  those  whom  the
king's  majesty  had  received  into  favour,  or  entertained  at
his  table,  though  they  had  been  excommunicated  by  them,
or  by  others,  in  order  that  the  church  might  not  appear  to
reject  or  condemn  those  whom  the  king  was  pleased  to  employ
in  his  service.*

The  excommunications  pronounced  against  the  sovereigns
themselves,  and  accompanied  with  the  absolution  of  their
subjects  from  their  oaths  of  allegiance,  put  the  finishing
stroke  to  this  enormous  abuse;  and  it  is  almost  incredible


14«


*  See  LeHen  on  ike  Pretentions  of  the  Clergy.


OF  PIETY  Am)  RELIGION.  74

that  nations  should  have  suffered  such  odious  procedures. 3ook  i.


ORAP.  xn.


We  have  slightly  touched  on  this  subject  in  §§  146  and  146.
The  thirteenth  century  gives  striking  instances  of  it.  Otho
IV.  for  endeavouring  to  obligie  several  provinces  of  Italy  to
submit  to  the  laws  of  the  empire,  was  excommunicated  and
deprived  of  the  empire  by  Innocent  III.  and  his  subjects
absolved  from  their  oath  of  allegiance.  Finally,  this  unfor-
tunate emperor,  being  abandoned  by  the  princes,  was  obliged
to  resign  the  crown  to  Frederic  11.  John,  king  of  England,
endeavouring  to  maintain  the  rights  of  his  kingdom  in  the
election  of  an  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  found  himself  ex-
posed to  the  audacious  enterprises  of  the  same  pope.  Inno-
cent excommunicated  the  king — laid  the  whole  kingdom  under
an  interdict — had  the  presumption  to  declare  John  unworthy
of  the  throne,  and  to  absolve  his  subjects  from  their  oath  of
fidelity ;  he  stirred  up  the  clergy  against  him— -excited  his
subjects  to  rebel — solicited  the  King  of  France  to  take  up
arms  to  dethrone  him — ^publishing,  at  the  same  time,  a  cru-
sade against  him,  as  he  would  have  done  against  the  Sara-
cens. The  king  of  England  at  first  appeared  determined  to
defend  himself  with  vigour ;  but  soon  losing  courage,  he  suf-
fered himself  to  be  brought  to  such  an  excess  of  infamy,  as
to  resign  his  kingdoms  into  the  hands  of  the  pope's  legate,
to  receive  them  b&ck  from  him,  and  hold  them  as  a  fief  of
the  church,  on  condition  of  paying  tribute.*

The  popes  were  not  the  only  persons  guilty  of  such  enor-
mities :  there  have  also  been  councils  who  bore  a  part  in
them.  That  of  Lyons,  summoned  by  Innocent  IV.,  in  the
year  1245,  had  the  audaccity  to  cite  the  emperor  Frederic  II.
to  appear  before  them  in  order  to  exculpate  himself  from  the
charges  brought  against  him — threatening  him  with  the
thunders  of  the  church  if  he  failed  to  do  it.  That  great
prince  did  not  give  himself  much  trouble  about  so  irregular
a  proceeding.  He  said — "  that  the  pope  aimed  at  rendering
himself  both  a  judge  and  a  sovereign ;  but  that,  from  all  an-
tiquity, the  emperors  themselves  had  called  councils,  where
the  popes  and  prelates  rendered  to  them,  as  to  their  sove-
reigns,-the  respect  and  obedience  that  was  their  due."t  The  [  75
emperor,  however,  thinking  it  necessary  to  yield  a  little  to
the  superstition  of  the  times,  condescended  to  send  ambassa-
dors to  the  council,  to  defend  his  cause ;  but  this  did  not
prevent  the  pope  from  excommunicating  him,  and  declaring
him  deprived  of  the  crown.  Frederic,  like  a  man  of  a  su-
perior genius,  laughed  at  the  empty  thunders  of  the  Vatican,
and  proved  himself  able  to  preserve  the  crown  in  spite  of  the
election  of  Henry,  Landgrave  of  Thuringia,  whom  the  eccle-
siastical electors,  and  many  bishops,  had  presumed  to  declare

*  Matthew  Paris. — Turtvtin,  Oompend. f  Heiss's  HuiUny  of  the  Empire,  book
Mist,  EccUt.  SecuL  xiii.  U.  chap,  jlyu

147


75  09  piBTT  Aisno  Riaiioioiir.

BOOK  I. king  of  the  Romans — ^but  who  obtained  little  more  by  dmft
3^L_iIL.  election,  than  the  ridiculous  title  of  king  of  the  priests.

I  should  never  have  done,  were  I  to  accumulate  examples ;
but  those  I  have  already  quoted  are  but  too  many  for  the
honour  of  humanity.  It  is  an  humiliating  aight  to  behold
the  excess  of  folly  to  which  superstition  had  reduced  the
nations  of  Europe  m  those  unhappy  times.*
i  f  155.  By  means  of  the  same spiritual arms,  the clergy  drew

1  10. The every  thing  to  themselves,,  usurped  the  authority  of  the  tri-

oiergy  draw-  jjm^als,  and  disturbed  the  course  of  justice.  They  claimed
maJta^  a  right  to  take  cognisance  of  all  causes  an  account  of  sin^  of
;  themselves,  wMch  (says  Innoccnt  Ill.f)  every  man  of  sense  m-ist  know

and  diBtorb-  that  the  cognisanc^  belongs  to  our  ministry. In  the  year


1  S^Mtic^*' ^^^^'  ^^®  prelates  of  France  had  the  assurance  to  tell  King

juB  CO.  pjjjjjp  ^Q  Valois,  that,  to  prevent  causes  of  any  kind  from
being  brought  before  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  was  depriving
the  church  of  all  its  rights,  omnia  ecclesiarum  jura  tolIere^X
And  accordingly,  it  was  their  aim  to  have  to  themselves  the
decision  of  all  disputes.  They  boldly  opposed  the  civil  au-
thority, and  made  themselves  feared  by  proceeding  in  the
way  of  excommunication.  It  even  happened  sometimes,  that
as  dioceses  were  not  always  confined  to  die  extent  of  the
[  76  ]  political  territory,  a  bishop  would  summon  foreigners  before
his  tribunal,  for  causes  purely  civil,  and  take  upon  him  to
decide  them,  in  manifest  violation  of  the  rights  of  nations.
To  such  a  height  had  the  disorder  arisen  three  or  four  cen-
turies ago,  that  our  wise  ancestors  thought  themselves  obliged
to  take  serious  measures  to  put  a  stop  to  it,  and  stipulated,
in  their  treaties,  that  none  of  the  confederates  should  be  sum-

*  Soverei^s  were  sometimes  found,  should acknowledge  him  as  king,  or

who,  without  oonsidering ftiture  con-  perform  towards  him  any  of  the  duties

sequences', favoured the papal en-  of  a  subject He  then  offered  Arragon

^  croachmentfl  when they were likely  and  Catalonia  to  the  Count  do  Valois,

to  prove  advaiitageous  to  their  own  second  son  of  Philip  the  Bold,  on  coo-
interests.  Thus,  Louis  VIIL,  king  dition  that  he  and  his  suooessors  should
of  France,  wishing  to  invade  the  terri-  acknowledge  ^emselves  vassals  of  the
tories  of  the  Count  of  Toulouse,  under  holy  see,  take  an  oath  of  fealty  to  the
pretence  of  making  war  on  the  Albi-  pope,  and  pay  Mm  a  yearly  tribute,
genses,  requested  of  the  pope,  among  The  king  of  France  assembled  the
other  things,  **  that  he  would  issue  a  barons  and  prelates  of  his  kingdom,  to
bull  declaring  that  the  two  Raymonds,  deliberate  on  the  pope's  offer,  and  they
father  and  son,  together  with  all  their  advised  him  to  accept  of  it.  "  Strange
adherents,  associates,  and  allies,  had*  blindness  of  kings  and  their  eounsel-
been  and  were  deprived  of  all  their  lore!"  exclaims,  with  good  reason,  a
possessions."  Vellt's  Higt.  of  France,  modem  historian ;  "  they  did  not  per-
voL  iv.  p.  33.  Of  a  similar  nature  to  oeive,  that,  by  thus  accepting  king;-
•  the  preceding  is  the  following  remark-  doms  from  the  hands  of  the  pope,  they
able  fact: — Pope  Martin  lY.  exoom-  strengthened  and  established  his  pre-
municated  Peter,  king  of  Arragon,  tensions  to  the  right  of  deposing  them-
declared  that  he  had  forfeited  his  king-  selves.''  Vrlly's  HUtory  of  Fra»«tf
dom,  all  his  lands,  and  even  the  regal  vol.  vi.  p.  190.
dignity,  and  pronounced  his  subjects  f  In  cap.  N^ovii.  de  Judieis.
I  absolved  from  their  oath  of  allegiance.  \  See  Leibnitii  Codex,  Jurit  6ea:
He  even  excommunicated  .  all  who  IHplomat.  DipL  LXVIL  ^  9.
148


•OF PIETY  AND RELl'GIO*.  76

moned  before  spiritual  courts,  for  money  debts,  since  evert/ book  i.
one  ought  to  be  contented  with  the  ordinary  modes  of  justice  ^^^^'  "''■
that  were  observed  in  the  country. ''^ We  find  in  history,  that
the  Swiss  on  many  occasions  repressed  the  encroachments  of
the  bishops  and  their  judges.

Over  every  affair  of  life  they  extended  their  authority,
under  pretence  that  conscience  was  concerned.  They  obliged
new-married  husbands  to  purchase  permission  to  lie  with  their
•wives  the  first  three  nights  after  marriage.f

This  burlesque  invention  leads  us  to  remark  another  abuse,  ?  i*®-
manifestly  contrary  to  the  rules  of  a  wise  policy,  and  to  the  J^* ^^'^^y
duty  a  nation  owes  to  herself;  I  mean  the  immense  sumsj^^^^
which  bulls,  dispensations,  &c.,  annually  drew  to  Rome,  from
all  the  countries  in  communion  with  her. How  much  might
be  said  on  the  scandalous  trade  of  indulgences !  but  it  at  last
became  ruinous  to  the  court  of  Rome,  which,  by  endeavour-
ing to  gain  too  much,  suffered  irreparable  losses.

Finally,  that  independent  authority  intrusted  to  ecclesi-  j  isr.
astics,  who  were  often  incapable  of  understanding  the  true  12. Laws
maxims  of  government,  or  too  careless  to  take  the  trouble  of  ^^  onstomi
studying  them,  and  whose  minds  were  wholly  occupied  by  a^^"^*^^,^
visionary  fanaticism,  by  empty  speculations,  and  notions  of  of  states.
a  chimerical  and  overstrained  purity, — that  authority,  I  say,
produced,  under  the  pretence  of  sanctity,  laws  and  customs
that  were  pernicious  to  the  state. Some  of  these  we  have
noticed;  but  a  very  remarkable  instance  is  mentioned  by
Grotius. "In  the  ancient  Greek  church,"  says  he,  ''was
long  observed  a  canon,  by  which  those  who  had  killed  an
enemy  in  any  war  whatsoever  were  excommunicated  for  three
years:"  J  a  fine  reward  decreed  .for  the  heroes  who  defended
their  country,  instead  of  the  crowns  and  triumphs  with  which
pagan  Rome  had  been  accustomed  to  honour  them ! Pagan
Rome  became  mistress  of  the  world  ;  she  adorned  her  bravest
warriors  with  crowns.- The  empire,  having  embraced  Chris-
tianity, soon  became  a  prey  to  barbarians ;  her  subjects,  by
defending  her,  incurred  the  penalty  of  a  degrading  excom-
munication. By  devoting  themselves  to  an  idle  life,  they
thought  themselves  pursuing  the  path  to  heaven,  and  actually
found  themselves  in  the  high  road  to  riches  and  greatness.

—  -  -  -  —  ^

*  Ihidm Alliance  of  Zurich  with  the  upon ;  they  ipould  hare  made  no  great

•sntons  of  Uri,  SchweitK,  and  Under-  profit  of  any  other,
wald,  dated  May  I,  1351,  J  7.  XDe  Jure  Belli  et  Paeia,  lib.  it  cap.

f  See  A  Regulation  of  Parltament  in  zxiv. He  quotes  Bcuil  ad  Amphiloch,

an  arret  of  March  19,  1409. Spirit  of  x.  13. Zonarcat  in  'Niceph,  Phoe.  voL

Caict. These  (says  Montesquieu)  were  ilL
Ihe  yeiy  best  nights  they  ooold  pitch

u2  li»


77


OF  JUSTICE  AND  P(iLITT.


BOOK  I.

CHAP.  xm.


CHAP.  xm.


OF  JUSTICE  AND POLITY.


1 168.  Ana-  NEXT  to  the  care  of  religion,  one  of  the  principal  duties
tion  ought  Qf  j^  nation  relates  to  justice.  They  ought  to  employ  their
iaatice*  utmost  attention  in  causing  it  to  preyail  in  the  state,  and  to
reign.  take  proper  measures  for  having  it  dispensed  to  every  one  in

the  most  certain,  the  most  speedy,  and  the  least  burdensome
manner.  This  obligation  flows  from  the  object  proposed  by
uniting  in  civil  society,  and  from  the  social  compact  itself.
We  have  seen  (§  15),  that  men  have  bound  themselves  by  the
engagements  of  society,  and  consented  to  divest  themselves,
in  its  favour,  of  a  part  of  their  natural  liberty,,  only  with  a
view  of  peaceably  enjoying  what  belongs  to  them,  and  ob-
taining justice  with  certainty.  The  nation  would  therefore
neglect  her  duty  to  herself,  and  deceive  the  individuals,  if
she  did  not  seriously  endeavour  to  make  the  strictest  justice
prevail.  This  attention  she  owes  to  her  own  happiness,  re-
pose, and  prosperity.  Confusion,  disorder,  and  despondency
will  soon  arise  in  a  stq^te,  when  the  citizens  are  not  sure  of
easily  and  speedily  obtaining  justice  in  all  their  disputes;
without  this,  the  civil  virtues  will  become  extinguished,  and
the  society  weakened.

There  are  two  methods  of  making  justice  flourish — ^good
laws,  and  the  attention  of  the  superiors  to  see  them  executed
In  treating  of  the  constitution  of  a  state  (Chap.  III.),  we
have  already  shown  that  a  nation  ought  to  establish  just  and
wise  laws,  and  have  also  pointed  out  the  reasons  why  we  can-
not here  enter  into  the  particulars  of  those  laws.  If  men
were  always  equally  just,  equitable,  and  enlightened,  the
laws  of  nature  would  doubtless  be  sufficient  for  society.  But
ignorance,  the  illusions  of  self-love,  and  the  violence  of  the
passions,  too  often  render  these  sacred  laws  ineffectual.  And
we  see,  in  consequence,  that  all  well-governed  nations  have
perceived  the  necessity  of  enacting  positive  laws.  There  is
a  necessity  for  general  and  formal  regulations,  that  each  may
clearly  know  his  own  rights,  without  being  misled  by  self-
deception.  Sometimes  even  it  is  necessary  to  deviate  from
natural  equity,  in  order  to  prevent  abuses  and  frauds,  and  to
accommodate  ourselves  to  circumstances ;  and,  since  the  sen-
sation of  duty  has  frequently  so  little  influence  on  the  heart
of  man,  a  penal  sanction  becomes  necessary,  to  give  the  laws
their  fidl  efficacy.  Thus  is  the  law  of  Jiature  converted  into
civil  law.*  It  would  be  dangerous  to  commit  the  interests
of  the  citizens  to  the  mere  discretion  of  those  who  are  to  dis-


{159. To
establish
good  laif(8.


*  Seo  a  dissertation  on  this  subject,  in  the  Louir  Philo9ophiqve,  p.  71.
160


or  JTTSTICB  AND  POLITY.

pense  justice.  The  legislator  should  assist  the  t
of  the  judges,  force  their  prejudices  and  inclinat:
due  their  will,  by  simple,  fixed,  and  certain  ri
again,  are  the  civil  laws.

The  best  laws  are  useless,  if  they  be  not  ob;
nation  ought  then  to  take  pains  to  support  them,
them  to  be  respected  and  punctually  executed :  t
she  cannot  adopt  measures  too  just,  too  extensi\
fectual ;  for  hence,  in  a  great  degree,  depend  he
glory,  and  tranquillity.

We  have  already  observed  (§  41)  that  the  so
represents  a  nation  and  is  invested  with  its  auth
charged  with  its  duties. An  attention  to  make  ji
in  the  state  must  then  be  one  of  the  principal  fur
prince ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  worthy  of  1 1
majesty. The  emperor  Justinian  thus  begins  hii
Institutes :  Imperatoriam  majestatem  non  solun
ratam^  sed  etiam  legibuB  oportet  esse  armatam,  \  \
temprlSy  et  hellorum  et  pacts,  recte  possit  guberna
gree  of  power  intrusted  by  the  nation  to  the  head
is  then  the  rule  of  his  duties  and  his  functions  ii
istration  of  justice. As  the  nation  may  either
legislative  power  to  itself,  or  intrust  it  to  a  sele
has  also  a  right,  if  it  thinks  proper,  to  establisl  i
tribunal  to  judge  of  all  disputes,  independently  o :
But  the  conductor  of  the  state  must  naturally  la
erable  share  in  legislation,  and  it  may  even  be  entir
to  him. In  this  last  case,  it  is  he  who  must  estab  I
laws,  dictated  by  wisdom  and  equity : but  in  a  I
should  be  the  guardian  of  the  law ;  he  should  watcl
who  are  invested  with  authority,  and  confine  eacl
within  the  bounds  of  duty.

•  The  executive  power  naturally  belongs  to  thd
— to  every  conductor  of  a  people :  he  is  suppos(
vested  with  it,  in  its  fullest  extent,  when  the  i
laws  do  not  restrict  it.  When  the  laws  are  es
is  the  prince's  province  to  have  them  put  in  exei
support  them  with  vigour,  and  to  make  a  just  ap]
them  to  all  -cases  that  present  themselves,  is  w!
rendering  justice*.  And  this  is  the  duty  of  the
who  is  naturally  the  judge  of  his  people.  We  ha  i
chiefs  of  some  small  states  perform  these  functions
but  this  custom  becomes  inconvenient,  and  even  ii:
a  great  kingdom.

The  best  and  safest  method  of  distributing  ji
establishing  judges,  distinguished  by  their  int
knowledge,  to  take  cognisance  of  all  the  disputci
arise  between  the  citizens.  It  is  impossible  for  th
take  upon  himself  this  painful  task :  he  cannot  spa
time  either  for  the  thorough  investigation  of  all


78  W  JUSTICE  AN©  POLITZ.

BOOK  I.  even  for  Olie  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  necessary  to  decide
CHAP.  xin«  them.  As  the  sovereign  cannot  personally  discharge  all  the
functions  of  government,  he  should,  with  a  just  discernment,
reserve  to  himself  such  as  he  can  successfully  perform,  and
are  of  most  importance, — intrusting  the  others  to  officers  and
magistrates  who  shall  execute  them  under  his  authority.
There  is  no  ineonvenience  in  trusting  the  decision  of  a  law-


[  79  ] suit  to  a  body  of  prudent,  honest,  and  enlightened  men  :■

the  contrary  it  is  the  best  mode  the  prince  can  possibly  adopt ;
and  he  fully  acquits  himself  of  the  duty  he  owes  to  his  people
in  this  particular,  when  he  gives  them  judges  adorned  with
all  the  qualities  suitable  to  ministers  of  justice :  he  has  then
nothing  more  to  do  but  to  watch  over  their  conduct,  in  order
that  they  may  not  neglect  their  duty.
J  164. The The  establishment  of  courts  of  justice  is  particularly  ne-
ordinary ccssary  for  the  decision  of  all  fiscal  causes, — that  is  to  say,
*^h"id  d *^^  *^®  disputes  that  may  arise  between  the  subjects  on  the
termine ^^®  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the  persons  who  exert  the  pro-
oMges  re- Stable  prerogatives  of  the  prince. It  would  be  very  unbe-
lating  to  the  coming,  and  highly  improper  for  a  prince,  to  take  upon  him
revenue. ^^  gjy^  judgment  in  his  own  cause : — he  cannot  be  too  much
on  his  guard  against  the  illusions  of  interest  and  self-love ;
and  even  though  he  were  capable  of  resisting  their  influence,
still  he  ought  not  to  expose  his  character  to  the  rash  judg-
ments of  the  multitude. These  important  reasons  ought  even
to  prevent  his  submitting  the  decision  of  causes  in  which  he
is  concerned,  to  the  ministers  and  counsellors  particularly  atr
tached  to  his  person. In  all  well-regulated  states,  in  coun-
tries that  are  really  states,  and  not  the  dominions  of  a  despot,
the  ordinary  tribunals  decide  all  causes  in  which  the  sovereign
is  a  party,  with  as  much  freedom  as  those  between  private
persons.
1 1(J5.  The  end  of  all  trials  at  law  is  justly  to  determine  the  dis-^

There  ought  putes  that  arise  between  the  citizens.  If,  therefore,  suits  are
Wri! d***^  prosecuted  before  an  inferior  judge,  who  examines  all  the  cir-
preme  cumstances  and  proofs  relating  to  them,  it  is  very  proper,
courts  of  that,  for  the  greater  safety,  the  party  condemned  should  be
justice  allowed  to  appeal  to  a  superior  tribunal,  where  the  sentence
wherein  ^f  ^j^^  former  judge  may  be  examined,  and  reversed,  if  it  ap-
ihouW  be  P®^*"  *^  ^^  ill-founaed.  But  it  is  necessary  that  this  supreme
finally  de-  tribunal  should  have  the  authority  of  pronouncing  a  definitive
unnined.  sehtencc  without  appeal :  otherwise  the  whole  proceeding  will
be  vain,  and  the  dispute  can  never  be  determined.

The  custom  of  having  recourse  to  the  prince  himself,  by
laying  a  complaint  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  when  the  cause
has  been  finally  determined  by  a  supreme  court,  appears  to  be
subject  to  very  great  inconveniences.  It  is  more  easy  to  deceive
the  prince  by  specious  reasons,  than  a  number  of  magistrates
well  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  laws ;  and  experience  too
plainly  shows  what  powerful  resources  are  derived  from  favouc

152


OT  JUSTICB  AND  POUTT.

^Tki  intrigue  in  the  courts  of  kings. If  this  practic
rized  by  the  laws  of  the  state,  the  prince  ought  alTi
that  these  complaints  are  only  formed  with  a  view  <
ing  a- suit,  and  procrastinating  a  just  condemnatio
and  wise  sovereign  will  not  admit  them  without  gre;
and  if  he  reverses  the  sentence  that  is  complained  c
not  to  try  the  cause  himself,  but  submit  it  to  the  e
of  another  tribunal,  as  is  the  practice  in  France.
ous  length  of  these  proceedings  authorizes  us  to  sa
more  convenient  and  advantageous  to  the  state,  to !
sovereign  tribunal,  whose  definitive  decrees  should
ject  to  a  reversal  even  by  the  prince  himself. It  i
for  the  security  of  justice  that  the  sovereign  keep
eye  over  the  judges  and  magistrates,  in  the  same i
he  is  bound  to  watch  all  the  other  officers  in  the  s  i
that  he  have  power  to  call  to  an  account  and  to  p  i
as  are  guilty  of  prevarication.

When  once  this  sovereign  tribunal  is  established,
cannot  meddle  with  its  decrees ;  and,  in  general, i
lutely  obliged  to  preserve  and  maintain  the  forms
Every  attempt  to  violate  them  is  an  assumption  of
power,  to  which  it  cannot  be  presumed  that  ipy  na
ever  have  intended  to  subject  itself.

When  those  forms  are  defective,  it  is  the  busin  s
legislator  to  reform  J;hem.  This  being  done  or  pro
manner  agreeable  to  the  fundamental  laws,  will  be  <  i
most  salutary  benefits  the  sovereign  can  bestow  upc  i
pie.  To  preserve  the  citizens  from  the  danger  <  1
themselves  in  defending  their  rights, — ^to  repress  ar  :
that  monster,  chicanery, — ^will  be  an  action  more  ^  1
the  eyes  of  the  wise  man,  than  all  the  exploits  of  a  c :

Justice  is  administered  in  the  name  of  the  sover  i
prince  relies  on  the  judgment  of  the  courts,  and,  ^  i
reason,  looks  upon  their  decisions  as  sound  law  an  [
His  part  in  this  branch  of  the  government  is  then  tc
the  authority  of  the  judges,  and  to  cause  their  sei.
be  executed ;  without  which  they  would  be  vain  and
for  justice  would  not  be  rendered  to  the  citizens.

There  is  another  kind  of  justice  named  attributive
butivey  which  in  general  consists  in  treating  every  on
ing  to  his  deserts.  This  virtue  ought  to  regulate  tho
tion  of  public  employments,  honours,  and  rewards  ii
It  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  duty  the  nation  owes  to  L
encourage  good  citizens,  to  excite  every  one  to  virtui
ours  and  rewards,  and  to  intrust  with  employments
sons  only  as  are  capable  of  properly  discharging  tl
the  next  place,  it  is  a  duty  the  nation  owes  to  indiv:
show  herself  duly  attentive  to  reward  and  honour  me
though  a  sovereign  has  the  power  of  distributing  hi
ftnd  employments  to  whomsoever  he  pleases,  and  nob

20


80  OF  JUSTICE  AND  POLITY.


%ooK  I. perfect  right  to  any  post  or  dignity, — ^yet  a  man  who  by  in-
HAP.  XIII.  |.gjjgg  appUcatiori  has  qualified  himself  to  become  useful  to  hi3
country,  and  he  who  has  rendered  some  signal  service  to  the
state,  may  justly  complain  if  the  prince  overlooks  them,  in
order  to  advance  useless  men  without  merit. This  is  treating
them  with  an  ingratitude  that  is  wholly  unjustifiable,  and
adapted  only  to  extinguish  emulation. There  is  hardly  any
fault  that  in  the  course  of  time  can  become  more  prejudicial
to  a  state :  it  introduces  into  it  a  general  relaxation ;  and  its
public  aflfairs,  being  managed  by  incompetent  hands,  cannot
[  81  ] fail  to  be  attended  with  iU-success. A  powerful  state  may
support  itself  for  some  time  by  its  own  weight ;  but"  at  length
it  falls  into  decay ;  and  this  is  perhaps  one  of  the  principal
causes  of  those  revolutions  observable  in  great  empires. The
sovereign  is  attentive  to  the  choice  of  those  he  employs,  while
he  feels  himself  obliged  to  watch  over  his  own  safety,  and  to
be  on  his  guard :  but  when  once  he  thinks  himself  elevated  to
such  a  pitch  of  greatness  and  power  as  leaves  him  nothing  to
fear,  he  follows  his  own  caprice,  and  all  public  offices  are  dis-
tributed by  favour.
i  169.  Pun- The  punishment  of  trangressors  commonly  belongs  to  dis-
whmentof tributive  justice,  of  which  it  is  really  a  breach;  since  good
aoT^^^' order  requires  that  malefactors  should  be  made  to  suffer  the
punishments  they  have  deserved. But,  if  we  would  clearly
establish  this  on  its  true  foundations,  wg  must  recur  to  first
^m  ^-^M  priiiciples. The  right  of  punishing,  which  in  a  state  of  nature
of  pimSh- belongs  to  each  individual,  is  founded  on  the  right  of  personal
lug.  safety. Every  man  has  a  right  to  preserve  himself  from  in-

jury, and  by  force  to  provide  for  his  own  security  against
those  who  unjustly  attack  him.  For  this  purpose  he  m^y,
when  injured,  inflict  a  punishment  on  the  aggressor,  as  well
with  the  view  of  putting  it  out  of  his  power  to  injure  him  for
the  future,  or  of  reforming  him,  as  of  restraining,  by  his  ex-
ample, all  those  who  might  be  tempted  to  imitate  Tiim.  Xow,
when  men  unite  in  society, — as  the  society  is  thenceforward
charged  with  the  duty  of  providing  for  the  safety  of  its  mem-
bers, the  individuals  all  resign  to  it  their  private  right  of  pun-
ishing. To  the  whole  body,  therefore,  it  belongs  to  avenge
private  injuries,  while  it  protects  the  citizens  at  large.  And
as  it  is  a  moral  person,  capable  also  of  being  injured,  it  has  a
right  to  provide  for  its  owii  safety,  by  punishing  those  who
trespass  against  it ; — that  is  to  say,  it  has  a  right  to  punish

Eublic  delinquents.  Hence  arises  the  right  of  the  sword,  which
elongs  to  a  nation,  or  to  its  conductor.  When  the  society  use
it  against  another  nation,  they  make  war ;  when  they  exert  it
in  punishing  an  individual,  they  exercise  vindictive  justice.
•Two  things  are  to  be  considered  in  this  part  of  government,
— the  laws,  and  their  execution.
i  170.  cw-  It  would  be  dangerous  to  leave  the  punishment  of  transgres
mlnai  kwa.  gorg  entirely  to  the  discretion  of  those  who  are  invested  with


or  JUSTICE  AND  POLITY.

authority. The  passions  might  interfere  in  a  h
ought  to  be  regulated  only  by  justice  and  wisdon
ishment  pre-ordained  for  an  evil  action,  lays  a  n  i
restraint  on  the  wicked  than  a  vague  fear,  in  wb
deceive  themselves. In  short,  the  people,  who  a
moved  at  the  sight  of  a  suffering  wretch,  are  bet
of  the  justice  of  his  punishment,  when  it  is  inflict(  i
themselves. Every  well-governed  state  ought  th
laws  for  the  punishment  of  criminals. It  belongs
tive  power,  whatever  that  be,  to  establish  them  wi1 1
wisdom. But  this  is  not  a  proper  place  for  givj  i
theory  of  them :  we  shall  therefore  only  say  tha
ought,  in  this  as  in  every  other  instance,  to  cho(  i
as  may  best  suit  her  peculiar  circumstances.

We  shall  only  make  one  observation,  which  i
with  the  subject  in  hand,  and  relates  to  the  degr ;
ment.  From  the  foundation  even  of  the  right  <
and  from  the  lawful  end  of  inflicting  penalties,  ji
cessity  of  keeping  them  within  just  bounds.  Si  i
designed  to  procure  the  safety  of  the  state  and  oi
they  ought  never  to  be  extended  beyond  what  tl
quires.  To  say  that  any  punishment  is  just  sim
gressor  knew  before-hand  the  penalty  he  was  at
IS  using  a  barbarous  language,  repugnant  to  hum
the  law  of  nature,  which  forbids  our  doing  any
unless  they  lay  us  under  the  necessity  of  inflici
own  defence  and  for  our  own  security.  When
particular  crime  is  not  much  to  be  feared  in  socii
the  opportunities  of  committing  it  are  very  rare,
subjects  are  not  inclined  to  it,  too  rigorous  punisli
not  to  be  used  to  suppress  it.  Attention  ought  ai
to  the  nature  of  the  crime;  and  the  punishmei
proportioned  to  the  degree  of  injury  done  to  the
quillity  and  the  safety  of  society,  and  the  wickei
poses  in  the  criminal.

These  maxims  are  not  only  dictated  by  justicci
but  also  as  forcibly  recommended  by  prudence
of  government.  Experience  shows  us  that  the
becomes  familiarized  to  objects  which  are  frequeii
ed  to  it.  If,  therefore,  terrible  punishments  ar<i
the  people  will  become  daily  less  affected  by  tl
length  contract,  like  the  Japanese,  a  savage  a
character : — these  bloody  spectacles  will  then  nc
duce  the  effect  designed ;  for  they  will  cease  t<
wicked.  It  is  with  these  examples  as  with  honour
who  multiplies  titles  and  distinctions  to  excess,
ciates  them,  and  makes  an  injudicious  use  of  one
powerful  and  convenient  springs  of  government
recollect  the  practice  of  the  ancient  Romans  wit
criininals — ^when  we  reflect  on  their  scrupulous


hi  (Of  TO&ncs  AinD  poiLrnr.

BOOK  L spare  the  blood  of  the  citisenfi,— ^e  cannot  fail  to  be  stmek
CHAP.  xm.  ^^  geeing  with  how  little  ceremony  it  is  now-a-days  shed  in  the
generality  of  states. Was  then  the  Roman  republic  but  il
governed  ?  Does  better  order  and  greater  security  reign  among
us? — It  is  not  so  much  the  cruelty  of  the  punishments,  aa
I  a  strict  punctuality  in  enforcing  the  penal  code,  that  keeps

mankind  within  the  bounds  of  duty :  and  if  simple  robbery  is
punished  with  death,  what  further  punishment  is  reserved  to
• check  the  hand  of  the  murderer  ?
{ 172. Ex. The  execution  of  the  laws  belongs  to  the  conductor  of  the
eoation  of gtate :  he  is  intrusted  with  the  care  of  it,  and  is  indispensably
tiio  lAwa. obliged  to  discharge  it  with  wisdom. The  prince  then  is  to
see  that  the  criminal  laws  be  put  in  execution ;  but  he  is  not
to  attempt  in  his  own  person  to  try  the  guilty. Besides  the
j[  88  ]  reasons  we  have  already  alleged  in  treating  of  civil  causes,  and
which  are  of  still  greater  weight  in  regard  to  those  of  a  crimi-
nal nature — ^to  appear  in  the  character  of  a  judge  pronouncing
sentence  on  a  wretched  criminal,  would  ill  become  the  majesty
of  the  sovereign,  who  ought  in  every  thing  to  appear  as  the
father  of  his  people. It  is  a  very  wise  maxim  commonly  re-
ceived in  France,  that  the  prince  ought  to  reserve  to  himself
.all  matters  of  favour,  and  leave  it  to  the  magistrates  to  execute
the  rigour  of  justice. But  then  justice  ought  to  be  exercised
in  his  name,  and  under  his  authority. A  good  prince  will
keep  a  watchful  eye  over  the  conduct  of  the  magistrates  ;  he
will  oblige  them  to  observe  scrupulously  the  established  forms,
and  \rill  himself  take  care  never  to  break  through  them.
Every  sovereign  who  neglects  or  violates  the  forms  of  justice
in  the  prosecution  of  criminals,  makes  large  strides  towards
tyranny;  and  the  liberty  of  the  citizens  is  at  an  end  when  onoe
they  cease  to  be  certain  that  they  cannot  be  condemned,  except
in  pursuance  of  the  laws,  according  to  the  established  forms,
and  by  their  ordinary  judges. The  custom  of  committing  the
trial  of  the  accused  party  to  commissioners  chosen  at  the  plea-
sure of  the  court,  was  the  tyrannical  invention  of  some  minis-
ters who  abused  the  authority  of  their  master.  By  this  irregu-
lar and  odious  procedure,  a  famous  minister  always  succeed-
ed in  destroying  his  enemies. A  good  prince  will  never  give
his  consent  to  such  a  proceeding,  if  he  has  sufficient  discern-
ment to  foresee  the  dreadful  abuse  his  ministers  may  make  of
it. If  the  prince  ought  not  to  pass  sentence  himself — ^for  the
same  reason,  he  ought  not  to  aggravate  the  sentence  passed
by  the  judges.
f  173.  Righi The  very  nature  of  government  requires  that  the  executor
j^  pardpa- ^f  ^j^^  i^^^g  gj^oui^j  ^ave  the  power  of  dispensing  with  them
^'  when  this  may  be  done  without  injury  to  any  person,  and  in

certain  particular  cases  where  the  welfare  of  the  state  requires
an  exception.  Hence  the  right  of  granting  pardons  is  one  of
the  attributes  of  sovereignty.  But,  in  his  whole  conduct,  in
his  severity  as  well  as  his  mercy,  the  sovereign  ought  to  have

160


OF  JUSTICE  ANB  POIJTY,

HO  other  object  in  view  than  the  greater  advanl
ety. A  wise  prince  knows  how  to reconcile
clemency — the  care  of  the  public  safety  with  tha i
is  due  to  the  unfortunate.

The  internal  police  consists  in  the  attention  oi I
and  magistrates  to  preserve  every  thing  in  order
gulations  ought  to  prescribe  whatever  will  best  o
the  public  safety,  utility,  and  convenience ;  and  tl i
invested  with  authority  cannot  be  too  attentive  to  ei
By  a  wise  police,  the  sovereign  accustoms  the  peo i
and  obedience,  and  preserves  peace,  tranquillity,  i I
among  the  citizens. The  magistrates  of  Holland
possess  extraordinary  talents  in  this  respect : — a  b I
prevails  in  their  cities,  and  even  their  establishm i
Indies,  than  in  any  other  places  in  the  known  wor .

Laws  and  the  authority  of  the  magistrates  havin^ I
Btituted  in  the  room  of  private  war,  the  conductors
>ught  not  to  suffer  individuals  to  attempt  to  do  thei
tice,  when  they  can  have  recourse  to  the  magistrates.
— that  species  of  combat,  in  which  the  parties  engage i
of  a  private  quarrel — ^is  a  manifest  disorder,  repug. i
ends  of  civil  society. This  frenzy  was  unknown i
cient  Greeks  and  Romans,  who  raised  to  such  a i
glory  of  their  arms  :  we  received  it  from  barbaro  •
who  knew  no  other  law  but  the  sword. Louis  XI^
the  greatest  praise  for  his  endeavours  to  abolish  1  i
custom.

But  why  was  not  that  prince  made  sensible  that
severe  punishments  were  incapable  of  curing  the  n  \
elling  ? They  did  not  reach  the  source  of  the  evil ;  i
a  ridiculous  prejudice  had  persuaded  all  the  nobilit
tlemen  of  the  army,  that  a  man  who  wears  a  swore
in  honour  to  avenge  with  his  own  hand  the  least  inj  .
received ;  this  is  the  principle  on  which  it  is  proper  t
We  must  destroy  this  prejudice,  or  restrain  it  by  a  :
the  same  nature. While  a.  nobleman,  by  obeying
shall  be  regarded  by  his  equals  as  a  coward  and  as  i
honoured — while  an  officer  in  the  same  case  shall  be
quit  the  service — can  you  hinder  his  fighting  by  th  i
him  with  death  ? On  the  contrary,  he  will  place  a  \  >
bravery  in  doubly  exposing  his  life  in  order  to  wash
affront. And,  certainly,  while  the  prejudice  subsist i
nobleman  or  an  officer  cannot  act  in  opposition  to  it
embittering  the  rest  of  his  life,  I  do  not  know  whetb
justly  punish  him  who  is  forced  to  submit  to  his  ty
whether  he  be  very  guilty  with  respect  to  moralit

(54)  As  to  the  legal  view  of  the  of- Aid.  462 ; and  Bora's J.
fence  of  duelling  in  England,  see  6  East **  Duelling."
Bep.  260 ;  2  East  Bep.  581 ;  2  Bam.  &

0


84  OF  JUSTICE  AND POLITY.


BOOK  t,  worldly  honour,  be  it  as  false  and  chimerical  as  you  please,  is
CHAP.  xm.  ^  j^jj^  ^  substantial  and  necessary  possession,  since  witbout
it  he  can  neither  live  with  his  equals,  nor  exercise  a  profession
that  is  often  his  only  resource.  When,  therefore,  any  insolent
fellow  would  unjustly  ravish  from  him  that  chimera  so  esteem-
.  ed  and  so  necessary,  why  may  he  not  defend  it  as  he  would  his
life  and  property  against  a  robber  ?  As  the  state  does  not
permit  an  individual  to  pursue  with  arms  in  his  hand  the  usur-
per of  his  property,  because  he  may  obtain  justice  from  the
magistrate — so,  if  the  sovereign  will  not  allow  him  to  draw  his
sword  against  the  man  from  whom  he  has  received  an  insult,
he  ought  necessarily  to  take  such  measures  that  the  patience
and  obedience  of  the  citizen  who  has  been  insulted  shall  not
prove  prejudicial  to  him.  Society  cannot  deprive  man  of  his
natural  right  of  making  war  against  an  aggressor,  without  fur-
nishing him  with  some  other  means  of  securing  himself  from
the  evil  his  enemy  would  do  him.  On  all  those  occasions
where  the  public  authority  cannot  lend  us  its  assistance,  we
resume  our  original  and  natural  right  of  self-defence.  Thus
a  traveller  may,  without  hesitation,  kill  the  robber  who  at-
I  85  ]  tacks  him  on  the  highway ;  because  it  would,  at  that  moment,
be  in  vain  for  him  to  implore  the  protection  of  the  laws  and
of  the  magistrate.  Thus  a  chaste  virgin  would  be  praised  for
taking  away  the  life  of  a  brutal  ravisher  who  attempted  to
force  her  to  his  desires.

Till  men  have  got  rid  of  this  Gothic  idea,  that  honour  obliges
them,  even  in  contempt  of  the  laws,  to  avenge  their  per-
sonal injuries  with  their  own  hands,  the  most  effectual  method
of  putting  a  stop  to  the  effects  of  this  prejudice  would  perhaps
be  to  make  a  total  distinction  between  the  offended  and  the
aggressor — ^to  pardon  the  former  without  difficulty,  when  it
appears  that  his  honour  has  been  really  attacked — and  to  ex-
ercise justice  without  mercy  on  the  party  who  has  committed
the  outrage.  And  as  to  those  who  draw  the  sword  for  trifles
and  punctilios,  for  little  piques,  or  railleries  in  which  honour
is  not  concerned,  I  would  have  them  severely  punished.  By
this  means  a  restraint  would  be  put  on  those  peevish  and  in-
solent folks  who  often  reduce  even  the  moderate  men  to  a
necessity  of  chastising  them.  Every  one  would  be  on  his
guard,  to  avoid  being  considered  as  the  aggressor ;  and  with
a  view  to  gain  the  advantage  of  engaging  in  duel  (if  un-
avoidable) without  incurring  the  penalties  of  the  law,  both
parties  would  curb  their  passions;  by  which  means  the
quarrel  would  fall  of  itself,  and  be  attended  with  no  con-
sequences. It  frequently  happens  that  a  bully  is  at  bottom
a  coward ;  he  gives  himself  haughty  airs,  and  offers  insult,  in
hopes  that  the  rigour  of  the  law  will  oblige  people  to  put  up
with  his  insolence.  And  what  is  the  consequence  ? — A  min
cf  spirit  will  run  every  risk,  rather  than  submit  to  be  insult-
ed :  the  aggressor  dares  not  recede :  and  a  combat  ensues,

168


OF  JUSTICE  AND  POLITY.  85

which  would  not  hare  taken  place,  if  the  latter  could  have ^^^  ^
once  imagined  that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  other  ^^^'  ""*
from  chastising  him  for  his  presumption — the  ^/fiended  per-
son being  acquitted  by  the  same  law  that  condemns  the  ag-
gressor.

To  this  first  law,  whose  efficacy  would,  I  doubt  not,  be  soon  .
proved  by  experience,  it  would  be  proper  to  add  the  following
regulations : — 1.  Since  it  is  an  established  custom  that  the
nobility  and  military  men  should  appear  armed,  even  in  time
of  peace,  care  should  be  taken  to  enforce  a  rigid  observance  of
the  laws  which  allow  the  privilege  of  wearing  swords  to  these
two  orders  of  men  only.  2.  It  would  be  proper  to  establish
a  particular  court,  to  determine,  in  a  summary  manner,  all
affairs  of  honour  between  persons  of  these  two  orders.  The
mai*shals'  court  in  France  is  in  possession  of  this  power ;  and
it  might  be  invested  with  it  in  a  more  formal  inanner  and  to
a  greater  extent.  The -governors  of  provinces  and  strong
places,  with  their  general  officers — ^the  colonels  and  captains  of
each  regiment — might,  in  this  particular,  act  as  deputies  to
the  marshals.  These  courts,  each  in  his  own  department,
should  alone  confer  the  right  of  wearing  a  sword.  Every  no-
bleman at  sixteen  or  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  every  soldier
at  his  entrance  into  the  regiment,  should  be  obliged  to  appear
before  the  court  to  receive  the  sword.  3.  On  its  being  there  f  86  ]
delivered  to  him,  he  should  be  informed  that  it  is  intrusted  to
him  only  for  the  defence  of  his  country ;  and  care  might  be
taken  to  inspire  him  with  true  ideas  of  honour.  4.  It  appears
to  me  of  great  importance  to  establish,  for  different  cases,  pun-
ishments of  a  different  nature.  Whoever  should  so  far  forget
himself,  as,  either  by  word  or  deed,  to  insult  a  man  who  wears
a  sword,  might  be  degraded  from  the  rank  of  nobility,  deprived
of  the  privilege  of  carrying  arms,  and  subjected  to  corporal
punishment — even  the  punishment  of  death,  according  to  the
grossness  of  the  insult :  and,  as  I  before  observed,  no  favour
should  be  shown  to  the  offender  in  case  a  duel  was  the  conse-"
quence,  while  at  the  same  time  the  other  party  should  stand
fully  acquitted.  Those  who  fight  on  slight  occasions,  I  would
not  have  condemned  to  death,  unless  in  such  cases  where  the
author  of  the  quarrel — ^he,  I  mean,  who  carried  it  so  far  as  to
draw  his  sword,  or  to  give  the  challenge — has  killed  his  ad-
versary.- People  hope  to  escape  punishment  when  it  is  too
severe ;  and,  besides,  a  capital  punishment  in  such  cases  is  not
considered  as  infamous.  But  let  them  be  ignominiously  de-
graded from  the  rank  of  nobility  and  the  use  of  arras,  and  for
ever  deprived  of  the  right  of  wearing  a  sword,  without  the  least
nope  of  pardon :  this  would  be  the  most  proper  method  to  re-
strain men  of  spirit,  provided  that  due  care  was  taken  to  make
a  distinction  betw.een  different  offenders,  according  to  *he  de-
gree of  the  offence.  As  to  persons  below  the  rank  of  nobility,
and  who  do  not  belong  to  die  army,  their  quarrels  should  be

159


THIRD  OBJECT  OF  A  GOOD GOTERNMiOrr,  DEFENCE.

BOOK  I.  left  to  the  cognisance  of  the  ordinary  courts,  which  in  case  of
— — '-  bloodshed  should  punish  the  oflfenders  according  to  the  com-
mon laws  against  violence  and  murder.  It  should  be  the  sam<^^
with  respect  to  any  quarrel  that  might  arise  between  a  com-
moner and  a  man  entitled  to  carry  arms :  it  is  the  business  of
the  ordinary  magistrate  to  preserve  order  and  peace  between
*  those  two  classes  of  men,  who  cannot  have  any  points  of  hon-
our to  settle  the  one  with  the  other.  To  protect  the  people
against  the  violence  of  those  who  wear  the  sword,  and  to
punish  the  former  severely  if  they  should  dare  to  insult  the
latter,  should  further  be,  as  it  is  at  present,  the  business  of
the  magistrate.

I  am  sanguine  enough  to  believe  that  these  regulations,  and
this  method  of  proceeding,  if  strictly  adhered  to,  would  extir-

Eate  that  monster,  duelling,  which  the  most  severe  laws  have
een  unable  tor  restrain.  They  go  to  the  source  of  the  evil,  by
preventing  quarrels,  and  oppose  a  lively  sensation  of  true  and
real  honour  to  that  false  and  punctilious  honour  which  occa-
sions the  spilling  of  so  much  blood.  It  would  be  worthy  a
great  monarch  to  make  a  trial  of  it :  its  success  would  immor-
talize his  name :  and  by  the  baire  attempt  he  would  merit  the
love  and  gratitude  of  his  people.


[  87  ]  CHAP.  XIV.

CHAP.  xiT,  THE THIRD OBJECT OF  A  GOOD GOVERNMENT, — ^TO FORTIFT

ITSELF  AGAINST  EXTERNAL  ATTACKS.

1 177.  A  na-  "![VE  have  treated  at  large  of  what  relates  to  the  felicity  of
to°f^^v*  iisition:  the  subject  is  equally  copious  and  complicated.
Beif  against  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  proceed  to  a  third  division  of  the  duties  which  a
external  at-  nation  owes  to  itself, — a  third  object  of  good  government.  One
tacks.  of  the  ends  of  political  society  is  to  defend  itself  with  its  com-

bined strength  against  all  external  insult  or  violence  (§  15).
If  the  society  is  not  in  a  condition  to  repulse  an  aggressor,  it
is  very  imperfect, — it  is  unequal  to  the  principal  object  of  its
destination,  and  cannot  long  subsist. The  nation  ought  to
put  itself  in  such  a  state  as  to  be  able  to  repel  and  humble  an
unjust  enemy :  this  is  an  important  duty,  which  the  care  of
its  own  perfection,  and  even  of  its  preservation,  imposes  both
on  the  state  and  its  conductor.
{ 178.  Na- It  is  its  strength  alone  that  can  enable  a  nation  to  repulse
tionai all  aggressors,  to  secure  its  rights,  and  render  itself  every-
itrength. ^i^g^e  respectable. It  is  called  upon  by  every  possible  motive
to  neglect  no  circumstance  that  can  tend  to  place  it  in  thin
happy  situation. The  strength  of  a  state  consists  in  three
things, — ^the  number  of  the  citizens,  their  military  virtues,  and

160


mXBJ)  OB^CT  OF  A  GOOD  aOYEHNMENT, DBFBNCE*

Iheir  riches. 15  ^der  this  last  article  we  may  comprehend  fort- b
resses,  artillery,  arms,  horses,  ammunition,  and,  in  general,  - —
all  that  immense  apparatus  at  present  necessary  in  war,  since
they  can  all  be  procured  with  money.

To  increase  the  number  of  the  citizens  as  far  as  it  is  pos-i  ^^
sible  or  convenient,  is  then  one  of  the  first  objects  that  claim  ^^^^
the  attentive  care  of  the  state  or  its  conductor :  and  this  will  be  /55)
successfully  effected  by  complying  with  the  obligation  to  procure
the  country  a  plenty  of  the  necessaries  of  life, — ^by  enabling
the  people  to  support  their  families  with  the  fruits  of  their
labour, — by  giving  proper  directions  that  the  poorer  classes,
and  especially  the  husbandmen,  be  not  harassed  and  oppressed
by  the  levying  of  taxes, — ^by  governing  with  mildness,  and
in  a  manner  which,  instead  of  disgusting  aiid  dispersing  the
present  subjects  of  the  state,  shall  rather  attract  new  ones, —
and,  finally,  by  encouraging marriage, after the example
of  the  Romans. That  nation,  so  attentive  to  every  thing
capable of increasing and supporting their power,  made
wise  laws  against  celibacy  (as  we  have  already  observed  in
§  149),  and  granted  privileges  {ind  exemptions  to  married
men,  particularly  to  those  who  hp,d  numerous  families  :  laws
that  were  equally  wise  and  just,  since  a  eitizen  who  rears [  i
subjects  for  the  state  has  a  right  to  expect  more  favour  from
it  than  the  man  who  chooses  to  live  for  himself  alone.*

Every  thing  tending  to  depopulate  a  country  is  a  defect  in
a  state  not  overstocked  with  inhabitants.  We  have  already
spoken  of  convents  and  the  celibacy  of  priests.  It  is  strange
that  establishments  so  directly  repugnant  to  the  duties  of  a
man  and  citizen,  as  well  as  to  the  advantage  and  safety  of
society,  should  have  found  such  favour,  and  that  princes,  in-
stead of  opposing  them,  as  it  was  their  duty  to  do,  should  have
protected  and  enriched  them.  A  system  of  policy,  that  dex-
trously  took  advantage  of  superstition  to  extend  its  own  power,
led  princes  and  subjects  astray,  caused  them  to  mistake  their
real  duties,  and  blinded  sovereigns  even  with  respect  to  their
own  interest.  Experience  seems  at  length  to  have  opened  the
eyes  of  nations  and  their  conductors  ;  the  pope  himself  (let  us
mention  it  to  the  honour  of  Benedict  XIV.)  endeavors  grad-


(55)  This  subject,  and  the  necessity  and  in  favour  of  celibacy. "Videtur

for  endeavouring  to  discourage  tbe  in-  esse matrimonii et  stupri differentia,

crease  of  population,  have, in recent  (says TertuUian) : sed utrobique est

years, occasioned the publication of  communicatio.*!- Ergo,  inquis,  et  primas

numerous  works. See  them  commented  nuptios  damnas? Nee  immerito,  quo«

upon,  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  1,  2,  niam  et  ipsco  constant  ex  eo  quod  est

«fcc.  stuprum.'' Exhort.  Gastit. And  thus

*  It  is  impossible  to  suppress  the  Jerome :  **  Hanc  tantnm  esse  differenti-

emotions  of  indignation  that  arise  on  am inter uxorem et scortum,  quod

reading  what  some  of  the  fathers  of  the  tolerabiliu  • sit uni esse prostitutam

church  have  written  against  marriage,  quam  pluribus."


-f"  Contaminatio. — ^Edit.
SI .  oS  161


6s  THIED OBJECT  OF  A  GOOD  QOVBRNMEITT,  DEFBNCfi.

BOOK  I.  nally  to  reform  bo  palpable  an  abuse ;  by  his  orders,  none  of
jHAP.  xiy.  ^^{g  dominipns  are  any  longer  permitted  to  take  the  vow  of
celibacy  before  they  are  twenty-five  years  of  age-  That  wise
pontiflF  gives  the  sovereigns  of  his  communion  a  salutary  ex-
ample ;  he  invites  them  to  attend  at  length  to  the  safety  of
their  states, — ^to  narrow  at  least,  if  they  cannot  entirely  close
up,  the  avenues  of  that  sink  that  drains  their  dominions-  Take
a  view  of  Germany ;  and  there,  in  countries  which  are  in  all
other  respects  upon  an  equal  footing,  you  will  see  the  protest-
ant  states  twice  as  populous  as  the  catholic  ones.  Compare
the  desert  state  of  Spain  with  that  of  England,  teeming  with
inhabitants:  survey  many  fine  provinces,  even  in  France,
destitute  of  hands  to  till  the  soil ;  and  then  tell  me,  whether
the  many  thousands  of  both  sexes,  who  are  now  locked  up  in
convents,  would  not  serve  God  and  their  country  infinitely
better  by  peopling  those  fertile  plains  with  useful  cultivators  ?
It  is  true,  indeed,  th^t  the  catholic  cantons  of  Switzerland  are
nevertheless  very  populous :  but  this  is  owing  to  a  profound
peace,  and  the  nature  of  the  government,  which  abundantly
repair  the  losses  occasioned  by  convents-  Jjiberty  is  able  to
remedy  the  greatest  evils ;  it  is  the  soul  of  a  state,  and  was
with  great  justice  called  by  the  Romans  alma  Libertas.
( 180.  Vft-  A  cowardly  and  undisciplined  multitude  are  incapable  of  re-
lour.  pulsing  a  warlike  enemy :  the  strength  of  the  st^te  consists

less  in  the  number  than  the  military  virtues  of  its  citizens.  Va-
lour, that  heroic  virtue  which  makes  us  undauntedly  encounter
[  89  ]  danger  in  defence  of  our  country,  is  the  firmest  support  of  the
state :  it  renders  it  formidable  to  its  enemies,  and  often  even
saves  it  the  trouble  of  defending  itself.  A  state  whose  repu-
tation in  this  respect  is  once  well  established,  will  be  seldom
attacked,  if  it  does  not  provoke  other  states  by  its  enterprises.
For  above  two  centuries  the  Swiss  have  enjoyed  a  profound
peace,  while  the  din  of  arms  resounded  all  around  them,  and
the  rest  of  Europe  was  desolated  by  the  ravages  of  war.  Na-
ture gives  the  foundation  of  valour ;  but  various  causes  may
animate  it,  weaken  it,  and  even  destroy  it.  A  nation  ougbt
then  to  seek  after  and  cultivate  a  virtue  so  useful ;  and  a
prudent  sovereign  will  take  all  possible  measures  to  inspire
his  subjects  with  it : — his  wisdom  will  point  out  to  him  the
means.  It  is  this  generous  flame  that  animates  the  French
nobility :  fired  with  a  love  of  glory  and  of  their  country,  they
fly  to  battle,  and  cheerfully  spill  their  blood  in  the  field  of
honour.  To  what  an  extent  would  they  not  carry  their  con-
quests, if  that  kingdom  were  surrounded  by  nations  less  war-
like !  The  Briton,  generous  and  intrepid,  resembles  a  lion
in  combat ;  and,  in  general,  the  nations  of  Europe  surpass  in
bravery  all  the  other  people  upon  earth.
J 181.  But  valour  alone  is  not  always  successful  in  war :  constant

^ther  mill-  succoss  can  only  be  obtained  by  an  assemblage  of  all  the  ini-
wry  virtaoa.  litary  virtucs. History  shows  us  the  importance  of  ability

162


THIRD  OBJECT  OF  A  OOOD  GOVERNMENT,  DEFENCE.  89

in  the  commanderB,  of  military  discipline,  frugality,  bodily  book  i.
strength,  dexterity,  and  being  inured  to  fatigue  and  labour.  .^^^'  ^^~
These  are  so  many  distinct  branches  which  a  nation  ought
carefully  to  cultivate.  It  was  the  assemblage  of  all  these
that  raised  so  high  the  glory  of  the  Romans,  and  rendered
them  the  masters  of  the  world.  It  were  a  mistake  to  suppose
that  valour  alone  produced  those  illustrious  exploits  of  the
ancient  Swiss — ^the  victories  of  Morgarten,  Sempach,  Laupen,
Morat,  and  many  others.  The.  Swiss  not  only  fought  with
intrepidity :  they  studied  the  art  of  war, — they  inured  them-
selves to  its  toils, — they  accustomed  themselves  to  the  prac-
tice of  all  its  manoeuvres, — and  their  very  love  of  liberty  made
them  submit  to  a  discipline  which  could  alone  secure  to  them
that  treasure,  and  save  their  country.  Their  troops  were  no
less  celebrated  for  their  discipline  than  their  bravery.  Me-
zeray,  after  having  given  an  account  of  the  behaviour  of  the
Swiss  at  the  battle  of  Dreux,  adds  these  remarkable  words :
"in  the  opinion  of  all  the  officers  of  both  sides  who  were  pre-
sent, the  Swiss,  in  that  battle,  under  every  trial,  against  in-
fantry and  cavalry,  against  French  and  against  Germans,
gained  the  palm  for  military  discipline,  and  acquired  the  re-
putation of  being  the  best  infantry  in  the  world.  **

Finally,  the  wealth  of  a  nation  constitutes  a  considerable  ;  isi.
part  of  its  power,  especially  in  modern  times,  when  war  re-  Richei.
quires  such  immense  expenses.  It  is  not  simply  in  the  re-
venues of  the  sovereign,  or  the  public  treasure,  that  the  riches
of  a  nation  consist :  its  opulence  is  also  rated  from  the  wealth  [  90  ]
of  individuals.  We  commonly  call  a  nation,  rich,  when  it
contains  a  great  number  of  citizens  in  easy  and  affluent  cir-
cumstances. The  wealth  of  private  persons  really  increases
the  strength  of  the  nation ;  since  they  are  capable  of  contri-
buting large  sums  towards  supplying  the  necessities  of  the
state,  and  that,  in  a  case  of  extremity,  the  sovereign  may  even
employ  all  the  riches  of  his  subjects  in  the  defence,  and  for
the  safety  of  the  state,  in  virtue  of  the  supreme  command
with  which  he  is  invested,  as  we  shall  hereafter  show.  The
nation,  then,  ought  to  endeavour  to  acquire  those  public  and
private  riches  tnat  are  of  such  use  to  it :  and  this  is  a  new
reason  for  encouraging  a  commerce  with  other  nations,  which
is  the  source  from  whence  they  flow, — and  a  new  motive  for
the  sovereign  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  over  the  diflFerent
branches  of  foreign  trade  carried  on  by  his  subjects,  in  order
that  he  may  preserve  and  protect  the  profitable  branches,
and  cut  off  those  that  occasion  the  exportation  of  gold  and
silver.

It  is  requisite  that  the  state  should  possess  an  income  pro-  g  183.  Pnb^
portionate  to  its  necessary  expenditures.  That  income  may  ^<^  revenue
be  supplied  by  various  means, — ^by  lands  reserved  for  that  ""^  *"**■•

•  BiHoty  of  France,  yoL  ii.  p.  888.

168


90  OF  THE  eLORT  OF  A  NATIOV.

BOOK  I. purpose,  by  contributions,  taxes  of  different  kinds,  &c. — but
CHAP,  xir.  ^f  ^jjjg  subject  we  shall  treat  in  another  place.
;  184. The We  have  here  summed  up  the  principal  ingredients  diat
nation  ought  constitute  that  strength  which  a  nation  ought  to  augment  and
^1^^  j'J^ improve. Can  it  be  necessary  to  add  the  observation,  that
power  by  ii-  ^^^^  desirable  object  is  not  to  be  pursued  by  any  other  me-
legai  meant,  thods  than  such  as  are  just  and  innocent  ? A  laudable  end
is  not  sufficient  to  sanctify  the  means ;  for  these  ought  to  be
in  their  own  nature  lawful. The  law  of  nature  cannot  con-
tradict itself:  if  it  forbids  an  action  as  unjust  or  dishonest  in
its  own  nature,  it  can  never  permit  it  for  any  purpose  what^
ever. And  therefore  in  those  cases  where  that  object,  in
itself  so  valuable  and  so  praiseworthy,  cannot  be  attained
without  employing  unlawful  means,  it  ought  to  be  considered
as  unattainable,  and  consequently  be  relinquished. Thus,  we
shall  show,  in  treating  of  the  just  causes  of  war,  that  a  nation
is  not  allowed  to  attack  another  with  a  view  to  aggrandize
itself  by  subduing  and  giving  law  to  the  latter. This  is  just
the  same  as  if  a  private  person  should  attempt  to  enrich  him-
self by  seizing  his  neighbour's  property.
{ 186.  Pow- The  power  of  a  nation  is  relative,  and  ought  to  be  measured
w  ia  but  re-  j^y  ^j^^^^  ^f  j^  neighbours,  or  of  all  the  nations  from  whom  it
has  any  thing  to  fear. The  state  is  sufficiently  powerful  when
it  is  capable  of  causing  itself  to  be  respected,  and  of  repelling
whoever  would  attack  it. It  may  be  placed  in  this  happy
situation,  either  by  keeping  up  its  own  strength  equal  or  even
superior  to  that  of  its  neighbours,  or  by  preventing  their
rising  to  a  predominant  and  formidable  power. But  we  can-
not show  here  in  what  cases  and  by  what  means  a  state  may
[  91  ] justly  set  bounds  to  the  power  of  another. It  is  necessary,
first,  to  explain  the  duties  of  a  nation  towards  others,  in  order
to  combine  them afterwards  with  its  duties  towards  itself.
For  the  present,  we  shall  only  observe,  that  a  nation,  while
it  obeys  the  dictates  of  prudence  and  wise  policy  in  this  in-
stance, ought  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  maxims  of  justice.


CHAP.  XV.

CHAP.  X7. '  OF  THE  GLORY  OF  A  NATIOK.

{ 18«.  Ad-  THE  glory  of  a  nation  is  intimately  connected  with  its
rantagea  of  pQ^ej.^  and  indeed  forms  a  considerable  part  of  it.  It  is  this
^^^'  brilliant  advantage  that  procures  it  the  esteem  of  other  na
tions,  and  renders  it  respectable  to  its  neighbours.  A  nation
whose  reputation  is  well  established — especially  one  whoe«
glory  is  illustrious — ^is  courted  by  all  sovereigns ;  they  desire
its  friendship,  and  are  afraid  of  offending  it. Its  friends,  and

164


OF  THE  GLOUT  OF  A  WATIOK.  91


those  who  wish  to  become  so,  favour  its  enterprises; and Jf2"^J;
those  who  envy  its  prosperity  are  afraid  to  show  their  ill-wili.  -


ItHAP. XT.


It  is,  then,  of  great  advantage  to  a  nation  to  establish  its ;  isr.  Duty
reputation  and  glory ;  hence,  this  becomes  one  of  the  most «'  ^o  »»-
important  of  the  duties  it  owes  to  itself. True  glory  consists  ^^
in  the  favourable opinion  of  men  of  wisdom and  discern-
ment ;  it  is  acquired  by  the  virtues  or  good  qualities  of  the
head  and  the  heart,  and  by  great  actions,  which  are  the
fruits  of  those  virtues. A  nation  may  have  a  two-fold  claim  How  true
to  it ; — ^first,  by  what  it  does  in  its  national  character,  by  the  gi^«7  "  »«-
conduct  of  those  who  have  the  administration  of  its  affairs,  v^^
and  are  invested  with  its  authority  and  government;  and,
secondly,  by  the  merit  of  the  individuals  of  whom  the  nation
is  composed.

A  prince,  a  sovereign  of  whatever  kind,  being  bound  to  J 188.  I>uty
exert  every  effort  for  the  good  of  the  nation,  is  doubtless  <>^.*^»
obliged  to  extend  its  glory  as  far  as  lies  in  his  power.  We  p"^*
have  seen  that  his  duty  is  to  labour  after  the  perfection  of
the  state,  and  of  the  people  who  are  subject  to  him ;  by  that
means  he  will  make  them  merit  a  good  reputation  and  glory.
He  ought  always  to  have  this  object  in  view,  in  every  thing
■le  undertakes,  and  in  the  use  he  makes  of  his  power*  Let
him,  in  all  his  actions,  display  justice,  moderation,  and  great-
ness of  soul,  and  he  will  thus  acquire  for  himself  and  his  peo-
ple a  name  respected  by  the  universe,  and  not  less  useful  than
glorious.  The  glory  of  Henry  IV.  saved  France.  In  the
deplorable  state  in  which  he  found  affairs,  his  virtues  gave
animation  to  the  loyal  part  of  his  subjects,  and  encouraged
foreign  nations  to  lend  him  their  assistance,  and  to  enter  into
an  alliance  with  him  against  the  ambitious  Spaniards.  In  his
circumstances,  a  weak  prince  of  little  estimation  would  have
been  abandoned  by  all  the  world ;  people  would  have  been
afraid  of  being  involved  in  his  ruin.

Besides  the  virtues  which  constitute  the  glory  of  princes  as  [  92
well  as  of  private  persons,  there  is  a  dignity  and  decorum
that  particularly  belong  to  the  supreme  rank,  and  which  a
sovereign  ought  to  observe  with  the  greatest  care.  He  can-
not neglect  them  without  degrading  himself,  and  casting  a
stain  upon  the  state.  Every  thing  that  emanates  from  the
throne  ought  to  bear  the  character  of  purity,  nobleness,  and
greatness.  What  an  idea  do  we  conceive  of  a  people,  when
we  see  their  sovereign  display,  in  his  public  acts,  a  meannesTs
of  sentiment  by  which  a  private  person  would  think  himself
disgraced  !  All  the  majesty  of  the  nation  resides  in  the  per-
son of  the  prince ;  what,  then,  must  become  of  it,  if  he  pros-
titutes it,  or  suffers  it  to  be  prostituted  by  those  who  speak
and  act  in  his  name  7  The  minister  who  puts  into  his  mas-
ter's mouth  a  language  unworthy  of  him,  deserves  to  be
turned  out  of  office  with  every  mark  of  ignominy.

The  reputation  of  individuals  is,  by  a  common  and  natural

166


92  *  OF  THE  aLORT  OF  A  NATIOIT.


BOOK  I.  mode  of  speaking  and  thinking,  made  to  reflect  on  the  whoI«
CHAP.  lY.  nation.  In  general,  we  attribute  a  yirtue  or  a  vice  to  a  peo*
}  189.  Dnty  pig^  when  that  vice  or  that  virtue  is  frequentlj  observed  among
lena.*^'  "  ^^^^'  ^^  say  that  a  nation  is  warlikt,  when  it  produces  a
great  number  of  brave  warriors ;  that  it  is  learned,  when
there  are  many  learned  men  among  the  citizens ;  and  that  it
excels  in  the  arts,  when  it  produces  many  able  artists.  On
the  other  hand,  we  call  it  cowardly,  lazy,  or  stupid,  when
men  of  those  characters  are  more  numerous  there  than  else-
where. The  citizens,  being  obliged  to  labour  with  all  their
might  to  promote  the  welfare  and  advantage  of  their  coantry,
not  only  owe  to  themselves  the  care  of  deserving  a  good  re-
putation, but  they  also  owe  it  to  the  nation,  whose  glory  is  so
liable  to  be  influenced  by  theirs.  Bacon,  Neirton,  DeBcartea,
Leibnitz,  and  Bernouilli,  have  each  done  honour  to  his  native
country,  and  essentially  benefited  it  by  the  glory  he  acquired.
Great  ministers,  and  great  generals — an  Oxenstiem,  a  Ta-
renne,  a  Marlborough,  a  Ruyter — serve  their  country  in  a
double  capacity,  both  by  their  actions  and  by  their  glory.
On  the  other  hand,  the  fear  of  reflecting  a  disgrace  on  hia
country  will  furnish  the  good  citizen  with  a  new  motive  for
abstaining  from  every  dishonourable  action.  And  the  prince
ought  not  to  suffer  his  subjects  to  give  themselves  up  to  vices
capable  of  bringing  infamy  on  the  nation,  or  even  of  simply
tarnishing  the  brightness  of  its  glory ;  he  has  a  right  to  sup-
press and  to  punish  scandalous  enormities,  which  do  a  real
injury  to  the  state.
{ 190.  Ex-  The  example  of  the  Swiss  is  very  capable  of  showing  how
ample  of  advantageous  glory  may  prove  to  a  nation.  (56)  The  high
the  Swiss,  reputation  they  have  acquired  for  their  valour,  and  which
they  still  gloriously  support,  has  preserved  them  in  peace  for
above  two  centuries,  and  rendered  all  the  powers  of  Europe
desirous  of  their  assistance.  Louis  XI.,  while  dauphin,  waa
witness  of  the  prodigies  of  valour  they  performed  at  the
[  93  ]  battle  of  St.  Jacques,  near  Basle,  and  he  immediately  formed
the  design  of  closely  attaching  to  his  interest  so  intrepid  a
nation.*  The  twelve  hundred  gallant  heroes,  who  on  this
occasion  attacked  an  army  of  between  fifty  and  sixty  thou-
sand veteran  troops,  first  defeated  the  vanguard  of  the  Ar-
magnacs,  which  was  eighteen  thousand  strong ;  afterwards,
rashly  engaging  the  main  body  of  the  army,  they  perished
almost  to  a  man,  without  being  able  to  complete  their  victory-t
But,  besides their terrifying the enemy,  and preserving

(66)  This  observation  properly  refers  considered by their connbymen u

to  antCf  §  124.  p.  54.  cowards  that  had  preferred a life  of

*  See  the  3femoira  of  Cominea,  shame  to  the  honour  of  dying  for  their

f  Of  this  small  army,  «  eleven  hun-  country." History  of  the  Helvetic  O*^

dred  and  fifty-eight  were  counted  dead  federacy,  by  M,  de  WajtUvilU,  toL  L  |k

on  the  field,  and  thirty-two  wounded.  250. — Tschudi,  p.  4^5.
Twelve  men  only  escaped,  who  were
166


OF  THE  PROTECTION  SOUGHT  BY  A  NATION.  M

Switzerland  from  a  ruinous  inrasion,  they  rendered  her  essen-  book  l
tial  service  by  the  glory  they  acquired  for  her  arms.  A  re-  >^^5f£iiElL.
putation  for  an  inviolable  fidelity  is  no  less  advantageous  to
that  nation ;  and  they  have  at  all  times  been  jealous  of  pre-
serving it.  The  canton  of  Zug  punished  with  death  that  un-
worthy soldier  who  betrayed  the  confidence  of  the  duke  of
Milan  by  discovering  that  prince  to  the  French,  when,  to
escape  them,  he  had  disguised  himself  in  the  habit  of  the
Swiss,  and  placed  himself  in  their  ranks  as  they  were  march-
ing out  of  No  vara.*

Since  the  glory  of  a  nation  is  a  real  and  substantial  ad-  ?  i^i- At-
vantage,  she  has  a  right  to  defend  it,  as  well  as  her  other  ad-  ^^'^^f*^^
vantages. He  who  attacks  her  glory  does  her  an  injury ;  and^j^^J^^^ig^^
she  has  a  right  to  exact  of  him,  even  by  force  of  arms,  a  just  ing  her  an
reparation. We  cannot,  then,  condemn  those  measures,  some-  injury.
times  taken  by  sovereigns  to  support  or  avenge  the  dignity
of  their  crown. They  are  equally  just  and  necessary. If,
when  they  do  not  proceed  from  too  lofty  pretensions,  we  at-
tribute them  to  a  vain  pride,  we  only  betray  the  grossest  igno-
rance of  the  art  of  reigning :  and  despise  one  of  the  firmest
supports  of  the  greatness  and  safety  of  a  state.


CHAP.  XVI.


CHAP.  XTI.


OF  THE  PROTECTION  SOUGHT  BY  A  NATION,  AND  ITS VOLUN-
TARY SUBMISSION  TO  A  FOREIGN POWER.

When  a  nation  is  not  capable  of  preserving  herself  from  §  192. P-o.
insult  and  oppression,  she  may  procure  the  protection  of  a  tection.
more  powerful  state. If  she  obtains  this  by  only  engaging
to  perform  certain  articles,  as  to  pay  a  tribute  in.  return  for
the  safety  obtained, — to  furnish  her  protector  with  troops, —
and  to  embark  in  all  his  wars  as  a  joint  concern, — but  still [  94  ]
reserving  to  herself  the  right  of  administering  her  own  govem-
luent  at  pleasure, — it  is  a  simple  treaty  of  protection,  that
does  not  all  derogate  from  her  sovereignty,  and  diflFers  not
from  the  ordinary  treaties  of  alliance,  otherwise  than  as  it
creates  a  difference  in  the  dignity  of  the  contracting  parties.

But  this  matter  is  sometimes  carried  still  farther :  and,  al-  ?  i^^. Vo-
though  a  nation  is  under  an  obligation  to  preserve  with  the  ^^^^^^  ^^
utmost  care  the  liberty  and  independence  it  inherits  from  one  nation
nature,  yet  when  it  has  not  suflBcient  strength  of  itself,  and  to  another,
feels  itself  unable  to  resist  its  enemies,  it  may  lawfully  sub-
ject itself  to  a  more  powerful  nation  on  certain  conditions

*  Vogers Historicflkl and poliUoal France  and  the  Thirteen  Cantons,  p.
Treatise of the Alliancea between 15, 76.

w


■ooK  I. agreed  to  bj  both  parties :  aod.  the  compact  or  treaty  of  Buh-

.£5i£i31L  mission  will  thenceforward  be  the  measure  and  rule  of  the
rights  of  each.  For,  since  the  people  who  enter  into  Bubjeo-
tloQ  resign  a  right  which  naturally  belongs  to  them,  and  trans-
fer it  to  the  other  nation,  they  are  perfectly  at  liberty  to  an-
nex what  conditions  they  please  to  this  transfer ;  and  the
other  party,  by  accepting  their  submisBion  on  this  footing,
engages  to  observe  religiously  all  the  clauses  of  the  treaty,
i  I9i.  8<-  This  Bubmiasion  may  be  varied  to  infinity,  according  to  the
Teril  kinOi  ^jU  of  the  Contracting  parties :  it  may  either  leave  the  infe-
of  labnia-  ^j^jj.  n^tJQQ  ^  p(,rt  of  the  sovereignty,  restraining  it  only  in  cer-
tain respects,  or  it  may  totally  abolish  it,  so  that  the  superior
nation  shall  become  the  sovereign  of  the  other, — or,  finally,
the  lesser  nation  may  be  incorporated  with  the  greater,  Id
order  thenceforward  to  form  with  it  but  one  and  the  same
Btate :  and  then  the  citizens  of  the  former  will  have  the  same
privileges  as  those  with  whom  they  are  united.  The  Roman
history  furnishes  examples  of  each  of  these  three  kinds  of  sub-
mission,— 1.  The  allies  of  the  Roman  people,  eucb  as. the  in-
habitants of  Latium  were  for  a  long  time,  who,  in  several  re-
spects, depended  on  Rome,  but,  in  all  others,  were  governed
according  to  their  own  laws,  and  by  their  own  magistrates ; —

2.  The  countries  reduced  to  Roman  provinces,  as  Capua,
whose  inhabitants  submitted  absolutely  to  the  Romans ; — *

3.  The  nations  to  which  Rome  granted  the  freedom  of  the
city.  In  after  times  the  emperors  granted  that  privilege  to
ill  the  nations  subject  to  the  empire^  and  thus  transformed
all  their  subjects  into  citizens.

( \u.  Rip;iii In  the  case  of  a  real  subjection  to  a  foreign  power,  the

of  iha  citi- citizens  who  do  not  approve  this  change  are  not  obliged  to

ae  nkUaD ^'t''™"'  '^  ''-  * — ^^^7  ougbt  to  be  allowed  to  sell  their  effects

tubmiti  b>  a  ^"id  retire  elsewhere. For,  my  having  entered  into  a  society

foreign  pow-  docs  not  oblige  mc  to  follow  its  fate,  when  it  dissolves  itself

*■■■  in  order  to  submit  to  a  foreign  dominion. I  submitted  to  the

society  as  it  then  was,  to  live  in  that  society  as  the  member

of  a  sovereign  state,  and  not  in  another :  I  am  bound  to  obey

It,  while  it  remains  a  political  society :  but,  when  it  divcsia

r  95  ] itself  of  that  quality  in  order  to  receive  its  laws  from  another

state,  it  breaks  the  bond  of  union  between  its  members,  and

releases  them  from  their  obligations.

J  IB*  When  a  nation  has  placed  itself  under  the  protection  of

Toeie  eom-  another  that  is  more  powerful,  or  has  even  entered  into  sub-

pscis  unui-  jection  to  it  with  a  view  to  receiving  its  protection, — if  the

rniiure  of" l**-*^"^  '^"^^  ^o*  effectually  protect  the  other  in  case  of  need,

prutiwtion. it  19  manifest,  that,  by  failing  in  its  engagements,  it  loses  all

the  rights  it  had  acquired  by  the  convention,  and  that  the

other,  being  disengaged  from  the  obligation  it  had  contracted.


OP  tHB  PBOTBCTION SOUGHT  BY  A  NATION.

Jfe-enters  into  the  possession  of  all  its  rights,  and  recovers  its
independence,  or  its  liberty.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  this
takes  place  even  in  cases  where  the  protector  does  not  fail  id
his  engagements  through  the  want  of  good  faith,  but  mere);y
through  inability.  For,  the  weaker  nation  having  submittec
only  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  protection, — if  the  other  prove.-
unable  to  fulfil  that  essential  condition,  the  compact  is  dis
solved ; — the  weaker  resumes  its  rights,  and  may,  if  it  thinks
proper,  have  recourse  to  a  more  eflfectual  protection.*  Thus,
the  dukes  of  Austria,  who  had  acquired  a  right  of  protection,
and  in  some  sort  a  sovereignty  over  the  city  of  Lucerne,  being
unwilling  or  unable  to  protect  it  effectually,  that  city  con-
cluded an  alliance  with  the  three  first  cantons ;  and  the  dukes
having  carried  their  complaint  to  the  emperor,  the  inhabit-
lints  of  Lucerne  replied,  "  that  they  had  used  the  natural
right  common  to  all  men,  by  which  every  one  is  permitted  to
endeavour  to  procure  his  own  safety  when  he  is  abandoned  by
those  who  are  obliged  to  grant  him  assistance/ 'f

The  law  is  the  same  with  respect  to  both  the  contracting
parties  :^  if  the  party  protected  do  not  fulfil  their  engage-  *
ments  with  fidelity,  the  protector  is  discharged  from  his  ;  he'
may  afterwards  refuse  his  protection,  and  declare  the  treaty  i
broken,  in  case  the  situation  of  his  affairs  renders  such  a  step
advisable.

In  virtue  of  the  same  principle  which  discharges  one  of  the  ^
contracting  parties  when  the  other  fails  in  his  engagements,  ^
if  the  more  powerful  nation  should  assume  a  greater  autho-^
rity  over  the  weaker  one  than  the  treaty  of  protection  or  sub- 1
mission  allows,  the  latter  may  consider  the  treaty  as  broken,
and  provide  for  its  safety  according  to  its  own  discretion. If
it  were  otherwise,  the  inferior  nation  would  lose  by  a  conven-
tion which  it  had  only  formed  with  a  view  to  its  safety ;  an*^
if  it  were  still  bound  hy  its  engagements  when  its  protector
abases  them  and  openly  violates  his  own,  the  treaty  would,
to  the  weaker  party,  prove  a  downright  deception. However,
as  some  people  maintain,  that,  in  this  case,  the  inferior  nation
has  only  the  right  of  resistance  and  of  imploring  foreign  aid,
— and  particularly  as  the  weak  cannot  take  too  many  pre-
cautions against  the  powerful,  who  are  skilful  in  colouring
over  their  enterprises, — the  safest  way  is  to  insert  in  this  kind
of  treaty  a  clause  declaring  it  null  and  void  whenever  the


*  We  speak  here  of  a  nation  that  t  ®^®  "^^^  HiBtory  of  Switzerland,
has  rendered  itself  subject  to  another.  The  United  t^rovinces,  having  been
and  not  of  one  that  has  incorporated  obliged  to  rely  wholly  on  their  own
itself  with  another  state,  so  as  to  con-  efforts  in  defending  themselves  against
stitute  a  part  of  it.  The  latter  stands  Spain,  would  no  longer  acknowledge
in  the  same  predicament  with  all  th<»  any  dependence  on  the  empire  from
othei  citizens.  Of  this  case  we  shall  which  they  had  received  no  assistance,
treat  in  the  following  chapter.  GnoTius, HisLof  the  Troubla  in  the  Low

Couniriea,  b.  xvi.  p.  627.
23  P  169


96  HOW  A  NATION  MAT  SEPARATE  rrSELF.

BOOK  I. superior  power  shall  arrogate  to  itself  any  rights  not  expressly
CHAP,  ivi.  granted  by  the  treaty.

^  199.  How But  if  the  nation  that  is  protected,  or  that  has  placed
the  right  of  itself  in  subjcctiou  on  certain  conditions,  does  not  resist  the
^^^^ tested'' ^^croachments  of  that  power  from  which  it  has  sought  sup-
lost  by  it8^*  P^^^ — ^f  ^^  makes  no  opposition  to  them — ^if  it  preserves  a
tUenoe. profound  silence,  when  it  might  and  ought  to  speak — ^its  pa-
tient acquiescence  becomes  in  length  of  time  a  tacit  consent
that  legitimates  the  rights  of  the  usurper. There  would  be
no  stability  in  the  affairs  of  men,  and  especially  in  those  of
nations,  if  long  possession,  accompanied  by  the  silence  of  the
persons  concerned,  did  not  produce  a  degree  of  right. But
it  must  be  observed,  that  silence,  in  order  to  show  tacit  eon-
sent,  ought  to  be  voluntary. If  the  inferior  nation  proves
that  violence  and  fear  prevented  its  giving  testimonies  of  its
opposition,  nothing  can  be  concluded  from  its  silence,  which
therefore  gives  no  right  to  the  usurper.


CHAP,  xvn;

CHAP,  xvn.  HOW  A  NATION  MAT  SEPARATE  ITSELF  FROM  THE  STATE  0?
WHICH  IT  IS  A  MEMBER,  OR  RENOUNCE  ITS  ALLEGIANCE
TO ITS SOVEREIGN  WHEN IT IS NOT PROTECTED.

§  200. Dif- WE  have  said  that  an  independent  nation,  which,  without
ference  be-  becoming  a  member  of  another  state,  has  voluntarily  rendered
tweon  the itself  dependent  on,  or  subject  to  it,  in  order  to  obtain  pro-
and  titos  "in  t^c^i^J^j  is  released  from  its  engagements  as  soon  as  that  pro-
thepreced-  tection  fails,  even  though  the  failure happen  through  the
ing  chapter,  inability  of  the  protector. But  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  it
is  precisely  the  same  case  with  every  nation  that  cannot  ob-
tain speedy  and  effectual  protection  from  its  natural  sovereign
or  the  state  of  which  it  is  a  member. The  two  cases  are  very
different. In  the  former,  a  free  nation  becomes  subject  to
another  state, — not  to  partake  of  all  the  other's  advantages,
and  form  with  it  an  absolute  union  of  interests  (for,  if  the
more  powerful  state  were  willing  to  confer  so  great  a  favour,
the  weaker  one  would  be  incorporated,  not  subjected), — but  to
obtain  protection  alone  by  the  sacrifice  of  its  liberty,  without
expecting  any  other  return. When,  therefore,  the  sole  and
indispensable  condition  of  its  subjection  is  (from  what  cause
soever)  not  complied  with,  it  is  free  from  its  engagements ;
and  its  duty  towards  itself  obliges  it  to  take  fresh  methods  to
provide  for  its  own  security. But  the  several  members  of  one
individual  state,*  as  they  all  equally  participate  in  the  advan-
tages it  procures,  are  bound  uniformly  to  support  it :  they

have  entered  into  mutual  engagements  to  continue  united
170


sow  A  NATION  MAT  SEPARATB  ITSBLF.  97

with  each  other,  and  to  have  on  all  occasions  but  one  common  book  i.  *
cause.  If  those  who  are  menaced  or  attacked  might  sepa-  <^hap.  xvu.
rate  themselves  from  the  others,  in  order  to  avoid  a  present
danger,  every  state  would  soon  be  dismembered  and  destroyed.
It  is,  then,  essentially  necessary  for  the  safety  of  society,  and
even  for  the  welfare  of  all  its  members,  that  each  part  should
with  all  its  might  resist  a  common  enemy,  rather  than  sepa-
rate from  the  others ;  and  this  is  consequently  one  of  the
necessary  conditions  of  the  political  association.  The  natural
subjects  of  a  prince  are  bound  to  him  without  any  other
reserve  than  the  observation  of  the  fundamental  laws ; — it  is
their  duty  to  remain  faithful  to  him,  as  it  is  his,  on  the  other
hand,  to  take  care  to  govern  them  well :  both  parties  have
but  one  common  interest ;  the  people  and  the  prince  together
constitute  but  one  complete  whole,  one  and  the  same  society.
It  is,  then,  an  essential  and  necessary  condition  of  the  poli-
tical society,  that  the  subjects  remain  united  to  their  {)rince
as  far  as  in  their  power.  (57)

When,  therefore,  a  city  or  a  province  is  threatened  or  actu-  §  201.  Du
ally  attacked,  it  must  not,  for  the  sake  of  escaping  the  danger,  ty  of  the
separate  itself  from  the  state  of  which  it  is  a  member,  ^r^*™^'^^
abandon  its  natural  prince,  even  when  the  state  or  the  princCgutjecteof  a
is  unable  to  give  it  immediate  and  effectual  assistance. Its  prince,  who
duty,  its  political  engagements,  oblige  it  to  make  the  greatest  ""^ "» dan-
efforts,  in  order  to  maintain  itself  in  its  present  state. If  it  ^^*
is  overcome  by  force,  necessity,  that  irresistible  law,  frees  it ^
from  its  former  engagements,  and  gives  it  a  right  to  treat
with  the  conqueror,  in  order  to  obtain  the  best  terms  possible.
If  it  must  either  submit  to  him  or  perish,  who  can  doubt  but
that  it  may  and  even  ought  to  prefer  the  former  alternative  ?
Modern  usa^e  is  conformable  to  this  decision : — a  city  sub-
mits to  the  enemy  when  it  cannot  expect  safety  from  a  vigor-
ous resistanCiS ;  it  takes  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  him ;  and  its
sovereign  lays  the  blame  on  fortune  alone.

The  state  is  obliged  to  defend  and  preserve  all  its  mem-§202.Theii
bers  (§  17)  ;  and  the  prince  owes  the  same  assistance  to  his"»*^^  ^^^
subjects. If,  therefore,  the  state  or  the  prince  refuses  or  neg-  ^^^j^^^
lects  to  succour  a  body  of  people  who  are  exposed  to  immi-
nent danger,  the  latter,  being  thus  abandoned,  become  per-
fectly free  to  provide  for  their  own  safety  and  preservation
in  whatever  manner  they  find  most  convenient,  without  pay-
ing the  least  regard  to  those  who,  by  abandoning  them,  have
been  the  first  to  fail  in  their  duty. The  country  of  Zug,  being
attacked  by  the  Swiss  in  1352,  sent  for  succour  to  the  duke
of  Austria,  its  sovereign ;  but  that  prince,  being  engaged  in


(67)  Nemo  potest  exure  patriam.  is  absolutely  conquered  by  a  foreign
This  is  part  ofnatural  allegiance,  which  power,  and  the  parent  state  has
no  individual  can  shake  off  until  the  acknowledged  the  severance.  Bee
part  of  the  country  where  he  reaida) 1  CkUty't  Conwurcial  Law,  129.

171


9T  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  NATION

.  BOOK  I.  discourse  concerning  his  hawks,  at  the  time  when  the  de{m-
cH^p.  XVII.  ^j^g  appeared  before  hitn,  would  scarcely  condescend  to  hear
them.  Thus  abandoned,  the  people  of  Zug  9  tered  into  the
[  98  ]  Helvetic  confederacy.*  The  city  of  Zurich  had  been  'n  the
Bame  situation  the  year  before.  Being  attacked  by  a  band
of  rebellious  citizens  who  were  supported  by  the  neighbouring
nobility,  and  the  house  of  Austria,  it  made  application  to  the
head  of  the  empire :  but  Charles  IV.,  who  was  then  emperor,
declared  to  its  deputies  that  he  could  not  defend  it ; — upon
which  Zurich  secured  its  safety  by  an  alliance  with  the  Swiss-f
The  same  reason  has  authorized  the  Swbs,  in  general,  to
separate  themselves  entirely  from  the  empire,  which'  never
.  protected  them  in  any  emergency ;  they  had  not  owned  its
authority  for  a  long  time  before  their  independence  was  ac-
knowledged by  the  emperor  and  the  whole  Germanic  body,
at  the  treaty  of  Westphalia.


CHAP  xvni.

CflAP.  xvni. OF  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OP  A  NATION  IN  A  COUNTRY.

;  203.  Pes-  HITHERTO  we  have  considered  the  nation  merely  with
j&Mion  of  a  respect  to  itself,  without  any  regard  to  the  country  it  pos-
«owi^  by  g^gggg^  j^Q^  ^  jjQ^  QQQ  j^;  establishcd  in  a  country  which
becomes  its  own  property  and  habitation.  The  earth  belongs
to  mankind  in  general ;  destined  by  the  Creator  to  be  their
common  habitation,  and  to  supply  them  with  food,  they  all
possess  a  natural  right  to  inhabit  it,  and  to  derive  from  it
whatever  is  necessary  for  their  subsistence,  and  suitable  to
their  wants.  But  when  the  human  race  became  extremely
multiplied,  the  earth  was  no  longer  capable  of  furnishing
spontaneously,  and  without  culture,  suflScient  support  for  its
inhabitants ;  neither  could  it  have  received  proper  cultivation
from  wandering  tribes  of  men  continuing  to  possess  it  in
common.  It  therefore  became  necessary  that  those  tribes
should  fix  themselves  somewhere,  and  appropriate  to  them-
selves portions  of  land,  in  order  that  they  might,  without
being  disturbed  in  their  labour,  or  disappointed  of  the  fruits
of  their  industry,  apply  themselves  to  render  those  lands  fer-
tile, and  thence  derive  their  subsistence.  Such  must  have
been  the  origin  of  the  rights  of  property  and  dominion  :  and
it  was  a  sufficient  ground  to  justify  their  establishment.  Since
their  introduction,  the  right  which  was  common  to  all  man-
kind is  individually  restricted  to  what  each  lawfully  possesses.

*  Bee  Etterlin,  Simler,  and  De  Wat- f  See  the  same  hisforinns,  and  BoU
tevllle.  linger,  Stnmpf,  Tachadi,  aLd  StetUer.

172


IN  A  COUNTBT.  98

The  countrj  wliich  a  nation  inhabits,  whether  thaini.tion  has book  i.
emigrated  thither  in  a  body,  or  the  different  families  of  which  ^Ef^iJI™*
it  consists  were  previously  scattered  over  the  country,  and,
there  uniting,  formed  themselves  into  a  political  society, —
that  country,  I  say,  is  the  settlement  of  the  nation,  and  it  has
a  peculiar  and  exclusive  right  to  it.

This  right  comprehends  two  things:  1.  The  domain,  by 2  204* its
virtue  of  which  the  nation  alone  may  use  the  country  for  the  "8***°^®'.
supply  of  its  necessities,  may  dispose  of  it  as  it  thinks  P^o-J^®  ^^[^"*
per,  and  derive  from  it  every  advantage  it  is  capable  of  yield-  gion.
ing. 2.  The  empirej  ox  the  right  of  sovereign  command,  by [  99^  ]
which  the  nation  directs  and  regulates  at  its  pleasure  every
thing  that  passes  in  the  country.

When  a  nation  takes  possession  of  a  country  to  which  no  j  205. Ac-
prior  owner  can  lay  claim,  it  is  considered  as  acquiring  the  qQiation  of
empire  or  sovereignty  of  it,  at  the  same  time  with  the  domain,  ^^f  ■**^®:
For,  since  the  nation  is  free  and  independent,  it  canlaave  nojj*^^^^*''
intention,  in  settling  in  a  country,  to  leave  to  others  the  right  country,
of  command,  or  any  of  those  rights  that  constitute  sove-
reignty. The  whole  space  over  which  a  nation  extends  its
government  becomes  the  seat  of  its  jurisdiction,  and  is  called
its  territory.

If  a  number  of  free  families,  scattered  over  an  independent  j  206.  Ano-
country,  come  to  unite  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  nation  or  thor  manner
state,  they  altogether  acquire  the  sovereignty  over  the  whole  ^^  acquiring
country  they  inhabit  2  for  they  were  previously  in  possession  in^^T©^"^*
of  the  domain — a  proportional  share  of  it  belonging  to  each  country,
individual  family :  and  since  they  are  willing  to  form  together
a  political  society,  and  establisn  a  public  authority,  which
every  member  of  the  society  shall  be  bound  to  obey,  it  is
evidently  their  intention  to  attribute  to  that  public  authority
the  right  of  command  over  the  whole  country.

All  mankind  have  an  equal  right  to  things  that  have  not  j  207.  How
yet  fallen  into  the  possession  of  any  one;  and  those  things  *  °**^.<*'*  *P-
Delong  to  the person  who first  takes  possession  of  them.  ^Itoi^"
When,  therefore,  a  nation  finds  a  country  uninhabited,  anddenortooua
without  an  owner,  it  may  lawfully  take  possession  of  it :  and,  try.
after  it  has  sufficiently  made  known  its  will  in  this  respect,  it
cannot  be  deprived  of  it  by  another  nation. Thus  navigators
going  on  voyages  of  discovery,  furnished  with  a  commission
from  their  sovereign,  and  meeting  with  islands  or  other  lands
in  a  desert  state,  have  taken  possession  of  them  in  the  name
of  their  nation :  and  this  title  has  been  usually  respected,
provided  it  was  soon  after  followed  by  a  real  possession.

But  it  is  questioned  whether  a  nation  can,  by  the  bare  act  \  208. A
of  taking  possession,  appropriate  to  itself  countries  which  it  question  on
does  not  really  occupy,  and  thus  engross  a  much  greater  ex-  ^^"  "^Vr'tt
tent  of  territory  than  it  is  able  to  people  or  cultivate. It  is
not  difficult  to  determine  that  such  a  pretension  would  bo  an
absolute  infringement  of  the  natural  rights  of  men,  and  re-

p2  173


99  ESTABLISHMENT  OP  A  NATION  IN  A  COUNTRY.

BOOK  I. pugnant  to  the  views  of  nature,  which,  having  destined  th*
CHAP.  xYiu.  ^>|^q)q  earth  to  supply  the  wants  of  mankind  in  gener?\^,  gives
no  nation  a  right  to  appropriate  to  itself  a  country,  except
for  the  purpose  of  making  use  of  it,  and  not  of  hii.dering
others  from  deriving  advantage  from  it. The  law  of  nations
will,  therefore,  not  acknowledge  the  property  and  sovereignty
of  a  nation  over  any  uninhabited  countries,  except  those  of
which  it  has  really  taken  actual  possession,  in  which  it  has
formed  settlements,  or  of  which  it  makes  actual  use. In  ef-
fect, when  navigators  have  met  with  desert  countries  in  which
f  100  ]  those  of  other  nations  had,  in  their  transient  visits,  erectevi
some  monument  to  show  their  having  taken  possession  of
. them,  they  have  paid  as  little  regard  to  that  empty  ceremoi-y
as  to  the  regulation  of  the  popes,  who  divided  a  great  pvt
of  the  world  between  the  crowns  of  Castile  and  Portugal.*
^  20».  Whe- There  is  another  celebrated  question,  to  which  the  disco-
ther  it  be ybtj  of  the  New  World  has  principally  given  rise. It  is  asked
possess*! '''whether  a  nation  may  lawfully  take  possession  of  some  part
part  of  a of  a  vast  couutry,  in  which  there  are  none  but  erratic  nations
country  in-  ^whose  scauty  population  is  incapable  of  occupying  the  whole !
habited  only  We  have  already  observed  (§  81),  in  establishing  the  obliga-
wandering **^^  ^^  Cultivate  the  earth,  that  those  nations  cannot  exclu-

*  Those  decrees  being  of  a  rery  sin-  pope  excepts  only  what  might  be  in  th*
gular  nature,  and  hardly  anywhere  to  be  possession  of  some  other  Christian
found  but  in  very  scarce  books,  the  prince  before  the  year  1493;  as  if  he
reader  will  not  be  displeased  with  see-  had  a  greater  right  to  give  what  be-
ing here  an  extract  of  them.  longed  to  nobody,  and  especially  what

The  buU  of  Alexander  YL  by  which  was  possessed  by  the  American  nations,

he  gives  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  king  He  adds : "  Ao  quibuBcunque  per&onis

and  queen  of  Castile  and  Arragon,  the  cujnscunque  dignitatis,  etiam  imperialis

New  World,  discorered  by  Christopher  et  regalis,  status,  gradus,  ordinis,  rel

Columbus.  conditionis,  sub  exeommunicationis  latK

''Motu  proprio"  (says  the  pope),  sententisd  pcsna^  quam  eo  ipso,  si
"  non  ad  vestram,  yel  alterius  pro  Tobis  contra  feoerint,  ineurrant^  districtios
super  hoc  nobis  oblataa  petitionis  in-  inhibemus  ne  ad  insulas  et  temu  firmas
stantiam,  sed  de  nostra  mera  liberal!-  inventas  et  Inyeniendas,  detectas  et  de-
late, et  ex  oerta  soientia,  ao  de  aposto-  tegendas,  yersuB  occidentem  et  meri-

licss  potestatis  plenitndine,  omnes  in-  diem pro  mereibus  habendis,

Bulas  et  terras  firmas,  inventas  et  inye-  yel  qnavis  aliA  de  oanaa,  aceedere  prc-

niendas,  detectas  et  detegendas,  yersus  snmant  absque  yestra  ao  hseredum  e^

occidentem et  meridiem,"  (drawing  a  successorum yestrorum prseditconuc

line  from  one  pole  to  the  other,  at  a  li<^entia speciali, Ac. Datum  Komas

hundred  leagues  to  the  west of  the  apud  S.  Petrum  anno  1493.  IV.  nooas

Azores,)  "auctoritate  omnipotentis  Dei  M^ji, Pontiflc. nostri anno primu."

nobis in beato Petro concessa, ao  Leibwiiii Codex  Jtaru  Gent.  DiploawL

vicariatis Jesu Christi,  qua  fimgimur  203.

in  terris,  cum  omnibus  illarum  domi- See ihid,  (Dfplom,  165),  the  boll  by

nils,  civitatibus,  Ac,  yobis,  hseredibus-  which  pope  Nicholaa  V.  gave to  Al-

que et  successoribus  yestris,  Castellss  phonso,  king  of  Portugal,  and  to  the

et  Legion  is  regibus,  in  perpetuum  te-  infant  Henry,  the  soyereignty  of  Gui-

nore  praesentinm  donamus,  coneedimus,  nea,  and  the  power  of  sabdulng  tht

assignamns,  yosque  et  hsoredes  ac  sue-  barbarous  nations  of  those  conctri^

eessores,  prssfatos,  illomm  dominos,  cum  forbidding  any  other  to  visit  that  couo-

plona  libera  et  omni  moda  potentate,  try  without  the  permission  of  Portngai.

auotoritato et  Jurisdiotione, facimus,  This  act  is  dated  Rome,  on  the  8th  of

oonstituimusy et deputamus." The  January,  1454
174


OF  Oim  NATIVE  COUNTRY,  ETC.  100

Hvely  appiopriate  to  themselves  more  land  than  they  have  book  i.
occasion  for,  or  more  than  they  are  able  to  settle  and  cnlti-  ^'E^EiiEZIS
vate.  Their  unsettled  habitation  in  those  immense  regions
connot  be  accounted  a  true  and  legal  possession ;  and  the
people  of  Europe,  too  closely  pent  up  at  home,  finding  land
of  which  the  savages  stood  in  no  particular  need,  and  of
which  they  made  no  actual  and  constant  use,  were  lawfully
entitled  to  take  possession  of  it,  and  settle  it  with  colonies.
The  earth,  as  we  have  already  observed,  belongs  to  mankind
in  general,  and  was  designed  to  furnish  them  with  subsist*
ence:  if. each  nation  had,  from  the  beginning,  resolved  to
appropriate  to  itself  a  vast  country,  that  the  people  might
live  only  by  hunting,  fishing,  and  wild  fruits,  our  globe  would
not  be  sufficient  to  maintain  a  tenth  part  of  its  present  inha-  [  101  ]
bit^nts.  We  do  not,  therefore,  deviate  from  the  views  of  na-
ture, in  confining  the  Indians  within  narrower  limits.  How-
ever, we  cannot  help  praising  the  moderation  of  the  English
Puritans  who  first  settled  in  New  England ;  who,  notwith-
standing their  being  furnished  with  a  charter  from  their  sove-  •
*  reign,  purchased  of  the  Indians  the  land  of  which  they  in-
tended to  take  possession.*  This  laudable  example  was  fol-
lowed by  William  Penn,  and  the  colony  of  Quakers  that  he
conducted  to  Pennsylvania.

When  a  nation  takes  possession  of  a  distant  country,  and?2io.  Co-
settles  a  colony  there,  that  country,  though  separated  from^**''"''
the  principal  establishment,  or  mother-country,  naturally  be-
comes a  part  of  the  state,  equally  with  its  ancient  possessions.
Whenever,  therefore,  the  political  laws,  or  treaties,  make  no
distinction  between  them,  every  thing  said  of  the  territory
of  a  nation,  must  also  extend  to  its  colonies.


CHAP.  XIX.

OP OXJB  NATIVE  COUNTRY,  AND SEVERAL  THINGS  THAT chap,  xjt.

RBI<ATE  TO  IT.

THE  whole  of  the  countries  possessed  by  a  nation  and  sub-  j  211,  wut
ject  to  its  laws,  forms,  as  we  have  alrejidy  said,  its  territory,  is  our  ooun-
and  is  the  common  country  of  all  the  individuals  of  the  na-  ^'
tion. We  have  been  obliged  to  anticipate  the  definition  of
the  term,  native  country  (§  122),  because  our  subject  led  us
to  treat  of  the  love  of  our  country — ^a  virtue  so  excellent  and
so  necessary  in  a  state. Supposing,  then,  this  definition  al-
ready known,  it  remains  that  we  should  explain  several  things
that  have  a  relation  to  this  subject,  and  answer  the  questions
that  naturally  arise  from  it.

•  Histoxy  of  the  English  Colonies  in  North  America.

17ft


lOX  (NT  OUB  HAUTE  COUNTRY,  EIC.

BOOK  k The  citizeu  are  the  members  of  the  ciyil  society ;  bound
OTAP.  XIX  ^  ^jjjg  gQciety  by  certain  duties,  and  subject  to  its  authority,
{  212. Citi-  tiiey  equally  participate  in  its  advantages. The  natives,  or
•^  "** natural-born  citizens,  are  those  born  in  the  country,  of  pa  •
rents  who  are  citizens. As  the  society  cannot  exist  and  per-
petuate itself  otherwise  than  by  the  children  of  the  citizens,
those  children  naturally  follow  the  condition  of  their  fathers,
and  succeed  to  all  their  rights. The  society  is  supposed  to
desire  this,  in  consequence  of  what  it  owes  to  its  own  preser-
vation ;  and  it  is  presumed,  as  matter  of  course,  that  each
citizen,  on  entering  into  society,  reserves  to  his  children  the
right  of  becoming  members  of  it. The  country  of  the  fa-
thers is  therefore  that  of  the  children^  aiid  these  become
true  citizens  merely  by  their  tacit  consent. We  shall  soon
see  whether,  on  their  coming  to  the  years  of  discretion,  they
may  renounce  their  right,  and  what  they  owe  to  the  society
in  which  they  were  born. I  say,  that,  in  order  to  be  of  the
country,  it  is  necessary  that  a  person  be  born  of  a  father  who
is  a  citizen ;  for,  if  be  is  born  there  of  a  foreigner,  it  will  be
*"  102  ]  only  the  place  of  his  birth,  and  not  his  country.
213.  In- The  inhabitants,  as  distinguished  from  citizens,  are  fo*
habitants, reigners,  who  are  permitted  to  settle  and  stay  in  the  country.
Bound  to  the  society  by  their  residence,  they  are  subject  to
the  laws  of  the  state  while  they  reside  in  it ;  and  they  are
obliged  to  defend  it,  because  it  grants  them  protection,  though
they  do  not  participate  in  all  the  rights  of  citizens. They
enjoy  only  the  advantages  which  the  law  or  custom  gives  them.
The  perpetual  inhabitants  are  those  who  have  received  the
right  of  perpetual  residence. These  are  a  kind  of  citizens  of
an  inferior  order,  and  are  united  to  the  society  without  par-
ticipating in  all  its  advantages. Their  children  follow  the
condition  of  their  fathers ; and,  as  the  state  has  given  to
these  the  right  of  perpetual  residence,  their  ri^'ht  pa^s'.es  to
their  posterity.
;  214 Na- A  nation,  or  the  sovereign  who  represents  it,  may  gra  jt  to
toraiization.  a  foreigner  the  quality  of  citizen,  by  admitting  him  into  the
(*®)  body  of  the  political  society. This  is  called  naturalization.

There  are  some  states  in  which  thQ  sovereign  cannot  grant  to
a  foreigner  all  the  rights  of  citizens, — ^for  example,  that  of

(58)  See fuUy  in general, and  of  89,  43,  45 ;  and  tee  Reeres,  2d  ed.  328^

nataralization  in  Ghreat  Britain  in  par-  830,  and  87  Geo.  8,  o.  97. — G.
tioular, 1 Chitty's Commeroial Law, {A  native  citben  of  the  United  States

123  to  131 ;  1  Bla.  Com.  369 ;  Bao.  Ab.  cannot  throw  off  his  allegiance  to  thi

Aliens. A  naturalization  in  a  foreign  government,  without  an  Act  of  Con

country,  without  license,  will  not  dis-  gress  authorising  him  to  do  so. IlilUt

charge  a  natural-bom  subject  from  his  y.  The  ReaohUion,  2  Dall.  10;  Shank*  r

allegiance,  2  Chalmer's  Col.  Opin.  363.  Dupont,  3  Pet  S.  C.  Rep.  246 ;  Coxr  r.

But  a  natural-bom  subject  of  England,  JUcIlvaine,  4  Cranch,  209  ,* The  Sftntis'

naturalized  in  America,  was  holden  to  tima  Tnnidada,  7  Wheat. Rep.  283;

be entitled to trade as  an  American  The  United  Statee  v.  Oilliee,  Peter's  0  ■

tubject  to  the  East  Indies,  8  Term  Rep.  G.  Rep.  159.}

176


OF  OUB  NATIVB  COUNTET,  ETC.  102

holding  public  offices — and  where,  consequently,  he  has  the  book  i.
power  of  granting  only  an  imperfect  naturalization.  It  ia  shap.  ijx.
here  a  regulation  of  the  fundamental  law,  which  limits  the
power  of  the  prince.  In  other  states,  as  in  England  and
i?oland,  the  prince  cannot  naturalize  a  single  person,  without
the  concurrence  of  the  nation,  represented  by  its  deputies.
Finally,  there  are  states,  as,  for  instance,  England,  where  the
single  circumstance  of  being  born  in  the  country  naturalizes
the  children  of  a  foreigner.

It  is  asked  whether  the  children  born  of  citizens  in  a§2l^;-Chil-
foieign  country  are  citizens? The  laws  have  decided  this^'®"^^*^*"
question  in  several  countries,  and  their  regulations  must  be  ^JJ^gyra  ""
followed. (59) By  the  law  of  nature  alone,  children  follow  ^„^^^.
the  condition  of  their  fathers,  and  enter  into  all  their  rights
(§  212) ;  the  place  of  birth  produces  no  change  in  this  parti-
cular, and  cannot,  of  itself,  furnish  any  reason  for  taking
from  a  child  what  nature  has  given  him;  I  say  ''of  itself,"
for,  civil  or  political  laws  may,  for  particular  reasons,  ordain
otherwise. But  I  suppose  that  the  father  has  not  entirely
quitted  his  country  in  order  to  settle  elsewhere. If  he  has
fixed  his  abode  in  a  foreign  country,  he  is  become  a  member
of  another  society,  at  least  as  a  perpetual  inhabitant;  and
his  children  will  be  members  of  it  also.

As  to  children  born  at  sea,  if  they  are  born  in  those  parts  *^;2v<j.  Ohfl-
of  it  that  are  possessed  by  their  nation,  they  are  born  in  the  <^e  *  born  at
country :  if  it  is  on  the  open  sea,  there  is  no  reason  to  make  ®®*
a  distinction  between  them  and  those  who  are  born  in  the
country;  for,  naturally,  it  is  our  extraction,  not  the  place  of
our  birth,  that  gives  us  rights:  and  if  the  children  are  born
in  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  nation,  they  may  be  reputed  born
in  its  territories ;  for,  it  is  natural  to  consider  the  vessels  of  a
nation  as  parts  of  its  territory,  especially  when  they  sail  upon
a  free  sea,  since  the  state  retains  its  jurisdiction  over  those
vessels.  And  as,  according  to  the  commonly  received  custom,
this  jurisdiction  is  preserved  over  the  vessels,  even  in  parts
of  the  sea  subject  to  a  foreign  dominion,  all  the  children  born
in  the  vessels  of  a  nation  are  considered  as  born  in  its  terri-
tory. For  the  same  reason,  those  born  in  a  foreign  vessel
are  reputed  born  in  a  foreign  country,  unless  their  birth  toot
place  in  a  port  belonging  to  their  own  nation :  for,  the  port
is  more  particularly  a  part  of  the  territory ;  and  the  mother,
though  at  that  moment  on  board  a  foreign  vessel,  is  not  on
that  account  out  of  the  country.  I  suppose  that  she  and  her
husband  have  not  quitted  their  native  country  to  settle  else-
where, [  103  ]

For  the  same  reasons  also,  children  born  out  of  the  coun-§2i7.  Chil
trv,  in  the  armies  of  the  state,  or  in  the  house  of  its  minister  at  dren  ooni  ii
ft  foreign  court,  are  reputed  born  in  the  country ;  for  a  citi-  ^®  i"t«'««


the  state


(59)  See  1  Chitty'i  CommezcuJ  Law,  114,  n.  1 ;  115,  n.  1.

23  177


103  OP  OUR  NATIVB  COUNTRY,  ETC.

BOOK  1. zen  who  is  absent  with  his  family,  on  the  service  of  the  stste,

CHAP,  xix^  but  still  dependent  on  it,  and  subject  to  its  jurisdiction,  caii-

or  in  the not  be  considered  as  having  quitted  its  territory.

house  of  its Settlement  is  a  fixed  residence  in  any  place,  with  an  inten-

minifiter  at  ^^^  ^f  always  Staying  there. A  man  does  not,  then,  esta-

court  blish  his  settlement  in  any  place,  unless  he  makes  sufficiently

§218. Set^  known  his  intention  of  fixing  there,  either  tacitly  or  by  an

tlement. express  declaration. However,  this  declaration  is  no  reason

why,  if  he  afterwards  changes  his  mind,  he  may  not  transfer

his  settlement  elsewhere. In  this  sense,  a  person  who  stops

at  a  place  upon  business,  even  though  he  stay  a  long  time,

has  only  a  simple  habitation  there,  but  has  no  settlement.

Thus,  the  envoy  of  a  foreign  prince  has  not  his  settlement  at

the  court  where  he  resides.

The  natural^  or  original  settlement^  is  that  which  we  ac-
quire by  birth,  in  the  place  where  our  father  has  his ;  and
we  are  considered  as  retaining  it,  till  we  have  abandoned  it,  in
order  to  choose  another. The  acquired  aettletnent  (adsciti'
tium)  is  that  where  we  settle  by  our  own  choice.
§219. Va- vagrants are  people  who  have  no  settlement. Conse-
grants. quently,  those  born  of  vagrant  parents  have  no  country,  since
a  man's  country  is  the  place  where,  at  the  time  of  his  birth,
his  parents  had  their  settlement  (§  122),  or  it  is  the  state  of
which  his  father  was  then  a  member,  which  comes  to  the  same
point ;  for,  to  settle  for  ever  in  a  nation,  is  to  become  a  mem-
ber of  it,  at  least  as  a  perpetual  inhabitant,  if  not  with  all  the
privileges  of  a  citizen. We  may,  however,  consider  the  coun-
try of  a  vagrant  to  be  that  of  his  child,  while  that  vagrant  is
considered  as  not  having  absolutely  renounced  his  natural  or
original  settlement.
§220.  Whe- Si  any  distinctions  .will  be  necessary,  in  order  to  give  a  com-
ther  a  per- plete  solution  to  the  celebrated  question,  whether  a  man  may
q^t  his^ 9wA  his  country  or  the  society  of  which  he  is  a  member.  (60)
country. — !•  The  children  are  bound  by  natural  ties  to  the  society  in
which  they  were  bom ;  they  are  under  an  obligation  to  show
themselves  grateful  for  the  protection  it  has  aflbrded  to  theii
fathers,  and  are  in  a  great  measure  indebted  to  it  for  their  birth
and  education. They  ought,  therefore,  to  love  it,  as  we  have
already  shown  (§  122),  to  express  a  just  gratitude  to  it,  and
requite  its  services  as  far  as  possible,  by  serving  it  in  turn.
We  have  observed  above  (§  212),  that  they  have  a  right  to
enter  into  the  society  of  which  their  fathers  were  members,
f  104  ] But  every  man  is  born  free;  and  the  son  of  a  citiaen,  when
come  to  the  years  of  discretion,  may  examine  whether  it  be
convenient  for  him  to  join  the  society  for  which  he  was  des-
•  tined  by  his  birth. If  he  does  not  find  it  advantageous  to
remain  in  it,  he  is  at  liberty  to.  quit  it,  on  making  it  a  cooi

(60)  In  Great  Britain,  the  established 1  Bla.  C.  369,  3  Chit.  Com.  Law,  its
maxim is  nemo  poutt  exueri  paltiam, to  132.
178


OF  OUE  KATIVE  COUNTRY, ETC.  104

pensation  for  what  it  has  done  in  his  favour,*  and  preserv-  bock  i.
mg,  as  far  as  his  new  engagements  will  allow  him,  the  senti-  chap  xix.
ments  of  love  and  gratitude  he  owes  it.  A  man's  obligations
to  his  natural  country  may,  however,  change,  lessen,  or  en-
tirely vanish,  according  as  he  shall  have  quitted  it  lawfully,
and  .with  good  reason,  in  order  to  choose  another,  or  has
been  banished  from  it  deservedly  or  unjustly,  in  due  form  of
law  or  by  violence.

2.  As  soon  as  the  son  of  a  citizen  attains  the  age  of  man-
hood, and  acts  as  a  citizen,  he  tacitly  assumes  that  character ;
his  obligations,  like  those  of  others  who  expressly  and  for-
mally enter  into  engagements  with  society,  become  stronger
and  more  extensive  :  but  the  case  is  very  diiSerent  with  re-
spect to  him  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking.  When  a  so-
ciety has  not  been  formed  for  a  determinate  time,  it  is  allow-
able to  quit  it^  when  that  separation  can  take  place  without
detriment  to  the  society.  A  citizen  m«'*y  therefore  quit  the
state  of  which  he  is  a  member,  provided  it  be  not  in  such  a
conjuncture  when  he  cannot  abandon  it  without  doing  it  a
visible  injury.  But  we  must  here  draw  a  distinction  between
what  may  in  strict  justice  be  done,  and  what  is  honourable
and  conformable  to  every  duty — ^in  a  word,  between  the  in-
ternal and  the  external  obligation.  Every  man  has  a  right
to  quit  his  country,  in  order  to  settle  in  any  other,  when  by
that  step  he  does  not  endanger  the  welfare  of  his  country.
But  a  good  citizen  will  never  determine  on  such  a  step  with-
out necessity,  or  without  very  strong  reasons.  It  is  taking
a  dishonourable  advantage  of  our  liberty,  to  quit  our  asso-
ciates upon  slight  pretences,  after  having  derived  considerable
advantages  from  them ;  and  this  is  the  case  of  every  citizen,
with  respect  to  his  country.

3.  As  to  those  who  have  the  cowardice  to  abandon  their
country  m  a  time  of  danger,  and  seek  to  secure  themselves,
instead  of  defending  it,  they  manifestly  violate  the  social
compact,  by  which  all  the  contracting  parties  engaged  to  de-
fend themselves  in  a  united  body,  and  in  concert ;  they  are
infamous  deserters,  whom  the  state  has  a  right  to  punish
severely.f


.  *  This  18  the  foundation  of  the  tax  moted  in  the  army  of  Saxony,  had,  with

paid  on  quitting  a  countiy,  called,  in  the  perraission  of  his  fonner  sovereign,

Jjatin,  census  emigrcUionis.  sold  the  property  he  possessed  in  Li-

t  Charles  XII.  condemned  to  death  vonia. He  had  therefore  quitted  his

and  executed  General  Patkul,  a  native  own country,  to choose another  (.is

of  Livonia,  whom  he  had  made  prisoner  every  free  citizen  is  at  liberty  to  do,

in an  engagement  with  the Saxons,  except,  as  we  have  observed  above,  at

Hut  the  sentence  and  execution  were  a  critical  moment,  when  the  circum-

a  violation  of  the  laws  of  justice. Pat*  stances  of  his  country  require  the  aid

Kul,  it  is  true,  had  been  bom  a  subject  of  all  her  sons),  and  the  lung  of  Sweden,

of  the  king  of  Sweden ;  but  he  had  by  permitting  him  to  sell  his  property^

quitted  his  native  country  at  the  age  hud  contfonted  to  his  emigration.
of  twelve  jreaiMi  and  having  been  pro-

.179


105  OF  OUK  NATIVE  C0T7NTRT, BTO.

BOOK  I. In  a  time  of  peace  and  tranquillity,  when  the  conntrj  has
CHAP.  XIX.  j^Q  actual  need  of  all  her  children,  the  very  welfare  of  the


i  221.  How  state,  and  that  of  the  citizens,  requires  that  every  individual
ma^^bsent  ^^  *^  liberty  to  travel  on  business,  provided  that  he  be  always
himself  for  ready  to  return,  whenever  the  public  interest  recalls  him- It
a  time. is  not  presumed  that  any  man  has  bound  himself  to  the  so-
ciety of  which  he  is  a  member,  by  an  engagement  never  to
leave  the  country  when  the  interest  of  his  affairs  requires  it,
and  when  he  can  .absent  himself  without  injury  to  his  country,
f  222.  Van- The  political  laws  of  nations  vary  greatly  in  this  respect-
•tion  of  the  Jn  gome  nations,  it  is  at  all  times,  except  in  case  of  actual
\hvrfin  this  ^*^'  allowed  to  cvcry  citizen  to  absent  himself,  and  even  to
respect.  (61)  ^^^  ^be  country  altogether,  whenever  he  thinks  proper,  with-
Xhese  must  out  alleging  any  reason  for  it. This  liberty,  contrary  in  its
be  obeyed, qwu  nature  to  the  welfare  and  safety  of  society,  can  nowhere
be  tolerated  but  in  a  country  destitute  of  resources  and  inca-
pable of  supplying  the  wants  of  its  inhabitants. In  such  a
country  there  can  only  be  an  imperfect  society ;  for  civil
society  ought  to  be  capable  of  enabling  all  its  members  to
procure,  by  their  labour  and  industry,  all  the  necessaries  of
life :  unless  it  effects  this,  it  has  no  right  to  require  them  t^
devote  themselves  entirely  to  it. In  some  other  states,  every
citizen  is  left  at  liberty  to  travel  abroad  on  business,  but  not
to  quit  his  country  altogether,  without  the  express  permission
of  .the  sovereign. Finally,  there  are  states  where  the  rigour
of  the  government  will  not  permit  any  one  whatsoever  to  go
out  of  the  country  without  passports  in  form,  which  are  even
not  granted  without  great  difficulty. In  all  these  cases,  it  ii
necessary  to  conform  to  the  laws,  when  they  are  made  by  a
lawful  authority. But,  in  the  last-mentioned  case,  the  sove-
reign abuses  his  power,  and  reduces  his  subjects  to  an  insup-
portable slavery,  if  he  refuses  them  permission  to  travel  for
their  own  advantage,  when  he  might  grant  it  to  them  without
inconvenience,  and  without  danger  to  the  state. Nay,  it  will
presently  appear,  that,  on  certain  occasions,  he  cannot,  under
any  pretext,  detain  persons  who  wish  to  quit  the  country,
with  the  intention  of  abandoning  it  for  ever.
j  223.  Cases There-  are  cases  in  which  a  citizen  has  an  absolute  right
in  which  a to  renounce  his  country,  and  abandon  it  entirely — a  right
a  ri  ht  to" f*^^^^®^  0^  reasons  derived  from  the  very  nature  of  the  social
quit  his compact. 1.  If  the  citizen  cannot  procure  subsistence  in  his
•ountry. own  country,  it  is  undoubtedly  lawful  for  him  to  seek  it  else-
where. For,  political  or  civil  society  being  entered  into  only
with  a  view  of  facilitating  to  each  of  its  members  the  means
of  supporting  himself,  and  of  living  in  happiness  and  safety,
it  would  be  absurd  to  pretend  that  a  member,  whom  it  cannot
furnish  with  such  things  as  are  most  necessary,  has  not  a  right
to  leave  it.

(61)  See  pmit.  Book  II.  ch.  viii.  §  108, p.  731  to  733,  as  to  write  of  ne  eaMol
p.  174,  and  Chitty's  General Practice, regno,
180


OP  OUR  NATIVE  COUNTRY, ETC.  lOi)

2.  If  the  body  of  the  society,  or  he  who  represents  it,'  ab- book  i.
Bolutely  fail  to  discharge  their  obligations  towards  a  citizen,  ^^^^'  "^-
the  latter  may  withdraw  himself. For,  if  one  of  the  contract-
ing parties  does  not  observe  his  engagements,  the  other  is  no
longer  bound  to  fulfil  his ;  as  the  contract  is  reciprocal  be-  [  106  }
tween  the  society  and  its  members. It  is  on  the  same  prin-
ciple, also,  that  the  society  may  expel  a  member  who  violates
its  laws.

.  3.  If  the  major  part  of  the  nation,  or  the  sovereign  who
represents  it,  attempt  to  enact  laws  relative  to  matters  in
which  the  social  compact  cannot  oblige  every  citizen  to  sub-
mission, those  who  are  averse  to  these  laws  have  a  right  to
quit  the  society,  and  go  settle  elsewhere-  For  instance,  if  the
sovereign,  or  the  greater  part  of  the  nation,  will  allow  but
one  religion  in  the  state,  those  who  believe  and  profess  another
religion  have  a  right  to  withdraw,  and  to  take  with  them  their
families  and  efiects.  '  For,  they  cannot  be  supposed  to  have
subjected  themselves  to  the  authority  of  men,  in  affairs  of
conscience  ;*  and  if  the  society  suffers  and  is  weakened  by
their  departure,  the  blame  must  be  imputed  to  the  intolerant
party ;  for  it  is  they  who  fail  in  their  observance  of  the  social
compact — it  is  they  who  violate  it,  and  force  the  others  to  a
separation.  We  have  elsewhere  touched  upon  some  other  in-
stances of  this  third  case, — ^that  of  a  popular  state  wishing
to  have  a  sovereign  (§  33),  and  that  of  an  independent  natit)n
taking  the  resolution  to  submit  to  a  foreign  power  (§  196).

Those  who  quit  their  country  for  any  lawful  reason,  with  ?  224.  Emi
a  design  to  settle  elsewhere,  and  take  their  families  and  pro-  8™"*^
perty  with  them,  are  called  emigrants.

Their  right  to  emigrate  may  arise  from  several  sources.  ?  226.
1.  In  the  cases  we  have  just  mentioned  (§  223),  it  is  a  natural  Sources  of
right,  which  is  certainly  reserved  to  each  individual  in  the ®^  "*^
very  compact  itself  6y  which  civil  society  was  formed.

2.  The  liberty  of  emigration  may,  in  certain  cases,  be  se-
cured to  the  citizens  by  a  fundamental  law  of  the  state.  The
citizens  of  Neufchatel  and  Valangin  in  Switzerland  may  quit
the  country  and  carry  off"  their  effects  at  their  own  pleasure,
without  even  paying  any  duties.

3.  It  may  be  voluntarily  granted  them  by  the  sovereign.

4.  This  right  may  be  derived  from  some  treaty  made  with
a  foreign  power,  by  which  a  sovereign  has  promised  to  leave
full  liberty  to  those  of  his-  subjects,  who,  for  a  certain  reason
— on  account  of  religion,  for  instance— desire  to  transplant
themselves  into  the  territories  of  that  power.  There  are
such  treaties  between  the  German  princes,  particularly  for
cases  in  which  religion  is  concerned.  In  Switzerland  like-
wise, a  citizen  of  Bern  who  wishes  to  emigrate  to  Fribourg,
find  there  profess  the  religion  of  the  place,  and,  reciprocally,


*  See  aboTe,  the  chapter  on  Religion.

Q  181


106  OF  OUR  NATIVE  COUNTRY, ETC.

BOOK  I. a  citizen  of  Fribourg  who,  for  a  similar  reason,  is  desirous  of
CHAP.  XIX.  removing  to  Bern,  has  a  right  to  quit  his  native  country,  and
carry  off  with  him  all  his  property.

It  appears  from  several  passages  in  history,  particularly
the  history  of  Switzerland  and  the  neighbouring  countries,
that  the  law  of  nations,  established  there  by  custom  some
ages  back,  did  not  permit  a  state  to  receive  the  subjects  of
another  state  into  the  number  of  its  citizens.  This  vicious
[  107  ]  custom  had  no  other  foundation  than  the  slavery  to  which  the
people  were  then  reduced.  A  prince,  a  lord,  ranked  his  sub-
jects under  the  head  of  his  private  property ;  he  calculated
their  number  as  he  did  that  of  his  flocks ;  and,  to  the  disgrace
of  human  nature,  this  strange  abuse  is  not  yet  everywhere
eradicated.

1  226.  If  If  the  sovereign  attempts  to  molest  those  who  have  a  right
the  8oye-  to  emigrate,  he  does  them  an  injury ;  and  the  injured  indi-
T^^  "*"  .  viduals  may  lawfully  implore  the  protection  of  the  power  who
li^l^he  hi^^^  willing  to  receive  them.  Thus  we  have  seen  Frederic  Wil-
jures  them.  Ham,  king  of  Prussia,  grant  his  protection  to  the  emigrant

Protestants  of  Saltzburgh.

2  227.  Sup-  The  name  of  supplicants  is  given  to  all  fugitives  who  im-
plicante. plorc  the  protection  of  a  sovereign  against  the  nation  or

prince  they  have  quitted.  We  cannot  solidly  establish  what
the  law  of  nations  determines  with  respect  to  them,  until  we
hive  treated  of  the  duties  of  one  nation  towards  others.
2  228.  Ex-  Finally,  exile  is  another  manner  of  leaving  our  country.
Uo  and  ba-  ^^  exile  is  a  man  driven  from  the  place  of  his  settlement,  or
°^  ®^  constrained  to  quit  it,  but  without  a  mark  of  infamy.  Ba-
nishment i^  a  similar  expulsion,  with  a  mark  of  infamy  an-
nexed.* Both  may  be  for  a  limited  time,  or  for  ever.  If  an
exile,  or  banished  man,  had  his  settlement  in  his  own  country,
he  is  exiled  or  banished  from  his  country.  It  is,  however,
proper  to  observe  that  common  usage  applies  also  the  terms
exile  and  banishment  to  the  expulsion  of  a  foreigner  who  is
driven  from  a  country  where  he  had  no  settlement,  and  to
which  he  is,  either  for  a  limited  time,  or  for  ever,  prohibited
to  return.

As  a  man  may  be  deprived  of  any  right  whatsoever  by  way
of  punishment — exile,  which  deprives  him  of  the  right  of
dwelling  in  a  certain  place,  may  be  inflicted  as  a  punishment:
banishment  is  always  one ;  for,  a  mark  of  infamy  cannot  be
set  on  any  one,  but  with  a  view  of  punishing  him  for  a  fault,
either  real  or  pretended.

When  the  society  has  excluded  one  of  its  members  by  a


*  The  oommon  acceptation  of  these  by  some  disgrace  at  court." The  reason

two  terms  is  not  repugnant  to  our  ap-  is  plain :  such  a  condemnation  from  tk«

plication  of  them. The French aca-  tribunal of  justice entails infamy  oo

demy  says,  ** BanUhment  is  only  ap-  the  emigrant; whereas  a  disgrace  at

plied  to  condemnations  in  duo  course  court  does  not  usually  iuTolve  the

of  law. Exile  is  only  an  absence  caused  consequence.
182


OF  OUE  NATIVE  COUNTRY,  BTO.  107

perpetual  banishment,  he  is  only  banished  from  the  lands  of  sook  i
that  society,  and  it  cannot  hinder  him  from  living  wherever  chap,  xix
else  te  pleases ;  for,  after  having  driven  him  out,  it  can  no
longer  claim  any  authority  over  him.  The  contrary,  how-
ever, may  take  place  by  particular  conventions  between  two
or  more  states.  Thus,  every  member  of  the  Helvetic  con-
federacy may  banish  its  own  subjects  out  of  the  territories  of
Switzerland  in  general ;  and  in  this  case  the  banished  person
will  not  be  allowed  to  live  in  any  of  the  cantons,  or  in  the
territories  of  their  allies.

Exile  is  divided  into  voluntary  and  involuntary. It  is  vo-
luntary, when  a  man  quits  his  settlement  to  escape  some
punishment,  or to avoid  some  calamity — and  involuntary, [  108  J
when  it  is  the  effect  of  a  superior  order.

Sometimes  a  particular  place  is  appointed,  where  the  exiled
person  is  to  remain  during  his  exile ;  or  a  certain  space  is
particularized,  which  he  is  forbid  to  enter.  These  various
circumstances  and  modifications  depend' on  him  who  has  the
power  of  sending  into  exile.

A  man,  by  being  exiled  or  banished,  does  not  forfeit  the  §  229.  The
human  character,  nor  consequently  his  right  to  dwell  some-^^^^f  ^^l*
where  on  earth. He  derives  this  right  from  nature,  or  rather  n^^^^ve  a
from  its  Author,  who  has  destined  the  earth  for  the  habitation  right  to  live
of  mankind ;  and  the  introduction  of  property  cannot  have  somewhere,
impaired  the  right  which  every  man  has  to  the  use  of  such
things  as  are  absolutely  necessary — a  right  which  he  brings
with  him  into  the  world  at  the  moment  of  his  birth.

But  though  this  right  is  necessary  and  perfect  in  the  gene-  §  230.  Na-
ral  view  of  it,  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  but  imperfect  with  ture  of  thu
respect  to  each  particular  country. For,  on  the  other  hand,  "*^^^
every  nation  has  a  right  to  refuse  admitting a foreigner
into  her  territory,  when  he  cannot  enter  it  without  expo&ing
the  nation  to  evident  danger,  or  doing  her  a  manifest  injury.
What  she  owes  to  herself,  the  care  of  her  own  safety,  gives
her  this  right ;  and,  in  virtue  of  her  natural  liberty,  it  be-
longs to  the  nation  to  judge,  whether  her  circumstances  will
or  will  not  justify  the  admission  of  that  foreigner  (Prelim.
§  16). He  cannot,  then,  settle  by  a  full  right,  and  as  he
pleases,  in  the  place  he  has  chosen,  but  must  ask  permission
of  the  chief  of  the  place ;  and,  if  it  is  refused,  it  is  his  duty
to  submit.

However,  as  property  could  not  be  introduced  to  the  pre- §231.  Dutj
judice  of  the  right  acquired  by  every  human  creature,  of  not  of  natiom
being  absolutely  deprived  of  such  things  as  are  necessary —  J?'^*^
no  nation  can,  without  good  reasons,  refuse  even  a  perpetual
residence  to  a  man  driven  from  his  country. But,  if  particular
and  substantial  reasons  prevent  her  from  aflfording  him  an
asvlum,  this  man  has  no  longer  any  right  to  detnand  it — be-
cause, in  such  a  case,  the  country  inhabited  by  the  nation

183


108  OP  OUR  NATIVE COUNTRY, ETC.

BOOK  1 cannot,  at  the  same  time,  serve  for  her  own  use,  and  that  of
cEAP.  3CIX.  ^j^jg  foreigner. Now,  supposing  even  that  things  are  still  in
common,  nobody  can  arrogate  to  himself  the  use  of  a*thing
which  actually  serves  to  supply  the  wants  of  another. Thus,
a  nation,  whose  lands  are  scarcely  sufficient  to  supply  the
wants  of  the  citizens,  is  not  obliged  to  receive  into  its  territo-
ries a  company  of  fugitives  or  exiles. Thus,  it  ought  even
absolutely  to  reject  them,  if  they  are  infected  with  a  conta-
gious disease. Thus,  also,  it  has  a  right  to  send  them  else-
where, if  it  has  just  cause  to  fear  that  they  will  corrupt  the
manners  of  the  citizens,  that  they  will  create  religious  disturb-
ances, or  occasion  any  other  disorder,  contrary  to  the  public
safety. In  a  word,  it  has  a  right,  and  is  even  obliged,  to
follow,  in  this  respect,  the  suggestions  of  prudence. But
this  prudence should be free  from unnecessary  suspicion
and  jealousy ;  it  should  not  be  carried  so  far  as  to  refuse  a
[  109  ]  retreat  to  the  unfortunate,  for  slight  reasons,  and  on  ground-
less and  frivolous  fears. The  means  of  tempering  it  will  be,
never  to  lose  sight  of  that  charity  and  commiseration  which
are due  to  the unhappy. We must not suppress these
feelings even for those  who have  fallen  into misfortune
through  their  own  fault. For,  we  ought  to  hate  the  crime,
but  love  the  man,  since  all  mankind ought  to love  each
other.
;  232. A If  an  exiled  or  banished  man  has  been  driven  from  his
nation  can-  country  for  any  crime,  it  does  not  belong  to  the  nation  in
not  punish ^j^JqIi  }^q  jjag  taken  refuge  to  punish  him  for  that  fault  com-
fauUs  com-  "ttittcd  in  a  foreign  country. For,  nature  does  not  give  to
mitted  out men  or  to  nations  any  right  to  inflict  punishment,  except  for
of  its  terri-  their  own  defence  and  safety  (§  169);  whence  it  follows  that
tones  J ^Q  cannot  punish  any  but  those  by  whom  we  have  been  in-
jured.
^  233. ex- &it  this  very  reason  shows,  that,  although  the  justice  of
efcpt  such each  nation  ought  in  general  to  be  confined  to  the  punishment
"  ftffoofc  the  ^f  crimes  committed  in  its  own  territories,  we  ought  to  except
sofJeS^of  *  fro°^  ^^^^  ^®  those  villains,  who,  by  the  nature  and  habitual
mankind, frequency  of  their  crimes,  violate  all  public  security,  and  de-
clare themselves  the  enemies  of  the  human  race. Iroisoners,
assassins,  and  incendiaries  by  profession,  may  be  exterminated
wherever  they  are  seized; for  they  attack and injure all
nations  by  trampling  under  foot  the  foundations  of  their  com-
mon safety. Thus,  pirates  are  sent  to  the  gibbet  by  the  first
into  whose  hands  they  fall. If  the  sovereign  of  the  country
where  crimes  of  that  nature  have  been  committed,  reclaims
the  perpetrators  of  them,  in  order  to  bring  them  to  punish-
men,  they  ought  to  be  surrendered  to  him,  as  being  the
person who is principally interested in punishing  them
in  an  exemplary  manner. And  as  it  is proper  to  have
criminals  regularly  convicted  by  a  trial  in  due  form  of  lav,

184


OF  PUBLIC,  COMMON,  AND  PRIVATE  PBOPBRTT.  100

this is  a  second reason for  delivering up  malefactors  of book  i.
that  class  to  the  states  where  their  crimes  have  been  com-  ^°^^'  "'j
mitted.  (62)


CHAP.  XX.

OP  PUBLIC, COMMON, AND  PRIVATB  PROPERTY.  .E5f!L?5l

LET  us  now  see  what  is  the  nature  of  the  different  things  1 234.  Whai
contained  in  the  country  possessed  by  a  nation,  and  endeavour^tii®  Roimm
to  establish  the  general  principles  of  the  law  by  which  they  ^^^^  ****
are  regulated. This  subject  is  treated  by  civilians  under  the  *^*^*"*'*"*^
title  de  rerum  divisione.  There  are  things  which  in  their  own
nature  cannot  be  possessed :  there  are  others,  of  which  nobody
claims  the  proper^,  and  which  remain  common,  aa  in  thei^
primitive  state,  when  a  nation  takes  possession  of  a  country :
the  Roman  lawyers  called  those  things  res  communes,  things
common :  such  were,  with  them,  the  air,  the  running  water,
the  sea,  the  fish,  and  wild  beasts.

Every  thing  susceptible  of  property  is  considered  as  be-  ?  235. Ag-
longing  to  the  nation  that  possesses  the  country,  and  as  form-  e^^ff^
inff  the  asffregate  mass  of  its  wealth. But  the  nation  does  ^^^^  ®^  •
not  possess  all  those  things  in  the  same  manner. Those  not  it^  divlsioni.
divided  between  particular  communities,  or  among  the  indi-  [  HO  1
viduals  of  a  nation,  are  called  public  property. Some  ar.e
reserved  for  the  necessities  of  the  state,  and  form  the  demesne
of  the  crown,  or  of  the  republic :  others  remain  common  to
all  the  citizens,  who  take  advantage  of  them,  each  according
to his  necessities,  or  according  to  the  laws  which  regulate
their  use ;  and  these  are  called  common  property. There  are
others  that  belong  to  some  body  or  community,  termed  joint
property y  res  universitatis  ;  and  these  are,  with  respect  to  this
body  in  particular,  what  the  public  property  is  with  respect •
to  the  whole  nation. As  the  nation  may  be  considered  as  a
great  community,  we  may  indifferently  give  the  name  of  com-
mon  property  to  those  things  that  belong  to  it  in  common,  in

(62)  A  distinction hu  usually  been  9 Bam. A Cress.  446. |A forei^

taken  between  capital  oflfences  and  mere  government  has  no  rights  by  the  Law

misdemeanors,  and  for  one  state  to  al-  of  Nations,  to  demand  of  the  goyem-

low  the  taking  and  removing  an  offen-  ment  of  the  United  States  a  surrender

der  of  the  former  class  back  into  the  of  a  citizen  or  subject  of  such  foreign

country where the  offence  was  com-  government,  who  has  committed  a  crime

mitted,  in  order  to  take  his  trial  in  the  in  his  own  country. Such  a  right  can

latter,  but  not  so  in  case  of  misdemean-.  only  exist  by  treaty. Comm,  v.  Deacon,

ore. But  sometimes,  as  upon  a  charge  10  Serg.  A  Raw.  125 ;  Gate  of  D09  Santos,

of  perjury,  a  foreign  country  will  allow  2  Brocken. Rep. 493. The Caw of

the  removal  of  an  offender  even  in  case  Robin*,  Bee's  Rep.  266,  was  under  tho

of  a  misdemeanor. See  Ex  parte  Scott,  treaty  with  Great  Britain. }

34  2V  185


110  OF  PUBLIC, COMMON, ANP

BOOK  T. such  a  manner  that  all  the  citizens  may  make  use  of  them,
CHAP.  XX.  ^^^  ^^  those  that  are  possessed  in  the  same  manner  by  a  bodj
or  community :  the  same  rules  hold  good  with  respect  to  botL
Finally,  the  property  possessed  by  individuals  is  termed  pri-
vate property^  res  aingulorem,
1 236. Two When  a  nation  in  a  body  takes  possession  of  a  country,
ways  of  lus-  3very  thing  that  is  not  divided  among  its  members  remains
qmnng commou  to  the  whole  nation,  and  is  called  public  property,
perty!  ^^^' There  is  a  second  way  whereby  a  nation,  and,  ill  general,
every  community,  may  acquire  possessions,  viz.  by  the  vill
of  whosoever  thinks  proper  to  convey  to  it,  under  any  title
whatsoever,  the  domain  or  property  of  what  he  possesses.
2  237. The As  soon  as  the  nation  commits  the  reins  of  government  to
reyenueB  of  the  hands  of  a  prince,  it  is  considered  as  committing  to  him,
the  public ^^  j-j^g  same  time,  the  means  of  governing. Since,  therefore,
natural^  at  *^®  income  of  the  public  property, of  the  domain  of  the
the  Bove- State,  is  destined  for  the  expenses  of  government,  it  is  natu-
reign's  dii;-  rally  at  the  prince's  disposal,  and  ought  always  to  be  consi-
P^"*^  dered  in  this  light,  unless  the  nation  has,  in  express  terms,

excepted  it  in  conferring  the  supreme  authority,  and  has  pro-
vided in  some  othe^  manner  for  its  disposal,  and  for  the  ne-
cessary expenses  of  the  state,  and  the  support  of  the  prince's
person  and  household. Whenever,  therefore,  the  prince  is
purely  and  simply  invested  with  the  sovereign  authority,  it
includes  a  full  discretional  power  to  dispose  of  the  public  re-
venues. The  duty  of  the  sovereign,  indeed,  obliges  him  to
apply  those  revenues  only  to  the  necessities  of  the  state ;  but
he  .alone  is  to  determine  the  proper  application  of  them,  and
is  not  accountable  for  them  to  any  person.
2  238. The The  nation  may  invest  the  superior  with  the  sole  use  of  i  '.
nation  may  common  possessions,  and  thus  add  them  to  the  domain  of  th%
^ant  him g^ate. It  mav  even  cede  the  property  of  them  to  him. But

the  use  and ,,.  •?».i  x*  ^ e

property  of  *"^®  cession  01  the  us^or  property  requires  an  express  act  ot
its  common  the  proprietor,  which  is  the  nation. It  is  difficult  to  found  it
poseessions.  on  a  tacit  Consent,  because  fear  too  often  hinders  the  subjects
from  protesting against the unjust  encroachments of  the
sovereign.
J  239. or The  people  may  even  allow  the  superior  the  domain  of  the
aUow  him things  they  possess  in  common,  and  reserve  to  themselves  the
the  domain,  ^g^  ^f  them  in  the  whole  or  in  part. Thus,  the  domain  of  a
to  iJe^^the  ^^vcr,  for  instance,  may  be  ceded  to  the  prince,  while  the  people
use  of  them,  reserve  to  themselves  the  use  of  it  for  navigation,  fishing,  the
£  111  3  watering  of  cattle,  &c. They  may  also  allow  the  prince  the
sole  right  of  fishing,  &c.,  in  that  river. In  a  word,  the  peo-
ple may  cede  to  the  superior  whatever  right  they  please  over
the  common  possessions  of  the  nation ;  but  all  those  particu-
lar rights  rights  do  not  naturally,  and  of  themselves,  flow  from
the  sovereignty.
^  240.  If  the  income  of  the  public  property,  or  of  the  domain,  is

laxM. not  sufficient  for  the  public  wants,  the  state  supplies  the  de-

186


PRIVATE  PROPBRTT.  ill

ficiency  by  taxes.  These  ought  to  be  regulated  in  such  a  book  i.
manner,  that  all  the  citizens  may  pay  their  quota  in  proper-  -^^^Ii3£l
tion  to  their  abilities,  and  the  advantages  they  reap  from  the
society.  All  the  members  of  civil  society  being  equally
obliged  to  contribute,  according  to  their  abilities,  to  its  ad-
vantage and  safety,  they  cannot  refuse  to  furnish  the  subsi-
iies  necessary  to  its  preservation,  when  they  are  demanded
by  lawful  authority.

Many  n&tions  have  been  unwilling  to  commit  to  the  prince  ;  241. Th«
a  tnist  of  so  delicate  a  nature,  or  to  grant  him  a  power  that  nation  may
he  may  so  easily  abuse. In  establishing  a  domain  for  the"'®^****
support  of  the  sovereign  and  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  ^ght  of  im-
state,  they  have  reserved  to  themselves  the  right  of  providing,  posing
by themselves or their  representatives,  for extraordinary  *^«nu
wants,  in  imposing  taxes  payable  by  all  the  inhabitants. In
England,  the  king  lays  the  necessities  of  the  state  before  the
parliament ;  that  body,  composed  of  the  representatives  of
the  nation,  deliberates,  and,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  king,
determines  the  sum  to  be  raised,  and  the  manner  of  raising
it.  (63) And  of  the  use  the  king  makes  of  the  money  thus
raised,  that  same  body  obliges  him  to  render  it  an  account.

In  other  states,  where  the  sovereign  possesses  the  full  and  ;  242. Of
absolute  authority,  it  is  he  alone  that  imposes  taxes,  regulates  the  sove-
the  manner  of  raising  them,  and  makes  use  of  them  as  he  '©ip^  7^«>
thinks  proper,  without  giving  an  account  to  anybody. The  ^^^j]*
French  king  at  present  enjoys  this  authority,  (64)  with  the
simple  formality  of  causing  his  edicts  to  be  registered  by  .the
parliament ;  and  that  body  has  a  right  to  make  humble  re-
monstrances, if  it  sees  any  inconveniences  attending  the  im-
position ordered  by  the  prince: — a  wise  establishment  for
causing  truth,  and  the  cries  of  the  people,  to  reach  the  ears
of  the  sovereign,  and  for  setting  some  bounds  to  his  extrava-
gance, or  to  the  avidity  of  the  ministers  and  persons  con-
cerned in  the  revenue.*

(63)  AU  money  bills,  imposing  a  tax,  dis.  Bat  Peter,  Connt  de  Lara,  vigor-
must  originate  in  and  be  passed  by  the  ously  opposed  the  measure,  "  contorac-
House  of  Commons,  and  afterwards  taque  nobilinm  manu,  ex  conventu  dis-
submitted  to  the  lords  and  the  king  for  oedit^  armiB  taeri  paratus  partam  armis
their  sanction,  before  they  can  become  et  yirtnte  a  mi^oribus  immunitatem,
law.  neque passurum affirmant nobilitatis

(64)  This  was,  of  course,  when  Vattel  opprimendas  atque  novis  vectigalibus
w^ote,  and  before  the  Revolution.  vexandse  ab  eo  aditn  initinm  fieri  ]  Man-

*  Too  great  attention  cannot  be  ros  opprimere  non  esse  tanti,  ut  gravi-
nsed  in  watching  the  imposition  of  ori  servitute  rempublicam  implicari  si-
taxes,  which,  once  introduced,  not  only  nant.  Rex,  periculo  permotus,  ab  ea
continue,  but  are  so  easily  multiplied. —  cogitatione  desistit.  Petrum  nobiles,
Alphonso  VIII.  king  of  Castile,  be-  oonsilio  communicate,  quotannis  convi-
sieging  a  city  belonging  to  the  Moors  vio  excipere  deereverunt,  ipsum  et  pos-
(Concham  urbem  in  CelUberis),  and  teres, — navatsd  operas  mercedem,  rei
being  in  want  of  money,  applied  to  the  gestsa  bonos  posteritati  monumentum,
itates  of  his  kingdom  for  permission  to  documentumque  ne  qua  vis  occasione
impose,  on  every  free  inhabitant,  a  jus  libertatis  imminui  patiantur."  Ma-
eapitation-taz  of  five  golden  marave-  biaita.

187


112  OF  PUBLIC, COMMON, AND

BOOK  T. The  prince  who  is  invested  with  the  power  of  taxing  hie
OHAP.  xx^  people  ought  by  no  means  to  consider  the  money  thus  raised


^  243. Bn-  as  his  owu  property. He  ought  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  end
ties  of  the fQj.  which  this  power  was  granted  him :  the  nation  was  willing
rTrtTo^  to  enable  him  to  provide,  as  it  should  seem  best  to  his  wisdom,
taxes. for  the  necessities  of  the  state. If  he  diverts  this  money  to
other  uses, — if  he  consumes  it  in  idle  luxury,  to-  gratify  his
pleasures,  to  satiate  the  avarice  of  his  mistresses  and  favour-
ites,— we  hesitate  not  to  declare  to  those  sovereigns  who  are
still  capable  of  listening  to  the  voice  of  truth,  that  such  a  one
is  not  less  guilty,  nay,  that  he  is  a  thousand  times  more  so,
than  a  private  person  who  makes  use  of  his  neighbours'  pro-
perty to  gratify  his  irregular  passions. Injustice,  though
screened  from  punishment,  is  not  the  less  shameful.
;  244.  Emi^ Every  thing  in  the  political  society  ought  to  tend  to  the
nent  domain  g^Q^j  ^f  fj^Q  community ;  and,  since  even  the  persons  of  the
tb^Bove-*^  citizens  are  subject  to  this  rule,  their  property  cannot  be  ex-
reignty. cepted. The  state  coiild  not  subsist,  or  constantly  administer
the  public  affairs  in  the  most  advantageous  manner,  if  it  had
not  a  power  to  dispose  occasionally  of  all  kinds  of  property
subject  to  its  authority. It  is  even  to  be  presumed,  that,  when
the.  nation  takes  possession  of  a  country,  the  property  of  cer-
tain things  is  given  up  to  the  individuals  only  with  this  reserve.
The  right  which  belongs  to  the  society,  or  to  the  sovereign,  of
disposing,  in  case  of  necessity,  and  for  the  public  safety,  of  all
the  wealth  contained  in  the  state,  is  called  the  eminent  domain.
It  i^  evident  that  this  right  is,  in  certain  cases,  necessary  to
him  who  governs,  and  consequently  is  a  part  of  the  empire,  or
sovereign  power,  and  ought  to  be  placed  in  the  number  of  the
prerogatives  of  majesty  (§  45). When,  therefore,  the  people
confer  the  empire  on  any  one,  they  at  the  same  time  invest
him  with  the  eminent  domain^  unless  it  be  expressly  reserved.
Every  prince,  who  is  truly  sovereign,  is  invested  with  this  right
when  the  nation  has  not  excepted  it, — ^however  limited  his
authority  may  be  in  other  respects.

If  the  sovereign  disposes  of  the  public  property  in  virtue  of
his  eminent  domain^  the  alienation  is  valid,  as  haying  been  made
with  suflScient  powers.

When,  in  a  case  of  necessity,  he  disposes  in  like  manner  of
the  possessions  of  a  community,  or  an  individual,  the  aliena-
tion will,  for  the  same  reason,  be  valid. But  justice  requires
that  this  community,  or  this  individual,  be  indemnified  at  the
public  charge : and  if.  the  treasury  is  not  able  to  bear  the
expense,  all  the  citizens  are  obliged  to  contribute  to  it ; for,
the  burdens  of  the  state  ought  to  be  supported  equally,  or  in
[  113  ]  a  just  proportion. The  same  rules  are  applicable  to  this  case
as  to  the  loss  of  merchandise  thrown  overboard  to  save  the
vessel.
I  245. Go. Besides  the  eminent  domain^  the  sovereignty  gives  a  right
fArnmeiit  of  of  another  nature  over  all  public,  common,  and  private  pro-

188


PKIVATB  PROPBBTT.  118

petty, — that  is,  the  empire,  or  the  right  of  command  in  all book  i.
planes  of  the  country  belonging  to  the  nation. The  supreme ^"^p*  ^^.
power  extends  to  every  thing  that  passes  in  the  state,  wher-  P°^^^®  P*^
ever  it  is  transacted;  and,  consequently,  the  sovereign  com-^®^'
mands  in  all  public  places,  on  rivers,  on  highways,  in  deserts,
&;c. Every  thing  that  happens  there,  is  subject  to  his  au*
thority.

In  virtue  of  the  same  authority,  the  sovereign  may  make  j  246. The
laws  to  regulate  the  manner  in  which  common  property  is  to  jrapenor
be  used, — as  well  the  property  of  the  nation  at  large,  as  that  ™*y  ™^®
of  distinct  bodies  or  corporations. He  cannot,  indeed,  take  ^gpect  to
away  their  right  from  those  who  have  a  share  in  that  property :  the  use  of
but  the  care  he  ought  to  take  of  the  public  repose,  and  of  the  things  po«-
common  advantage  of  the  citizens,  gives  him  doubtless  a  right  ■®**®^  *"
to  establish  laws  tending  to  this  end,  and,  consequently,  to
regulate  the  manner  in  which  things  possessed  in  common  are
to  be  enjoyed. This  affair  might  give  room  for  abuses,  and  t

excite  disturbances,  which  it  is  important  to  the  state  to  pre-
vent, and  against  which  the  prince  is  obliged  to  take  just
measures.  Thus,  the  sovereign  may  establish  wise  laws  with
respect  to  hunting  and  fishing, — forbid  them  in  the  seasons  of
propagation, — ^prohibit  the  use  of  certain  nets,  and  of  every
destructive  method,  &c.  But,  as  it  is  only  in  the  character
of  the  common  father,  governor,  and  guardian  of  his  people,
that  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  make  those  laws,  he  ought
never  to  lose  sight  of  the  ends  which  he  is  called  upon  to  ac-
complish by  enacting  them ;  and  if,  upon  those  subjects,  he
makes  any  regulations  with  any  other  view  than  that  of  the
public  welfare,  he  abuses  his  power.

A  corporation,  as- well  as  every  other  proprietor,  has  a  1 247.  Alien-
right  to  alienate  and  mortgage  its  property :  bu£  the  present  ation  of  the
members  ought  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  destination  of  that  ^"^P®^^  ^'
joint  property,  nor  dispose  of  it  otherwise  than  for  the  ad-  tion.^^'*^
vantage  of  the  body,  or  in  cases  of  necessity. If  they  alien-
ate it  with  any  other  view,  they  abuse  their  power,  and  trans-
gress against  the  duty  they  own  to  their  own  corporation  and
their  posterity ;  and  the  prince,  in  quality  of  common  father,
has  a  right  to  oppose  the  measure. Besides,  the  interest  of
the  state  requires  that  the  property  of  corporations  be  not
squandered  away; — ^which  gives  the  prince  intrusted  with
the  care  of  watching  over  the  public  safety,  a  new  right  to
prevent  the  alienation  of  such  property. It  is,  then  very
proper  to  ordain  in  a  state,  that  the  alienation  of  the  pro-
perty of  corporations  should  be  invalid,  without  the  consent
of  the  superior  powers. And  indeed  the  civil  law,  in  this
respect,  gives  to  corporations  the  rights  of  minors. But  this
is  strictly  no  more  than  a  civil  law ;  and  the  opinion  of  those
who  make  the  law  of  nature  alone  «  sufficient  authority  to
take  from  a  corporation  the  power  of  alienating  their  pro-

189


114  OF  PUBLIC, COMMOK,  AND


BOOK  1.  perty  without  the  consent  of  the  sovereign,' appears  to  me
CHAP.  XX.  ^  Y)e  void  of  foundation,  and  contrary  to  the  notion  of  pro-
perty. A  corporation,  it  is  true,  may  have  received  pro-
perty, either  from  their  predecessors  or  from  any  other  per-
sons, with  a  clause  that  disables  them  from  alienating  it:  but
in  this  case  they  have  only  the  perpetual  use  of  it,  not  the
entire  and  free  property.  If  any  of  their  property  wag
solely  given  for  the  preservation  of  the  body,  it  is  evident
that  the  corporation  has  not  a  right  to  alienate  it,  except  in
a  case  of  extreme  necessity: — and  whatever  property  they
may  have  received  from  the  sovereign  is  presumed  to  be  of
that  nature.
{  S48. Uae AH  the  members  of  a  corporation  have  an  equal  right  to

^^  wtttT^"  ^^®  ^^^  ^^  ^**  common  property. But,  respecting  the  manner
^^' of  enjoying  it,  the  body  of  the  corporation  may  make  such
regulations  as  they  think  proper,  provided  that  those  regula-
tions be  not  inconsistent  with  that  equality  which  ought  to
be  preserved  in  a  communion  of  property. Thus,  a  corpo-
ration may  determine  the  use  of  a  common  forest  or  pasture,
either  allowing  it  to  all  the  members  according  to  their  wants
or  allotting  to  each  an  equal  share ;  but  they  have  not  a
right  to  exclude  any  one  of  the  number,  or  to  make  a  distin^
tion  to  his  disadvantage,  by  assigning  him  a  less  share  than
that  of  the  others.
{  249.  How All  the  members  of  a  body  having  an  equal  right  to  its
each  mem- common  property,  each  individual  ought  so  to  manage  in
io'  "l*^  *°*  taking  advantage  of  it,  as  not  in  any  wise  to  injure  the  com-
mon use. According  to  this  rule,  an  individual  is  not  per-
mitted to  construct  upon  any  river  that  is  public  property,
any  work  capable  of  rendering  it  less  convenient  for  the  u<e
of  every  one  else,  as,  erecting  mills,  making  a  trench  to  turn
the  water  upon  his  own  lands,  &c. If  he  attempts  it,  he  ar-
rogates to  himself  a  private  right,  derogatory  to  the  common
right  of  the  public.
J  250.  Right The  right  of  anticipation  {Ju$  prBeventianis)  ought  to  be
of  anticipa-  faithfully  observed  in  the  use  of  common  things  which  can-
'  oM^of^i^* ^^^  ^®  ^®^  ^7  several  persons  at  the  same  time. This  name
is  given  to  the  right  which  the  first  comer  acquires  to  the  n?e
of  things  of  this  nature. For  instance,  if  I  am  actually
drawing  water  from  a  common  or  public  well,  another  who
comes  after  me  cannot  drive  me  away  to  draw  out  of  it  him-
self: and  he  ought  to  wait  till  I  have  done. For,  I  make
use  of  my  right  in  drawing  that  water,  and  nobody  can  dis-
turb me :  a  second,  who  has  an  equal  right,  cannot  assert  it
to  the  prejudice  of  mine ;  to  stop  me  by  his  arrival  would  be
arrogating  to  himself  a  better  right  than  he  allows  me,  ani
thereby  violating  the  law  of  equality.
^  251. The The  same  rule  ought  to  be  observed  in  regard  to  those
«4mo  right  common  things  which  are  consumed  in  using  them. Thev


PRIVATE PROPERTY.  114


belong  to  the  person  who  first  takes  possession  of  them  with book  m.
the  intention  of  applying  them  to  his  own  use :  and  a  second,  -£5££iiEf*
who  comes  after,  has  no  right  to  take  them  from  him. I  re-  in  another
pair  to  a  common  forest,  and  begin  to  fell  a  tree :  you  come  ^^•^
in  afterwards,  and  would  wish  to  have  the  same  tree :  you
cannot  take  it  from  me :  for  this  would  be  arrogating  to  your-
self a  right  superior  to  mine,  whereas  our  rights  are  equal.  [  115  ]

^The  rule  in  this  case  is  the  same  as  that  which  the  law  of
nature  prescribes  in  the  use  of  the  productions  of  the  earth
before  the  introduction  of  property.

The  expenses  necessary  for  the  preservation  or  reparation  j  252. Pw
of  the  things  that  belong  to  the  public,  or  to  a  community,  serration
ought  to  be  equally  borne  by  all  who  have  a  share  in  them,  ^^  repain
whether  the  necessary  sums be  drawn from  the  common  ^^^^^^^^1^^
coffer,  or  that  each  individual  contributes  his  quota. The
nation,  the'corporation,  and,  in  general,  every  collective  body,
may  also  establish  extraordinary  taxes,  imposts,  or  annual
contributions,  to  defray  these  expenses, — provided  there  be
no  oppressive  exaction  in  the  case,  and  that  the  money  so
levied  be  faithfully  applied  to  the  use  for  which  it  was  raised.
To  this  end,  also,  as  we  have  before  observed  (§  103),  toll-
duties are lawfully  established. Highways,  bridges, and
causeways  are  things  of  a  public  nature,  from  which  all  who
pass  over  them  derive  advantage :  it  is  therefore  just  that  all
those  pasengers  should  contribute  to  their  support.

We  shall  see  presently  that  the  sovereign  ought  to  provide  g  253.  Duty
*or  the  preservation  of  the  public  property. He  is  no  less  *°d  right  of
obliged,  as  the  conductor  of  the  whole  nation,  to  watch  over  *®  ^^^±1
the  preservation  of  the  property  of  a  corporation. It  is  the  ^gp^^
interest  of  the  state  at  large  that  a  corporation  should  not
fall  into  indigence  by  the  ill  conduct  of  its  members  for  the
time  being. And,  as  every  obligation  generates  the  corre-
spondent right  which  is  necessary  to  discharge  it,  the  sove-
reign has  here  a  right  to  oblige  the  corporation  to  conform  to

.  their  duty.  If,  therefore,  he  perceives,  for  instance,  that
they  suffer  their  necessary  buildings  to  fall  to  ruin,  or  that
they  destroy  their  forests,  he  has  a  right  to  prescribe  what
they  ought  to  do,  and  to  put  his  orders  in  force.

We  have  but  a  few  words  to  say  with  respect  to  private  ?  254.  Pn
property:  every  proprietor  has  a  right  to  make  what  use  he^*^P'^'
pleases  of  .his  own  substance,  and  to  dispose  of  it  as  he^®"^*
pleases,  when  the  rights  of  a  third  person  are  not  involved
in  the  business. The  sovereign,  however,  as  the  father  of
his  people,  may  and  ought  to  set  bounds  to  a  prodigal,  and
to  prevent  his  running  to  ruin,  especially  if  this  prodigal  be
tne  father  of  a  family.  (65) But  he  must  take  care  not  to

(65)  In  Great  Britain  no  such  right  person,  or  defrauds  a  person  who  has
of  interference  exists,  and  a  person  may  insured  against  fire.  Co.  Lit  254;  Sci-
lay  waste  or  even  horn  his  own  property,  «t7^«  case,  For.  6,  3  Thomas  Co.  Lit,
■nless  he  thereby  endangers  a  third 243,  n.  (m).—  G.

191


115  OF PUBLIC, COMMON, AND  PRIVATE  PROPBRTT,

BOOK  T. extend  this  right  of  inspection  so  far  as  to  lay  a  restraint  on
CHAP.  XX.  Y^^  subjects in the administration  of  their affairs — ^which
would  be  no  less  injurious  to  the  true  welfare  of  the  state
than  to  the  just  liberty  of  the  citizens. The  particulars  of
this  subject  belong  to  public  law  and  politics.
{255. The It  must  also  be  observed,  that  individuals  are  not  so  por
Boverei^ fectly  free  in  the  economy  or  government  of  their  affairs  as
It  to  resraia-  ^^^  *^  ^^  Subject  to  the  laws  and  regulations  of  police  made
tionfl  of  po-  by  the  sovereign. For  instance,  if  vineyards  are  multiplied
lio6»  to  too  great  an  extent  in  a  country  which  is  in  want  of  corn,

the  sovereign  may  forbid  the  planting  of  the  vine  in  fields
proper  for  tillage ;  for  here  the  public  welfare  and  the  safety
of  the  state  are  concerned.  When  a  reason  of  such  import-
ance requires  it,  the  sovereign  or  the  magistrate  may  obligu
[  116  ]  an  individual  to  sell  all  the  provisions  in  his  possession  above
what  are  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  his  family,  and  may
fix  the  pricQ  he  shall  receive  for  them.  (66)  The  public  au-
thority may  and  ought  to  hinder  monopolies,  and  suppress
«11  practices  tending  to  raise  the  price  of  provisions — ^to  which
practices  the  Romans  applied  the  expressions  anrionam  in-
eendercj  comprimere^  vexare,
{  25e.  In-  Every  man  may  naturally  choose  the  person  to  whom  he
heritances,  ^ould  leave  his  property  after  his  death,  as  long  as  his  right
is  not  limited  by  some  indispensable  obligation — ^as,  for  in-
stance, that  of  providing  for  the  subsistence  of  his  children.  (67)
The  children  also  have  naturally  a  right  to  inherit  their  fa-
ther's property  in  equal  proportions.  But  this  is  no  rea«)n
why  particular  laws  may  not  be  established  in  a  state,  with
regard  to  testaments  and  inheritances — a  respect  being,  how-
ever, paid  to  the  essential  laws  of  nature.  Thus,  by  a  rule
established  in  many  places  with  a  view  to  support  noble  fami-
lies, the  eldest  son  is,  of  right,  his  father's  principal  heir.
Lands  perpetually  appropriated  to  the  eldest  male  heir  of  a
family,  belong  to  him  by  virtue  of  another  right,  which  has
its  source  in  the  will  of  the  person  who,  being  sole  owner  of
those  lands,  has  bequeathed  them  in  that  manner.

(66)  In  Great  Britain  no  snch  inter-  (67)  In  England  a  parent  has  an  abs(^

ference  now  takes  place,  though  formerly  lute  right  to  deyise  or  bequeath  all  bii

it  was  exercised. See 1  Bla.  Com.  property  to  a  stranger  in  exclusion  of

387. — C.  his  children.


m


OF  THE  ALIENATION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  PBOPEBTY.  116


BOOK  I.
CHAP.  XXL


CHAP.  XXI.

OF THE ALIENATION OF THE PUBLIC PBOPEBTY, OB THE
DOMAIN, AND  THAT  OF  A  PABT  OF  THE  STATE.

THE  nation,  being  the  sole  mistress  of  the  property  in  her  j  257. Th«
possession,  may  dispose  of  it  as  she  thinks  proper,  and  may  nation  may
lawfully  alienate  or  mortgage  it. This  right  is  a  necessary  *i»®^**®  **■
consequence  of  the  full  and  absolute  domain :  the  exercise  p^^^^  ^"^*
of  it  is  restrained  by  the  law  of  nature  only  with  respect  to
proprietors  who  have  not  the  use  of  reason  necessary  for  the
management  of  their  affairs ;  which  is  not  the  case  with  a
nation. Those  who  think  otherwise,  cannot  allege  any  solid
reason  for  their  opinion  4  and  it  would  follow  from  their  prin-
ciples that  no  safe  contract  can  be  entered  into  with  any  na-
tion ; — a  conclusion  which  attacks  the  foundation  of  all  public
treaties.

But  it  is  very  just  to  say,  that  the  nation  ought  carefully  j  253. Dit-
to  preserve  her  public  property — to  make  a  proper  use  of  ties  of  a  na^
it — not  to  dispose  of  it  without  good  reasons,  nor  to  alienate  ^^^  "*  **^
or  mortgage  it  but  for  a  manifest  public  advantage,  or  in  case  "'P*®^
of  a  pressing  necessity. .This  is  an  evident  consequence  of
the  duties  a  nation  owes  to  herself. The  public  property
is  extremely  useful  and  even  necessary  to  the  nation ;  and
she  cannot  squander  it  improperly  without  injuring  herself,
and  shamefully  neglecting  the  duty  of  self-preservation. I
speak  of  the  public  property,  strictly  so  called,  or  the  domain
of  the  state. Alienating  its  revenues  is  cutting  the  sinews  of
government. As  to  the  property  common  to  all  the  citizens,
the  nation  does  an  injury  to  those  who  derive  advantage  from
it,  if  she  alienates  it  without  necessity,  or  without  cogent  [  117 J
reasons. She  has  a  right  to  do  this  as  proprietor  of  these
possessions ;  but  she  ought  not  to  dispose  of  them  except  in
a  manner  that  is  consistent  with  the  duties  which  the  body
owes  to  its  members.

The  same  duties  lie  on  the  prince,  the  director  of  the  na-  J  259. »u.
tion :  he  ought  to  watch  over  the  preservation  and  prudent  *^®8  ***  ^^
management  of  the  public  property — ^to  stop  and  prevent^
all  waste  of  it — and  not  suffer  it  to  be  applied  to  improper
uses.

The*  prince,  or  the  superior  of  the  society,  whatever  he  is,  1 26O. He
being  naturally  no  more  than  the  administrator,  and  not  the  cannot
proprietor  of  the  state,  his  authority,  as  sovereign  or  head  of  *^*®°*^  *^*
tne  nation,  does  not  of  itself  give  him  a  right  to  alienate  orp^n^,
mortgage  the  public  property. The  general  rule  then  is,  that
the  superior  cannot  dispose  of  the  public  property,  as  to  its
Rubstance — the  right  to  do  this  being  reserved  to  the  proprietor
aJone,  since  proprietorship  is  defined  to  be  the  right  to  dispose

26  B  198


117  OP  THE  ALIENATIOH  OP

BOOK  I. of  a  thing  substantially. If  the  superior  exceeds  his  powers
CHAP.  XXI.  ^jtij  respect  to  this  property,  the  alienation  he  makes  of  it
will  be  invalid,  and  may  at  any  time  be  revoked  by  his  suc-
cessor, or  by  the  nation. This  is  the  law  generally  received
in  France ;  and  it  was  upon  this  principle  that  the  duke  of
Sully*  advised  Henry  IV.  to  resume  the  possession  of  all  the
domains  of  the  crown  alienated  by  his  predecessors.
$261.  The The  nation,  having  the  free  disposal  of  all  the  property
nation  may  belonging  to  her  (§  257),  may  convey  her  right  to  the  sove-
^t  u>  iL ^^^S^>  *^^  consequently  confer  upon  him  that  of  alienating
and  mortgaging  the  public  property. But  this  right  not  being
necessary  to  the  conductor  of  the  state,  to  enable  him  to  ren-
der the  people  happy  by  his  government — it  is  not  to  be  pre-
sumed that  the  nation  have  given  it  to  him;  and,  if  tliey  hare
not  made  an  express  law  for  that  purpose,  we  are  to  conclude
that  the  prince  is  not  invested  with  it,  unless  he  has  received
full,  unlimited,  and  absolute  authority.
§261.  Rules The  rules  we  have  just  established  relate  to  alienations  of
on  thk  sub-  public  property  in  favour  of  individuals. The  question  ass^imes
r^rto  '^*''  ^iiff^rent  aspect  when  it  relates  to  alienations  made  by  one
i^aties  be-  nation  to  another  :t  it  requires  other  principles  to  decide  it  in
tween  na- the  different  cases  that  may  present  themselves. Let  ns  en-
tion  and deavour  to  give  a  general  theory  of  them,
nauon.  y^ j^  j^  necessarv  that  nations  should  be  able  to  treat  and

contract  validly  with  each  other,  since  they  would  otherwiase
find  it  impossible  to  bring  their  affairs  to  an  issue,  or  to  obtain
the  blessings  of  peace  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  Whence
it  follows,  that,  when  a  nation  has  ceded  any  part  of  its  pro-
perty to  another,  the  cession  ought  to  be  deemed  valid  and
[  118  ]  irrevocable,  as  in  fact  it  is,  in  virtue  of  the  notion  of  pro-

ioerty.  This  principle  cannot  be  shaken  by  any  fundamental
aw  by  which  a  nation  might  pretend  to  deprive  themselves  of
the  power  of  alienating  what  belongs  to  them :  for,  this  would
be  depriving  themselves  of  all  power  to  form  contracts  with
other  nations,  or  attempting  to  deceive  them.  A  nation  with
such  a  law  ought  never  to  treat  concerning  its  property :  if  it
is  obliged  to  it  by  necessity,  or  determined  to  do  it  for  its  own
advantage,  the  moment  it  broaches  a  treaty  on  the  subject,  it
renounces  its  fundamental  law.  It  is  seldom  disputed  that  aa
entire  nation  may  alienate  what  belongs  to  itself:  but  it  is
asked,  whether  its  conductor,  its  sovereign,  has  thi^  power  ?
The  question  may  be  determined  by  the  fundamental  laws^
But,  if  the  laws  say  nothing  on  this  subject,  then  we  have
recourse  to  our  second  principle,  viz.

2.  If  the  nation  has  conferred  the  full  sovereignty  on  it*
conductor — if  it  has  intrusted  to  him  the  care,  and,  without

*  See  his  Memoirs.

t  Quod  domania  regnorum  inalicn- contra  alias  gentes  divino  priTil^itt
•Kilia  ct  semper  revocabilia  dicuntur, opus  foret. Leibnitz^  Prafat.  «rf  f^md.
id  lespectu  privatorum  intelligitar ;  nam Jur,  GtnU  D^ivmaL
194


THE  PUBLIC  PROPBRTY.  118

reserve,  given  him  the  right,  of  treating  and  contracting  with book  l

other  states,  it  is  considered  as  having  invested  him  with  all  chap,  xxt.

the  powers  necessary  to  make  a  valid  contract. The  prince

is  then  the  organ  of  the  nation :  what  he  does  is  considered

as  the  act  of  the  nation  itself;  and,  though  he  is  not  the  owner

of  the  public  property,  his  alienations  of  it  are  valid,  as  heing

duly  authorized.

The  question  becomes  more  distinct,  when  it  relates,  not  to  §263.  Ali^a
the  alienation  of  some  parts  of  the  public  property,  but  to  »^ion  o^  *
the  dismemberin£c  of  the  nation  or  state- itself — the  cession  P*^°^****
of  a  town  or  a  province  that  constitutes  a  part  of  it.  This
question,  however,  admits  of  a  sound  decision  on  the  same
principles.  A  nation  ought  to  preserve  itself  (§  26) — it  ought
to  preserve  all  its  members — it  cannot  abandon  them ;  and  it
is  under  an  engagement  to  support  them  in  their  rank  as  mem-
bers of  the  nation  (§  17).  It  has  not,  then,  a  right  to  traffic
with  their  rank  and  liberty,  on  account  of  any  advantages  it
may  expect  to  derive  from  such  a  negotiation.  They  have
joined  the  society  for  the  purpose  of  being  members  of  it —
they  submit  to  the  authority  of.  the  state  for  the  purpose  of
promoting  in  concert  their  common  welfare  and  safety,  and
not  of  being  at  its  disposal,  like  a  farm  or  a  herd  of  cattle.
But  the  nation  may  lawfully  abandon  them  in  a  case  of  ex-
treme necessity ;  and  she  has  a  right  to  cut  them  off  from  the
body,  if  the  public  safety  requires  it.  When,  therefore,  in
such  a  case,  the  state  gives  up  a  town  or  a  province  to  a
neighbour  or  to  a  powerful  enemy,  the  cession  ought  to  remain
valid  as  to  the  state,  since  she  had  a  right  to  make  it :  nor
can  she  any  longer  lay  claim  to  the  town  or  province  thus
alienated,  since  she  has  relinquished  every  right  she  could
have  over  it.

But  the  province  or  town  thus  abandoned  and  dismembered  §  264.
from  the  state,  is  not  obliged  to  receive  the  new  master  whom  ^^^  ^^
the  state  attempts  to  set  over  it. Being  separated  from  the  ^^^^  p^jy,
society  of  which  it  was  a  member,  it  resumes  all  its  original
rights ;  and  if  it  be  capable  of  defending  its  liberty  against
the  prince  who  would  subject  it  to  his  authority,  it  may  law-
fully resist  him. Francis  I.  having  engaged,  by  the  treaty  [  119  ]
of  Madrid,  to  cede  the  duchy  of  Burgundy  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  the  states  of  that  province  declared,  "  that,  hav-
ing n'ever  been  subject  but  to  the  crown  of  France,  they  would
die  subject  to  it ;  and  that,  if  the  king  abandoned  them,  they
would  take  up  arms,  and  endeavour  to  set  themselves  at  lib-
erty, rather  than  pass  into  a  new  state  of  subjection."* It
is  true,  subjects  are  seldom  able  to  make  resistance  on  such
occasions ;  and,  in  general,  their  wisest  plan  will  be  to  submit
to  their  new  master,  and  endeavour  to  obtain  the  best  terms
they  can.

*  MesBerajr'B  Historjr  of  France,  vol.  il.  p.  458.

Its


119  OF  THE  AUBI^ATION  OF  THE PUBLIC  P&OPSKTT.

BOOK  T.  Has  the  prince,  or  the  superior  of  "vrhateyer  kind,  a  power
oHAP.  XXI.  to  dismember  the  state  ?  We  answer  as  we  have  done  with
r  255.  respect  to  the  domain : — ^if  the  fundamental  laws  forbid  all
Whether  dismemberment  by  the  sovereign,  he  cannot  do  it  without  the
the  prince  concurrence  of  the  nation  or  its  representatives.  But,  if  the
has  power  i^^g  are  silent,  and  if  the  prince  has  received  a  full  and  ab-
ber  th?*™"  ^^^^^^  authority,  he  is  then  the  depositary  of  the  rights  of  the
state.  nation,  and  the  organ  by  which  it  declares  its  will. The  na-

tion ought  never  to  abandon  its  members  but  in  a  case  of
necessity,  or  with  a  view  to  the  public  safety,  and  to  preserv*.
itself  from  total  ruin ;  and  the  prince  ought  not  to  give  them
up  except  for  the  same  reasons.  But,  since  he  has  received
an  absolute  authority,  it  belongs  to  him  to  judge  of  the  neces*
sity  of  the  case,  and  of  what  the  safety  of  the  state  requires.
On  occasion  of  the  above-mentioned  treaty  of  Madrid,  the
principal  persons  in  France,  assembled  at  Gognag  after  the
king's  return,  unanimously  resolved,  "  that  his  authority  did
not  extend  so  far  as  to  dismember  the  crown."*  The  treaty
was  declared  void,  as  being  contrary  to  the  fundamental  law
of  the  kingdom :  and,  indeed,  it  had  been  concluded  without
suflScient  powers :  for,  as  the  laws  in  express  terms  refused  to
the  king  the  power  of  dismembering  the  kingdom,  the  con-
currence of  the  nation  was  necessary  for  that  purpose ;  and  it
might  give  its  consent  by  the  medium  of  the  states-general.
Charles  V.  ought  not  to  have  released  his  prisoner  before
those  very  states  had  approved  the  treaty ;  or  rather,  making
a  more  generous  use  of  his  victory,  he  should  have  imposed
less  rigorous  conditions,  such  as  Francis  I.  would  have  been
able  to  comply  with,  and  such  as  he  could  *  not,  without  dis-
honour, have  refused  to  perform.  But  now  that  there  are  no
longer  any  meetings  of  the  states-general  in  France,  the  king
remains  the  sole  organ  of  the  state,  with  respect  to  other
powers  :  these  latter  have  a  right  to  take  his  will  for  that  of
all  France;  and  the  cessions  the  king-  might  make  them
would  remain  valid,  in  virtue  of  the  tacit  consent  bv  which
the  nation  has  vested  the  king  with  unlimited  powers  to  treat
with  them.  Were  it  otherwise,  no  solid  treaty  could  be  en-
tered into  with  the  crown  of  France.  For  greater  security,
[  120  ]  however,  other  powers  have  often  req^iired  that  their  treaties
should  be  registered  in  the  parliament  of  Paris;  but  at  presebt
even  this  formality  seems  to  be  laid  aside.

*  Mezeray's  Histoiy  of  France,  toL  u.  p.  458*


196


09  BIYEBSy STREAMS,  AKD  LAKES.  120


BOOK  I.

cHiLP.  nxn.


CHAP.  xxn.

OF  RIYEBS, STREAMS, AND LAKES.

WHEN  a  nation  takes  possession  of  a  country,  with  a  view  j  266.  A  rf-
to  settle  there,  it  takes  possession  of  every  thing  included  in  ^er  that  so-
it,  as  lands,  lakes,  rivers,  &c. But  it  may  happen  that  theP^^J*".*"^®
country  is  bounded  and  separated  from  another  by  a  river ;  in
which  case,  it  is  asked,  to  whom  this  river  belongs. It  is
manifest,  from  the  principles  established  in  Chap.  XVIII.,  that
it  ought  to  belong  to  the  nation  who  first  took  possession  of
it. This  principle  cannot  be  denied ;  but  the  diflSculty  is,  to
make  the  application. It  is  not  easy  to  determine  which  of
the  two  neighbouring  nations  was  the  first  to  take  possession
of  a  river  that  separates  them. For  the  decision  of  such
questions,  the  rules  which  may  be  deduced  from  the  principles
of  the  law  of  nations  are  as  follow : —

1.  When  a  nation  takes  possession  of  a  country  bounded
by  a  river,  she  is  considered  as  appropriating  to  herself  the
river  also :  for,  the  utility  of  a  river  is  too  great  to  admit  a
supposition  that  the  nation  did  not  intend  to  reserve  it  to  her*
self.  Consequently,  the  nation  that  first  established  her  do-
minion on  one  of  the  banks  of  the  river  is  considered  as  being
the  first  possessor  of  all  that  part  of  the  river  which  bounds
her  territory.  When  there  is  question  of  a  very  broad  river,
this  presumption  admits  not  of  a  doubt,  so  far,  at  least,  as
relates  to  a  part  of  the  river's  breadth ;  and  the  strength  of
the  presumption  increases  or  diminishes  in  an  inverse  ratio
-with  the  breadtji  of  a  river ;  .for,  the  narrower  the  river  is,
the  more  does  the  safety  and  convenience  of  its  use  require
that  it  should  be  subject  entirely  to  the  empire  and  property
of  that  nation^  (68)

2.  If  that  nation  has  made  any  use  of  the  river,  as,  for
navigating  or  fishing,  it  is  presumed  with  the  greatest  cer-
tainty that  she  has  resolved  to  appropriate  the  river  to  her
own  use.

3.  If,  of  two  nations  inhabiting  the  opposite  banks  of  the
river,  neither  party  can  prove  that  they  themselves,  or  those
whose  rights  they  inherit,  were  the  first  settlers  in  those
tracts,  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  both  nations  came  there  at
the  same  time,  since  neither  of  them  can  give  any  reason  for
claiming  the  preference ;  and  in  this  case  the  dominion  of
each  will  extend  to  the  middle  of  the  river.  (^)

(68)  As  regards  private  rights,  there Dong.  411. [Palmer  y.  Biekt,  6  Johns.
Is  no  legal  presumption  that  the soil Rep.  133.}

of  a  navigable  river  belongs  to  the  own- (1)  { 5  Wheat  Rep.  874,  379 ;  8  Mass.
ers  of  the  adjoining  lands,  ex  utraque Rep.  147.)
jfaru,  or  otherwise. Bex  v.  Smith,  2

b2  197


120  OF  LIVERS,  STREAMS,  AND  LAKES.

BOOK  I.  .  4.  A  long  and  undisputed  possession  establishes  the  right
CHAP,  xxn.  ^f  nations,  (69)  otherwise  there  could  be  no  peace,  no  stabi-
lity between  tnem  ;  and  notorious  facts  must  be  admitted  to
prove  the  possession.  Thus,  when  from  time  immemorial  a
nation  has,  without  contradiction,  exercised  the  sovereignty
[  121  ]  npon  a  river  which  forms  her  boimdary,  nobody  can  dis-
pute with  that  nation  the  supreme  dominion  over  the  river  in
question.

5.  Finally,  if  treaties  determine  any  thing  on  this  question,
they  must  be  observed. To  decide  it  by  accurate  and  express
stipulations,  is  the  safest  mode ;  and  such  is,  in  fact,  the  me-
thod taken  by  most  powers  at  present.
2  267. Of If  a  river  leaves  its  bed,  whether  it  be  dried  up  or  takes
the  bod  of  aits  coursc  clsfewhere,  the  bed  belon&:s  to*  the  owner  of  the
is^dried river ;  for,  the  bed  is  a  part  of  the  river ;  and  he  who  had
or  takes  an- appropriated  to  himself  the  whole,  had  necessarily  appro-
other  coarse  priated  to  himself  all  its  parts.

1 268.  The  If  a  territory  which  terminates  on  a  river  has  no  other
right  of  ai-  boundary  than  that  river,  it  is  one  of  those  territories  that
luvion.(70)  j^^^^  natural  or  indeterminate  bounds  {territoria  areifinia\
and  it  enjoys  the  right  of  alluvion  ;  that  is  to  say,  every  gra-
dual increase  of  soil,  every  addition  which  the  current  of  the
river  may  make  to  its  bank  on  that  side,  is  an  addition  to
that  territory,  stands  in  the  same  predicament  with  it,  and
belongs  to  the  same  owner.  •  For,  if  I  take  possession  of  s
piece  of  land,  declaring  that  I  will  have  for  its  boundary  the
river  which  washes  its  side,^-or  if  it  is  given  to  me  upon
that  footing, — \  thus  acquire,  beforehand,  the  right  of  aUu-
vion  ;  and,  consequently,  I  alone  may  appropriate  to  myself
whatever  additions  the  current  of  the  river  may  insensibly
make  to  my  land: — I  say  ^^ insensibli/y"  because  in  the  very
uncommon  case  called  avuhioUf  when  the  violence  of  the
stream  separates  a  considerable  part  from  one  piece  of  land
and  joins  it  to  another,  but  in  such  manner  that  it  can  still
be  identified,  the  property  of  the  soil  so  removed  naturally
continues  vested  in  its  former  owner.  The  civil  laws  have  thus
provided  against  and  decided  this  case,  when  it  happens  be-
tween individual  and  individual ;  they  ought  to  unite  equity  with
the  welfare  of  the  state,  and  the  care  of  preventing  litigations.
In  case  of  doubt,  every  territory  terminating  on  a  river  is
presumed  to  have  no  other  boundary  than  the  river  itself;
because  nothing  is  more  natural  than  to  take  a  river  for  a

(69)  As  to  what  is  a  sufficiently  long  178 ;  4  Dowl.  ft  By.  790 ;  3  Bam.  *
and  undisturbed  possession,  by  the  law  Ores.  91,  S.  C;  ^  Bing.  163,  169;  1
of  France,  Jersey,  and  England,  in  Thomas  Co.  LiU  47,  in  note ;  Scultes  on
general,  see  Benest  t.  Pipon,  Knapp's  Aquatic  Rights  j  Chitty*8  General  Prac-
Rep.  67.  tice,  199,  200. {2  Johns.  Rep.  322;  3

(70)  As  to  the  rights  of  alluvion^  or  Mass.  Rep.  325,'  2  HaH's  L.  Jouxn.SOT;
tudden  derelict  in  general,  see  The  King  5  HaU's  L.  Joum.  1, 113.}

V.  Yarboroughf  1  Dow  Rep.  Now  Series,

198


OF  RIVERS, STREAMS, AND  LAKES.  121

boundary,  when  a  settlement  is  made ;  and  wherever  there  Is book  i.
a  doubt,  that  is  always  to  be  presumed  which  is  most  natural  °"^'''  ^'"'
and  most  probable.

As  soon  as  it  is  determined  that  a  river  constitutes  the  ^  269.  Whe.
boundary  line  between  two  territories,  whether  it  remains  com-  ther  aiiu-
mon  to  the  inhabitants  on  each  side  of  its  banks,  or  whether  ^'^^^  ^^'
each  shares  half  of  it,  or,  finally,  whether  it  belongs  entirely  ch^l^tn
to  one  of  them,  their  rights  with  respect  to  the  river  are  in  the  right  to
no  wise  changed  by  the  alluvion. If,  therefore,  it  happens,  a  river.
that,  by  a  natural  effect  of  the  current,  one  of  the  two  terri-
tories receives  an  increase,  while  the river  gradually  en-
croaches on  the  opposite  bank,  the  river  still  remains  the  na-
tural boundary  of  the  two  territories,  and  notwithstanding
the  progressive  changes  in  its  course,  each  retains  over  it  the
same  rights  which  it  possessed  before ;  so  that,  if,  for  instance,
it  be  divided  in  the  middle  between  the  owners  of  the  oppo-
site banks,  that  middle,  though  it  changes  its  place,  will  con-
tinue to  be  the  line  of  separation  between  the  two  neighbours.
The  one  loses,  it  is  true,  while  the  other  gains ;  but  nature
alone  produces  this  change :  she  destroys  the  land  of  the  one,  [  122  ]
while  she  forms  new  land  for  the  other. The  case  cannot  be
otherwise  determined,  since  they  have  taken  the  river  alone
for  their  limits.

But  if,  instead  of  a  gradual  and  progressive  change  of  its  g  270.
bed,  the  river,  by  an  accident  merely  natural,  turns  entirely  What  Ib  the
out  of  its  course,  and  runs  into  one  of  the  two  neighbouring  <^®  7^®^
states,  the  bed  which  it  has  abandoned  becomes,  thencefor-  ^^g^l^^^if^
ward,  their  boundary,  and  remains  the  property  of  the  for-  bed.
nierowner  of  the  river  (§  267) ;  the  river  itself  is,  as  it  were,
annihilated  in  all  that  part;  while  it  is  reproduced  in  its  new
bed,  and  there  belongs  only  to  the  state  in  which  it  flows.

This  case  is  very  different  from  that  of  a  river  which
changes  its  course  without  going  out  of  the  same  state.  The
latter,  in  its  new  course,  continues  to  belong  to  its  former
owner,  whether  that  owner  be  the  state,  or  any  individual  to
whom  the  state  has  given  it ;  becatfee  rivers  belong  to  the
public  in  whatever  part  of  the  country  they  flow.  Of  the
bed  which  it  has  abandoned,  a  moiety  accrues  to  the  contigu-
ous lands  on  each  side,  if  they  are  lands  that  have  natural
boundaries,  with  the  right  of  alluvion.  That  bed  (notwith-
standing what  we  have  said  in  §  267)  is  no  longer  the  pro-
perty of  the  public,  because  of  the  right  of  alluvion  vested
in  the  owners  of  its  banks,  and  because  the  public  held  pos-
session of  the  bed  only  on  account  of  its  containing  a  river.
But,  if  the  adjacent  lands  have  not  natural  boundaries,  the
public  still  retains  the  property  of  the  bed.  The  new  soil
over  which  the  river  takes  its  course  is  lost  to  the  proprietor,
because  all  the  rivers  in  the  country  belong  to  the  public.

It  is  not  allowable  to  raise  any  works  on  the  bank  of  aj27i.
river,  which  have  a  tendency  to  turn  its  course,  and  to  cast  Work»

199


122  OP  RIVERS,  STREAMS,  AND  LAKES.

BOOK  I.  it  upon  the  opposite  bank:  this  would  be  promoting  our  own
CHAP.  XXII.  advantage  at  our  neighbour's  expense.  Each  can  only  secure
landing  to himself,  and  hinder  the  current  from  undermining  and  carry-

T27T.  or  in ^^  general,  no  person  ought  to  build  on  a  river,  any  more
general, ' than  clsewhere,  any  work  that  is  prejudicial  to  his  neigh-
prejudicial hour's  rights. If  a  river  belongs*  to  one  nation,  and  another
to  the  rights  ^g^g  ^j^  incontestiblc  right  to  navigate  it,  the  former  cannot
ns) *"* erect  upon  it  a  dam  or  a  mill  which  might  render  it  unfit  for
navigation. The  right  which  the  owners  of  the  river  possess
in  this  case  is  only  that  of  a  limited  property ;  and,  in  the
exercise  of  it,  they  are  bound  to  respect  the  rights  of  others.
2  273.  Ruiea But,  when  two  different  rights  to  the  same  thing  happen  to
in  relation clash  with  each  Other,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  determine
to  intorfer-  -^^hich  ought  to  yield  to  the  other :  the  point  cannot  be  satis-
'ng  ng • factorily  decided,  without  attentively  considering  the  nature
of  the  rights,  and  their  origin. For  example,  a  river  belongs
to  me,  but  yovi  have  a  right  to  fish  in  it :  and  the  question  is,
whether  I  may  erect  mills  on  my  river,  whereby  the  fishery
will  become  more  difficult  and  less  advantageous  ? The  na-
[  123  ]  ture  of  our  rights  seems  to  determine  the  question  in  the
affirmative. I,  as  proprietor,  have  an  essential  right  over  the
river  itself: — you  have  only  a  right  to  make  use  of  it — a
right  which  is  merely  accessory,  and  dependent  on  mine ;  you
* have  but  a  general  right  to  fish  as  you  can  in  my  river,  such
as  you  happen  to  find  it,  and  in  whatever  state  I  may  think
fit  to  possess  it. I  do  not  deprive  you  of  your  right  by  erect-
ing my  mills :  it  still  exists  in  the  general  view  of  it ;  and,
if  it  becomes  less  useful  to  you,  it  is  by  accident,  and  becfause
it  is  dependent  on  the  exercise  of  mine.  (74)

The  case  is  different  with  respect  to  the  right  of  naviga-
tion, of  which  we  have  spoken.  This  right  necessarily  sup-
poses that  the  river  shall  remain  free  and  navigable^  and
therefore  excludes  every  work  that  will  entirely  interrupt  its
navigation.  .

The  antiquity  and  origin  of  the  rights  serve,  no  less  than
their  nature,  to  determine  the  question. The  more  ancient

(71)  This  principle  of  the  law  of  in  the  current  Eex  r.  Pngham,  S  Btim,
nations  has  been  ably  discussed  as  part  &  Cress.  355 ;  Rex  v.  Traffordy  1  Barn,
of  the  municipal  law  of  Scotland  and  k  Adolph.  874;  2  Man.  k  Rjl.  46S;  1
England  in  Menzien  v.  Brecidalhatie,  Moore  k  Seott^  401 ;  8  Bing.  204,  (in
3 Wils. k Shaw,  235; and  see The  error.)

King  V.  Lord  Yarboroitghf  1  Dow.  Rep., (73)  See  note  72.
'  New  Series,  179;  and  Wright  v.  How- (74)  But  this  doctrine  seems  ques-

ard,  1 Sim.  k  Stu.  190 ;  Hex  v.  Traf-  tionable. See  Wright  v.  Hotcardy  1  SHu

ford,  1  Barn,  k  Adolph.  874,  and  Chit-  k  Stu.  190 ;  and  3fa»on  v.  HiUf  3  Bam.

ty's General  Practice, 610. {4  Ball,  k  Adolph.  304;  Chitty's  General  Prac.

Rep.  211 ;  13  Mass.  420,  507;  3  Har.  k  191,  192. Eren  a  right  of  irrigating  at

McHen.  441;  2  Conn.  Rep.  584;  Goxe's  reasonable  times  may  qualify  the  absu-

Rep.  460. }  lute  and  general  right  to  the  ase  of  tht

(72)  That  is  permitted  as  well  as  a  water  for  working  a  miU.
Ikank  or  groove  to  prevent  an  akefation

200


OF  RIVERS, STREAMS, AND  LAKES.  123

rifftt,  if  it  be  absolute,  is  to  be  exerted  in  its  full  extent,  and ■*<>«  »•

O '  '  , • (TRAP XX  U.

the  other  only  so  far  as  it  may  be  extended  without  prejudice — :-

to  the  former ;  for,  it  could  only  be  established  on  this  foot-
ing, unless  the  possessor  of  the  first  right  has  expressly  con-
sented to  its  being  limited.

In  the  same  manner,  rights  ceded  by  the  proprietor  of  any
thing  are  considered  as  ceded  without  prejudice  to  the  other
rights  that  belong  to  him,  and  only  so  far  as  they  are  consist-
ent with  these  latter,  unless  an  express  declaration,  or  the
very  nature  of  the  right,  determine  it  otherwise.  If  1  have
ceded  to  another  the  right  of  fishing  in  my  river,  it  is  mani-
fest that  I  have  ceded  it  without  prejudice  to  my  other  rights,
and  that  I  remain  free  to  build  on  that  river  such  works  as  I
think  proper,  even  thougb  they  should  injure  the  fishery,  pro-
vided they  do  not  altogether  destroy  it.  (75)  A  work  of  thi^
latter  kind,  such  as  a  dam  that  would  hinder  the  fish  from
ascending  it,  could  not  be  built  but  in  case  of  necessity,  and
on  making,  according  to  circumstances,  an  adequate  compen-
sation to  the  person  who  has  a  right  to  fish  there.

What  we  have  said  of  rivers  and  streams,  may  be  easily  J  274.
applied  to  lakes. Every  lake,  entirely  included  in  a  country,  i^®**
belongs  to  the  nation  that  is  the  proprietor  of  that  country ;
for  in  taking  possession  of  a  territory,  a  nation  is  considered  as
having  appropriated  to  itself  every  thing  included  in  it ;  and,
as  it  seldom  happens  that  the  property  of  a  lake  of  any  con- *
siderable  extent  falls  to  the  share  of  individuals,  it  remains
common  to  the  nation. If  this  lake  is  situated  between  two
states,  it  is  presumed  to  be  divided  between  them  at  the  mid-
dle, while  there  is  no  title,  no  constant  and  manifest  custom,
to  determine  otherwise.

What  has  been  said  of  the  right  of  alluvion,  in  speaking  of  j  275. In-
rivers,  is  also  to  be  understood  as  applying  to  lakes. When  c^aae  of  »
a  lake  which  bounds  a  state  belongs  entirely  to  it,  every  in-  ^*^®'
crease  in  the  extent  of  that  lake  falls  under  the  same  predi-
cament as  the  lake  itself;  but  it  is  necessary  that  the  increase
Bhould  be  insensible,  as  that  of  land  in  alluvion,  and  moreover
that  it  be  real,  constant,  and  complete.  To  explain  myself  more
fully, — 1. 1  speak  of  insensible  increase:  this  is  the  reverse  of
alluvion ;  the  question  here  relates  to  the  increase  of  a  lake,  as,  [  124  ]
in  the  other  case,  to  an  increase  of  soil. If  this  increase  be
not  insensible, — ^if  the  lake,  overflowing  its  banks,  inundates  a
large  tract  of  land,  this  new  portion  of  the  lake,  this  tract  thus
covered  with  water,  still  belongs  to  its  former  owner. Upon
what  principles  can  we  found  the  acquisition  of  it  in  behalf  of  the
owner  of  the  lake?  The  space  is  very  easily  identified,  though
it  has  changed  its  nature :  and  ijb  is  too  considerable  to  admit  a
presumption  that  the  owner  had  no  intention  to  preserve  it  to
himself,  notwithstanding  the  changes  that  might  happen  to  it.

(75)  See  note  H,  ante,  p.  122.
2A  201


124  OP  BIVERS, 6TBEAMS, AND  LAKES.

BOOK  I.  But,  2.  If  the  lake  insensibly  undermines  a  part  of  the
CHAP,  xxir.  QppQgite  territory,  destroys  it,  and  renders  it  impossible  to  be
known,  by  fixing  itself  there,  and  adding  it  to  its  bed,  that
part  of  the  territory  is  lost  to  its  former  owner ;  it  no  longer
exists ;  and  the  whole  of  the  lake  thus  increased  still  belongs
to  the  same  state  as  before.

3.  If  some  of  the  lands  bordering  on  the  lake  are  only  ovei^
flowed  at  high  water,  this  transient  accident  cannot  produce
any  change  in  their  dependence.  The  reason  why  the  soil
which  the  lake  invades  by  little  and  little  belongs  to  the  owner
of  the  lake  and  is  lost  to  its  former  proprietor,  is,  because
the  proprietor  has  no  other  boundary  than  the  lake,  nor  any
other  marks  than  its  banks,  to  ascertain  how  far  his  posses-
sions extend.  If  the  water  advances  insensibly,  he  loses ;  if
it  retires  in  like  manner,  he  gains :  such  must  have  been  the
intention  of  the  nations  who  have  respectively  appropriated
to  themselves  the  lake  and  the  adjacent  lands : — it  can  scarce-
ly be  supposed  that  they  had  any  other  intention.  But  a
territory  overflowed  for  a  time  is  not  confounded  with  the
rest  of  the  lake :  it  can  still  be  recognised ;  and  the  owner
may  still  retain  his  right  of  property  in  it.  Were  it  other-
wise, a  town  overflowed  by  a  lake  woidd  become  subject  to  a
different  government  during  the  inundation,  and  refurn  to  its
former  sovereign  as  soon  as  the  waters  were  dried  up.
<  4.  For  the  same  reasons,  if  the  waters  of  the  lake,  pene-

trating by  an  opening  into  the  neighbouring  country,  there
form  a  bay,  or  new  lake,  joined  to  the  first  by  a  canal,  this
new  body  of  water  and  the  canal  belong  to  the  owner  of  the
country  in  which  they  are  formed.  For  the  boundaries  are
easily  ascertained :  and  we  are  not  to  presume  an  intention
of  relinquishing  so  considerable  a  tract  of  land  in  case  of  its
happening  to  be  invaded  by  the  waters  of  an  adjoining  lake.
It  must  be  observed  that  we  here  treat  the  question  as
arising  between  two  states :  it  is  to  be  decided  by  other  princi-
ples when  it  relates  to  proprietors  who  are  members  of  the
same  state.  In  the  latter  case,  it  is  not  merely  the  bounds
of  the  soil,  but  also  its  nature  and  use,  that  determine  the
possession  of  it.  An  individual  who  possesses  a  field  on  the
borders  of  a  lake,  cannot  enjoy  it  as  a  field  when  it  is  over-
flowed ;  and  a  person  who  has,  for  instance,  the  right  of  fish-
ing in  the  lake,  may  exert  his  right  in  this  new  extent :  if  the
[  125  ]  waters  retire,  the  field  is  restored  to  the  use  of  its  former
owner.  If  the  lake  penetrates  by  an  opening  into  the  low
lands  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  there  forms  a  permanent  in-
undation, this  new  lake  belongs  to  the  public,  because  all
lakes  belong  to  the  public.
{  276.  Land  The  Same  principles  show,  that  if  the  lake  insensibly  forma
fonned  on  an  accession  of  land  on  its  banks,  either  by  retiring  or  in  Any
*f'^^  other  manner,  this  increase  of  land  belongs  to  the  country
which  it  joins,  when  that  country  has  no  other  boundary  than


OF  THS  SEA.  125

the  lake. It  is  the  same  thins^  as  alluvion  on  th6  banks  of book  i.

.1  •  °  CHAP.  XXII,

the  rrver.

But,  if  the  lake  happened  to  be  suddenly  dried  up,  either  i  277. Bed
totally  or  in  a  great  part  of  it,  the  bed  would  remain  in  the  ^*J®^®
possession  of  the  sovereign  of  the  lake ;  the  nature  of  the  soil, ®  ^^'
80  easily  known,  sufficiently  marking  out  the  limits.

The  empire  or  jurisdiction  over  lakes  and  rivers  is  subject?  278. Ju-
to  the  same  rules  as  the  property  of  them,  in  all  the  cases  risdictio»
which  we  have  examined. Each  state  naturally  possesses  it  ^^"^rf*  g^.
over  the  whole  or  the  part  of  which  it  possesses  the  domain.
We  have  seen  (§  245)  that  the  nation,  or  its  sovereign,  com-
mands in  all  places  in  its  possession. .


CHAP.  xxin.

OP  THE  SEA.  (76)  CHAP,  xxiii.

IN  order  to  complete  the  exposition  of  the  principles  of  the  ?  270. Tkj
law  of  nations  with  respect  to  the  things  a  nation  may  pos-  *«*»  ^^  '^^
sess,  it  remains  to  treat  of  the  open  sea. The  use  of  the  open  ""®" »
sea  consists  in  navigation,  and  in  fishing ;  along  its  coasts  it
is  moreover  of  use  for  the  procuring  of  several  things  found
pear  the  shore,  such  as  shell-fish,  amber,  pearls,  &;c.,  for  the

(76)  As  to  the  dominion  of  the  main  Pipott,  Knapp's  Hep.  67;  Bhtndell  t.

■eaSy  and  right  to  limit  the  passage  there-  Chtterall,  5  Bar.  &  Aid.  268 ;  and  The

on,  and  the  claim  of  the  English  in  the  King  y.  Lord  Yariorougk,  3  Bar.  &  Cres.

British  seas  and  elsewhere,  in  general,  01,  and 1 Dow's  Appeal Cases,  New

Bee  the  authorities  collected  in  1  Chittj's  Series,  178. In  the  first  mentioned  case.

Commercial  Law,  88  to  108. With  re-  it  was  decided  that  the  lord  of  a  manor

speet  to  the  view  taken  by  the  Engliah  cannot  establish  a  claim  to  the  exclusive

lata  of  rights  in  and  connected  with  the  right  of  cutting  sea-weed  on  rocks  helow

sea  and  sea-shore,  the  doctrine  is,  that  low-water  mark,  except  by  a  grant  from

the  sea  is  the  property  of  the  king ;  and  the  king,  or  by  such  long  and  undis-

that  BO  is  the  land  beneath,  except  such  turbed  enjoyment  of  it  (viz.  at  least  for

part  of  that  land  as  is  capable  of  being  twenty  years  oontinnonsly)  as  to  give

usefully  occupied  without,  prejudice  to  him  a  title  by  prescription;  and  that

navigation,  and  of  which  a  8)ibj.ect  has  the  possession  necessary  to  constitute  a

either  had  a  grant  from  the  king,  or  title  by  pre8cripti<fti  must  be  uninter-

haa  BO  exolunvely  used  it  for  so  long  a  ropted  and  peaceable,  both  according  to

time  as  to  eonfer  on  him  a  title  by  pre-  the  law  of  England,  the  civil  law,  and

scnption. In the  latter  case, a  pre-  thoee  of  France,  Normandy,  and  Jersey.

sumption  is  raised  that  the  king  has  But,  where  artificial  cuts  or  recesses

either  granted  him  an  exclusive  right  have  been  made  on  the  sea-shore,  into

to  it^  or  has  permitted  him  to  have  pos-  and  over  which  the  sea  afterwards  flows,

■esBion  of  it,  and  to  employ  his  money  then,  in  the  absence  of  proof  as  to  acta

and  labour  upon  it,  so  as  to  confer  upon  of  ownership,  the  soil  of  these  recesses

him  a  title  by  occupation,  the  founda-  is  to  be  presumed  to  have  belonged  to

tion  of  most  of  the  rights  to  property  in  the  owner  of  the  adjacent  estate,  and

land. This  is  the  law  of  England,  and  not  to  the  crown. Lotee  v.  Oovett,  3  Bar.

also  of  Jersey,  and  some  other  ishunds  A  AdoL  863. — C.
belonging  to  Great  Britain. JBeneet  v.

203


125  •  07  THE  SEA.

BOOK  I. making  of  salt,  and  finally,  for  the  establisliment  of  places  of
CHAP,  xxm.  retreat  and  security  for  vessels.

J  280.  Whe- The  open  sea  is  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  the  holding
ther  the  sea  possession  of  it,  sinco  no  settlement  can  be  formed  on  it,  so
can  be  pes-,  ^g  ^q  hinder  others  from  passing. But  a  nation  powerful  at
ite  X)nii*° ^®^  ^^J  forbid  others  to  fish  in  it  and  to  navigate  it ;  declar-
nion  appro-  i^g  that  she  appropriates  to  herself  the  dominion  over  it,  and
priated. that  she  will  destroy  the  vessels  that  shall  dare  to  appear  in
it  without  her  permission.  Let  us  see  whether  she  has  a  right
to  do  this.
J  281. No- It  is  manifest  that  the  use  of  the  open  sea,  which  consists
body  hiM  a in  navigation  and  fishing,  is  innocent  and  inexhaustible  ;  that
"*^***te*to  ^^  *^  ®^y — ^®  ^^^  navigates  or  fishes  in  the  open  sea  does  no
Wi^ei  the  ^^j^^y  *o  ^°y  o^®j  ^i^d  the  sea,  in  these  two  respects,  is  suffi-
uf>e  of  the cient  for  all  mankind. Now,  nature  does  not  give  to  man  a
open  8oa. right  of  appropriating  to  himself  things  that  may  be  inno-
cently used,  and  that  are  inexhaustible,  and  sufficient  for  all.
For,  since  those  things,  while  common  to  all,  are  sufficient  to
•  supply  the  wants  of  each, — whoever  should,  to  the  exclusion

of  all  other  participants,  attempt  to  render  himself  sole  pro-
[  126  ]  prietor  of  them,  would  unreasonably  wrest  the  bounteous  gifts
of  nature  from  the  parties  excluded.  The  earth  no  longer
furnishing,  without  culture,  the  things  necessary  or  useful  to
the  human  race,  who  were  extremely  multiplied,  it  became
necessary  to  introduce  the  right  of  property,  in  order  that
each  might  apply  himself  with  more  success  to  the  cultivation
of  what  had  fallen  to  his  share,  and  multiply,  by  his  labour,
the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life.  It  is  for  this  reason
the  law  of  nature  approves  the  rights  of  dominion  and  pro-
perty, which  put  an  end  to  the  primitive  manner  of  living  in
common.  But  this  reason  cannot  apply  to  things  which  are
in  themselves  inexhaustible;  and,  consequently,  it  cannot
furnish  any  just  grounds  for  seizing  the  exclusive  possession
of  them.  If  the  free  and  common  use  of  a  thing  of  this  na-
ture was  prejudicial  or  dangerous  to.  a  nation,  the  care  of  their
own  safety  would  authorize  them  to  reduce  that  thing  under
their  own  dominion,  if  possible,  in  order  to  restrict  the  use
of  it  by  such  precautions  as  prudence  might  dictate  to  them.
But  this  is  not*the  case  with  the  open'  sea,  on  which  people
may  sail  and  fish  without  the  least  prejudice  to  any  person
whatsoever,  and  without  putting  any  one  in  danger.  No
nation,  therefore,  has  a  right  to  take  possession  of  the  open
sea,  or  claim  the  sole  use  of  it,  to  the  exclusion  of  other
nations.  The  kings  of  Portugal  formerly  arrogated  to  them-
selves the  empire  of  the  seas  of  Guinea  and  the  East  Indies  ;^
but  the  other  maritime  powers  gave  themselves  little  trouble
about  such  a  pretension.

The  right  of  navigating  and  fishing  in  the  open  sea  being

*  See  Grotins's  Siare  Liberam,  and  Selden's  Mare  Claorom,  lib.  i.  cap.  xm.
204


OF  THE  SEA.  .  126

then  a  right  common  to  all  men,  the  nation  that  attempts  to book  i.
exclude  another  from  that  advantage  does  her  an  injury,  and  ^''^'*'  ^^^"'
furnishes  her  with  sufScient  grounds  for  commencing  hostili-  ?  282. The
ties,  since  nature  authorizes  a  nation  to  repel  an  injury — that  ^^^^^  ^**
is,  to  make  use  of  force  against  whoever  would  deprive  her  e^j^iude

of  her  rights.  another.

Nay,  more, — a  nation,  which,  without  a  legitimate  claim,  does  it  an
would  arrogate  to  itself  an  exclusive  right  to  the  sea,  and  ^^I^'
support  its  pretensions  by  force,  does  an  injury  to  all  nations ;  l^^^  '^^^
,  it  infringes  their  common  right ;  and  they  are  justifiable  in  an  injury  to
forming  a  general  combination  against  it,  in  order  to  repress  ail  naUons.
such  an  attempt. Nations  have  the  greatest  interest  in  caus-
ing the  law  of  nations,  which  is  the  basis  of  their  tranquil-
lity, to  be  universally  respected. If  any  one  openly  tram- .
pies  it  under  foot,  they  all  may  and  ought  to  rise  up  against
him ;  and,  by  uniting  their  forces  to  chastise  the  common
enemy,  they  will  discharge  their  duty  towards  themselves,
and  towards human  society, of  which  they  are  members
(Prelim.  §  22).

However,  as  every  one  is  at  liberty  to  renounce  his  right,  j  284. it
a  Qation  may  acquire  exclusive  rights  of  navigation  and  fish-  may  aoquiw
ing,  by  treaties,  in  which  other  nations  renounce  in  its  favour  ^  uf  ? **"^*
the  rights  they  derive  from  nature. The  latter  are  obliged  ^„^^^.
to  observe  their  treaties ;  and  the  nation  they  have  favoured
has  a  right  to  maintain  by  force  the  possession  of  its  advan-
tages. Thus,  the  house  of  Austria  has  renounced,  in  favour  [  127  ^
of  England  and  Holland,  the  right  of  sending  vessels  from
the  Netherlands  to  the  East  Indies. In  Chrotiv^^  de  Jure
Belli  et  PaciSj  lib.  ii.  cap.  iii.  §  15,  may  be  found  many
instances  of  simUar  treaties.

As  the  rights  of  navigation  and  of  fishing,  and  other  rights  §  285.  bnt
which  may  be  exercised  on  the  sea,  belong  to  the  class  of  °°*  ^J  ?'•*
those  rights  of  mere  ability  {jura  merce  facultatia)^  '''^hich  ^*^^^j*^^"
are  imprescriptible  (§  95),  they  cannot  be  lost  for  want  of  use.  iiBe,{77)
Consequently,  although  a  nation  should  happen  to  have  been,
from  time  immemorial,  in  sole  possession  of  the  navigation
or  fishery  in  certain  seas,  it  cannot,  on  this  foundation,  claim
an  exclusive  right  to  those  advantages. For,  though  others
have  not  made  use  of  their  common  right  to  ijavigation  and
fishery  in  those  seas,  it  does  not  thence  follow  that  they  have
had  any  intention  to  renounce  it ; and  they  are  entitled  to
exert  it  whenever  they  think  proper.  (78)

But  it  may  happen  that  the  non-usage  of  the  right  may  J  286.  on-
assume  the  nature  of  a  consent  or  tacit  agreement,  and  thus  ^^^  ^y  ^^'"7
become  a  title  in  favour  of  one  nation  against  another.  When  J^^,^^,^^
a  nation  that  is  in  possession  of  the  navigation  and  fishery

(77)  See  observations  and  authorities,  tion  not  snccessfally  litigated  will  pre-
1  Chit.  Com.  L.  287,  n.  4,  5.  vent  a  right,  see  the  judgment  in  Beneti

(78)  As  to  the  eflfect  of  twenty  years'  v.  Pipon,  Knapp's  Rep.  (J7. — C.
unintemiptod  use,  and  what  interrap-

S  206


127


OF  THE SEA.


BOOK  I. in  certain  tracts  of  sea  claims  an  exclusive  right  to  them,  and
CBAP.  ixm.  £^^1^- jg  ^2j  participation  on  the  part  of  other  nations, — ^if  the
others  obey  that  prohibition  with  sufficient  marks  of  acquies-
cence, they  tacitly  renounce  their  own  right  in  favour  of  that
nation,  and  establish  for  her  a  new  right,  which  she  may  after-
wards lawfully  maintain  against  them,  especially  when  it  is
confirmed  by  long  use.  (79)
{  287. Th6 The  various  uses  of  the  sea  near  the  coasts  render  it  very
sea  near  the  gugceptiblo  of  property. It  furnishes  fish,  shells,  pearl?,  am-
becomra^  bcr,  &c. Now,  in  all  these  respects,  its  use  is  not  inexhausti-  .
property, ble  :  wherefore,  the  nation,  to  whom  the  coasts  belong,  may
appropriate  to  themselves,  and  convert  to  their  own  profit,
an  advantage  which  nature  has  so  placed  within  their  reach
as  to  enable  them  conveniently  to  take  possession  of  it,  in
the  same  manner  as  they  possessed  themselves  of  the  domi-
nion of  the  land  they  inhabit. Who  can  doubt  that  the  pearl
fisheries  of  Bahrem  and  Ceylon  may  lawfully  become  pro-
perty ? And  though,  where  the  catching  of  fish  is  the  only
object,  the  fishery  appears  less  liable  to  be  exhausted,  yet,  if
a  nation  have  on  their  coast  a  particular  fishery  of  a  profita-
ble nature,  and  of  which  they  may  become  masters,  shall  they
not  be  permitted  to  appropriate  to  themselves  that  bounteous
gift  of  nature,  as  an  appendage  to  the  country  they  possess,
and  to  reserve  to  themselves  the  great  advantages  which  their
commerce  may  thence  derive  in  case  there  be  a  sufficien
abundance  of  fish  to  furnish  the  neighbouring  nations  ? Bnt
if,  so  far  from  taking  possession  or  it,  the  nation  has  once
acknowledged  the  common  right  of  other  nations  to  come  and
fish  there,  it  can  no  longer  exclude  them  from  it ;  it  has  left
that  fishery  in  its  primitive  freedom,  at  least  with  respect  to
those  who  have  been  accustomed  to  take  advantage  of  it.
The  English  not  having  originally  taken  exclusive*  possession
of  the  herring  fishery  on  their  coasts,  it  is  become  common
[  128  ]  to  them  with  other  nations.

{  288.  An-  A  nation  may  appropriate  to  herself  those  things  of  which
other  reason  the  free  and  common  use  would  be  prejudicial  or  dangerous
for  »PP«>- ^^  Yier. This  is  a  second  reason  for  which  governments  ex-

pnating  the  ii*i**-  i  i  i>^  ^

Ilea  border-  ^^^d  their  dominion  over  the  sea  along  their  coasts  as  far  as
ing  on  the  they  are  able  to  protect  their  right.  It  is  of  considerable  im-
eoastB.  (80)  portance  to  the  safety  and  welfare  of  the  state  that  a  general
liberty  be  not  allowed  to  all  comers  to  approach  so  near  their
possessions,  especially  with  ships  of  war,  as  to  hinder  the  ap-
proach of  trading  nations,  and  molest  their  navigation.  Dur-
ing the  war  between  Spain  and  the  United  Provinces,  James  I.,
king  of  England,  marked  out  along  his  coasts  certain  bound-
aries, within  which  he  declared  that  he  would  not  sufifer  aDV
of  the  powers  at  war  to  pursue  their  enemies,  nor  even  allow

(79)  See  further,  1  Chit.  Com.  L.  94, (80)  See  farther,  1  Chit.  Com.  L,  9i,
B.  1 ;  ib.  98,  8.  1.— C.  n.  2 ;  ib.  94,  n.  1 ;  ib.  95,  n.  I ;  Puff  (v

S,  0.  3,  8.  6,  p.  69.— C.
206


OF  THE  -SS^  128

their  armed  vessels  to  stop  and  observe  the  ships  that  should  booc  r.
enter  or  sail  out  of  the  ports.*  These  parts  of  the  sea,  thus  ^'^'*'  "™*
subject  to  a  nation,  are  comprehended  in  her  territory  ;  nor
must  any  one  navigate  them  without  her  consent.  But,  to
vessels  that  are  not  liable  to  suspicion,  she  cannot,  without  a
breach  of  duty,  refuse  permission  to  approach  for  harmless
purposes,  since  it  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  every  proprietor  to
allow  to  strangers  a  free  passage,  even  by  land,  when  it  may
be  done  without  damage  or  danger.  It  is  true  that  the  state
itself  ia  sole  judge  of  what  is  proper  to  be  done  in  every  par-
ticular case  that  occurs ;  and,  if  it  judges  amiss,  it  is  to
blame  :  but  the  others  are  bound  to  submit.  It  is  otherwise^
however,  in  cases  of  necessity, — as,  for  instance,  when  a  ves-
sel is  obliged  to  enter  a  road  which  belongs  to  you,  in  order
to  shelter  lierself  from  a  tempest.  In  this  case,  the  right  of
entering  wherever  we  can,  provided  we  cause  no  damage,  or
that  we  repai^r  any  damage  done,  is,  as  we  shall  show  more  at
large,  a  remnant  of  the  primitive  freedom  of  which  no  man
can  be  supposed  to  have  divested  himself;  and  the  vessel
may  lawfully  enter  in  spite  of  you,  if  you  unjustly  refuse  her
permission.

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  to  what  distance  a  nation  may  §  289.  How
extend  ij;s  rights  over  the  sea  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  Bo-  ^"  ^}^  p<*"-
dinusf  pretends,  that  according  to  the  common  right  of  ^-U'^^^^^J^^*^
maritime  nations,  the  prince's  dominion  extends  to  the  distance
of  thirty  leagues  from  the  coast.  But  this  exact  determina-
tion can  only  be  founded  on  a  general  consent  of  nations,
which  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove.  Each  state  may,  on  this
head,  make  what  regulation  it  pleases  so  far  as  respects  the
transactions  of  the  citizens  with  each  other,  or  their  concerns
with  the  sovereign :  but,  between  nation  and  nation,  all  that
can  reasonably  be  said  is,  that  in  general,  the  dominion  of  the
state  over  the  neighbouring  sea  extends  as  far  as  her  safety
renders  it  necessary  and  her  power  is  able  to  assert  it ;  since,
on  the  one  hand,  she  cannot  appropriate  to  herself  a  thing
that  is  common  to  all  mankind,  such  as  the  sea,  except  so  far
as  she  has  need  of  it  for  some  lawful  end  (§  281^,  and,  on  the
other,  it  would  be  a  vain  and  ridiculous  pretension  to  claim  a  [  129  ]
right  which  she  were  wholly  unable  to  assert.  The  fleets  of
England  have  given  room  to  her  kings  to  claim  the  empire  of
the  seas  which  surround  that  island,  even  as  far  as  the  opposite
coasts.^  Selden  relates  a  solemn  act,§  by  which  it  appears,
that,  in  the  time  of  Edward  I.,  that  empire  was  acknowledged
by  the  greatest  part  of  the  maritime  nations  of  Europe  ;  and
the  republic  of  the  United  Provinces  acknowledged  it,  in  some

*  Seidell's  Mare  Claasnmj  lib.  ii.  -|-  In  his  Republic,  book  i.  c.  x.

(81)  See  further,  Paff.  b.  4,  c.  5,  a.  9, X  See  Selden'a  Mare  Clausum.
pp.  167,  8 ;  1  Chit  Com.  L.  99,  n.  1 ; }  Ibid.  Ub.  2,  cap.  zxriiL
b.  100,  n.  1 ;  ib.  101,  n.  2 ;  ib.  101,  n.
4  J  ib.  287,  n.  7;  ib  441,  n.  6.  207


12C  07  THE  SSA.

BOOK  I. measure,  by  the  treaty  of  Breda,  in  1667,  at  least  so  far  as

oaAP.  xxin.  rft]fttft(]  iq  ^i^q  honours  of  the  flag. But  solidly  to  establish  a

right  of  such  extent,  it  were  necessary  to  prove  very  clearly

the  express  or  tacit  consent  of  all  the  powers  concerned.  The

French  have  never  agreed  to  this  pretension  of  England;  and,

in  that  very  treaty  of  Breda  just  mentioned,  Louis  XIV.  would

not  even  suffer  the  channel  to  be  called  the  English  channel,

or  the  British  sea. The  republic  of  Venice  claims  the  empire

of  the  Adriatic,  and  everybody  knows  the  ceremony  annually

• performed  upon  that  account. In  confirmation  of  this  right

we  are  referred  to  the  examples  of  TJladislaus,  king  of  Xapks,

of  the  emperor  Frederic  III.,  and  of  some  of  the  kings  of

Hungary,  w}^o  asked  permission  of  the  Venetians  for  their

vese^s  to  pass  through  that  sea.* That  the  empire  of  the

Adriatic  belongs  to  the  republic  to  a  certain  distance  from  her

coasts,  in  the  places  of  which  she  can  keep  possession,  and  of

which  the  possession  is  important  to  her  own  safety,  appears

to  me  incontestable :  but  I  doubt  very  much  whether  any

power  is  at  present  disposed  to  acknowledge  her  sovereignty

over  the  whole  Adriatic  sea. Such  pretensions  to  empire  arc

respected  as  long  as  the  nation  that  makes  them  is  able  to

assert  them  by  force ;  but  they  vanish  of  course  on  the  decline

of  her  power. At  present  the  whole  space  of  the  s^a  within

cannon  shot  of  the  coast  is  considered  as  making  a  part  of

the  territory ;  and,  for  that  reason,  a  vessel  taken  under  the

cannon  of  a  neutral  fortress  is  not  a  lawful  prize.  (82)

i  290.  The  shores  of  the  sea  incontestably  belong  to  the  nation

Shores'and  that  possesses  the  country  of  which  they  are  a  part ;  and  they

ports.  (83) belong  to  the  class  of  public  things. If  civilians  have  set

them  down  as  things  common  to  all  mankind  {res  commifnes)^

it  is  only  in  regard  to  their  use ;  and  we  are  not  thence  to

conclude  that  they  considered  them  as  independent  of  the

empire :  the  very  contrary  appears  from  a  great  number  of

laws. Ports  and  harbours  are  manifestly  an  appendage  to

and  even  a  part  of  the  country,  and  consequently  are  the

property  of  the  nation. Whatever  is  said  of  the  land  itself

will  equally  apply  to  them,  so  far  as  respects  the  consequences

of  the  domain  and  of  the  empire.

{  291.  Bayi -^^^  we  have  said  of  the  parts  of  the  sea  near  the  coast,  may

and  Btraita.  be  Said  more  particularly,  and  with  much  greater  reason,  of

v^)  roads,  bays,  and  straits,  as  still  more  capable  of  being  pos-

[  130  ]  sessed,  and  of  greater  importance  to  the  safety  of  the  country.

But  I  speak  of  bays  and  straits  of  small  extent,  and  not  of

*  See  Selden's  Mare  Claiuxun,  lib.  i.  rigbt  to  cut  sea-weed  on  rocks  situate

oap.  xvi.  below  low- water  mark,  but  bj  cxprifi

• (82)  PoH,  b.  3,  c.  7f  2  132,  p.  344. — C.  grant  from  tbe  kiug>  or  unmtcrru]tted

(83) See further  1 Chittjr's Com-  presumption. Benest  v  Pipon,  Knapp's

morcial  Law,  100,  n.  2. The  sea-shore,  Rep.  67.

below  low-water  mark,  primd  facie  be-  (84)  See  1  Ghittj's  Commercial  Law,

longs  to  the  king  and  all  his  subjects,  100,  n.  3. — C.
mad  no  subject  can  claim  an  exclusive


OF  THB  SBA.  180

those  great  tracts  of  sea  to  which  these  names  are  sometimes  book  i.
given,  as  Hudson's  Bay  and  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  overS5£!LHE
which  the  empire  cannot  extend,  and  still  less  a  right  of  pro-
perty. A  bay,  whose  entrance  can  be  defended,  may  be  pos-
sessed and  rendered  subject  to  the  laws  of  the  sovereign ;  and
it  is  important  that  it  should  be  so,  since  the  country  might
be  much  more  easily  insulted  in  such  a  place,  than  on  the
coast  that  lies  exposed  to  the  winds  and  the  impetuosity  of
the  waves.

It  must  be  remarked,  with  regard  to  straits,  that,  when  ?  292.
they  serve  for  a  communication  between  two  seas,  the  naviga-  straita  in
tion  of  which  is  common  to  all,  or  several  nations,  the  nation  ^^^  '
which  possesses  the  strait  cannot  refuse  the  others  a  passage
through  it,  provided  that  passage  be  innocent  and  attended
with  no  danger  to  herself.  By  refusing  it  without  just  reasons,
she  would  deprive  those  nations  of  an  advantage  granted  them
by  nature ;  and  indeed,  the  right  to  such  a  passage  is  a  rem-
nant of  the  primitive  liberty  enjoyed  by  all  mankind.  No-
thing but  the  care  of  his  own  safety  can  authorize  the  owner
of  the  strait  to  make  use  of  certain  precautions,  and  to  require
certain  formalities,  commonly  established  by  the  custom  of
*  nations.  He  has  a  right  to  levy  a  moderate  tax  on  the  ves-
sels that  pass,  partly  on  account  of  the  inconvenience  they
give  him,  by  obliging  him  to  be  on  his  guard — partly  as  a
return  for  the  safety  he  procures  them  by  protecting  them
from  their  enemies,  by  keeping  pirates  at  a  distance,  and  by
defraying  the  expense  attendant  on  the  support  of  light-houses,
sea-marks,  and  other  things  necessary  to  the  safety  of  mari-
ners. Thus,  the  king  of  Denmark  requires  a  custom  at  the
straits  of  the  Sound.  Such  1  ight  ought  to  be  founded  on  the
same  reasons,  and  subject  to  ihe  same  rules,  as  the  tolls  estab-
lished on  land,  or  on  a  river. (See  §§  103  and  104.)

It  is  necessary  to  mention  the  right  to  wrecks — a  right  which  j  293.
was  the  wretched  offspring  of  barbarism,  and  which  has  almost  R^firht  to
everywhere  fortunately  disappeared  with  its  parent. Justice  '^•*^-  C^*)
and  humanity  cannot  allow  of  it,  except  in  those  cases  only •
where  the  proprietors  of  the  effects  saved  from  a  wreck  cannot
possibly  be  discovered. In  such  cases,  those  effects  belong  to
the  person  who  is  the  first  to  take  possession  of  them,  or  to
the  sovereign,  if  the  law  reserves  them  for  him.

If  a  sea  is  entirely  enclosed  by  the  territories  of  a  nation,  J  294. A
and  has  no  other  communication  with  the  ocean  than  by  a  "®*  ©ndosed
channel  of  which  that  nation  may  take  possession,  it  appears  J^ititorfM  of
that  such  a  sea  is  no  less  capable  of  being  occupied,  and  be-  a  naUon.
coining  property,  than  the  land ;  and  it  ought  to  follow  the


(85)  See  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law, in  general  modem  cases,  Sbip  Angnsta,
101,  n.  1.— C.  1  Hagg.  Rep.  16 ;  and  The  Bailiffs,  Ac,

(86)  The  right  to  wreck  is  not  nnfre- of  Dunwieh  y.  Sterry,  1  Barn. 'A  Adolph.
^uently  the  subject  of  litigation  in  the 831. — C.

Mtmicipkl  Goortg  of  Great  Britain ;  see

27  b2  209


/


130  07  THE  SEA.


BOOK  I. fate  of  the  country  that  surroands  it. The  Mediterranean,
CHAP.  xxin.  j^  former  times,  was  absolutely  enclosed  within  the  territories
of  the  Romans;  and  that  people,  by  rendering  themselves
masters  of  the  strait  which  joins  it  to  the  ocean,  might  subject
the  Mediterranean  to  their  empire,  and  assume  the  dominion
over  it. They  did  not,  by  such  procedure,  injure  the  right?
of  other  nations ;  a  particular  sea  being  manifestly  designed
[  131  ]  by  nature  for  the  use  of  the  countries  and  nations  that  sur-
round it. Besides,  by  barring  the  entrance  of  the  Mediter-
ranean  against  all  suspected  vessels,  the  Romans,  by  one  single
stroke,  secured  the  immense  extent  of  their  coasts :  and  this
reason  was  sufficient  to  authorize  them  to  take  possession  of
it. And,  as  it  had  absolutely  no  communication  but  with  the
.«*ates  which  belonged  to  them,  they  were  at  liberty  to  permit
or  prohibit  the  entrance  into  it,  in  the  same  manner  as  into
any  of  their  towns  or  provinces.
i  295. Tho When  a  nation  takes  possession  of  certain  parts  of  the  sea,
parts  of  the  j^  takes  possession  of  the  empire  over  *them,  as  well  as  of  the

■ea  possess-  j  •  ^.i.  • • i i.*  i.  j  j  • x i-

ed  by  a  uomam,  on  the  same  principle  which  we  advanced  m  treating
power  are  of  the  land  (§  205).  These  parts  of  the  sea  are  within  the
within  its  jurisdiction  of  the  nation,  and  a  part  of  its  territory :  the
j«™diction.  sovereign  commands  there ;  he  makes  laws,  and  may  punish
^ '  those  who  violate  them ;  in  a  word,  he  has  the  same  rights

there  as  on  land,  and,  in  general,  every  right  which  the  laws
of  the  state  allow  him.

It  is,  however,  true  that  the  empire  and  the  domain^  or  pro-
perty,  are  not  inseparable  in  their  own  nature,  even  in  a  sove-
reign state.'*'  As  a  nation  may  possess  the  domain  or  pro-
perty of  a  tract  of  land  or  sea,  without  having  the  sovereignty
of  it,  so  it  may  likewise  happen  that  she  shall  posses?  the
sovereignty  of  a  place,  of  which  the  property  or  the  domain,
with  respect  to  use,  belongs  to  some  other  nation.  But  it  is
always  presumed,  that,  when  a  nation  possesses  the  useful
domain  of  any  place  whatsoever,  she  has  also  the  higher  do-
main and  empire,  or  the  sovereignty  (§  205).  We  cannot,
•  however,  from  the  possession  of  the  empire,  infer,  with  equal
probability,  a  coexistent  possession  of  the  useful  domain;
for,  a  nation  may  have  good  reasons  for  claiming  the  empire
over  a  country,  and  particularly  over  a  tract  of  sea,  with-
out pretending  to  have  any  property  in  it,  or  any  useful  do-
main. The  English  have  never  claimed  the  property  of  all
the  seas  over  which  they  have  claimed  the  empire.  (88)

^ -*'  _-__-■  — .

(87)  See  further,  1  Chittjr's  Commer-  mercial  Law,  101,  3,  8.  As  to  the
cial  LaW|  95,  n.  3 ;  Grotius,  b.  2,  c.  3,  s.  duty  of  ike  Jlag,  or  the  obligation  npoa
13,  p.  166. — C.  other  nations  to  pay  a  particular  mark

*  See  Book  II.  J  83.  of  respect to  British men-of-war,  br

(88)  As  to  the  British  seas,  and  the  striking  their  flag  or  lowering  their
claims  of  the  English  of  empire  oyer  topsail,  formerly  claimed,  and  so  ob-
the  seas  in  general,  see  Selden's  Mare  noxious  to  foreign  shipping,  see  id.
Clausum,  b.  2,  c.  1,  p.  182,  and  other  101,  2;  Molloy,  b.  1,  c  5,  ss.  11:  tani
authorities  collected 1 Chitty's Com-  see  Postlewaito's  Diet,  tit  Sea,  Britisk;

21<>


OF  THE SEA.  • 181

*

This  is  all  we  have  to  say  in  this  first  book.  A  more  mi-  book  i.
nute  detail  of  the  duties  and  rights  of  a  nation,  considered  in  c"^p-  "^q*
herself,  would  lead  us  too  far.  Such  detail  must,  as  we  hare
already  obseryed,  be  sought  for  in  particular  treatises  on  the
public  and  political  law.  We  are  very  far  from  flattering
ourselves  that  we  have  omitted  no  important  article ;  this
is  a  slight  sketch  of  an  immense  picture  :  but  an  intelligent
reader  will  without  difficulty  supply  all  our  omissions  by  mak-
ing a  proper  application  of  the  general  principles :  we  have
taken  the  utmost  care  solidly  to  establish  those  principles,
and  to  develop  them  with  precision  and  perspicuity.

Marten's  L.  Nat  168, 9 — ^172, 175 ;  Com.  tween  shipfl,  fee  Otntn  de  Droit  PuMm

Big.  Navigation,  A. And,  ai  to the  InUme  et  Exteme,  torn.  2,  p.  SO  to  84»

French  yiew  of  the  right  of  the  Be%  and  id.  396  to  406^~O.
and  of  the  reepecta  to  be  ehferred  be^

211


188


BOOK  II,

OF  A  NATION  CONSIDERED  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO

OTHERS.


CHAP.  L

CHAP."! ^^  ^^^  COMMON  DUTIES  OF  A  NATION  TOWAKDS  OTHERS; OR,
'—^  OF  THE OFFICES OF  HUMANITY BETWEEN  NATIONS.


1 1. Fonn-  1  HE  following  maxims  will  appear  very  strange  to  cabinet
datioA  of politicians ;  and  such  is  the  misfortune  of  mankind,  that,  to
and  mutakT  ^^^7  ^^  those  refined  conductors  of  nations,  the  doctrine  of
duties  of this  chapter  will  be  a  subject  of  ridicule. Be  it  so ;  but  we
Qations.. will,  nevertheless,  boldly  lay  down  what  the  law  of  nature
prescribes  to  nations. Shall  we  be  intimidated  by  ridicule,
when  we  speak  after  Cicero  ? That  great  man  held  the  reing
of  the  most  powerful  state  that  ever  existed ;  and  in  that
station  he  appeared  no  less  eminent  than  at  the  bar. The
punctual  observance  of  the  law  of  nature  he  considered  as
the  most  salutary  policy  to  the  state. In  my  preface,  I  have
already  quoted  this  fine  passage — Nihil  est  quod  adhue  de
republica  putem  dictum^  et  quo  posaim  hngius  progredi^  ni^i
8it  confirmatum^  non  modo  falsum  esse  illud,  sine  injuria  nou
posse^  sed  hoc  verissimum^  sine  summa  justitia  rempuiUeam
regi  non  posse.* I  might  say  on  good  grjunds,  that,  by  the
words  summa  justitia^  Cicero  means  that  universal  justice
which  consists  in  completely  fulfilling  the  law  of  nature. But
in  another  place  he  explains  himself  more  clearly  on  this
head,  and  gives  us  sufficiently  to  understand  that  he  does  not
[  184  ]  confine  the  mutual  duties  of  men  to  the  observance  of  justice,
properly  so  called. "Nothing,"  says  he,  "is  more  agree-
able to  nature,  more  capable  of  affording  true  satisfaction,
than,  in  imitation  of  Hercules,  to  undertake  even  the  most
arduous  and  painful  labours  for  the  benefit  and  preservation
of  all  nations." Magis  eU  secundum  naturam,  pro  omnibus
gentibuSy  si  fieri  possit^  conservandis  aut  juvandis^  niaxiwa
labores  molestiasque  suscipere,  imitantem  Herculem  illuiJi,
quem  hominum  fama,  beneficiorum  memor,  in  concilium  m*
lestium  colhcavU^  quam  vivere  in  solitudine^  non  modo  sint

*  Fragm.  ex  lib.  i/\  De  Kepublieik
212


COMMON  DUTIES  OP  A  NATION, ETC.  • 1B4

uUis  molestiiSy  sed  etiam  in  maximis  voluptatihus^  abundan-  book  ii.
tern  omnibus  copiiSy  ut  exceUa%  etiam  pulchritudine  et  viribus.  ^°^^'  '"  ■
Quocirca  optima  quisque  et  splendidtasimo  ingenio  longe  illam
vitam  huic  anteponit.*  In  the  same  chapter,  Cicero  ex-
pressly refutes  those  who  are  for  excluding  foreigners  from
the  benefit  of  those  duties  to  which  they  acknowledge  them-
selves bound  towards  their  fellow-citizens.  Qui  autem  civium
rationem  dieunt  habendam^  externorum  negant,  hi  dirimunt
jommunem  humani  generis  soeietatem;  qua  sublata^  benefit
centiay  liber alitas^  bonitas,  justitia,  funditus  tollitur ;  qum
qui  tollunty  etiam  adversus  Deos  immortales  impii  judicandi
sunt;  ab  iis  enim  constitutam  inter  homines  soeietatem  ever-
tunt.

And  why  should  we  not  hope  still  to  find,  among  those
who  are  at  the  head  of  afiairs,  some  wise  individuals  who  are
convinced  of  this  great  truth,  that  virtue  is,  even  for  sove-
reigns and  political  bodies,  the  most  certain  road  to  prosperity
and  happiness?  There  is  at  least  one  benefit  to  be  expected
from  the  open  assertion  and  publication  of  sound  maxims,
which  is,  that  even  those  who  relish  them  the  least  are  there-
by laid  under  a  necessity  of  keeping  within  ^ome  bounds,  lest
they  should  forfeit  their  characters  altogether.  To  flatter
ourselves  with  the  vain  expectation  that  men,  and  especially
men  in  power,  will  be  inclined  strictly  to  conform  to  the  laws
of  nature,  would  be  a  gross  mistake;  and  to  renounce  all
hope  of  making  impression  on  some  of  them,  would  be  to
give  up  mankind  for  lost.

Nations,  being  obliged  by  nature  reciprocally  to  cultivate
human  society  (Prelim.  §  11),  are  bound  to  observe  towards
each  other  all  tne  duties  which  the  safety  and  advantage  of
that  society  require.

The  offices  of  humanity  are  those  succours,  those  duties,  i  2. Officai
which  men  owe  to  each  other,  as  men, — ^that  is,  as  social  be-  *^^  i»^"iani-
ings  formed  to  live  in  society,  and  standing  in  need  of  mu-  |,he^"fonn-
tual  assistance  for  their  preservation  and  happiness,  and  to  dation.
enable  them  to  live  in  a  manner  conformable  to  their  nature.
NoWy  the  laws  of  nature  being  no  less  obligatory  on  nations
than  on  individuals  (Prelim,  §  6),  whatever  duties  each  man
owes  to  other  men,  the  same  does  each  nation,  in  its  way,  owe
to  other  nations  (Prelim.  §  10,  &c.). Such  is  the  foundation
of  those  common  duties — of  those  offices  of  humanity — to
which  nations  are reciprocally  bound towards  each  other.
They  consist,  generally,  in  doing  every  thing  in  our  power  [  135  ]
for  the  preservation  and  happiness  of  others,  as  far  as  such
conduct  is  reconcilable  with  our  duties  towards  ourselves.

The  nature  and  essence  of  man,  who,  without  the  assist-  ?  3.  Gene-
ance  of  his  fellow-men,  is  unable  to  supply  all  his  wants,  to  ":^  P'^^^p^'
preserve  himself,  to  render  himself  perfect,  and  to  live  hap-  ^^^0^1  ^u.

•  De  Offioiifly  lib.  iiL  eap.  5.  tions.


■


135  OOMMOK  BUTIES  OF  A  NATION


BOOK  XL  pily,  plainly  show  us  that  he  is  destined  to  live  in  society,  in
^^^^'  '•  the  interchange  of  mutual  aid ;  and,  consequently,  that  all
men  are,  by  their  very  nature  and  essence,  obliged  to  unite
their  common  efforts  for  the  perfection  of  their  own  being
and  that  of  their  condition.  The  surest  method  of  succeed-
ing in  this  pursuit  is,  that  each  individual  should  exert  his
efforts  first  for  himself  and  then  for  others.  Hence  it  fol-
lows, that,  whatever  we  owe  to  ourselves,  we  likewise  owe  to
others,  so  far  as  they  stand  in  need  of  assistance,  and  we  can
grant  it  to  them  without  being  wanting  to  ourselves.  Since,
then,  one  nation,  in  its  way,  owes  to  another  nation  every  duty
that  one  man  owes  to  another  man,  we  may  confidently  lay
down  this  general  principle  .'—one  state  owes  to  another  state
whatever  it  owes  to  itself,  so  far  as  that  other  stands  in  real
need  of  its  assistance,  and  the  former  can  grant  it  without
neglecting  the  duties  it  owes  to  itself.  Such  is  the  eternal
and  immutable  law  of  nature.  Those  who  might  be  alarmed
at  this  doctrine,  as  totally  subversive  of  the  maxims  of  sound
policy,  will  be  relieved  from  their  apprehensions  by  the  two
following  considerations : —

1.  Social  bodies  or  sovereign  states  are  much  more  culpa-
ble of  supplying  all  their  wants  than  individual  men  are ;
and  mutual  assistance  is  not  so  necessary  among  them,  nor
so  frequently  required.  Now,  in  those  particulars  which  a
nation  can  itself  perform,  no  succour  is  due  to  it  from  others.

2.  The  duties  of  a  nation  towards  itself,  and  chiefly  the
care  of  its  own  safety,  require  much  more  circumspection  and
reserve  than  need  be  observed  by  an  individual  in  giving  as-
sistance to  others. This  remark  we  shall  soon  illustrate.

;  4. Daties Of  all  the  duties  of  a  nation  towards  itself,  the  chief  ob-
«f  a  nadon ject  is  its  preservation  and  perfection,  together  with  that  of

le^ttion'of  ^^  ^***®-  ^*^®  ^®^*^^  Siven  of  them  in  the  first  book  of  this
othen.  work  may  serve  to  point  out  the  several  objects  in  relation  to
which  a  state  may  and  should  assist  another  state.  Every
nation  ought,  on  occasion,  to  labour  for  the  preservation  of
others,  and  for  securing  them  from  ruin  and  destruction,  as
far  as  it  can  do  this  without  exposing  itself  too  much.  Thus,
when  a  neighbouring  nation  is  unjustly  attacked  by  a  power-
ful enemy  who  threatens  to  oppress  it,  if  you  can  defend  it,
without  exposing  yourself  to  great  danger,  unquestionably  it
is  your  duty  to  do  so.  Let  it  not  be  said,  in  objection  to
this,  that  a  sovereign  is  not  to  expose  the  lives  of  his  soldiers
for  the  safety  of  a  foreign  nation  with  which  he  has  not  con-
tracted a  defensive  alliance.  It  may  be  his  own  case  to  stand
in  need  of  assistance ;  and,  consequently,  he  is  acting  for  the
safety  of  his  own  nation  in  giving  energy  to  the  spirit  and  dispo-
I.  186  ]  sition  to  afford  mutual  aid.  Accordingly,  policy  here  coincides
with  and  enforces  obligation  and  duty.  It  is  the  interest  of
princes  to  stop  the  progress  of  an  ambitious  monarch,  who
aims  at  aggiandizing  himself  by  subjugating  his  neighbours.

2U


TOWARDS OTHERS.  136


A  powerful  league  was  formed  in  favour  of  the  United  Pro- bc.^c  n.
vinces,  when  threatened  with  the  yoke  of  Louis  XIV.* When ^^^^  '•
the  Turks  laid  siege  to  Vienna,  the  brave  Sobieski,  king  of
Poland,  saved  the  house  of  Austria,t  and  possibly  all  Ger-
many, and  his  own  kingdom.

For  the  same  reason,  if  a  nation  is  afflicted  with  famine,  ?  fi- it  ought
all  those  who  have  provisions  to  spare  ought  to  relieve  her  ^  ^^^*  *
distress,  without,  however,  exposing  themselves  to  want.  (89)  Jf^^J  ^'^j^
But,  if  that  nation  is  able  to  pay  for  the  provisions  thus  fur-  famine  or
nished,  it  is  perfectly  lawful  to  sell  them  to  her  at  a  reason-  any  other
able  rate ;  for  they  are  not  bound  to  furnish  her  with  what  «ai*n^ities.
she  is  herself  capable  of  procuring ;  and,  consequently,  there
is  no  obligation  of  gratuitously  bestowing  on  her  such  things
as  she  is  able  to  purchase. To  give  assistance  in  such  ex-
treme necessity  is  so  essentially  conformable  to  hnpanity,
that  the  duty  is  seldom  neglected  by  any  nation  that  has  re-
ceived the  slightest  polish  of  civilization. The  great  Henry
the  Fourth  could  not  forbear  to  comply  with  it  in  favour  of
obstinate  rebels  who  were  bent  on  his  destruction.^

Whatever  be  the  calamity  with  which  a  nation  is  afflicted,
the  like  assistance  is  due  to  it.  We  have  seen  little  states  in
Switzerland  order  public  collections  to  be  made  in  behalf  of
towns  or  villages  of  the  neighbouring  countries,  which  had
been  ruined  by  fire,  and  remit  them  liberal  succours ;  the  dif-
ference of  religion  proving  no  bar  to  the  performance  of  so
humane  a  deed.  The  calamities  of  Portugal  have  given  Eng-
land an  opportunity  of  fulfilling  the  duties  of  humanity  with
that  noble  generosity  which  characterizes  a  great  nation.
On  the  first  intelligence  of  the  disastrous  fate  of  Li8bon,§  the
parliament  voted  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling  for  the
relief  of  an  unfortunate  people ;  the  king  also  added  consi-
derable sums:  ships,  laden  with  provisions  and  all  kinds  of
succours,  were  sent  away  with  the  utmost  despatch ;  and  their
arrival  convinced  the  Portuguese  that  an  opposition  in  belief
and  worship  does  not  restrain  the  beneficence  of  those  who
understand  the  claims  of  humanity.  On  the  same  occasion,
likewise,  the  king  of  Spain  signally  displayed  his  tenderness
for  a  near  ally,  and  exerted,  in  a  conspicuous  manner,  his
humanity  and  generosity.

A  nation  must  not  simply  confine  itself  to  the  preservation  j  0.  It  ongM
of  other  states ;  it  should  likewise,  according  to  its  power  and  tocontribnt*
their  want  of  its  assistance,  contribute  to  their  perfection.  ^^^^^^®^*'

other  statM.

*  In  1672.  which  would  have  occasioned  more  de-

f  He  defeated  the  Turks,  and  obliged struction  than  the  most  disastrous  defeat

fthem  to  raife  the  siege  of  Vienna,  in in  battle,  England  supplied  them  with

1883.  Peruvian  bark,  which  instantly  checked

(89)  Ante,  Prelim.  }  14. Upon  this and  overcame  the  disease. — C.
principle, during the late  war  with %  At  the  famous  siege  of  Paris.
Fniace,  when  the French  troops  were j  The  earthquake  by  which  a  great
titensively  afflicted with a disorder part  of  that  dity  was  destroyed.

216


136


COMMON DUTIES  OF  A  NATION


BOCK  n. We  have  already  shown  (Prelim.  §  13)  that  natural  society
CHAP.  '!_  imposes  on  it  this  general  obligation. We  are  now  come  to


[  137  ]  the  proper  place  for  treating  of  the  obligation  somewhat  more
in  detail.  A  state  is  more  or  less  perfect,  as  it  is  more  or
less  adapted  to  attain  the  end  of  civil  society,  which  consists
in  procuring  for  its  members  every  thing  of  which  they  stand
in  need,  for  the  necessities,  the  conveniences,  and  enjoyments
of  life,  and  for  their  happiness  in  general, — in  providing  for
the  peaceable  enjoyment  of  property,  and  the  safe  and  easy
administration  of  justice, — and,  finally,  in  defending  itself
against  all  foreign  violence  (Book  I.  §  15).  Every  nation
therefore,  should  occasionally,  and  according  to  its  power,
contribute,  not  only  to  put  another  nation  in  possession  of
these  advantages,  but  likewise  to  render  it  capable  of  pro-
curing them  itself.  Accordingly,  a  learned  nation,  if  applied
to  for  masters  and  teachers  in  the  sciences,  by  another  nation
desirous  of  shaking  off  its  native  barbarism,  ought  not  to
refuse  such  a  request.  A  nation,  whose  happiness  it  is  to
live  under  wise  laws,  should,  on  occasion,,  make  it  a  point
of  duty  to  communicate  them.  Thus,  when  the  wise  and  vir-
tuous  Romans  sent  ambassadors  to  Greece  to  collect  good
laws,  the  Greeks  were  far  from  rejecting  so  reasonable  and
so  laudable  a  request.  (90)
,j  r.  Butnot  But,  though  a  nation  be  obliged  to  promote,  as  far  as  lies
by  force,  jj^  j^-g  power,  the  perfection  of  others,  it  is  not  entitled  forcibly
to  obtrude  these  good  o£Sces  on  them.  Such  an  attempt
would  be  a  violation  of  their  natural  liberty.  In  order  to
compel  any  one  to  receive  a  kindness,  w^  must  have  an  autho-
rity over  him ;  but  nations  are  absolutely  free  and  independ-
ent (Prelim.  §  4).  Those  ambitious  Europeans  who  attacked
the  American  nations,  and  subjected  them  to  their  greedy
dominion,  in  order,  as  they  pretended,  to  civilize  them,  and
cause  them  to  be  instructed  in  the  true  religion, — those
usurpers,  I  say,  grounded  themselves  on  a  pretext*  equally
unjust  And  ridiculous.  It  is  strange  to  hear  the  learned  and
judicious  Grotius  assert  that  a  sovereign  may  justly  take  up
arms  to  chastise  nations  which  are  guilty  of  enormous  trans-
gressions of  the  law  of  natui*e,  which  treat  their  parents  with
inhumanity  like  the  SogdianSy  which  eat  human  flesh  as  the
ancient  Grauhj  ^(?.*(91) What  led  him  into  this  error,  was,


(00)  See  the  conduct  of  Charlemagne
and  Alfred  the  Great  Hume  Hist.
The  ancient  policy  was  to  withhold  any
communication  or  information  in  im-
provements which  might  diminish  our
home  manufactures ;  but  the  restrictions
upon  the  exportations  of  artificers  and
machinery  were  removed  by  5  Geo.  4,
0.  97.  If  there  be  reciprocity  on  the
part- of  the  other  nation^  the  indulgence
of  this  liberal  policy  must  be  desinUble ;
216


but  otherwise  it  requires  prudential
checks. — C.

*  Do  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  liK  iL  capw
XX.  ^  11.

(91)  And  see  the  absurdi^  of  rack
interference  sarcastically  weU  exempli-
fied by  Cervantes  in  his  Don  Quixoto,
releasing  the  refractory  apprentiee  aod
compelling  his  master  to  beg  pardua,
thereby  occasioning  ^e  former  an  in-
finitely more  severe  obastisement. — C


TOWARDS  OTHEB8.  187


n.

CHAP. L


bis  attributing  to  every  independent  man,  and  of  course  to  ^^ok
rvery  sovereign,  an  odd  kind  of  rigbt  to  punish  faults  which
involve  an  enormous  violation  of  the  laws  of  nature,  though
they  do  not  affect  either  his  rights  or  his  safety.  But  we
have  shown  (Book  I.  §  169)  that  men  derive  the  right  of  pun-
ishment solely  from  their  right  to  provide  for  their  own  safety ;
and  consequently  they  cannot  claidi  it  except  against  those
by  whom  they  have  been  injured.  Could  it  escape  Grotius,
that,  notwithstanding  all  the  precautions  added  by  him  in
the  following  paragraphs,  his  opinion  opens  a  door  to  all  the
ravages  of  enthusiasm  and  fanaticism,  and  furnishes  ambition
with  numberless  pretexts  ?  Mohammed  and  his  successors  have
desolated  and  subdued  Asia,  to  avenge  the  indignity  done  to
the  unity  of  the  Godhead ;  all  whom  they  termed  associators
or  idolaters  fell  victims  to  their  devout  fury.  [  138  ]

Since  nations  ought  to  perform  these  duties  or  oflBces  of  ?  8. The
humanity  towards  each  other,  according  as  one  stands  in  need,  ^^}^  *^"*
and  the  other  can  reasbnably  comply  with  them,—- every  nation  l^l^  J
being  free,  independent,  and  sole  arbitress  of  her  own  actions,  humanity,
it  belongs  to  each  to  consider  whether  her  situation  warrants
her  in  asking  or  granting  any  thing  on  this  head. Thus,
1.  Every  nation  has  a  perfect  right  to  ask  of  another  that
assistance  and  those  kind  offices  which  she  conceives  herself
to  stand  in  need  of. To  prevent  her,  would  be  doing  her  an -
injury. If  she  makes  the  application  without  necessity,  she
is  guilty  of  a  breach  of  duty;  but,  in  this  respect,  she  is
wholly  independent  of  the  judgment  of  others. A  nation  has
a  right  to  ask  for  these  kind  offices,  but  not  to  demand  them.

For,  2.  These  offices  being  due  only  in  necessity,  and  by  a  j  9. The
nation  which  can  comply  with  them  without  being  wanting  tonghtof
itself ;  the  nation  that  is  applied  to  has,  on  the  other  hand,  a  ^^^^*^
right  of  judging  whether  the  case  really  demands  them,  and  ^^  ^^  ^
whether  circumstances  will  allow  her  to  grant  them  consist-  be  granted,
ently  with  that  regard  which  she  ought  to  pay  to  her  own
safety  and  interests :  for  instance,  a  nation  is  in  want  of  corn,
and  applies  to  another  nation  to  sell  her  a  quantity  of  it : —
in  this  case  it  rests  with  the  latter  party  to  judge  whether,  by
a  compliance  with  the  request,  they  will  not  expose  themselves
to  the  danger  of  a  scarcity :  and,  if  they  refuse  to  comply,
their  determination  is  to  be  patiently  acquiesced  in. We  have
very  lately  seen  a  prudent  performance  of  this  duty  on  the
part  of  Russia :  she  generously  assisted  Sweden  when  threaten-
ed with  a  famine,  but  refused  to  other  powers  the  liberty  of
purchasing  corn  in  Livonia,  from  the  circumstance  of  stand
ing  herself  in  need  of  it,  and,  no  doubt,  from  weighty  political
motives  likewise.

Thus,  the  right  which  a  nation  has  to  the  offices  of  humanity  ?  !<>•  A  na-
is  but  an  imperfect  one:  she  cannot  compel  another  nation  to *^®° ""****•
the  performance  of  them.  The  nation  that  unreasonably  ^^^*^^"j..
refuses  them  offends  against  equity,  which  consists  in  acting  fom  thoM

28  I  217


138  COMMON  DUTIES  OF  A  NATION


BOOK  n. conformably  to  the  imperfect  right  of  another :  but  thereby
^^^^'  '• no  injury  is  done ;  injury  or  injustice  being  a  trespass  against
offices  of the  perfect  right  of  another.

ref^ai^i/no ^*  ^®  impossible  that  nations  should  mutually  discharge  all
wrong. these  several  duties  if  they  do  not  love  each  other." This  is
§  n. Mu-  *^®  P^r^  source  from  which  the  offices  of  humanity  should
tuai  love  of  proceed ;  they  will  retain'  the  character  and  perfection  of  it.
natioQa. Then  nations  will  be  seen  sincerely  and  cheerfully  to  help  each
other,  earnestly  to  promote  their  common  welfare,  and  culti-
vate peace,  without  jealousy  or  distrust.
i  12. Each A  real  friendship  will  be  seen  to  reign  among  them ;  and
nation this  happy  state  consists  in  a  mutual  affection. Every  nation
tivate  the^^  obliged  to  Cultivate  the  friendship  of  other  nations,  and
ftiendship carefuUy  to  avoid  whatever  might  kindle  their  enmity  against
of  others, her. Wise  and  prudent  nations  often  pursue  this  line  of  con-
duct from  views  of  direct  and  present  interest :  a  more  noble,
[  139  ]  more  general,  and  less  direct  interest,  is  too  rarely  the  motive
of  politicians. If  it  be  incontestable  that  men  must  love  each
other  in  order  to  answer  the  views  of  nature  and  discharge
the  duties  which  she  prescribes  them,  as  well  as  for  their  own
private  advantage, — can  it  be  doubted  that  nations  are  under
the  like  reciprocal  obligation  ? Is  it  in  the  power  of  meo,  on
dividing  themselves  into  different  political  bodies,  to  break
the  ties  of  that  universal  society  which  nature  has  established
amongst  them  7
gi3. To If  a  man  ought  to  qualify  himself  for  becoming  useful  to
perfect  itself  other  men, — and  a  citizen,  frfr  rendering  useful  services  to  his
^^^^J"*®^  country  and  fellow  citizens, — ^a  nation  likewise,  in  perfecting
yantage  of herself,  ought  to  havo  in  view  the  acquisition  of  a  greater
others,  and  degree  of  ability  to  promote  the  perfection  and  happiness  of
eet  them other  nations ;  she  should  be  careful  to  set  them  good  examples,
good  exam-  ^^^^  avoid  Setting  them  a  pattern  of  any  thing  evil. Imitation
^  ^^  is  natural  to  mankind :  the  virtues  of  a  celebrated  nation  are

sometimes  imitated,  and  much  more  frequently  its  vices  and
defects.
;  14. To Glory  being  a  possession  of  great  importance  to  a  nation,
take  care  of  as  WO  have  shown  in  a  particular  chapter  expressly  devoted
their  glory.  ^^  ^j^^  gubjcct,* — ^the  duty  of  a  nation  extends  even  to  the
care  of  the  glory  of  other  nations. In  the  first  place,  she
should,  on  occasion,  contribute  to  enable  them  to  merit  true
glory :  secondly,  she  should  do  them  in  this  respect  all  the
justice  due  to  them,  and  use  all  proper  endeavours  that  such
justice  be  universally  done  them :  finally,  instead  of  irritating
she  should  kindly  extenuate  the  bad  effect  which  some  slight
blemishes  may  produce.
i  15. r»if< From  the  manner  in  which  we  have  established  the  obligm-
ference  of tion  of  performing  the  offices  of  humanity,  it  plainly  appears
"*"  ^^^ to  be  solely  founded  ou  the  nature  of  man. Wherefore,  no

*  Book  L  chap.  zt.
fif


lOWARDS  OTHERS.  139

nation  can  refuse  them  to  another,  under  pretence  of  its  pro- book  n.
fessing  a  different  religion :  to  be  entitled  to  them,  it  is  suffi- ^^^^'  '*


cient  that  the  claimant  is  our  fellow-creature.  A  conformity  ought  not  to
of  belief  and  worship  may  become  a  new  tie  of  friendship  P"*'^"^®  ^*
between  nations :  but  no  difference  in  these  respects  can  war-^^^^^^
rant  us  in  laying  aside  the  character  of  men,  or  the  sentiments
annexed  to  it.  As  we  have  already  related  (§  5)  some  instances
well  worthy  of  imitation,  let  us  here  do  justice  to  the  pontiff
who  at  present  fills  the  see  of  Rome,  and  has  recently  given
a  very  remarkable  example,  and  which  cannot  be  too  highly
commended.  Information  being  given  to  that  prince,  that
several  Dutch  ships  remained  at  Civita  Vecchia,  not  daring  to
put  to  sea  for  fear  of  the  Algerine  corsairs,  he  immediately
issued  orders  that  the  frigates  of  the  ecclesiastical  state  should
convoy  those  ships  out  of  danger ;  and  his  nuncio  at  Brussels
received  instructions  to  signify  to  the  ministers  of  the  states-
general,  that  his  holiness  made  it  a  rule  to  protect  commerce
and  perform  the  duties  of  humanity,  without  regarding  any
difference  of  religion.  Such  exalted  sentiments  cannot  fail
of  raising  a  veneration  for  Benedict  XIV.  even  amongst  Pro-
testants. (92)  '  [  140  ]
How  happy  would  mankind  be,  were  these  amiable  precepts  i  16.  Roi«
of  nature  everywhere  observed !  Nations  would  communicate  *?^,™*^™^
to  each  other  their  products  and  their  knowledge ;  a  profound  of  himiLuty
peace  would  prevail  all  over  the  earth,  and  enrich  it  with  its
invaluable  fruits ;  industry,  the  sciences,  and  the  arts  would
be  employed  in  promoting  our  happiness,  no  less  than  in  re-
lieving our  wants ;  violent  methods  of  deciding  contests  would
be  no  more  heard  of;  all  differences  would  be  terminated  by
moderation,  justice,  and  equity;  the  world  would  have  the
appearance  of  a  large  republic ;  men  would  live  everywhere
like  brothers,  and  each  individual  be  a  citizen  of  the  universe.
That  this  idea  should  be  but  a  delightful  dream  !  yet  it  flows
from  the  nature  and  essence  of  man.*  But  disorderly  pas-
sions, and  private  and  mistaken  interest,  will  for  ever  prevent
its  being  realized. Let  us,  then,  consider  what  limitations

(92)  He  vas much eelebrated  and  man, — ^it  necessarily  follows,  that,  ao-

Bpoken  of  in  Lord  Cliarlemonf  s  Tra-  cording  to  the  intentions  of  nature,  all

Tela  in  A.  D.  1742. — C.  mankind  must hare  one  common  in-

*  Here,  again,  let  us  caU  in  the  terest — Ergo  unum  debet  esse  omni-
authority  of  Cicero  to  our  support  bus  propositnm,  ut  eadem  sit  utilitas
"  AU  mankind  (says  that  excellent  uninsci^usque  et  uniyersorum :  quam
philosopher)  should  lay  it  down  as  si  ad  se  quisque  rapiai^  dissolvetur
their  constant  rule  of  action,  that  in-  omnis  humana  consociatio.  Atque  si
dividual  and  general  advantage  should  etiam  hoc  natnra  pnescribit,  ut  homo
be  the  same :  for,  if  each  man  strives  to  homini,  quicunqne  sit,  ob  eam  ipsam
grasp  every  advantage  for  himself,  all  causam^  quod  is  homo  sit,  consultum
•he  ties  of  human  society  wUl  be  velity  necesse  wst,  secundum  eandem
broken.  And,  if  nature  ordains  that  naturam,  omnium  utilitatem  esse  corn-
man  should  feel  interested  in  the  wel*  munem.  Dt  Offic,  lib.  iiL  cap.  iv.  Not«
fare  of  his  fellow-man,  whoever  he  be,  Ed.  1797*
vid  for  the  single  reason  that  he  is  a

219


140  COMMON  DUTIES  OF  A  NATIOK

BOOR  n. the  present  state  of  men,  and  the  ordinary  maxims  and  con-
CHAP.  I. ^jmj^.  Qf  nations,  may  render  necessary  in  the  practice  of
these  precepts  of  nature,  which  are  in  themselyes  so  nobk
and  excellent.

The  law  of  nature  cannot  condemn  the  good  to  be'come  the
dupes  and  prey  of  the  wicked,  and  the  victims  of  their  injus-
tice and  ingratitude.  Melancholy  experience  shows  that  most
nations  aim  only  to  strengthen  and  enrich  themselves  at  the
expense  of  others, — to  domineer  over  them,  and  even,  if  an
opportunity  offers,  to  oppress  and  bring  them  under  the  yoke.
Prudence  does  not  allow  us  to  strengthen  an  enemy,  (93)  or
one  in  whom  we  discover  a  desire  of  plundering  and  oppress-,
ing  us :  and  the  care  of  our  own  safety  forbids  it.  We  have
8een(§  3,  &c.)  that  a  nation  does  not  owe  her  assistance  and
the  offices  of  humanity  to  other  nations,  except  so  far  as  the
grant  of  them  is  reconcilable  with  her  duties  to  herself
Hence,  it  evidently  follows,  that,  though  the  universal  love  of
mankind  obliges  us  to  grant  at  all  times,  and  to  all,  even  to
our  enemies,  those  offices  which  can  only  tend  to  render  them
more  moderate  and  virtuous,  because  no  inconvenience  is  to
be  apprehended  from  granting  them, — ^we  are  not  obliged  to
give  them  such  succours  as  probably  may  become  destructive
to  ourselves.  Thus,  1.  The  exceeding  importance  of  trade,
not  only  to  the  wants  and  conveniences  of  life,  but  likewise
to  the  strength  of  a  state,  and  furnishing  it  with  the  meanfi
of  defending  itself  against  its  enemies, — ^and  the  insatiable
[  141  3  avidity  of  those  nations  which  seek  wholly  and  exclusively  to
engross  it, — thus,  I  say,  these  circumstances  authorize  a  nai-
tion  possessed  of  a  branch  of  trade,  or.  the  secret  of  some
important  manufacture  or  fabric,  to  reserve  to  herself  those
sources  of  wealth,  and,  instead  of  communicating  them  to
foreign  nations,  to  take  measures  against  it.  But,  where  the
necessaries  or  conveniences  of  life  are  in  question,  the  nation
ought  to  sell  them  to  others  at  a  reasonable  price,  and  not
convert  her  monopoly  into  a  system  of  odious  extortion.  To
commerce  England  chiefly  owes  her  greatness,  her  power,  and
her  safety :  who,  then,  will  presume  to  blame  her  for  endea-
vouring, by  every  fair  and  just  method,  to  retain  the  several
branches  of  it  in  her  own  hand  ?

2.  As  to  things  directly  and  more  particularly  useful  for
war,  a  nation  is  under  no  obligation  to  sell  them  to  others  of
whom  it  has  the  smallest  suspicion ;  and  prudence  even  de-
clares against  it.  Thus,  by  the  Roman  laws,  people  were
very  justly  prohibited  to  instruct  the  barbarous  nations  in
building  galleys. Thus,  in  England,  laws  have  been  enacted

(93)  The  Bame  prudential  consider-  granted  without  eqnlralent  to  aaotlier

ation  extends  also  in  time  of  jveace  /  state,  she  may  declare  war  against  Um

for,  who  can  anticipate  how  soon  after  nation  who  conferred  them  ? — C
advantages hare been conferred or
220


TOWARDS  OTHEBS.  141.

to  preyent  the  best  method  of  Bhip-buildingfrom  being  carried book  n.
out  of  the  kingdom.  ^"^'''  ''

This  caution  is  to  be  carried  farther,  with  respect  to  na-
tions more  justly  suspected.  Thus,  when  the  Turks  were
successfully  pursuing  their  victorious  career,  and  rapidly  ad-
vancing to  the  zenith  of  power,  all  Christian  nations  ought,
independent  of  every  bigoted  consideration,  to  have  consi-
dered them  as  enemies ;  even  the  most  distant  of  those  na-
tions, though  not  engaged  in  any  contest  with  them,  would
have  been  justifiable  in  breaking  off  all  commerce  with  a  peo-
ple who  made  it  their  profession  to  subdue  by  force  of  arms
all  who  would  not  acknowledge  the  authority  of  thmr  prophet.

Let  us  further  observe,  with  regard  to  the  prince  in  par-  g  ir.  Parti-
ticular,  that  he  ought  not,  in  affairs  of  this  nature,  to  obey  cniar  limita*
without  reserve  all  the  suggestions  of  a  noble  and  generous  ^^^  ^^^
heart  impelling  him  to  sacrifice  his  own  interests  to  the  ad-  ^f  pjim^
vantage  of  others,  or  to  motives  of  generosity ;  because  it  is
not  his  private  interest  that  is  in  question,  but  that  of  the
state — that  of  the  nation  who  has  committed  herself  to  his
care. Cicero  says  that  a  great  and  elevated  soul  despises
pleasures,  wealth,  life  itself,  and  makes  no  account  of  them,
when  the  common  utility  lies  at  stake.* He  is  right,  and
such  sentiments  are  to  be  admired  in  a  private  person  ;  but
generosity  is  not  to  be  exerted  at  the  expense  of  others.
The  head  or  conductor  of  a  nation  ought  not  to  practise  that
virtue  in  public  affairs  without  great  circumspection,  nor  to  a
greater  extent  than  will  redound  to  the  glory  and  real  advan-
tage of  the  state. As  to  the  common  good  of  human  society,
he  ought  to  pay  the  same  attention  to  it  as  the  nation  ho  re-
presents would  be  obliged  to  pay  were  the  government  of  her
affairs  in  her  own  hand.

But,  though  the  duties  of  a  nation  towards  herself  set  j  is. No
bounds  to  the  obligation  of  performing  the  offices  of  human- nation
ity,  they  cannot  in  the  least  affect  the  prohibition  of  doing  ^"«^*  ^  *°"
any  harm  to  others,  of  causing  them  any  prejudice, — ^in  a  ^^*"  ^

word,  of  injuring  them  f If  every  [  142  ]

man  is,  by  his  very  nature,  obliged  to  assist  in  promoting  the
perfection  of  others,  much  more  cogent  are  the  reasons  which
forbid  him  to  increase  their  imperfection,  and  that  of  their
condition.  The  same  duties  are  incumbent  on  nations  (Pre-
lim. §§  5,  6).  No  nation,  therefore,  ought  to  commit  any
actions  tending  to  impair  the  perfection  of  other  nations,  and
that  of  their  condition,  or  to  impede  their  progress, — ^in  other

♦  De  Offic.  lib.  iii.  cap.  V.  prejudice (to prejudice), ble«ser (to

f  Lfzer  (professedly  borrowed  from  wound,  or  hurt),  are  not  of  precisely  the

the Latin  Iddo)  is  the  term  nsed  by  same  import,"  and  that,  by  the  word

the  author,  who,  in  order  the  better  to  Uzer  (which  is  here  rendered  injure)  he

explain  his  moaning,  proceeds  to  In-  means,  "in  general,  causing  imperfection

form  us,  that  "nuire  (to  hurt),  offenaer  in  the  injured  party,  or  in  his  condition

(to  offend),  faire  tort  (to  wrong),  ^wrfcr  — ^rendering  his  person  or  his  condition

dommuxa^t  (to  cause  detriment),  porter  less  perfect"

t2  221


142  COMMON  DUTIES  OF  A  KATIOS

BOOK  n.  words,  to  injure  them.  (94)  And,  since  the  perfection  of  a
j;hap.  I.  natiQn  consists  in  her  aptitude  to  attain  the  end  of  civil  so-
ciety— and  the  perfection  of  her  condition,  in  not  wanting
any  of  the  things  necessary  to  that  end  (Book  I.  §  14) — no
one  nation  ought  to  hinder  another  from  attaining  the  end  of
civil  society,  or  to  render  her  incapable  of  attaining  it.  This
general  principle  forbids  nations  to  practise  any  evil  manceu-
vres  tending  to  create  disturbance  in  another  state^  to  foment
discordy  to  corrupt  its  citizens^  to  alienate  its  allies,  to  raise
enemies  against  it,  to  tarnish  its  glory,  and  to  deprive  it  of
its  natural  advantages.  (95)

However,  it  will  be  easily  conceived  that  negligence  in  ful-
filling the  common  duties  of  humanity,  and  even  the  refusal
of  these  duties  or  ofSces,  is  not  an  injury.  To  neglect  or  re-
fuse contributing  to  the  perfection  of  a  nation,  is  not  impair-
ing  that  perfection.

It  must  be  further  observed,  that,  when  we  are  making  use
of  our  right,  when  we  are  doing  what  we  owe  to  ourselves  or
to  others,  if,  from  this  action  of  ours,  any  prejudice  results
to  the  perfection  of  another, — any  detriment  to  his  exterior

(94)  This  position,  howerer,  requires  Bep.  203,  212,  3,  and  in  Biri  t.  Thomp.
qualification ;  for,  whether  in  time  of  toUf  cited  id.  and  id.  222,  Lord  Eldon
peace  or  of  war,  a  nation  has  a  right  refused  to  take  notice  of  the  Repablie
to  diminish  the  oommeroe  or  resooroes  of  Colombia:  and  it  seems  that,  if  a
of  another  bj  fair  rivaliy  and  other  bill  in  equity  falsely  state  that  the  eo<
means  not  in  themselves  ui^ust,  precisely  lony  had  been  recognised  as  an  inde-
as  one  tradesman  may  by  /air  eotnpe-  pendent  state,  Uie  court  may  take  ju.
tition  underaeU  his  neighbour,  and  dicial  notice  of  the  contrary,  and  decree
thereby  alienate  his  customers. — 0.  or  proceed  accordingly ;  and  the  mere

(95)  An  instance  of  this  rule  is,  the  iact  of  this  country  baring  for  com-
Ulegality  of  any  commercial  intercourse  mercial  purposes  sent  a  comuI  to  a  ro-
with  a  revolted  colony  before  its  sepa-  volted  colony,  is  not  equivalent  to  a
rate  independence  has  been  acknow-  ttate  recognition  of  its  independence;
lodged.  A  contract  made  between  a  Taylor  v.  Barclay,  2  Sim.  213,  and
revolted  colony  in  that  character  with  TrUarri  v.  Clement,  11  Moore,  308 ;  2
the  subject  of  another  state  that  has  Carr.  A  P.  223 ;  3  Bing.  432,  cited  id.
not  as  yet  recognised  such  revolted  eo-  219 ;  {  The  United  States  v.  Palmer,  3
lony  as  an  independent  state,  is  illegal  Wheat  Rep.  010. }

and  void,  and  will  not  be  given  effect To supply  such  a  revolted colony

to  by  the Court  of  Chancery,  or  any  (or  even  any  independent  state)  with

other,  court  in  this  country. City  of  money,  without  leave  of  the govern-

Berne  v.  Bank  of  England,  9  Ves.  347 ;  ment  to  which  a  subject  belongs,  is  il-

Jonee  v.  Oarexa  del  Bio,  1  Turner  A  legal,  because  that  would  be  assisting

Buss.  297;  Thompeon  v.  Powlea,  2  Sim.  such  colony  against  the  parent  country

Bep. 202, 3; De  Wut»  v.  Hendrieke,  to  which  it  belongs;  and  also  because

2 Bing. 314 ; Yriearri v. Clement,  it  would  create  objects  ajid  interests  on

11 Moore, 308; 2 Car. k P.  223;  the  part  of  the  subject  that  might  in

8  Bing.  432 ;  for,  such  direct  recogni-  case  of  war  be  injurious  to  his  own  go-

tion  of  such  a revolted  colony  must  vemment Observations  in Thompson

necessarily  be  offensive  to  the  princi-  v.  Powlee,  2  Sim.  Bep.  203,  and  Ben-

pal  state  to  which  it  belonged;  and,  in  ninge  v.  Bothtchild,  12  Moore,  659;  4

the  American  war.  Great  Britain  de-  Bing.  315,  335;  9 Bar.  A Ores.  470;

clared  war  against  France  and  oUier  Yriearri  y»  Clement,  11  Moore,  SOS;  2

countries on  the  ground  of  their  im-  Car. A P.  223; 3 Bing.  432. {See

proper  interference between her  and  The  Santieeima Trinidiuia,  7 Wheati

her  colonies,  Thompeon  v.  Powlee,  2  Bim.  Bep.  283.)


TOWARDS  OTHERS.  142


CHAP. 1.


condition. — ^we  are  not  guilty  of  an  injury :  we  are  doing  book  f
what  IS  lawful,  or  even  what  we  ought  to  do.  The  damage
which  accrues  to  the  other  is  no  part  of  our  intention :  it  is
merely  an  accident,  the  imputability  of  which  must  be  deter-
mined by  the  particular  circumstances.  For  instance,  in  case
of  a  lawful  defence,  the  harm  we  do  to  the  aggressor  is  not
the  object  we  aim  at : — we  act  only  with  a  view  to  our  own
safety ;  we  make  use  of  our  right ;  and  the  aggressor  alone  is
chargeable  with  the  mischief  which  he  brings  on  himself.

Nothing  is  more  opposite  to  the  duties  of  humanity,  nor  ?  19. Of-
more  contrary  to  that  society  which  should  be  cultivated  by  ^«»»««b-
nations,  than  offences,  or  actions  which  give  a  just  displeasure
to  others :  every  nation  therefore  should  carefully  avoid  giving
any  other  nation  real  offence:  I  say  real;  for,  should  others
take  offence  at  our  behaviour  when  we  are  only  using  our
rights  or  fulfilling  our  duties,  the  fault  lies  with  them,  not  with
us. Offences  excite  such  asperity  and  rancour  between  nations
that  we  should  avoid  .giving  any  room  even  for  ill-grounded  [  143  j
piques,  when  it  can  be  done  without  any  inconveniency,  or
failure  in  our  duty. It  is  said  that  certain  medals  and  dull
jests  irritated  Louis  XIV.  against  the  United  Provinces  to
such  a  degree  as  to  induce  him,  in  1672,  to  undertake  the  de-
struction of  that  republic.  (96]

The  maxims  laid  down  in  tnis  chapter, — ^those  sacred  pre-  J  20. Bad
cepts  of  nature, — were  for  a  long  time  unknown  to  nations,  castom  of
The  ancients  had  no  notion  of  any  duty  they  owed  to  nations '  "*'*  ****
with  whom  they  were  not  united  by  treaties  of  friendship.*
The  Jews  especially  placed  a  great  part  of  their  zeal  in  hating
all  nations ;  and,  as  a  natural  consequence,  they  were  detested
and  despised  by  them  in  tyrn. At  length  the  voice  of  nature
came  to  be  heard  among  civilized  nations ;  they  perceived  that
all  men  are  brethren.f When  will  the  happy  time  come  that
they  shall  behave  as  such?


(96)  On  this  ground  it  was  held  that  20,  and  see  poH,  page  173,  end  of  note;

the  pablioation  in  England  of  a  libel  and  see  1  Chit  Commercial  L.  74. — 0.

upon  Bonaparte,  then first  consul  of  *  To  the  example  of  the  Romans

the  French  republlo,  was  an  indictable  may  be  added  that  of  the  English  in

offence,  as  calculated  to  stir  up  ani-  former  days,--Hiince,  on  the occasion

mosity  between  him  and  the  citizens  of  a  navigator  being  accused  of  having

of  the  republic,  and  to  create  discord  committed  some depredations  on  the

between  our  king  and  people  and  said  natives  of  India, ''  this  act  of  injustice"

Bonaparte  and said republic. Infor-  (according  to  Qrotins) ''was  not  with-

mation  against  Peltier  filed  in  Crown  out  advocates  who maintained,  thaty

Office, K. B., in Michaelmas Term,  by  the  ancient  laws  of  England,  crimes

43 Geo.  3 — 1 Camp. 352. { Adam's  committed  against  foreign  nations  with

Rep.  of  i'e/<ter'«  Trial,  Lond.  1803.} So  whom there  existed  no  public  treaty

Lord Hawkesbury  laid  it  down  to  be  of  alliance,  were  not  punishable  in  that

olear  "  that  a  foreign  power  has  a  right  kingdom." — Hietory  of  the  Dieturbancet

to  Apply  to  foreign  courts  of  judicature  in  the  Lota  Countriet,  book  xvL

mnd  obtain  redress  for  defamation  or  f  See  J  1,  a  fine  passage  of  Cicero.
«alumny,"  6  RusseU's  Modern  Europe,

223


143  MUTUAL  COMMELCE  OF  NATIONS.


BOOK  IL
CHAP.  n.


CHAP.  n.

OP  THE  MUTUAL COMMERCE  BETWEEN  NATIONS,

Li  obu**"*^ ALL  men  ought  to  find  on  earth  the  things  they  stand  in
tion  of  n»-  need  of. In  the  primitive  state  of  communion,  they  took  them
tioM  to  car-  wherever  they  happened  to  meet  with  them,  if  another  had
ry  on  mu- i^ot  before  appropriated  them  to  his  own  use. The  introduc-
tnai  com- ^j^^  ^f  dominion  and  property  could  not  deprive  men  of  so
essential  a  right;  and,  consequently,  it  cannot  take  place
without  leaving  them,  in  general,  some  mean  of  procuring
what  is  useful  or  necessary  to  them. This  mean  is  commerce ;
by  it  every  man  may  still  supply  his  wants. Things  being
now  become  property,  there  is  no  obtaining  them  without  the
owner's  consent,  nor  are  they  usually  to  be  had  for  nothing ;
but  they  may  be  bought,  or  exchanged  for  other  things  of
equal  value. Men  are^  therefore^  under  an  obligation  to  carry
on  that  commerce  with  ea^ch  other^  if  they  wish  not  to  deviate
from  the  views  of  nature  ;  and  this  obligation  extends  also  to
whole  nations  or  states  (Prelim.  §  5). It  is  seldom  that  nature
is  seen  in  one  place  to  produce  every  thing  necessary  for  the
use  of  man ;  one  country  abounds  in  corn,  another  in  pastures
and  cattle,  a  third  in  timber  and  metals,  &c. If  all  those
countries  trade  together,  as  is  agreeable  to  human  nature,  no
£  144  ]  one  of  them  will  be  without  such  things  as  are  useful  and
necessary ;  and  the  views  of  nature,  our  common  mother,  will
be  fulfilled. Further,  one  country  is  fitter  for  some  kind  of
products  than  another,  as,  for  instance,  fitter  for  the  vine  than
for  tillage. If  trade  and  barter  take  place,  every  nation,  on
the  certainty  of  procuring  what  it  wants,  will  employ  its  land
and  its  industry  in  the  most  advantageous  manner,  and  man-
kind in  general  prove  gainers  by  it. Such  are  the  foundations
of  the  general  obligation  incumbent  on  nations  reciprocally  to
cultivate  commerce.  (97)

(97)  The  restriotions  on  trade,  whioh  freedom  being  very  fiftyonrable  to  ccm-

hare  been  enforced  absolutely  or  con-  merce,  it  is  implied  in  the  duties  of  n*-

ditionally,  by  almost  all  the  powerful  tions  that  they  should  support  it  as  to

nations  of  the  world,  have  been the  as  possible,  instead  of  cramping  it  by

cause of a thousand  wars, and the  unnecessary burdens or restrictions;

ground- work  of  innumerable  treaties;  and  this  position  is  supported  by  the

and,  therefore,  it  is  important  that  we  reasons  thus  urged  by  Vattel  (Mpm,

should  gire  them  full  consideration.  J  21).

With  respect  to  the  freedom  of  trade.  It  was  this feeling  that  inflnenced

it  has  been  laid  down  by  the  wisest  of  that  celebrated  statesman,  Mr.  Pitt,  in

politicians  and  best  of  men,  that  every  concluding  the  commercial  treaty  with

nation  ought  not  only  to  countenance  France, in 1786. Great  Britain and

trade  as  far  as  it  reasonably  can,  but  France  had,  for  centuries  before,  c»d-

even  to  protect  and  favour  it;  and  that,  trary  to  every  sound  principle  of  poUcy,
2U


MUTUAL  COMMERCE OF  NATIONS.  144

Every  nation  ought,  therefore,  not  only  to  countenance bookii.
trade,  as  far  as  it  reasonably  can,  but  even  to  protect  and  fa- chap,  il
Tour  it. The  care  of  the  public  roads,  the  safety  of  travel-  §  22.  They
lers,  the  establishment  of  ports,  of  places  of  sale,  of  well-  shouJd  !&-
regulated  fairs,  all  contribute  to  this  end. And,  where  these  ^^^  *^*'
are  attended  with  expense,  the  nation,  as  we  have  already  ob-
served (Book  I.  §  103),  may,  by  tolls  and  other  duties  equita-
bly proportioned,  indemnify  itself  for  its  disbursements.

Freedom  being  very  favourable  to  commerce,  it  is  implied,  §  23.  Fwt
in  the  duties  of  nations,  that  they  should  support  it  as  far  as  dom  of
possible,  instead  of  cramping  it  by  unnecessary  burdens  or  *^**
restrictions. Wherefore,  those  private  privileges  and  tolls,
which  obtain  in  many  places,  and  press  so  heavily  on  com-

acted  as  rival  enemieg,*  and  their  com-  merdal advantage  we  might  expect

merdai  policy  was dictated  hy the  from  a  friendly  intercourse  with  that

Fame  spirit  which  prompted  their  un-  country  1  or,  was  a  pacific  connection

h  ippy  wars ;  insomuch,  that,  though  between  the  two  kingdoms  so  highly

they  possessed  the  materials  of  a  most  offensive  that  even  an  extension  of  com*

extensive  commerce — ^the  one  abound-  merce  could  not  counterpoise  it  1"  To-

iiig  in  all  that  art  and  industry  can  wards  the  close  of  the  same  speech,  he

supply,  and  the  other  in  productions  observes, «The quarrels between

of  a  more  favoured  soil  and  ctimate —  France  and  Britain  had  too  long  con-

the  exchange  of  their  peculiar  produce  tinned  to  harass  not  only  those  two

was  discouraged  by  a  complicated  sys-  great  nations  themselves,  but  had  fre-

tern of  restraint and  heavy  duties.t  quently  embroiled  the  peace  of  Europe ;

The  object  of  the  commercial  treaty  nay,  had  disturbed  the  tranquiUity  of

alluded  to  was,  to  abolish  those  per-  the  most  remote  parts  of  the  world,

nidous  restraints,  and,  by  connecting  They  had,  by  their  paat  conduct,  acted

the  two  countries  in  the  bonds  of  a  as  if  they  were  intended  for  the  de-

redprocal  trade,  to  pledge them,  by  struction  of  each  other ;  but  he  hoped

their  mutual  interest,  to  an  oblivion  the  time  was  now  come  when  they

of  their  andent  animosities. The  view  should  justify  the  order  of  the  universe

in  which  that  treaty  originated  was  ex-  and  show  that  they  were  better  calcu

plained  by  Mr.  Pitt,  when  it  was  sub-  lated  for  the  more amiable purposer

mitted  to  Parliament;  and  the  senti-  of  friendly  inUrcotirse  and  mutual  betw

menta  which  he  expressed  gave  to  this  volence,** «*  Conddering  the  treaty,"

measure  a  remarkable character of  he  continued,  <<  in  a  political  view,  he

moderation  and  wisdom. In  reply  to  an  should  not  hesitate  to  contend  against

argument  inculcating  constant  jealousy  the  too  frequently  advanced  doctrine,

0/  France,'^  he  inquired,  «  whether,  in  that  France  was  and  must  be  the  un-

Vfling  the  word  jealousy,  it  was  meant  alterable  enemy  of  Britain ;  his  mind

to  recommend  to  this  country  such  a  revolted  from  this  position  as  monstrous

species  ot  jealousy  as  should  be  either  and  impossible. To  suppose  that  any

mad  or  blind,  sudi  a  spedes  of  jealousy  nation  was  unalterably  the  enemy  of

as  should  induce  her  either  madly  to  ano&er,  was  weak and childish :  it

throw away  what  was  to  make her  had  neither  its  foundation  in  the  expe-

happy,  or  blindly  grasp  at  that  which  rience  of  nations  nor  in  the  history  of

must  end  in  her  ruin  1 Was  the  ne-  man. It  toas  a  libel  on  the  constitution

cessity  of  a  perpetual  animodty  with  of  political  societies,  and  supposed  diabo-

franco  so  evident  and  so  pressing  that  lieal  malice  in  the  original  frame  of

lor  it  we  were  to  sacrifice  every  com-  manJ*—^,


•  S  Smith's  Wealth  of  KationiT,  pp.  226-7,  252-^;  Tucker's  Pamphlet,  Cui


f  See  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  vol.  4,  lB9,per  Buchanan;  and  see  Ai^
•tenon's  Hist.  Com.  voL  4,  pp.  634  to  639.

29  236


144  MUTUAL  COMMERCE  OF  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. merce,  are  deservedly  to  be  reprobated,  unless  founded  on

CHAP.  II. YQYJ  important  reasons  arising  from  the  public  good.

S  24.  Right Every  nation,  in  virtue  of  her  natural  liberty,  has  a  right

of  trading,  to  trade  with  those  who  are  willing  to  correspond  with  such

belonguig  to  jj^^gjj^j^jjg .  ^^^  ^^  molest  her  in  the  exercise  of  her  riffht

is  doing  her  an  injury.  (98) The  Portuguese,  at  the  time  of
their  great  power  in  the  East  Indies,  were  for  excluding  aU
other  European  nations  from  any  commerce  with  the  Inr
diqns  ;  but  such  a  pretension,  no  less  iniquitous  than  chime^
rical,  was  treated  with  contempt; and  the  other  nations
agreed  to  consider  any  acts  of  violence  in  support  of  it,  as
just  grounds  for  making  war  against  the  Portuguese. This*
common  right  of  all  nations  is,  at  present,  generally  acknow-
ledged under  the  appellation  of  freedom  of  trade.
$26.  Each But,  although  it  be  in  general  the  duty  of  a  nation  to
nation  ib carry  on  commerce  with  others,  and,  though  each  nation  ha-i
*f*th^^^^ a  right  to  trade  with  those  countries  that  are  willing  to  en-
priety  of courage  her — on  the  other  hand,  a  nation  ought  to  decline  a
commerce Commerce  which  is  disadvantageous  or  dangerous  (Book  L
on  her  own  §  98) ;  and  since,  in  case  of  collision,  her  duties  to  herself  are
part.(99) paramount  to  her  duties  to  others,  she  has  a  full  and  clear
right  to  regulate  her  conduct,  in  this  respect,  by  the  consi-
deration of  what  her  advantage  or  safety  requires. We  have
already  seen  (Book  I.  §  92),  that  each  nation  is,  on  her  own
part,  the  sole  judge  whether  or  not  it  be  convenient  for  her  to
cultivate  such  or  such  branch  of  commerce. She  may,  there-
fore, either  embrace  or  reject  any  commercial  proposals  from
foreign  nations,  without  aflfording  them  any  just  grounds  to
accuse  her  of  injustice,  or  to  demand  a  reason  for  such  re-
fusal, much  less  to  make  use  of  compulsion. She  is  free  in
[  145  ]  the  administration  of  her  affairs,  without  being  accountable
to  any  other. The  obligation  of  trading  with  other  nations  is
in  itself  an  imperfect  obligation  (Prelim.  §  17),  and  giv^
them  only  an  imperfect  right ;  so  that,  in  cases  where  the
commerce  would  be  detrimental,  that  obligation  is  entirely
void. When  the  Spaniards  attacked  the  Americans,  under  a
pretence  that  those  people  refused  to  traflSc  with  them,  they
only  endeavoured  to  throw  a  colourable  veil  over  their  own
insatiable  avarice.
§  26.  No- These  few  remarks,  together  with  what  we  have  already

ceaiity  of

commercial ^gg^  It  ia  a  general  rule  of  the  law  position. It  there  seems  that  an  er

^•iw** °^  nations,  that,  in  time  of  peace,  no  elusive trade may  bo  acquired  fcy  a

nation  is  entitled  to  limit  or  impose  treaty  with  the  nations  of  India  wbo

regulations  upon  the  commerce  which  have  not  before  entered  into  a  restxicy

any  other  independent  state  may  think  tive  treaty. See  also  1  Chit.  Com.  L»

fit  to  carry  on,  either  externally,  with  76. — C.

the  natives  of  other  independent  states, (99)  See  further,  1  ChiL  Com.  L

or  internally,  amongst  its  own  Jiubjects.  80,  n.  2  ;  Grotius,  158 ;  Pu£  b.  4,  c  a^

PufTcnd.  b.  4,  c  6,  s.  10,  p.  168 ;  Mar-  s.  10,  p.  168.

ten's  L.  N.  162-3 ;  where  see  the  dif- (100)  See, more  fully, 1  Chhtr'a

ferent  authorities  in  support  of  this  Com.  L.  36.

si2a


MtmiAL  COMMERCB  OF  NATIONS.  145

Baid  on  the  subject  (Book  I.  Chap.  VIII.),  may  suffice  to  book  n.
establish  the  principles  of  the  natural  law  of  nations  respect-  ^^^^-  "•
ing  the  mutual  commerce  of  states.  It  is  not  difficult  to
point  oirt,  in  general,  what  are  the  duties  of  nations  in  this
respect,  and  what  the  law  of  nature  prescribes  to  them  for
the  good  of  the  great  society  of  mankind.  But,  as  each  na-
tion is  only  so  far  obliged  to  carry  on  commerce  with  others
as  she  can  do  it  without  being  wanting  to  herself,  and  as  the
whole  ultimately  depends  .on  the  judgment  that  each  state
may  form  of  what  it  can  and  ought  to  do  in  particular  cases,
nations  cannot  count  on  any  thing  more  than  generalities,
•  such  as,  the  inherent  liberty  of  each  to  carry  on  trade,  and,
moreover,  on  imperfect  rights,  which  depend  on  the  judgment
of  others,  and,  consequently,  are  ever  uncertain.  Where-  •
fore,  if  they  wish  to  secure  to  themselves  any  definite  and
constant  advantages,  they  must  procure  them  by  treaties.

Since  a  nation  has  a  full  right  to  regulate  herself  in  com-  §  vt,  Gene>
mercial  affairs  by  what  is  useful  or  advantageous  to  her,  she '«!  ™1«.
may  make  such  commercial  treaties  as  she  thinks  proper ;  ^^^^^^
and  no  other  nation  has  a  right  to  take  offence,  provided  ^^
those  treaties  do  not  affect  the  perfect  rights  of  others. If,
by  the  engagements  contracted,  a  nation,  unnecessarily,  or
"without  powerful  reasons,  renders  herself  incapable  of  join-
ing in  the  general  trade  which  nature  recommends  between
nations,  she  trespasses  against  her  duty. But,  the  nation
being  the  sole  judge  in  this  case  (Prelim.  §  16),  other  nations
are  bound  to  respect  her  natural  liberty — to  acquiesce  in  her
determination,  and  even  to  suppose  that  she  is  actuated  by
substantial reasons. Every  commercial treaty,  therefore,
which  does  not  impair  the  perfect  right  of  others,  is  allowa-
ble between  nations ;  nor  can  the  execution  of  it  be  lawfully
opposed. But  those  commercial  treaties  alone  are  in  them-
selves just  and  commendable,  which  pay  to  the  general  inte-
rest of  mankind  as  great  a  degree  of  respect  as  is  possible
and  reasonable  in  the  particular  case.

As  express  promises  and  engagements  should  be  inviolable,  §  2S.  Dutj
every  wise  and  virtuous  nation  will  be  attentive  to  examine  pf  nationa
and  weigh  a  commercial  treaty  before  she  concludes  it,  and  J?  ™*!™^
to  take  care  that  she  be  not  thereby  engaged  to  any  thing  ^^3^
contrary  to  the  duties  which  she  owes  to  herself  and  others.

Nations  may,  in  their  treaties,  insert  such  clauses  and  con-  §  29.  Per-
ditions as  they  think  proper ;  they  are  at  liberty  to  make  petual  or
them  perpetual,  or  temporary,  or  dependent  on  certain  events.  *®™P°™^
It  IS  usually  most  prudent  not  to  engage  for  ever,  as  circum-  r  -j^^g  -i
stances  may  afterwards  intervene,  by  which  the  treaty  might  treaties  re-
become  very  oppressive  to  oi^e  of  the  contracting  parties. A  vocable  at
nation  may  confine  a  treaty  to  the  grant  of  only  a  precarious  pleasure,
right — ^reserving  to  herself  the  liberty  of  revoking  it  at  plea-
sure. We  have  already  observed  (Book  L  §  94)  that  a  simple

permission  does  not,  any  more  than  long  custom  (Ibid.  §  95),

Tsn


146  MUTUAL  COMMEEGB  OF  NATIOXe

BOOK  n. give  any  perfect  right  to  a  trade. These  things — ^namely,
osAP.  II. permission  and  customs — are  therefore  not  to  be  confounded
with  treaties, — not  even  with  those  which  give  only  a  preca-
rious right.
§  30.  No- When  once  a  nation  has  entered  into engagements  by
thing  con- treaty,  she  is  no  longer  at  liberty  to  do,  in  favour  of  others,
f*^  **l ®  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  treaty,  what  she  might  otherwise

tenor  of  a .  ^ .  -  i-i*^ii« "Pi

treaty  can have  granted  to  them  agreeably  to  the  duties  oi  humanity  or
be  granted  the  general  obligation  of  mutual  cgmmerce  ;  for  she  is  to  do
to  a  third for  others  no  more  than  what  is  in  her  power ;  and,  haWng
^"*^' deprived  herself  of  the  liberty  of  disposing  of  a  thing,  that
thing  is  no  longer  in  her  power. Therefore,  when  a  nation  '
has  engaged  to  another  that  she  will  sell  certain  merchandise
or  produce  to  the  latter  only — as,  for  instance,  corn — ^she
can  no  longer  sell  it  to  any  other. The  case  is  the  same  ia
a  contract  to  purchase  certain  goods  of  that  nation  alone.
S  81.  How But  it  will  be  asked,  how  and  on  what  occasions  a  nation
ftr  lawful  to  may  enter  into  engagements  which  deprive  her  of  the  liberty
^^°P  ^y to  fulfil  her  duties  to  others. As  the  duties  we  owe  to  our-
Uj,^  Qf selves  are  paramount  to  those  we  owe  to  others,  if  a  nation
trading  with  finds  her  safety  and  substantial  advantage  in  a  treaty  of  thia
other  na- natur^,  she  is  unquestionably  justifiable  in  contracting  it,  espe*
^^^  cially  as  she  does  not  thereby  interrupt  the  general  commerce

of  nations,  but  simply  causes  one  particular  branch  of  her
own  commerce  to  pass  through  other  hands,  or  insures  to  a
particular  people  certain  things  of  which  they  stand  in  need.
If  a  state  which  stands  in  need  of  salt  can  secure  a  supply  c^
it  from  another,  by  engaging  to  sell  her  corn  and  cattle  only
to  that  other  nation,  who  will  doubt  but  that  she  has  a  right
to  conclude  so  salutary  a  treaty  ? In  this  case,  her  com  or
cattle  are  goods  which  she  disposes  of  for  supplying  her  own
wants. But,  from  what  we  have  observed  (§  28),  engage-
ments of  this  kind  are  not  to  be  entered  into  without  veiy
good  reasons. However,  be  the  reasons  good  or  bad,  tha
treaty  is  still  valid,  and  other  nations  have  no  right  to  op-
pose it  (§  27).
§  82.  A  na- Every  one  is  at  liberty  to  ren-ounce  his  right ;  a  nation^
tion  may therefore,  may  lay  a  restriction  on  her  commeroo  in  favour
abridge  ito ^f  another  nation,  and  engage  not  to  traffic  in  a  certain  iial
in  fovour  of  ^^  goods,  or  to  forbear  trading  with  such  and  such  a  country,
another. &c. And,  in  departing  from  such  engagements,  she  acta
against  the  perfect  right  of  the  nation  with  which  she  has  con*
tracted,  and  the  latter  has  a  right  to  restrain  her. The
natural  liberty  of  trade  is  not  hurt  by  treaties  of  this  nature;
for  that  liberty  consists  only  in  every  nation  being  unmolested
in  her  right  to  carry  on  commerce  with  those  that  consent  to
[  147  ]  traffic  with  her ;  each  one  remaining  free  to  embrace  or  de-
cline a  particular  branch  of  commerce,  as  she  shall  judge  most
advantageous  to  the  state.
Nations  not  only  carry  on  trade  for  the  sake  of  procuring

228


MUTUAL COMMERCE  OF  NATIONS.  14T

necessary  or  useful  articles,  but  also  with  a  view  to  make  it book  ii.
a  source  of  opulence. Now,  wherever  a  profit  is  to  be  made, chap,  ii.
it  is  equally  lawfuffor  every  one  to  participate  in  it :  but  the  §33.  A  nm
piost  diligent  may  lawfully  anticipate  the  others  by  taking  tion  may
possession  of  an  advantage  which  lies  open  to  the  first  occu-  appropriate
pier ; — he  may  even  secure  the  whole  entirely  to  himself,  if  pa^cular
he  has  any  lawful  means  of  appropriating  it. When,  there-  branch  of
fore,  a  particular  nation  is  in  sole  possession  of  certain  articles,  trade,
another  nation  may  lawfully  procure  to  herself  by  treaty  the
advantage  of  being  the  only  buyer,  and  then  sell,  them  again
all  over  the  world. And,  as  it  is  indifierent  to  nations  from

*  what  hand  they  receive  the  commodities  they  want,  provided
they  obtain  them  at  a  reasonable  price,  the  monopoly  of  this
nation  does  not  clash  with  the  general  duties  of  humanity,
provided  that  she  do  not  take  advantage  of  it  to  set  an  un-
reasonable and  exorbitant  price  on  her  goods.  Should  she,
by  an  abuse  of  her  monopoly,  exact  an  immoderate  profit,  this
"would  be  an  ofience  against  the  law  of  nature,  as,  by  such  an
exaction,  she  either  deprives  other  nations  of  a  necessary  or
agreeable  article  which  nature  designed  for  all  men,  or  obliges
them  to  purchase  it  at  too  dear  a  rate:  nevertheless,  she.
does  not  do  them  any  positive  wrong,  because,  strictly  speak-
ing, and  according  to  external  right,  the  owner  of  a  commo-
dity may  either  keep  it  or  set  what  price  he  pleases  on  it.
Thus,  the  Dutch,  by  a  treaty  with  the  king  of  Ceylon,  have
vholly  engrossed  the  cinnamon  trade :  yet,  whilst  they  keep
their  profits  within  just  limits,  other  nations  have  no  right  to
complain.

But,  were  the  necessaries  of  life  in  question — were  the
monopolist  inclined  to  raise  them  to  an  excessive  price —
other  nations  would  be  authorized  by  the  care  of  their  own
safety,  and  for  the  advantage  of  human  society,  to  form  a

*  general  combination  in  order  to  reduce  a  greedy  oppressor  to
reasonable  terms.  The  right  to  necessaries  is  very  different
from  that  to  things  adapted  only  to  convenience  and  pleasure,
which  we  may  dispense  with  if  they  be  too  dear.  It  would
be  absurd  that  the  subsistence  and  being  of  other  nations
ahould  depend  on  the  caprice  or  avidity  of  one.

Among  the  modem  institutions  for  the  advantage  of  com-  §  34.  Con
merce,  one  of  the  most  useful  is  that  of  consuls,  or  persons  ■''^(^^^i


r

(101)  See  further  as  to  con8uk,;K»^,  and  see  decisions  Albreion  v.  Suitman,

B.  4,  ch.  8,  8.  76,  p.  461. This  and  2  Yes.  &,  B.  323 ;  4  Bar.  6c  Ores.  886;

tbe  following  sections  are  much  too  8  Moore's  Rep. 632; 7  T.  R.  251;

concise  upon  the  important  subject  of  8  East,  364 ;  2  Chalm.  Opin.  294. A

consuls. See more fully 1  Chitty's  foreign  consul  cannot  sue  a  merchant

Oommercial  Law,  48 to  73 ;  statute  here  for  any  supposed  services  in  that

B  Geo.  4,  c  87 ;  Warden  on  Consular  character— JD« lAma ▼. Haldimnnd,

BTetablishmenU, Paris, a. d. 1818;  1  Ryan  &  Moody,  45:  nor  is  he  pri-

Madame de Steck, a Berlin,  1790 ;  vileged  from  arrest,  Viveash  v.  Belcher,

yVnderson's Hist Commerce,  index,  3  Mau.  &  Selw.  284. {He  is liable

aitles,  «« Conservator/'  and  <<  Consul;"  as  gamishf'e  in  the  cose  of  a  foreign

U  229


147  MUTUAL COMMERCE  OF  NATIONS,

BOOK  n.  residing  in  the  large  trading  cities,  and  especiallj  the
CHAP.  II.  ports,  of  foreign  countries,  with  a  commission  to  watch  over
the  rights  and  privileges  of  their  nation,  and  to  decide  dis-
putes between  her  merchants  there.  When  a  nation  trades
largely  with  a  country,  it  is  requisite  to  have  there  a  person
charged  with  such  a  commission :  and,  as  the  state  which
allows  of  this  commerce  must  naturally  favour  it, — ^for  the
same  reason,  also,  it  must  admit  the  consul.  Bat,  there
being  no  absolute  and  perfect  obligation  to  this,  the  nation
[  148  J  that  wishes  to  have  a  consul,  must  procure  this  right  by  the
commercial  treaty  itself.

The  consul  being  charged  with  the  affairs  of  his  sovereign,
and  receiving  his  orders,  continues  his  subject,  and  account-
able to  him  for  his  actions.

The  consul  is  no  public  minister  (as  will  appear  by  what
we  shall  say  of  the  character  of  ministers,  in  our  fourth  book),
and  cannot  pretend  to  the  privileges  annexed  to  such  character.
Yet,  bearing  his  sovereign's  commission,  and  being  in  this
quality  received  by  the  prince  in  whose  dominions  he  resides,
he  is,  in  a  certain  degree,  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
law  of  nations.  This  sovereign,  by  the  very  act  of  receiving
him,  tacitly  engages  to  allow  him  all  the  liberty  and  safety
necessary  to  the  proper  discharge  of  his  functions,  without
which  the  admission  of  the  consul  would  be  nugatory  and
delusive.

The  functions  of  a  consul  require,  in  the  first  place,  that
he  be  not  a  subject  of  the  state  where  he  resides :  as,  in  this
case,  he  would  be  obliged  in  all  things  to  conform  to  its
orders,  and  thus  not  be  at  liberty  to  acquit  himself  of  the
duties  of  his  office.

They  seem  even  to  require  that  the  consul  should  be  inde-
pendent of  the  ordinary  criminal  justice  of  the  place  where
he  resides,  so  as  not  to  .be  molested  or  imprisoned  unless
he  himself  violate  the  law  of  nations  by  some  enormous  crime.

And,  though  the  importance  of  the  consular  functions  be
not  so  great  as  to  procure  to  the  consul's  person  the  inviolv
bility  and  absolute  independence  enjoyed  by  public  ministers,
— yet,  being  under  the  particular  protection  of  the  sovereign
who  employs  him,  and  intrusted  with  the  care  of  his  concerns,
— if  he  commits  any  crime,  the  respect  due  to  his  master
requires  that  he  should  be  sent  home  to  be  punished.  Such
is  the  mode  pursued  by  states  that  are  inclined  to  preserve  a
good  understanding  with  each  other.  But  the  surest  way  is,
expressly  to  settle  all  these  matters,  as  far  as  practicable,  bj
the  commercial  treaty.

attachment  in  the  State  courts,  Kid-  Raoara,  2  DalL  Rep.  297;  Comn.  «

<fer;mv.ilfcy«7-,2Mile6'8Rep.242;  and  Kozloff,  5  Serg.  &  Rawle,  545;  2%

to  indictment  for  nnademeanour  m  \}[ie  StateY,DelaFore8t,2'Soti&'bUCaiA**

courts  of  tke United States, which  Rep.  545,  oonlrd.}
have  exclutioe  jurisdiction,  U,  Staiea  v.
230


DIONITT  AND  BQUALITT  OF  NATIONS,  148

Wicquefort,  in  his  treatise  of  The  Ambassadary  Book  I.  book  n.
§  5,  says,  that  consuls  do  not  enjoy  the  protection  of  the-  law  chap,  n.  ^
of  nationSy  and  thaty  both  in  civil  and  criminal  casesy  they  are
svhject  to  the  jiistice  of  the  place  where  they  reside.  But  the
very  instances  he  quotes  contradict  his  proposition.  The
states-general  of  the  United  Provinces,  whose  consul  had  been
affronted  and  put  under  arrest  by  the  governor  of  Cadiz,  comn
plained  of  it  to  the  court  of  Madrid  as  a  breach  of  the  law
of  nations.  And,  in  the  year  1634,  the  republic  of  Venice
was  near  coming  to  a  rupture  with  pope  Urban  VIIL  on
account  of  the  violence  offered  to  the  Venetian  consul  by  the
governor  of  Ancona.  The  governor,  suspecting  this  consul  to
have  given  information  detrimental  to  the  commerce  of  An-
cona, had  persecuted  him,  seized  his  furniture  and  papers,
and  caused  him  to  be  summoned,  declared  guilty  of  contumacy,
and  banished  under  pretence  thaty  contrary  to  public  prohi-
bitiony  he  had  caused  goods  to  be  unloaded  in  a  time  of  con-  [  149  J
tagion.  This  consul's  successor  he  likewise  imprisoned.  The
Venetian  senate  warmly  insisted  on  having  due  satisfaction :
and,  on  the  interposition  of  the  ministers  of  France,  who
were  apprehensive  of  an  open  rupture,  the  pope  obliged
the  governor  of  Ancona  to  give  the  republic  satisfaction
accordingly.

In  default  of  treaties,  custom  is  to  be  the  rule  on  these
occasions ;  for,  a  prince,  who  receives  a  consul  without  ex-
press conditions,  is  supposed  to  receive  him  on  the  footing
established  by  custom.


CHAP.  III.

OP  THE  DIGNITY  AND  EQUALITY  OF  NATIONS — OP  TITLES,  AND ohap.  m.

OTHER MARKS OP  HONOUR.

•

EVERT  nation,  every  sovereign  and  independent  state,  §  35.  Dig-
deserves  consideration  and  respect,  because  it  makes  an  im-  ^}^  ^^  »»-
mediate figure  in  the  grand  society  of  the  human  race,  is  **°"*  ^J^
independent  of  all  earthly  power,  and  is  an  assemblage  of  a  states,
great  number  of  men,  which  is,  doubtless,  more  considerable
than  any  individual. The  sovereign  represents  his  whole
nation ;  he  unites  in  his  person  all  its  majesty. No  indivi-
dual, though  ever  so  free  and  independent,  can  be  placed  in
competition  with  a  sovereign ;  this  would  be  putting  a  single
person  upon  an  equality  with  a  united  multitude  of  his  equals.
Nations  and  sovereigns  are,  therefore,  under  an  obligation,
and  at  the  same  time  have  a  right,  to  maintain  their  dignity,
and  to  cause  it  to  be  respected,  as  being  of  the  utmost  im-
portance to  their  safety  and  tranquillity.

231


149  DIONITT  AKD BQT7ALIT7  OF  NATIONS.

BOOK  iL We  have  already  observed  (Prelim.  §  18)  that  nature  has
CHAP,  m.  established  a  perfect  equality  of  rights  between  independent
§  3G.  Their  nations. Consequently,  none  can  naturally  lay  claim  to  any
equality, superior  prerogative:  for,  whatever  privileges  any  one  of
them  derives  from  freedom  and  sovereignty,  the  others  equally
derive  the  same  from  the  same  source.
^  37.  Pre- And  since  precedency  or  pre-eminence  of  rank  is  a  prero-
cedency. gative,  no  nation,  no  sovereign,  can  naturally  claim  it  as  a
right. Why  should  nations  that  are  not  dependent  on  him
give  up  any  point  to  him  against  their  will  ? However,  as  a
powerful  and  extensive  state  is  much  more  considerable  in
universal  society  than  a  small  state,  it  is  reasonable  that  the
latter  should  yield  to  the  former  on  occasions  where  one  must
necessarily  yield  to  the  other,  as,  in  an  assembly, — and  should
pay  it  those  mere  ceremonial  deferences  which  do  not,  it,
fact,  destroy  their  equality,  and  only  show  a  superiority  of
order,  a  first  place  among  equals. Other  nations  will  natu-
rally assign  the  first  place  to  the  more  powerful  state ;  and
it  would  be  equally  useless  as  ridiculous  for  the  weaker  one
obstinately  to  contend  about  it. The  antiquity  of  the  state
enters also  into  consideration on  these occasions: a  new
[  150  ]  comer  cannot  dispossess  any  one  of  the  honours  he  has  en-
joyed ;  and  he  must  produce  very  strong  reasons,  before  he
can  obtain  a  preference.
§88.  The The  form  of  government  is  naturally  foreign  to  this  ques-
formofgo-  tion. The dignity,  the majesty,  resides  originally  in  the
^ramentiB  j^^^y  ^f  ^j^^  state;  that  of  the  sovereign  is  derived  from  his
thb^quea- representing  the nation. And,  can  it  be  imagined  that  a
tion.  state  possesses  i^ore  or  less  dignity  according  as  it  is  governed

by  a  single  person  or  by  many  ?  At  present  kings  claim  a
superiority  of  rank  over  republics :  but  this  pretension  has
no  other  support  than  the  superiority  of  their  strength.  For-
merly, the  Roman  republic  considered  all  kings  as  very  far
beneath  them :  but  the  moharchs  of  Europe,  finding  none
but  feeble  republics  to  oppose  them,  have  disdained  to  admit
them  to  an  equality.  The  republic  of  Venice,  and  that  of
the  United  Provinces,  have'  obtained  the  honours  of  crowned
heads ;  but  their  ambassadors  yield  precedency  to  those  of
kings.
§  39. A  In  consequence  of  what  we  have  just  established,  if  the

ptate  ought  foj-m  of  government  in  a  nation  happens  to  be  changed,  she
raniTno^*  ^^^^  ^^^^  preserve  the  same  honours  and  rank  of  which  she
withstand-  ^^^  before  in  possession.  When  England  had  abolished  rov-
ing any  alty,  Cromwcll  would  suffer  no  abatement  of  the  honours  that
rhanges  m  jj^d  been  paid  to  the  crown  or  to  the  nation ;  and  he  every-
luTffown-  ^^®^®  maintained  the  English  ambassadors  in  the  rank  they
mcnt had  always  possessed.

*;  40.  In  If  the  grades  of  precedency  have  been  settled  by  treaties,

ihitf  respect,  or  by  long  custom  founded  on  tacit  consent,  it  is  necessary
ireaties  and  to  conform  to  the  established  rule. To  dispute  with  a  prince

23S


DIGNmr  AND  BQUALIT7  07  NATI0K8.  150

the  rank  he  has  acquired  in  this  manner,  is  doing  him  an book  ii.
injury,  inasmuch  as  it  is  an  expression  of  contempt  for  him,  chap,  m.
or  a  violation  of  engagements  that  secure  to  him  a  right,  established
Thus,  by  the  injudicious  partition  between  the  sons  of  Charle-  customB
magne,  the  elder  having  obtained  the  empire,  the  younger,  °!J^*  *^^
■who  received  the  kingdom  of  France,  yielded  precedency  to  ° ^
him  the  more  readily,  as  there  still  remained  at  that  time  a
recent  idea  of  the  majesty  of  the  real  Roman  empire. His
successors  followed  the  rule  they  found  established: — they
were  imitated  by  the  other  kings  of  Europe ;  and  thus  the
imfperial  crown  continues  to  possess,  without  opposition,  the
first  rank  in  Christendom. With  most  of  the  other  crowns,
the  point  of  precedency  remains  yet  undetermined.

Some  people  would  have  us  to  look  upon  the  precedency
of  the  emperor  as  something  more  than  the  first  place  among
equals ;  they  would  fain  attribute  to  him  a  superiority  over
all  kings,  and,  in  a  word,  make  him  the  temporal  head  of
Christendom.'*'  And  it,  in  fact,  appears  that  many  empe-
rors entertained  ideas  of  such  pretensions, — as  if,  by  reviving
the  name  of  the  Roman  empire,  they  could  also  revive  its
rights.  Other  states  have  been  on  their  guard  against  these
pretensions.  We  may  see  in  Mezeray  f  the  precautions  taken  [  151  ]
by  king  Charles  V.  when  the  emperor  Charles  IV.  .visited
Prance,  "for  fear,'*  says  the  historian,  "lest  that  prince,
and  his  son,  the  king  of  the  Romans,  should  found  any  right
of  superiority  on  his  courtesy."  Bodinus  relates, J  that  "  the
Prench  took  great  ofience  at  the  Emperor  Sigismund's  placing
himself  in  the  royal  seat  in  full  parliament,  and  at  his  having
knighted  the  Senechal  de  Beaucaire." — ^adding,  that,  "to
repair  the  egregious  error  they  had  committed  in  suflfering  it,
they  would  not  allow  tBe  same  emperor,  when  at  Lyons,  to
make  the  Count  of  Savoy  a  duke.'*  At  present,  a  king  of
Prance  would  doubtless  think  it  a  degradation  of  his  dignity,
were  he  to  intimate  the  most  distant  idea  that  another  might
claim  any  authority  in  his  kingdom. ||

As  a  nation  may  confer  on  her  conductor  what  degree  of  §  41.  Of tli#
authority  and  what  rights  she  thinks  proper,  she  is  equally  J**""®  ^^

t

*  Bartolus  went  so  far  as  to  say,  that  Count  Provana,  the  king  of  Sardinia's

^  all  those  were  heretics  who  did  not  minister,  to  sign  a  deed,  in  which  ha

believe  that  the  emperor  was  lord  of  the  declared  that  neither  his  own  sovereign

whole  earth." See  Bodinus's  Republic,  nor  any  other  prince  had  a  right  to  dis-

book  i.  ch.  ix.  p.  m.  139.  pute  pre-eminence  with  the  emperor.

t  History  of  France,  explanation  of  Its  coiitents  being  made  public,  the

the  medals  of  Charles  Y.  kings  made  such  heavy  complaints  on

"f  In  his  Republic,  p.  138.  the  occasion, that Pxovana  was  re*

I Pentherrieder, minister  plenipo-  called,  and the  emperor  ordered  his

tentiary  of  the  emperor  at  the  congress  minister  to  suppress  the  deed, — afiect-

of  Cambray,  made  an  attempt  to  insure  ing,  at  the  same  time,  a  profound  igno-

to  his  master  an  incontestable  superi-  ranee  of  the  whole  transaction :  and

mrity  and pre-eminence  over  all  the  thus  the  affair  was  dropped. Memoirs

•thar  crowned  heads. He induced  of  Moiis.  de  St  Phmppe,  vol.  iv.  p.  194.

30 H  S 33.3


151  DIGNITT  XSr>  EQUALITT  OF  STATIONS.

BOOK  II. free  in  regard  to  the  name,  the titles,  and honours mth
CHAP,  in.  which  she  may  choose  to  decorate  him. But  discretion  and
given  by  the  the  care  of  her  reputation  require  that  she  should  not,  iu
nation  to  its  this respect,  deviate too  far  from  the customs commonly
conductor, established  among  civilized  nations.  ^  Let  us  further  observe,
that,  in  this  point,  she  ought  to  be  guided  by  prudence,  and
inclined  to  proportion  the  titles  and  honours  of  her  chief  to
the  power  he  possesses,  and  to  the  degree  of  authority  with
which  she  chooses  to  invest  him. Titles  and  honours,  it  is
true,  determine  nothing: they  are but  empty  names,  and
vain  ceremonies,  when  they  are  misplaced:  yet,  who  does
not  know  how  powerful  an  influence  t.hey  have  on  the  minds
of  mankind? This  is,  then,  a  more  serious  affair  than  it
appears  at  the  first  glance. The  nation  ought  to  take  care
not  to  debase  herself  before  other  states,  and  not  to  degrade
her  chief  by  too  humble  a  title :  she  -ought  to  be  still  more
careful  not  to  swell  his  heart  by  a  vain  name,  by  unbounded
honours,  so  as  to  inspire  him  with  the  idea  of  arrogating  to
himself  a  commensurate  authority  over  her,  or  of  acquiring
a  proportionate  power  by  unjust  conquests. On  the  other
hand,  an  exalted  title  may  engage  the  chief  to  support,  with
greater  firmness,  the  dignity  of  the nation. Prudence  is
guided by circumstances, and, on every occasion, keeps
within  due  bounds. "Royalty,"  says  a  respectable  author,
who  may  be  believed  on  this  subject,  "rescued  the  house
of.  Brandenburg  from  that  yoke  of  servitude  under  which
the house of  Austria then kept  all  the  German  princes.
This  was  a  bait  which  Frederic  I.  threw  out  to  all  his  pos-
terity, saying  to  them,  as  it  were,  I  have  acquired  a  title  for
L  152  ]  you ;  do  you  render  yourselves  worthy  of  it :  I  have  laid  the
foundations  of  your  greatness ;  it  is 'you  who  are  to  finish  the
work."*
§42.  Who- If  .the  conductor  of  the  state  is  sovereign,  he  has  in  his
ther  a  sove-  hands  the  rights  and  authority  of  the  political  society ;  and
reign  may consequently  he  may  himself  determine  what  title  he  will
what  title Assume,  and  what  honours  shall  be  paid  to  him,  unless  these
and  honours  have  been  already  determined  by  the  fundamental  laws,  or
he  pleases, that  the  limits  which  have  been  set  to  his  power  manifestly
oppose  such  as  he  wishes  to  assume. His  subjects  are  equally
obliged  to  obey  him  in  this  as  in  whatever  he commands
by  virtue  of  a  lawful  authority. Thus,  the  Czar  Peter  I.,
grounding  his  pretensions  on  the  vast  extent  of  his  dominions,
took  upon  himself  the  title  of  emperor.
5  43.  Hight But  foreign  nations  are  not  obliged  to  give  way  to  the  will
of  other  na-  of  a  Sovereign  who  assumes  a  new  title,  or  of  a  people  who
'  *  -  ^g^]j  ^jjgjj,  chief  by  what  name  they  please.f


tions  in  this
lespect


*  Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Branden-  — '<  Olivarius,  Dominus  Protector  Ar

burg.  glie» Scotia,  et  Hibemie, Ludoriri

f  Cromwell,  in  writing  to  Louis  the  XIV.  Francorum  Regi  ChnstiaQisaiBfl

Fourteenth,  used  the  following  style:  Rex.''— *And  th0  subscription  was—
834


DIGNirr  AND  EQUALITT  OF  NATIONS.  152

However,  if  this  title  has  nothing  unreasonable,  or  con- book  n.
trary  to  received  customs,  it  is  altogether  agreeable  to  the  chap,  m.
mutual  duties  which  bind  nations  together,  to  give  to  a  sove-  §  44.  Their
reign  or  conductor  of  a  state  the  same  title  that  is  given  him  ^^'
by  his  people. But,  if  this  title  is  contrary  to  custom — if  it
implies  attributes  which  do  not  belong  to  him  who  affects  it,
foreign  nations  may  refuse  it  without  his  having  reason  to
complain. The  title  of  "  Majesty*-  is  consecrated  by  custom
to  monarchs  who  command  great  nations. The  emperors  of
Germany  have  long  affected  to  reserve  it  to  themselves,  as
belonging solely  to the imperial crown. But the kings
asserted  with  reason  that  there  was  nothing  on  earth  more
eminent  or  more  august  than  their  dignity :  they  therefore
refused  the  title  of  Majesty  to  him  who  refused  it  to  them;*
and  at  present,  except  in  a  few  instances  founded  on  parti-
cular reasons,  the  title  of  Majesty  is  a  peculiar  attribute  of  the
royal  character.

As  it  would  be  ridiculous  for  a  petty  prince  to  take  the
title  of  king,  and  assume  the  style  of  "  Majesty,"  foreign
nations,  by  refusing  to  comply  with  this  whim,  do  nothing
but  what  is  conformable  to  reason  and  their  duty.  However,
if  there  reigns  anywhere  a  sovereign,  who,  notwithstanding
the  small  extent  of  his  power,  is  accustomed  to  receive  from
his  neighbours  the  title  of  king,  distant  nations  who  would  [  153  1
carry  on  an  intercourse  with  him  cannot  refuse  him  that
title.  It  belongs  not  to  them  to  reform  the  customs  of  distant
countries.

The sovereign  who  wishes  constantly  to  receive  certain  §46.  How
titles  and  honours  from  other  powers,  must  secure  them  by^^®*"*^
treaties. Those  who  have  entered  into  enffagements  in  this  ^^S^.^
way  are  obliged  to  coniorm  to  them,  and  cannot  deviate  cured,
from  the  treaties  without  doing  him  an  injury. Thus,  in
the  examples  we  have  produced  (§§  41  and  42),  the  czar  and
the  king  of  Prussia  took  care  to  negotiate  beforehand  with
the  courts  in  friendship  with  them,  to  secure  their  being  ac-
knowledged under  the  new  titles  they  intended  to  assume.

The  popes  have  formerly  pretended  that  it  belonged  to
the  tiara  alone  to  create  new  crowns;  they  had  the  confi-
dence to  expect  that  the  superstition  of  princes  and  nations
would  allow them so sublime  a  prerogative. But  it  was

« In  Aula  nostra  Alba.  Yester  bonus  *  At  the  famous  treaty  of  West-

amicus." The  court  of  France  was  phalia,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  France

highl}^  offended  at  this  form  of  address,  agreed with  those  of the emperor,

The  ambassador  Boreel,  in  a  letter  to  <*  that the  king  and  queen  writing

the  Pensionary  De  Witt,  dated  May  25,  with  their  own  hand  to  the  emperor,

les.'),  said  that  Cromwell's  letter  had  and  giving  him  the  title  of  majesty,

not  been  presented,  and  that  those  who  he  should  answer  them,  with  his  own

iprere  charged  with  the  deUvery  of  it,  hand,  and  give  them  the  same  title.''

had  withheld  it,  through  an  apprehen-  Letter  of  the  plenipotentiaries  to  M«

flion  of  its  giving  rise  to  some  misunder-  de  Brienne,  Oct.  15th,  1646.
fftandiitg  between  the  two  countries.


153  DIGNITY  AND EQUALITY  OF  NATIOITS.

BOOK  n. eclipsed  at  the  revival  of  letters.* The  emperors  of Ger-
CHAP.  Ill,  many,  who  formed  the  same  pretensions,  were  at  least  coaB-
tenanced  by  the  example  of  the  ancient  Bomam  emperors.
They  only  want  the  same  power  in  order  to  have  the  same
right.
^  46. We In  default  of  treaties,  we  ought,  with  respect  to  titles,  and,
must  con- j^  general,  every  other  mark  of  honour,  to  conform  to  the
neral  oil^  rule  established  by  general  custom. To  attempt  a  deviation
torn.  (102)  from  it  with  respect  to  a  nation  or  sovereign,  when  there  is  no
particular reason  for  such  innovation,  is  expressing  either
contempt  or  ill-will  towards  them ; — a  conduct  equally  incon-
sistent with  sound  policy  and  with  the  duties  that  nations  owe
to  each  other.  (102)
§  47.  Mu- The  greatest  monarch  ought  to  respect  in  every  sovereign
tual  respect  i}^q  eminent  character  with  which  he  is  invested. The  in-
rei owe" <i^P®^^d®^<5G>  ^^e  equality  of  nations,  the  reciprocal  duties  of
to  each humanity, — all  these  circumstances  should  induce  him  to  pay,
other. even  to  the  chief  of  a  petty  state,  the  respect  due  to  the
station  which  he  fills. The  weakest  state  is  composed  of  men
as  well  as  the  most  powerful :  and  our  duties  are  the  same
towards  all  those  who  do  not  depend  on  us.

But  this  precept  of  the  law  of  nature  does  not  extend  be-
yond what  is  essential  to  the  respect  which  independent
nations  owe  to  each  other,  or  that  conduct,  in  a  word,  which
shows  that  we  acknowledge  a  state  or  its  chief  to  be  truly
independent  and  sovereign,  and  consequently  entitled  to
every  thing  due  to  the  quality  of  sovereignty.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  a  great  monarch  being,  as  we  have  already  ob-
served, a  very  important  personage  in  human  society,  it  is
natural,  that,  in  matters  merely  ceremonial,  and  not  deroga-
tory to  the  equality  of  rights  between  nations,  he  should
[  154  ]  receive  honours  to  which  a  petty  prince  can  have  no  preten-
sions :  and  the  latter  cannot  refuse  to  pay  the  former  every
mark  of  respect  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  own  inde-
pendence and  sovereignty.
$48.  How Every nation,  every  sovereign,  ought  to maintain their

a  sovereign  dignity  (§  35)  by  causing  due  respect  to  be  paid  to  them ;
ought  to

maintain  his  "

dignity.  *  Catholic  princes  receive  stiU  from  of  2d  vol.  p.  324. See,  as  to  the  tea

(103)  thd  pope  titles  that  relate  to  religion,  and incidents,  ante,  125 and  131  ia

Benedict XIY.  gave that  of  <*  Most  notes;  and  Cours  de  Droit  Public  too.

Faithful "  to the king  of  Portugal ;  2,  p»  80  to  84,  and  396  to  406.— G.
and  the  condescension  of  other  princes ( 1 03)  The  House  of  Lords  recently,

connived  at the imperative  style  in  rather  facetiously,  maintained  the  dig-

which  the  bull  is  couched. — It  is  dated  nity  of  the  king  of  Spain,  by  declining

December  23,  1748.  to  give  him  cMtt,  on  the  same  principle

(102)  Formerly  all  nations  used  to  that  our  king  does  not  recover  coels,

observe,  in  the  British  Seas,  the  mark  saying,  we  will  not  disparage  tiie  dig-

of  honour,  by  lowering  the  flag  or  ti^p-  nity  of  the  king  of  Spain  by  giving

sail  to  an  English  man  of  war,  called  him  costs. HewleU  v.  King  of  Spam,

the  duty  of  the  flag. See 1  Chitty's  on  appeal  from  Chancery  to  House  sf

Commercial  Law,  102 ; and  see  end  Lords,  1  Dow  Rep.  New  Series,  177«
236


OV  IHS  SIGHT  TO  SBCURIT7,  STO.  154

ttDdy  especially,  they  ought  not  to  suffer  that  dignity  to  be hook  il
impaired. If,  then,  there  are  titles  and  honours,  which,  by  coat  u^
eonstiint custom,  belong to a  prince,  he  may  insist  upon
them ;  and  he  ought  to  do  it  on  occasions  where  his  glory  is
concerned.

£ut  it  is  proper  to  distinguish  between  neglect  or  the  omis-
sion of  what  the  established  usage  requires,  and  positive  acts
of  disrespect  and  insult.  The  prince  may  complain  of  an
instance  of  neglect,  and,  if  it  be  not  repaired,  may  consider
it  as  an  indication  of  ill-wUl :  he  has  a  right  to  demand,  even
by  force  of  arms,  the  reparation  of  an  insult.  The  czar  Peter
the  First,  in  his  manifesto  against  Sweden,  complained  that
the  cannon  had  not  been  fired  on  his  passing  at  Riga.  He
might  think  it  strange  that  they  did  not  pay  him  this  mark
of  respect,  and  he  might  complain  of  it ;  but,  to  have  made
this  the  subject  of  a  war,  must  have  indicated  a  preposterous
prodigality  of  human  blood.


CHAP.  IV.

OP  THE  RIGHT  TO  SECURITY,  AND  THE  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SOVB- JDAI.  IT^
REIGNTY  AND INDEPENDENCE OF  NATIONS.  (104)  ' ""

IN  vain  does  nature  prescribe  to  nations,  as  well  as  to  indi-  §49.  uhAA
viduals,  the  care  of  self-preservation,  and  of  advancing  their  ^  -secunty.
own  perfection  and  happiness,  if  she  does  not  give  them  a
right  to  preserve  themselves  from  every  thing  that  might
render  this  care  ineffectual.  This  rigJit  is  nothing  more  than
a  moral  power  of  acting ^  that  is,  the  power  of  doing  what  is
morally  possible — what  is  proper  and  conformable  to  our
duties.  \fe  have,  then,  in  general,  a  right  to  do  whatever  is
necessary  to  the  discharge  of  our  duties.  Every  nation,  as
well  as  every  man,  has,  therefore,  a  right  to  prevent  other
nations  from  obstructing  her  preservation,  her  perfection,
and  happiness, — -that  is,  to  preserve  herself  from  all  injuries
(§  18) :  and  this  right  is  a  perfect  one,  since  it  is  given  to
satisfy  a  natural  and  indispensable  obligation :  for,  when  we
cannot  use  constraint  in  order  to  cause  our  rights  to  be  re-
spected, their  effects  are  very  uncertain.  It  is  this  right
to  preserve  herself  from  all  injury  that  is  called  the  right  to
security.

It  is  safest  to  prevent  the  evil  when  it  can  be  prevented.  §60.  Itproi
A  nation  has  a  right  to  resist  an  injurious  attempt,  and  to  <*."<^  *«
xuake  use  of  force  and  every  honourable  expedient  against  2f^,M-'*'


sutaiice;


(104)  Afl  to  the  independence  of Public  Paris,  A.  D.  1830,  torn.  2,  111
ji^tirtifcg^  lee  in  general,  Conn  de  Droit pert,  article  ii.  pp.  3  to  16.

387


154  OP  THE  RIGHT  TO  SECUBITT,  ETO.

BOOK  n.  whosoever  is  actually  engaged  in  opposition  to  her,  and  even

CHAP.  IV.  to  anticipate  his  machinations,  observing,  however,  not  to

attack  him  upon  vague  and  uncertain  suspicions,  lest she

should  incur  the  imputation  of  becoming  herself  an  unjust

[  155  ]  aggressor.

§  51.  and  When  the  evil  is  done,  the  same  right  to  security  autho-
that  of  ob-  rizes  the  offended  party  to  endeavour  to  obtain  a  complete
tammg  re-  reparation,  and  to  employ  force  for  that  purpose,  if  neces-
^ ^^* sary.

§52.  and Finally,  the  offended  party  have  a  right  to  provide  for
the  right  of  their  future  security,  and  to  chastise  the  offender,  by  inflict-
puniflhmg. jj^g  upon  him  a  punishment  capable  of  deterring  him  thence-
forward from  similar  aggressions,  and  of  intimidating  those
who  might  be  tempted  to  imitate  him. They  may  even,  if
necessary,  disable  the  aggressor  from  doing  further  injury.
They  only  make  use  of  their  right,  in  all  these  measures,
which  they  adopt  with  good  reason :  and  if  evil  thence  results
to  him  who  has  reduced  them  to  the  necessity  of  taking  such
steps,  he  must  impute  the  consequences  only  to  his  own  in-
justice.
^  53.  Right Ifj  then,  there  is  anywhere  a  nation  of  a  restless  and  mia-
ofallna- chievous  disposition,  ever  ready  to  injure  others,  to  traverse
amischie- *^®^^  designs,  and  to  excite  domestic  disturbances  in  their
vou>  people 'dominions, — it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  all  the  others  have
a  right  to  form  a  coalition  in  order  to  repress  and  chastise  that
nation,  and  to  put  it  for  ever  after  out  of  her  power  to  injure
them. Such  would  be  the  just  fruits  of.  the  policy  which
Machiav^l  praises  in  Csesar  Borgia. The  conduct  followed
.  by  Philip  II.  king of  Spain,  was calculated to  unite  all
Europe  against  him ;  and  it  was  from  just  reasons  that  Henry
the  Great  formed  the  design  of  humbling  a  power whose
strength  was  formidable,  and  whose  maxims  were  pernicious.
The  three  preceding  propositions  are  so  many  principles
that  furnish  the  various  foundations  for  a  just  war,  as  we  shaU
see  in  the  proper  place.
§  54.  No ^*  ^^  ^^  evident  consequence  of  the  liberty  and  independ-
nation  has ence  of  nations,  that  all  have  a  right  to  be  governed  as  they
a  right  to think  proper,  and  that  no  state  has  the  smallest  right  to
interfere  in  interfere  in  the  government  of  another. Of  all  the  rights
me^^ofan  *^*^*  ^^^  belong  to  a  nation,  sovereignty  is,  doubtless,  the
•Cher  state,  most  precious,  and  that  which  other  nations  ought  the  most
scrupulously  to respect,  if  they  would  not  do  her  an  in-
jury. (105)

The  sovereign  is  he  to  whom  the  nation  has  intrusted  the


(105)  Nor  has  a  subject  of  one  state  state  assist  a  revolted  colony,  it  is  just

a  right  to  enter  into  any  contract  with,  ground  of  war  on  the  part  of  the  paien*-

or  to  assist  the  revolted  colony  of  an-  state. Thompson  v.  PowUsy  2  Simon's

other  before  the  same  has been for-  Rep.  194;  Taylor  ▼.  Barday,  id.  8191

mally  recognised as  an  independent  jinlt,  p.  141,  note  96.
aiate  by  iti  own  government;  and  if  a


OF  THB  RIGHT TO SBCURITY^ ETC*  155

empire  and  the  care  of  the  government :  she  has  invested  him book  ii.
with  her  rights ;  she  alone  is  directly  interested  in  the  manner  ohap.  it.
in  which  the  conductor  she  has  chosen  makes  use  of  his  power.  §  55.  One
It  does  not,  then,  belong  to  any  foreign  power  to  take  cog-  sovereign
nisance  of  the  administration  of  that  sovereign,  to  set  himself  cannotmako
up  for  a  judge  of  his  conduct,  and  to  oblige  him  to  alter  it.  .^^  ^^^^
If  he  loads  his  subjects  with  taxes,  and  if  he  treats  them  with  conduct  of
severity,  the  nation  alone  is  concerned  in  the  business ;  and  another,
no  other  is  called  upon  to  oblige  him  to  amend  his  conduct,
and  follow  more  wise  and  equitable  maxims. It  is  the  part
of  prudence  to  point  out  the  occasions  when  officious  and  ami-
cable representations  may  be  made  to  him. The  Spaniards
violated  all  rules  when  they  set  themselves  up  as  judges  of
the  Inca  Athualpa. If  that  prince  had  violated  the  law  of
nations  with  respect  to  them,  they  would  have  had  a  right  to  [  156  ]
'  punish  him. But  they  accused  him  of  having  put  some  of  his
subjects  to  death,  of  having  had  several  wives,  &c. — things,
for  which  he  was  not  at  all  accountable  to  them ;  and,  to  fill
up  the  measure  of  their  extravagant  injustice,  they  condemned
him  by  the  laws  of  Spain.*

But,  if  the  prince,  by  violating  the  fundamental  laws,  gives  §  56.  How
his  subjects  a  legal  right  to  resist  him, — if  tyranny,  becom-  far  lawful  tc
ing  insupportable,  obliges  the  nation  to  rise  in  their  own  de-  interfere  in
fence, — every  foreign  power  has  a  right  to  succour  an  op-  ^|^^^  ^
pressed  people  who  implore  their  assistance. The  English  sovereign
justly  complained  of  James  II. The  nobility  and  the  most  and  his  <»aoi
distinguished  patriots  having  determined  to  check  him  in  the  J®*^***
prosecution  of  his  schemes,  which  manifestly  tended  to  over-
throw the  constitution,  and  to  destroy,  the  liberties  and  the
religion  of  the  people,  applied  for  assistance  to  the  United
Provinces. The authority  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  had,
doubtless,  an  influence  on  the  deliberations  of  the  states-
general  ;  but  it  did  not  lead  them  to  the  commission  of  an
act  of  injustice :  for,  when  a  people,  from  good  reasons  take
up  arms  against  an  oppressor,  it  is  but  an  act  of  justice  and
generosity  to  assist  brave  men  in  the  defence  of  their  liber-
ties. Whenever,  therefore,  matters  are  carried  so  far  as  to
produce  a  civil  war,  foreign  powers  may  assist  that  party
which  appears  to  them  to  have  justice  on  its  side. He  who
assists  an  odious  tyrant, — he  who  declares  for  an  unjust  and  *

rebellious  people, — violates  his  duty.  But,  when  the  bands
of  the  political  society  are  broken,  or  at  least  suspended,
between  the  sovereign  and  his  people,  the  contending  parties
may  then  be  considered  as  two  distinct  powers ;  and,  since
they  fire  both  equally  independent  of  all  foreign  authority,
nobody  has  a  right  to  judge  them.  Either  may  be  in  the
right ;  and  each  of  those  who  grant  their  assistance  may  ima-
gine that  he  is  acting  in  support  of  the  better  cause. It  fol-

*  GarcillasBO  de  la  Vega.


156  OF  THE  RIGHT  TO  8ECUBITT, ETC.

BOOK  n. lows,  then,  in virtue  of  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  (sea
OHAP.  IV. Prelim.  §  21),  that  the  two  parties  may  act  as  having  an  equal
right,  and  behave  to  each  other  accordingly  till  the  decision
of  the  affair.

But  we  ought  not  to  abuse  this  maxim,  and  make  a  handle

of  it  to  authorize  odious  machinations  against  the  internal

tranquillity  of  states. It  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  nations

to  invite  those  subjects  to  revolt  who  actually  pay  obedience

to  their  sovereign,  though  they  complain  of  his  government.

The  practice  of  nations  is  conformable  to  our  maxims.

When  the  German  protestants  came  to  the  assistance  of  tht

reformed  party  in  France,  the  court  never  attempted  to  treai

them  otherwise  than  on  the  usual  footing  of  enemies  in  general,

and  according  to  the  laws  of  war. France  was  at  the  same

time  engaged  m  assisting  the  Netherlands  then  in  arms  against

Spain,  and  expected  that  her  troops  should  be  considered  in

no  other  light  than  a49  auxiliaries  in  a  regular  war. But  no

power  ever  fails  to  complain,  as  of  an  atrocious  wrong,  if

any  one  attempts  by  his  emissaries  to  excite  his  subjects  to

revolt.

[  157  3 As  to  those  monsters  who,  under  the  title  of  sovereignSi

render  themselves  the  scourges  and  horror  of  the  human  race^

they  are  savage  beasts,  whom  every  brave  man  may  justly

exterminate  from  the  face  of  the  earth. All  antiquity  has

praised  Hercules  for  delivering  the  world  from  an  Ant^as,  a

Busiris,  and  a  Diomede.

$  67.  Right After  having  established  the  position  that  foreign  nations

of  opposing  have  no  right  to  interfere  in  the  government  of  an  independ-

mieiier-  ^^^  gtato,  it  is  uot  difficult  to  prove  that  the  latter  has  a  right

enceoffor- .  i-*.  m  ii<»  t^

eign  powers  *^  Oppose  such  interference. To  govern  herself  according  to
in  the  affaire  her  own  pleasure,  is  a  necessary  part  of  her  independence,
of  govern- A  Sovereign  state  cannot  be  constrained  in  this  respect,  except
^^^^ it  be  from  a  particular  right  which  she  has  herself  given  to
other  states  by  her  treaties ;  and,  even  if  she  has  given  them
such  a  right,  yet  it  cannot,  in  an  affair  of  so  delicate  a  nature
as  that  of  government,  be  extended  beyond  the  clear  and
express  terms  of  the  treaties. In  every  other  case,  a  sove-
reign has  a  right  to  treat  those  as  enemies  who  attempt  to
interfere  in  his  domestic  affairs  otherwise  than  by  their  good
*  offices.

S  M.  The  Religion  is  in  every  sense  an  object  of  great  importance  to
'"^*  ^^^^  *  nation,  and  one  of  the  most  interesting  subjects  on  which
to^relirion!^  the  government  can  be  employed.  An  independent  people
are  accountable  for  their  religion  to  God  alone ;  in  this  par-
ticular, as  in  every  other,  they  have  a  right  to  regulate  their
conduct  according  to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience,
and  to  prevent  all  foreign  interference  in  an  affair  of  so  deli-
cate a  nature.* The  custom,  long  kept  up  in  Christendom,

*  When,  however,  we  see  a  party the  religion  we  profess,  and  m  neigh*
inflamed  with  deadly  hatred  against bouring  prince  persecuting  in  ooose-
940


Of  THB  RIGHT  TO SECURITY,  ETC.  157

of  causing  all  the  affairs  of  religion  to  be  decided  and  regu-  book  h.
lated  in  a  general  council,  could  only  have  been  introduced  chap.  !▼.
oy  the  singular  circumstance  of  the  submission  of  the  whole
church  to  the  same  civil  government, — the  Roman  empire.
When  that  empire  was  overthrown,  and  gave  place  to  many
independent  kingdoms,  this  custom  was  found  contrary  to
the  first  principles  of  government,  to  the  very  idea  of  inde-
pendent states  and  political  societies.  It  was,  however,  long
supported  by  prejudice,  ignorance,  and  superstition,  by  the
authority  of  the  popes  and  the  power  of  the  clergy,  and  still
respected  even  at  the  time  of  the  reformation.  The  states
who  had  embraced  the  reformed  religion  offered  to  submit  to
the  decisions  of  an  impartial  council  lawfully  assembled.  At
present  they  would  not  hesitate  to  declare,  that,  in  matters
of  religion,  they  are  equally  independent  of  every  power  on
earth,  as  they  are  in  the  affairs  of  civil  government.  The
general  and  absolute  authority  of  the  pope  and  council  is  [  168  ]
absurd  in  every  other  system  than  that  of  those  popes  who
strove  to  unite  all  Christendom  in  a  single  body,  of  which
they  pretended  to  be  the  supreme  monarchs.*  But  even
Catholic  sovereigns  have  endeavoured  to  restrain  that  autho-
rity within  such  limits  as  are  consistent  with  their  supreme
power:  they  do  not  receive  the  decrees  of  councils  or  the
popes*  bulls  till  they  have  caused  them  to  be  examined ;  and  ,

these  ecclesiastical  laws  are  of  no  force  in  their  dominions
unless  confirmed  by  the  prince.  In  the  first  book  of  this
work.  Chap.  XII.  we  have  sufficiently  established  the  rights
of  a  state  in  matters  of  religion ;  and  we  introduce  them
here  again,  only  to  draw  just  consequences  from  them  with
respect  to  the  conduct  which  nations  ought  to  observe  towards
each  other.

It  is,  then,  certain  that  we  cannot,  in  opposition  to  the  will  §  59.  Nona-
of  a  nation,  interfere  in  her  religious  concerns,  without  vio-  ^^^^  *^?  ^
lating  her  rights,  and  doing  her  an  injury. Much  less  are  ^"|^  '^^
we  allowed  to  employ  force  of  arms  to  oblige  her  to  receive  to  religion.
a  doctrine  and  a  worship  which  we  consider  as  divine. What
right  have  men  to  set  themselves  up  as  the  defenders  and  pro-
tectors of  the  cause  of  God  ?  '  He  can,  whenever  he  pleases,
lead  nations  to  the  knowledge  of  himself,  by  more  effectual
means  than  those  of  violence. Persecutors  make  no  true  con-
verts. The  monstrous  maxim  of  extending  religion  by  the
sword,  is  a  subversion  of  the  rights  of  mankind,  and  the  most

quence  the  profeesora  of  that  religion,  nature  requires  that  I  should  antici-
it  is  lawful  for  us  to  give  assistance  to  pate  and  prevent  the  evil  which  may
the  suficrers, — as  it  was  well  remarked  thence  result  to  myself." — Le  Yassor,
by  James  I.  of  England  to  Bouillon  History  of  Louis  XIII.
the  ambassador  of  Mary  de  Medici,  *  See  above,  §  46,  and  Bodinus's
queen-regent  of  France, — **  When  my  Republic,  book  L  c.  ix,  with  his  quo-
neighbours  are  attacked  in  a  quarrol  tations,  p.  m.  I39t
in  which  I  am  interested,  the  law  of

31 y  841


158


BOOK  II.
CHAP.  IV.


§  60.  om-

ces  of  hu-
manity in
these  mat-
ters.

Missiona-
ries.


OF  THE RIGHT  TO  SECUEITYy BTO.

terrible  scourge  of  nations.  Every  madman  will  fancy  lie  ia
fighting  in  the  cause  of  God,  and  every  aspiring  spirit  will
use  that  pretext  as  a  cloak  for  his  ambition.  While  Char-
lemagne was  ravaging  Saxony  with  fire  and  sword,  in  order
to  plant  Christianity  there,  the  successors  of  Mohammed  were
ravaging  Asia  and  Africa,  to  establish  the  Koran  in  those
parts.

But  it  is  an  oflSce  of  humanity  to  labour,  by  mild  and  law-
ful means,  to  persuade  a  nation  to  receive  a  religion  which
we  believe  to  be  the  only  one  that  is  true  and  salutary.  Mis-
sionaries may  be  sent  to  instruct  the  people ;  and  this  care  is
altogether  comformable  to  the  attention  which  every  nation
owes  to  the  perfection  and  happiness  of  others.  But  it  must
be  observed,  that,  in  order  to  avoid  doing  an  injury  to  the
rights  of  a  sovereign,  the  missionaries  ought  to  abstain  from
preaching  clandestinely,  or  without  his  permission,  a  new  doc-
trine to  his  people.  Ho  may  refuse  to  accept  their  proflfered
services ;  and,  if  he  orders  them  to  leave  his  dominions,  they
ought  to  obey.  They  should  have  a  very  express  order  from
the  King  of  kings,  before  they  can  lawfully  disobey  a  sove-
reign who  commands  according  to  the  extent  of  iiis  power;
and  the  prince  who  is  not  convinced  of  that  extraordinary
order  of  the  Deity,  will  do  no  more  than  exert  hia  lawful

^  rights,  in  punishing  a  missionary  for  disobedience. But,

what  if  the  nation,  or  a  considerable  part  of  the  people,  are
desirous  of  retaining  the  missionary,  and  following  his  doc-

[  159  ]  trine  ? In  a  former  part  of  the  work  (Book  I.  §§  128—136),
we  have  established  the  rights  of  the  nation  and  those  of  the
citizens ;  and  thither  we  refer  for  an  answer  to  this  question.
This  is  a  very  delicate  subject;  and  we  cannot  authoriie

^'""■P®^"  an  inconsiderate  zeal  for  making  proselytes,  without  endan-
gering the  tranquillity  of  all  nations,  and  even  exposing  those
who  are  engaged  in  making  converts  to  act  inconsistently
with  their  duty,  at  the  very  time  they  imagine  they  are  accom-
plishing the  most  meritorious  work.  For,  it  is  certainly  per-
forming a  very  bad  office  to  a  nation,  and  doing  her  an  essen-
tial injury,  to  spread  a  false  and  dangerous  religion  among
the  inhabitants.  Now,  there  is  no  person  who  does  not  be-
lieve his  own  religion  to  be  the  only  true  and  safe  one.  Re-
commend, kindle  in  all  hearts,  the  ardent  zeal  of  the  missiona-
ries, and  you  will  see  Europe  inundated  with  Lamas,  Bonzes^
and  Der vises,  while  monks  of  all  kinds  will  overrun  Asia  and
Africa.  Protestant  ministers  will  crowd  to  Spain  and  Italy,
in  defiance  of  the  Inquisition,  while  the  Jesuits  will  spread
themselves  among  the  Protestants  in  order  to  bring  them  back
into  the  pale  of  the  church.  Let  the  Catholics  reproach  the
Protestants  as  much  as  they  please  with  their  lukewarmness,
the  conduct  of  the  latter  is  undoubtedly  more  agreeable  to
reason  and  the  law  of  nations.  True  zeal  applies  itself  to
the  task  of  making  a  holy  religion  flourish  in  the  countries


§61. Cir-


\


OF  THB  BIGHT  TO  SECURITY, BTO.  159

wliere  it  is  received,  and  of  rendering  it  useful  to  the  man-  book  n.
ners  of  the  people  and  to  the  state :  and,  without  forestalling  chap.it.
the  dispositions  of  Providence,  it  can  find  suflBcient  employ-
ment at  home,  until  an  invitation  come  from  foreign  nations,
or  a  very  evident  commission  be  given  from  heaven,  to
preach  that  religion  abroad.  Finally,  let  us  add,  that,  before
yre  can  lawfully  undertake  to  preach  a  particular  religion  to  the
various  nations  of  the  earth,  we  must  ourselves  be  thoroughly
convinced  of  its  truth  by  the  most  serious  examination. —
*' What !  can  Christians  doubt  of  their  religion  V* — The  Mo-
hammedan entertains  no  doubt  of  his.  Be  ever  ready  to
impart  your  knowledge, — simply  and  sincerely  expose  the
principles  of  your  belief  to  those  who  are  desirous  of  hearing
you :  instruct  them,  convince  them  by  evidence,  but  seek  not
to  hurry  them  away  with  the  fire  of  enthusiasm.  It  is  a  suffi-
cient charge  on  each  of  us,  to  be  responsible  for  his  own  con-
science.— Thus,  neither  will  the  light  of  knowledge  be  refused
to  any  who  wish  to  receive  it,  nor  will  a  turbulent  zeal  disturb
the  peace  of  nations.

When  a  religion  is  persecuted  in  one  country,  foreign  na-  §  62.  Whmt
tions  who  profess  it  may  intercede  for  their  brethren :  but  *  Mvereign
this  is  all  they  can  lawfully  do,  unless  the  persecution  be  car-  ™*y I"
ried  to  an  intolerable  excess :  then,  indeed,  it  becomes  a  case  those  who
of  manifest  tyranny,  in  opposition  to  which  all  nations  are  profess  his
allowed  to  assist  an  unhappy  people  (§  66). A  regard  to  ^^^^^  "*
their  own  safety  may  also  authorize  them  to  undertake  the
defence  of  the  persecuted  sufferers. A  king  of  France  re-
plied to  the  ambassadors  who  solicited  him  to  suffer  his  sub-  v
jects  of  the  reformed  religion  to  live  in  peace,  "that  he  was
master  in  his  own  kingdom." But  the  Protestant  sovereigns,
who  saw  a  general  conspiracy  of  the  Catholics  obstinately  [  160  ]
bent  on  their  destruction,  were  so  far  masters  on  their  side
as  to  be  at  liberty  to  give  assistance  to  a  body  of  men  who
might  strengthen  their  ps^rty,  and  help  them  to  preserve
themselves  from  the  ruin  with  which  tjiey  were  threatened.
All  distinctions  of  states  and  nations  are  to  be  disregarded,
when  there  is  question  of  forming  a  coalition  against  a  set
of  madmen  who  would  exterminate  all  those  that  do  not  im-
plicitly receive  their  doctrines.


another
state.


160


OF  THE  OBSERYAirCB  OF  JXTSTICE  BETWEEN  KAHoNS.


BOOK  II.
CHAP.  V.


CHAP.  V.

OF  THE OBSERVANCE OF  JUSTICE  BETWEEN  NATIONS.

§  63.  Ne-  Justice  is  the  basis  of  all  society,  the  sure  bond  of  all
cessityofthe  ^QjQjng|.Q^^  Human  society,  far  from  being  an  inter coiir«<H)
of  justice  in  ^^  assistance  and  good  oflSces,  ttouIJ  be  no  longer  any  thincr
human  ao-  but  a  vast  scene  of  robbery,  if  no  respect  were  paid  to  iLi^
ciety.  virtue,  which  secures  to  every  one  his  own. It  is  still  more

necessary  between  nations  than  between  individuals ;  because
injustice  produces  more  dreadful  consequences  in  the  quarrels
of  these  powerful  bodies  politic,  and  it  is  more  difficult  to
obtain  redress. The  obligation  imposed  on  all  men  to  be  just
is  easily  demonstrated  from  the  law  of  nature. We  here  take
that  obligation  for  granted  (as  being  sufficiently  known\  and
content  ourselves  with  observing  that  it  is  not  only  indispen-
sably binding  on  nations  (Prelim.  §  5),  but  even  still  more
sacred  with  respect  to  them,  from  the  importance  of  its  con-
sequences.
S  64.  Obli- All  nations  are  therefore  under  a  strict  obligation  to  culti-
vation of  all  vate  justice  towards  each  other,  to  observe  it  scrupulously,
"*ltiva^e** and  carefully  to  abstain  from  every  thing  that  may  violate  it.
and  observe  Each  ought  to  render  to  the  others  what  belongs  to  them,  to
justice. respect  their  rights,  and  to  leave  them  in  the  peaceable  en-
joyment of  them.*
§  66.  Right From  this  indispensable  obligation  which  nature  imposes
ff"^"^^*  on  nations,  as  well  as  from  those  obligations  which  each  na-
tion owes  to  herself,  results  the  right  of  every  state  not  to
suffer  any  of  her  rights  to  be  taken  away,  or  any  thing  which
lawfully  belongs  to  her :  for,  in  opposing  this,  she  only  acts
in  conformity  to  all  her  duties ;  and  therein  consists  the  right
[  161  ]  (§  49).

§66. This This  right  is  a  perfect  one, — that  is  to  say,  it  is  accompa-
right  is  a j^jo/j  -^ith  the  right  of  using  force  in  order  to  assert  it. In
pe  ect  one.  ^^^^  would  nature  give  us  a  right  to  refuse  submitting  to  in-
justice,— in  vain  would  she  oblige  others  to  be  just  in  their
dealings  with  us,  if  we  could  not  lawfully  make  use  of  forc^


to  submit  to
mjustioe


*  Might  not  this  duty  be  extended
to  the  execution  of  sentences  passed  in
other  countries  according  to  the  neces-
sary and  usual  forms  1 — On  this  subject
M.  Van  Bouningin  wrote  as  follows  to
M.  De  Witt,  Oct.  15,  1666 :  **  By  what
the  courts  of  Holland  have  decreed  in  the
affair  of  one  Koningh,  of  Rotterdam,  I
see  they  suppose  that  every  judgment
pronounced  b^  the  parliaments  of
France  against  the  inhabitants  of  Hol-
land injudiao  contradiclorio,  ought  to
944


be  executed  on  requisiuon  made  by  those
parliaments.  But  I  do  not  knoiBr  that
the  tribunals  of  this  country  art  in  the
same  manner  with  respect  to  seutencet
passed  in  Holland ;  and,  if  ihty  do  &<
an  agreement  might  be  made,  that
sentences  passed  on  either  side  asrviast
subjects  of  the  other  stat«  shall  oc^
take  efiect  on  such  property  as  the  eea>
demned  party  is  found  to  poaeaeas  ui
the  state  where  the  sentence  ha:3  b<


given


t*


COKCEBK  OF  A  NATION  IN  THS  ACTIONS  OF  HER  CITIZENS.  l6l

when  they  refused  to  discharge  this  duty.  The  just  would  book  ii.
lie  at  the  mercy  of  avarice  and  injustice,  and  all  their  rights  ^°'^^-  ^'
"would  soon  become  useless.

From  the  foregoing  right  arise,  as  distinct  branches,  first,  §  67.  It  pro-
the  right  of  a  just  defence,  which  belongs  to  every  nation, —  duces  i.Tha
or  the  right  of  making  use  of  force  against  whoever  attacks  ^^^^°  ®"
her  and  her  rights. This  is  the  foundation  of  defensive  war.

Secondly,  the  right  to  obtain  justice  by  force,  if  we  cannot  §  ^^-  ^T
obtain  it  otherwise,  or  to  pursue  our  right  by  force  of  arms.  ^rJ^^JvJ^*"*
This  is  the  foundation  of  offensive  war.  justice.

An  intentional  act  of  injustice  is  undoubtedly  an  injury.  §  69.  The
We  have,  then,  a  right  to  punish  it,  as  we  have  shown  above,  pght  of  pun-
in  speaking  of  injuries  in  general  (§  52). The  right  of  refus- ^^^  "^-^^^
ing  to  suffer  injustice  is  a  branch  of  the  right  to  security.

.  Let  us  apply  to  the  unjust  what  we  have  said  above  (§  53)  §  70.  Right
of  a  mischievous  nation. If  there  were  a  people  who  made  ®^  ***  ^^'
open  profession  of  trampling  justice  under  foot,-who  de-^°»'.J^
spised  and  violated  the  rights  of  others  whenever  they  found  openly  de-
an opportunity, — the  interest  of  human  society  would  author-  splses  jus-
ize  all  the  other  nations  to  form  a  confederacy  in  order  to  hum-  tice.
ble  and  chastise  the  delinquents. 'We  do  not  here  forget  the
maxim  established  in  our  Preliminaries,  that  it  does  not  be-
long to  nations  to  usurp  the  power  of  being  judges  of  each
other. In  particular  cases,  whore  there  is room  for  the
smallest  doubt,  it  ought  to  be  supposed  that  each  of  the  parties
may  have  some  right :  and  the  injustice  of  the  party  that  has
committed  the  injury  may  proceed  from  error,  and  not  from
a  general  contempt  of  justice. But  if,  by  her  constant  max-
ims, and  by  the  whole  tenor  of  her  conduct,  a  nation  evidently
proves  herself  to  be  actuated  by  that  mischievous  disposition,

if  she  regards  no  right  as  sacred, — the  safety  of  the  human

race  requires  that  she  should  be  repressed.  To  form  and  sup-
port an  unjust  pretension,  is  only  doing  an  injury  to  the  party
-whose  interests  are  affected  by  that  pretension ;  but,  to  de-
spise justice  in  general,  is  doing  an  injury  to  all  nations.


CHAP.  VI.

OF THE CONCERN  A  NATION  MAY  HAVE  IN  THE  ACTIONS  Qg chap.  7a.

HER CITIZENS.

We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapters  what  are  the  com-  §  71. The
xnon  duties  of  nations  towards  each  other, — how  they  ought  sovereign
mutually  to  respect  each  other,  and  to  abstain  from  all  i^j'iry  venire  Ae""
^Tid  all  offence, — and  how  justice  and  equity  ought  to  reign  injuries  of
between  them  in  their  whole  conduct. But  hitherto  we  have  the  state,

oxil  T  considered  the  actions  of  the  body  of  the  nation,  of  the  ^^  ^  T"^

v2  Ui


161  CONCERN  OF  A  NATION

BOOK  n. state,  of  the  sovereign. Private  persons  who  are  memben

OHAP.  Ti. of  one  nation,  may  offend  and  ill-treat  the  citizens  of  another,

tect  the citi- and  may  injure  a  foreign  sovereign: — ^it  remains  for  us  to

^"^^  examine  what  share  a  state  may  have  in  the  actions  of  her

L  1^2  J  citizens,  and  what  are  the  rights  and  obligations  of  sovereigns

in  this  respect.

Whoever  offends  the  state,  injures  its  rights,  distnrbs  ita
tranquillity,  or  does  it  a  prejudice  in  any  manner  whatsoever,
declares  himself  its  enemy,  and  exposes  himself  to  be  justly
punished  for  it. Whoever  uses  a  citizen  ill,  indirectly  offends
the  state,  which  is  bound  to  protect  this  citizen;  and  the
sovereign  of  the  latter  shoujd  avenge  his  wrongs,  punish  the
aggressor,  and,  if  possible,  oblige  him  to  make  full  repara-
tion ;  since  otherwise  the  citizen  would  not  obtain  the  great
end  of  the  civil  association,  which  is,  safety.
§  72.  He But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  nation  or  the  sovereign  ought
ought  not  to  not  to  suffer  the  citizens  to  do  an  injury  to  the  subiects  of  an-
•liner  ma Q^^er  state,  much  less  to  offend  that  state  itself:  and  this,  not

flUDiects  to

offend  other  ^^^7  because  no  sovereign  ought  to  permit  those  who  are
nations  or  under  his  command  to  violate  the  precepts  of  the  law  of  na-
their  citi-  ture,  which  forbids  all  injuries, — ^but  also  because  nations
""*•  ought  mutually  to  respect  each  other,  to  abstain  from  all

offence,  from  all  injury,  from  all  wrong, — ^in  a  word,  &om
fevery  thing  that  may  be  of  prejudice  to  othera. If  a  sove-
reign, who  might  keep  his  subjects  within  the  rules  of  justice
and  peace,  suffers  them  to  injure  a  foreign  nation  either  in
its  body  or  its  members,  he  does  no  less  injury  to  that  nation
than  if  he  injured  it  himself. In  short,  the  safety  of  the
state,  and  that  of  human  society,  requires  this  attention  from
every  sovereign. If  you  let  loose  the  reins  to  your  subjectJ
against  foreign  nations,  these  will  behave  in  the  same  manntf
to  you ;  and,  instead  of  that  friendly  intercourse  which  nature
has  established  between  all  men,  we  shall  see  nothing  but  one
vast  and  dreadful  scene  of  plunder  between  nation  and  nation.
§  73.  The However,  as  it  is  impossible  for  the  best  regulated  sute,
acts  of  indi-  qj.  for  the  most  vigilant  and  absolute  sovereign,  to  model  at
t  to  l^  his  pleasure  all  the  actions  of  his  subjects,  and  to  conSrie
imputed  to  them  on  every  occasion  to  the  most  exact  obedience,  it  would
the  nation,  be  unjust  to  impute  to  the  nation  or  the  sovereign  every  fault
committed  by  the  citizens. We  ought  not,  then,  to  sav,  in
general,  that  we  have  received  an  injury  from  a  nation  because
we  have  received  it  from  one  of  its  members.
S  74.  nnleas But,  if  a  nation  or  its  chief  approves  and  ratifies  the  ar<
it  approves  of  the  individual,  it  then  becomes  a  public  concern ;  and  the
or  ratifies injured  party  is  to  consider  the  nation  as  the  real  author  d
^™'  the  injury,  of  which  the  citizen  was  perhaps  only  the  instni-

§75.  Con-  ment.

^h^ ^tAh  ^^  *^®  offended  state  has  in  her  power  the  individual  w^9
Sie  offend^  ^*8  done  the  injury,  she  may  without  scruple  bring  himw
party. justice  and  punish  him. If  he  has  escaped  and  returned  ta

246


IN  THE  ACTIONS OF  HER  CITIZENS.  H2

his  own  country,  she  ought  to  apply  to  his  sovereign  to  have book  n.
justice  done  in  the  case.  ^^^^  ^'^


And,  since  the  latter  ought  not  to  suffer  his  subjects  to  [  163  ]
molest  the  subjects  of  other  states,  or  to  do  them*  an  injury,  §76.  Duty
much  less  to  give  open,  audacious  offence  to  foreign  powers,  o^  ^^  fS-
he  ought  to  compel  the  transgressor  to  make  reparation  for  ^^^  **"
the  damage  or  injury,  if  possible,  or  to  inflict  on  him  an  ex-
emplary punishment ;  or,  finally,  according  the  nature  and  cir-
cumstances of  the  case,  to  deliver  him  up  to  the  offended  state,
to  be  there  brought  to  justice.  This  is  pretty  generally  ob-
served with  respect  to  great  crimes,  which  are  equally  con-
trary to  the  laws  and  safety  of  all  nations.  Assassins,  incen-
diaries, and  robbers,  are  seized  everywhere,  at  the  desire  of
the  sovereign  in  whose  territories  the  crime  was  committed,
and  are  delivered  up  to  his  justice.  The  matter  is  carried
still  farther  in  states  that  are  more  closely  connected  by  friend-
ship and  good  neighbourhood.  Even  in  cases  of  ordinary
trangressions,  which  are  only  subjects  of  civil  prosecution,
either  with  a  view  to  the  recovery  of  damages,  or  the  inflic-
tion of  a  slight  civil  punishment,  the  subjects  of  two  neigh-
bouring states  are  reciprocally  obliged  to  appear  before  the
magistrate  of  the  place  where  they  are  accused  of  having
failed  in  their  duty.  Upon  a  requisition  of  that  magistrate,
called  Letters  Rogatory,  they  are  summoned  in  due  form  by
their  own  magistrates,  and  obliged  to  appear.  An  admirable
institution,  by  means  of  which  many  neighbouring  states  live
together  in  peace,  and  seeto  to  form  only  one  republic !  This
is  in  force  throughout  all  Switzerland.  As  soon  as  the  Let-
ters Rogatory  are  issued  in  form,  the  superior  of  the  accused
is  bound  to  enforce  them.  It  belongs  not  to  him  to  examine
whether  the  accusation  be  true  or  false :  he  is  to  presume  on
the  justice  of  his  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  any  doubts  on  his
own  part  to  impair  an  institution  so  well  calculated  to  pre-
serve harmony  and  good  understanding  between  the  states.
However,  if  by  constant  experience  he  should  find  that  his
subjects  are  oppressed  by  the  neighbouring  magistrates  who
summon  them  before  their  tribunals,  it  would  undoubtedly  be
right  in  him  to  reflect  on  the  protection  due  to  his  people,
and  to  refuse  the  rogatories  till  satisfaction  were  given  for  the
abuses  committed,  and  proper  steps  tak^n  to  prevent  a  repe-
tition of  them.  But,  in  such  case,  it  would  be  his  duty  to
allege  his  reasons,  and  set  them  forth  in  the  clearest  point
of  view.

The  sovereign  who  refuses  to  cause  reparation  to  be  made  §  77.  If  he
for  the  damage  done  by  his  subject,  or  to  punish  the  offender,  refiwes  jua.
or,  finally,  to  deliver  him  up,  renders  himself  in  some  mea-  ^^^\  ^
sure  an  accomplice  in  the  injury,  and  becomes  responsible  party  in  th#
for  it. But,  if  he  delivers  up  either  the  property  of  the  fault  and
offender,  as  an  indemnification,  in  cases  that  will  admit  of  offence,
pecuniary  ccmpensation— or  his  person,  in  order  that  he  may


138  EPFBCTS  OF  THE  DOMAIN BETWEEN  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. suffer  the  punishment  due  to  his  crime,  the  offended  party
oHAp.  VI. has  no  further  demand  on  him. King  Demetrius,  having  de-
[  164  ]  livered  to  the  Romans  those  who^  had  killed  their  ambassador,
the  senate- sent  them  back,  resolving  to  reserve  to  themselves
the  liberty  of  punishing  that  crime,  by  avenging  it  on  the
king  himself,  or  on  his  dominions.* If  this  was  really  the
case,  and  if  the  king  had  no  share  in  the  murder  of  the  Ro-
man ambassador,  the  conduct  of  the  senate  was  highly  unjust,
and  only  worthy  of  men  who  sought  but  a  pretext  to  cover
their  ambitious  enterprises,
other caaein Fi^^llj?  there  is  another  case  where  the  nation  in  general
wiiich  the ^^  guilty  of  the  crimes  of  its  members. That  is,  when,  by
nation  is its  manners,  and  by  the  maxims  of  its  government,  it  accu&-
guilty  of  the  toms  and  authorizes  its  citizens  indiscriminately  to  plunder
Se'^SiMnfi  ^^^  maltreat  foreigners,  to  make  inroads  into  the  neighbour-
*  ing  countries,  &c. Thus,  the  nation  of  the  Usbecks  is  guilty
of  all  the  robberies  committed  by  the  individuals  of  which  it
is  composed. The  princes  whose  subjects  are  robbed  and
massacred,  and  whose  lands  are  infested  by  those  robbers,  may
justly  level  their  vengeance  against  the  nation  at  large.  (106)
Nay,  more ;  all  nations  have  a  right  to  enter  into  a  league
against  such  a  people,  to  repress  them,  and  to  treat  them
as  the  common  enemies  of  the  human  race. The  Christian
nations  would be  no  less  justifiable in  forming a confe-
deracy against  the  states  of  Barbary,  in  order  to  destroy
those  haunts  of  pirates,  with  whom  the  love  of  plunder,  or
the  fear  of  just  punishment,  is  the  only  rule  of  peace  and
war. But  these  piratical  adventurers  are  wise  enough  to  re-
spect those  who  are  most  able  to  chastise  them ;  and  the  na-
tions that  are  able  to  keep  the  avenues  of  a  rich  branch  of
commerce  open  for  themselves,  are  not  sorry  to  see  them  shut
against  others.


CHAP.  VIL

CHAP.  VII.  EFFECTS OF  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.

§  79.  Gene- yf^  have  explaine'd,  in  Chap.  XVIII.  Book  I.,  how  a  n»-
ral  effect  of  ^j^^  takes  possession  of  a  country,  and  at  the  same  time  gains

the  uomaui.  *  n i ^ •  •%  i ^ mi^

possession  of  the  domam  and  government  tnerof.  Ihat  coun-
try, with  every  thing  included  in  it,  becomes  the  property  of
the  nation  in  general.  Let  us  now  see  what  are  the  eifects
of  this  property,  with  respect  to  other  nations.  The  full  do-
main is  necessarily  a  peculiar  and  exclusive  right ;  for,  if  I

•  See  Polybius,  quoted  by  Barbey- (106)  It  wm  on  this  ground  that  the

rac,  in  his  notes  on  Grotius,  book  iiL  French  nation  so  recently  took  posse*-

chap.  zxiv.  §  vii.  sion  of  Algiersw-^.
S48


EFFECTS OF  THE  DOMAIN BETWEEN  NATIONS.  164

have  a  full  right  to  dispose  of  a  thing  as  I  please,  it  thence ^^^  "^

follows  that  others  have  no  right  to  it  at  all,  since,  if  they  ^"^^'

had  any,  I  could  not  freely  dispose  of  it.  The  private  domain
of  the  citizens  may  he  limited  and  restrained  in  several  ways
by  the  laws  of  the  state,  and  it  always  is  so  by  the  eminent
domain  of  the  sovereign ;  but  the  general  domain  of  the  na-
tion is  full  and  absolute,  since  there  exists  no  authority  upon
earth  by  which  it  can  be  limited :  it  therefore  excludes  all
right  on  the  part  of  foreigners.  And,  as  the  rights  of  a  nation
ought  to  be  respected  by  all  others  (§  64),  none  can  form  any  [  165  ]
pretensions  to  the  country  which  belongs  to  that  nation,  nor
ought  to  dispose  of  it  without  her  consent,  any  more  than  of
the  tilings  contained  in  the  country.

The  domain  of  the  nation  extends  to  every  thing  she  pos-  §  80.  What
sesses  by  a  just  title :  it  comprehends  her  ancient  and  original  ^  compy©-

•  1 n  1  •  'j.'  J V  L* u  hended  in

possessions,  and  all  her  acquisitions  made  by  means  which  are  ^j^^  domain
just  in  themselves,  or  admitted  as  such  among  nations, — con-  of  a  nation,
cessions,  purchases,  conquests  made  in  the  regular  war,  &c.
And  by  her  possessions  we  ought  not  only  to  understand  her
territories,  but  all  the  rights  she  enjoys.

Even  the  property  of  the  individuals  is,  in  the  aggregate,  §  81. ITie
to  be  considered  as  the  property  of  the  nation,  with  respect  property  of
to  other  states. It,  in  some  sort,  really  belongs  to  her,  fro°^^^^^|^
the  right  she  has  over  the  property  of  her  citizens,  because  perty  of  the
it  constitutes  a  part  of  the  sum  total  of  her  riches,  and  aug-  nation,  with
ments  her  power. She  is  interested  in  that  property  by  her  ^pec*  ^
obligation  to  protect  all  her  members. In  short,  it  cannot  be  ^^^^  "*"
otherwise,  since  nations  act  and  treat  together  as  bodies  in
their  quality  of  political  societies,  and  are  considered  as  so
many  moral  persons. AH  those  who  form  a  society,  a  nation
being  considered  by  foreign  nations  as  constituting  only  one
whole,  one  single  person, — ^all  their  wealth  together  can  only
be  considered  as  the  wealth  of  that  same  person. And  this  is
80  true,  that  each  political  society  may,  if  it  pleases,  establish
within  itself  a  community  of  goods,  as  Gampanella  did  in  his
republic  of  the  sun. Others  will  not  inquire  what  it  does  in
this  respect :  its  domestic  regulations  make  no  chaAge  in  its
rights  with  respect  to  foreigners  nor  in  the  manner  in  which
they  ought  to  consider  the  aggregate  of  its  property,  in  what
way  soever  it  is  possessed.

By  an  immediate  consequence  of  this  principle,  if  one  na-  §  B2.  a  ooih
tion  has  a  right  to  any  part  of  the  property  of  another,  she  sequence  of
has  an  indiscriminate  right  to  the  property  of  the  citizens  of j P™ici-
the  latter  nation  until  the  debt  be  discharged. This  maxim
is  of  great  use,  as  shall  hereafter  be  shown.  §  83^  Con

The  general  domain  of  the  nation  over  the  lands  she  inhabits  nection  of

is  naturally  connected  with  the  empire ;  for,  in  establishing  t^e  domain

herself  in  a  yacant  country,  the  nation  certainly  does  not  in-  f/  *^®  .^?*
J  i.  '-^  • I.' 1' X  i.u  J  tionwith

tend  to  possess  it  m  subjection  to  any  other  power:  and,  can ^^^ ^^^

we  suppose  an  independent  nation  not  vested  with  the  absolute  reigntr*

32  848


165  EFFECTS  OF  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS

BOOK  n.  command  in  her  domestic  concerns  7 .  Thus,  we  have  already
OHAP.  ru.  observed  (Book  I,  §  -205),  that,  in  taking  possession  of  a
country,  the  nation  is  presumed  to  take  possession  of  its
government  at  the  same  time.  We  shall  here  proceed  further,
and  show  the  natural  connection  of  these  two  rights  in  an  in-
dependent nation.  How  could  she  govern  herself  at  her  own
pleasure  in  the  country  she  inhabits,  if  she  cannot  truly  and
absolutely  dispose  of  it  ?  And  how  could  she  have  the  fuU
and  absolute  domain  of  a  place  where  she  has  not  the  command  ?
Another's  sovereignty,  and  the  rights  it  comprehends,  must
deprive  her  of  the  free  disposal  of  that  place.  Add  to  this
loo  J  the  eminent  domain  which  constitutes  a  part  of  the  sovereignty
(Book  I,  §  244),  and  you  will  the  better  perceive  the  intimate
connection  existing  between  the  domain  and  the  sovereignty
of  the  nation.  And,  accordingly,  what  is  called  the  hit^k
domain^  which  is  nothing  but  the  domain  of  the  body  of  the
nation,  or  of  the  sovereign  who  represents  it,  is  everywhere
considered  as  inseparable  from  the  sovereignty.  The  useful
domain^  or  the  domain  confined  to  the  rights  that  may  belong
to  an  individual  in  the  state,  may  be  separated  from  the
sovereignty :  and  nothing  prevents  the  possibility  of  its  be-
longing to  ajiation  in  places  that  are  not  under  her  juris-
diction. Thus,  many  sovereigns  have  fiefs,  and  other  pos-
sessions, in  the  territories  of  another  prince :  in  these  cases
they  possess  them  in  the  manner  of  private  individuals.
$  84.  Juria-  The  sovereignty  united  to  the  domain  establishes  the  ju-
diction.  risdiction  of  the  nation  in  her  territories,  or  the  country  that
belongs  to  her.  It  is  her  province,  or  that  of  her  sovereign,
to  exercise  justice  in  all  the  places  under  her  jurisdiction,  to
take  cognisance  of  the  crimes  committed,  and  the  difierencea
that  arise  in  the  country.

Other  nations  ought  to  respect  this  right.  And,  as  the
administration  of  justice  necessarily  requires  that  every  de-
finitive sentence,  regularly  pronounced,  be  esteemed  just,  and
executed  as  such, — when  once  a  cause  in  which  foreigners  are
interested  has  been  decided  in  form,  the  sovereign  of  the  de-
fendants cannot  hear  their  complaints.  To  undertake  to  ex-
amine the  justice  of  a  definitive  sentence  is  an  attack  on  the
jurisdiction  of  him  who  has  passed  it.  The  prince,  therefore,
ought  not  to  interfere  in  the  causes  of  his  subjects  in  foreign
countries,  and  grant  them  his  protection,  excepting  in  cases
where  justice  is  refused,  or  palpable  and  evident  injustice
done,  or  rules  and  forms  openly  violated,  or,  finally,  an  odious
distinction  made,  to  the  prejudice  of  his  subjects,  or  of  fo-
reigners in  general.  The  British  court  established  this  maxim,
with  great  strength  of  evidence,  on  occasion  of  the  Prussian
vessels  seized  and  declared  lawful  prizes  during  the  last  war.*

*  See  the  report  made  to  the  King  Murray. It  ia  an  exoellent  pieoe  <m

of  Great  Britain  by  Sir  Greorge  Lee,  the  law  of  nationa.
Dr.  Paul,  Sir  Dudley  Ryd«T>  and  Mr.
S6M


J5VFBCT3  09  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  I()6

What  is  here  said  has  no  relation  to  the  merits  of  that  par- book  h.
ticular  cause,  since  they  must  depend  on  fafts.  chap,  vh

In  consequence  of  these  rights  of  jurisdiction,  the  decisiona  §85.Efferu

made  by  the  judge  of  the  place  within  the  extent  of  his  power  of  tlie  juns
ought  to  be  respected,  and  to  take  effect  even  in  foreign  coun-  foj^jgn
tries. For  instance,  it  belongs  to  the  domestic  judge  to  nomi-  countries
nate  tutors  and  guardians  for  minors  and  idiots. The  law  of  (107)

( 1 07)  This  principle  appears  to  be  now  (Haveloek  v.  Rockwood,  Atcheson's  Rep.  |

settled  by  the  law  and  practice  of  na^  8  &  49 ;  The  Flad  Oyen,  1  Rob.  Rep.  '

tions;  but,  nevertheless,  subject  to  cer-  115, 8 Term Rep. 270, in notes.)

tain  general  wholesome  rules,  essential  Thirdly,  the  ship,  or  other  property

to  be  adhered  to  in  order  to  prevent  the  condemned  as  prize,  must,  at  the  time

effect  of  partial  and  unjust  sentences  ofcondemnation,in  general,  be  actually

and  decisions. The  respected  dec^isions  in  the  country  where  the  sentence  was

which  have  given  rise  to  discussion,  pronounced^r— <Pcr  Sir  W.  Scott,  in  The

have  principally  been  in  foreign  Courts  Flad  Oyen^  1  Rob.  Rep.  115,  where  see

of  Admiralty,  or  Prize  Courts ;  and  the  some  exceptions ;  and  see  also  Haveloek

law  respecting  them  has  been  better  v.  Rockiooodj  Atch.  Rep.  49 ;  {JoUy  v.

settled  by  the  decisions  of  Sir  W.  Scott  The  Neptune,  2  Pet  Adm.  Dec  345;

and  Sir  J.  Nichol,  so  universally  re-  Findlay  v.  The  William,  1  Pet  Adm.

spected,  than  at  any  other  period  of  his-  Dec  12.^ See  other  cases  in  1  Har-

tory. By  the  long-established  doctrine  rison's  Index,  pp.  687  to  689.
in  England,  and  by  the  more  recent By  the  marine  law  of  England,  as

general  practice  of  European  nations,  practised  i«  the  High  Court  of  Admi-

a  sentence  of  condemnation,  pronounced  ralty,  it  wa^  formerly  held  that  there

in  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  is  was  no  change  of  property  in  case  of

essential, completely to  transfer  the  recaption,  so  as  to  bar  the  original

legal  interest  in  property  captured  as  owner  in  favour  of  a  vendee  or  recaptor,

prize,  {per  Sir  W.  Scott,  in  The  Flad  until  there  had  been  a  tentence  of  «m-

Oyen  I  Rob.  Rep.  116). And,  in  order  dentnation  (2  Burr.  696 ;  Lindo  v.  Rod-

to  constitute  a  legal  prize-court  to  pro-  ney  4r  another^  2  Douglas,  616  ;  1  Rob.

nounce  a  binding  sentence,  by  the  law  Rep.  139) ;  and  now  by  statutes  13  Geo.

of  nations,  certain  requisites  are  es-  2,  c  4,  s.  18,  and  29  Geo.  2,  c  34,  s.

sential. The  celebrated  report  drawn  24,  in  case  of  recapture,  the  jus  postli'

up  by  Lord  Mansfield  and  signed  by  mitiii  is  extended,  and continues for

him  and  other  very  eminent  personages  ever,  upon  payment  of  certain  salvage,

as  their  opinion,  contains  much  of  the  which  is  regulated  and  fixed  by  33  Geo.

law  of  nations  upon  the  subject (See  3,  c  66,  s.  42. (See  2 Burr.  696,

Postle.  Universal  Diet  of  Trade  and  1209,  &c) And,  when  the  private

Commerce,  article  SUesiOj  4th  ed. ;  and  property  of  an  aUied  sovereign  is  recap-

1  Col.  Jurid.  133;  and  see  Lindo  v.  tured  fiom  the  enemy,  it  is  to  be  re-

Rodney,  2  Doug.  613,  and  Le  Caux  v.  stored  to  him  firee  from  salvage,  or  even

EdeHf  id.  594.) One  rule  was  there  expense— (./^/ezamfir,  2  Dodson's  Rep.

laid  down,  that  the  condemnation  must  37). With  respect  to  the  effect  in

have  been  pronounced  by  a  court  6e-  England  of  foreign  judgments,  decrees,

longing  to  the  belligerent  country. (See  and  sentences,  the  present  general  rule

id.,  and  Haveloek  v.  Rochvood,  Atche-  is,  that,  if  they  were  decided  in  a  fo-

son's  Rep.  7  &  8 ;  8  Term  Rep.  288 ;  reign  court,  of  competent  jurisdiction,

1  Col.  Jurid.  130.) Secpndly,  the  court  they  shall  be  admitted  as  prima  fade

must  have,  at  the  time  it  pronounced  valid  and  binding  on  the  parties  in  all

sentence  of  condemnation,  actually  sat  other  countries,  but  not  conclusively  so»

in  the  country  to  which  it  belonged,  and  (See  the  cases  referred  to  in  note  (a)

not  within  the  dominions  of  any  foreign  to  NovelU  v.  Ross,  2  Bam.  &.  Adolph.

prince,  whether  neutral  or  an  tdly ;  for,  765;  and  see  Frankland  v.  M^Guety^

otherwise,  a  captor  might  have  innu-  Knapp's Rep. 295; 1 Ves. 159;

merable  seats  of  war,  and  elude  the  2  Strange,  733 ;  2  Bing.  380 ;  3  Bing.

fiiir chance of  recaption whilst the  353 ;  4  Bam.  &  Cres.  637 ;  Tarleton  ▼•

vessel or property  was  in  progress  Tarletany  4  Maule  6c  Sel.  20 ;  Kennedy

towards  a  proper condemning  port  ▼.  Caesilis,  2  Swanstd25);  {CaUwun

251


166  EFFECTS OF  THE  DOMAIN BETWEEN  NATIONS.


CHAP,  vir.


BOOK  n.  nations,  which  has  an  eje  to  the  common  advantage  and  the
good  harmony  of  nations,  requires,  therefore,  that  such  nomi-
nation of  a  tutor  or  guardian  be  valid,  and  acknowledged  in
all  countries  where  the  pupil  may  have  any  concerns. Use

▼.  FUzsimons,  1  Bin.  Rep.  293;  Cal-  that  there are cases  which  seem  to

breath  v.  Gracyy  1  Wash.  C.  C.  Rep.  decide  that  such  foreign  judgments  are

219.} And  it  was  held,  that  a  (/f nee  conclusive. (Bee  Newland y.  Horseman,

of  the  sale  of  a  ship  made  in  an  Ame-  1  Vem.  21.) In  a  late  case  the  Vice*

rican  court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  Chancellor  held  that  the  grounds  of  &

pending  war  with  this  country,  was  to  foreign  judgment  cannot  be  reviewed

be  received  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty  in  the  courts  oi  this  country,  and  that,

in  England  as  legally  operative. ( The  therefore,  a  bill  for  a  discovery  and  a

KxperinmUSf  2 Bods. Rep. 46,  47);  commission to  examine  wihiesses  in

{Thirty f  &c  v.  Boylty  9  Cranch,  191}.  Antigua,  in  aid  of  the  parties'  defence

DO,  a  niarriagey  established  by  the  sen-  to  an  action  brought  on  tiie  judgment  in

tence  of  a  foreign  court  having  proper  this  country,  was  demurrable. {Marlm

jurisdiction,  has  even  been  considered  v.  Nichollsy  3  Simon's  Rep.  458,  cited

as conclusive  by  the  law  of  nations  by  Parke,  J.,  in  Bequest  v.  M^Casihy^

(Roach  v.  Gavan, 1 Ves.  sen.  169);  2  Bam.  &  Adol.  954 ;  see  also  iTeiinedy

{Story,  Conf.  Laws,  p.  103,  ed.  1834};  v.  Cassilwy  2  Swans.  326.) But  thai

and  it  was  laid  down  by  De  Grey,  C.  J.  doctrine  is  net  sustainable,  and,  there-

that  tlie  judgment  of  a  court  of  com-  fore, upon an appeal to the Privy

petent  jurisdiction  directly  upon  a  point,  Council  from  a  decree  of  the  court  of

is,  as  a  plea^ «  bar,  or,  as  evidence,  con-  justice  at  Dcmerara,  such  decree  being

elusive^  between  the  same  parties  upon  for  a  sum  of  money  alleged  to  be  due

the same  matter  directly  in  question  on  foreign  judgments,  was  reversed,  on

in  another  court.  (See  Duchess  of  King-  the  ground  that  such  court  of  justice

»ton*8  ca.se,  20  Howell's  State  Trials,  had  erroneously  determined  that  those

538 ;  and  see  Bui.  N.  Pri.  244 ;  Phillips  judgments  were  conclusive  when  they

V.  Hunter^  2  Hen.  Bla.  402,  per  Eyre,  were  only  prima  facie  evidence  of  tht

C.  J. ;  and  see,  as  to  that  point,  l,Phil-  debt,  and  it  was  competent  to  the  ori-

lipps  on  Evid.  part  ii.  c  2  and  3,  -[vol.  ginal  defendant  to  show  that  the  judg*

4,  Am.  ed.  1839,  New  York,  pages  ment had  been  improperly  obtained.

856 to  915} ;  and  Starkie on Evid.  (Frankland  v.  M^Gusty and Othen,

part  ii.§§  67,68  ;i!'ra/iWanrfv.Jlf*GiM.'y,  Knapp's Rep.  274.) If,  therefore,  a

1 Knapp's Rep. 274 ; Buchanan v.  foreign  judgment  appear  upon  the  feioe

Ruckery  1  Campb.  63,  180,  n.,  9  East,  of  it  to  have  proceeded,  either  wholly

192,  S.  C;  Sadler  v.  HobinUy  id.  280,  in  the  defendant's  absence,  and  with-

253 ;  Cavan  v.  Stewart,  1  Stark.  Rep.  out  his  having  had  any  opportunity  of

525 ;  and  see  1  Chitty's  Com.  L.  61  to  knowing  of  the  proceeding,  and  defend-

65.) But  such  foreign  decision  is  tudI  ing  it,  and,  therefore,  manifestly  against

concltisive  like  the  judgment  of  a  court  justice ;  or  if  the  decision  hasmanifostly

of  record  in  England ;  and,  therefore,  proceeded  upon  false  premises,  or  in-

if  a  man  recover  a  judgment  or  sen-  adequate  reasons,  or  upon  a  mistake  of

tence  in  France  for  money  due  to  him,  local  or  foreign  law,  and  which  ought  to

the  debt  must  be  considered  here in  have  occasioned a  di0erent decidoo

England  as  only  a  simple  contract  debt,  (NoveUi  v.  Ross,  2  Bam.  «&  Adol.  757) ;

and  the  statute  of  limitations  will  run  or,  even  if  either  of  those  objections  be

upon  it  (Dupleix  v.  De  Raven,  2  Vem.  shown  by  extrinsicevidenie(FraNiS:/aiiif

540)  :  and  the  sentence  of  a  court  of  v.  M^  Crusty,  Knapp's  Rep.  274  to  310;

summary  jurisdiction  in  France  can-  semble,  overruling  the  conti  aiy  dedsion

not  be  pleaded  to  a  bill  in  Chancery  in  in  Martin  v.  Nicolls,  3  Simon's  Rep.

England  for  the  same  matter  (Gage  v.  458,  and  2  Swans.  326) ;  then,  it  eerms

BtUkeley,  3  Atk.  215);  and  it  should  now  to  be  clearly  settled,  at  !e«st  la

fleem,  that  even  a  recovery  of  a  judg-  England,  that  the  foreign  decision  will

ment  upon  a  bond  in  a  foreign  country  not  be binding or  valid — (id.  ^'hid.)

is  no bar  to  an  action  here on the  Thus,  it  was  recently  held,  that,  ^  here

same  bond. (Foster  v.  Vassall,  3  Atk.  the  French  courts  had  in  their  decnwi,

689,  decided  upon  an  Irish  bond  and  on  the  face  of  them,  mistaken  the  ianr

judgment  before  the  Union.) It  is  true  of  England  as  to  the  effect  of  a  cancel
25S


BPPBCTS OP  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEBN  NATIONS.  166

was  made  of  this  maxim  in  the  year  1672,  even  with  respect booeii
to  a  sovereign. The  abb^  D' Organs,  sovereign  prince  of  ohap.  vn.
Neufchatel,  in  Switzerland,  being  incapable  of  managing  his  [  167  ]
own  affairs,  the  king  of  France  appointed,  as  his  guardian,
his  mother,  the  duchess-dowager  of  Longueville. The  duch-
ess of  Nemours,  sister  to  that  prince,  laid  claim  to  the  guar-
dianship for  the  principality  of  Neufchatel :  but  the  title  of
the  duchess  of  Longueville  was  acknowledged  by  the  three
estates  of  the  country. Her  counsel  rested  her  cause  on  the

lation  of  the  acceptance  of  a  bill  by  mis-  the  Attorney-General  should  commu-
take,  and  had,  on  that  ground,  and  con-  nicate  with  the  absent  party ;  it  was
trary  to  the  English  law,  adjudged  that  held,  that  such  law  was  not  so  con-
the  defendant,  as  well  as  the  plaintiff,  tr&ry  to  national  justice  as  to  render
was  discharged  from  liability  by  such  void  a  judgment  obtained  against  a
cancellation,  when,  according  to  the  party  who  had  resided  within  the  juris-
English  law,  they  remained  liable,  it  diction  of  the  court  at  the  time  when
was  held,  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  the  cause  of  action  accrued,  but  had
in  England,  that  the  defendant  was  withdrawn  himself  before  the  proceed-
still  liable  to  be  sued  by  the  plaintiff  for  ings  were  commenced.  (Ibid. ;  Douglas
the  debt  in  respect  of  which  the  bills  v.  Forresl,  4  Bing.  686 ;  1  Moore  &
were  given,  notwithstanding  the  de-  Pay.  663.)  So,  homing,  in  Scotland
cree.  {Niwrlli  v.  Rotsi,  2  Bam.  &  Adolp.  (though  the  party  was  absent),  was
757.)  And,  upon  appeal  to  the  Privy-  held  legal,  where  the  defendant  had
Council,  a  decree  of  the  court  of  jus-  been  domiciled  in  that  country,  and
tice  of  Demerara,  for  a  sum  of  money  had  left  property  there.  (Douglas  t
due  upon  three  foreign  judgments  in  Forrest.)

8t. Vincent's,  was  reversed,  on the In England, the  judgment of  an

ground  that  those  judgments  had  been  English court  of  record,  however  in-

improperly obtained. (Frankland  v.  ferior,  is  conclusive,  until  reversed  by

Jlf*Griary,  Knapp's  Rep.  274.) So,  if  it  writ  of  error  (1  Doug.  5),  and  even

appear  on  the  face  of  the  proceedings,  English  judgments  of  inferior  courts,

or  otherwise,  that  the  defendant  in  the  not  of  record,  are  to  some  purposes

foreign court  was absent  from the  conclusive,  unless  it  appear  upon  the

country  before  the  suit  was  commenced,  face  of  the  proceedings  to  have  been  un-

the judgment against  him may be  fairly  obtained  (2  Burr.  1009 ;  2  Bing.

deemed  invalid. (Buchanan  v.  Rtuker,  216). But  the  judgment  of  an  infe-

I  Campb.  63,  9  East  Rep.  192;  Cavan  rior  court  may  be  controverted,  when

T.  Stewart,  1  Stark.  Rep.  525 ;  Frank-  it  appears  that  the  proceedings  have

land  V.  M^Gusly,  Knapp*s  Rep.  304.)  been  bad  in  law,  as,  where  a  summons

But,  to  render  a  foreign  judgment  void,  and  attachment,  which  ought  to  have

on  the  ground  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  been  successive  proceedings,  in  default

law  of  the  country  where  it  was  given,  of  appearance  to  the  former,  were  is-

or  to  reason  and  justice,  it  must  be  sued  against  the  defendant  at  the  same

shown  clearly  and  unequivocally  to  be  time,  and  returnable  at  the  same  time,

80. {Becquet  v.  McCarthy,  3  Barn.  6i  and  to  which  the  defendant  never  ap-

Adolp.  951.) But,  if  the  error  do  not  peared  (3  Barn.  &  Cres.  772 ;  5  Dowl.

appear  upon  the  face  of  the  proceeding  &  Ryl.  719,  S.  C.) ;  and  it  seems  that

and  the  party  complaining  of  the  judg-  the  judgment  of  an  inferior  court  may

ment  himself  was  misled, and  sub-  be  avoided,  by  proof  that  the  cause  of

mitted  to  the  decision  instead  of  pro-  action  did  not  arise  within  the  jurisdio-

testing  against  it,  he  is  too  late  to  com-  tion  of  the  court.  ( Willes,  36  n. ;  2  Bing.

plain  upon  an  appeal  against  it. {Mao-  213.)

aUisterv.  Macallister,  4  Wilson  &  SUaw, With  respect  to  the  proof  of  foreign '

142,  147.) And  where  the  law  of  a  judgments  and  decrees  in  England,  it  has

British  colony  required,  that,  on  a  suit  been  decided,  that  an  exemplification

instituted  against  an  absent  party,  the  of  a  sentence  in  Holland  under  the

process  should be  served upon the  common  seal  of  the  States,  may  be  read

King's  Attorney-General  in  the  colony,  in  evidence  in a  suit  in Chancery.

but  it  was  not  expreaslv  provided  that  Jlnon,  9  Mod.  66.

W  263


167  EFFECTS OF  THE  DOMAIN BETWEEK  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. circumstance  of  her  having  been  nominated  ^rdian  by  the
CHAP,  vii.  domestic  judge.* This  was  a  very  wrong  apphcation  of  a  just
principle :  for,  the  prince's  domestic  residence  could  be  no

where  but  in  his  state :  and  it  was  only  by  the  decree  of  the
three  estates,  who  alone  had  a  right  to  choose  a  guardian  for
their  sovereign,  that  the  authority  of  the  duchess  of  Longue-
ville  became  firm  and  lawful  at  Neufchatel.
Wine  and In  the  same  manner  the  validity  of  a  testament^  (108)  as

*  Memorial  in  behalf  of  the  duchess  sequences,  and  in  manj  instances  de-

of  Longueville,  1672.  feat  the  intention  of  the  testator,  if

(108)  Bee  post  Book  II.  ch.  VIII.  those  rules  were  to  be  altogether  disre-

§  103,  p.  173,  and  §  111,  p.  175.  garded,  and  the  judges  of  a  foreign

It  is  now  settled  in  Great  Britain  court  (which  it  may  be  considcrod,  in
that  a  will  is  to  be  construed,  inter-  relation  to  the  will),  without  reference
preted,  and  given  effect  to,  according  to  to  that  knowledge  which  it  is  desirable
the  law  of  the  countiy  where  it  toa<  to  obtain  of  the  law  of  the  country  in
made  and  where  the  testator  had  his  domi'  which  the  will  waa  made,  were  to  in-
aUf  and  every  court  in  every  country  terpret  the  will  according  to  their  own
is  bound  to  construe  it  accordingly,  rules  of  construction.  That  would  also
(Trotter  v.  Trotter,  3  Wilson  &  Shaw,  be  productive  of  another  inconvenience,
Rep.  on  Appeal  Cases,  407,  414, — in  namely,  that  the  will  might  have  a  con-
House  of  Lords,  appeal  from  Scotland.)  stniction  put  upon  it  in  the  English
And,  therefore,  where  a  native  of  Scot-  courts  different  from  that  which  might
land,  domiciled  in  India,  but  who  pos-  be  put  upon  it  in  the  foreign  country,
sessed  heritable  bonds  in  Scotland,  as  It  appears  to  me,  my  Lords,  that  then
well  as 'personal  property  there,  and,  is  no  solid  ground  for  the  objection;
also,  in  India,  having  execuied  a  vnll  in  but  that,  where  a  will  is  executed  in  a
Itidia,  ineffectual  to  convey  Scotch  hen-  foreign  country  by  a  person  having  bis
tage ;  and  a  question  having  arisen  domicile  in  that  countiy,  with  respect
whether  his  hei]^at-law  (who  claimed  to  that  person's  property,  the  will  rndst
,  the  heritable  bonds  as  heir)  was  also  be  interpreted  according  to  the  law  of
entitled  to  a  share  of  the  movable  pro-  the  country  where  it  is  made ;  it  must,
perty,  as  legatee  under  the  will — it  was  if  it  comes  into  question,  in  any  pro-
held  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  Eng-  ceeding,  have  the  same  interpretatioB
land  (affirming  the  judgment  of  the  put  upon  it  as  would  be  put  upon  it  in
court  below),  that'  the  construction  of  any  tribunal  of  the  country  where  it
the  will,  as  to  whether  it  expressed  an  was  made." — Per  Lord  Chancellrr.
intention  to  pass  the  Scotch  heritable  But,  where  a  will  was  made  by  a
bonds,  and  the  legal  consequences  of  native  of  Scotland,  obrntd/leti  in  jEnj|.iz.n^
that  construction,  mtut  be  determined  by  and  having  personal  property  only  there,
tke  law  of  the  land  where  it  uxu  made;  and  and  who  went  for  a  short  time  to  Sootp
toliere  the  testator  had  his  domiciley  namely  land,  and  there  executed  his  will  in  the
IndiOf  that  is,  by  the  law  of  England;  Scotch  form,  and  registered  it  there,
and  this  although  the  will  was  the  sub-  and  afterwards  died  in  England,  it  was
ject  of  judicial  inquiry  in  the  courts  held  that  such  will  must  be  constraed
of  Scotland ;  for,  these  courts  also  are  according  to  ^e  law  of  England,  (jiih
bound  to  decide  according  to  the  law  struther  v.  Chalmers,  2  Simons,  1).  It
of  the  place  where  the  will  was  made,  should  seem,  therefore,  that  in  some
(Id.  ibid.  414.)  <*  A  will  must  be  inter-  cases,  as  respects  personalty,  the  domi'
preted  according  to  the  law  of  the  coun-  cUe  of  the  testator  is  to  be  r^anM
try  where  it  is  made,  and  where  the  rather  than  the  precise  place  of  signing
par^  making  the  will  has  his  domicile,  the  will  (id.  ibid.,  sed  quere).
There  are  certain  rules  of  construction  A  will  made  in  Jamaica  deviunt
adopted  in  the  courts,  and  the  expres-  rents,  issues,  and  profits  of  an  esiafet
sions  which  are  made  use  of  in  a  will,  there,  passes  slaves,  mules,  cattle,  and
and  the  language  of  a  will,  have  fre-  machinery,  (3  Simons,  398,  Luskingtpm
quently  reference  to  those  rales  of  con-  ▼.  Sewell,  1  Simons,  436,  8.  P.),  though
stniction ;  and  it  would  be  productive,  a  devise  of  a  fiurm  in  England  woold
therefore,  of  the  most  mischievous  con-  not  pass  farming  uteosiJs.  {Stewart  w
254


EFFECTS OF  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  167

to  its  form,  can  only  be  decided  by  the  domestic  judge,  whoso  book  n
sentence  delivered  in  form  ought  to  be  everywhere  ackuow-  omap.  vn.
ledged.  But,  without  affecting  the  validity  of  the  testament
itself,  the  bequests  contained  in  it  may  be  disputed  before  the
judge  of  the  place  where  the  effects  are  situated,  because  those
effects  can  only  be  disposed  of  conformably  to  the  laws  of  the
country.  Thus,  the  abb^  D' Orleans  above  mentioned  having
appointed  the  prince  of  Conti  his  universal  legatee, — the
three  estates  of  Neufchatel,  without  waiting  till  the  parlia-
ment of  Paris  should  pronounce  their  decision  on  the  question
of  two  contradictory  wills  made  by  the  abb^  D' Orleans,  gave
the  investiture  of  the  principality  to  the  duchess  of  Nemours,
— declaring  that  the  sovereignty  was  unalienable.  Besides,
it  might  have  been  said  on  this  occasion  also,  that  the  domestic
residence  of  the  prince  could  be  nowhere  but  in  the  state.

As  every  thing  included  in  the  country  belongs  to  the  §86- Desert
nation, — and,  as  none  but  the  nation,  or  the  person  on  whom  ^^  '"icnl-
she  has  devolved  her  right,  is  authorized  to  dispose  of  those  pi^^,
things  (§  79), — ^if  she  has  left  uncultivated  and  desert  places
in  the  country,  no  person  whatever  has  a  right  to  take  pos-
session of  them  without  her  consent.  .  Though  she  does  not
make  actual  use  of  them,  those  places  still  belong  to  her ;  she
has  an  interest  in  preserving  them  for  future  use,  and  is  not
accountable  to  any  person  for  the  manner  in  which  she  makes
use  of  her  property.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  recollect
here  what  we  have  observed  above  (Book  I.  §  81).  No  nation
can  lawfully  appropriate  to  herself  a  too  disproportionate  ex-
tent of  country,  and  reduce  other  nations  to  want  subsistence,
and  a  place  of  abode.  A  German  chief,  in  the  time  of  Nero,
said  to  the  Romans,  ^^As  heaven  belongs  to  the  gods,  so  the
earth  is  given  to  the  human  race ;  and  desert  countries  are
common  to  all,"* — giving  those  proud  conquerors  to  under-
stand that  they  had  no  right  to  reserve  and  appropriate  to
themselves  a  country  which  they  left  desert.  The  Romans  [  168  ]
had  laid  waste  a  chain  of  country  along  the  Rhine,  to  cover
their  provinces  from  the  incursions  of  the  barbarians.  The
German's  remonstrance  would  have  had  a  good  foundation,  *
had  the  Romans  pretended  to  keep  without  reason  a  vast
country  which  was  of  no  use  to  them :  but  those  lands  which
they  would  not  suffer  to  be  inhabited,  serving  as  a  rampart
against  foreign  nations,  were  of  considerable  use  to  the  empire.

When  there  is  not  this  singular  circumstance,  it  is  equally  S  87.  Dut?
agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  humanity,  and  to  the  particular  ^^^^f**^

■~^^~-~— ————'— ^—^——^^■~^—— '-^—^——^—^— ^—^^-^-^-~-^-^—^-^^  respect.

Maryatf  11  Yes.  657.) So,  if  a  Datch-  (Anon.  9  Mod.  66,  and  see  Bowaman

man  be  possessed  of  real  estate  in  Hoi-  ▼.  Rteve^  Pre.  Ch.  577.) A  will  of

and,  and  personal  estate  in  England,  property  entirely  abroad  may  be  proved

«nd  devise  his  real  estate  to  A.,  and  there. (Jaunay  v.  Seaiey,  1  Vem.  397.)
Iiis  personal  to  B.,  the  personal  shall *  Sicut  ccelum  diis,  ita  terras  generi

be  first  applied  to  pay  debts  in  Hoi-  mortalium  datas;  qusque  vaciue,  eas

land,  though  real  estate  is  liable  there,  publicas  esse^-T^ciT.

2SC


168  EFFECTS OF  THE DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.


CHAP.  Tn.


BOOK  n^ advantage  of  the  state,  to  give  those  desert  tracts  to  foreign-
ers who  are  willing  to  clear  the  land  and  to  render  it  valuable.
The  beneficence  of  the  state  thus  turns  to  her  own  advantage ;
she  acquires  new  subjects,  and  augments  her  riches  and  power.
This  is  the  practice  in  America ;  and,  by  this  wise  method,
the  English  have  carried  their  settlements  in  the  new  world
to  a  degree  of  power  which  has  considerably  increased  that
of  the  nation. Thus,  also,  the  king  of  Prussia  endeavours  to
re-people  his  states  laid  waste  by  the  calamities  of  former  wars.
J  88.  Right The  nation  that  possesses  a  country  is  at  liberty  to  leave
of  posseBs- jjj  ^jjg  primitive  state  of  communion  certain  things  that  have
thathav^no^®  yet  no  owner,  or  to  appropriate  to  herself  the  right  of
owner. possessing those things,  as  well  as  every  other  advantage
which  that  country  is  capable  of  affording. And,  as  such  a
right  is  of  use,  it  is,  in  case  of  doubt,  presumed  that  the  nation
has  reserved  it  to  herself. It  belongs  to  her,  then,  to  the
exclusion  of  foreigners,  unless her  laws  expressly  declare
otherwise ;  as  those  of  the  Romans,  which  left  wild  beasts,
fish,  &c.,  in  the  primitive  state  of  communion. No  foreigner,
therefore,  has  a  natural  right  to  hunt  or  fish  in  the  terri-
tories of  a  state,  to  appropriate  to  himself  a  treasure  found
there,  &c.
i  89.  Rights There  exists  no  reason  why  a  nation,  or  a  sovereign,  if  au-
granted  to thorized  by  the  laws,  may  not  grant  various  privileges  in  their
another  na-  territories  to  another  nation,  or  to  foreigners  in  general,  since
every  one  may  dispose  of  his  own  property  as  he  thinks  fit-
Thus,  several  sovereigns  in  the  Indies  have  granted  to  the
trading  nations  of  Europe  the  privilege  of  having  factories,
ports,  and  even  fortresses  and garrisons  in  certain places
within  their  dominions. We  may  in  the  same  manner  grant
the  right  of  fishing  in  a  river,  or  on  the  coast,  that  of  hunting
in  the  forests,  &c.,  and,  when  once  these  rights  have  been
validly  ceded,  they  constitute  a  part  of  the  possessions  of  him
who  has  acquired  them,  and  ought  to  be  respected  in  the  same
manner  as  his  former  possessions.
i  90. It  is Whoever  agrees  that  robbery  is  a  crime,  and  that  we  are
notaUowa-  ^^^  allowed to  take  forcible  possession  of  our  neighbour's
a natio "outP^^P^^^y?  ^^'^  acknowledge,  without  any  other  proof,  that  no
of  a  country  nation  has  a  right  to  expel  another  people  from  the  country
which  it  in-  they  inhabit,  in  order  to  settle  in  it  herself. Notwithstanding
habits, the  extreme  inequality  of  climates  and  soils,  every  people
ought  to  be  contented  with  that  which  has  fallen  to  their  share.
[  169  ]  Will  the  conductors  of  nations  despise  a  rule  that  constitutes
all  their  safety  in  civil  society  ? Let  this  sacred  rule  be  en-
tirely forgotten,  and  the  peasant  will  quit  his  thatched  cottage
to  invade  the  palaces  of  the  great,  or  the  delightful  possessions
of  the  rich. The  ancient  Helvetians,  discontented  with  their
native  soil,  burned  all  their  habitations,  and  commenced  their
march,  in  order  to  establish  themselves,  sword  in  hand,  in  lht>
fertile  plains  of  southern  Gaul. But  they  received  a  terrible

256


BFFECTS  OJf  THE  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  169

lesson  from  a  conqueror  of  superior  abilities  to  themselves,  book  n.
and  who  paid  still  less  regard  to  the  laws  of  justice.  Csesar  ^'^^'  ^^^
defeated  them,  and  drove  them  back  into  their  o.wn  country.
Then*  posterity,  however,  more  wise  than  they,  confine  their
views  to  the  preservation  of  the  lands  and  the  independence
they  have  received  from  nature:  they  live  contented,  and  the
labour  of  free  hands  counterbalances  the  sterility  of  the  soil.

There  are  conquerors,  who,  aspiring  after  nothing  more  j  91,  nor  to
than  the  extension  of  the  boundaries  of  their  dominions,  with-  extend  by
out  expelling  the  inhabitants  from  a  country,  content  them-  7><>i«no«  ^»
selves  with  subduing  them; — a  violence  less  barbarous,  but^^^^^
not  less  unjust :  while  they  spare  the  property  of  individuals,
they  seize  all  the  rights  of  the  nation,  and  of  the  sovereign.

Since  the  least  encroachment  on  the  territory  of  another  j  92. The
is  an  act  of  injustice, — ^in  order  to  avoid  the  commission  of  Umita  of
any  such  act,  and  to  prevent  every  subject  of  discord,  every  **"!*^"*?
occasion  of  quarrel,  the  limits  of  territories  ought  to  be  marked  ^^f^iiy
out  with  clearness  and  precision. If  those  who  drew  up  the  setUed.
treaty  of  Utrecht  had  bestowed  on  so  important  a  subject  all
the  attention  it  deserved,  we  should  not  see  France  and  Eng-
land in  arms,  in  order  to  decide  by  a  bloody  war  what  are  to
be  the  boundaries  of  their  possessions  in  America. But  the
makers  of  treaties  often  designedly  leave  in  them  some  obscu-
rity, some  uncertainty,  in  order  to  reserve  for  their  nation  a
pretext  for  a  rupture : — an  unworthy  artifice  in  a  transaction
wherein  good  faith  alone  ought  to  preside ! We  have  also
seen  commissioners  endeavouring  to  overreach  or  corrupt  those
oC  a  neighbouring  state,  in  order  to  gain  for  their  master  an
unjust  acquisition  of  a  few  leagues  of  territory. How  can
princes  or  ministers  stoop  to  dirty  tricks  that  would  dishonour
a  private  man  ? -

We  should  not  only  refrain  from  usurping  the  territory  of  j  93.  Vioi»
others ;  we  should  also  respect,  and  abstain  from  every  act  ^^^  o^  ^r-
contrary  to  the  rights  of  the  sovereign :  for,  a  foreign  nation  ^^*^^'
can  claim  no  right  in  it  (§  79). We  cannot,  then,  without
doing  an  injury  tb  a  state,  enter  its  territories  with  force  and
arms  in  pursuit  of  a  criminal,  and  take  him  from  thence.
This  would  at  once  be  a  violation  of  the  safety  of  the  state,
and  a  trespass  on  the  rights  of  empire  or  supreme  authority
vested  in  the  sovereign. This  is  what  is  called  a  violation
of  territory ;  and  among  nations  there  is  nothing  more  gene-
rally acknowledged  as  an  injury  that  ought  to  be  vigorously
repelled  byevery  state  that  would  not  suifer  itself  to  be  op-
pressed. We  shall  make  use  of  this  principle  in  speaking  of
war,  which  gives  occasion  for  many  questions  on  the  rights
of  territory.

The  sovereign  may  forbid  the  entrance  of  his  territory  j  94, p^

— hibition  to

'109)  See  fnriiher  m  to  the  sabjeet A  H  85; Marten's  Law  of  Nations,  onter  the
o£  this  section,  I  Chit.  Com.  Law,  73 163.  territory.

83  w  2  257 a09>


170  SFFBCTS  OF  THB  DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.

BOOK  n.  either  to  foreigners  in  general  or  in  particniar  cases,  or  to
CHAP.  Yn.  certain  persons  or  for  certain  particular  purposes,  according
as  he  may  think  it  advantageous  to  the  state.  There  is  no-
thing in  all  this  that  does  not  flow  from  the  rights  of  domain
and  sovereignty :  every  one  is  obliged  to  pay  respect  to  the
prohibition ;  and  whoever  dares  to  violate  it,  incurs  the  penalty
decreed  to  render  it  effectual.  But  the  prohibition  ought  to  be
known,  as  well  as  the  penalty  annexed  to  disobedience :  those
who  are  ignorant  of  it,  ought  to  be  informed  of  it  when  they
approach  to  enter  the  country.  Formerly  the  Chinese,  fear-
ing lest  the  intercourse  of  strangers  should  corrupt  the  man-
ners of  the  nation,  and  impair  the  maxims  of  a  wise  but  sin-
gular government,  forbade  all  people  entering  the  empire :  a
prohibition  that  was  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  justice,  pro-
vided they  did  not  refuse  human  assistance  to  those  whom
tempest  or  necessity  obliged  to  approach  their  frontiers.  It
was  salutary  to  the  nation,  without  violating  the  rights  of  any
individual,  or  even  the  duties  of  humanity,  which  permits  us.
in  case  of  competition,  to  prefer  ourselves  to  others.
{  95. A  If  at  the  same  time  two  or  more  nations  discover  and  take

country  po§-  possession  of  an  island  or  any  other  desert  land  without  an
leesed  by  Q^^er,  they  ought  to  asree  between  themselves,  and  make  an
tiona  at  the  ©q^itable  partition ;  but,  if  they  cannot  agree,  each  will  have
same  time, the  right  of  empire  and  the  domain  in  the  parts  in  which

they  first  settled.
{  96. A  An  independent  individual,  whether  he  has  been  driven

country  pos-  from  his  country,  or  has  legally  quitted  it  of  his  own  accord,
tewed  by  a  jj^g^y  settle  in  a  country  which  he  finds  without  an  owner,  and
^n^  ^^'  there  possess  an  independent  domain.  Whoever  would  after-
wards make  himself  master  of  the  entire  country,  could  not
do  it  with  justice  without  respecting  the  rights  and  independ-
ence of  this  person.  But,  if  he  himself  finds  a  sufficient
number  of  men  who  are  willing  to  live  under  his  laws,  he  may
form  a  new  state  within  the  country  he  has  discovered,  and
possess  there  both  the  domain  and  the  empire.  But,  if  this
individual  should  arrogate  to  himself  alone  an  exclusive  right
to  a  country,  there  to  reign  monarch  without  subjects,  his
vain  pretensions  would  be  justly  held  in  contempt : — a  rash
and  ridiculous  possession  can  produce  no  real  right.

There  are  also  other  means  by  which  a  private  person  rosj
found  a  new  state. Thus,  in  the  eleventh  century,  sonit
Norman  noblemen  founded  a  new  empire  in  Sicily,  after  hav-
ing wrested  that  island  by  conquest  from  the  common  enemies
of  the  Christian  name. The  custom  of  the  nation  permitted
the  citizens  to  quit  their  country  in  order  to  seek  their  for-
tune elsewhere.
1 97. Inde- When  several  independent  families  are  settled  in  a  country,
pendent  fa-  they  possess  the  free  domain,  but  without  sovereignty,  einee
nniiee  in  a ^j^^y  ^q  ^ot  form  a  political  society. Nobody  can  seize  tbc
^^trj. empire  of  that  country ;  since  this  would  be  reducinr^  tboaf

258


EFPBOTS OF  THE DOMAIN  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  170


families  to  subjection  against  their  will ;  and  no  man  has  a book  h.
right  to  command  men  who  are  bom  free,  unless  they  volun-  ^^^'  T"*
tarily  submit  to  him.

If  those  families  have  fixed  settlements,  the  place  possessed
by  each  is  the  peculiar  property  of  that  family :  the  rest  of  [  171  ]
the  country  of  which  they  make  no  use,  being  left  in  the
primitive  state  of  communion,  belongs  to  the  first  occupant.
Whoeyer  chooses  to  settle  there,  may  lawfully  take  possession
of  it.

Families  wandering  in  a  country,  as  the  nations  of  shep-
herds, and  ranging  through  it  as  their  wants  require,  possess
it  in  common :  it  belongs  to  them  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other
nations ;  and  we  cannot,  without  injustice,  deprive  them  of
the  tracts  of  tsountry  of  which  they  make  use.  But,  let  us
here  recollect  what  we  have  said  more  than  once  (Book  I.
§§  81  and  209,  Book  II.  §  69).  The  savages  of  North  Ame-
rica had  no  right  to  appropriate  all  that  vast  continent  to
themselves ;  and  since  they  were  unable  to  inhabit  the  whole
of  those  regions,  other  nations  might,  without  injustice,  set-
tle in  some  parts  of  them,  provided  they  left  the  natives  a
sufficiency  of  land.  If  the  pastoral  Arabs  would  carefully
cultivate  the  soil,  a  less  space  might  be  sufficient  for  them.
Nevertheless,  no  other  nation  has  a  right  to  narrow  their
boundaries,  unless  she  be  under  an  absolute  want  of  land.
For,  in  short,  they  possess  their  country ;  they  make  use  of
it  after  their  manner ;  they  reap  from  it  an  advantage  suit-
able to  their  manner  of  life,  respecting  which  they  have  no
laws  to  receive  from  any  one.  In  a  case  of  pressmg  neces-
sity, I  think  people  might,  without  injustice,  settle  in  a  part
of  that  country,  on  teaching  the  Arabs  the  means  of  render-
ing it,  by  the  cultivation  of  the  earth,  sufficient  for  their  own
wants,  and  those  of  the  new  inhabitants.

It  may  happen  that  a  nation  is  contented  with  possessing  ^  98. Pos-
only  certain  places,  or  appropriating  to  itself  certain  rights,  Besaion  of
in  a  country  that  has  not  an  owner,  without  being  solicitous  <^«'^'»
to  take  possession  of  the  whole  country. In  this  case,  an-J,*Jf'^^^Jj
other  nation  may  take  possession  of  what  the  first  has  neg- rights,  in  a
lected ;  but  this  cannot  be  done  without  allowing  all  the  rights  vacant
acquired  by  the  first  to  subsist  in  their  full  and  absolute  inde-  co»°^'
pendence. In  such  cases,  it  is  proper  that  regulations  should
be  made  by  treaty ;  and  this  precaution  is  seldom  neglected
among  civilized  nations.


17t  BtriiES  WITH  RBSPBCT  TO  FOREIGNEB&


BOOK  IT.
CHAP.  Till.


CHAP.  VIIL

BULES  WITH  RESPECT  TO  FOREIGNERS.

1 99.  Gene- WE  have  already  treated  (Book  I.  §  218)  of  tie  inhabi-
»i  idea  of tants,  or  persons  who  reside  in  a  country  where  they  are  not
the  Btate citizens. We  shall  here  treat  only  of  those  foreigners  who
ought  to  ob-  pass  through  or  sojourn  in  a  country,  either  on  business,  or
wrve  to- merely  as  travellers. The  relation  that  subsists  between  them
wardB  fo- ^^^^  ^^^  society  in  which  they  now  live — the  obiects  of  their
journey,  and  of  their  temporary  residence — ^the  duties  of  hu-
manity— the  rights,  the  interest,  and  the  safety  of  the  state
which  harbours  them — the  rights  of  that  to  which  they  belong
[  172  ]  — all  these  principles,  combined  and  applied  according  to
cases  and  circumstances,  serve  to  determine  the  conduct  that
ought  to  be  observed  towards  them,  and  to  point  out  our  right
and  our  duty  with  respect  to  them. But  the  intention  of  this
chapter  is  not  so  much  to  show  what  humanity  and  justice
require  towards  foreigners,  as  to  establish  the  rules  of  the  law
of  nations  on  this  subject — rules  tending  to  secure  the  rights
of  all  parties,  and  to  prevent  the  repose  of  nations  being  dis-
turbed by  the  quarrels  of  individuals.
i  100. En- Since  the  lord  of  the  territory  may,  whenever  he  thinks
tering  the proper,  forbid  its  being  entered  (§  94),  he  has,  no  doubt,  a
nm'^ power  to  annex  what  conditions  he  pleases  to  the  permission
. ^  to  enter. This,  as  we  have  already  said,  is  a  consequence

of  the  right  of  domain.  Can  it  be  necessary  to  add,  that  the
owner  of  the  territory  ought,  in  this  instance,  to  respect  the
duties  of  humanity  ?  The  case  is  the  same  with  all  rights
whatever :  the  proprietor  may  use  them  at  his  discretion ;  and,
in  so  doing,  he  does  not  injure  any  person ;  but,  if  he  would
be  free  from  guilt,  and  keep  his  conscience  pure,  he  will  never
use  them  but  in  such  manner  as  is  most  conformable  to  his
duty.  We  speak  here,  in  general,  of  the  rights  which  belong
to  the  lord  of  the  country,  reserving  for  the  following  chapter
the  examination  of  the  cases  in  which  he  cannot  refuse  an
entrance  into  his  territory ;  and  we  shall  see,  in  Chap.  X.,  how
his  duty  towards  all  mankind  obliges  him,  on  other  occasion?,
to  allow  a  free  passage  through,  and  a  residence  in  his  state.
If  the  sovereign  annexes  any  particular  condition  to  the
permission  to  enter  his  territories,  he  ought  to  have  measures
taken  to  make  foreigners  acquainted  with  it,  when  they  pre-
sent themselves  on  the  frontier.

There  are  states,  such  as  China  and  Japan,  into  which  all
foreigners  are  forbid  to  penetrate  without  an  express  permis-


(110)  See  more  Miy,  GroUaB,  book  2,  chap.  2,  p.  153;  1  Chit  Com.  L.  M,  87
260


BULBS  WITH RESPECT  TO  FOREIGNERS.  172

Sion ;  but,  in  Europe,  the  access  is  everywhere  free  to  every »ook  n,
person  who  is  not  an  enemy  of  the  state,  except,  in  some  ^^^'  ^'"t
countries,  to  vagabonds  and  outcasts.

But,  even  in  those  countries  which  every  foreigner  may  j  loi. Fo-
freely  enter,  the  sovereign  is  supposed  to  allow  him  access  reignen  v
only  upon  this  tacit  condition,  that  he  be  subject  to  the  laws,  "^^J««*  *®
— I  mean  the  general  laws  made  to  maintain  good  order,  and ^ ^"'
which  have  no  relation  to  the  title  of  citizen  or  of  subject  of
the  state. The  public  safety,  the  rights  of  the  nation  and
of  the  prince,  necessarily  require  this  condition;  and  the
foreigner  tacitly  submits  to  it,  as  soon  as  he  enters  the  coun-
try, as  he  cannot  presume  that  he  has  access  upon  any  other
footing. The  sovereignty  is  the  right  to  command  in  the
whole  country ;  and  the  laws  are  not  simply  confined  to  regu-
lating the  conduct  of  the  citizens  towards  each  other,  but  also
determine  what  is  to  be  observed  by  all  orders  of  people
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  state.

In  virtue. of  this  submission,  foreigners  who  commit  faults}  102.  and
are  to  be  punished  according  to  the  laws  of  the  country.  The  p«°i«habie
object  of  punishment  is  to  cause  the  laws  to  be  respected,  a-i^d  JJ^^JJ^"*  ***
to  maintain  order  and  safety.  r  ^^3  1

For  the  same  reason,  disputes  that  may  arise  between  foreign-  g  103.  who
ers,  or  between  a  foreigner  and  a  citizen,  are  to  be  determined  is  the  jadge
by  the  judge  of  the  place,  and  according  to  the  laws  of  the  ^^  ^^^  ^'^
place.  (Ill) And,  as  the  dispute  properly  arises  from  the^**®"*

r-M-^ •~— ■ ■ 1 11  ■ I  !■ Mill  ■  I

(111)  {In  the  conrts  of  the  United  amitj  with  another  state,  the  conrts  of
States  alien  friends  are  entitled  to  claim  the  latter  ought  not  to  give  eflfeot  to
the  same  protection  of  their  rights  as  it.  In  neither  case  ought  the  accidental
citizens.  Taylor  v.  CarpetitcTf  3  Story's  removal  of  either  of  the  parties  into  a
Rep.  458. }  See  ante,  166,  in  notes,  as  foreign  country,  or  his  prosecuting  his
to  foreign  judgments.  The  doctrine  remedy  there,  alter  the  substance  of  the
here  advanced  by  Vattel  (excepting  as  remedy ;  and,  however  inconvenient
regards  land)  is  contrary  to  the  present  and  difficult  it  may  be  to  Investigate
French  Code,  and  many  other  authors,  and  accurately  ascertain  the  precise
Upon  principle,  it  should  seem,  that  if  state  of  foreign  law,  stiU,  if  courts  wiU
a  contract  or  right  be  created  in  one  entertain  jurisdiction  over  such  cases,
country,  and  be  there  by  the  lex  loci  they  ought  to  administer  the  law  so  as
subjected  to  certain  qualifications,  and  to  give  effect  to  the  transaction  pre-
•lothed  with  certain  privileges,  it  ought  cisely  the  same  as  if  it  had  been  liti-
to  be  enforced  if  at  all  as  against  all  gated  in  the  country  where  created ;
the  original  parties,  precisely  the  same  for,  otherwise  the  original  expectations,
in  a  foreign  country  as  it  would  be  in  rights,  and  interests  of  the  parties  would
that  where  it  was  created ;  and  this,  not  be  given  effect  to ;  and  it  would  be
although  it  be  a  negotiable  security,  conceded  that,  more  especially  after  a
and  the  interest  therein  vested  in  a  competent  local  court  has  already  de-
third  person  resident  in  a  foreign  oided  upon  the  transaction  {vrithout  any
conntry,  because  the  latter  ought,  apparent  injustice,)  such  decision  ought
when  he  takes  it,  to  inquire  into  the  to  be  conclusive  in  aU  other  courts  and  ^
circumstances and  law  which  affected  countries.

it  in  the  place  where  it  was  made.  These  principles  are  ftilly  acknow-
And  d  fortiori  it  should  seem  that  if  a  ledged  and  given  effect  to  in  the  pre-
contract or  transaction  were  in  viola-  sent  French  Code  and  in  their  admi-
ti'^n  of  the  state  regulations  of  a  foreign  nistration  of  the  law.  (See  Pardessus,
nation  where  it  was  made,  as  in  fraud  Droit  Commercial,  vol.  1,  p.  455,  4  id.
of  itfi  revenue, and  such  state  is  in  196,  205,  209  to  211,  and  220  to  223,

261


xfS  BtTLES  WITH  RBSPECT  TO  FOBEiamSBS.

BOOK  n. refasal  of  the  defendant,  who  maintains  that  he  is  n^t  boimd

CHAP,  vm  ^^  perform  what  is  required  of  him,  it  follows,  from  the  same

principle,  that  every  defendant  ought  to  be  prosecuted  before

his  own  judge,  who  alone  has  a  right  to  condemn  him,  and


titles,  **De8  Ckmjlitade  LeffwltUumrelaHf  moTe ;  for,  what  is  not  an  obUgstion  in

OM  Commerce  /*  **  De  V  application  de  loie  one  place  canno^  by  the  laws  of  another

eetrangeret  relatives  d  la  forme  dee  aetee;"  country,  become  such  in  another  place.

*'Derinterpretationdeeaetee/ait»enpay9  {The King of Spain  T. Machado,  4

eatrangere  f*  **  De  P  ezeeuHon  dee  actee  Russ.  Rep.  239 ;  Bwrovoe  r.  Jemino,  %

faiu  en  pay*  eetrangere,")  Thus,  in  their  Stra.  733;  BeL  Caa.  144,  S.  C.  ,*  Potter  r.

courts it has  been  considered,  that,  JSrofon,  6  East^  130 }  Chitty  on  Bills,  Sth

if  a  bill  of  exchange  be  made  in  a  fo*  edit,  191.)

reign  country,  defective  according  to  the  And  a  foreign  marriage,  if  eelelnated

French  law,  but  valid  according  to  the  according  to  the  lex  loci,  will  be  Tslid,

foreign  law,  it  must neyertheless  be  though  in  a  form  quite  different  to  that

given  effect  to  in  the  French  courts,  prescribed  by  English  law. — Laeo*  v.

even  against  a  French  endorser,  "par  ee  Higgine,  1  DowL  A  RyL  NL  Pri.  Cas.

que  lee  reglea  eur  la  validitS  intrineeque  88 ;  3  Stark.  Rep.  176 ;  where  see  tho

dee  conventione,  eont  deriviee  du  droit  mode  of  proving  the  foreign  law. A»

natural,  eteontdetoute*  lee  legielatione/'  to  which also see JSill  ▼.  BeardoUf

and  in  the  ease  of  limitations,  it  is  laid  Jacob's  Rep.  89,  90 ;  and  as  to  foreigm

down that  the law of prescriptions  marriagee,  in  general,  see  1  Roper  on

prevailing  in  the country  where  the  Husband  and  Wife, 333;  Lantanr  r.

contract  was made, though different  Teeedale,  8  Taunt.  830 ;  Smitk  r.  Ma^-

from  that  in France,  must, in  their  well,  Ry. k  Mood.  NL  PrL  Gas.  80;

courts,  be  given  effect  to. (4  PardessnSy  1  Carr.  A  Payne,  271,  8.  C;  and  sc«

223.) They  admit  the  difficulty  of  as-  Butler  v.  Freeman,  Ambl.  803. And

certaining correctly  the  foreign law,  indeed,  a  marriage  had  in  a  foreign

but  consider  that  difficulty  as  not  con-  country  wiU  not  be  valid  here  unless  it

stituting  any  sufficient  grounds  for  re-  were  so  by  the  lex  loci, {Btttler  v.  IVee-

Ueving  their  courts  from  the  necessity  man,  Ambl.  303.) And,  where  the  da-

of  giving  full  effect  to  the  contract  ac-  fendant  gave  the  plaintiff,  in  a  foreign

cording  to  the  law  of  the  place  where  country,  where  both  were resident,  a

it  was  made.  (4  Pardessus,  246.) When  bill  of  exchange  drawn  by  the  defend*

the  foreign  law  differs  from  that  where  ant  upon  a  person  in  England,  whieh

the  suit  is  depending,  undoubtedly  the  bill  was  afterwards  protested  here  for

party  relying  on  the  foreign  law  must  non-acceptance, and the defendant

prove  it {Broum  v.  Lacy,  1  DowL  &  afterwards,  while  still  abroad,  became

RyL  Ni.  Pri.  Gas.  41,  n.  (a). As  to  the  bankrupt  there,  and  obtained  a  oertifi-

evidence,  see  poet,  note.)  cate  of  discharge  by  the  law  of  that

In  Great  Britain  the  same  theory  is  state,  it  was  held  that  such  certificato

professed,  and prevails to a limited  was  a  bar  to  an  action  here  upon  an

extent; but  the courts  have  so  nar-  implied  assumpsit  to  pay  the  bill  in

rowedly  applied  it,  that,  as  regards  ^e  consequence of  such non-acceptanea

proeeee  for  the  recovery  of  the  claim,  in  England,  because  such  implied  oon-

and  the  ttm«  loAen  it  must  be  commenced,  tract must be Considered as made

it  is  a  doctrine  rather  in  name  than  in  abroad. {Potter  v.  Brown,  5  Bast,  124.)

practice,  excepting  in  a  few  instances  So,  in  England,  the  rule  is  recognised,

as  regards  foreign  marriages,  and  a  few  that  the  payment  of  a  bill  is  to  be  made

other  cases. Dalrymple  v.  Dalrymple,  according  to  the  law  of  the  place  where

Hagg.  Rep. 54; Lacon  ▼.  Higgine,  1  it  was made  payable,  as  best  eorres-

DowL  A  Ryl.  Ni.  Pri.  Rep.  38;  Boach  ponding  with  the  original  intention  of

y.  Oarvan,  1  Yes.  159.) In  theory  it  is  the  parties. (Beawes,  pL  251 ;  Marias^

laid  down,  that  effect  ought  to  be  given  102;  Poth.  pi.  156;  5  Bam. A Crea.

to  contracts,  and  especially  to  bills  of  443 ; Chitty  on  Bills, 191.) So, the

exchange  according  to  the  law  of  the  English  courts,  in  some  cases,  beeidee

country  where  the  contract  was  made,  giving  effect  to  the  conduct  itself,  ac-

and  in  which  it  was  to  be  performed,  cording  to  the  foreign  law,  also  give

and  not  according  to  the  law  of  the  effect  to  such  foreign  law  In  some  col-

eonntry  into  which  either  or  ail  may  re-  lateral respects, acknowledging tltmS

262


BULBS  WITH  RESPECT  TO  FOREiaNBRS.  173

compel  him  to  the  performance. The  Swiss  have  wisely  made loor  u.
this  rule  one  of  the  articles  of  their  alliance,  in  order  to  pre- -2!lf£iZL""
vent  the  quarrels  that  might  arise  from  abuses  that  were  for-
merly too  frequent  in  relation  to  this  subject. The  defend-

otherwise  tho  greatest  injastioe  might  doabted  whether  the  4oci8ion  in  Del-

ensue. Thus,  in  France,  a  protest  for  valle  y.  The York  Buildingt Company

non-payment  is  not  to  be  made  till  the  was  not  the  better  law.
day  after  a  bill  falls  due,  whereas  in Again,  in  the English  courts  there

England  it  must  be made  upon  the  is  a  rule  of  narrow  petty  policy  not  to

very  day; and  it  cannot  be  doubted  protect  the  revenue  laws  of  a  foreign

that  if  the  bill  were  payable  in  France  state,  even  at  amity  with  this  country,

the  English  courts  mutt  give  effect  to  but  eyen  to  encourage  And  giye  effect

the  French  instead  of  the  English  law,  to the  most dishonourable  practices,

(4  Pardessus,  227,  semble.) So,  where  howeyer  injurious  to  such  independent

a  wife  was  entitled  to  a  share  under  state;  so  that  British  subjects  are  al-

the statute of distribution, and was  lowed  to  carry  on  smuggling  transao-

resident  in  Prussia,  and  by  the  law^  of  tions  adyerse  to  the  interests  of  a  neigh-

which  one  moiety  of  the  effects  of  the  bouring  country,  proyided  they  do  not

husband  must  come  to  her  on  his  death,  prejudice  our  own  revenue, (//o/man  v.

the  court  of  equity  hero did  not,  as  JohtuoHf  Oowp .  Z4d)—per  Lord  Mans-

usual,  require  him  to  make  any  settle-  field,  **no  country  etfer  taket  notice  of  the

ment  upon  his  wife. {Sawyer  v.  Shute,  revenue  lavo4  of  another" (See  all  the

1  Anst  63 ;  and  Campbell  v.  French,  3  cases  collected  and  observed  upon  in

Ves.  323.)  Chitty  on Bills,  8th  edit 143,  n.  c.)

But  as  before  observed,  the  English  And  this  to  such  a  degree  that  a  British

courts  will  noty  as  respects the  form  subject  has  been  allowed  in  the  English

of  the  remedy,  notice  the  foreign  law  ,*  courts  to  support  an  action  against  a

and  therefore  a  foreigner  may  in  Eng-  purchaser of  paper knowingly  made

land  be  arrested  for  a  debt,  or  in  equity  by  the  plaintiff  for  the  purpose  of  fory-

upon  a  writ  of  ne  exeat,  in  respect  of  ing  assign&ts upon the  same, to  be

which  he  could not,  according  to  the  exported  to  France,  in  order  to  commit

foreign  law,  where  it  was  contracted,  frauds  there  on  other  persons. (Smith

have  been  imprisoned. {Ve  la  Vega  ▼.  Mareonnoy,  2  Peake's Rep.  81,  ad-

y.  Vianna,  1  Barn.  A  Adolph.  284 ;  10  denda ; and Stronyitharm v. Lukyn,

Barn. & Cress.  903 ; Flack  v.  Holm,  1  Esp.  Rep.  380). Assuredly  one  state

1  Jac.  &  Walk.  405.)  So,  though  ao-  is  bound  to  act  towards  another  as
cording  to  the  law  of  Holland,  persons  neighbours  should  to  each  other;  and
jointly  concerned  in  trade  could  not  sue  should  it  be  tolerated  that  the  latter
as  partners,  they  might  do  so  in  Eng-  should  encourage  frauds  of  one  upon
land.  [Shaw  v.  Harvey,  Mood.  A  M.  the  other?  Express  treaties  sometimes  *
226.)  And,  as  regards  the  time  for  expressly  provide  against  the  toleration
commencing  suits  on  foreign  contracts,  of  such  practices.  So,  in  some  cases,
the  English  courts,  contrary  to  the  the  English  courts  will  not  only  deny
practice  in  France,  will  only  apply  the  effect  to  a  correct  decbion  of  a  foreign
EngliBh  Statute  of  Limitatume,  and  will  court  upon  the  lex  loci  applicable  to  the
not  regard  the  foreign  lac  loci,  ( The  same  transaction,  but  wiU  actually  ad-
Briti«h  Linen  Company  v.  Drummond,  jndicate  to  the  contrary.  Thus,  in  a
10  Bom.  A  Cress.  903 ;  1  Bam.  A  late  case  it  was  held  in  chancery,  that
Adolph.  285,  385;  1  Younge  A  Jerv.  a  distinct  holder  might  recover  in  an
S76 ;  I  yash  v.  Txtpper,  1  Caines's  Rep.  English  court  on  a  bill  drawn  in  France
402 ;  Decouche  v.  Savetier,  3  Johns,  on  a  French  stamp,  although,  in  conse-
Gha.  Rep.  190 ;  LeRoy  v.  Crovoninahield,  quence  of  it  not  being  in  the  form  re-

2  Mason's  Rep.  151 ; }  aliter  in  France,  quired  by  the  French  Code,  another
4  Pardessus,  223.)  But  it  must  be  ob-  holder  had  failed  in  an  action  which  he
served,  that,  in  the  case  of  The  British  brought  upon  it  in  a  French  court;
Linen  Company  v.  Drummond,  (10  Barn,  and  the  vice-chancellor  is  reported  to
A  Cress.  903),  the  much  more  distinct  have  been  of  opinion,  **  that  the  ciroum-
Fronch  law  in  1  Pardessus,  455,  4  id.  stance  of  the  bills  being  drawn  and  ac*
196,  209  to  211,  220  to  223,  and  285,  cepted  by  the  defendant  in  France,  and
WHS  not  cited,  and  that  Lord  Tenterden  of  the  plaintiff  having  received  the  same

JM3


173  RULES  WITH  RESPECT  TO  FORSiaNERS.

Booz  n. ant*s  judge  is  the  judge  of  the  place  where  that  defendant  has
CHAP_^  vm.  j^g  settled  abode,  or  the  judge  of  the  place  where  the  defend-
ant IS,  when  any  sudden  difficulty  arises,  provided  it  does

not  relate  to  an  estate  in  land,  or  to  a  right  annexed  to  such

, .

from  the  French  drawer,  and  of  the  bUls  was  received  as  evidence  of  the  law  of

having  been  drawn  in  such  a  form  in  France,  upon  which  the  Court  in  En^-

France  that  the  holder  could  not  recover  land  would  act  in  deciding  upon  the

on  them  in  France,  was  no  objection  to  validity  of  a  marriage  in  France  be-

his  recovering  on  them  in  an  English  tween  British  subjects. {Laeon  r.  Ifig-

court" (  Wynne  v.  Jocitfon,  2 Russ.  gif»»,  1  Bowl.  A  Ryl.  Ni.  Pri.  Rep.  .^ ;

352 ;  but  see  observations  in  Wynne  v.  3  Stark.  176,  S.  C.) And  it  has  been

€fullender,  1  Russ.  293.)  supposed  that  the  same  point  was  de-

In  cases  where  the  foreign  law  and  cided  in  Sir  Thomae  Picton's  ca«e,  where
rule  of  construction  would  prevail,  care  the  question  arose  as  to  the  right  of  in-
must  be  observed  to  establish  it,  and  flicting  torture  in  the  island  of  Trinidad,
have  it  stated  on  the  record,  for  other-  formerly  under  the  dominion  of  Spain ;
wise  the  contract  will  be  construed  the  and  the  attorney-general  of  the  inland
same  as  an  English  contract ;  and  there-  was  examined  as  a  witness,  and  the
fore  it  was  held  that  an  instrument  exe-  court  allowed  him  to  refer  to  printed
cuted  by  foreigners  in  a  foreign  country,  books  purporting  to  contain  the  law  of
as  in  Spain,  must^  on  demurrer,  be  Spain;  and  Lord  Ellenborough,  C.  J.,
construed  by  the  same  grammatical  expressed  no  doubt  that  such  bookf  were
rules  as  English  contracts,  and  according  receivable  as  evidence  of  the  law  of
to  the  obvious  import  of  its  terms,  un-  Spain  and  Trinidad.  (30  HoweU's  State
less  there  be  an  allegation  in  the  bill  in  Trials.  514 ;  but  see  1  Dowl.  A  RyL  KL
equity,  setting  it  forth,  and  that,  accord-  Pri.  Rep.  42,  n.  (a).)
ing  to  ^e  law  of  the  country  in  which  In  equity,  it  has  been  held  that  the
it  was  executed,  the  true  construction  foreign  law  must  be  verified  by  the  affi-
of  it  is  different.  ( The  King  of  Spain  davit  of  a  professional  person  swearing
and  Others  v.  Machvido  and  Others,  4  positively,  and  not  by  the  affidavit  of
Russ.  224.)  another  person not  professionally  ac-

Where  an English  oommission  pre-  qnainted  with  the  law,  and  swearing

cedes  a  Scotch  sequestration,  all  Scotch  only  to  information  and  belief. {lliU  v.

personal  estate  is  liable  to  the  commis-  Beardon,  Jacob,  89.) The  best  evidence

sion,  and  not  to  the  sequestration. {Ex  is  an  affidavit  or  evidence  of  the  foreign

parte  Cridlandf  3  Yes.  A  B.  100  ;  when  consul,  or  a  foreign  advocate  of  experi-

otherwise.  Ex  parte  Oeddee,  1  Glyn  A  ence,  stating  verbatim  the  terms  of  the

J.  414.)  foreign  law,  when  it  was  a  written  edict.

Legacy  in  a foreign country,  and  or  in  the  nature  of our  statute  law.

• coin,  as  sicca  rupees,  by  a  wiU  in  In-  {Flack  v.  ffolm,  1  Jac  A  Walk.  41$.)

dia,  if  paid  by  remittance  to  this  coun-  ' As  respects  the  claims  of  a  eoverrigm

try,  ^e  payment  must  be  according  to  of  a  foreign  independent  etate  upon  a

the  current  value  of  the  rupee  in  India,  eubject  of  Great  Britain,  it  seems  clear

without  regard  to  the  exchange  or  the  that  he  stands  in  the  same  situation  aa

expense  of  remittance  :  so,  as  to  other  a  private  subject  of  such  foreign  Etate.

countries. (Cfockerellr, Barber,  16  Yea,  {Greig  v.  Somerville,  1  Russ.  A  M.  3^

461.)  case  of  the  emperor  of  Russia's  elaim.)

With  respect  to  the  proof  of  foreign  Lord  Hawkesbury  said,  that  a  foreigii

law,  it  must  in  general  be  established  power  might  legally  apply  to  the  courts

as  a  fact,  and  the  court  cannot  take  of  judicature,  and  might  obtain  redresa^

notice  of  the  same  judicially. {Free-  as  for  defamation  or  calumny  (6  Rn«s.

moult  V.  Bedire,  1  P.  Wms.  431 ; Ex  Mod.  Europe,  20,  anfe,  143),  excepting

parte  Gridland,  3  Yes.  A  B.  99 ;  {  Tal-  that,  in  respect  of  his  dignity,  he,  like

bot  V.  Seeman,  1  Cranch,  1.} It  is  not  our  king,  is  not  to  recover  costs  {ante,

absolutely  necessary  to  prove  it  by  the  154,  Uullet  v.  King  of  Spain,  1 I>«>w.

production  of  an examined  copy;  but  Rep.  new  ser.  177);  and,  if  eueh  sore»

a  printed  copy  of  the Cinq  Codes  of  reign  has  never  been  in  England,  tiie

France,  produced  by  the  French  vice-  statute'  of limitations constitutes bo

consul  resident  in  London,  purchased  bar;  and  in  equity  at  any  distasf'^  of

by  him  at  a  bookseller's  shop  at  Paris,  time,  however  remote,  whilst  th«i«  »
26-1


RULES  WITH  EESPECT  TO  FOREIGlfnSRS.  ITS

an  estate. In  this  last  case,  as  property  of  that  kind  is  to book  n.
be  held  according  to  the  laws  of  the  country  where  it  is  situ-  ^^^^'  ^^""^
ated,  and  as  the  right  of  granting  possession  is  vested  in  the
ruler  of  the  country,  disputes  relating  to  such  property  can
only  be  decided  in  the  state  on  which  it  depends.

We  have  already  shown  (§  84)  how  the  jurisdiction  of  a
nation  ought  to  be  respected  by  other  sovereigns,  and  in  what
cases  alone  they  may  interfere  in  the  causes  of  their  subjects
in  foreign  countries.

The  sovereign  ought  not  to  grant  an  entrance  into  his  state  J 104.  Pro-
for  the  purpose  of  drawing  foreigners  into  a  snare:  as  sooij*®®*'®'*.^'**
as  he  admits  them,  he  engages  to  protect  them  as  his  own^**'®***"
subjects,  and  to  afford  them  perfect  security,  as  far  as  depends
on  him.  Accordingly,  we  see  that  every  sovereign  who  has
given  an  asylum  to  a  foreigner,  considers  himself  no  less
offended  by  an  injury  done  to  the  latter,  than  he  would  be
by  an  act  of  violence  committed  on  his  own  subject.  Hospi-
tality was  in  great  honour  among  the*  ancients,  and  even
among  barbarous  nations,  such  as  the  Germans.  Those
savage  nations  who  treated  strangers  ill,  that  Scythian  tribe
who  sacrificed  them  to  Diana,*  were  universally  held  in  ab-
horrence ;  and  Grotius  justly  saysf  that  their  extreme  ferocity
excluded  them  from  the  great  society  of  mankind.  All  other
nations  had  a  right  to  unite  their  forces  in  order  to  chastise
them.

From  a  sense  of  gratitude  for  the  protection  granted  to  ?  106.  Theh
him,  and  the  other  advantages  he  enjoys,  the  foreigner  ought  ^^^^es.
not  to  content  himself  with  barely  respecting  the  laws  of  the


a  tand  in  courty  it  wiU  be  decreed  that  Columhtan  Government  r.  Bothschild,  1
the  foreign  sovereign  shaUbe  at  liberty,  Simons,  94,  id.  68.)  And  the  sovereign
by  his  ambassador,  to  go  before  the  of  a  foreign  state  mnst  either  sue  here
master  and  prove  such  debt  due  from  in  his  own  name  or  by  his  ambassador;
an  intestate's  estate  as  he  might  be  able,  and  his  subjects,  when  privately  inter-
though  not  so  as  to  prejudice  any  pre-  ested,'  must  sue  individually  in  their
Tious  distribution  (id.  ibid,  oases  first  names,  or  in  their  defined  political
stated).  character;  and  an  ambassador  cannot

It  has  been  recently  decided,  that  a  sue  in  England  as  procurator  general

foreign  sovereign  has  a  right  to  sue  in  for  all  or  any  of  the  subjects  of  tho

the English courts  in equity  as  well  foreign  sovereign. (Spanish  Ambae$a-

as  at  law. (HulUtt  and  Others  r.  King  dor  v.  Bingley,  Hob.  113.)

of  Spain,  1 Dow. Rep.  new  ser.  169,  By the maritime law materially

and  2  Bligh,  new  ser.  31,  in  the  House  affecting  the  intercourse  of  nations  with

uf  Lords, on appeal from Court  of  each other,  when damage has  been

Chancery.) {The Constitution  of  the  occasioned  to  a  ship  by  the  equal  fault

United  States  gives  jurisdiction  to  the  of  those  managing one ship  as  the

courts of the United States where  other,  as,  by  running  foul  of  each  other,

foreign  states  are  parties. The  King  the  owner  of  the  damaged  vessel  is  to

of  Spain  V.  Oliver,  2  Wash.  C.  C.  Rep.  receive  half  the  amount  of  the  4<^mage

429. }  sustained. {Ifay  t.  Le  Neve,  2  Shaw's

If  a  foreign  state  sue  in  chancery.  Rep.  401  to  405.)

the biU must properly  describe the  *  The Taurians. See Grotins da

plaintiff,  so  that  he  may,  if  thought  Jure  Belli  et  Paois,  lib.  iL  cap.  xz.  {  xL

fit»  be  served  upon  a  cross  bilL {The  n.  7.

54 X  266


178  RULES  WITH  RBSPECT  TO  FOBBiaNEK&

BOOK  n. country ;  he  ought  to  assist  it  upon  occasion,  and  contribute
CHAP,  vm.  ^  -^  defence,  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  his  daty  as  citizen
of  another  state. We  shall  see  elsewhere  what  he  can  and
ought  to  do,  when  the  country  is  engaged  in  a  war. But
there  is  nothing  to  hinder  him  from  defending  it  against  pi*
rates  or  robbers,  against  the  ravages  of  an  inundation,  or  the
[  174  1  devastations  of  fire. Can  he  pretend  to  live  under  the  pro-
tection of  a  state,  to  participate  in  a  variety  of  advantages
that  it  affords,  and  yet  make  no  exertion  for  its  defence,  but
remain  an  unconcerned  spectator  of  the  dangers  to  which  the
pitizens  are  exposed  ?
{ 106. To He  cannot,  indeed,  be  subject  to  those  burdens  that  have
what  bur- Q^jy  ^  relation  to  the  quality  of  citizens ;  but  he  ought  to
•re  attbjeot  ^^^^  ^^  share  of  all  the  others. Being  exempted  from  serving
in  the  militia,  and  from  paying  those  taxes  destined  for  the
support  of  the  rights  of  the  nation,  he  will  pay  the  duties  im-
posed upon  provisions,  merchandise,  &c.,  and,  in  a  word,
every  thing  that  has  only  a  relation  to  .his  residence  in  the
country,  or  to  the  affairs  which  brought  him  thither.
;  107. Fo- The  citizen  or  the  subject  of  a  state  who  absents  himself
reignera for  a  time  without  any  intention  to  abandon  the  society  of
memben  of  "^^^^^  he  is  a  member,  does  not  lose  his  privilege  by  his  ab-
their  own sence : he  preserves  his  rights,  and  remains  bound  by  the
nation. same  obligations. Being  received  in  a  foreign  country,  in
virtue  of  the  natural  society,  the  communication,  and  com-
merce which  nations  are  obliged  to  cultivate  with  each  other
(Prelim.  §§  11, 12 ;  Book  II.  §  21),  he  ought  to  be  considered
there  as  a  member  of  his  own  nation,  and  treated  as  such.
2  108. The The  state,  which  ought  to  respect  the  rights  of  other  na*
Btate  haa  no  tions,  and  in  general  those  of  all  mankind,  cannot  arrogate
Swpenon *^  herself  any  power  over  the  person  of  a  foreigner,  who,
of  a  foreign- tliough  he  has  entered  her  territory,  has  not  become  her  sub-
«r;  (112) ject. The  foreigner  cannot  pretend  to  enjoy  the  liberty  of
living  in  the  country  without  respecting  the  laws :  if  he  vio-
lates them,  he  is punishable  as  a  disturber  of  the public
peace,  and  guilty  of  a  crime  against  the  society  in  which  he
lives :  but  he  is  not  obliged  to  submit,  like  the  subjects,  to  all
the  compiands  of  the  sovereign :  and,  if  such  things  are  re-

(112) Bat^  in ancient times, the  able  claim,  or  even  a  demand  at  law  is

CbaoceUor  had  jurigdiction,  by  writ  of  nature  of  an  account^ cither upon  a

ne  exeat, to  restrain  a  foreigner  or  a  contract  or  transaction  entered  into  in

British  subject  from  going  abroad  and  the  foreign  country,  and  althoQj^h  by

oommunioating  intelligence  to  an  ene-  the  lex  loci  the  foreigner  could  not  hare

my,  or  otherwise  injurious  to  this  state,  been  arrested,  {Flack  ▼.  Holm,  1  Jac  M

And  the  Court  of  Chancery,  from  more  W.  405 ; but  see 2>« CarHcn  r.  tv.

to  moYe,  have  assumed  and  established  lonney  4  Ves.  577) ;  and  it  is  now  se^

a  jurisdiction  over  foreigners  in  favour  Ued,  that  at  law,  a  foreigner  may  b«

of  a  private  subject,*  so  that,  if  a  fo-  arrested  in  this  country  for  a  furvt^-r

reigner  be  here,  and  be  about  to  depart,  debt,  though  he  could  not hare  bee

he  may  be  restrained  and  compelled  to  imprisoned  in  his  own  oountry. ( He  /i

give  security  for  satiAfying  any  eqoit-  Vega  t.  Viannoj  1  Bam.  A  A«inlpbl  284  )

see


VULBB  WITH  BESPBOT  TO  FOBEIGNEBS.  174

qaired  of  him  as  he  is  unwilling  to  perform,  he  may  quit  the  book  u.
country.'  He  is  free  at  all  times  to  leave  it ;  nor  have  we  a  chap,  vnu
.right  to  detain  him^  except  for  a  time,  and  for  very  particu-
lar reasons,  as,  for  instance,  an  apprehension,  in  war  time,
lest  such  foreigner,  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  country
and  of  the  fortified  places,  should  communicate  his  know-
ledge to  the  enemy.  (113)  From  the  voyages  of  the  Dutch
to  the  East  Indies,  we  learn  that  the  kings  of  Gorea  forcibly
detain  foreigners  who  are  shipwrecked  on  their  coast;  and
Bodinus  assures  us,*  that  a  custom  so  contrary  to  the  law  of
nations  was  practised  in  his  time  in  .Ethiopia,  and  even  in
Muscovy.  This  is  at  once  a  violation  of  the  rights  of  indivi-
duals, and  of  those  of  the  state  to  which  they  belong.  Things
have  been  greatly  changed  in  Russia ;  a  single  reign— that
of  Peter  the  Great — ^has  placed  that  vast  empire  in  the  rank
of  civilized  nations.

The  property  of  an  individual  does  not  cease  to  belong  to  i  109.  nor
tim  on  account  of  his  being  in  a  foreign  country;  it  still  con- °^®' ^ P'*^
stitutes  a  part  of  the  aggregate  wealth  of  his  nation  (§  81).  ^*'*^'
Any  power,  therefore,  which  the  lord  of  the  territory  might  [  175  ]
clain.  over  the  property  of  a  foreigner  would  be  equally  de-
rogatory to  the  rights  of  the  individual  owner  and  to  those
of  the  nation  of  which  he  is  a  member.  (114)

Since  the  foreigner  still  continues  to  be  a  citizen  of  his  i  no.  Who
own  country,  and  a  member  of  his  own  nation  (§  107),  the*J®^®^**"
property  he  leaves  at  his  death  in  a  foi%ign  country  ought  ^^  *  *^"  *""
naturally  to  devolve  to  those  who  are  his  heirs  according  to
the  laws  of  the  state  of  which  he  is  a  member. But,  not-
withstanding this  general  rule,  his  immovable  effects  are  to
be  disposed  of  according  to  the  laws  of  the  country  where
they  are  situated. (See  §  103.)

As  the  right  of  making  a  will,  or  of  disposing  of  his  for-  ?  m. J^iU
tune  in  case  of  death,  is  a  right  residting  from  property,  it®^*^Y\*^**°*
cannot,  without  injustice,  be  taken  from  a  foreigner. The*'"^
foreigner,  therefore,  by  natural  right,  has  the  liberty  of  mak-
ing a  will. But,  it  is  asked,  by  what  laws  he  is  obliged  to
regulate  himself,  either  in  the  form  of  his  testament,  or  in
the  disposal  of  his  property. 1.  As  to  the  form  or  solemni-
ties appointed  to  settle  the  validity  of  a  will,  it  appears  that
the  testator  ought  to  observe  those  that  are  established  in  the
country  where  he  makes  it,  unless  it  be  otherwise  ordained
by  the  laws  of  the  state  of  which  he  is  a  member ;  in  which

(113)  Bat  see  ante,  105,  and  note.  (1^^)  ^nte,  167,  and  note ; and  nee
*  In  his  Republic,  book  i.  chap,  vi Vattel  cited,  Aiutruiher  y.  Chalmer,  2

(114)  But  specific  perfonnanoe  of  an  Sim.  Brep.  4;  but  see  Trotter  y.  Trotter,
aipreement  relating  to  the'  boundaries  3  Wils.  A  Shaw,  407, 414,  and  antCf  167,
of  two  prorinces  in  America,  may  be  en-  in  notes ;  and  see  Anon,  9  Mod.  66  j
forced  by  bill  in  chancery  in  England,  Bowama-^  v.  Reeve,  Pre.  Ch.  677,  ante,
if  the  paTliefi  be  within  the  jurisdiction  173,  note.

^Peun  T.  Bakimore,  I  Yes.  sen.  444.^

267


175  BULES  WITH  BESPEOT  TO  FOBEI0KBB8.

BOOK  n.  case,  he  will  be  obliged  to  observe  the  forms  which  they  pre-
CHAP.  Yiii.  gQr|][)e,  if  he  would  validly  dispose  of  the  property  he  pos-
sesses in  his  own  country.  I  speak  here  of  a  will  which  ia
to  be  opened  in  the  place  where  the  person  dies ;  for,  if  a  tra-
veller makes  his  will,  and  sends  it  home  under  seal,  it  is  the
same  thing  as  if  it  had  been  written  at  home ;  and,  in  this
case,  it  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  his  own  country.  2.  As  to
the  bequests  themselves,  we  have  already  observed  that  those
which  relate  to  immovables  ought  to  be  conformable  to  the
laws  of  the  country  where  those  immovables  are  situated.
The  foreign  testator  cannot  dispose  of  the  goods,  movable  or  im-
movable, which  he  possesses  in  his  own  country,  otherwise  than
in  a  manner  conformable  to  the  laws  of  that  country.  But,  as
to  movable  goods,  specie,  and  other  effects  which  he  possesses
elsewhere,  which  he  has  with  him,  or  which  follow  his  person,
we  ought  to  distinguish  between  the  local  laws,  whose  effect
cannot  extend  beyoad  the  territory,  and  those  laws  which
peculiarly  affect  the  character  of  citizen.  The  foreigner,  re-
maining a  citizen  of  his  own  country,  is  still  bound  by  those
last-mentioned  laws,  wherever  he  happens  to  be,  and  is  obliged
to  conform  to  them  in  the  disposal  of  his  personal  property,
and  all  his  movables  whatsoever*  The  laws  of  this  kind,
made  in  the  country  where  he  resides  at  the  time,  but  of
which  he  is  not  a  citizen,  are  not  obligatory  with  respect  to
him.  Thus,  a  man  who  makes  his  will,  and  dies  in  a  foreign
country,  cannot  deprive  his  widow  of  the  part  of  his  movable
effects  assigned  to  that  widow  by  the  laws  of  his  own  country.
A  Genevan,  obliged  by  the  law  of  Geneva  to  leave  a  dividend
of  his  personal  property  to  his  brothers  or  his  cousins,  if  they
f  176  ]  be  his  next  heirs,  cannot  deprive  them  of  it  by  making  his
will  in  a  foreign  country,  while  he  continues  a  citizen  of  Ge-
neva ;  but,  a  foreigner  dying  at  Geneva  is  not  obliged,  in  this
respect,  to  conform  to  the  laws  of  the  republic.  The  case  is
quite  otherwise  with  respect  to  local  laws :  they  regulate  what
may  be  done  in  the  territory,  and  do  not  extend  beyond  it.
The  testator  is  no  longer  subject  to  them  when  he  is  out  of
the  territory ;  and  they  do  not  affect  that  part  of  his  property
which  is  also  out  of  it.  The  foreigner  is  obliged  to  observe
those  laws,  in  the  country  where  he  makes  his  will,  with  re-
spect to  the  goods  he  possesses  there.  Thus,  an  inhabitant
of  Neufchatel,  to  whom  entails  are  forbidden  in  his  own  coun-
try with  respect  to  the  property  he  possesses  there,  freely
makes  an  entail  of  the  estate  he  possesses  out  of  the  juris-
diction of  the  country,  if  he  dies  in  a  place  where  entails  are
allowed ;  and,  a  foreigner  making  a  will  at  Neufchatel,  can-
not make  an  entail  of  even  the  movable  property  he  possesses
there, — unless,  indeed,  we  may  suppose  that  his  movable  pro-
perty is  excepted  by  the  spirit  of  the  law.
1 112.  Bb-  What  we  have  established  in  the  three  preceding  sections
obMtage is  sufficient  to  show  with  how  little  justice  the  crown,  in  some

268


BULES  WITH  RESPECT  TO  FOREIGNERS.  176


states,  lays  claim  to  the  effects  left  there  by  a  foreigner  at  ^"^ok  u.
his  death. This  practice  is  founded  on  what  is  called  escheat-  ""'"  ^^


CHAP. VIII.


flyre,  by  which  foreigners  are  excluded  from  all  inheritances  (or  doctrine
in  the  state,  either  of  the  property  of  a  citizen  or  that  of  an  ^J^g"*""^*'^
alien,  and,  consequently,  cannot  be  appointed  heirs  by  will,
nor  receive  any  legacy.  Grotius  justly  observes,  that  this
law  has  descended  to  us  from  those  ages  when  foreigners  were
almost  considered  as  enemies.'*'  Even  after  the  Romans  were
become  a  very  polite  and  learned  people,  they  could  not  ac-
custom themselves  to  consider  foreigners  as  men  entitled  to
any  right  in  common  with  them.  "Those  nations,"  says
Pomponius,  the  civilian,  "with  whom  we  have  neither  friend-
ship, nor  hospitality,  nor  alliance,  are  not,  therefore,  our  ene-
mies ;  yet,  if  any  thing  belonging  to  us  falls  into  their  hands,
it  becomes  their  property ;  our  free  citizens  become  slaves  to
them;  and  they  are  on  the  same  terms  with  respect  to  us.'^f
Wo  cannot  suppose  that  so  wise  a  people  retained  such  inhu-
man laws  with  any  other  view  than  that  of  a  necessary  reta-
liation, as  they  could  not  otherwise  obtain  satisfaction  from
barbarous  nations,  with  whom  they  had  no  connection  or  trea-
ties existing.  Bodinus  shows,  |  that  escheatage  is  derived  from
these  worthy  sources !  It  has  been  successively  mitigated,  or
even  abolished,  in  most  civilized  states.  The  emperor  Fre-
deric II.  first  abolished  it  by  an  edict,  which  permitted  all
foreigners  dying  within  the  limits  of  the  empire  to  dispose
of  their  substance  by  willy  or^  if  tJcey  died  intestate^  to  have
tJieir  nearest  relatione  for  heirs.X  But  Bodinus  complains
that  this  edict  is  but  ill  executed.  Why  does  there  still  re-  [  177  ]
main  any  vestige  of  so  barbarous  a  law  in  Europe,  which  is
now  so  enlightened  and  so  full  of  humanity  ?  The  law  of
nature  cannot  suffer  it  to  be  put  in  practice  except  by  way
of  retaliation.  This  is  the  use  made  of  it  by  the  king  of  Po-
land in  his  hereditary  states.  Escheatage  is  established  in
Saxony;  but  the  sovereign  is  so  just  and  equitable,  that  he
enforces  it  only  against  those  nations  which  subject  the  Saxons
to  a  similar  law.

The  right  of  traite  foraine  (called  in  Latin  jus  detractus)  ?  lis. Th«
is  more  conformable  to  justice  and  the  mutual  obligation  of  "8^*  **^
nations. We  give  this  name  to  the  right  by  virtue  of  which  *'^".'^'^*'"
the  sovereign  retains  a  moderate  portion  of  the  property
either  of  citizens  or  aliens  which  is  sent  out  of  his  territories
to  pass  into  the  hands  of  foreigners. As  the  exportation  of

(116)  Ab  to  alienage  in  general,  and  the  same,  notwithstanding  a  subsequent

the jealons provisions in England  war — Sutton  y.  Sutton,  1  Rnss.  A  Myl.

against  foreigners,  see  1  Chitty's  Com-  Rep.  663.

zneroial  Law,  108  to  169. See  excep-  *  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  lib.  ii.  oap.

tions  in  treaty  with  Ameriea,  and  de-  ri.  J  14.

oiaions  thereon  with  respeot  to  Ame-  f  Digest^  lib.  zUx*  tit.  it. De  Cap-

rieans  who  were seised  of  lands  in  tiyis,  et  Postlimin.

Great  Britain,  being  allowed  to  retain  ^  His  RepubliOi  book  L  ohap.  ri

z2  260


177  RULES  WITH  BBSP3KT  TO  FOEKGHSX&

BOOK  It. that  property  ia  a  loss  to  the  state,  she  may  fairly  reoem  aa
cBAP.  Tm,  equitable  compensation  for  it.

i  114. Im- Every  state  has  the  liberty  of  granting  or  refusing  to
moTftbiB foreigners  the  power  of  possessing  lands  or  other  immoTable
jJJ^„J^ property  within  her  territory.  (117) If  she  grants  them  that
bj  an  aUen.  privilege,  all  such  property  possessed  by  aliens  ranains  sub-
ject to  the  jurisdiction  and  laws  of  the  country,  and  to  the
same  taxes  as  other  property  of  the  same  kind. The  author-
ity of  the  sovereign  extends  oy^r  the  whole  territory ;  and  it
would  be  absurd  to  except  some  parts  of  it,  on  account  of
their  being  possessed  by  foreigners. If  the  sovereign  does
not  permit  aliens  to  possess  immovable  property,  nobody  haa
a  right  to  complain  of  such  prohibition;  for,  he  may  have
very  good  reasons  for  acting  in  this  manner :  and,  as  foreignera
cannot  claim  any  right  in  his  territories  (§  79),  they  ought
not  to  take  it  amiss  that  he  makes  use  of  his  power  and  of
his  rights  in  the  manner  which  he  thinks  most  for  the  advan-
tage of  the  state. And,  as  the  sovereign  may  refuse  to
foreigners  the  privilege  of  possessing  immovable  property,  he
is  doubtless  at  liberty  to  forbear  granting  it  except  with  cer-
tain conditions  annexed.
^115.  Mir- There  exists  no  natural  impediment  to  prevent  foreigners
^*®'  ri  18  ^^^^  contracting  marriages  in  the  state. But,  if  these  mar-

(117)  B J  the  munioipal  law  of  Great  disooyeiy  filed  to  ascertain  wbetlMr  l»

Britain,  no  alien  can  inherit  or  hold  hae  purchased  land. {DupU»*a  t.  At-

real  property. Thus,  Doe  y.  Aeklam,  tomey-General,  1  Bro.  P.  C.  415 ;  3  Vei

2  Bar.  A Cress.  799,  establishes  that  280.^

a  person  bom  in  the  United  States,  (118)  The  validity  of  a  manisfs
since  1783,  when  the  two  countries  celebrated  in  a  foreign  eoiantiy  most
were  separated,  cannot  inherit  lands  in  be  determined  in  an  English  court  bj
England ;  and  the  same  point  was  after-  the  lex  loci  where  the  marriage  was
wards  decided  in  Doe  d,  AnehmUy  t.  solemnized;  and,  therefore,  on  a  pies
Mulea^ter,  6  Bam.  A  Ores.  771.  To  of  corertare,  where  the  parties,  who
this  rule  some  exemptions  have  been  oo-  were  British  subjects,  were  married  ia
casionallj  introduced  by  express  treaty  France,  it  was  held,  that,  if  Uie  mar-
intended  to  be  permanent,  as  regards  riage  would  not  be  valid  in  that  coor-
such  exception,  and  sfarengthened  by  try,  according  to  the  municipal  Uw
statute;  as  under  the  treaty  of  1794,  there,  it  would  not  be  valid  is  this
between  Great  Britain  and  America,  country.  It  was  eren  further  held
and  the  act  37  Geo.  ILL  c.  97,  under  that  a  printed  copy  of  the  "  Cinq  Coda^
which  American  citizens  who  held  lands  of  France,  produced  by  the  French
in  Great  Britain,  on  28  Oct.  1795,  and  rice-consul  resident  in  Ijondon,  pcr-
their  heirs  and  assigns,  are  at  aU  timet  chased  by  him  at  a  bookaeUer^i  Aaf
to  be  considered,  so  far  as  regards  thoee  in  Paris,  was  properly  receired  a*  eri<
land«f  not  as  aliens,  but  as  native  sub-  denoe  of  the  law  of  France  upon  wbKh
Jeets  of  Great  Britain,  and  this,  not-  the  court  would  act ;  aad  Abbott,  C  J^
withstanding  a  subsequent  war  and  said:  The  general  rule  eertainly  is,
the  adherence  of  the  citizen  to  Ame-  that  the  written  law  of  a  foreign  oocs-
rica  whilst  at  war  with  Great  Britain,  try  must  be  proved  by  an  examiaid
(Sutton  V.  Sutton,  1  Russ.  A  M.  663),  copy  thereof  before  it  can  be  acted
and  the  conseqaent  confliction  of  duties  upon  in  an  English  oourt ;  but,  aceoni*
as  regards  the  American  citizen  seised  ing  to  my  recollection,  printed  boob
cf  such  estate.  But,  as  alienage  sub-  upon  the  subject  of  the  law  of  Spsii
jects  no  party  to  any  indictment  or  pe-  were  referred  to  and  »cted  upoa  it
nalty,  an  alien  must  answer  a  bill  of  argument  in  Sir  Thomae  /^ietfoa**  ease,
270


KIOHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO  ALL  7TATI0KS.  177


riages  are  found  prejudicial  or  dangerous  to  a  nation^  she  has  bo<«  n.
a  right,  and  is  even  in  duty  bound  to  prohibit  them,  or  to  ^^^^'  "^
Bubject  to  certain  conditions  the  permission  to  contract  them :
and,  as  it  belongs  to  the  nation  or  to  her  sovereign  to  deter-
mine what  appears  most  conducive  to  the  welfare  of  the  state,
other  nations  ought  to  acquiesce  in  the  regulations  which  any
sovereign  state  has  made  on  this  head.  Citizens  are  almost
everywhere  forbid  to  marry  foreign  wivesof  a  different  religion ;
and  in  many  parts  of  Switzerland  a  citizen  cannot  marry  a
foreign  woman,  unless  he  prove  that  she  brings  him  in  mar-
riage a  certain  sum  fixed  by  the  law.


CHAP.  IX.  [  178  ]

OF  THE  RIGHTS  RETAINED  BY  ALL  NATIONS  AFTER  THE cbap.  g.
INTRODUCTION  OF  DOMAIN  AND  PROPERTY.

IF  an  obligation,  as  we  have  before  observed,  gives  a  right  g  lie.  Wh»t
to  those  things  without  which  it  cannot  be  fulfilled,  every  ab-  "f®  *^«
solute,  necessary,  and  indispensable  obligation  produces  iii"^icbmen
this  manner  rights  equally  absolute,  necessary,  and  indefea- cannot  be
sible. Nature  imposes  no  obligations  on  men  without  giving  deprived,
them  the  means  of  fulfilling  them. They  have  an  absolute
right  to  the  necessary  use  of  those  means :  nothing  can  deprive
them  of  that  right,  as  nothing  can  dispense  with  their  fulfilling
their  natural  obligations.

In  the  primitive  state  of  communion,  men  had,  without  dis-;  117.  Right
tinction,  a  right '  to  the  use  of  every  thing,  as  far  as  was  ne-  f ^  remain-
3essary  to  the  discharge  of  their  natural  obliffations. And,  "*?  ^'T  *^*
as  nothing  could  deprive  them  of  this  right,  the  introduction  gtateof  com-
of  domain  and  property  could  not  take  place  without  leaving  monion.
to  every  man  the  necessary  use  of  things, — ^that  is  to  say,
the  use  absolutely  required  for  the  fulfilment  of  natural  obli-
gations. We  cannot,  then,  suppose  the  introduction  to  have
taken place  without this  tacit  restriction,  that  every  man
should  still  preserve  some  right  to  the  things  subjected  to  pro-
perty, in  those  cases  where,  without  this  right,  he  would  re-
main absolutely  deprived  of  the  necessary  use  of  things  of  this
nature. This  right  is  a  necessary  remnant  of  the  primitive
state  of  communion.

Notwithstanding  the domain  of  nations,  therefore,  each  ?  1^8.  Right
nation  still  retains  some  right  to  what  is  possessed  by  others, '®^^°®^.^y
in  those  cases  where  she  would  find  herself  deprived  of  the  ^^,  ^^^^

U6  evidence  of  the  Iaw  of  that  connlarj,  of  France.  (Xaoon  y.  Hi^'na,  1  Dowl-
iind,  therefore,  I  shall  act  npon  that  ing  A  Ryland,  Ni.  PrL  Oases,  38;  8
sutbority,  and  receive  the  printed  copy  Stark.  Rep.  176,  S.  C. ;  Butler  y.  Fre^
now  produced  as  evidence  of  the  law man,  AmbL  803.)

271


178  BIGHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO  ALL  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. necessary  use  of  certain  things  if  she  were  to  be  absolutely
CHAP.  IX.  debarred  from  using  them  by  the  consideration  of  their  be-


property  of  j^g  other  people's  property.  We  ought  carefully  to  weigh
•'^^"- every  circumstance  in  order  to  make  a  just  appUcation  of

this  principle.
2  110.  Right I  say  the  same  of  the  right  of  necessitp. We  thus  call  the
of  neoesaiiy.  right  which  necessity  alone  gives  to  the  performance  of  cer-
tain actions  that  are  otherwise  unlawful,  when,  without  these
actions,  it  is  impossible  to  fulfil  an  indispensable  obligation.
But  it  is  carefully  to  be  noted,  that,  in  such  a  case,  the  obli-
gation must  really  be  an  indispensable  one,  and  the  act  jn
question the  only  means  of  fulfilling that  obligation. If
either  of  these  conditions  be  wanting,  the  right  of  necessity
does  not  exist  on  the  occasion. We  may  see  these  subjects
discussed  in  treatises  on  the  law  of  nature,  and  particularly
in  th%t  of  Mr.  Wolf. I  confine  myself  here  to  a  brief  sum-
mary of  those  principles  whose  aid  is  necessary  to  us  in  de-
[  179  ]  veloping  the  rights  of  nations.

{  120.  Right  The  earth  was  designed  to  feed  its  inhabitants ;  and  he  who
of  procuring  jg  jjj  ^^^i^^  of  ovcry  thing  is  not  obliged  to  starve  because  all
K^forcT'  pi^operty  is  vested  in  others.  When,  therefore,  a  nation  is
(119)  111  absolute  want  of  provisions,  she  may  compel  her  neigh-

bours who  have  more  than  they  want  for  themselves  to  supply*
her  with  a  share  of  them,  at  a  fair  price ;  she  may  even  take
it  by  force,  if  they  will  not  sell  it. Extreme  necessity  re-
vives the  primitive  communion,  the  abolition  of  which  ought
to  deprive  no  person  of  the  necessaries  of  life  f§  117). The
same  right  belongs  to  individuals,  when  a  foreign  nation  re-
fuses them  a  just  assistance. Captain  Bontekoe,  a  Dutchman,
having  lost  his  vessel  at  sea,  escaped  in  his  boat,  with  a  part
of  his  crew,  and  landed  on  an  Indian  coast,  where  the  bar-
barous inhabitants  refusing  him  provisions,  the  Dutch  obtained
them  sword  in  hand.*
;  121.  Right In  the  same  manner,  if  a  nation  has  a  pressing  want  of  the
of  m^ing Bhipg^  wagons,  horscs,  or  even  the  personal  labour  of  foreign-
magB  that  ®^®'  ®^®  ™^y  make  use  of  them,  either  by  free  consent  or  by
belong  to force,  provided  that  the  proprietors  be  not  under  the  same
others.  (119)  necessity. But,  as  she  has  no  more  right  to  these  things  than
necessity  gives  her,  she  ought  to  pay  for  the  use  she  makes
of  them,  if  she  has  the  means  of  paying. The  practice  of
Europe  is  conformable  to  this  maxim. In  cases  of  necessity,
a  nation  sometimes  presses  foreign  vessels  which  happen  to
be  in  her  ports ;  but  she  pays  a  compensation  for  the  services
performed  by  them.
2 122.  Right Let  us  say  a  few  words  on  a  more  sinmilar  case,  since  an-
of  canying  thors  have  treated  of  it — ^a  case  in  which  at  present,  people


women.


(119)  See  the  doctrine  of  Preemption, *  Bonketoe's  Voyage,  in  the  Voyagof
1  Chitty's  Com.  Law,  103, 104,  105,  440, of  the  Dutch  to  the  Eaat  Indies.
447.

272


BIGHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO  ALL  NATIONS.  179

are  never  reduced  to  employ  force.  A  nation  cannot  preserve  book  «.
and  perpetuate  itself,  except  by  propagation.  A  nation  of  ^^^^'  '^i
men  has,  therefore,  a  right  to  procure  women,  who  are  abso-
lutely necessary  to  its  preservation ;  and  if  its  neighbours,  who
have  a  redundancy  of  females,  refuse  to  give  some  of  them  in
marriage  to  those  men,  the  latter  may  justly  have  recourse
to  force.  We  have  a  famous  example  of  this  in  the  rape  of  the
Babine  women.*  But,  though  a  nation  is  allowed  to  procure
for  itself,  even  by  force  of  arms,  the  liberty  of  obtaining
women  in  marriage,  no  woman  in  particular  can  be  constrained
in  her  choice,  nor  become,  by  right,  the  wife  of  a  man  who
carries  her  off  by  force — a  circumstance  which  has  not  been
attended  to  by  those  who  have  decided,  without  restriction,
that  the  Romans  di^  not  commit  an  act  of  injustice  on  that  oc-
casion.f  It  is  true  that  the  Sabine  women  submitted  to  their
fate  with  a  good  grace ;  and,  when  their  nation  took  up  arms
to  avenge  them,  it  sufficiently  appeared,  from  the  ardour  with
which  those  women  rushed  between  the  combatants,  that  they
willingly  acknowledged  the  Romans  for  their  lawful  husbands.

We  may  further  add,  that,  if  the  Romans,  as  many  pretend,
were  originally  only  a  band  of  robbers  united  under  Romulus,
they  did  not  form  a  true  nation,  or  a  legitimate  state ;  the  [  180  3
neighbouring  nations  had  a  just  right  to  refuse  them  women ;
and  the  law  of  nature,  which  approves  no  civil  society  but
such  as  is  legitimate,  did  not  require  them  to  furnish  that
society  of  vagabonds  and  robbers  with  the  means  of  perpetu-
ating itself;  much  less  did  it  authorize  the  latter  to  procure
those  means  by  force.  In  the  same  manner,  no  nation  was
obliged  to  furnish  the  Amazons  with  males.  That  iaation  of
women,  if  it  ever  existed,  put  itself,  by  its  own  fault,  out  of  a
condition  to  support  itself  without  foreign  assistance.

The  right  of  passage  is  also  a  remnant  of  the  primitive  state  j  123.  Kighi
of  communion,  in  which  the  entire  earth  was  common  to  aU  of  pwaage,
mankind,  and  the  passage  was  everywhere  free  to  each  indi-  ^^^®^
vidual  according  to  his  necessities. Nobody  can  be  entirely
deprived  of  this  right  (§  117) ;  but  the  exercise  of  it  is  limited
by  the  introduction  of  domain  and  property :  since  they  have
been  introduced,  we  cannot  exert  that  right  without  paying
due  regard  to  the  private  rights  of  others. The  effect  of  pro-
perty is,  to  give  the  proprietor's  advantage  a  preference  over
that  of  all  others. When,  therefore,  the  owner  of  a  territory
thinks  proper  to  refuse  you  admission  into  it,  you  must,  in
order  to  enter  it  in  spite  of  him,  have  some  reason  more

*  lAvjf  book  i.  and  states  that  the  law  of  humanitj
f  Wolfii  Jus  GFent  J  34t.  does  not  seem  to  oblige  as  to  grant  pas-
(120)  See  fully  1  Chitty's  Com.  L.,  84 ;  sage  to  any  other  goods  except  such  asare
Q-rotins,  book  ii.  chap.  ii.  p.  153,  states  absolutely  necessary  for  the  purpose  of
that  a  nation  is  bound  to  grant  free  pas-  their  life  to  whom  they  are  thus  con-
sage  without  reserve  or  discretion.  Bat  veyed. — Puff,  book  iiL  chap.  iiL  }  6,
Puffendorf  appears  to  agree  with  Yattel,  p.  29.

35  2rs


180  RIGHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO ALL  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. cogent  than  all  his  reasons  to  the  contrary. Such  is  the  right
^cHAP^ix^  ^f  necessity :  this  authorizes  an  act  on  your  part,  which  on


other  occasions  would  be  unlawful,  viz.  an  infringement  of  the
right  of  domain.  When  a  real  necessity  obliges  you  to  enter
into  the  territory  of  others, — for  instance,  if  you  cannot  other-
wise escape  from  imminent  danger,  or  if  you  have  no  other
passage  for  procuring  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  those  of
satisfying  some  other  indispensable  obligation,— you  may
'  force  a  passage  when  it  is  unjustly  refused.  But,  if  an  equs&l
necessity  obliges  the  proprietor  to  refuse  you  entrance,  he
refuses  it  justly ;  and  his  right  is  paramount  to  yours.  Thus^
a  vessel  driven  by  stress  of  weather  has  a  right  to  enter,  even
by  force,  into  a  foreign  port.  But,  if  that  vessel  is  affected
with  the  plague,  the  owner  of  the  port  may  fire  upon  it  and
beat  it  off,  without  any  violation  either  of  justice,  or  even  of
charity,  which,  in  such  a  case,  ought  doubtless  to  begin  at  borne.
;  1^4.  and  of  The  right  of  passage  through  a  country  would  in  most  cases
procuring  ][)e  usclcss,  without  that  of  procuring  necessaries  at  a  fair
neceasanes.  pj,j^g .  ^^^  ^^  h&ve  already  shown  (§  120)  that  in  case  of  ne-
cessity it  is  lawful  to  take  provisions  even  by  force.
1 125.  Right  In  speaking  of  exile  and  banishment,  we  have  observed
of  dwelling  (Book  I.  §§  229—231)  that  every  man  has  a  right  to  dwell
coimf  "^^^  somewhere  upon  earth.  What  we  have  shown  with  respect
to  individuals  may  be  applied  to  whole  nations.  If  a  pe<3ple
are  driven  from  the  place  of  their  abode,  they  have  a  right  tc
seek  a  retreat :  the  nation  to  which  they  make  application
ought  then  to  grant  them  a  place  of  habitation,  at  least  for  a
time,  if  she  has  not  very  important  reasons  for  a  refusal.
But,  if  the  country  inhabited  by  this  nation  is  scarcely  suflS-
cient  for  herself,  she  is  under  no  obligation  to  allow  a  band
of  foreigners  to  settle  in  it  for  ever :  she  may  even  dismiss
L  181  ]  them  at  once,  if  it  be  not  convenient  to  her  to  grant  them  a
permanent  settlement.  As  they  have  the  resource  of  seek-
ing an  establishment  elsewhere,  they  cannot  claim  any  autho-
rity from  the  right  of  necessity,  to  stay  in  spite  of  the  owners
of  the  country.  But  it  is  necessary,  in  short,  that  these
fugitives  should  find  a  retreat;  and,  if  everybody  rejects
them,  they  will  be  justifiable  in  making  a  settlement  in  the
first  country  where  they  find  land  enough  for  themselves,
without  depriving  the  inhabitants  of  what  is  sufficient  for
them.  But,  even  in  this  case,  their  necessity  gives  them  only
the  right  of  habitation ;  and  they  are  bound  to  submit  to  aii
the  conditions,  not  absolutely  intolerable,  which  may  be  im-
posed on  them  by  the  master  of  the  country, — such  as  pay-
ing him  tribute,  becoming  his  subjects,  or  at  least  living  under
his  protection,  and,  in  certain  respects,  depending  on  him.
This  right,  as  well  as  the  two  preceding,  is  a  remnant  of  the
primitive  state  of  communion.
{ 125.  We  have  been  occasionally  obliged  to  anticipate  the  subject

Thingi  of Qf  ^^Q  present  chapter,  in  order  to  follow  the  order  of  the

274


RIGHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO ALL  NATIONS.  181

different  subjects  that  presented  themselves. Thus,  in  speak- book  n.
ing  of  the  open  sea,  we  have  remarked  (Book  I.  §  281)  that  ^"*'*"  "*


those  things,  the  use  of  which  is  inexhaustible,  cannot  fall '^i»w*' t*'*

use  i0  ine:
haofltible.


under  the  domain  or  property  of  any  one ;  because,  in  that  '"**  "  "****


free  and  independent  state  in  which  nature  has  produced
them,  they  may  be  equally  useful  to  all  men.  And,  as  to
those  things  even  which*  in  other  respects  are  subject  to  do-
main, if  their  use  is  inexhaustible,  they  remain  common  with
respect  to  that  use.  -Thus  a  river  may  be  subject  both  to  do-
main and  empire ;  but,  in  quality  of  running  water,  it  remains
common, — that  is  to  say,  the  owner  of  the  river  cannot  hin-
der any  one  from  drinking  and  drawing  water  out  of  it.
Thus,  the  sea,  even  in  those  parts  that  are  held  in  possession,
being  sufficient  for  the  navigation  of  all  mankind,  he  who  has
the  domain  cannot  refuse  a  passage  through  it  to  any  vessel
from  which  he  has  nothing  to  fear.  But  it  may  happen,  by
accident,  that  this  inexhaustible  use  of  the  thing  may  be
justly  refused  by  the  owner,  when  people  cannot  take  advan-
tage of  it  without  incommoding  him  or  doing  him  a  prejudice.
For  instance,  if  you  cannot  come  to  my  river  for  water  without
passing  over  my  land  and  damaging  the  crop  it  bears,  I  may  for
that  reason  debar  you  from  the  inexhaustible  use  of  the  running
water :  in  which  case,  it  is  but  through  accident  you  are  de-
prived of  it.  This  leads  us  to  speak  of  another  right  which
lias  a  great  connection  with  that  just  mentioned,  and  is  even
derived  from  it ;  that  is,  the  right  of  innocent  use.

We  call  innocent  tise,  or  innocent  advantage,  that  which  j  127.  Ki^h
may  be  derive*'  from  a  thing  without  causing  either  loss  or  of  mnoctjui
inconvenience  to  the  proprietor ;  and  the  right  of  innocent  ""*•
use  is  the  right  we  have  to  that  advantage  or  use  which  may
be  made  of  things  belonging  to  another,  without  causing  him
either  loss  or  inconvenience. I  have  said  that  this  right  is
derived  from  the  right  to  things  of  which  the  use  is  inex-
haustible. In  fact,  a  thing  that  may  be  useful  to  any  one  [  182  1
without  loss  or  inconvenience  to  the  owner,  is,  in  this  respect,
inexhaustible  in  the  use ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  the  law
of  nature  still  allows  all  men  a  right  to  it  notwithstanding
the  introduction  of  domain  and  property. Nature,  who  de-
signs her  gifts  for  the  common  advantage  of  mankind,  does  not
allow  us  to  prevent  the  application  of  those  gifts  to  a  useful
purpose  which  they  may  be  made  to  serve  without  any  preju-
dice to  the  proprietor,  and  without  any  diminution  of  the
utility  and  advantages  he  is  capable  of  deriving  from  his  rights.

This  right  of  innocent  use  is  not  a  perfect  right,  like  that  2 128. N*.
of  necessity :  for,  it  belongs  to  the  owner  to  judge  whether  ^"''*  ^f  *^**
the  use  we  wish  to  make  of  a  thing  that  belongs  to  him  will  "f^^/"  ^^
not  be  attended  with  damage  or  inconvenience. If  others
Bhould  presume  to  decide  on  the  occasion,  and,  in  case  of  re-
fusal, to  compel  the  proprietor,  he  would  be  no  longer  master
of  his  own  property. It  may  frequently  happen  that  the

275


182  RIGHTS  WHICH  BELONG  TO ALL  NATIONS.

BOOK  n. person  who  wishes  to  derive  advantage  from  a  thing  shall
OHAP.  IX.  je^p^  tjjg  uge  Qf  it  perfectly  innocent,  though  it  is  not  so  in

fact ;  and  if,  in  such  case,  he  attempts  to  force  the  proprietor^
he  exposes  himself  to  the  risk  of  committing  an  act  of  injus-
tice ;  nay,  he  actually  commits  one,  since  he  infringes  the
owner's  right  to  judge  of  what  is  proper  to  be  done  on  the
occasion. In  all  cases,  therefore,  which  admit  of  any  doubt,
we  have  only  an  imperfect  right  to  the  innocent  use  of  things
that  belong  to  others.
{ 129.  ftnd But,  when  the  innocence  of  the  use  is  evident,  and  abso-
xn  oases  not  lutely  indubitable,  the  refusal  is  an  injury. For,  in  addition
doubtfuL ^Q  ^  manifest  violation  of  the  rights  of  the  party  by  whom
that  innocent  use  is  required,  such  refusal  is  moreover  a  tes-
timony of  an  injurious  disposition  of  hatred  or  contempt  for
him. To  refuse  a  merchant-ship  the  liberty  of  passing  through
a  strait,  to  fishermen  that  of  drying  their  nets  on  the  sea*
shore,  or  of  watering  at  a  river,  is  an  evident  infringement
of  the  right  they  have  to  the  innocent  use  of  things  in  those
cases. But  in  every  case,  if  we  are  not  pressed  by  necessity,
we  may  ask  the  owner  his  reasons  for  the  refusal,  and  if  he
gives  none,  we  may  consider  him  as  an  unjust  man ;  or  an
enemy,  with  whom  we  are  to  act  according  to  the  rules  of
.  prudence. In  general,  we  should  regulate  our  sentiments  and
conduct  towards  hiiA,  according  to  the  greater  or  lesser  weight
of  the  reasons  on  which  he  acts.
{  130. Ex. All  nations  do  therefore  still  retain  a  general  right  to  the
•roiso  of  ttdB  innocent  use  of  thinirs  that  are  under  the  domain  of  any  one
twwn  n individual  nation. But,  in  the  particular  application  of  ;this
lions.  nght,  it  is  the  nation  in  whom  the  property  is  vested  that  is

to  determine  whether  the  use  which  others  wish  to  make  of
what  belongs  to  her  be  really  innocent:  and,  if  she  gives
them  a  denial,  she  ought  to  allege  her  reasons ;  as  she  must
not  deprive  others  of  their  right  from  mere  caprice. All  this
is  founded  in  justice :  for,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the
innocent  use  of  things  is  not  comprehended  in  the  domain,  or
[  183  ]  the  exclusive  property. The  domain  gives  only  the  right  of
judging,  in  particular  cases,  whether  the  use  be  really  inno-
cent. Now,  he  who  judges  ought  to  have  his  reasons ;  and
^^  should  mention  them,  if  he  would  have  us  think  that  he
rms  any  judgment,  and  not  that  he  acts  from  caprice  or  lU-
ature. All  this,  I  say,  is  founded  in  justice. In  the  next
hapter,  we  shall  see  the  line  of  conduct  which  a  nation  is,
jy  her  duty  to  other  nations,  bound  to  observe  in  the  exer-
cise of  her  rights.


ire


HOW  A  NATION  IS  TO  USE  HEB  BIGHT  OF  DOMAIN.  183


loot  n.

CHAP. X.


CHAP.  X.

HOW  A  NATION  IS  TO  USE  HER  RIGHT  OP  DOMAIN,  IN  ORDER
TO  DISCHARGE  HER  DUTIES  TOWARDS  OTHER  NATIONS,  WITH
RESPECT  TO  THE  INNOCENT  USB  OF  THINGS.

SINCE  the  law  of  nations  treats  as  well  of  the  duties  of  ?  I3i.  Ge
states  as  of  their  rights,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  we  have  ex-  ^^^  ^°^
plained,  on  the  subject  of  innocent  use,  what  all  nations  have  p^etorf '*"
a  right  to  require  from  the  proprietor :  we  are  now  to  con-
sider what  influence  his  duties  to  others  ought  to  have  on  the
proprietor's  conduct.  As  it  belongs  to  him  to  judge  whether
the  use  be  really  innocent,  and*  not  productive  of  any  detri-
ment or  inconvenience  to  himself,  he  ought  not  to  give  a  re-
fusal unless  it  be  grounded  upon  real  and  substantial  reasons :
this  is  a  maxim  of  equity :  he  ought  not  even  to  stop  at  trifles,
— a  slight  loss,  or  any  little  inconvenience  :  humanity  forbids
this  ;  and  the  mutual  love  which  men  owe  to  each  other,  re-
quires greater  sacrifices.  It  would  certainly  be  too  great  a
deviation  from  that  universal  benevolence  which  ought  to  unite
the  human  race,  to  refuse  a  considerable  advantage  to  an  in-
dindual,  or  to  a  whole  nation,  whenever  the  grant  of  it  might
happen  to  be  productive  of  the  most  trifling  loss  or  the  slight-
est inconvenience  to  ourselves.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  a
nation  ought  on  all  occasions  to  regulate  her  conduct  by  rea-
sons proportioned  to  the  advantages  and  necessities  of  others,
and  to  reckon  as  nothing  a  small  expense  or  a  supportable
inconvenience,  when  great  good  will  thence  result  to  another
nation.  But  she  is  under  no  obligation  to  incur  heavy  ex-
penses or  embarrassnjents,  for  the  sake  of  furnishing  others
with  the  use  of  any  thing,  when  such  use  is  neither  necessary
nor  of  any  great  utility  to  them.  The  sacrifice  we  here  require
is  not  contrary  to  the  interests  of  the  nation : — ^it  is  natural
to  think  that  the  others  will  behave  in  the  same  manner  in
return  ;  and  how  great  the  advantages  that  will  result  to  all
states  from  such  a  line  of  conduct !

The  introduction  of  property  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  ^  132. in-
deprived  nations  of  the  general  right  of  traversing  the  earth  nocent  pw-
for  the  purposes  of  mutual  intercourse,  of  carrying  on  com-  ^*^®'  (^^^)
merce  with  each  other,  and  for  other  just  reasons. It  is  only
on  particular  occasions,  when  the  owner  of  a  country  thinks
it  would  be  prejudicial  or  dangerous  to  allow  a  passage  through  [  184  ]
it,  that  he  ought  to  refuse  permission  to  pass. He  is  there-
fore bound  to  grant  a  passage  for  lawful  purposes,  whenever
he  can  do  it  without  inconvenience  to  himself. And  he  can-

(121)  See,  Id  general,  1  Chitty's  Com.  Law,  84^  88.

T  277


184  HOW  A  KATION  IS  TO  USE  HER  RIGHT  OF  DOMADT.

BOOK  n. not  lawfully  annex  burdensome  conditions to  a  permission
CHAP.  X. ^jfi(5}i  jjg  ig  obliged  to  grant,  a<nd  which  he  cannot  refuse  if  ho


wishes  to  discharge  his  duty,  and  not  abuse  his  right  of  pro-
perty. The  count of  Lupfen having improperly stopped
some  merchandise  in  Alsace,  and  complaints  being  made  on
the  subject  to  the  emperor"  Sigismund,  who  was  then  at  the
council  of  Constance,  that prince  assembled  the electors,
princes,  and  deputies  of  towns,  to  examine  the  aflfair. The
opinion  of  the  burgrave  of  Nuremberg  deserves  to  be  men-
tioned :  "  God,"  said  he,  "  has  created heaven  for  himself
and  his  saints,  and  has  given  the  earth  to  mankind,  intending
it  for  the  advantage  of  the  poor  as  well  as  of  the  rich. The
roads  are  for  their  use,  and  God  has  not  subjected  them  to  any
taxes." He  condemned  the  count  of  Lupfen  to  restore  the
merchandise,  and  to  pay  costs  and  damages,  because  he  could
not  justify  his  seizure  by  any  peculiar  right. The  emperor
approved  this  opinion,  and  passed  sentence  accordingly.*
i  133.  Sure- But,  if  any  apprehension  of  danger  arise  from  the  grant
ties  may  bo  ^f  liberty  to  pass  through  a  country,  the  state  has  a  right  to
require  . j-Qq^j,.^  Sureties :  the  party  who  wishes  to  pass  cannot  refuse
them,  a  passage  being  only  so  far  due  to  him  as  it  is  attended
with  no  inconvenience.
{ 134. Pas. In  like  manner,  a  passage  ought  also  to  be  granted  for
■*«®**f™®'- merchandise:  and,  as  this  is  in  general  productive  of  no  in-
rmf"** convenience,  to  refuse  it  without  just  reason  is  injuring  a
nation,  and  endeavouring  to  deprive  her  of  the  means  of  car-
rying on  a  trade  with  other  states. If  this  passage  occasions
any  inconvenience,  any  expense  for  the  preservation  of  canals
and  highways,  we  may  exact  a  compensation  for  it  by  toll
duties  (Book  I.  §  103).
J 136.  Reai- In  explaining  the  eflFects  of  domain  we  have  said  above

fowU"  *^*  (^^  ^^  *^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  *^®  °^"^®^  ^^  *^®  territory  may  forbid
fountry. ^^^  entrance  into  it,  or  permit  it  on  such  conditions  as  he

thinks  proper.  We  were  then  treating  of  his  external  right,
— that  right  which  foreigners  are  bound  to  respect.  But  now
that  we  are  considering  the  matter  in  another  view,  and  as  it
relates  to  his  duties  and  to  his  internal  right,  we  may  venture
to  assert  that  he  cannot,  without  particular  and  important
reasons,  refuse  permission,  either  to  pass  through  or  reside
in  the  country,  to  foreigners  who  desire  it  for  lawful  purposes.
For,  their  passage  or  their  residence  being  in  this  case  an  in-
nocent advantage,  the  law  of  nature  does  not  give  him  a  right
to  refuse  it :  and,  though  other  nations  and  other  men  in  ge-
neral are  obliged  to  submit  to  his  judgment  (§§  128  and  130),
,  he  does  not  the  less  offend  against  his  duty,  if  he  refuses
without  sufficient  reason :  he  then  acts  without  any  true  right ;
he  only  abuses  his  external  right. He  cannot,  therefore,

•  Stettler,  vol.  L  p.  114. Tsohudi, (122)  Poffendorf,  b. 3,  ch. 3, i.  0,
VoL  ii.  pp.  27,  28.  p.  29.

278


HOW  A  NATION  IS  TO USE  HEK BIGHT  OP  DOMAIN.  185


CHAP. X.


without  some  particular  and  cogent  reason,  refuse  the  liberty  book  il
of  residence  to  a  foreigner  who  comes  into  the  country  with
the  hope  of  recovering  his  health,  or  for  the  sake  of  acquir-
ing instruction  in  the  schools  and  academies.  A  diflference
in  religion  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  to  exclude  him,  provided  he
do  not  engage  in  controversial  disputes  with  a  view  to  dissemi-
nate his  tenets :  for,  that  difference  does  not  deprive  him  of
ihe  rights  of  humanity.

We  have  seen(§  125)  how  the  right  of  necessity  may  inji36.  How
certain,  cases  authorize  a  people,  who  are  driven  from  the  ^^  ^e  to
place  of  their  residence,  to  settle  in  the  territory  of  another  J^*  to^^ds
nation.  Every  state  ought,  doubtless,  to  grant  to  so  unfor-  ^ho  desire
tunate  a  people  every  aid  and  assistance  which  she  can  be-  &  perpetual
stow  without  being  wanting  to  herself:  but  to  grant  them  an  residence,
establishment  in  the  territories  of  the  nation,  is  a  very  deli-
cate step,  the  consequences  of  which  should  be  maturely  con-
sidered by  the  conductor  of  the  state.  The  emperors  Probus
and  Valens  experienced  the  evil  effects  of  their  conduct  in
having  admitted  into  the  territories  of  the  empire  numerous
bands  of  Gepidse,  Vandals,  Goths,  and  other  barbarians.*
If  the  sovereign  finds  that  such  a  step  would  be  attended
with  too  great  an  inconvenience  or  danger,  he  has  a  right  to
refuse  an  establishment  to  those  fugitive  people,  or  to  adopt,
on  their  admission,  every  precaution  that  prudence  can  dic-
tate to  him.  One  of  the  safest  will  be,  not  to  permit  those
foreigners  to  reside  together  in  the  same  part  of  the  country,
there  to  keep  up  the  form  of  a  separate  nation.  Men  who
have  not  been  able  to  defend  their  own  country,  cannot  pre-
tend to  any  right  to  establish  themselves  in  the  territory  of
another,  in  order  to  maintain  themselves  there  as  a  nation  in
a  body.f  The  sovereign  who  harbours  them  may  therefore
disperse  them,  and  distribute  them  into  the  towns  and  pro-
vinces that  are  in  want  of  inhabitants.  In  this  manner  his
charity  will  turn  to  his  own  advantage^  to  the  increase  of  his
power,  and  to  the  greater  benefit  of  the  state.  What  a  dif-
ference is  observable  in  Brandenburg  since  the  settlement  of
the  French  refugees !  The  great  elector,  Frederic  William,
offered  an  asylum  to  those  unfortunate  people ;  he  provided
for  their  expenses  on  the  road,  and  with  truly  regal  munifi-
cence established  them  in  his  states ;  by  which  conduct  that
beneficent  and  generous  prince  merited  the  title  of  a  wise
and  able  politician.

When,  by  the  laws  or  the  custom  of  a  state,  certain  actions  ?  137.  RiKht
are  generally  permitted  to.  foreigners,  as,  for  instance,  treir^^^^s

*  Vopiacus,  Prob.  c.  xviii. — Ammian.  aeized,  that  it  was  not  just  for  them  to

MarceU.  lib.  xxzL — Socrat  Hist  Eccles.  invade  the  territories  of others,  since

Ub.  iv.  c.  28.  thej  had  not  been  able  to  defend  their

f  Caesar  replied  to  the Tench theri  own. — Neque  verum  este,  qui  »uoa  Jiuet

and Usipetos, who wanted to retain  tueri  non  potHerint,  alienoa  occupare.  De

possession  of  Uie  territories  they  had  Bello  GaUico,  lib.  iv.  cap.  vi.

279


)8.'»  HOW  A  NATION  IS  TO  USE  HBR  RIGHT  OV  DOMAIN.


?ooK  n. veiling  freely  through  the  country  without  any  express  por-
■  ^^^^'  ^' mission,  marrying  there,  buying  or  selling  merchandise,  bunt-
from  a  ge- j^g^  fishing,  &c.,  wc  Cannot  exclude  any  one  nation  from  the
nerai  per- ][jgjjQg|.  ^f  ^j^^  general  permission,  without  doing  her  an  in-
r  18fi  1  J^^y>  unless  there  be  some  particular  and  lawful  reason  for
L  J  refusing  to  that  nation  what  is  granted  indiscriminately  to

others.  The  question  here,  it  is. to  be  observed,  only  relates
to  those  actions  which  are  productive  of  innocent  advantage:
and,  as  the  nation  allows  them  to  foreigners  without  distinc-
tion, she,  by  the  very  nature  of  that  general  permission,  af-
fords a  sufficient  proof  that  she  deems  them  innocent  with
respect  to  herself;  which  amounts  to  a  declaration  that  fo-
reigners have  a  right  to  them  (§  127):  the  innocence  of  such
acts  is  manifested  by  the  confession  of  the  state;  and  the
refusal  of  an  advantage  that  is  manifestly  innocent,  is  an  in-
jury (§  129).  Besides,  to  attempt  without  any  reason  to  lay
one  nation  under  a  prohibition  where  an  indiscriminate  per-
mission is  enjoyed  by  all  others,  is  an  injurious  distinction,
since  it  can  only  proceed  from  hatred  or  contempt.  If  there
be  any  particular  and  well-founded  reason  for  the  exception,
the  advantage  resulting  from  the  act  in  question  can  no  longer
be  deemed  an  innocent  one  with  respect  to  the  excepted  na-
tion ;  consequently  no  injury  is  done  to  them.  The  state
may  also,  by  way  of  punishment,  except  from  the  general
permission  a  people  who  have  given  her  just  cause  of  com-
plaint.
J  138.  A  As  to  rights  of  this  nature  granted  to  one  or  more  nations
right  grant-  for  particular  reasons,  they  are  conferred  on  them  as  favours,
ed  aa  a  fa-  either  by  treaty,  or  through  gratitude  for  some  particular  ser-
vice: those  to  whom  the  same  rights  are  refused  cannot  con-
sider themselves  as  offended.  The  nation  does  not  esteem .
the  advantage  accruing  from  those  acts  to  be  an  innocent  one,
since  she  does  not  indiscriminately  allow  them  to  all  nations :
and  she  may  confer  on  whom  she  pleases  any  rights  over  her
own  property,  without  affording  just  grounds  to  anybody  else,
either  for  uttering  a  complaint^  or  forming  pretensions  to  the
same  favour.
1 139.  The  Humanity  is  not  confined  to  the  bare  grant  of  a  permission
oatioo  ought  to  foreign  nations  to  make  an  innocent  use  of  what  belongs
to  be  cour-  ^^  ^g .  j^  moreover  requires  that  we  should  even  facilitate  to
them  the  means  of  deriving  advantage  from  it,  so  far  as  we
can  do  this  without  injury  to  ourselves.  Thus,  it  becomes  a
well-regulated  state  to  promote  the  general  establishment  of
inns  where  travellers  may  procure  lodging  and  food  at  a  fair
price, — to  watch  over  their  safety, — and  to  see  that  they  be
treated  with  equity  and  humanity.  A  polite  nation  should
give  the  kindest  reception  to  foreigners,  receive  them  with
politeness,  and  on  every  occasion  show  a  disposition  to  oblige
them.  By  these  means  every  citizen,  while  he  discharges  his
duty  to  mankind  in  general,  will  at  the  same  time  render

280


Olf  tl^JCAPTION  AND PRESCRIPTION  AMONa  NATIONS.  186


CHAP.  Z


essential  services  to  his  country.  Glory  is  the  certain  reward  book  n
of  virtue;  and  the  good-will  which  is  gained  by  an  amia-
ble character,  is  often  productive  of  consequences  highly  im-
portant to  the  state.  No  nation  is  entitled  to  greater  praise
in  this  respect  than  the  French :  foreigners  nowhere  meet  a
reception  more  agreeable,  or  better  calculated  to  prevent  their
regretting  the  immense  sums  they  annually  spend  at  Paris.


CHAP.  XI.  [  187  ]

OP USUCAPTION  AND  PRESCRIPTION  AMONG  NATIONS.  (123) c«^^-  "v

LET  US  conclude  what  relates  to  domain  and  property  with
an  examination  of  a  celebrated  question  on  which  the  learned
are  much  divided.  It  is  asked  whether  usucaption  and  pre-
scription  can  take  place  between  independent  nations  and
states.

Usucaption  is  the  acquisition  of  domain  founded  on  a  long  j  140. D*.
possession, uninterrupted  and  undisputed — ^that is to say,  finition  of
an  acquisition  solely  proved  by  this  possession. Wolf  defines  ^^^'^p**®*
it,  an  acquisition  of  domain  founded  on  a  presumed  desertion,  g^p^^
His  definition  explains  the  manner  in  which  a  long  and  peace-
able possession  may  serve  to  establish  the  acquisition  of  do-
main. Modestinus,  Digest^  lib.  3,  de  Usurp,  et  Usucap,,  says,
in  conformity  to  the  principles  of  the  Romai)  law,  that  usvr
caption  is  the  acquisition  of  domain  by  possession  continued
during  a  certain  period  prescribed  by  law. These  three  defi-
nitions are  by  no  means  incompatible  with  each  other ;  and
it  is  easy  to  reconcile  them  by  setting  aside  what  relates  to
the  civil  law  in  the  last  of  the  three. In  the  first  of  them, .
we  have  endeavoured  clearly  to  express  the  idea  commonly
affixed  to  the  term  usucaption.

Prescription  is  the  exclusion  of  all  pretensions  to  a  right —
an  exclusion  founded  on  the  length  of  time  during  which  that
light  has  been  neglected :  or,  according  to  Wolf's  definition,
it  is  the  loss  of  an  inherent  right  by  virtue  of  a  presumed
consent.  This  definition,  too,  is  just;  that  is,  it  explains
how  a  right  may  be  forfeited  by  long  neglect ;  and  it  agrees
with  the  nominal  definition  we  give  of  the  term,  prescription^
in  which  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  meaning  usually  annexed
to  the  word.  As  to  the  rest,  the  term  usucaption  is  but  lit-
tle used  in  French ;  and  the  word  prescription  implies,  in  that

(123)  We  have  seen  that  twenty  years'  creates  a  right  See  ante,  125  to  127 ;
nndtstarbed  possession  or  enjoyment  of  and  see  lieneH  t.  Pipon,  Enapp's  Rep.
ar.  easement  or  profit  amongst  nations,  60  to  73 ;  where  see  the  law  of  nations
as  well  as  amongst  private  individuals, fully  examined. — G.

H  12  281


187  OP  USUCAPTION  AND  PRBSCEIPTION  AMONG  ^JTIONS.


BOOK  n. language,  every  thing  expressed  by  the  Latin  terms  usueapio
■  ^^^^'  ^'' and  praescriptio :  wherefore  we  shall  make  use  of  the  wori
prescription  wherever  we  have  not  particular  reasons  for  em-
ploying the  other.
;  141.  Usu- Now,  to  decide  the  queption  we  have  proposed,  we  must
caption  and  first  SCO  whether  usucaption  and  prescription  are  derived  from
prescription  ^j^^  jg^^  ^f  natufc. Many  illustrious  authors  have  asserted
tbriaw  o7™  ^^^  proved  them  to  be  so.* Though  -in  this  treatise  we  fre-
nature. ^juently  suppose  the  reader  acquainted  with  the  law  of  nature,
It  13  proper  in  this  place  to  establish  the  decision,  since  the
affair  is  disputed.

Nature  has  not  herself  established  a  private  property  over
any  of  her  gifts,  and  particularly  over  land;  she  only  ap-
proves its  establishment,  for  the  advantage  of  the  human
f  188  ]  race.  On  this  ground,  then,  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose,
that,  after  the  introduction  of  domain  and  property,  the  law
of  nature  can  secure  to  a  proprietor  any  right  capable  of  in-
troducing disorder  into  human  society.  Such  would  be  the
right  of  entirely  neglecting  a  thing  that  belongs  to  him, — of
leaving  it  during  a  long  space  of  time  under  all  the  appear-
ances of  a  thing  utterly  abandoned  or  not  belonging  to  him, —
and  of  coming  at  length  to  wrest  it  from  a  bona  fide  possessor,
who  has  perhaps  dearly  purchased  his  title  to  it, — who  has
received  it  as  an  inheritance  from  his  progenitors,  or  as  a  por-
tion with  his  wife, — and  who  might  have  made  other  acquisi-
tions, had  he  been  able  to  discover  that  the  one  in  questiou
was  neither  solid  nor  lawful.  .  Far  from  giving  such  a  right,
the  law  of  nature  lays  an  injunction  on  the  proprietor  to  take
care  of  his  property,  and  imposes  on  him  an  obligation  to
make  known  his  rights,  that  others  may  not  be  led  into  error :
it  is  on  these  conditions  alone  that- she  approves  of  the  pro-
perty vested  in  him,  and  secures  him  in  the  possession.  If
he  has  neglected  it  for  such  a  length  of  time  that  he  cannot
now  be  admitted  to  reclaim  it  without  endangering  the  rights
of  others,  the  law  of  nature  will  no  longer  allow  him  to  re-
vive and  assert  his  claims.  We  must  not  therefore  conceive
the  right  of  private  property  to  be  a  right  of  so  extensive
and  imprescriptible  a  nature,  that  the  proprietor  may,  at  the
risk  of  every  inconvenience  thence  resulting  to  human  society,
absolutely  neglect  it  for  a  length  of  time,  and  afterwards  re-
claim it,  according  to  his  caprice.  With  what  other  view  than
that  of  the  peace,  the  safety,  and  the  advantage  of  human
society,  does  the  law  of  nature  ordain  that  all  men  should
respect  the  right  of  private  property  in  him  who  makes  use
of  it  ?  For  the  same  reason,  therefore,  the  same  law  requires
that  every  proprietor  who  for  a  long  time  and  without  any
just  reason  neglects  his  right,  should  be  presumed  to  have

*  See  Grotius  de  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis, Gent  lib.  It.  cap.  xii. — and  especially
lib.  11.  cap.  It. — Pnffendorf,  Jiu  Nat  et Wolfius,  Jus  Nat  part  iii.  cap.  viL

282


OP  USUCAPTION  AND PRESCEIPTION  AMONft  NAxIONS.  188

entirely  renounced  and  abandoned  it. This  is  what  forms  the ^^^^  ";

absolute  presumption  (juris  et  de  jure)  of  its  abandonment, ^^^^'

a  presumption,  upon  which  another  person  is  legally  entitled
to  appropriate  to  himself  the  thing  so  abandoned.  The  ab-
solute presumption  does  not  here  signify  a  conjecture  of  the
secret  intentions  of  the  proprietor,  but  a  maxim  which  the
law  of  nature  ordains  should  be  considered  as  true  and  inva-
riable,— and  this  with  a  view  of  maintaining  peace  and  order
among  men.  Such  presumption  therefore  confirms  a  title  as
firm  and  just  as  that  of  property  itself,  and  established  and
supported  by  the  same  reasons.  The  bona  fide  possessor,
resting  his  title  on  a  presumption  of  this  kind,  has,  then,  a
right  which  is  approved  by  the  law  of  nature ;  and  that  law,
which  requires  that  the  rights  of  each  individual  should  be
stable  and  certain,  does  not  allow  any  man  to  disturb  him  in
his  possession.

The  right  of  usucaption  properly  signifies  that  the  bona
fide  possessor  is  not  obliged  to  sufier  his  right  of  property  to
be  disputed  after  a  long-continued  and  peaceable  possession
on  his  part :  he  proves  that  right  by  the  very  circumstance
of  possession,  and  sets  up  the  plea  of  prescription  in  bar  to  [  189  ]
the  claims  of  the  pretended  proprietor.  Nothing  can  be  more
equitable  than  this  rule.  If  the  claimant  were  permitted
to  prove  his  property,  he  might  happen  to  bring  proofs
very  convincing  indeed  in  appearance,  but,  in  fact,  deriving
all  their  force  only  from  the  loss  or  destruction  of  some  docu-
ment or  deed  which  would  have  proved  how  he  had  either
lost  or  transferred  his  right.  Would  it  be  reasonable  that  he
should  be  allowed  to  call  in  question  the  rights  of  the  pos-
sessor, when  by  his  own  fault  he  has  suffered  matters  to  pro-
ceed to  such  a  state  that  there  would  be  danger  of  mistaking
the  truth  ?  If  it  be  necessary  that  one  of  the  two  should  be
exposed  to  lose  his  property,  it  is  just  it  should  be  the  party
who  is  in  fault.

It  is  true,  that,  if  the  bona  fide  possessor  should  discover,
with  perfect  certainty,  that  the  claimant  is  the  real  proprie-
tor, and  has  never  abandoned  his  right,  he  is  bound  in  con-
science, and  by  the  internal  principles  of  justice,  to  make
restitution  of  whatever  accession  of  wealth  he  has  derived
from  the  property  of  the  claimant.  But  this  estimation  is
not  easily  made ;  and  it  depends  on  circumstances.

As  prescription  cannot  be  grounded  on  any  but  an  abso-  ?  142.  Wh«»
lute  or  lawful  presumption,  it  has  no  foundation,  if  the  pro- f**"°*****®"
prietor  has  not  really  neglected  his  right. This  condition  J?p®^J^|j[|^
implies  three  particulars :  1,  that  the  proprietor  cannot  allege  prescription,
an  invincible  ignorance,  either  on  his  own  part,  or  on  that  of
the  persons  from  whom  he  derives  his  right ; — 2,  that  he  can-
not justify  his  silence  by  lawful  and  substantial  reasons ; — 3,
that  he  has  neglected  his  right,  or  kept  silence  during  a  con-
siderable number  of  years :  for,  the  negligence  of  a  few  years,

283


189  OP  TTSUCAPTION  AND  PRESCRIPTION  AMONG  NATIONB.

BOOK  a being  incapable  of  producing  confusion  and  rendering  doubt-
iHf ^iZL  ful  the  respective  rights  of  the  parties,  is  not  suflScient  to
found  or  authorize  a  presumption  of  relinquishment. It  ia
impossible  to  determine  by  the  law  of  nature  the  number  of
years  required  to  found  a  prescription :  this  depends  on  the
nature  of  the  property  disputed,  and  the  circumstances  of
the  case.
{  143. im- What  we  have  remarked  in  the  preceding  section,  relates
"rescrr*don  *^  Ordinary  prescription. There  is  another  called  immemo-
'  naZ,  because  it  is  founded  on  immemorial  possession, — that
is,  on  a  possession,  the  origin  of  which  is  unknown,  or  so
deeply  involved  in  obscurity,  as  to  allow  no  possibility  of  prov-
ing whether  the  possessor  has  really  derived  his  right  from
the  original  proprietor,  or  received  the  possession  from  another.
This  immemorial  prescription  secures  the  possessor's  right,
beyond  the  power  of  recovery :  for,  it  affords  a  legal  pre-
sumption that  he  is  the  proprietor,  as  long  as  the  adverse  party
fails  to  adduce  substantial  reasons  in  support  of  his  claim :
and,  indeed,  whence  could  these  reasons  be  derived,  since  the
origin  of  the  possession  is  lost  in  the  obscurity  of  time  ? It
ought  even  to  secure  the  possessor  against  every  pretension '
contrary  to  his  right. What  would  be  the  case  were  it  per-
mitted to  call  in  question  a  right  acknowledged  time  immemo-
rial, when  the  means  of  proving  it  were  destroyed  by  time  ?
Immemorial  possession,  therefore,  is  an  irrefragable  title,  and
[  190  ]  immemorial  prescription  admits  of  no  exception:  both  are
founded  on  a  presumption  which  the  law  of  nature  directs  us
to  receive  as  an  incontestable  truth.
1 144.  In  cases  of  ordinary  prescription,  the  same  argument  can-

ciaimant  ai-  not  be  used  against  a  claimant  who  alleges  just  reasons  for
leging  rea-  j^jg  gilencc,  as,  the  impossibility  of  speaking,  or  a  well-founded
'uenor  ^  ^^^^y  &c.,  because  there  is  then  no  longer  any  room  for  a  pre-
sumption that  he  has  abandoned  his  right. It  is  not  his  fault
if  people  have  thought  themselves  authorized  to  form  such  a
presumption ;  nor  ought  he  to  suffer  in  consequence :  he  can-
not therefore  be  debarved  the  liberty  of  clearly  proving  his
property. This  method  of  defence  in  bar  of  prescription  has
been  often  employed  against  princes  whose  formidable  power
had  long  silenced  the  feeble  victims  of  their  usurpations.
;  145. Pro- It  is  also  very  evident  that  we  cannot  plead  prescription
prietor  suf-  jjj  opposition  to  a  proprietor  who,  being  for  the  present  un-
^hcwin^ able  to  prosecute  his  right,  confines  himself  to  a  notification,
that  he  doca  by  any  token  whatever,  suflicient  to  show  that  it  is  not  his
not  mean  to  intention  to  abandon  it. Protests  answer  this  purpose. With
abandon  hia  govercigns  it  is  usual  to  retain  the  title  and  arms  of  a  sove-
^'^  reign  ty  or  a  province,  as  an  evidence  that  they  do  not  relin-

quisti  their  claims  to  it.
a  146. Pre. Every  proprietor  who  expressly  commits,  or  omits,  certain
icription acts,  which  he  cannot  commit  or  omit  without  renouncing  his
founded  on right,  suflBiciontly  indicates  by  such  commission  or  on^ission

284


OF  USUGAPTION  AKD PRBSGRIPTION  AUOKG  NATION0.  190


that  it  is  not  his  intention  to  preserve  it,  unless,  by  an  express book  n.
reservation,  he  declare  the  contrary. We  are  undoubtedly


CBAP. XI.


authorized  to  consider  as  true  what  he  sufficiently  manifests  *^®  actions
on  occasions  where  he  ought  to  declare  the  truth :  conse-  pjietor^*^
quently,  we  may  lawfully  presume  that  he  abandons  his  right;
and,  if  he  would  afterwards  resume  it,  we  can  plead  prescrip-
tion in  bar  to  his  claim.

After  having  shown  that  usiicaption  and  prescription  are ;  147.  Ura-
founded  in  the  law  of  nature,  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  they  caption  and
are  equally  a  part  of  the  law  of  nations,  and  ought  to  take  P^escnption
place  between  different  states. For,  the  law  of  nations  is  but  tetween^na-
the  law  of  nature  applied  to  nations  in  a  manner  suitable  to  tions.
the  parties  concerned  (Prelim.  §  6). And  so  far  is  the  nature
of  the  parties  from  affording  them  an  exemption  in  the  case,
that  usucaption  and  prescription  are  much  more  necessary
between  sovereign  states  than  between  individuals. Their
quarrels  are  of  much  greater  consequence ;  their  disputes  are
usually  terminated  only  by  bloody  wars ;  and  consequently
the  peace  and  happiness  of  mankind  much  more  powerfully
require  that  possession  on  the  part  of  sovereigns  should  not
be  easily  disturbed, — and  that,  if  it  has  for  a  considerable
length  of  time  continued  uncontested,  it  should  be  deemed
just  and  indisputable. Were  we  allowed  to  recur  to  antiquity
on  every  occasion,  there  are  few  sovereigns  who  could  enjoy
their  rights  in  security,  and  there  would  be  no  peace  to  be
hoped  for  on  earth.

It  must  however  be  confessed,  that,  between  nations,  the  i  i^S-  Mor«
rights  of  usucaption  and  prescription  are  often  more  difficult  ^^'^^  ^e-
in  their  application,  so  far  as  they  are  founded  on  a  presump-^^^®"^'^*"
tion  drawn  from  long  silence. Nobody  is  ignorant  how  dan-  found  ^hem
gerous  it  commonly  is  for  a  weak  state  even  to  hint  a  claim  on  a  pre-
to  the  possessions  of  a  powerful  monarch. In  such  a  case,  """P^^o
therefore,^  it  is  not  easy  to  deduce  from  long  silence  a  legal  ''^®'^'®'*-
presumption  of  abandonment. To  this  we  may  add,  that,  as  [  191  ]
the  ruler  of  the  society  has  usually  no  power  to  alienate
what  belongs  to  the  state,  his  silence,  even  though  sufficient  to
afford  a  presumption  of  abandonment  on  his  own  part,  can-
not  impair  the  national  right  or  that  of  his  successors. The
question  then  will  be,  whether  the  nation  has  neglected  to
supply  the  omission  caused  by  the  silence  of  her  ruler,  or  has
participated  in  it  by  a  tacit  approbation.

But  there  are  other  principles  that  establish  the  use  and ;  149.  otnor
force  of  prescription  between  nations. The  tranquillity  of  principles
the  people,  the  safety  of  states,  the  happiness  of  the  human  *****  e^oroe
race,  do  not  allow  that  the  possessions,  empire,  and  other  ^^^^
rights  of  nations  should  remain  uncertain,  subject  to  dispute,
and  ever  ready  to  occasion  bloody  wars. Between  nations,
therefore,  it  becomes  necessary  to  admit  prescription  founded
on  length  of  time  as  a  valid  and  incontestable  title. If  any
nation  has  kept  silence  through  fear,  and  as  it  were  through

2S5


Ihfl  OP  USUCAPTION  AND PRESCRIPTION  AMONG NATIONo.


CHAP. XI.


BOOK  n.  necessity,  the  loss  of  her  right  is  a  misfortune  which  she  ought
patiently  to  bear,  since  she  could  not  avoid  it:  and  why  should
she  not  submit  to  this  as  well  as  to  have  her  towns  and  pro-
vinces taken  from  her  by  an  unjust  conqueror,  and  to  be
forced  to  cede  them  to  him  by  treaty  ?  It  is,  however,  only
in  cases  of  long-continued,  undisputed,  and  uninterrupted
possession,  that  prescription  is  established  on  these  grounds,
because  it  is  necessary  that  affairs  should  some  time  or  other
be  brought  to  a  conclusion,  and  settled  on  a  firm  and  solid
foundation.  But  the  case  is  different  with  a  possession  of
only  a  few  years*  continuance,  during  which  the  party  whose
rights  are  invaded  may  from  prudential  reasons  find  it  expe-
dient to  keep  silence,  without  at  the  same  time  affording
room  to  accuse  him  of  suffering  things  to  become  uncertain,
and  of  renewing  quarrels  without  end.

As  to  immemorial  prescription,  what  we  have  said  respect-
ing it  (§  143)  is  suflicient  to  convince  every  one  that  it  ought
necessarily  to  take  place  between  nations.
;  150.  Bf-  Usucaption  and  prescription  being  so  necessary  to  the  tran-
fectfl  of  the  quiUity  and  happiness  of  human  society,  it  is  justly  presumed
voluntary  ^.j^^^  g^jj  nations  have  consented  to  admit  the  lawful  and  rea-
^*^g°Q^^jgSonable  use  of  them,  with  a. view  to  the  general  advantage,
iubjeot. and  even  to  the  private  interest  of  each  individual  nation.

Prescription  of  many  years*  standing,  as  well  as  usucap-
tion, is,  then,  established  by  the  voluntary  law  of  nations
(Prelim.  §  21).

Nay,  more,  as  by  virtue  of  that  law  nations  are,  in  all
doubtful  cases,  supposed  to  stand  on  a  footing  of  equal  right
in  treating  with  each  other  Tibid.),  prescription,  when  founded
on  long  undisputed  possession,  ought  to  have  its  full  effect
between  nations,  without  admitting  any  allegation  of  the  pos-
[  192  1  session  being  unjust,  unless  the  evidence  to  prove  it  be  very
clear  and convincing  indeed. For,  without  such  evidence,
every  nation  is  to  be  considered  as  a  bona  fide  possessor.
Such  is  the  right  that  a  sovereign  state  ought  to  allow  to
other  states ;  but  to  herself  she  should  only  allow  the  use  of
the  internal  and  necessary  right  (Prelim.  §  28). It  is  the
bona  fide  possessor  alone  whose  prescription  will  stand  the
test  of  conscience.
;  151. Law Since  prescription  is  subject  to  so  many  difficulties,  it  would
of  treaties {jg  yg^y  proper  that  adjoining  nations  should  by  treaty  adopt
1^  ^.^*"^™  some  rule  on  this  subject,  particularly  with  respect  to  the
uAtter. number  of  years  required  to  found  a  lawful  prescription,  since
this  latter  point  cannot  in  general  be  determined  by  the  law
of  nature  alone. If,  in  default  of  tireaties,  custom  has  de-
termined any  thing  in  this  matter,  the  nations  between  whom
this  custom  is  in  force,  ought  to  conform  to  it  (Prelim.  §  26).


286


OP  TREATIES OP  ALLIANCE, ETC.  192


BOOS  n.
CHAP.  xn.


CHAR  XQ.

OP  TREATIES OP  ALLIANCE, AND  OTHER  PUBLIC  TREA-
TIES. (124)

THE  subject  of  treaties  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  im-  ?  162. N*.
portant  that  the  mutual  relations  and  affairs  of  nations  can  *)*"  ^'  *'*•'
present  us  with. Having  but  too  much  reason  to  be  con-^"*"^ '
vinced  of  the  little  dependence  that  is  to  be  placed  on  the
natural  obligations  of  bodies  politic,  and  on  the  reciprocal
duties  imposed  upon  them  by  humanity, — the  most  prudent
nations  endeavour  to  procure  by  treaties  those  succours  and
advantages  which  the  law  of  nature  would  insure  to  them,  if
it  were  not  rendered  ineffectual  by  the  pernicious  counsels  of
a  false  policy.

A  treaty,  in  Latin  foedus^  is  a  compact  made  with  a  view
to  the  public  welfare  by  the  superior  power,  either  for  per-
petuity, or  for  a  considerable  time.

The  compacts  which  have  temporary  matters  for  their  ob-  j  us. Pao-
ject  are  called  agreements,  conventions,  and  pactions. They  tions,  sgre«.
are  accomplished  by  one  single 'act,  and  not  by  repeated  acts.  ™«°*^  ^J
These  compacts  are  perfected  in  their  execution  once  for  all :  °  ^  °
treaties  receive  a  successive  execution  whose  duration  equals
tliat  of  the  treaty.

Public  treaties  can  only  be  made  by  the  superior  powers,  j  154. By
by  sovereigns,  who  contract  in  the  name  of  the  state. Thus,  ^^o™  <*•»-
conventions,  made  between  sovereigns  respecting  their  own*^*"."*
private  affairs,  and  those  between  a  sovereign  and  a  private
person,  are  not  public  treaties.

The  sovereign  who  possesses  the  full  and  absolute  authority
has,  doubtless,  a  right  to  treat  in  the  name  of  the  state  he
represents ;  and  his  engagements  are  binding  on  the  whole
nation.  But  all  rulers  of  states  have  not  a  power  to  make
public  treaties  by  their  own  authority  alone :  some  are  obliged
to  take  the  advice  of  a  senate,  or  of  the  representatives  of  the  [  193  ]
nation.  It  is  from  the  fundamental  laws  of  each  state  that
we  must  learn  where  resides  the  authority  that  is  capable  of
contracting  with  validity  in  the  name  of  the  state.

Notwithstanding  our  assertion  above,  that  public  treaties
are  made  only  by  the  superior  powers,  treaties  of  that  nature
may  nevertheless  be  entered  into  by  princes  or  communities,
who  have  a  right  to  contract  them,  either  by  the  concession
of  the  sovereign,  or  by  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  state,  by
particular  reservations,  or  by  custom. Thus,  the  princes  and

^124)  See  in  general,  as  to  the  law  47;  and,  as  to  oommerfeial  treaties  in
of  nations  respecting  treaties,  povt,  particular,  63,  and  616  to  630 ;  and  see
Book  IV.  Chap.  II.  Ac,  page  432  to  each  separate  treaty,  2  Chitty's  Com.
462,  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  38  to Law,  p.  183.

287


198 '  OF  TREATIES  OP  ALLIANCE.

BOOK  n. free  cities  of  Germany,  though  dependent  on  the  emperor
OHAP.  XII.  ^^^  ^Y^^  empire,  have  the  right  of  forming  alliances  with  foreign
powers. The  constitutions  of  the  empire  give  them,  in  this
as  in  many  other  respects,  the  rights  of  sovereignty. Some
cities  of  Switzerland,  though  subject  to  a  prince,  have  made
alliances  with  the  cantons :  the  permission  or  toleration  of
the  sovereign  has  given  birth  to  such  treaties,  and  long  custom
has  established  the  right  to  contract  them.
{  155.  Whe- As  a  state  that  has  put  herself  under  the  protection  of  an-
^*d  *  ^^  other,  has  not  on  that  account  forfeited  her  character  of  sove-
tootion  may  reignty  (Book  I.  §  192),  she  may  make  treaties  and  contract
make  trea- alliances,  unlcss  she  has,  in  the  treaty  of  protection,  expressly
ties.  renounced  that  right. But  she  continues  for  ever  after  bound

by  this  treaty  of  protection,  so  that  she  cannot  enter  into  any
engagements  contrary  to  it, — that  is  to  say,  engagements
which  violate  the  express  conditions  of  the  protection,  or  that
are  in  their  own  nature  repugnant  to  every  treaty  of  protec-
tion. Thus,  the  protected  state  cannot  promise  assistance  to
the  enemies  of  her  protector,  nor  grant  them  a  passage.
;  156.  Trea- Sovereigns  treat  with  each  other  through  the  medium  of
Ues  con- agents  or  proxies  who  are  invested  with  sufficient  powers  for
oiaded  by ^^^  purpose,  and  are  commonly  called  plenipotentiaries. To
pienipoteJ.  their  office  we  may  apply  all  the  rules  of  natural  law  which
tiaries, respect  things  done  by  commission. The  rights  of  the  proxy
are  determined  by  the  instructions  that  are  given  him :  he
must  not  deviate  from  them;  but  every  promise  which  he
makes  in  the  terms  of  his  commission,  and  within  the  extern
of  his  powers,  is  binding  on  his  constituent.

At  present,  in  order  to  avoid  all  danger  and  difficulty,
princes  reserve  to  themselves  the  power  of  ratifying  what  has
been  concluded  upon  in  their  name  by  their  ministers. The
plenipotentiary  commission  is  but  a  procuration  cum  libera.
If  this  commission  were  to  have  its  full  effect,  they  could  not
be  too  circumspect  in  giving  it. But,  as  princes  cannot  other-
wise than  by  force  of  arms  be  compelled  to  fulfil  their  engage-
ments, it  is  customary  to  place  no  dependence  on  their  treaties,
till  they  have  agreed  to  and  ratified  them. Thus,  as  every
agreement  made  by  the  minister  remains  invalid  till  sanctioned
by  the  prince's  ratification,  there  is  less  danger  in  vesting  him
with  unlimited  powers. But,  before  a  prince  can  honourably
[  194  ]  refuse  to  ratify  a  compact  made  in  virtue  of  such  plenipoten-
tiary commission,  he  should  be  able  to  allege  strong  and  sub-
stantial reasons,  and,  in  particular,  to  prove  that  his  minister
has  deviated  from  his  instructions.
{ 157. Va- A  treaty  is  valid  if  there  be  no  defect  in  the  manner  in
lidity  of which  it  has  been  concluded :  and  for  this  purpose  nothing
treaties. more  can  be  required  than  a  sufficient  power  in  the  contract-
ing parties,  and  their  mutual  consent  sufficiently  declared.
;  168. In- An  injury  cannot,  then,  render  a  treaty  invalid. He  who
jury  does enters  into  engagements  ought  carefully  to  weigh  every  thing

2S8


ANB OTHER  PUBLIC  TBBATIBS.  194

before  he  concludes  them ;  he  may  do  what  he  pleases  with book  il
his  own  property,  forego  his  rights,  and  renounce  his  advan-  chap,  xh-
tages,  as  he  thinks  proper ;  the  acceptor  is  not  obliged  to  in-  not  render
quire  into  his  motives,  and  to  estimate  their  due  weight.  If  we  them  void,
might  recede  from  a  treaty  because  we  found  ourselves  injured
by  it,  there  would  be  no  stability  in  the  contracts  of  nations.
Civil  laws  may  set  bounds  to  injury,  and  determine  what  de-
gree of  it  shall  be  capable  of  invalidating  a  contract.  But  sove-
reigns are  subject  to  no  superior  judge.  How  shall  they  be  able
to  prove  the  injury  to  each  other's  satisfaction  ? Who  shall
determine  the  degree  of  it  sufiScient  to  invalidate  a  treaty  ?
The  peace  and  happiness  of  nations  manifestly  require  that
their  treaties  should  not  depend  on  so  vague  and  dangerous  a
plea  of  invalidity.

A  sovereign  nevertheless  is  in  conscience  bound  to  pay  a  §  169.  Duty
regard  to  equity,  and  to  observe  it  as  much  as  possible  in  all  ©^nations  in
his  treaties. And,  if  it  happens  that  a  treaty  which  he  has '«*P®^
concluded  with  upright  intentions,  and  without  perceiving  any
unfairness  in  it,  should  eventually  prove  disadvantageous  to
an  ally,  nothing  can  be  more  honourable,  more  praiseworthy,
more  conformable  to  the  reciprocal  duties  of  nations,  than  to
relax  the  terms  of  such  treaty  as  far  as  he  can  do  it  consist-
ently with  his  duty  to  himself,  and  without  exposing  himself
to  danger,  or  incurring  a  considerable  loss.

Though  a  simple  injury,  or  some  disadvantage  in  a  treaty,  §  160.  Nul-
be  not  suflScient  to  invalidate  it,  the  case  is  not  the  same  wim  ^|*y  of  ^^^
those  inconveniences  that  would  lead  to  the  ruin  of  the  nation.  ^  ^^^end-
Since,  in  the  formation  of  every  treaty,  the  contracting  parties  aoua  to  the
must  be  vested  with  suflScient  powers  for  the  purpose,  a  treaty  state,
pernicious  to  the  state  is  null,  and  not  at  all  obligatory,  as  no  r  195  1
conductor  of  a  nation  has  the  power  to  enter  into  engage-
ments to  do  such  things  as  are  capable  of  destroying  the  state,
for  whose  safety  the  government  is  intrusted  to  him. The
nation  itself,  being  necessarily  obliged  to  perform  every  thing
required  for  its  preservation  and  safety  (Book  I.  §  16,  &c.),
cannot  enter  into  engagements  contrary  to  its  indispensable
obligations. In  the  ye^if  1506,  the states-general  of  the
kingdom  of  France,  assembled  at  Tours,  engaged  Louis  XII.
to  break  the  treaty  he  had  concluded  with  the  emperor  Maxi-
milian and  the  archduke  Philip,  his  son,  because  that  treaty
was pernicious to the  kingdom. They  also  decided  that
neither  the  treaty,  nor  the  oath  that  had  accompanied  it,
could  be  binding  on  the  king,  who  had  no  right  to  alienate
the  property  of  the  crown.* We  have  treated  of  this  latter
source  of  invalidity  in  the  twenty-first  chapter  of  Book  I.

For  the  same  reason — the  want  of  suflScient  powers — a  §  I6i.  Nul-
treaty  concluded  for  an  unjust  or  dishonest  purpose  is  abso-%  **^^*"
lutely  null  and  void, — nobody  having  a  right  to  engage  to  do  fo^^jj^^L^

*  See  the  French  historians.
87  Z  S89 •


195  OF  TKBATIES  OF  ALLIANCE,

«

BOOK  n. things  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature. Thus,  an  offensive
CHAP.  XII.  alliance,  made  for  the  purpose  of  plundering  a  nation  from

•r  difihoneBt  whom  no  injury  has  been  received,  may  or  ratner  ought  to  be

purpose. broken.

§  162.  Whe- It  is  asked,  whether  it  be  allowable  to  contract  an  alliance
ther  an  alh-  -^^h  a  nation  that  does  not  profess  the  true  religion,  and
contacted '^^^^'^^r  treaties  made  with  the  enemies  of  the  faith  are  valid.
with  those Grotius  has  treated  this  subject  at  large  :*  and  the  discussion
who  do  not  might  have  been  necessary  at  a  time  when  party-rage  still
profess  the obscured  those  principles  which  it  had  long  caused  to  be  for-
Son  ^  ' gotten  ;  but  we  may  venture  to  believe  that  it  would  be  super-
fluous in  the  present  age. The  law  of  nature  alone  regulates
the  treaties  of  nations :  the  difference  of  religion  is  a  thing
absolutely  foreign  to  them. Different  people  treat  with  each
other  in  quality  of  men,  and  not  under  the  character  of  Chris-
tians, or  of  Mohammedans.  Their  common  safety  requires  that
they  should  be  capable  of  treating  with  each  other,  and  of
treating  with  security. Any  religion  that  should  in  this  case
clash  with  the  law  of  nature,  would,  on  the  very  face  of  it,
wear  the  stamp  of  reprobation,  and  could  not  pretend  to  derive
its  origin  from  the  great  Author  of  nature,  who  is  ever  steady,
ever  consistent  with  himself. But,  if  the  maxims  of  a  religion
tend  to  establish  it  by  violence,  and  to  oppress  all  those  who
will  not  embrace  it,  the  law  of  nature  forbids  us  to  favour
that  religion,  or  to  contract  any  unn'^i^essary  alliances  with
[  196  ]  its  inhuman  followers,  and  the  common  safety  of  mankind
invites  them  rather  to  enter  into  an  alliance  against  such  a
people, — to  repress  such  outrageous  fanatics,  who  disturb  the
public  repose  and  threaten  all  nations.
§  163.  ObK- It  is  a  settled  point  in  natural  law,  that  he  who  has  made
gation  of ^  promise  to  any  one.  has  conferred  upon  him  a  real  right  to
treaties. require  the  thing  promised, — and, consequently,  that the
breach  of  a  perfect  promise  is  a  violation  of  another  person's
right,  and  as  evidently  an  act  of  injustice  as  it  would  be  to
rob  a  man  of  his  property. The  tranquillity,  the  happiness,
the  security  of  the  human  race,  wholly  depend  on  justice, —
on  the  obligation  of  paying  a  regard  to  the  rights  of  others.
The  respect  which  others  pay  to  our  rights  of  domain  and
property  constitutes  the  security  of  our  actual  possessions ;
the  faith  of  promises  is  our  security  for  things  that  cannot
be  delivered  or  executed  upon  the  spot. There  would  no
longer  be  any  security,  no  longer  any  commerce  between
mankind,  if  they  did  not  think  themselves  obliged  to  keep
faith  with  each  other,  and  to  perform  their  promises. This
obligation  is,  then,  as  necessary  as  it  is  natural  and  indubita-
ble, between  nations  that  live  together  in  a  state  of  nature,
and  acknowledge  no  superior  upon  earth,  to  maintain  order
and  peace  in  their  society. Nations,  therefore,  and  their  con-

*  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pads,  lib.  ii.  cap.  zv.  §  8,  et  acq
f90


AND  OTHER  PUBLIC  TREATIES.  196

diictors,  ought  inviolably  to  observe  their  promises  and  their  book  h.
'  treaties.  This  great  truth,  though  too  often  neglected  in  chap,  xii.
practice,  is  generally  acknowledged  by  all  nations  :*  the  re-
proach of  perfidy  is  esteemed  by  sovereign^  a  most  atrocious
affront ;  yet  he  who  does  not  observe  a  treaty  is  certainly
perfidious,  since  he  violates  his  faith.  On  the  contrary,  no-
thing adds  so  great  a  glory  to  a  prince,  and  to  the  nation  he
governs,  as  the  reputation  of  an  inviolable  fidelity  in  the  per-
formance of  promises.  By  such  honourable  conduct,  as  much
or  even  more  than  by  her  valour,  the  Swiss  nation  has  ren-
dered herself  respectable  throughout  Europe,  and  is  de-
servedly courted  by  the  greatest  monarchs  who  intrust  their
personal  safety  to  a  body-guard  of  her  citizens.  The  parlia-  .  ^
ment  of  England  has  more  than  once  thanked  the  king  for
his  fidelity  and  zeal  in  succouring  the  allies  of  his  crown.
This  national  magnanimity  is  the  source  of  immortal  glory ;
it  presents  a  firm  basis  on  which  nations  may  build  their  con-
fidence ;  and  thus  it  becomes  an  unfailing  source  of  power
and  splendour.

As  the  engagements  of  a  treaty  impose  on  the  one  hand  a  §  1^4.  The
perfect  obligation,  they  produce  on  the  other  a  perfect  right,  violation  of
The  breach  of  a  treaty  is  therefore  a  violation  of  the  perfect  *  f®aty  «»
right  of  the  party  with  whom  we  have  contracted  ;  and  this  ?J^*^^^  "**
is  an  act  of  injustice  against  him.

A  sovereign  already  bound  by  a  treaty  cannot  enter  into  §  16&.  Trca-
others  contrary  to  the  first. The  things,  respecting  which  ties  cannot
he  has  entered  into  engagements  are  no  longer  at  his  disposal'.  ^®  "^*^®
If  it  happens  that  a  posterior  treaty  be  found,  in  any  parti-  ^^^J^^.
cular  point,  to  clash  with  one  of  more  ancient  date,  the  new  jy  existing
treaty  is  null  and  void  with  respect  to  that  point,  inasmuch  as
it  tends  to  dispose  of  a  thing  that  is  no  longer  in  the  power  of
him  who  appears  to  dispose  of  it. (We  are  here  to  be  under-
stood as  speaking  of  treaties  made  with  different  powers,  j
If  the  prior  treaty  is  kept  secret,  it  would  be  an  act  of  con-
summate perfidy  to  conclude  a  contrary  one,  which  may  be
rendered  void  whenever  occasion  serves. Nay,  even  to  enter
into  engagements,  which,  from  the  eventual  turn  of  affairs,
may  chance  at  a  future  day  to  militate  against  the  secret-
treaty,  and  from  that  very  circumstance  to  prove  ineffectual
and  nugatory,  is  by  no  means  justifiable,  unless  we  have  the
ability  to  make  ample  compensation  to  our  new  ally :  other-
wise it  would  be  practising  a  deception  on  him,  to  promise  him
a  thing  without  informing  him  that  cases  may  possibly  occur
which  will  not  allow  us  to  substantiate  our  promise. The  ally
thus  deceived  is  undoubtedly  at  liberty  to  renounce  the  treaty :
but,  if  he  chooses  rather  to  adhere  to  it,  it  will  hold  good  with  [  197  J
respect  to  all  the  articles  that  do  not  clash  with  the  prior  treaty.

*  Mohammed  warmly  recommend- treaties^— Ockley's  History  of  tlie  8v
cd  to  his  disciples  the  obserrance  of racens,  voL  L

391


197  ^F  TREATIES  01  AXiLIANCK,.

BOOK  n. There  is  nothing  to  prevent  a  sovereign  from  entering  inU|
OHAP.  xn.  engagements  of  the  same  nature  with  two  or  more  nations,  if

5 166.  How  he  be  able  to  fulfil  those  several  engagements  to  his  different
treaties  may  allies  at  the  Same  time.  For  instance,  a  commercial  treaty
beconcluded  ^j^jj  ^jj^  nation  does  not  deprive  us  of  the  liberty  of  afterwards
nations  wiSi  contracting  similar  engagements  with  other  states,  unless  we
the  same  have,  in  the  former  treaty,  bound  ourselves  by  a  promise  not
vipw.  to  grant  the  same  advantages  to  any  other  nation. We  may

in  the  same  manner  promise  to  assist  two  different  allies  with
troops,  if  we  are  able  to  furnish  them,  or  if  there  is  no  pro*
bability  that  both  will  have  occasion  for  them  at  the  same  time.

5 167.  The  If  nevertheless  the  contrary  happens,  the  more  ancient
more  an-  ^  ^lly  is  entitled  to  a  preference :  for,  the  engagement  was  pure
witiUwi  to*a  ^  absolute  with  respect  to  him ;  whereas  we  could  not  con-
preference, tract  with  the  more  recent  ally,  without  a  reservation  of  the

rights  of  the  former.  Such  reservation  is  founded  in  justice,
and  is  tacitly  understood,  even  if  not  expressly  made.

5 168.  We  The  justice  of  the  cause  is  another  ground  of  preference
owe  no  as-  between  two  allies.  We  ought  even  to  refuse  assistance  to
■a  unjust  ^^®  ^^®  whose  cause  is  unjust,  whether  he  be  at  war  with  one
war.  of  our  allies,  or  with  another  state :  to  assist  him  on  such

occasion,  would  in  the  event  be  the  same  thing  as  if  we  had
contracted  an  alliance  for  an  unjust  purpose ;  which  we  are
not  allowed  to  do  (§  161).  No  one  can  be  validly  engaged
to  support  injustice.

5169.  Ge-  Grotius  divides  treaties  into  two  general  classes, — first,
'"f™^  ?^  <Ao8«  which  turn  merely  on  things  to  which  the  parties  were
^gg^  "  already  hound by  the  law  of  nature^ — secondly, those by

which  they  enter  into  further  engagements.'^ By  the  former
1.  Those "vfe  acquire  a  perfect  right  to  things  to  which  we  before  had
to  tiiLa  *ai-  ^^^  ^^  imperfect  right,  so  that  we  may  thenceforward  de-
ready  due  "  niand  as  our  due  what  before  we  could  only  request  as  an
by  the  law oflSce  of  humanity. Such  treaties  became  very  necessary  be-
of  nature, tween  the  nations  of  antiquity,  who,  as  we  have  already  ob-
served, did  not  think  themselves  bound  to  any  duty  towards
people  who  were  not  in  the  number  of  their  allies. They
are  useful  even  between  the  most  polished  nations,  in  order
the  better  to  secure  the  succours  they  may  expect, — to  deter-
mine the  measure  and  degree  of  those  succours,  and  to  show
on  what  they  have  to  depend, — to  regulate  what  cannot  in
general  be  determined  by  the  law  of  nature, — and  thus  to
obviate  all  difficulties,  by  providing  against  the  various  inter-
pretations of  that  law. Finally,  as  no  nation  possesses  inex-
haustible means  of  assistance,  it  is  prudent  to  secure  to  our-
selves a  peculiar  right  to  that  assistance  which  cannot  be
granted  to  all  the  world.

To  this  first  class  belong  all  simple  treaties  of  peace  and
friendship,  when  the  engagements  which  we  thereby  contract

*  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xt.  §  6
89S


A^D  OTHER  PUBLIC  TREATrSS.  198

(nake  no  addition  to  those  duties  that  men  owe  to  each  other  book  n.
as  brethren  and  as  members  of  the  human  society :  such  are  chap,  xu.
those  treaties  that  permit  commerce,  passage,  &c.

If  the  assistance  and  offices  that  are  due  by  virtue  of  such  §  170.  Cd-
a  treaty  should  on  any  occasion  prove  incompatible  with  the  lision  of
duties  a  nation  oWes  to  herself,  or  with  what  the  sovereign  ^®*®  ^^^'
owes  to  his  own  nation,  the  case  is  tacitly  and  necessarily  ^*^^'*^g  *
excepted  in  the treaty. For,  neither  the  nation  nor  the  owe  to  oui-
Bovereign  could  enter  into  an  engagement  to  neglect  the  care  selves,
of  their  own  safety,  or  the  safety  of  the  state,  in  order  to
contribute  to  that  of  their  ally. If  the  sovereign,  in  order
to  preserve  his  own  nation,  has  occasion  for  the  things  he
has  promised  in  the  treaty, — ^if,  for  instance,  he  has  engaged
to  furnish  corn,  and  in  a  time  of  dearth  he  has  scarcely  suf-
ficient for  the  subsistence  of  his  subjects,  he  ought  without
hesitation  to  give  a  preference  to  his  own  nation ;  for,  it  is
only  80  far  as  he  has  it  in  his  power  to  give  assistance  to  a
foreign  nation,  that  he  naturally  owes  such  assistance ;  and
it  was  upon  that  footing  alone  that  he  could  promise  it  in  a
treaty. Now,  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  deprive  his  own  nation
of  the  means  of  subsistence  in  order  to  assist  another  nation
at  their  expense. Necessity  here  forms  an  exception,  and  he
does  not  violate  the  treaty,  because  he  cannot  fulfil  it.

The  treaties  by  which  we  simply  agree  not  to  do  any  evil  §  171.  Tre»-
to  an  ally,  to  abstain,  with  respect  to  him,  from  all  harm,  ^ea  in  which
offence,  and  iniury,  are  not  necessary,  and  produce  no  new  ^®  ^e^y
right,  since  every  individual  already  possesses  a  perfect  natu*  J^  ^o  in-
ral  right  to  be  exempt  from  harm,  injury,  and  real  offence,  jury.
Such  treaties,  however,  become  very  useful,  and  accidentally
necessary,  among  those  barbarous  nations  who  think  they
have  a  right  to  act  as  they  please  towards  foreigners. They
are  not  wholly  useless  with  nations  less  savage,  who,  without
so  far  divesting  themselves  of  humanity,  entertain  a  much
less  powerful  sense  of  a  natural  obligation,  than  of  one  which
they  have  themselves  contracted  by  solemn  engagements:
and  would  to  God  that  this  manner  of  thinking  were  entirely
confined  to  barbarians ! .  We  see  too  frequent  effects  of  it
among  those  who  boast  of  a  perfection  much  superior  to  the
law  of  nature. But  the  imputation  of  perfidy  is  prejudicial
to  the  rulers  of  nations,  and  thus  becomes  formidable  even  to
those  who  are  little  solicitous  to  merit  the  appellation  of  vir-
tuous men, and  who  feel  no  scruple  in  silencing  the  re-
proaches of  conscience.

Treaties  by  which  we  contract  engagements  that  were  not  §172.  Tre*-
imposed  on  us  by  the  law  of  nature,  are  either  equal  or  ur^  ^^^  ^""
equal  ceming

Equal  treaties  are  those  in  which  the  contracting  parties  are  not  na-
promise  the  same  things,  or  things  that  are  equivalent,  or,  turally  due.
finally,  things  that  are  equitably  proportioned,  so  that  the  ^<l"^.
condition  of  the  parties  is  equal. Such  is,  for  example,  a^'®*^®*


198  OF  TREATIES  OE  ALLIA17CE,

BOOK  It.  defensive  alliance,  in  which  the  parties  reciprocally  stipulate
OHAP.  xu.  for  the  same  succours.  Such  is  an  offensive  alliance,  in
[  199  ]  ^l^ich  it  is  agreed  that  each  of  the  allies  shall  furnish  the
same  number  of  vessels,  the  same  number  of  troops,  of
cavalry  and  infantry,  or  an  equivalent  in  vessels,  in  trgops,
in  artillery,  or  in  money.  Such  is  also*  a  league  in  which
the  quota  of  each  of  the  allies  is  regulated  in  proportion  to
the  interest  he  takes  or  may  have  in  the  design  of  the  league.
Thus,  the  emperor  and  the  king  of  England,  in  order  to  in-
duce the  states-general  of  the  United  Provinces  to  accede  to
the  treaty  of  Vienna  of  the  16th  of  March,  1731,  consented
that  the  republic  should  only  promise  to  her  allies  the  a<s8ist«
ance  of  four  thousand  foot  and  a  thousand  horse,  though  they
engaged,  in  case  of  an  attack  upon  the  republic,  to  furnish
her,  each,  with  eight  thousand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse.
We  are  also  to  place  in  the  class  of  equal  treaties  those  which
stipulate  that  the  allies  shall  consider  themselves  as  embarked
in  a  common  cause,  and  shall  act  with  all  their  strength.
Notwithstanding  a  real  inequality  in  their  strength,  they  are
nevertheless  willing  in  this  instance  to  consider  it  as  equal.

Equal  treaties  may  be  subdivided  into  as  many  species  aa

there  are  of  different  transactions  between  sovereigns. Thus,

they  treat  of  the  conditions  of  commerce,  of  their  mutual

defence,  of  associations  in  war,  of  reciprocally  granting  each

other  a  passage,  or  refusing  it  to  the  enemies  of  their  ally ;

they  engage  not  to  build  fortresses  in  certain  places,  &c. But

it  would  be  needless  to  enter  into  these  particulars :  generals

are  sufficient,  and  are  easily  applied  to  particular  cases.

§  173.  Ob- Nations  being  no  less  obliged  than  individuals  to  pay  a

ligation  of regard  to  equity,  they  ought,  as  much  as  possible,  to  pre-

preservuig ggj.yg  equality  in  their  treaties. When,  therefore,  the  parties

equality  in  i  i  •  n  «» i  i i  i i

Ueaties.  8-^0  able  reciprocally  to  anord  each  other  equal  advantages,
the  law  of  nature  requires  that  their  treaties  should  be  equal,
unless  there  exist  some  particular  reason  for  deviating  from
that  equality, — ^such,  for  instance,  as  gratitude  for  a  former
benefit, — the  hope  of  gaining  the  inviolable  attachment  of  a
nation, — some  private  motive,  which  renders  one  of  the  con-
tracting parties  particularly  anxious  to  have  the  treaty  con-
cluded, &c.  Nay,  viewing  the  transaction  in  its  proper  point
of  light,  the  consideration  of  that  particular  reason  restores
to  the  treaty  that  equality  which  seems  to  be  destroyed  by
the  difference  of  the  things  promised.

I  see  those  pretended  great  politicians  smile,  who  employ
all  their  subtilty  in  circumventing  those  with  whom  they  treat,
and  in  so  managing  the  conditions  of  the  treaty,  that  all  the
advantages  shall  accrue  to  their  masters.  Far  from  blushing
at  a  conduct  so  contrary  to  equity,  to  rectitude  and  natural
honesty,  they  glory  in  it,  and  think  themselves  entitled  to  the
appellation  of  able  negotiators.  How  long  shall  we  continue
to  see  men  in  public  characters  take  a  pride  in  practices  that

294


AND  OTHEB PUBLIC  TBBATIES.  199

would  disgrace  a  private  individual  ? The  private  man,  if  he book  ii.
is  void  of  conscience,  laughs  also  at  the  rules  of  morality  and  chap,  tn.
justice  ;  but  he  laughs  in  secret :  it  would  be  dangerous  and
prejudicial  to  him  to  make  a  public  mockery  of  them/ Men  [  200  ]
in  power  more  openly  sacrifice  honour  and  honesty  to  present
advantage :  but,  fortunately  for  mankind,  it  often  happens
that  such  seeming  advantage  proves  fatal  to  them ;  and  even
between  sovereigns,  candour  and  rectitude  are  found  to  be
the  safest  policy. All  the  subtilties,  all  the  tergiversations
of  a  famous  minister,  on  the  occasion  of  a  treaty  in  which
Spain  was  deeply  interested,  turned  at  length  to  his  own
confusion,  and  to  the  detriment  of  his  master;  while  Eng-
land, by  her  good  faith  and  generosity  to  her  allies,  gained
immense  credit,  and  rose  to  the  highest  pitch  of  influence
and  respectability.

When  people  speak  of  equal  treaties,  they  have  commonly  §  174.  Dif-
in  their  minds  a  double  idea  of  equality,  viz.  equality  in  the  ference  be-
engagements,  and  equality  in  the  dignity  of  the  contracting  *^®®P  ^"*'
parties. It  becomes  therefore  necessary  to  remove  all  ambi-  g"^^^^^"
guity ;  and  for  that  purpose,  we  may  make  a  distinction  be-  ances.
tween  equal  treaties  and  equal  alliances. Equal  treaties  are
those  in  which  there  is  an  equality  in  the  promises  made,  as
we  have  above  explained  (§  172) ;  and  eqv^l  alliances^  those
in  which  equal  treats  with  equal,  making  no  difference  in  the
digpity  of  the  contracting  parties,  or,  at  least,  admitting  no  too
glaring  superiority,  but  merely  a  pre-eminence  of  honour  and
rank. Thus  kings  treat  with  the  emperor  on  a  footing  of
equality,  though  they  do  not  hesitate  to  allow  him  precedency ;
thus  great  republics  treat  with  kings  on  the  same  footing,
notwithstanding  the  pre-eminence  which  the  former  now-a-
days  yield  to  the  latter. Thus  all  true  sovereigns  ought  to
treat  with  the  most  powerful  monarch,  since  they  are  as  really
sovereigns,  and  as  independent  as  himself. (See  §  37  of  this
Book.)

Unequal  treaties  are  those  in  which  the  allies  do  not  reci-  §  175.  Un
procally  promise  to  each  other  the  same  things,  or  things  equal  trea-
equivalent ;  and  an  alliance  is  unequal  when  it  makes  a  differ-  ^®*  *^<^  ^^
ence  in  the  dignity  of  the  contracting  parties. It  is  true,  that  ^^
most  commonly  an  unequal  treaty  will  be  at  the  same  time  an
unequal  alliance ;  as  great  potentates  are  seldom  accustomed
to  give  or  to  promise  more  than  is  given  or  promised  to  them,
unless  such  concessions  be  fully  compensated  in  the  article  of
honour  and  glory ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  weak  state  does
not  submit  to  burdensome  conditions  without  being  obliged
also  to  acknowledge  the  superiority  of  her  ally.

Those  unequal  treaties  that  are  at  the  same  time  unequal
alliances,  are  divided  into  two  classes, — ^the  first  consisting  of
those  where  the  inequality  prevails  on  the  side  of  the  more  eon*
siderable  power ^ — the  second  comprehending  treaties  where
the  inequality  is  on  the  side  of  the  inferior  power*

296


200  09  TREATIES  OF  ALLIANCE/

BOOK  n.  Treaties  of  the  fonner  class,  without  attributing  to  the  more
OHAP.  xn.  powerful  of  the  contracting  parties  any  right  over  the  weaker,
simply  allow  him  a  superiority  of  honours  and  respect.  We
have  tt-eated  of  this  in  Book  1.  §  5.  Frequently  a  great  mo-
narch, wishing  to  engage  a  weaker  state  in  his  interest,  offers
\  201  ]  her  advantageous  conditions, — promises  her  gratuitous  suc-
cours, or  greater  than  he  stipulates  for  himself:  but  at  the
same  time  he  claims  a  superiority  of  dignity,  and  requires  re-
spect from  his  ally.  It  is  this  last  particular  which  renders
the  alliance  unequal:  and  to  this  circumstance  we  must  atten-
tively advert ;  for,  with  alliances  of  this  nature  we  are  not  to
confound  those  in  which  the  parties  treat  on  a  footing  of  equal-
ity, though  the  more  powerful  of  the  allies,  for  particular
reasons,  gives  more  than  he  receives,  promises  his  assistance
gratis,  without  requiring  gratuitous  assistance  in  his  turn,  or
promises  more  considerable  succours,  or  even  the  assistance
of  all  his  forces : — here  the  alliance  is  equal,  but  the  treaty
is  unequal,  unless  indeed  we  may  be  allowed  to  say,  that,  as
the  party  who  makes  the  greater  concessions  has  a  greater
interest  in  concluding  the  treaty,  this  consideration  restores
the  equality.  Thus,  at  a  time  when  France  found  herself  em-
barrassed in  a  momentous  war  with  the  house  of  Austria,
and  the  cardinal  de  Richelieu  wished  to  humble  that  formi-
dable power,  he,  like  an  able  minister,  concluded  a  treaty
with  Gustavus  Adolphus,  in  which  all  the  advantage  appeared
to  be  on  the  side  of  Sweden.  From  a  bare  consideration  of
the  stipulations  of  that  treaty,  it  would  have  been  pronounced
an  unequal  one ;  but  the  advantages  which  France  derived
from  it,  amply  compensated  for  that  inequality.  The  alliance
of  France  with  the  Swiss,  if  we  regard  the  stipulations  alone,
is  an  unequal  treaty ;  but  the  valour  of  the  Swiss  troops  has
long  since  counterbalanced  that  inequality;  and  the  differ-
ence in  the  interests  and  wants  of  the  parties  serves  still
further  to  preserve  the  equilibrium.  France,  often  involved
in  bloody  wars,  has  received  essential  services  from  the  Swiss :
the  Helvetic  body,  void  of  ambition,  and  untainted  with  the
spirit  of  conquest,  may  live  in  peace  with  the  whole  world ;
they  have  nothing  to  fear,  since  they  have  feelingly  convinced
the  ambitious,  that  the  love  of  liberty  gives  the  nation  suffi-
cient strength  to  defend  her  frontiers.  This  alliance  may  at
certain  times  have  appeared  unequal :— our  forefathers*  paid
little  attention  to  ceremony : — ^but,  in  reality,  and  especially
since  the  absolute  independence  of  the  Swiss  is  acknowledged
by  the  empire  itself,  the  alliance  is  certainly  equal,  although
the  Helvetic  body  do  not  hesitate  to  yield  to  the  king  of
France  all  that  pre-eminence  which  the  established  usage  of
modern  Europe  attributes  to  crowned  heads,  and  especially
to  great  monarchs.

*  The  author  was  a  native  of  Switaerlaad.


AND  OTHEB  PUBLIC  TKSATIB8.  201

Treaties  in  which  the  inequality  prevaih  on  the  side  of  the  -book  n.
inferior  power — that  is  to  say,  those  which  impose  on  the  ohap.  xiu
weaker  party  more  extensive  obligations  or  greater  burdens,
or  bind  him  down  to  oppressive  or  disagreeable  conditions, —
these  unequal  treaties,  I  say,  are  always  at  the  same  time
unequal  alliances;  for,  the  weaker  party  never  submits  to
burdensome  conditions,  without  being  obliged  also  to  acknow-
ledge the  superiority  of  his  ally.  These  conditions  are  com-
monly imposed  by  the  conqueror,  or  dictated  by  necessity,  [  202  1
which  obliges  a  weak  state  to  seek  the  protection  or  assist-
ance of  another  more  powerful ;  'and  by  this  very  step,  the
weaker  state  acknowledges  her  own  inferiority.  Besides,
this  forced  inequality  in  a  treaty  of  alliance  is  a  disparage-
ment to  her,"  and  lowers  her  dignity,  at  the  same  time  that  it
exalts  that  of  her  more  powerful  ally.  Sometimes  also,  the
weaker  state  not  being  in  a  condition  to  promise  the  same  suc-
cours as  the  more  powerful  one,  it  becomes  necessary  that  she
Bhould  compensate  for  her  inability  in  this  point,  by  engage-
ments which  degrade  her  below  her  ally,  and  often  even  sub-
ject her,  in  various  respects,  to  his  will.  Of  this  kind  are  all
those  treaties  in  which  the  weaker  party  alone  engages  not
to  make  war  without  the  consent  of  her  more  powerful  ally, —
to  have  the  same  friends  and  the  same  enemies  with  him,—
to  support  and  respect  his  dignity, — ^to  have  no  fortresses  in
certain  places, — not  to  trade  or  raise  soldiers  in  certain  free
countries, — to  deliver  up  her  vessels  of  war,  and  not  to  build
others,  as  was  the  case  of  the  Carthaginians  when  treating
with  their  Roman  conquerors, — to  keep  up  only  a  certain
number  of  troops,  &c.

These  unequal  alliances  are  subdivided  into  two  kinds ;
they  either  impair  tfte  sovereignty^  or  they  do  not.  We  have
slightly  touched  on  this  in  Book  I,  Ch.  I.  and  XVI.

The  sovereignty  subsists  entire  and  unimpaired  when  none
of  its  constituent  rights  are  transferred  to  the  superior  ally,
or  rendered,  as  to  the  exertion  of  them,  dependent  on  his
will.  But  the  sovereignty  is  impaired  when  any  of  its  rights
are  ceded  to  an  ally,  or  even  if  the  use  of  them  be  merely
rendered  dependent  on  the  will  of  that  ally.  For  example,
the  treaty  does  not  impair  the  sovereignty,  if  the  weaker
state  only  promises  not  to  attack  a  certain  nation  without  the
consent  of  her  ally.  By  such  an  engagement  she  neither
divests  herself  of  her  right,  nor  subjects  the  exertion  of  it  to
another's  will ;  she  only  consents  to  a  restriction  in  favour
of  her  ally :  and  thus  she  incurs  no  greater  diminution  of
liberty  than  is  incurred  by  promises  of  every  kind.  Such
reservations  are  every  day  stipulated  in  alliances  that  are
perfectly  equal.  But,  if  either  of  the  contracting  parties
engages  not  to  make  war  against  any  one  whatsoever  without
the  consent  or  permission  of  an  ally  who  on  his  side  does  not
make  the  same  promise,  the  former  contracts  an  unequal  alii-

3S  S97


202  OF  TREATIES  OF  ALLIANCE,

BOOK  II. ance,  with  diminution  of  sovereignty ;  for  he  deprives  him-
OHAP.  XII.  geif  of  one  of  the  most  important  branches  of  the  sovereign
power,  or  renders  the  exertion  of  it  dependent  on  another's
will. The  Carthaginians  having,  in  the  treaty  that  termi-
nated the  second  Punic  war,  promised  not  to  make  war  "oii
any  state  without  the  consent  of  the  Roman  people,  were
thenceforward,  and  for  that  reason,  considered  as  dependent
on  the  Romans.
§  176.  How When  a  nation  is  forced  to  submit  to  the  will  of  a  superior
^^  h^ll*"-^  power,  she  may  lawfully  renounce  her  former  treaties,  if  the
nution^of " P^^^J  ^^^^  whom  she  is  obliged  to  enter  into  an  alliance  re-
Bovereignty  quires  it  of  her. As  she  then  loses  a  part  of  her  sovereignty,
may  annul  her  ancient  treaties  fall  to  the  ground  together  with  the  power
preceding ^jj^jj  jjg^^  concluded  them. This  is  a  necessity  that  cannot  be
r^^'o  -1  imputed  to  her  as  a  crime :  and  since  she  would,  have  a  right
■"  J  to  place  herself  in  a  state  of  absolute  subjection,  and  to  re-

nounce her  own  sovereign,  if  she  found  such  measures  neces-
sary for  her  preservation, — by  a  much  stronger  reason,  she
has  a  right,  under  the  same  necessity,  to  abandon  her  allies.
But  a  generous  people  will  exhaust  every  resource  before  they
will  submit  to  terms  so  severe  and  so  humiliating.
S 177.  We In  general,  as  every  nation  ought  to  be  jealous  of  her  glory,
ought  to careful  of  maintaining  her  dignity,  and  preserving  her  inde-
much  as pendence,  nothing  short  of  the  last  extremity,  or  motives  the
poflsible most  Weighty  and  substantial,  ought  ever  to  induce  a  people
making  un-  to  contract  an  unequal  alliance. This  observation  is  particu-
equal  alii- lariy  meant  to  apply  to  treaties  where  the  inequality  prevails
on  the  side  of  the  weaker  ally,  and  still  more  particularly  to
those  unequal  alliances  that  degrade  the  sovereignty. Men
of  courage  and  spirit  will  accept  such  treaties  from  no  other
hands  but  those  of  imperious  necessity.
§  178.  Mu- Notwithstanding  every  argument  which  selfish  policy  may
tual  duties suggest  to  the  contrary,  we  must  either  pronounce  sovereigns
wiih'respect *^  be- absolutely  emancipated  from  all  subjection  to  the  law
to  unequal of  nature,  or  agree  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  them,  without
alliances, just  reasons,  to  compel  weaker  states  to  sacrifice  their  dig-
nity, much  less  their  liberty,  by  unequal  alliances. Nations
owe  to  each  other  the  same  assistance,  the  same  respect,  the
same  friendship,  as  individuals  living  in  a  state  of  nature.
Far  from  seeking  to  humble  a  weaker' neighbour,  and  to  de*
•  spoil  her  of  her  most  valuable  advantages,  they  will  respect

and  maintain  her  dignity  and  her  liberty,  if  they  are  inspired
by  virtue  more  than  by  pride — if  they  are  actuated  by  prin-
ciples of  honour  more  than  by  the  meaner  views  of  sordid
interest — nay,  if  they  have  but  suflScient  discernment  to  dis-
tinguish their  real  interests.  Nothing  more  firmly  secures
the  power  of  a  great  monarch  than  iiis  attention  and  respect
to  all  other  sovereigns.  The  more  cautious  he  is  to  avoid
offending  his  weaker  brethren,  the  greater  esteem  he  testifies
for  them,  the  more  will  they  revere  him  in  turn ;  they  fed

298


AKD  OTHER  PUBUO  TREATIES.  203

an  affection  for  a  power  whose  superiority  over  them  is  dis-  book  n.
played  only  by  the  conferring  of  favours :  they  ding  to  such  ^^^  ^"%
a  monarch  as  their  prop  and  support;  and  he  becomes
the  arbiter  of  nations.  Had  his  demeanour  been  stamped^
with  arrogance,  he  would  have  been  the  object  of  their
jealousy  and  fear,  and  might  perhaps  have  one  day  sunk
under  their  united  efforts.

But,  as  the  weaker  party  ought,  in  his  necessity,  to  accept  §  179.  In
with  gratitude  the  assistance  of  the  more  powerful,  and  not  alliances
to  refuse  him  such  honours  and  respect  as  are  flattering  to  T'^^^  ,^.^®
the  person  who  receives  them,  without  degrading  him by  ^  ^^  the
whom  they  are  rendered;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  side  of  the
more  conformable  to  the  law  of  nature  than  a  generous  grant  nio^e  pow-
of  assistance  from  the  more  powerful  state,  unaccompanied  ®^^  P*^^*
by  any  demand  of  a  return,  or,  at  least,  of  an  equivalent.
And  in  this  instance  also,  there  exists  an  inseparable  connec-  [  204  ]
tion  between  interest  and  duty. Sound  policy  holds  out  a
caution  to  a  powerful  nation  not  to  suffer  the  lesser  states  in
her  neighbourhood  to  be  oppressed. If  she  abandon  them  to
the  ambition  of  a  conqueror,  he  will  soon  become  formidable
to  herself. Accordingly,  sovereigns,  who  are  in  general  suf-
ficiently attentive  to  their  own  interests,  seldom  fail  to  reduce
this  maxim  to  practice. Hence  those  alliances,  sometimes
against  the  house  of  Austria,  sometimes  against  its  rival,
according  as  the  power  of  the  one  or  the  other  preponderates.
Hence  that  balance  of  power,  the  object  of  perpetual  nego-
tiations and  wars.

When  a  weak  and  poor  nation  has  occasion  for  assistance
of  another  kind — when  she  is  afflicted  by  famine — we  have
seen  (§  5),  that  those  nations  who  have  provisions  ought  to
supply  her  at  a  fair  price.  It  were  noble  and  generous  to
furnish  them  at  an  under  price,  or  to  make  her  a  present  of
them,  if  she  be  incapable  of  paying  their  value.  To  oblige
her  to  purchase  them  by  an  unequal  alliance,  and  especially
at  the  expense  of  her  liberty — to  treat  her  as' Joseph  for-
merly treated  the  Egyptians — would  be  a  cruelty  almost  as
dreadful  as  suffering  her  to  perish  with  famine.

But  there  are  cases  where  the  inequality  of  treaties  and  §  180.  How
alliances,  dictated  by  some  particular  reasons,  is  not  contrary  inequality
to  equity,  nor,  consequently,  to  the  law.  of  nature. Such,  in  ^j^^^J^^.
general,  are  all  those  cases  in  which  the  duties  that  a  nation  ces  &ay  be
owes  to  herself,  or  those  which  she  owes  to  other  nations,  pre-  conformable
scribe  to  her  a  departure  from  the  line  of  equality. If,  for  ^  ^®  ^^^
instance,  &  weak  state  attempts,  without  necessity,  to  erect  a "*'**'"^
fortress,  which  she  is  incapable  of  defending,  in  a  place  where
it  might  become  very  dangerous  to  her  neighbour  if  ever  it
should  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  powerful  £nemy,  that  neigh-
bour may  oppose  the  construction  of  the  fortress ;  and,  if  he
does  not  find  it  convenient  to  pay  the  lesser  state  a  compen-
sation for  complying  with  his  desire,  he  may  force  her  com-

399


204  OF  TREATISS  OF  ALLIANOB,*

BOOK  n.  pliance,  by  threatening  to  block  up  the  roads  and  avennes  of
CHAP.  XII.  communication,  to  prohibit  all  intercourse  between  the  two
nations,  to  build  fortresses,  or  to  keep  an  army  on  the  fron
tier,  to  consider  that  little  state  in  a  suspicious  light,  &c.  He
thus  indeed  imposes  an  unequal  condition ;  but  his  conduct  is
authorized  by  the  care  of  his  own  safety.  In  the  same  man-
ner he  may  oppose  the  forming  of  a  highway,  that  would  open
to  an  enemy  an  entrance  into  his  state.  War  might  furnish
us  with  a  multitude  of  other  examples.  Sut  rights  of  this
nature  are  frequently  abused ;  and  it  requires  no  less  mode*
ration  than  prudence  to  avoid  turning  them  into  oppression.

Sometimes  those  duties to  which  other  nations have »
claim,  recommend  and  authorize  inequality  in  a  contrary
sense,  without  affording  any  ground  of  imputation  against  a
sovereign,  of  having  neglected  the  duty  which  he  owes  to
himself  or  to  his  people. Thus,  gratitude — ^the  desire  of
showing  his  deep  sense  of  a  favour  received — ^may  induce  a
generous  sovereign  to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  joy,  and  to
,  [  205  ]  give  in  the  treaty  more  than  he  receives.
§  181.  Ine- It  is  also  Consistent  with  justice  to  impose  the  conditions
quality  im-  of  an  unequal  treaty,  or  even  an  unequal  alliance,  by  way
posed  by ^f  penalty,  in  order  to  punish  an  unjust  aggressor,  and  ren-
ishmenu ^®^  ^"^  incapable  of  easily  injuring  us  for  the  time  to  come.
Such  was  the  treaty  to  which  the  elder  Scipio  Africanus  forced
the  Carthaginians  to  submit,  after  he  bad  defeated  Hannibal.
The  conqueror  often  dictates  such  terms :  and  his  conduct  in
this  instance  is  no  violation  of  the  laws  of  justice  or  equity,
provided  he  do  not  transgress  the  bounds  of  moderation,
after  he  has  been  crowned  with  success  in  a  just  and  neces-
sary war.
§  182.  Other The  different  treaties  of  protection — those  by  which  a  state
kinds  of renders  itself  tributary  or  feudatory  to  another — form  so
wliich  we many  different  kinds  of  unequal  alliances. But  we  shall  not
elsewhere. r^P^^-t  here  what  we  have  said  respecting  them  in  Book  L

Chap.  I.  arid  XVL
S  183.  Per- By  another  general  division  of  treaties  or  alliances,  they
Bonaland ^^^  distinguished  into  personal  and  real :  the  former  are  those
*  that  relate  to  the  persons  of  the  contracting  parties,  and  are
confined  and  in  a  manner  attached  to  them. Meal  alliances
relate  only  to  the  matters  in  negotiation  between  the  contract-
• ing  parties,  and  are  wholly  independent  of  their  persons.
A  personal  alliance  expires  with  him  who  contracted  it.
A  reaJ.  alliance  attaches  to  the  body  of  the  state,  and  sub-
sists as  long  as  the  state,  unless  the  period  of  its  duration
has  been  limited.

It  is  of  considerable  importance  not  to  confound  these  two
sorts  of  alliances..  Accordingly,  sovereigns  are  at  present
accustomed  to  express  themselves'  in  their  treaties  in  such  a
manner  as  to  leave  no  uncertainty  in  this  respect :  and  this

is  doubtless  the  best  and  safest  method. In  default  of  this
;iuo


AHD  OTHSJi  PUBLIC  TBSATIE6.  20t1

precaution,  the  very  subject  of  the  treaty,  or  the  expressions book  ii.
in  which  it  is  couched,  may  furnish  a  clufe  to  discover  whether .  £5f£iiE5l.
it  be  real  or  personal. On  this  head  we  shall  lay  down  some
general  rules.

In  the  first  place,  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  a  treaty  is  §  i84.
a  personal  one  from  the  bare  circumstance  of  its  naming  the  Naming  tha
contracting  sovereigns :  for,  the  name  of  the  reigning  sove-  contracting
reign  «  often  inBerted  with  the  sole  view  of  showing  withgf^J
whom  the  treaty  has  been  concluded,  without  meaning  thereby  does  not
to  intimate  that  it  has  been  made  with  himself  personally,  render  it
This  is  an  observation  of  the  civilians  Pedius  and  Ulpian,*  pe^onaL
repeated  by  all  writers  who  have  treated  of  these  subjects.

Every  alliance  made  by  a  republic  is  in  its  own  nature  real,  §  185.  An
for  it  relates  only  to  the  body  of  the  state.  When  a  free  peo-  alliance
pie,  a  popular  state,  or  an  aristocratical  republic,  concludes  a  ™  ^j^jk^  •
treaty,  it  is  the  state  herself  that  contracts ;  and  her  engage-  real,
ments  do  not  depend  on  the  lives  of  those  who  were  only  the  [  206  ]
instruments  in  forming  them :  the  members  of  the  people,  or
of  the  governing  body,  change  and  succeed  each  other  ;  but
the  state  still  continues  the  same.

Since,  therefore,  such  a  treaty  directly  relates  to  the  body
of  the  state,  it  subsists,  though  the  form  of  the  republic  should
happen  to  be  changed— even  though  it  should  be  transformed
into  a  monarchy.  For,  the  state  and  the  nation  are  still  the
same,  notwithstanding  every  change  that  may  take  place  in
the  form  o(  the  government ;  and  the  treaty  concluded  with
the  nation  remains  in  force  as  long  as  the  nation  exists.  But
it  is  manifest  that  all  treaties  relating  to  the  form  of  govern-
ment are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Thus  two  popular  states,
that  have  treated  expressly,  or  that  evidently  appear  to  have
treated,  with  the  view  of  maintaining  themselves  in  concert
in  their  state  of  liberty  and  popular  government,  cease  to  be
allies  from  the  very  moment  that  one  of  them  has  submitted
to  be  governed  by  a  single  person.

Every  public  treaty,  concluded  by  a  king  or  by  any  other  §  186
monarch,  is  a  treaty  of  the  state ;  it  is  obligatory  on  the  ^^^*,^^
whole  state,  on  the  entire  nation  which  the  king  represents,  by"kinm  or
and  whose  power  and  rights  he  exercises. It  seems  then  at  other
first  view,  that  every  public  treaty  ought  to  be  presumed  reaL  monardw.
as  concerning  the  state  itself. There  can  be  no  doubt  with
respect  to  the  obligation  to  observe  the  treaty :  the  only  ques-
tion that  arises,  is  respecting  its  duration. Now,  there  i»
often  room  to  doubt  whether  the  contracting  parties  have
intended  to  extend  their  reciprocal  engagements  beyond  the
term  of  their  own  lives,  and  to  bind  their  successors. Con-
junctures change ;  a  burden  that  is  at  present  light,  may  in
other  circumstances  become  insupportable,  or  at  least  oppres-
sive: the  manner  of  thinking  among  sovereigns  is  no  less

*  Bigflft,  lib.  ii  tit  xir.  de  Pactii,  leg.  viL  §  8.

8  A  801


206  OP  TREATIES  OP  ALLIANCE,

BOOK  II. variable ;  and  there  are  certain  things  of  which  it  is  proper

CHAP.  XII.  that  each  prince  should  be  at  liberty  to  dispose  according  to

his  own  system. There  are  others  that  are  freely  granted  to

one  king,  and  would  not  be  allowed  to  his  successor. It

therefore  becomes  necessary  to  consider  the  terms  of  the

treaty,  or  the  matter  which  forms  the  subject  of  it,  in  order

to  discover  the  intentions  of  the  contracting  powers.

i)etualtrea- Perpetual treaties, and those made  for a determinate

ties,  and period,  are  real  ones,  since  their  duration  cannot  depend  oq

those  for  a the  lives  of  the  contracting  parties.

certain  time jjj  ^j^q  same  manner,  when  a  king  declares  in  the  treaty
§i88.Trea-tlia^;  it  is  made  "for  himself  and  his  successors,"  it  is  mani-

foTthe  khig  ^*^®*  *^**  ^^^®  ^®  *  ^®*^  treaty. It  attaches  to  the  state,  and
and  his is  intended  to  last  as  long  as  the  kingdom  itself,
successors. When  a  treaty  expressly  declares  that  it  is  made  for  the
§  189.  good  of  the  kingdom,  it  thus  furnishes  an  evidient  proof  that

Treaties the  Contracting  powers  did  not  mean  that  its  duration  should
Se  ^o^  of  ^^P^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  *^®^  ^^^  lives,  but  on  that  of  the  kingdom
the  kmg- itself. . Such  treaty  is  therefore  a  real  one.
dom.  Independently  even  of  this  express  declaration,  when  a

[  207  ]  treaty  is  made  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  to  the  state  a
certain  advantage  which  is  in  its  own  nature  permanent  and
unfailing,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  prince  by
whom  the  treaty  has  been  concluded,  intended  to  limit  it  to
the  duration  of  his  own  life.  Such  a  treaty  ought  therefore
to  be  considered  as  a  real  one,  unless  there  exist  very  power-
ful evidence  to  prove  that  the  party  with  whom  it  was  made
granted  the  advantage  in  question  only  out  of  regard  to  the
prince  then  reigning,  and  as  a  personal  favour :  in  which  caae
the  treaty  terminates  with  the  life  of  the  prince,  as  the  motive
for  the  concession  expires  with  him.  But  such  a  reservation
is  not  to  be  presumed  on  slight  grounds :  for,  it  would  seem,
that,  if  the  contracting  parties  had  had  it  in  contemplation,
they  should  have  expressed  it  in  the  treaty.
§  190.  How  In  case  of  doubt,  where  there  exists  no  circumstance  by
presump-  which  WO  Can  clearly  prove  either  the  personality  or  the
tion  ought reality  of  a  treaty,  it  ought  to  be  presumed  a  real  treaty  if  it

to  be  found- i  • n"^  •  ^ V  r-  i_i  x*  i  •!• i» j*

ed  in  doubts  Chiefly  cousists  ot  favourable  articles, — if  of  odious  ones,  a
fill  cases,  personal  treaty.  By  favourable  articles  we  mean  those  which
tend  to  the  mutual  advantage  of  the  contracting  powers,  and
which  equally  favour  both  parties;  by  odious  articles,  we
*  understand  those  which  onerate  one  of  the  parties  only,  or
w^hich  impose  a  much  heavier  burden  upon  the  one  than  upou
the  other.  We  shall  treat  this  subject  more  at  large  in  the
chapter  on  the  "Interpretation  of  Treaties."  Nothing  is
more  conformable  to  reason  and  equity  than  this  rule.  When-
ever absolute  certainty  is  unattainable  in  the  affairs  of  men,
we  must  have  recourse  to  presumption.  Now,  if  the  con
tracting  powers  have  hot  explained  themselves,  it  is  natural,
when  the  question  relates  to  things  favourable,  and  equally

302


AKD  OTHER  PUBLIC  TREATIES. •  207

advantageous  to  the  two  allies,  to  presume  that  it  was  their  book  ii.
intention  to  make  a  real  treaty,  as  being  the  more  advan- ^2£i^i£ff:,
tageous  to  their  respective  kingdoms :  and  if  we  are  mistaken
in  this  presumption,  we  do  no  injury  to  either  party.  But,
if  there  be  any  thing  odious  in  the  engagements, — if  one  of
the  contracting  states  finds  itself  overburdened  by  them, —
how  can  it  be  presumed  that  the  prince  who  entered  into
such  engagements  intended  to  lay  that  burden  upon  his  king-
dom in  perpetuity  ?  Every  sovereign  is  presumed  to  desire
the  safety  and  advantage  of  the  state  with  which  he  is  in-
trusted: wherefore  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  has  con-
sented to  load  it  for  ever  with  a  burdensome  obligation.  If
necessity  rendered  such  a  measure  unavoidable,  it  was  in-
cumbent on  his  ally  to  have  the  matter  explicitly  ascertained
at  the  time ;  and  it  is  probable  that  he  would  not  have  neg-
lected this  precaution,  well  knowing  that  mankind  in  gene-
ral, and  sovereigns  in  particular,  seldom  submit  to  heavy  and
disagreeable  burdens,  unless  bound  to  do  so  by  formal  obliga-
tions. If  it  happens  then  that  the  presumption  is  a  mistake,
and  makes  him  lose  something  of  his  right,  it  is  a  consequence
of  his  own  negligence.  To  this  we  may  add,  that,  if  either
the  one  or  the  other  must  sacrifice  a  part  of  his  right,  it  will
be  a  less  grievous  violation  of  the  laws  of  equity  that  the  lat-  [  208  ]
ter  should  forego  an  expected  advantage,  than  that  the  former
ehould  sufier  a  positive  loss  and  detriment.  This  is  the  fa-
mous distinction  de  lucro  captando,  and  de  damno  vitando.

We  do  not  hesitate  to  include  equal  treaties  of  commerce
in  the  number  of  those  that  are  favourable,  since  they  are  in
general  advantageous,  and. perfectly  conformable  to  the  law
of  nature.  As  to  alliances  made  on  account  of  war,  Grotius
Bays  with  reason,  that  "  defensive  alliances  are  more  of  a
favourable  nature,^-ofiensive  alliances  have  something  in
them  that  approaches  nearer  to  what  is  burdensome  or
odious.*'*

We  could  not  dispense  with  the  preceding  brief  summary
of  those  discussions,  lest  we  should  in  this  part  of  our  trea-
tise leave  a  disgusting  chasm.  They  are,  however,  but  sel-
dom resorted  to  in  modern  practice,  as  sovereigns  at  present
generally  take  the  prudent  precaution  of  explicitly  ascertain-
ing the  duration  of  their  treaties.  They  treat  for  themselves
and  their  successors, — for  themselves  and  their  kingdoms,—
for  perpetuity, — ^for  a  certain  number  of  years,  &c. — or  they  *
treat  only  for  the  time  of  their  own  reign, — for  an  affair
peculiar  to  themselves, — for  their  families,  &c.

Since  public  treaties,  even  those  of  a  personal  nature,  con-  §  I9i.  The
eluded  by  a  king,  or  by  any  other  sovereign  who  is  invested  obiigationa
with  suflScient  power,  are  treaties  of  state,  and  obligatory  on  *^gJ2nir** •
the  whole  nation  (§  186),  real  treaties,  which  were  intended

*  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacus,  lib.  ii  cap.  XTi  §  16.

303


208  OP  TREATIES  OF  ALLIANCE,

BOOK  n. to  subsist  independently  of  the  person  who  has  concluded
OHAP.  XII.  them,  are  undoubtedly  binding  on  his  successors ;  and  the


from  a  real  obligation  which  such  treaties  impose  on  the  state  passes

treaty  pass  successively  to  all  her  rulers  as  soon  as  they  assume  the  pub-

to  the  sue- jj[^5 authority. The  case  is  the  same  with  respect  to  the

rights  acquired  by  those  treaties :  they  are  acquired  for  the

state,  and  successively  pass  to  her  conductors.

It  is  at  present  a  pretty  general  custom  for  the  successor
to  confirm  or  renew  even  real  alliances  concluded  by  his  pre-
decessors :  and  prudence  requires  that  this  precaution  should
not  be  neglected,  since  men  pay  greater  respect  to  an  obli-
gation which  they  have  themselves  contracted,  than  to  one
which  devolves  on  them  from  another  quarter,  or  to  which
they  have  only  tacitly  subjected  themselves. The  reason  is,
that,  in  the  former  case,  they  consider  their  word  to  be  en-
gaged, and,  in  the  latter,  their  conscience  alone.
§i92.Trea-  '  The  treaties  that  have  no  relation  to  the  performance  of
^^r^h^T*"*"  reiterated  acts,  but  merely  relate  to  transient  and  single  acts
fop  all  and*'^  which  are  concluded  at  once, — those  treaties  (unless  indeed
perfected it  be  more  proper  to  call  them  by  another  name*) — tho:?e
conventions,  those  compacts,  which  are  accomplished  once  for
all,  and  not  by  successive  acts, — are  no  sooner  executed  than
[  209  ]  they  are  completed  and  perfected. If  they  are  valid,  they
have  in  their  own  nature  a  perpetual  and  irrevocable  effect :
nor  have  we  them  in  view  when  we  inquire  whether  a  treaty
*  be  real  or  personal. Puflfendorf  f  gives  us  the  following  rules
to  direct  us  in this  inquiry — "1.  That  the  successors  are
bound  to  observe  the  treaties  of  peace  concluded  by  their '
predecessors. 2.  That  a  successor  should  observe  all  the
lawful  conventions  by  which  his  predecessor  has  transferred
any  right  to  a  third  party." This  is  evidently  wandering
from  the  point  in  question :  it  is  only  saying  that  what  is
done  with  validity  by  a  prince,  cannot  be  annulled  by  his
successors. — And  who  doubts  it  ? A  treaty  of  peace  is  in
its  own  nature  made  with  a  view  to  its  perpetual  duration  :
and,  as  soon  as  it  is  once  duly  concluded  and  ratified,  the
affair  is  at  an  end ;  the  treaty  must  be  accomplished  on  both
sides,  and  observed  according  to  its  tenor. If  it  is  executed
upon  the  spot,  there  ends  the  business  at  once. But,  if  the
treaty  contains  engagements  for  the  performance  of  succes-
sive and  reiterated  acts,  it  will  still  be  necessary  to  examine,
according  to  the  rules  we  have  laid  down,  whether  it  be  in
this  respect  real  or  personal, — whether  the  contracting  par-
ties intended  to  bind  their  successors  to  the  performance  of
those  acts,  or  only  promised  them  for  the  time  of  their  own
reign. In  the  same  manner,  as  soon  as  a  right  is  transferred
by  a  lawful  convention,  it  no  longer  belongs  to  the  state  that

•

•  See  Chap.  XII.  §  163,  of  this  book,
t  Law  of  ligature  and  Nations,  book  8,  c  9,  §  8.
304


AND OTHEB  PUBLIC TBBATIBS.  ^09

haB  ceded  it ;  the  affair  is  concluded  and  terminated.  But,  book  n.
if  the  successor  discovers  any  flaw  in  the  deed  of  transfer,  ch^p-  ^»
and  proves  it,  he  is  not  to  be  accused  of  maintaining  that  the
convention  is  not  obligatory  on  him,  and  refusing  to  fulfil  it ;
— he  only  shows  that  such  convention  has  not  taken  place :
for  a  defective  and  invalid  deed  is  a  nullity,  and  to  be  consi-
dered as  having  never  existed.

The  third  rule  given  by  Puffendorf  is  no  less  useless  with  §  i93.*Tre«-
respect  to  this  question.  It  is,  '*  that  if,  after  the  other  ally  ^®"  a^ea*}y
has  already  executed  something  to  which  he  was  bound  by  ^  ^^^  \jjg
virtue  of  the  treaty,  the  king  happens  to  die  before  he  has  one  part,
accomplished  in  his  turn  what  he  had  engaged  to  perform,
his  successor  is  indispensably  obliged  to  perform  it.  For,
what  the  other  ally  has  executed  under  the  condition  of  re-
ceiving an  equivalent,  having  turned  to  the  advantage  of  the
state,  or  at  least  having  been  done  with  that  view,  it  is  clear,
that,  if  he  does  not  receive  th«  return  for  which  he  had
stipulated,  he  then  acquires  the  same  right  as  a  man  who  has
paid  what  he  did  not  owe ;  and,  therefore,  the  successor  is
obliged  to  allow  him  a  complete  indemnification  for  what  he
has  done  or  given,  or  to  make  good,  on  his  own  part,  what
his  predecessor  had  engaged  to  perform.*'  All  this,  I  say,  is
foreign  to  our  question.  If  the  alliance  is  real,  it  still  sub-
sists, notwithstanding  the  death  of  one  of  the  contracting
parties ;  if  it  is  personal,  it  expires  with  them,  or  either  of
them  (§  183).  But,  when  a  personal  alliance  comes  to  be
dissolved  in  this  manner,  it  is  quite  a  different  question  to  [  210  J
ascertain  what  one  of  the  allied  states  is  bound  to  perform,  in
case  the  other  has  already  executed  something  in  pursuance
of  the  treaty :  and  this  question  is  to  be  determined  on  very
different  principles.  It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  nature
of  what  has  been  done  pursuant  to  the  treaty.  If  it  has
been  any  of  those  determinate  and  substantial  acts  which  it
is  usual  with  contracting  parties  mutually  to  promise  to  each
other  in  exchange,  or  by  way  of  equivalent,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  he  who  has  received,  ought  to  give  what  he  has
promised  in  return,  if  he  would  adhere  to  the  agreement,  and
is  obliged  to  adhere  to  it :  if  he  is  not  bound,  and  is  unwilling
to  adhere  to  it,  he  ought  to  restore  what  he  has  received,  to
replace  things  in  their  former  state,  or  to  indemnify  the  ally
from  whom  he  has  received  the  advantage  in  question.  To  act
otherwise,  would  be  keeping  possession  of  another's  property.
In  this  case,  the  ally  is  in  the  situation,  not  of  a  man  who
has  paid  what  he  did  not  owe,  but  of  one  who  has  paid  be-
forehand for  a  thing  that  has  not  been  delivered  to  him.
But,  if  the  personal  treaty  related  to  any  of  those  uncertain
and  contingent  acts  which  are  to  be  performed  as  occasions
offer, — of  those  promises  which  are  not  obligatory  if  an  op-
portunity of  fulfilling  them  does  not  occur, — ^it  is  only  on
occasion  likewise  that  the  performance  of  similar  acts  is  due

89  2  A  2  306


210  OF  TBEATIES OF  ALLIANCE,

BOOK  n.  in  return :  and,  when  the  term  of  the  alliance  is  expired^
CHAP,  xir.  neither  of  the  parties  remains  bound  by  any  obligation.  In
a  defensive  alliance,  for  instance,  two  kings  have  reciprocally
promised  each  other  a  gratuitous  assistance  during  the  term
of  their  lives :  one  of  them  is  attacked :  he  is  succoured  by
his  ally,  and  dies  before  he  has  an  opportunity  to  succour
him  in  his  turn :  the  alliance  is  at  an  end,  and  no  obligation
thence  devolves  on  the  successor  of  the  deceased,  except  in-
deed that  he  certainly  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  sove-
reign who  has  given  a  salutary  assistance  to  his  state.  And
we  must  not  pronounce  such  an  alliance  an  injurious  one  to
the  ally  who  has  given  assistance  without  receiving  any.  Hia
treaty  was  one  of  those  speculating  contracts  in  which  the
advantages  or  disadvantages  wholly  depend  on  chance :  he
might  have  gained  by  it,  though  it  has  been  his  fate  to  lose.

We  might  here  propose  another  question.  The  personal
alliance  expiring  at  the  death  of  one  of  the  allies,  if  the  sur-
vivor, under  an  idea  that  it  is  to  subsist  with  the  successor,
fulfils  the  treaty  on  his  part  in  favour  of  the  latter,  defends
his  country,  ^aves  some  of  his  towns,  or  furnishes  provisions
for  his  army, — what  ought  the  sovereign  to  do,  who  is  thus
succoured  ?  He  ought,  doubtless,  either  to  suffer  the  alliance
to  subsist,  as  the  ally  of  his  predecessor  has  conceived  that
it  was  to  subsist  (and  this  will  be  a  tacit  renewal  and  exten-
sion of  the  treaty) — or  to  pay  for  the  real  service  he  has  re-
ceived, according  to  a  just  estimate  of  its  importance,  if  he
does  not  choose  to  continue  that  alliance.  It  would  be  in
such  a  case  as  this  that  we  might  say  with  Puffendorf,  that  he
[  211  ]  who  has  rendered  such  a  service  has  acquired  the  right  of  a

man  who  has  paid  what  he  did  not  owe.
§  194.  The The  duration  of  a  personal  alliance  being  restricted  to  the
fiersonal  al-  persons  of  the  contracting  sovereigns, — if^  from  any  cause
Uance  ex- ^rhatsoever,  one  of  them  ceases  to reign,  the  alliance  ex-

Dires  ii  one  o '

of  the  con-  pir^s :  for  they  have  contracted  in  quality  of  sovereigns ;  and
tracting  he  who  ceases  to  reign  no  longer  exists  as  a  sovereign,  though
powers he  still  lives  as  a  man.

ceases  to  Kings  do  not  always  treat  solely  and  directly  for  their

r  J jj^i^j.^^^ kingdoms;  sometimes,  by  virtue  of  the  power  they  have  in
ties  in  their  their  hands,  they  ma.ke  treaties  relative  to  their  own  persons,
own  nature  or  their  families ;  and  this  they  may  lawfully  do,  as  the  wel-
pcrsonal. f^re  of  the  state  is  interested  in  the  safety  and  advantage  of
the  sovereign,  properly  understood. These  treaties  are  per-
sonal in  their  own  nature,  and  expire,  of  course,  on  the  death
of  the  king  or  the  extinction  of  his  family. Such  is  an  alii
ance  made  for  the  defence  of  a  king  and  his  family.
§  196.  Alli- It  is  asked,  whether  such  an  alliance  subsists  with  the  king
ance  con- j^jj J  ^^^  royal  family,  when,  by  some  revolution,  they  are  de-
\ul  defence  P^i^®^  ^^  *^®  crown. We  have  remarked  above  (§  194),  that
iM  the  king  ^  personal  alliance  expires  with  the  reign  of  him  who  cou-
•iid  the tracted  it :  but  that  is  to  be  understood  of  an  alliance  formed

306


/


^AND  OTHER  PUBLIC  TREATIES.  21X

with  the  state,  and  restricted,  in  its  duration,  to  the  reign  of book  ii.
the  contracting  king. But  the  alliance  of  which  we  are  now  chap,  xil
to  treat,  is  of  another  nature. Although  obligatory  on  the  ^oyal
state,  since  she  is  bound  by  all  the  public  acts  of  her  sove-  family,
reign,  it  is  made  directly  in  favour  of  the  king  and  his  family :
it  would,  therefore,  be  absurd  that  it  should  be  dissolved  at
the  moment  when  they  stand  in  need  of  it,  and  by  the  very
event  which  it  was  intended  to  guard  against. Besides,  the
king  does  not  forfeit  the  character  of  royalty  merely  by  the
loss  of  his  kingdom. If  he  is  unjustly  despoiled  of  it  by  an
usurper,  or  by  rebels,  he  still  preserves  his  rights,  among
which  are  to  be  reckoned  his  alliances.

But  who  shall  judge  whether  a  king  has  been  dethroned
lawfully  or  by  violence  ?  An  independent  nation  acknow-
ledges no  judge.  If  the  body  of  the  nation  declare  that  the
king  has  forfeited  his  right,  by  the  abuse  he  has  made  of  it,
and  depose  him,  they  may  justly  do  it  when  their  grievances
are  well  founded ;  and  no  other  power  has  a  right  to  censure
their  conduct.  The  personal  ally  of  this  king  ought  not,
therefore,  to  assist  him  against  the  nation  who  have  made  use
of  their  right  in  deposing  him:  if  he  attempts  it,  he  injures
that  nation.  England  declared  war  against  Louis  XIV.,  in
the  year  1688,  for  supporting  the  interests  of  James  II.,  who
had  been  formally  deposed  by  the  nation.  The  same  coun-
try declared  war  against  him  a  second  time,  at  the  beginning
of  the  present  century,  because  that  prince  acknowledged  the
son  of  the  deposed  monarch,  under  the  title  of  James  III.
In  doubtful  cases,  and  when  the  body  of  the  nation  has  not
pronounced,  or  has  not  pronounced  freely,  a  sovereign  ought  [  212  ]
naturally  to  support  and  defend  an  ally ;  and  it  is  then  that
the  voluntary  law  of  nations  subsists  between  different  states.
The  party  who  have  expelled  the  king  maintain  that  the;
have  right  on  their  side :  the  unfortunate  prince  and  his  allien
flatter  themselves  with  having  the  same  advantage ;  and,  at
they  have  no  common  judge  upon  earth,  there  remains  nc
other  mode  of  deciding  the  contest  than  an  appeal  to  arms ;
they,  therefore,  engage  in  a  formal  war.

Finally,  when  the  foreign  prince  has  faithfully  fulfilled  his
engagements  towards  an  unfortunate  monarch,  when  he  has
done,  in  his  defence,  or  to  procure  his  restoration,  every  thing
which,  by  the  terms  of  the  alliance,  he  was  bound  to  do, — if
his  efforts  have  proved  ineffectual,  it  cannot  be  expected,  by
the  dethroned  prince,  that  he  shall  support  an  endless  war  in
his  favour, — that  he  shall  for  ever  continue  at  enmity  with
the  nation  or  the  sovereign  who  has  deprived  him  of  the
throne.  He  must  at  length  think  of  peace,  abandon  his  un-
fortunate ally,  and  consider  him  as  having  himself  abandoned
his  right  through  necessity.  Thus,  Louis  XIV.  was  obliged
tc  abandon  James  II.  and  to  acknowledge  King  William,

though  he  had  at  first  treated  him  as  an  usurper.

ao7


212 .  OF  TREATIES OF  ALLIANCB^ ETC^

vooK  n. The  same  qaestion  presents  itself  in  real  alliances,  and,  in

OHAP.  XII.  general,  in  all  alliances  made  with  a  state,  and  not  in  parti-

$197.  Obli-  cular  with  a  king,  for  the  defence  of  his  person. An  ally

Ration  of  a  ought, doubtless,  to be defended against every  invasion,

'^h^  *^*h^*^  against  every  foreign  violence,  and  even  against  his  rebellioua

allied  king Subjects ;  in  the  same  manner  a  republic  ought  to  be  defended

U  depoeed, against  the  enterprises  of  one  who  attempts  to  destrdy  the

public  liberty. But  the  other  party  in  the  alliance  ought  to

recollect  that  he  is  the  ally,  and  not  the  judge,  of  the  state

or  the  nation. If  the  nation  has  deposed  her  king  in  form,

— if  the  people  of  a  republic  have  expelled  their  magistrates,

and  set  themselves  at  liberty,  or,  either  expressly  or  tacitly,

acknowledged  the  authority  of  an  usurper, — to  oppose  these

domestic  regulations,  or  to  dispute  their  justice  or  validity,

would  be  interfering  in  the  government  of  the  nation,  and

doing  her  an  injury  (see  §§  54,  &c.  of  this  Book.) The  ally

remains  the  ally  of  the  state,  notwithstanding  the  change

that  has  happened  in  it. However,  if  this  change  rendeis

the  alliance  useless,  dangerous,  or  disagreeable  to  him,  he  is

at  liberty  to  renounce  it :  for,  he  may  upon  good  grounds

assert  that  he  would  not  have  entered  into  an  alliance  with  that

nation,  had  she  been  under  her  present  form  of  government

To  this  case  we  may  also  apply  what  we  have  said  above
respecting  a  personal  ally.  However  just  the  cause  of  that
king  may  be,  who  is  expelled  from  the  throne  either  by  his
subjects  or  by  a  foreign  usurper,  his  allies  are  not  obliged  to
support  an  eternal  war  in  his  favour.  After  having  made
ineffectual  efforts  to  reinstate  him,  they  must  at  length  restore
to  their  people  the  blessings  of  peace ;  they  must  come  to  an
accommodation  with  the  usurper,  and  for  that  purpose  treat
with  him  as  with  a  lawful  sovereign.  Louis  XIV.,  finding
himself  exhausted  by  a  bloody  and  unsuccessful  war,  made
[  213  ]  an  offer,  at  Gertruydenberg,  to  abandon  his  grandson,  whom
.he  had  placed  on  the  throne  of  Spain :  and  afterwards,  when
the  aspect  of  affairs  was  changed,  Charles  of  Austria,  the
rival  of  Philip,  saw  himself,  in  his  turn,  abandoned  by  his
allies.  They  grew  weary  of  exhausting  their  states  in  order
to  put  him  in  possession  of  a  crown  to  which  they  thought
him  justly  entitled,  but  which  they  no  longer  saw  any  proba-
bility of  being  able  to  procure  for  him.


OP  THE  DISSOLUTION  AND  BENEWAL  OF  TREATIES.  213


BOOK  II.
CHAP.  2JII.


CHAP.  XIIL

OF  THE  DISSOLUTION AND RENEWAL OF  TREATIES.  (125)

AN  alliance  is  dissolved  at  the  expiration  of  the  term  for  §  198.  Ex-
vhich  it  had  been  concluded. This  term  is  sometimes  fixed,  piration  of
as,  when  an  alliance  is  made  for  a  certain  number  of  years ;  ^"J^^j^  ^
sometimes  it  is  uncertain,  as  in  personal  alliances,  whose  du-  limited
ration  depends  on  the  lives  of  the  contracting  powers. The  time,
term  is  likewise  uncertain,  when  two  or  more  sovereigns  form
an  alliance  with  a  view  to  some  particular  object;  as,  for
instance,  that  of  expelling  a  horde  of  barbarous  invaders
from  a  neighbouring  country, — of  reinstating  a  sovereign  on
his  throne,  &c. The  duration  of  such  an  alliance  depends
on  the  completion  of  the  enterprise  for  which  it  was  formed.
Thus,  in  the  last-mentioned  instance,  when  the  sovereign  is
restored,  and  so  firmly  seated  on  his  throne  as  to  be  able  to
retain  the  undisturbed  possession  of  it,  the  alliance,  which
was  fonned  with  a  sole  view  to  his  restoration,  is  now  at  an
end. But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  enterprise  prove  unsuc-
cessful,— the  moment  his  allies  are  convinced  of  the  impossi-
bility of  carrying  it  into  efiFect,  the  alliance  is  likewise  at  a
end;  for  it  is  time  to  renounce  an  undertaking  when  it  is
acknowledged  ta  be  impracticable.

A  treaty  entered  into  for  a  limited  time  may  be  renewed  §  199.  R©.
by  the  common  consent  of  the  allies, — which  consent  may  be  "®^^  ^
either  expressly  or  tacitly  made  known. When  the  treaty  is  ''^^^^^
expressly  renewed,  it  is  the  same  as  if  a  new  one  were  con-
cluded, in  all  respects  similar  to  the  former.

The  tacit  renewal  of  a  treaty  is  not  to  be  presumed  upon
slight  grounds ;  for,  engagements  of  so  high  importance  are
well  entitled  to  the  formality  of  an  express  consent.  The
presumption,  therefore,  of  a  tacit  renewal  must  be  founded
on  acts  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  admit  a  doubt  of  their  hav-
ing been  performed  in  pursuance  of  the  treaty.  But,  even  in
this  case,  still  another  difficulty  arises :  for,  according  to  the
circumstances  and  nature  of  the  acts  in  question,  they  may
prove  nothing  more  than  a  simple  continuation  or  extension
of  the  tre;ity, — which  is  very  difierent  from  a  renewal,  espe-
cially as  to  the  term  of  duration.  For  instance,  England  has  [  214  J
entered  into  a  subsidiary  treaty  with  a  German  prince,  who  is
to  keep  on  foot,  during  ten  years,  a  stated  number  of  troops
at  the  disposal  of  that  country,  on  condition  of  receiving  from
her  a  certain  yearly  sum.  Ihe  ten  years  being  expired,  the
king  of  England  causes  the  sum  stipulated  for  one  year  to  be

(125)  See,  in  general,  GrotiiM,  b.  3, to  47,  615  to  630,  and  iL  Index,  tit.
e.  3;  ana  1  Chitty's  Com.  Law,  38 Treatia,

309


214  OF  THE  DISSOLUTION  AND  KENEWAL  OF  TREATIES;

BOOK  It.  paid :  the  ally  receives  it :  thus  the  treaty  is  indeed  i  icitly
oicAP.  XIII.  continued  for  one  year;  but  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  renewed;
for  the  transaction  of  that  year  does  not  impose  an  obligatioa
of  doing  the  same  thing  for  ten  years  successively.  But,  sup  •
posing  a  sovereign  has,  in  consequence  of  an  agreement  witli
a  neighbouring  state,  paid  her  a  million  of  money  for  permis-
sion to  keep  a  garrison  in  one  of  her  strongholds  during  ten
years, — if,  at  the  expiration  of  that  term,  the  sovereign,  in-
stead of  withdrawing  his  garrison,  makes  his  ally  a  tender  of
another  million,  and  the  latter  accepts  it,  the  treaty  is,  in
this  case,  tacitly  renewed.

When  the  term  for  which  the  treaty  was  made  is  expired,
each  of  the  allies  is  perfectly  free,  and  may  consent  or  refuse
to  renew  it,  as  he  thinks  proper. It  must,  however,  be  con-
fessed, that,  if  one  of  the  parties,  who  has  almost  singly
reaped  all  the  advantages  of  the  treaty,  should,  without  just
and  substantial  reasons,  refuse  to  renew  it  now  that  he  thinks
he  will  no  longer  stand  in  need  of  it,  and  foresees  the  time
approaching  when  his  ally  may  derive  advantage  from  it  in
turn, — such conduct  would  be dishonourable,  inconsistent
with  that  generosity  which  should  characterize  sovereigns,
and  widely  distant  from  those  sentiments  of  gratitude  and
friendship  that  are  due  to  an  old  and  faithful  ally. It  is  but
too  common  to  see  great  potentates,  when  arrived  at  the  sum-
mit of  power,  neglect  those  who  have  assisted  them  in  attain-
ing it.
§S00.  How Treaties  contain  promises  that  are  perfect  and  reciprocal,
a  treaty  w jf  one  of  the  allies  fails  in  his  engagements,  the  other  may
when^viola-  ^^'^P^^  ^^^  *^  fulfil  them : — a  perfect  promise  confers  a  right
t«d  by  one ^^  ^0  SO. But,  if  the  latter  has  no  other  expedient  than  that
of  the  con-  of  arms  to  force  his  ally  to  the  performance  of  his  promises,
tracting ^e  will  sometimes  find  it  more  eligible  to  cancel  the  promises
P"^®*' on  his  own  side  also,  and  to  dissolve  the  treaty. He  has  un-
doubtedly a  right  to  do  this,  since  his  promises  were  made
only  on  condition  that  the  ally  should,  on  his  part,  execute
every  thing  which  he  had  engaged  to  perform.  '  The  party,
therefore,  who  is  ofiended  or  injured  in  those  particulars
which  constitute  the  basis  of  the treaty,  is  at  liberty  to
choose  the  alternative  of  either  compelling  a  faithless  ally  to
fulfil  his  engagements,  or  of  declaring  the  treaty  dissolved
by  his  violation  of  it. On  such  an  occasion,  prudence  and
wise  policy  will  point  out  the  line  of  conduct  to  be  pursued.
§201.  Tlie But  when  there  exist  between  allies  two  or  more  treaties,
violation  of  different  from  and  independent  of  each  other,  the  violation
does^not^ of  one  of  those  treaties  does  not  directly  disengage  the  in*
cancel  an- j^^ed  party  from  the  obligations  he  has  contracted  in  the
other.  others :  for,  the  promises  contained  in  these  do  not  depend

.  on  those  included  in  the  violated  treaty. But  the  offended
f  215  ]  ally  may,  on  the  breach  of  one  treaty  by  the  other  party,
threaten  him  with  a  renunciation,  on  his  own  part,  of  all  the

310


OF  THE  DISSOLVTl'^N  AhD  RENBWAL  OF  TREATIES.


215


other  treaties  by  which  they  are  united, — and  may  put  his  book  h.
threats  in  execution  if  the  other  disregards  them.  For,  if  any  chap,  xm.
one  wrests  or  withholds  from  me  my  right,  I  may,  in  the  state
of  nature,  in  order  to  oblige  him  to  do  me  justice,  to  punish
him,  or  to  indemnify  myself,  deprive  him  also  of  some  of  his
rights,  or  seize  and  detain  them  till  I  have  obtained  complete
satisfaction.  And,  if  recourse  is  had  to  arms,  in  order  to
obtain  satisfaction  for  the  infringement  of  that  treaty,  the
oflfended  party  begins  by  stripping  his  enemy  of  all  the  rights
which  had  accrued  to  him  from  the  different  treaties  subsist-
ing between  them :  and  we  shall  see,  in  treating  of  war,  that
he  may  do  this  with  justice.

Some  writers*  would  extend  what  we  have  just  said  to  the  §  202.  Tho
different  articles  of  a  treaty  which  have  no  connection  with  violation  of
the  article  that  has  been  violated, — saying  we  ought  to  con-  ?^^  ^^cle
sider  those  several  articles  as  so  many  distinct  treaties  con-  ™  *  cancel
eluded  at  the  same  time. They  maintain,  therefore,  that,  if  the  whole,
either  of  the  allies  violates  one  article  of  the  treaty,  the  other  (126)
has  not  immediately  a  right  to  cancel  the  entire  treaty,  but
that  he  may  either  refuse,  in  his  turn,  what  he  had  promised
with  a  view  to  the  violated  article,  or  compel  his  ally  to  fulfil
his  promises  if  there  still  remains  a  possibility  of  fulfilling
them, — if  not,  to  repair  the  damage ;  and  that  for  this  pur-
pose he  may  threaten  to  renounce  the  entire  treaty, — a  menace
which  he  may  lawfully  put  in  execution,  if  it  be  disregarded
by  the  other. Such  undoubtedly  is  the  conduct  which  pru-
dence, moderation,  the  love  of  peace,  and  charity  would  com-
monly prescribe  to  nations. Who  will  deny  this,  and  madly
assert  that  sovereigns  are  allowed  to  have  immediate  recourse
to  arms,  or  even  to  break  every  treaty  of  alliance  and  friend-
ship, for  the  least  subject  of  complaint  ? But  the  question
here  turns  on  the  simple  right,  and  not  on  the  measures  which
are  to  be  pursued  in  order  to  obtain  justice ;  and  the  principle
upon*  which  those  writers  ground  their  decision,  appears  to
me  utterly  indefensible. We  cannot  consider the  several
articles  of  the  same  treaty  as  so  many  distinct  and  independ-
ent treaties :  for,  though  we  do  not  see  any  immediate  con-
nection between  some  of  those  articles,  they  are  All  connected


•  See  Wolfius,  Jus  Gent  §  432.

(126)  In  Sutton  v.  Sutton,  I  Ruse.  6c
Mylne  Rep.  663,  A.  D.  1830,  it  wa«
held  in  the  Court  of  Chanceiy,  that,
under  the  treaty  of  peace,  19  Nov.  1794,
between  Great  Britain  and  {the  United
States  of}  America,  the  act  of  37  Geo.  3,
&  97,  passed  for  the  purpose  of  carrying
such  treaty  into  execution,  American  ci-
tizens, who  held  lands  in  Great  Britain
on  the  28th  Oct.  1795,  and  their  heirs
vid  assigns,  are  cU  all  time$  to  be  consi-
dered, 90 far  as  regards  these  lands,  not  as


aliens  but  as  native  subjects  of  Great
Britain,  and  capable  of  inheriting  and
holding  such  lands,  notwithstanding  a
subsequent  war  between  the  two  coun-
tries, and  this  in  respect  of  the  express
provision  which  prevents  a  subsequent
war  from  wholly  determining  that  part  of
the  treaty.  The  Master  of  the  Rolls  there
said,  **  It  is  a  reasonable  (^instruction,
that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  treaty
that  the  operation  of  the  treaty  should
be  permanent,  and  not  depend  upon  th«
continuance  of  a  state  of  peace."

311


215  OF  THE  DISSOLUTION  AND  RENEWAL  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n. by  this  common  relation,  viz.  that  the  contracting  powers
CHAP.  XIII.  have  agreed  to  some  of  them  in  consideration  of  the  others,
. and  by  way  of  compensation. I  would  perhaps  never  have
consented  to  this  article,  if  my  ally  had  not  granted  me  an-
other, which  in  its  own  nature  has  no  relation  to  it. Every
thing,  therefore,  which  is  comprehended  in  the  same  treaty,
is  of  the  same  force  and  nature  as  a  reciprocal  promise,  unless
where  a  formal  exception  is  made  to  the  contrary. Grotius
very  properly  observes  that  "  every  article  of  a  treaty  carries
with  it  a  condition,  by  the  non-performance  of  which  the
treaty  is  wholly  cancelled."* He  adds,  that  a  clause  is  some-
times inserted  to  the  following  effect,  viz.  "  that  the  violation
of  any  one  of  the  articles  shall  not  cancel  the  whole  treaty,"
in  order  that  one  of  the  parties  may  not  have,  in  every  slight
offence,  a  pretext  for  receding  from  his  engagements. This
precaution is  extremely  prudent,  and  very  conformable*  to
the  care  which  nations  ought  to  take  of  preserving  peace,
[  216  ]  and  rendering  their  alliances  durable.  (127)
S  203.  The In  the  same  manner  as  a  personal  treaty  expires  at  the
treaty iBvoid  death  of  the  king  who  has  contracted  it,  a  real  treaty  is  dis-
hy the  de- golved,  if  One  of  the  allied  nations  is  destroyed, — that  is  to

one*S"The  ^^^^  ^^*  ^^^^  ^^  ^^®  ^^^  ^^^  compose  it  happen  all  to  perish,
contracting  but,  also  if,  from  any  cause  whatsoever,  it  loses  its  national
jraweni.  quality,  or  that  of  a  political  and  independent  society.  Thus,
when  a  state  is  destroyed  and  the  people  are  dispersed,  or
when  they  are  subdued  by  a  conqueror,  all  their  alliances  and
treaties  fall  to  the  ground  with  the  public  power  that  had
contracted  them.  But  it  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  treaties
or  alliances  which  impose  a  mutual  obligation  to  perform  cer-
tain acts,  and  whose  existence  consequently  depends  on  that
of  the  contracting  powers,  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  those
contracts  by  which  a  perfect  right  is  once  for  all  acquired,
independent  of  any  mutual  performance  of  subsequent  acts.
If,  for  instance,  a  nation  has  for  ever  ceded  to  a  neighbouring
prince  the  right  of  fishing  in  a  certain  river,  or  that  of  keep-
ing a  garrison  in  a  particular  fortress,  that  prince  does  not
loSe  his  rights,  even  though  the  nation  from  whom  he  has  re-
ceived them  happens  to  be  subdued,  or  in  aiiy  other  manner
subjected  to  a  foreign  dominion.  His  rights  do  not  depend
on  the  preservation  of  that  nation :  she  had  alienated  them ;
and  the  conqueror  by  whom  she  has  been  subjugated  can  only
take  what  belonged  to  her.  In  the  same  manner,  the  debts
of  a  nation,  or  those  for  which  the  sovereign  has  mortgaged
any  of  his  towns  or  provinces,  are  not  cancelled  by  conquest.
The  king  of  Prussia,  on  acquiring  Silesia  by  conquest  and  by
the  treaty  of  Breslau,  took  upon  himself  the  debts  for  which

*  Grotins  de  Jure  Belli  et  Pads,  lib.  1  Russ.  &,  Mylne,  663,  is  an  express

ij*  cap.  XV.  §  16.  dedaion  upon  such  a  provision  even  by

(127)  The  case  of  Sutton  v*  Sutton,  implication.
812


OF  THE  DISSOLUTION  AND  RENEWAL  OF  TREATIES.  216

that  province  stood  mortgaged  to  some  English  merchants,  book  ii.
In  fact,  his  conquest  extended  no  further  than  the  acquisition  chap,  xiu.
of  those  rights  which  the  house  of  Austria  had  possessed  over
the  country ;  and  he  could  only  take  possession  of  Silesia,
such  as  he  found  it  at  the  time  of  the  cpnquest,  with  all  its
rights  and  all  its  burdens.  For  a  conqueror  to  refuse  to  pay
the  debts  of  a  country  he  has  subdued,  would  be  robbing  the
creditors,  with  whom  he  is  not  at  war.

Since  a  nation  or  a  state,  of  whatever  kind,  cannot  make  §204.  Alti-
any  treaty  contrary  to  those  by  which  she. is  actually  bound "^^es ^f  a
(§  165),  she  cannot  put  herself  under  the  protection  of  another  ^^  r^[
state,  without  reserving  all  her  alliances  and  all  her  existing  wards  put
treaties. For,  the  convention  by  which  a  state  places  herself  herself  un-
under  the  protection  of  another  sovereign,  is  a  treaty  (§  175) :  <ier  the  pro-
if  she  does  it  of  her  own  accord,  she  ought  to  do  it  in  such  a  ^^^?^  ®^

^  anotueF

manner,  that  the  new  treaty  may  involve  no  infringement  of .
her  pre-existing  ones. We  have  seen  (§  176)  what  rights  a  [217  ]
nation  derives,  in  a  case  of  necessity,  from  the  duty  of  self-
preservation.

The  alliances  of  a  nation  are  therefore  9ot  dissolved  when
she  puts  herself  under  the  protection  of  another  state,  unless
they  be  incompatible  with  the  conditions  of  that  protection.
The  ties  by  which  she  was  bound  to  her  former  allies  still  sub-
sist, and  those  allies  still  remain  bound  by  their  engagements
to  her,  &s  long  as  she  has  not  put  it  out  of  her  power  to  fulfil
her  engagements  to  them.

When  necessity  obliges  a  people  to  put  themselves  under
the  protection  of  a  foreign  power,  and  to  promise  him  the
assistance  of  their  whole  force  against  all  opponents  whatso-
ever, without  excepting  their  allies, — their  former  alliances
do  indeed  subsist,  so  far  as  they  are  not  incompatible  with
the  new  treaty  of  protection.  But,  if  the  case  should  happen,
that  a  former  ally  enters  into  a  war  with  the  protector,  the
protected  state  will  be  obliged  to  declare  for  the  latter,  to
whom  she  is  bound  by  closer  ties,  and  by  a  treaty  which,  in
case  of  collision,  is  paramount  to  all  the  others.  Thus  the
Nepesinians,  having  been  obliged  to  submit  to  the  Etrurians,
thought  themselves  afterwards  bound  to  adhere  to  their  treaty
of  submission  or  capitulation,  preferably  to  the  alliance  which
had  subsisted  between  them  and  the  Romans :  postqitam  de*
ditioniSj  quam  societatis,  fides  sanctiar  erat^  says  Livy.*

Finally,  as  treaties  are  made  by  the  mutual  agreement  of  §  205.
the  parties,  they  may  also  be  dissolved  by  mutual  consent,  at  Treaties
the  free  will  of  the  contracting  powers. And,  even  though  a  «^Molved  by
third  party  should  find  himself  interested  in  the  preservation  ™^jj*
uf  the  treaty,  and  should  suffer  by  its  dissolution, — yet,  if  he
had  no  share  in  making  such  treaty,  and  no  direct  promise
bad  been  made  to  him,  those  who  have  reciprocally  made  pro-

*  Lib.  vi.  cap.  z.
dO  1^  S  818


217  OF  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.

BOOK  ix.  mises  to  each  other,  which  eventually  prove  advantageous  to
CHAP.  XIII.  that  third  party,  may  also  reciprocally  release  each  oth<»r
from  them,  without  consulting  him,  or  without  his  having  u
right  to  oppose  them.  Two  monarchs  have  bound  themselves
by  a  mutual  promise  to  unite  their  forces  for  the  defence  of  a
neighbouring  city;  that  city  derives  advantage  from  their
assistance ;  but  she  has  no  right  to  it ;  and,  as  soon  as  the
two  monarchs  think  proper  mutually  to  dispense  with  their
engagements,  she  will  be  deprived  of  their  aid,  but  can  have
no  reason  to  complain  on  the  occasion,  since  no  promise  ha<l
been  made  to  her.


[  218  ]  CHAP.  XIV.

CHAP.  XIV.  OP  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS, — OF  THOSE  THAT  ARE  MABB
BY  SUBORDINATE  POWERS, — PARTICULARLY  OF  THE  AGREE-
MENT CALLHD  IN  LATIN  SPONSIO, — AND  OF  CONVENTIONS  OF
SOVEREIGNS  WITH  PRIVATE  PERSONS.,

§  206.  Con- THE  public  compacts,  called  conventions,  articles  of  agree-
▼entions ment,  &c.,  when  they  are  made  between  sovereigns,  differ
MvereiOTB.  ^^^^  treaties  only  in  their  object  (§  163). What  we  have
said  of  the  validity  of  treaties,  of  their  execution,  of  their
dissolution,  and  of  the  obligations  and  rights  that  flow  from
them-,  is  all  applicable  to  the  various  conventions  which  sove^
reigns  may  conclude  with  each  other. Treaties,  conventions,
and agreements  are  all public  engagements,  in  regard  to
which  there  is  but  one  and  the  same  right,  and  the  same
rules. We  do  not  here  wish  to  disgust  the  reader  by  unne-
cessary repetitions :  and  it  were  equally  unnecessary  to  enter
into  an  enumeration  of  the  various  kinds  of  these  conven-
tions, which  are  always  of  the  same  nature,  and  differ  only
in  the  matter  which  constitutes  their  object.
§207.  But  there  are  public  conventions  made  by  subordinate

^'^^'f™?:^® powers,  in  virtue  either  of  an  express  mandate  from  the
nLlepowere.  sovereign,  or  of  the  authority  with  which  they  are  invested
iJy  the  terms  of  their  commission,  and  according  as  the  nature
of  the  affairs  with  which  they  are  intrusted  may  admit  or  re-
quire the  exercise  of  that  authority.

The  appellation  of  inferior  or  subordinate  powers  is  given
to  public  persons  who  exercise  some  portion  of  the  sovereignty
in  the  name  and  under  the  authority  of  the  sovereign :  such
are  magistrates  established  for  the  administration  of  justice,
generals  of  armies,  and  ministers  of  state.

When,  by  an  express  order  from  their  sovereign  on  the
particular  occasion,  and  with  sufficient  powers  derived  from
him  for  the  purpose,  those  persons  form  a  convention,  such


OF  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.  218

convention  is  made  in  the  name  of  the  sovereign  himself, -who  book  h.
contracts  by  the  mediation  and  ministry  of  his  delegate  or  chap,  xiv,
proxy :  this  is  the  case  we  have  mentioned  in  §  156.

But  public  persons,  by  virtue  of  their  office,  or  of  the  com-
mission given  to  them,  have  also  themselves  the  power  of
making  conventions  on  public  affairs,  exercising  on  those
occasions  the  right  and  authority  of  the  sovereign  by  whom
they  are  commissioned.  There  are  two  modes  in  which  they
acquire  that  power ; — it  is  given  to  them  in  express  terms  by
the  sovereign :  or  it  is  naturally  derived  from  their  commis-
sion itself, — the  nature  of  the  affairs  with  which  these  persons
and  intrusted,  requiring  that  they  should  have  a  power  to
make  such  conventions,  especially  in  cases  where  they  cannot
await  the  orders  of  their  sovereign.  Thus,  the  governor  of  a  [  219  ]
town,  and  the  general  who  besieges  it,  have  a  power  to  settle
the  terms  of  capitulation ;  and  whatever  agreement  they  thus
form  within  the  terms  of  their  commission,  is  obligatory  on
the  state  or  sovereign  who  has  invested  them  with  the  power
by  which  they  conclude  it.  As  conventions  of  this  nature
take  place  principally  in  war,  we  shall  treat  of  them  more  at
large  in  Book  III.

If  a  public  person,  an  ambassador,  or  a  general  of  an  army,  §  2oa
exceeding  the  bounds  of  his  commission,  concludes  a  treaty  Treatiea
or  a  convention  without  orders  from  the  sovereign,  or  without  ^*^'**^*"^fj
being  authorized  to  do  it  by  virtue  of  his  office,  the  treaty  is  Mreon^
null,  as  being  made  without  sufficient  powers  (§  157) :  it  can-  vithout
not  become  valid  without  the  express  or  tacit  ratification  of  orders  from
the  sovereign. The  express  ratification  is  a  written  deed  by  ^^?  ^^^^
which  the  sovereign  approves  the  treaty,  and  engages  to  ob-  ^iSout'
serve  it. The  tacit  ratification  is  implied  by  certain  steps  sufficient
which  the  sovereign  is  justly  presumed  to  take  only  in  pur-  powers,
suance  of  the  treaty,  and  which  he  could  not  be  supposed  to
take  without  considering  it  as  concluded  and  agreed  upon.
Thus,  on  a  treaty  of  peace  being  signed  by  public  ministers
who  have  even  exceeded  the  orders  of  their  sovereigns,  if  one
of  the  sovereigns  causes  troops  to  pass  on  the  footing  of
friends  through  the  territories  of  his  reconciled  enemy,  he
tacitly  ratifies  the  treaty  of  peace. But  if,  by  a  reservatory
clause  of  the  treaty,  the  ratification  of  the  sovereign  be  re-
quired,— as  such  reservation  is  usually  understood  to  imply
an  express  ratification,  it  is  absolutely  requisite  that  the  treaty
be  thus  expressly  ratified  before  it  can  acquire  its  full  force.

By  the  Latin  term,  sponsio^  we  express  an  agreement  re-  §  209.  Th«
lating  to  affairs  of  state,  made  by  a  public  person,  who  ex-  agreement
ceeds  the  bounds  of  his  commission,  and  acts  without  the^^^^^
orders  or  command  of  the  sovereign. The  person  who  treats
for  the  state  in  this  manner  without  being  commissioned  for
the  purpose,  promises  of  course  to  use  his  endeavours  for  pre-
vailing on  the  state  or  sovereign  to  ratify  the  articles  he  has
agreed  to :  otherwise  his  engagement  would  be  nugatory  and

315


219  OF  OTHER  PUBLi.. JONYENTIONS,  BTO.

BOOK  n. niusive. The  foundation  of  this  agreement  can  be  no  other,
OHAP.  xiY.  Qn  either  side,  than  the  hope  of  such  ratification.

The  Roman  history  furnishes  us  with  various  instances  of
such  agreements : — the  one  that  first  arrests  our  attention  is
that  which  was  concluded  at  the  Furcae  CaudinaB — the  most
famous  instance  on  record,  and  one  that  has  been  discussed
by  the  most  celebrated  writers.  The  consuls  Titus  Veturius
Calvinus  and  Spurius  Postumius,  with  the  Roman  army,  being
enclosed  in  the  defiles  of  the  Furcae  Caudinae,  without  hope
of  escaping,  concluded  a  shameful  agreement  with  the  Sam-
nites — informing,  them,  however,  that  they  could  not  make  a
real  public  treaty  (foedus)  without  orders  from  the  Roman
people,  without  the  feciales,  and  the  ceremonies  consecrated
[  220  ]  by  custom.  The  Samnite  general  contented  himself  with
exacting  a  promise  from  the  consuls  and  principal  officers  of
the  army,  and  obliging  them  to  deliver  him  six  hundred  host-
ages ;  after  which,  having  made  the  Roman  troops  lay  down
their  arms,  and  obliged  them  to  p^s  under  the  yoke,  he  dis-
missed them.  The  senate,  however,  refused  to  accede  to  the
treaty, — delivered  up  those  who  had  concluded  it  to  the  Sam-
nites,  who  refused  to  receive  them — and  then  thought  them-
selves free  from  all  obligation,  and  screened  from  all  reproach.*
Authors  have  entertained  very  difierent  sentiments  of  thia
conduct.  Some  assert,  that,  if  Rome  did  not  choose  to  ratify
the  treaty,  she  ought  to  have  replaced  things  in  the  same  situ-
ation they  were  in  before  the  agreement,  by  sending  back  the
whole  army  to  their  encampment  at  the  Furcae  Caudinae:  and
this  the  Samnites  also  insisted  upon.  I  confess  that  I  am
not  entirely  satisfied  with  the  reasonings  I  have  found  on
this  question,  even  in  authors  whose  eminent  superiority  I
am  in  other  respects  fully  inclined  to  acknowledge.  Let  us
therefore  endeavour,  with  the  aid  of  their  observations,  to  set
the  afiair  in  a  new  light.
^210.  The  It  presents  two  questions — first,  what  is  the  person  bound
b***d"b"°'  *^  ^^'  ^^^  ^^  made  an  agreement  {apoyisor),  if  the  state  dis-
•uchan  avows  it? — Secondly,  what  is  the  state  bound  to  do?  But,
•greement  previous  to  the  discussion  of  these  questions,  it  is  necessary
to  observe  with  Grotius,t  that  the  state  is  not  bound  by  an
agreement  of  that  nature.  This  is  manifest,  even  from  the
definition  of  the  agreement  called  spo^mo.  The  state  has
not  given  orders  to  conclude  it :  neither  has  she  in  any  man-
ner whatever  conferred  the  necessary  powers  for  the  pur-
pose :  she  has  neither  expressly  given  them  by  her  injunc-
tions or  by  a  plenipotentiary  commission,  nor  tacitly  by  a
natural  or  necessary  consequence  of  the  authority  intrusted
to  him  who  makes  the  agreement  (sponaori).  The  general
of  an  army  has,  indeed,  by  virtue  of  his  commission,  a  power

to  enter,  as  circumstances  may  require,  into  a  private  con-

— . \.

*  Livy,  lib.  iz.  f  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  lib.  ii.  cap.  zy.  §  Itt.

316


OF  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.  220

vention, — ^a  compact  relative  to  himself,  to  his  troops,  or  to book  h.
the  occurrences  of  war:  but  he  has  no  power  to  conclude  a  chap; xiy
treaty  of  peace. He  may  bind  himself,  and  the  troops  under
his  command,  on  all  the  occasions  where  his  functions  re-
quire that  he  should  have  the  power  of  treating ;  but  he  can-
not bind  the  state  beyond  the  extent  of  his  commission.

Let  us  now  see  to  what  the  person  promising  {sponsor)  is  §211.  To
bound,  when  the  state  disavows  the  agreement.  We  ought  wl»at  the
not  here  to  deduce  our  arguments  from  the  rules  which  ob-  kI°°T^V
tain  between  private  individuals  under  the  law  of  nature :  u  is  dis-
for,  the  nature  of  the  things  in  question,  and  the  situation  avowed,
of  the  contracting  parties,  necessarily  make  a  difference  be-
tween the  two  cases.  It  is  certain  that,  between  individuals,
he  who  purely  and  simply  promises  what  depends  on  the  will
of  another,  without  being  authorized  to  make  such  promise,
is  obliged,  if  the  other  disavows  the  transaction,  to  accom-  [  221  ]
plish  himself  what  he  has  promised, — to  give  an  equivalent —
to  restore  things  to  their  ^former  state ;  or,  finally,  to  make
full  compensation  to  the  person  with  whom  he  has  treated,
according  to  the  various  circumstances  of  the  case.  His
promise  (sponsio)  can  be  understood  in  no  other  light.  But
this  is  not  the  case  with  respect  to  a  public  person,  who,  with-
out orders  and  without  authority,  engages  for  the  perform-
ance of  his  sovereign.  The  question  in  such  case  relates  to
things  that  infinitely  surpass  his  power  and  all  his  faculties —
things  which  he  can  neither  execute  himself  nor  cause  to  be
executed,  and  for  which  he  cannot  offer  either  an  equivalent
or  a  compensation  in  any  wise  adequate :  he  is  not  even  at
liberty  to  give  the  enemy  what  he  has  promised,  without  au-
thority: finally,  it  is  equally  out  of  his  power  to  restore
things  entirely  to  their  former  state.  The  party  who  treats
with  him  cannot  expect  any  thing  of  this  nature.  If  the
promiser  has  deceived  him  by  saying  he  was  sufficiently  au-
thorized, he  has  a  right  to  punish  him.  But  if,  like  the
Roman  consuls  at  the  Furcse  Caudinse,  the  promiser  has
acted  with  sincerity,  informing  him  that  he  had  not  a  power
to  bind  the  state  by  a  treaty, — nothing  else  can  be  presumed,
but.  that  the  other  party  was  willing  to  run  the  risk  of  making
a  treaty  that  must  become  void,  if  not  ratified, — ^hoping  that  a
regard  for  him  who  had  promised,  and  for  the  hostages,  would
induce  the  sovereign  to  ratify  what  had  been  thus  concluded.
If  the  event  deceives  his  hopes,  he  can  only  blame  his  own
imprudence.  An  eager  desire  of  obtaining  peace  on  advan-
tageous conditions,  and  the  temptation  of  some  present  ad-
vantages, may  have  been  his  only  inducements  to  make  so
hazardous  an  agreement.  This  was  judiciously  observed  by
the  consul  Postumius  himself,  after  his  return  to  Rome.  In
his  speech  to  the  senate,  as  given  to  us  by  Livy,  "Your
generals,"  said  he,  "and  those  of  the  enemy,  were  equally

guilty  of  imprudence, — we,  in  incautiously  involving  ourselves

2  B  2  317


221  OP  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.

BOOK  IT.  in  a  dangerous  situation, — ^they,  in  suffering  a  victory  to  escape
CHAP  xjT.  them,  of  which  the  nature  of  the  ground  gq,ve  them  a  cer-
tainty; still  distrusting  their  own  advantages,  and  hasting,
at  any  price,  to  disarm  men  who  were  ever  formidable  while
they  had  arms  in  their  hands.  Why  did  they  not  keep  ua
shut  up  in  our  camp  ?  Why  did  they  not  send  to  Rome,  in
order  to  treat  for  peace,  on  sure  grounds,  with  the  senate  and
the  people?**

It  is  manifest  that  the  Samnites  contented  themselves  with
the  hope  that  the  engagement  which  the  consuls  and  principal
officers  had  entered  into,  and  the  desire  of  saving  six  hundred
knights,  left  as  hostages,  would  induce  the  Romans  to  ratify
the  agreement,  considering,  that,  at  all  events,  they  should
still  have  those  six  hundred  hostages,  with  the  arms  and  bag-
gage of  the  army,  and  the  vain,  or  rather,  as  it  is  proved  by
its  consequences,  the  fatal  glory,  of  having  made  them  pass
under  the  yoke.

Under  what  obligation  then  were  the  consuls,  and  all  the
others  who  had  joined  with  them  in  the  promise  (spansores)  f
They  themselves  judged  that  they  ought  to  be  delivered  up  tc
[  222  3  the  Samnites.  This  was  not  a  natural  consequence  of  the
agreement  (sponsionis) ;  and  from  the  observations  above
made,  it  does  not  appear  that  a  general  in  such  circumstances,
having  promised  things  which  the  promisee  well  knew  to  be
out  of  his  power,  is  obliged,  on  his  promise  being  disavowed,
to  surrender  his  own  person  by  way  of  compensation.  But,
as  he  has  a  power  expressly  to  enter  into  such  an  engagement
which  lies  fairly  within  the  bounds  of  his  commission,  the
custom  of  those  times  had  doubtless  rendered  such  .engage-
ment a  tacit  clause  of  the  agreement  called  sponsiOj  since  the
Romans  delivered  up  all  the  sponsores,  all  those  who  had  pro-
mised :  this  was  a  maxim  of  their  fecial  law,*

If  the  sponsor  has  not  expressly  engaged  to  deliver  himself
up,  and  if  established  custom  does  not  lay  him  under  an  obli-
gation to  do  so,  it  would  seem  that  he  is  bound  to  nothing
further  by  his  promise  than  honestly  to  endeavour;  by  every
lawful  means,  to  induce  the  sovereign  to  ratify  what  he  has
promised :  and  there  cannot  exist  a  doubt  in  the  case,  provided
the  treaty  be  at  all  equitable,  advantageous  to  the  state,  or
supportable  in  consideration  of  the  misfortune  from  which  it
has  preserved  her.  But,  to  set  out  with  the  intention  of  mak-
ing a  treaty  the  instrument  to  ward  off  a  deadly  blow  from
the  state,  and  soon  after  to  advise  the  sovereign  to  refuse  his
ratification,  not  because  the  treaty  is  insupportable,  but  be-

*  I  have  said  in  my  preface,  that  it  gave  rise.  They  had  also  the  care
the  fecial  law  of  the  Romane  was  their  of  the  ceremonies  on  the  declaration
law  of  war.  The  college  of  the  feciales  of  war,  and  on  concluding  treaties  of
were  consulted  on  the  causes  that  peace.  The  feciales  were  likewise  con-
might  authorize  the  nation  to  engage  suited,  and  their  agen<^  employed,  in
in  a  war,  and  on  the  questions  to  which  all  public  treaties.
318


OP OTHER PUBLIC CONVENTIONS,  ETC.  £22

cause  an  advantage  may  be  taken  of  its  having  been  concluded  book  ii
without  authority — such  a  proceeding  would  undoubtedly  be  chap,  xjv
a  fraudulent  and  shameful  abuse  of  the  faith  of  treaties.  But,
what  must  the  general  do,  who,  in  order  to  save  his  army,  has
been  forced  to  conclude  a  treaty  that  is  detrimental  or  dis-
honourable to  the  state?  Must  he  advise  the  sovereign  to
ratify  it  ?  He  will  content  himself  with  laying  open  the  mo-
tives of  his  conduct,  and  the  necessity  that  obliged  him  to
treat :  he  will  show,  as  Postumius  did,  that  he  alone  is  bound,
and  that  he  consents  to  be  disowned  and  delivered  up  for  the
public  safety.  If  the  enemy  are  deceived,  it  is  through  their
own  folly.  Was  the  general  bound  to  inform  them  that,  in*
all  probability,  his  promises  would  not  be  ratified  ?  It  would
be  too  much  to  require  this  of  him.  In  such  a  case,  it  is
sufficient  that  he  does  not  impose  on  the  enemy  by  pretend-
ing to  more  extensive  powers  than  he  really  possesses,  but
contentF,  himself  with  embracing  the  overtures  which  they
make  to  him,  without,  on  his  side,  holding  forth  any  delusive
hopes  to  decoy  them  into  a  treaty.  It  is  the  enemy's  business
to  take  all  possible  precautions  for  their  own  security :  if  they
neglect  them,  why  should  not  the  general  avail  himself  of
their  imprudence,  as  of  an  advantage  presented  to  him  by
the  hand  of  fortune  ?  "It  is  she,"  said  Postumius,  "who  has
saved  our  army,  after  having  put  it  in  danger.  The  enemy's
head  was  turned  in  his  prosperity ;  and  his  advantages  have
been  no  more  to  him  than  a  pleasant  dream."

If  the  Samnites  had  only  required  of  the  Roman  generals
and  army  such  engagements  as  the  nature  of  their  situation,
and  their  commission,  empowered  them  to  enter  into, — if  they
had  obliged  them  to  surrender  themselves  prisoners  of  war, —
or  if,  from  their  inability  to  hold  them  all  prisoners,  they  had  [  223  ]
dismissed  them,  upon  their  promise  not  to  bear  arms  against
them  for  some  years,  in  case  Rome  should  refuse  to  ratify  the
peace, — the  agreement  would  have  been  valid,  as  being  made
with  sufficient  powers;  and  the  whole  army  would  have  been
bound  to  'observe  it ;  for,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the
troops,  or  their  officers,  should  have  a  power  of  entering  into  a
contract  on  those  occasions^  and  upon  that  footing.  This  is  the
case  of  capitulations,  of  which  we  shall  speak  in  treating  of  war.

If  the  promiser  has  made  an  equitable  and  honourable
convention,  on  an  affair  of  such  a  nature,  that,  in  case  the
convention  be  disallowed,  he  still  has  it  in  his  own  power  to
indemnify  the  party  with  whom  he  has  treated, — he  is  pre-
sumed to  have  personally  pledged  himself  for  such  indemnifi-
cation ;  and  he  is  bound  to  make  it,  in  order  to  discharge  his
promise,  as  did  Fabius  Maximus  in  the  instance  mentioned  by
Grotius.* But  there  are  occasions  when  the  sovereign  may

*  Lib.  ii.  chap.  xv.  §  16. Fabius ment-with  the  enemj  which  the  se-
llaximu^  having  concluded  an  agree- nate  disapproved,  sold  a  piece  of  land

819


228  OP  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.

BOOK  II. forbid  him  to  act  in  that  manner,  or  to  give  any  thing  to  the
CHAP.  XIV.  enemies  of  the  state.

§  212.  To  We  have  shown  that  a  state  cannot  be  bound  by  an  agree-
what  the  ment  made  without  her  orders,  and  without  her  having  granted
■overeign  k  ^^j  power  for  that  purpose.  But  is  she  al)8olutcly  free
from  all  obligation  ?  That  is  the  point  which  now  remains
for  us  to  examine.  If  matters  as  yet  continue  in  their
original  situation,  the  state  or  the  sovereign  may  simply
disavow  the  treaty,  which  is  of  course  done  away  by  such  disa-
vowal, and  becomes  as  perfect  a  nullity  as  if  it  had  never  ex-
isted. But  the  sovereign  ought  to  make  known  his  intentions
as  soon  as  the  treaty  comes  to  his  knowledge ;  not,  indeed,
that  his  silence  alone  can  give  validity  to  a  convention  which
the  contracting  parties  have  agreed  not  to  consider  as  valid
without  his  approbation  ;  but  it  would  be  a  breach  of  good
faith  in  him  to  suffer  a  sufficient  time  to  elapse  for  the  other
party  to  execute,  on  his  side,  an  agreement  which  he  himself
is  determined  not  to  ratify.

If  any  thing  has  already  been  done  in  consequence  of  the
agreement, — if  the  party,  who  has  treated  with  the  spomoTy
has  on  his  side  fulfilled  his  engagements,  either  in  the  whole
or  in  part, — is  the  other  party,  on  disavowing  the  treaty,
bound  to  indemnify  him,  or  restore  things  to  their  former
situation  ? — or  is  he  allowed  to  reap  the  fruits  of  the  treaty,
r  224  ]  at  the  same .  time  that  he  refuses  to  ratify  it  ? — We  should
here  distinguish  the  nature  of  the  things  that  have -been  exe-
cuted, and  that  of  the  advantages  which  have  thence  accrued
to  the  state.  He  who,  having  treated  with  a  public  person
not  furnished  with  sufficient  powers,  executes  the  agreement
on  his  side  without  waiting  for  its  ratification,  is  guilty  of  im-
prudence, and  commits  an  egregious  error,  into  which  he  has
not  been  led  by  the  state  with  which  he  supposes  he  has  con-
tracted. If  he  has  given  up  any  part  of  his  property,  the
other  party  is  not  justifiable  in  taking  advantage  of  his  folly,
and  retaining  possession  of  what  he  has  so  given.  Thus,
when  a  state,  thinking  she  has  concluded  a  peace  with  the
enemy's  general,  has  in  consequence  delivered  up  one  of  her
strong  places,  or  given  a  sum  of  money,  the  sovereign  of  that
general  is,  undoubtedly,  bound  to  restore  what  he  has  re-
ceived, if  he  does  not  choose  to  ratify  the  agreement, .  To  act
otherwise,  would  be  enriching  himself  with  another's  property,
and  retaining  that  property  without  having  any  title  to  it.

But,  if  the  agreement  has  given  nothing  to  the  state  which
she  did  not  before  possess, — if,  as  in  that  of  the  Furcae  Cau-
dinae,  the  advantage  simply  consists  in  her  escape  from  an
impending  danger,  her  preservation  from  a  threatened  loss, —

for  which  he  received two  hundred  ransom  of  the  prisoners. Aurel.  Vio>

thousand  sesterces,  in  order  to  make  tor,  de  Viris  Illustr. Plutarch's  Lifi

good  his  promise. It  related  to  the  of  Faliius  Maximus.
320


OP  OTHBR  PUBLib CONVENTIONS, ETC.  224


such  advantage  is  a  boon  of  fortune,  which  she  may  enjoy  book  n.
without  scruple.  Who  would  refuse  to  be  saved  by  the  folly  -£HH:-£3I:
of  his  enemy?  And  who  would  think  himself  obliged  to
indemnify  that  enemy  for  the  advantage  he  had  suflfered  to
escape  him,  when  no  fraud  had  been  used  to  induce  him  to
forego  that  advantage  ?  The  Samnites  pretended,  that,  if
the  Romans  would  not  ratify  the  treaty  made  by  their  con-
suls, they  ought  to  send  back  the  army  to  the  Furcae  Caudi-
nse,  and  restore  every  thing  to  its  former  state.  Two  tri-
bunes of  the  people,  who  had  been  in  the  number  of  the
sponsores,  and  wished  to  avoid  being  delivered  up,  had  the
assurance  to  maintain  the  same  doctrine ;  and  some  authors
have  declared  themselves  of  their  opinion.  What !  the  Sam-
nites take  advantage  of  conjunctures,  in  order  to  give  law  to
the  Romans,  and  to  wrest  from  them  a  shameful  treaty, —
they  are  so  imprudent  as  to  treat  with  the  consuls,  who  ex-
pressly declare  themselves  unauthorized  to  contract  for  the
state, — they  suffer  the  Roman  army  to  escape,  after  having
covered  them  with  infamv, — and  shall  not  the  Romans  take
advantage  of  the  folly  of  an  enemy  so  void  of  generosity  ?
Must  they  either  ratify*  a  sh4imeful  treaty,  or  restore  to  the
enemy  all  those  advantages  which  the  situation  of  the  ground
had  given  them,  but  which  he  had  lost  merely  through  his  own
folly  I  Upon  what  principle  can  such  a  decision  be  founded  ?
Had  Rome  promised  any  thing  to  the  Samnites  ?  Had  she
prevailed  upon  them  to  let  her  army  go,  previous  to  the  rati-
fication of  the  agreement  made  by  the  consuls  ?  If  she  had
received  any  thing  in  consequence  of  that  agreement,  she  «
would  have  been  bound  to  restore  it,  as  we  have  already  said,
because  she  would  have  possessed  it  without  a  title,  on  de-
claring the  treaty  null.  But  she  had  no  share  in  the  conduct
of  her  enemies:  she  did  not  contribute  to  the  egregious
blunder  they  had  committed ;  and  she  might  as  justly  take  [  225  ]
advantage  of  it,  as  generals  in  war  do  of  the  mistakes  of  an
unskilful  opponent.  Suppose  a  conqueror  after  having  con-
cluded a  treaty  with  ministers  who  have  expressly  reserved
the  ratification  to  their  master,  should  have  the  imprudence
to  abandon  all  his  conquests  without  waiting  for  such  ratifi-
cation,— must  the  other,  with  a  foolish  generosity,  invite  him
back  to  take  possession  of  them  again,  in  case  the  treaty  be
not  ratified?

I  confess,  however,  and  freely  acknowledge,  that,  if  the
enemy  who  suffer  an  entire  army  to  escape  on  the  faith  of  an
agreement  concluded  with  the  general,  who  is  unprovided
with  sufiicient  powers,  and  a  simple  sponsor^ — I  confess,  I
say,  that,  if  the  enemy  have  behaved  generously, — if  they  had
not  availed  themselves  of  their  advantages  to  dictate  shame-
ful or  too  severe  conditions, — equity  requires  that  the  estate
should  either  ratify  the  agreement  or  conclude  a  new  treaty
ou  just  and  reasonable  conditions,  abating  even  of  her  pre-

41  321


125  OP  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.

Boor  iL  tensions  as  far  as  the  public  welfare  will  allow.  For,  we
CHAP  XIV.  Qught  never  to  abuse  the  generosity  and  noble  confidence
even  of  an  enemy.  Puffendorf  *  thinks  that  the  treaty  at
the  Furcae  CaudinsB  contained  nothing  that  was  too  severe
or  insupportable.  That  author  seems  to  make  no  great  ac-
count of  the  shame  and  ignominy  with  which  it  would  have
branded  the  whole  republic.  He  did  not  see  the  full  extent
of  the  Roman  policy,  which  would  never  permit  them,  in
their  greatest  distresses,  to  accept  a  shameful  treaty,  or  even
to  make  peace  on  the  footing  of  a  conquered  nation : — a  sub-
lime policy,  to  which  Rome  was  indebted  for  all  her  greatness.
Finally,  \ht  us  observe,  that,  when  the  inferior  power  has.
without  orders,  and  without  authority,  concluded  an  equitable
and  honourable  treaty,  to  rescue  the  state  from  an  imminent
danger,  if  the  sovereign  afterwards,  on  seeing  himself  thus
delivered,  should  refuse  to  ratify  the  treaty,  not  because  he
thinks  it  a  disadvantageous  one,  but,  merely  through  a  wish
to  avoid  performing  those  conditions  which  were  annexed  as
the  price  of  his  deliverance,  he  would  certainly  act  in  oppo-
sition to  all  the  rules  of  honour  and  equity.  This  would  be  a
case  in  which  we  might  apply  the  maxim,  summum  juSy  swmma
injuria.

To  the  example  we  have  drawn  from  the  Roman  history,  let
us  add  a  famous  one  taken  from  modern  history.  The  Swiss,
dissatisfied  with  France,  entered  into  an  alliance  vrith  the  em-
peror against  Louis  XII.  and  made  an  irruption  into  Burgundy,
in  the  year  1513.  They  laid  siege  to  Dijon.  La  Trimouille,
who  commanded  in  the  place,  fearing  that  he  should  be  unable
to  save  it,  treated  with  the  Swiss,  and,  without  waiting  for  a
commission  from  the  king,  concluded  an  agreement,  by  virtue
of  which  the  king  of  France  was  to  renounce  his  pretensions
to  the  duchy  of  Milan,  and  to  pay  the  Swiss,  by  settled  in-
stalments, the  sum  of  six  hundred  thousand  crowns ;  whereas
the  Swiss,  on  their  side,  promised  nothing  further  than  to  re-
turn home  to  their  own  country, — thus  remaining  at  liberty
to  attack  France  again,  if  they  thought  proper.  They  re-
ceived hostages,  and  departed.  The  king  was  very  much  dis-
satisfied with  the  treaty,  though  it  had  saved  Dijon,  and  rescued
the  kingdom  from  an  imminent  and  alarming  danger ;  and  he
[  226  ]  refused  to  ratify  it."t  I*  ^  certain  that  La  Trimouille  had
exceeded  the  powers  he  derived  from  his  commission,  espe-
cially in  promising  that  the  king  should  renounce  the  duchy  of
Milan.  It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  his  only  view  was  to  rid
himself  of  an  enemy  whom  it  was  less  diflScult  to  overreach
in  negotiation  than  to  subdue  in  battle.  Louis  was  not  obliged
to  ratify  and  execute  a  treaty  concluded  without  orders  and
without  authority; and,  if  the  Swiss  were  deceived,  they

*  Jaa  NaL  et  6  ent.  Ub.  viii.  cap.  ix. f  Gnicciardini,  book xiL  cbup.  ii. —
;  12  De  Watteville's  Uisiory  of  the  lloivetic

Confederaoji  part  ii.  p.  1S5|  4o.
822


OP  OTHER  PUBLIC  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.  226

could  only  blame  their  own  imprudence.  But,  as  it  manifestly  book  n.
appeared  that  La  Trimouille  did  not  behave  towards  them  with  ^°^^'  ^'^'
candour  and  honesty,  since  he  had  deceived  them  on  the  sub-
ject of  the  hostages,  by  giving,  in  that  character,  men  of  the
meanest  rank,  instead  of  four  of  the  most  distinguished  citi-
zens, as  he  had  promised,* — the  Swiss  would  have  been  justi-
fiable in  refusing  to  make  peace  without  obtaining  satisfaction
for  that  act  of  perfidy,  either  by  the  surrender  of  him  who
was  the  author  of  it,  or  in  some  other  manner.

The  promises,  the  conventions,  all  the  private  contracts  of  ?  213. PrU
the  sovereign,  are  naturally  subject  to  the  same  j-ules  as  those  ^***  ^^'  ^

« . ^ ^ '  Ti»  j'jE ix'  •  A  V i. 'a.  tracts  of  th»

of  private  persons.  If  any  difficulties  arise  on  the  subject,  it^^^^^.
is  equally  conformable  to  the  rules  of  decorum,  to  that  deli-
cacy of  sentiment  which  ought  to  be  particularly  conspicuous
in  a  sovereign,  and  to  the  love  of  justice,  to  cause  them  to
be  decided  by  the  tribunals  of  the  state.  And  such  indeed
is  the  practice  of  all  civilized  states  that  are  governed  by
settled  laws.

The  conventions  and  contracts  which  the  sovereign,  in  his  j  214  Con-
sovereign  character  and  in  the  name  of  the  state,  forms  with  tn«5<f  ™af  •
private  individuals  of  a  foreien  nation,  fall  under  the  rules  ^^.  ^^  ^*

1  ,.,,  .,  °  If.  •  T/«. pnvate  per-

we  have  laid  down  with  respect  to  public  treaties.  In  tact,  g^ng  -^  t^^
when  a  sovereign  enters  into  a  contract  with  one  who  is  name  of  th«
wholly  independent  of  him  and  of  the  state,  whether  it  be  ******
with  a  private  person,  or  with  a  nation  or  sovereign,  this  cir-
cumstance does  not  produce  any  difierence  in  the  rights  of
the  parties.  If  the  private  person  who  has  treated  with  the
sovereign  is  his  subject,  the  rights  of  each  party  in  this  case
also  are  the  same :  but  there  is  a  difierence  in  the  manner  of
deciding  the  controversies  which  may  arise  from  the  contract.
That  private  person,  being  a  subject  of  the  state,  is  obliged
to  submit  his  pretensions  to  the  established  courts  of  justice.
It  is  added  by  some  writers  on  this  subject,  that  the  sovereign
may  rescind  those  contracts,  if  they  prove  inimical  to  the
public  welfare.  Undoubtedly  he  may  do  so,  but  not  upon  any
principle  derived  from  the  peculiar  nature  of  such  contracts :  [  227  ]
— it  must  be  either  upon  the  same  principle  which  invalidates
even  a  public  treaty  when  it  is  ruinous  to  the  state  and  incon-
sistent with  the  public  safety, — or  by  virtue  of  the  eminent
domain,  which  gives  the  sovereign  a  right  to  dispose  of  the
property  of  the  citizens  with  a  view  to  the  common  safety.
We  speak  here  of  an  absolute  sovereign.  It  is  from  the  con-
stitution of  each  state  that  we  are  to  learn  who  are  the  per-
sons, and  what  is  the  power,  entitled  to  contract  in  the  name
of  the  state,  to  exercise  the  supreme  authority,  and  to  pro-
nounce on  what  the  public  welfare  requires.

When  a  lawful  power  contracts  in  the  name  of  the  state,  it  ?  215.  They
lays  an  obligation  on  the  nation  itself,  and  consequently  on "« binding

on  the  ni^

*  ....  a

*  Bee  De  Watteville's  HiBtoxy  of  the  Helretic  Confederacy,  p.  190.

ft2n


227  OF  OTHER  PUBLIC  COKVKNTIONS^  KTO,

BOOK  n. all  the  future  rulers  of  the  society. When,  therefore,  a  priDCf^

CBAP.  iiv.  jjg^  ^j^^  power  to  form  a  contract  in  the  name  of  the  state,  ho

tion,  and  on  jj^yg  g^^  obligation  ou  all  his  successors ;  and  these  are  not

^a^suocefl- j^^^  bound  than  himself  to  fulfil  his  engagements.

{  216.  Debts The  Conductor  of  the  nation  may  have  dealings  of  his  own,

of  the  soye-  and  private  debts ; and  his  private  property  alone  is  liable

roign  and (q^  the  discharge  of  such  debts. But  loans  contracted  for

e  state, ^j^^  service  of  the  state,  debts  incurred  in  the  administration

of  public  affairs,  are  contracts  in  all  the  strictness  of  law,  and

obligatory  on  the  state  and  the  whole  nation,  which  is  indif^

pensably  bound  to  discharge  those  debts.* When  once  they

have  been  contracted  by  lawful  authority,  the  right  of  the

creditor  is  indefeasible. Whether  the  money  borrowed  has

been  turned  to  the  advantage  of  the  state,  or  squandered  in

foolish  expenses,  is  no  concern  of  the  person  who  has  lent  it :

he  has  intrusted  the  nation  with  his  property,  and  the  nation

is  bound  to  restore  it  to  him  again :  it  is  so  much  the  worse

for  her,  if  she  has  committed  the  management  of  her  affairs

to  improper  hands.

This  maxim,  however,  has  its  bounds,  founded  even  on  the
nature  of  the  thing.  The  sovereign  has  not,  in  general,  a
power  to  render  the  state  or  body  corporate  liable  for  the
debts  he  contracts,  unless  they  be  incurred  with  a  view  to  the
national  advantage,  and  in  order  to  enable  him  to  provide  for
all  occurrences.  If  he  is  absolute,  it  belongs  to  him  alone  to
decide,  in  all  doubtful  cases,  what  the  welfare  and  safety  of
the  state  require.  But,  if  he  should,  without  necessity,  con-
tract debts  of  immense  magnitude  and  capable  of  ruining  the
nation  for  ever,  there  could  not  then  exist  any  doubt  in  the
case :  the  sovereign  has  evidently  acted  without  authority ;
and  those  who  have  lent  him  their  money  have  imprudently
[  228  ]  risked  it.  It  cannot  be  presumed  that  a  nation  has  ever  con-
sented to  submit  to  utter  ruin  through  the  caprice  and  foolish
prodigality  of  her  ruler.

As  the  national  debts  can  only  be  paid  by  contributions
and  taxes,  wherever  the  sovereign  has  not  been  intrusted  by
the  nation  with  a  power  to  levy  taxes  and  contributions,  or,
in  short,  to  raise  supplies  by  his  own  authority,  neither  has
he  a  power  to  render  her  liable  for  what  he  borrows,  or  to  in-
volve the  state  in  debt.  Thus,  the  king  of  England,  who  has
the  right  of  making  peace  and  war,  has  not  that  of  contract-


*  In  1596,  Philip  II.  deolitred  him-  could  no  longer  find  any  one  who  was

self  a  bankrnpty  under  pretence  that  an  willing  to  lend  him money ; and  his

unfair  advantage  had  been  taken  of  his  afiairs suffered so severely  in  eonse>

necessities. His  creditors loudly  ex-  quenco,  that  he  was  obliged  to  replaeo

claimed  against  his conduct,  and  as-  Uiings  on  their  former  footing,  and  to

sorted  that  no  confidence  could  thence-  heal  the  wound  which  he  had  given  to

forward  be  placed  either  in  his  word  or  the public faith. — Grotius, HisL of

his  treaties, since he interposed the  the Disturbances in  the  Netherlands

royal  authority  to  supersede  them. He  book
324


07  THE  FAITH  OF  TREATIES.  228

iiig  national  debts,  without  the  concurrence  of  parliament :  book  n.
because  he  cannot,  without  their  concurrence,  levy  any  money -H!1£LJ^
on  his  people.

The  case  is  not  the  same  with  the  donations  of  the  sove-  ?  2ir.  Do-
reign  as  with  his  debts.  When  a  sovereign  has  borrowed  "^at^o^*  <>^
without  necessity,  or  for  an  unwise  purpose,  the  creditor  has  ^f  ^^®"
intrusted  the  state  with  his  property  ;  and  it  is  just  that  the  ^
state  should  restore  it  to  him,  if  at  the  time  of  the  transac-
tion, he  could  entertain  a  reasonable  presumption  that  it  was
to  the  state  he  was  lending  it.  But,  when  the  sovereign  gives
away  any  of  the  property  of  the  state, — a  part  of  the  national
domain, — a  considerable  fief, — he  has  no  right  to  make  such
grant  except  with  a  view  to  the  public  welfare,  as  a  reward
for  services  rendered  to  the  state,  or  for  some  other  reason-
able cause,  in  which  the  nation  is  concerned  :  if  he  has  made
the  donation  without  reason,  and  without  a  lawful  cause,  he
has  made  it  without  authority.  His  successor,  or  the  state,
may  at  any  time  revoke  such  a  grant ;  nor  would  the  revoca-
tion be  a  wrong  done  to  the  grantee,  since  it  does  not  deprive
him  of  any  thing  which  he  could  justly  call  his  own.  What
we  here  advance  holds  true  of  every  sovereign  whom  the  law
does  not  expressly  invest  with  the  free  and  absolute  disposal
of  the  national  property  :  so  dangerous  a  power  is  never  to
be  founded  on  presumption.

Immunities  and  privileges  conferred  by  the  mere  liberality
of  the  sovereign,  are  a  kind  of  donations,  and  may  be  revoked
in  the  same  manner,  if  they  prove  detrimental  to  the  state.
But  a  sovereign  cannot  revoke  them  by  his  bare  authority,
unless  he  be  absolute :  and,  even  in  this  case,  he  ought  to  be
cautious  and  moderate  in  the  exertion  of  his  power,  uniting
an  equal  share  of  prudence  and  equity  on  the  occasion.  Im-
munities granted  for  particular  reasons,  or  with  a  view  to
some  return,  partake  of  the  nature  of  a  burdensome  contract,
and  can  only  be  revoked  in  case  of  abuse,  or  when  they  be-
come incompatible  with  the  safety  of  the  state.  And  if  they
be  suppressed  on  this  latter  account,  an  indemnification  is
due  to  those  who  enjoyed  them.


CHAP.  XV.  [  229  1

OP  THE  FAITH  OF  TREATIES.  chap,  xt.

THOUGH  we  have  sufficiently  established  (§§  163  and  164)  2  2i8-.
the  indispensable  necessity  of  keeping  promises,  and  observ-  ^5,.^,^ y,^^,^
ing  treaties,  the  subject  is  of  such  importance,  that  we  cannot  natioiw.
forbear  considering  it  here  in  a  more  general  view,  as  inter-
esting, not  only  to  contracting  parties,  but  likewise  to  all
nations,  and  to  the  universal  society  of  mankind.

2C  325


229  OF  THB  FAITH  OF  TBEATIES.

»oor  n. Every  thing  which  the  public  safety  renders  inviolable  w
OHAP.  XV.  gucred  in  society.  Thus,  the  person  of  the  sovereign  is  sacred,
because  the  safety  of  the  state  requires  that  he  should  be  iu
perfect  security,  and  above  the  reach  of  violence :  thus  the
people  of  Rome  declared  the  persons  of  their  tribunes  sacred,
— considering  it  as  essential  to  their  own  safety  that  their
defenders  should  be  screened  from  all  violence,  and  even  ex-
empt from  fear. Every  thing,  therefore,  which  the  common
safety  of  mankind  and  the  peace  and  security  of  human  so*
ciety  require  to  be  held  inviolable,  is  a  thing  that  should  be
sacred  among  nations.
{  219.  Trea- Who  Can  doubt  that  treaties  are  in  the  number  of  those
ties  are  sor-  things  that  are  to  be  held  sacred  by  nations  ? By  treaties
ored  bo- ^j^^  ^^g^  important  affairs  are  determined ;  by  them  the  pre-

trW6oii  na-  .  .  *^  ^

tions.  tensions  of  sovereigns  are  regulated ;  oh  them  nations  are  to

depend  for  the  acknowledgment  of  their  rights,  and  the  secu-
rity of  their  dearest  interests. Between  bodies  politic, — be-
tween sovereigns  who  acknowledge  no  superior  on  earth, —
treaties  are  the  only  means  of  adjusting  their  various  pre-
tensions,— of  establishing  fixed  rules  of  conduct, — of  ascer-
taining what  they  are  entitled  to  expect,  and  what  they  have
to  depend  on. But  treaties  are  no  bettor  than  empty  words,
if  nations  do  not  consider  them  as  respectable  engagements,
— ^as  rules  which  are  to  be  inviolably  observed  by  sovereigns,
and  held  sacred  throughout  the  whole  earth.
J  220. The The  faith  of  treaties, — that  firm  and  sincere  resolution, —
faith  of  trea-  that  invariable  constancy  in  fulfilling  our  engagements,— of
ties  ia  sar- y^ijich  WO  make  profession  in  a  treaty,  is  therefore  to  be  held
sacred  and  inviolable  between  the  nations  of  the  earthy  whose
safety  and  repose  it  secures :  and,  if  mankind  be  not  wilfully
deficient  in  their  duty  to  themselves,  infamy  must  ever  be  the
portion  of  him  who  violates  his  faith.
;  221. He He  who  violates  his  treaties,  violates  at  the  same  time  the
who  violates  Jaw  of  nations  ;  for,  he  disregards  the  faith  of  treaties, — that
his  troaties,  ^^^^-^  which  the  law  of  nations  declares  sacred ;  and,  so  far
law  of  na- ^^  depends  on  him,  he  renders  it  vain  and  ineffectual.  Doubly
tions.  guilty,  he  does  an  injury  to  his  ally,  he  does  an  injury  to  all

nations,  and  inflicts  a  wound  on  the  great  society  of  mankind,
r  230  ]  "  On  the  observance  and  execution  of  treaties,"  said  a  re-
spectable sovereign,  "  depends  all  the  security  which  princes
and  states  have  with  respect  to  each  other :  and  no  depend-
ence could  henceforward  be  placed  in  future  conventions  if
the  existing  ones  were  not  to  be  observed."*
;  222.  Right As  all  nations  are  interested  in  maintaining  the  faith  of
of  nations treaties,  and  causing  it  to  be  everywhere  considered  as  sacred
*ir*^^-^  ^""  *"^  inviolable,  so  likewise  they  are  justifiable  in  forming  a
^^ confederacy  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  him  who  testifies  a


*  Resolution of  the  States-General, to  the  Memorial  of  the  MarquiB  de  St
of  the  15th  of  March,  1726,  in  answer PhUip,  Ambassador  of  Spain.
326


OP  THE  FAITH OF  TREATIES.  280

disregard  for  it, — ^who  openly  sports  with  it, — who  violates book  ii.
and  tramples  it  under  foot. Such  a  man  is  a  public  enemy  .^H£l£T-,
who  saps  the  foundations  of  the  peace  and  common  safety  of  ^^^  ^*
nations. But  we  should  be  careful  not  to  extend  this  maxim  ^^^
to  the  prejudice  of  that  liberty  and  independence  to  which
every  nation  has  a  claim. When  a  sovereign breaks  his
treaties,  or  refuses  to  fulfil  them,  this  does  not  immediately
imply  that  he  considers  them  as  empty  names,  and  that  he
disregards  the  faith  of  treaties :  he  may  have  good  reasons
for  thinking  himself  liberated  from  his  engagements; and
other  sovereigns  have  not  a  right  to  judge  him. It  is  the
sovereign  who  violates  his  engagements  on  pretences  that  are
evidently  frivolous,  or  who  does  not  even  think  it  worth  his
while  to  allege  any  pretence  whatever,  to  give  a  colourable
gloss  to  his  conduct,  and  cast  a  veil  over  his  want  of  faith, —
it  is  such  a  sovereign  who  deserves  to  be  treated  as  an  enemy
to  the  human  race.

In  treating  of  religion,  in  the  first  book  of  this  work,  we  ^  223.  Tht
could  not  avoid  giving  several  instances  of  the  enormous  ^f'^  ^'^  .'**'
abuses  which  the  popes  formerly  made  of  their  authority,  j^^^^j  y^  ^^
There  was  one  in  particular,  which  was  equally  injurious  to  all  popes,
states,  and  subversive  of  the  law  of  nations.  Several  popes
have  undertaken  to  break  the  treaties  of  sovereigns;  they
carried  their  daring  audacity  so  far  as  to  release  a  contract-
ing power  from  his  engagements,  and  to  absolve  him  from
the  oaths  by  which  he  had  confirmed  them.  Cesarini,  legate
of  pope  Eugenius  the  Fourth,  wishing  to  break  the  treaty
which  Uladislaus,  king  of  Poland  and  Hungary,  had  con-
cluded with  the  sultan  Amurath,  pronounced,  in  the  pope's
name,  the  king's  absolution  from  his  oaths.*  In  those  times
of  ignorance,  people  thought  themselves  really  bound  by  no-
thing but  their  oaths,  and  they  attributed  to  the  pope  the
power  of  absolving  them  from  oaths  of  every  kind.  Uladislaus
renewed  hostilities  against  the  Turks :  but  that  prince,  in
other  respects  worthy  of  a  better  fate,  paid  dearly  for  perfidy,
or  rather  for  his  superstitious  weakness:  he  perished,  with
his  army,  near  Varna : — a  loss  which  was  fatal  to  Christen-
dom,, and  brought  on  her  by  her  spiritual  head.  The  follow-
ing epitaph  was  written  on  Uladislaus :

BomalldsB  Cannas,  ego  Varnam  clade  notavi.
,  Discite,  mortalea,  non  temerare  fidein.

Me  nisi  pontifices  jassissont  rumpere  foedna,
Non  ferret  Scythicum  Pannonis  ora  jugum.

Pope  John  XII.  declared  null  the  oath  which  the  emperor  [  281  ]
Louis  of  Bavaria,  and  his  competitor  Frederic  of  Austria,  had
mutually  taken  when  the  emperor  set  the  latter  at  liberty.
Philip,  duke  of  Burgundy,  abandoning  the  alliance  of  the


*  History  of  Poland,  by  the  Chevalier Dlagoss,  Neugobauer,  Samicki,  Herburt^
do  Solignao,  toL  iv.  112. He  quotes Da  Fulatin,  Ao.

S27


281  OP  THE  FAITH  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n.  English,  procured  from  the  pope  and  the  council  of  Basil  an
CHAP.  XY,  absolution  from  his  oath.  And  at  a  time  when  the  revival
of  letters,  and  the  establishment  of  the  Reformation  should
have  rendered  the  popes  more  circumspect,  the  legate  Caraffa,
in  order  to  induce  Henry  II.  of  France  to  a  renewal  of  hos-
tilities, had  the  audacity  to  absolve  him,  in  1656,  from  the
oath  he  had  made  to  observe  the  truce  of  Vaucelles.*  The
famous  peace  of  Westphalia  displeasing  the  pope  on  many
accounts,  he  did  not  confine  himself  to  protesting  against  the
articles  of  a  treaty  in  which  all  Europe  was  interested :  he
published  a  bull,  in  which,  from  his  mvn  certain  knowledge^
and  full  eoclesiastical  power,  he  declared  several  articles  of
the  treaty  null,  vain,  invalid,  iniquitous,  unjust,  condemned,
reprobated,  frivolous,  void  of  force  and  effect ;  and  that  no-
body was  bound  to  observe  them  or  any  of  them,  though  they
were  confirmed  by  oath. — Nor  was  this  all : — his.  holiness,  as-
suming the  tone  of  an  absolute  master,  proceeds  thus — And,
nevertheless,  for  the  greater  precaution,  and  as  much  as  n^ed
be,  from  the  same  motions,  knowledge,  deliberations,  and  ple-
nitude of  power,  we  condemn,  reprobate,  break,  annul,  and
deprive  of  all  force  and  effect,  the  said  articles,  and  all  the
other  things  prejudicial  to  the  above,  ^c.f  Who  does  not  see
that  these  daring  acts  of  the  popes,  which  were  formerly  very
frequent,  were  violations  of  the  law  of  nations,  and  directlv
tended  to  destroy  all  the  bands  that  could  unite  mankind,
and  to  sap  the  foundations  of  their  tranquillity,  or  to  render
the  pope  sole  arbiter  of  their  affairs  ?
{  224.  This  But  who  Can  restrain  his  indignation  at  seeing  this  strange
abuM  au-  abuse  authorized  by  princes  themselves  ?  In  the  treaty  con-
thonxed  y  ^j^j^^j  ^^  Vinccnnes,  between  Charles  V.  king  of  France,  and
Robert  Stuart,  king  of  Scotland,  in  1371,  it  was  agreed  th(U
the  pope  should  absolve  the  Scots  from  all  the  oaths  they  had
taken  in  swearing  to  a  trUrCe  with  the  English,  and  thai  he
[  232  ]  should  promise  never  to  absolve  the  French  or  Soots  from  the
oaths  they  were  about  to  make  in  swearing  to  the  new  treaty, %
I  225.  Use  The  custom  generally  received  in  former  times,  of  swearing
rf  *L^f!?  *^  *^®  observance  of  treaties,  had  furnished  the  popes  with  a
pretext  for  claiming  the  power  of  breaking  them,  by  absolv-
ing the  contracting  parties  from  their  oaths.  But,  in  the
present  day,  even  children  know  that  an  oath  does  not  con-
IhrobHga  stitute  the  obligation  to  keep  a  promise  or  a  treaty :  it  only
Uon.  (128) gives  an  additional  strength  to  that  obligation,  by  calling  God

*  On  these  facts,  see  the  French  and  out  a preyious declaration  of hostali-

German historians. — "  Thus  war was  ties." — De  Thou,  lib.  xtH.

determined  on  in  favour  of  the  pope :  f  History  of the Treatj  of  West-

and  after  cardinal  Caraflfa,  by  virtue  of  phalia,  by  Father  Bougeant,  in  12mo.

the  powers  vested  hi  him  by  his  holi-  vol.  vi.  p.  413.

ness,  had  absolved  the  king  from  tbe  \  Choisy's  History  of  Charles  V.  p.

oiths  he  had  taken  in ratification  of  282.

the truce,  he  even permitted  him  to  (128)  Paley,  in  his Moral Philoso-

attack  the emperor  and  his  son  with-  phy,  agrees  in  this  view  of  moral  obli*
S28


til  treaties.

It  does  not
constitute


OP  THE  FAITH  OP  TREATIES.  282

to  bear  witness.  A  man  of  sense,  a  man  of  honour,  does  not  book  n.
think  himself  less  hound  by  his  word  alone,  by  his  faith  once  S^Sjl^
pledged,  than  if  he  had  added  the  sanction  of  an  oath.  Cicero
would  not  have  us  to  make  much  difference  between  a  per-
jurer and  a  liar.  "  The  habit  of  lying  (says  that  great  man)
paves  the  way  to  perjury. »  Whoever  can  be  prevailed  on  to
utter  a  falsehood,  may  be  easily  won  over  to  commit  perjury :
for  the  man  who  has  once  deviated  from  the  line  of  truth,
generally  feels  as  little  scruple  in  consenting  to  a  perjury  as
to  a  lie.  For,  what  influence  can  the  invocation  of  the  gods
have  on  the  mind  of  him  who  is  deaf  to  the  voice  of  con-
scietice?  The  same  punishment,  therefore,  which  heaven
has  ordained  for  the  perjurer,  awaits  also  the  liar :  for  it  is
not  on  account -of  the  formula  of  words  in  which  the  oath  is
couched,  but  of  the  perfidy  and  villany  displayed  by  the  per-
jurer in  plotting  harm  against  his  neighbour,  that  the  anger
and  indignation  of  the  gods  is  roused."*

The  oath  does  not  then  produce  a  new  obligation :  it  only
gives  additional  force  to  the  obligation  imposed  by  the  treaty,
and  in  every  thing  shares  the  same  fate  with  it.  Where  the
treaty  is  of  its  own  nature  valid  and  obligatory,  the  oath  (\n
itself  a  supererogatory  obligation)  is  so  too :  but,  where  tne
treaty  is  void,  the  oath  is  void  likewise.

The  oath  is  a  personal  act :  it  can  therefore  only  regard  ^  226.  it
the  person  of  him  who  swears,  whether  he  swears  himself,  or  ^®®*  "***
deputes  another  to  swear  in  his  name. However,  as  this  act  ^J^^^f^^f  *
does  not  produce  a  new  obligation,  it  makes  no  change  in  the  obUgationt.
nature  of  a  treaty. Thus,  an  alliance  confirmed  by  oath  is
80  confirmed  only  with  respect  to  him  who  has  contracted  it :
but  if  it  be  a  real  alliance,  it  survives  him,  and  passes  to  his
successors  as  an  alliance  not  confirmed  by  oath.

For  the  same  reason,  since  the  oath  can  impose  no  other  ?  227.  It
obligation  than  that  which  results  from  the  treaty  itself,  it  P^«« '»<>?'•••
gives  no  pre-eminence  to  one  treaty,  to  the  prejudice  of  .those  ^"J'J^"^'**
that  are  not  sworn  to. And  as,  in  case  of  two  treaties  clash-  above
ing  with  each  other,  the  more  ancient  ally  is  to  be  preferred  another.
(§  167) ;  the  same  rule  should  be  observed,  even  though  the
more  recent  treaty  has  been  confirmed  by  an  oath. In  the  [  282  *)
same  manner,  since  it  is  not  allowable  to  engage  in  treaties


gation. It is  the  modem policy  to  eonsnerit Qnts enim deprecatione

restrain  pro«pective  oaths,  or  rather  pro-  deomm,  non  consoientisB  fide  commo-

mises,  and  ail  extra-judioial  oaths  not  vetur? Propterea,  qaie  poena  ab  diii

essential for  eliciting evidence apon  immortalibus  perjure,  hsBO  eadem  men<

poff  events. — G.  daci  constitata  est Non  enim  ex  pao-

*  At  quid  interest  inter  peijamm  et  tione verborum qnions jnsjnrandum

raendacem  ? Qui  mentiri  solet,  pejerare  oomprehenditur, sed ex perfldia et

consuevit Quern ego, ut mentiatur,  malitia per  quam insidim tenduntar

inducere  possum, ut  pejeret,  exorare  alicui,  dii  iaimortales  bomiuibus  irasoi

facile  potero :  nam  qui  semel  a  veritate  et  succensere  consu^runt. Cicer.  Orat*

deflexit,  bic  non majori  religione  ad  pro  Q.  Roscio,  oomoedo.
peijurittm  quam  ad  mendaoium  perdue!

4i  2o3  329


283  OF  THE  FAITH  OF  TREATIES.


BOOK  n. inconsistent  with  existing  ones  (§  165),  the  circumstance ,  ot
CHAP.  xY.  ^^  Q^|.jj  ^^,jjj  j^Q|.  justify  such  treaties,  nor  give  them  suthcient

validity  to  supersede  those  which  are  incompatible  with  them :
— if  it  had  such  an  effect,  this  would  be  a  convenient  mode
for  princes  to  rid  themselves  of  their  engagements,
f  228. It Thus  also  an  oath  cannot  give  validity  to  a  treaty  that  is
cannot  give  q{  Jts  own  nature  invalid, — justify  a  treaty  which  is  in  itself
to^t'^ttTt ^^J^^^» — ^^  impose  any  obligation  to  fulfil  a  treaty,  however
is  invaiicL lawfully  Concluded,  when  an occasion  occurs  in  which the
observance  of  it  would  be  unlawful, — as  for  instance,  if  the
ally  to  whom  succours  have  been  promised  undertakes  a  war
that  is  manifestly  unjust. In  short,  every  treaty  made  for  a
dishonourable  purpose  (§  161),  every  treaty  prejudicial  to  the
state  (§  160),  or  contrary  to  her  fundamental  laws  (Book  L
§  265),  being  in  its  own  nature  void, — the  oath  that  may  have
been  added  to  such  a  treaty  is  void  likewise,  and  falls  to  the
ground  together  with  the  covenant  which  it  was  intended  t^i
confirm.
1 229. As- The  asseverations  used  in  entering  into  engagements  are
aeverations.  forms  of  expression  intended  to  give  the  greater  force  to  pro-
mises. Thus,  kings  promise  in  the  most  sacred  matm^r,  with
good  faithy  Bolemnly^  irrevocably^ and  engage their royal
word,  &c. A  man  of  honour  thinks  himself  sufiiciently  bound
by  his  word  alone :  yet  these  asseverations  are  not  useless,  in-
asmuch as  they  tend  to  prove  that  the  contracting  parties
form  their  engagements  deliberately,  and  with  a  knowledge
of  what  they  are  about. Hence,  consequently  the  violation
of  such  engagements  become  the  more  disgraceful. With
mankind,  whose  faith  is  so  uncertain,  every  circumstance  is
to  be  turned  to  advantage :  and  since  the  sense  of  shame  ope-
rates more  powerfully  on  their  minds  than  the  sentiment  of
duty,  it  would  be  imprudent  to  neglect  this  method.
J  230. The After  what  we  have  said  above  (§  162),  it  were  unnecessary
faith  of ^Q  undertake  in  this  place  to  prove  that  the  faith  of  treaties
noTdepen^'  ^^  ^^  relation  to  the  difference  of  religion,  and  cannot  in  any
on  the  dif- manner  depend  upon  it. The  monstrous  maxim,  that  no  faith
forenee  of is  to  be  kept  with  heretics,  might  formerly  raise  its  head  amidst
reUgion. ^j^^  madness  of  party  and  the  fury  of  superstition  :  but  it  is

at  present  generally  detested.

g  231. Pre- If  the  Security  of  him  who  stipulates  for  anything  in  his

cautions  to ^^^^  favour  prompts  him  to  require  precision,  fulness,  and

wording *'^®  greatest clearness  in  the  expressions, — good  faith  de-

treades. mands,  on  the  other  hand,  that  each  party  should  express  his

promises  clearly,  and  without  the  least  ambiguity. The  faith

of  treaties  is  basely  prostituted  by  studying  to  couch  them  in

vague  or  equivocal  terms,  to  introduce  ambiguous  expressions,

to  reserve  subjects  of  dispute,  to  overreach  those  with  whom

we  treat,  and  outdo  them  in  cunning  and  duplicity. Let  the

man  who  excels  in  these  arts  boast  of  his  happy  talents,  and

esteem  himself  a  keen  negotiator ;  but  reason  and  the  sacred

S30


or  THE  FAITH  OF  TREATIES.  234

law  of  nature  will  class  him  as  far  beneath  a  vulgar  cheat  as book  n.
the  majesty  of  kings  is  exalted  above  private  persons. True  ^°^''-  ^^'
diplomatic  skill  consists  in  guarding  against  imposition,  not
in  practising  it.

Subterfuges  in  a  treaty  are  not  less  contrary  to  good  faith.  ?  232.  Sub-
His  catholic  Majesty,  Ferdinand,  having  concluded  a  treaty  ^^^^®*  "*
with  the  archduke  his  son-in-law,  thought  he  could  evade  it
by  privately  protesting  against  the  treaty :  a  puerile  finesse  !
which,  without  giving  any  right  to  th^t*  prince,  only  exposed
his  weakness  and  duplicity.

The  rules  that  establish  a  lawful  interpretation  of  treaties  ?  233. An
are  sufficiently  important  to  be  made  the  subject  of  a  distinct  ®^*^«°*^y
chapter. For  the  present,  let  us  simply  observe  that  an  evi-  pretation  "
dently  false  interpretation  is  the  grossest  imaginable  violation  incoosistent
of  the  faith  of  treaties. Hethat  resorts  to  such  an  expedient,  wUh  the
either  impudently  sports  with  that  sacred  faith,  or  sufficiently  ^*****.°^
evinces  his  inward  conviction  of  the  degree  of  moral  turpitude  .
annexed  to  the  violation  of  it :  he  wishes  to  act  a  dishonest
part,  and  yet  preserve  the  character  of  an  honest  man :  he
is  a  puritanical  impostor,  who  aggravates  his  crime  by  the
addition  of  a  detestable  liypocrisy. Grotius  quotes  several
instances  of  evidently  false  interpretations  put  upon  treaties  :*
the  Plateaus,  having  promised  the  Thebans  to  restore  their
prisoners,  restored  them  after  they  had  put  them  to  death.
Pericles,  having  promised  to  spare  the  lives  of  such  of  the
enemy  as  laid  down  their  arms,t  ordered  all  those  to  be  killed
who  had  iron  clasps  to  their  cloaks. A  Roman  general,f  hav-
ing agreed  with  Antiochus  to  restore  him  half  of  his  fleet,
caused  each  of  the  ships  to  be  sawed  in  two. All  these  in-
terpretations are  as  fraudulent  as  that  of  Rhadamistus,  who,
according  to  Tacitus's  account,  ||  having  sworn  to  Mithridates
that  he  would  not  employ  either  poison  or  the  steel  against
him,  caused  him  to  be  smothered  under  a  heap  of  clothes.

Our  faith  may  be  tacitly  pledged,  as  well  as  expressly  :  it  §  234.  Faith
is  sufficient  that  it  be  pledged,  in  order  to  become  obligatory :  ^-^^^y
the  manner  can  make  no  difference  in  the  case. The  tacit  ^  ®  s®
pledging  of  faith  is  founded  on  a  tacit  consent ;  and  a  tacit
consent  is  that  which,  is,  by  fair  deduction,  inferred  from  our
actions. Thus,  as  Grotius  observes,  §  whatever  is  included  in
the  nature  of  certain  acts  which  are  agreed  upon,  is  tacitly
comprehended  in  the  agreetnent :  or,  in  other  words,  every
thing  which  is  indispensably  necessary  to  give  effect  to  the
articles  agreed  on,  is  tacitly  granted. If,  for  instance,  a  pro-
'  mise  is  made  to  a  hostile  army  who  have  advanced  far  into


*  Be  Jure  BeUi  et  Pacifl,  lib.  iL  cap.  {  Q.  Fabius  Labeo,  according  to  Ya-

ztL  §  5.  lerias  Maximus ;  Livy  makes  no  men-

f  LiteraUy,  "  laid  down  their  iron  or  tion  of  the  transaction.

$teel :"  hence  the  perfidious  quibble  on  ||  Annal.  lib.  zii.

the  word  iron,  which  cannot  be  so  weU  j  Lib.  iiL  cap.  zzir.  |  1.
rendered  in  English.

m


235  OP SECUllITIES GIVEN FOR

BOOK  n.  the  country,  that  they  shall  be  allowed  to  return  home  in
CHAP.  XV.  gj^fety^  j^  Is  manifcst  that  they  cannot  be  refused  provisions ;
for  they  cannot  return  without  them.  In  the  same  manner,
in  demanding  or  accepting  an  interview,  full  security  is
tacitly  promised.  Livy  justly  says,  that  the  Q-allo-Greeks
violated  the  law  of  nations  in  attacking  the  consul  Manlins
at  the  time  when  he  was  repairing  to  the  place  of  interview
to  which  they  had  invited  him.*  The  emperor  Valerian,
having  been  defeated  by  Sapor,  king  of  Persia,  sent  to  him
to  sue  for  peace.  Sapor  declared  that  he  wished  to  treat
with  the  emperor  in  person ;  and  Valerian,  having  consented
to  the  interview  without  any  suspicion  of  fraud,  was  carried
off  by  the  perfidious  enemy,  who  kept  him  a  prisoner  till
his  death,  and  treated  him  with  the  most  brutal  cruelty.f

Grotius,  in  treating  of  tacit  conventions,  speaks  of  those  in
which  the  parties  pledge  their  faith  by  mute  signs.J  But  we
.  ought  not  to  confound  these  two  kinds  of  tacit  conventions :
for  that  consent  which  is  sufficiently  notified  by  a  sign,  is  an
express  consent,  as  clearly  as  if  it  had  been  signified  by  the
voice.  Words  themselves  are  but  signs  established  by  cus^
tom:  and  there  are  mute  signs  which  established  custom
renders  as  clear  and  as  express  as  words.  Thus,  at  the  present
day,  by  displaying  a  white  flag,  a  parley  is  demanded,  as  ex-
pressly as  it  could  be  done  by  the  use  of  speech.  Security  is
tacitly  promised  to  the  enemy  who  advances  upon  this  invita-
tion.


CHAP.  XVI.

CHAP.  XYi. OP  SECURITIES  GIVEN  FOR  THE  OBSERVANCE  OF  TREATIES.

$  235.  Gua-  CONVINCED  by  unhappy  experience,  that  the  faith  of
tnnty,  treaties,  sacred  and  inviolable  as  it  ought  to  be,  does  not
always  afford  a  sufficient  assurance  that  they  shall  be  punc-
tually observed, — mankind  have  sought  for  securities  against
perfidy, — for  methods,  whose  efficacy  should  not  depend  on
the  good  faith  of  the  contracting  parties.  A  guaranty  is  one
of  these  means.  When  those  who  make  a  treaty  of  peace,
or  any  other  treaty,  are  not  perfectly  easy  with  respect  to
its  observance,  they  require  the  guaranty  of  a  powerful  sove-
reign. The  guarantee  promises  to  maintain  the  conditions
of  the  treaty,  and  to  cause  it  to  be  observed.  As  he  may
find  himself  obliged  to  make  use  of  force  against  the  party
who  attempts  to  violate  his  promises,  it  is  an  engagement  that

*  Livy,  lib.  xxxviii.  cap.  xxt.

f  The  Life  of  Valerian  in  Grevier's  Hustory  of  the  Emperon.

f  Lib.  iii.  cap.  xxiv.  J  5.

S82


THE  OBSBBYANCE  OF  TREATIES.  23f

no  sovereign  ought  to  enter  into  lightly,  and  without  good book  n.
reason. Princes  indeed  seldom  enter  into  it  unless  when  they  ^^^^'  ^^''^
have  an  indirect  interest  in  the  observance  of  the  treaty,  or
are  induced  by  particular  relations  of  friendship. The  gua-  [  236  ]
ranty  may  be  promised  equally  to  all  the  contracting  parties,
to  some  of  them,  or  even  to  one  alone :  but  it  is  commonly
promised  to  all  in  general. It  may  also  happen,  when  several
sovereigns  enter  into  a  common  alliance,  that  they  all  reci-
procally pledge  themselves  to  each  other  as  guarantees,  for  its
observance. The  guaranty  is  a  kind  of  treaty,  by  which  as-
sistance and  fiuccours  are  promised  to  any  one,  in  case  he  has
need  of  them,  in  order  to  compel  a  faithless  ally  to  fulfil  his
engagements.

Guaranty  being  given  in  favour  of  the  contracting  powers,  J  236. it
or  of  one  of  them,  it  does  not  authorize  the  guarantee  to  in-  p^«*  *^«
terfere  in  the  execution  of  the  treaty,  or  to  enforce  the  obser-  ^^^^^
vance  of  it,  unasked,  and  of  his  own  accord. If,  by  mutual  interfere  an
consent,  the  parties  think  proper  to  deviate  from  the  tenor  asked  in  the
of  the  treaty,  to  alter  some  of  the  articles,  or  to  cancel  it  alto-  execution  of
gether, — or  if  one  party  be  willing  to  favour  the  other  by  a  *  *^®*^y-
relaxation  of  any  claim, — they  have  a  right  to  do  this,  and
the  guarantee  cannot  oppose  it. Simply  bound  by  his  pro-
mise to  support  the  party  who  should  have  reason  to  complain
of  the  infraction  of  the  treaty,  he  has  acquired  no  rights  for
himself. The  treaty  waa  not  made  for  him ;  for,  had  that
been  the  case,  he  would  have  been  concerned,  not  merely  as
a  guarantee,  but  as  a  principal  in  the  contract. This  obser-
vation is  of  great  importance :  for  care  should  be  taken,  lest,
under  colour  of  being  a  guarantee,  a  powerful  sovereign  should
render  himself  the  arbiter  of  the  affairs  of  his  neighbours,
and  pretend  to  give  them  law.

But  it  is  true,  that,  if  the  parties  make  any  change  in  the
articles  t  of  the  treaty  without  the  consent  and  concurrence
of  the  guarantee,  the  latter  is  no  longer  bound  to  adhere  to
the  guaranty ;  for  the  treaty  thus  changed  is  no  longer  that
which  he  guarantied.  (129)

As  no  nation  is  obliged  to  do  any  thing  for  another  nation,  j  237. N»-
which  that  other  is  herself  capable  of  doing,  it  naturally  fol-^'f  o^  *^»
lows  that  the  guarantee  is  not  bound  to  give  his  assistance  p^^^^*^**^**  **
except  where  the  party  to  whom  he  has  granted  his  guaranty
is  of  himself  unable  to  obtain  justice.

If  there  arises  any  dispute  between  the  contracting  parties
respecting  the  sense  of  any  article  of  the  treaty,  the  guarantee
is  not  immediately  obliged  to  assist  him  in  favour  of  whom
he  has  given  his  guaranty.  As  he  cannot  engage  to  support
injustice,  he  is  to  examine,  and  to  search  for  the  true  sense

(129)  This  principle  of  the  law of viduals. 6  Barn.  A  Ores.  269;  2  Bowl,
ttaiions  in  this  respect  precisely  appUei A  B.  22 ;  5  Bing.  485. — C»
feo  guaranties given  by  private  indi-

333


236  OF SECURITIES GIVEN  FOR


BOOK  n. of  the  treaty,  to  weigh  the  pretensions  of  him  who  claims  hig
CHAP.  XVI.  guaranty ;  and,  if  he  finds  them  ill  founded,  he  may  refuse  to

support  them,  without  failing  in  his  engagements.
§  238. The It  is  no  less  evident  that  the  guaranty  cannot  impair  the
^M^tT ^^S^^  ^f  *^y  ^^®  ^^^  ^3  ^^^  ^  party  to  the  treaty. If,  there-
pair  the  " ^^^^^  ^*  happens  that  the  guarantied  treaty  proves  derogatory
righte  of  a to  the  rights  of  those  who  are  not  concerned  in  it, — the  treaty
third  party,  being  unjust  in  this  point,  the  guarantee  is  in  no  wise  bound
to  procure  the  performance  of  it ;  for,  as  we  have  shown  above,
he  can  never  have  incurred  an  obligation  to  support  injustice.
[  237  ]  This  was  the  reason  alleged  by  France,  when,  notwithstand-
ing her  having  guarantied  the  famous  pragmatic  sanction  of
Charles  VI.,  she  declared  for  the  house  of  Bavaria,  in  oppo-
sition to  the  heiress  of  that  emperor. This  reason  is  incon-
testably  a  good  one,  in  the  general  view  of  it:  and  the  only
question  to  be  decided  at  that  time  was,  whether  the  court
of  France  made  a  just  application  of  it.

Non  noetnim  inter  vos  tantas  componere  lites.

I  shall  observe  on  this  occasion,  that,  according  to  common
usage,  the  term  guaranty  is  often  taken  in  a  sense  somewhat
different  from  that  we  have  given  to  it. For  instance,  most
of  the  powers  of  Europe  guarantied  the  act  by  which  Charles
VI.  had  regulated  the  succession  to  his  dominions ; — sove-
reigns sometimes  reciprocally  guaranty  their  respective  states.
But  we  should  rather  denominate  those  transactions  treaties
of  alliance,  for  the  purpose,  in  the  former  case,  of  maintain-
ing that  rule  of  succession, — ^and,  in  the  latter,  of  supporting
the  possession  of  those  states.
;  239. Da- The  guaranty  naturally  subsists  as  long  as  the  treaty  that
ration  of  the  13  the  obJBCt  of  it;  and,  in  case  of  doubt,  this  ought  always
^''*'*°*^' to  be  presumed,  since  it  is  required,  and  given,  for  the  secu-
rity of  the  treaty. But  there  is  no  reason  which  can  natu-
rally prevent  its  limitation  to  a  certain  period, — ^to  the  lives
of  the  contracting  powers,  to  that  of  the  guarantee,  &c. In
a  word,  whatever  we  have  said  of  treaties  in  general  is  equally
applicable  to  a  treaty  of  guaranty,
f  240.  Trea- When  there  is  question  of  things  which  another  may  do  or
ties  with gj^^  j^g  ^^u  g^  j^^  ^j^^  promises,  as,  for  instance,  the  payment

of  a  sum  of  money,  it  is  safer  to  demand  a  security  than  a
guaranty :  for  the  surety  is  bound  to  make  good  the  promise
in  default  of  the  principal, — ^whereas  the  guarantee  is  only
obliged  to  use  his  best  endeavours  to  obtain  a  performance  of
the  promise  from  him  who  has  made  it.
i  241.  A  nation  may  put  some  of  her  possessions  into  the  hands

Pawns,  se- ^f  another,  for  the  security  of  her  promises,  debts,  or  engagc-
^^^^^'^'"^ments. If  she  thus  deposits  movable  property,  she  gives
pledges. Poland  formerly  pledged  a  crown  and  other  jewels
.  to  the  sovereigns  of  Prussia. But  sometimes  towns  and  pro-
vinces are  given  in  pawn. If  they  are  only  pledged  by  %

834


THE  OBSERVANCE  OF  TREATIES.  287

deed  which  assigns  them  as  security  for  a  debt,  they  serve  as book  n.
a  mortgage :  if  they  are  actually  put  into  the  hands  of  the  ere-  ^^^^'  ^^
ditor,  or  of  him  with  whom  the  affair  has  been  transacted,  he
holds  them  as  pledges :  and,  if  the  revenues  are  ceded  to  him
as  an  equivalent  for  the  interest  of  the  debt,  the  transaction
is  called  a  compact  of  antichresis.

The  right  which  the  possession  of  a  town  or  province  con-  j  242. A
fers  upon  him  who  holds  it  in  pledge,  extends  no  further  than  nation's
to  secure  the  payment  of  what  is  due  to  him,  or  the  perform-  ^|  J  **^®'
ance  of  the  promise  that  has  been  made  to  him. He  may  y^^i^  ^^  ^
therefore  retain  the  town  or  the  province  in  his  hands,  till  he  pledge.
is  satisfied :  but  he  has  no  right  to  make  any  change  in  it ;
for  that  town,  or  that  country,  does  not  belong  to  him  as  pro-  [  238  ]
prietor. He  cannot  even  interfere  in  the  government  of  it,  -
beyond  what  is  required  for  his  own  security,  unless  the
empire,  or  the  exercise  of  sovereignty,  has  been  expressly
made  over  to  him. This  last  point  is  not  naturally  to  be
presumed,  since  it  is  sufficient  for  the  security  of  the  mort-
gagee, that  the  country  is  put  into  his  hands  and  under  his
power. Further,  he  is  obliged,  like  every  other  person  who
has  received  a  pledge,  to  preserve  the  country  he  holds  as  a
security,  and,  as  far  as  in  his  power,  to  prevent  its  suffering
any  damage  or  dilapidation :  he  is  responsible  for  it ;  and  if
the  country  is  ruined  through  his  fault,  he  is  bound  to  in-
demnify the  state  that  intrusted  him  with  the  possession  of
it. If  the  sovereignty  is  deposited  in  his  hands  together
with  the  country  itself,  he  ought  to  govern  it  according  to
its  constitution,  and  precisely  in  the  same  manner  as  the
sovereign  of  the  country  was  obliged  to  govern  it ;  for  the
latter  could  only  pledge  his  lawful  right.

As  soon  as  the  debt  is  paid,  or  the  treaty  is  fulfilled,  the  1 243,  How
term  of  the  security  expires,  and  he  who  holds  A  town  or  a*^«^
province  by  this  title  is  bound  to  restore  it  faithfully,  in  the  ^J^^l^  ^
same  state  in  which  he  received  it,  so  far  as  this  depends
on  him.

But  to  those  who  have  no  law  but  their  avarice,  or  their
ambition — who,  like  Achilles,  place  all  their  right  in  the  point
of  their  sword* — a  tempting  allurement  now  presents  itself:
they  have  recourse  to  a  thousand  quibbles,  a  thousand  pre-
tences, to  retain  an  important  place,  or  a  country  which  is
conveniently  situated  for  their  purposes.  The  subject  is  too
odious  for  us  to  allege  examples :  they  are  well  enough  known,
and  sufficiently  numerous  to  convince  every  sensible  nation,
that  it  is  very  imprudent  to  make  over  such  securities.

But  if  the  debt  be  not  paid  at  the  appointed  time,  or  if  the  ?  244.  How
treaty  be  not  fulfilled,  what  has  been  given  in  security  may  ^^^  ™»y  »p-
be  retained  and  appropriated,  or  the  mortgage  seized,  at  least  ^°jf/^J^*^
until  the  debt  be  discharged,  or  a  just  compensation  made.

*  Jara  negat  eibi  nata,  nihil  non  arrogat  armis. — Horat.

835


238  OF  SECURITIES  OIVEN  FOR


GHAP. XVI.


BOOK  n.  The  house  of  Savoy  had  mortgaged  the  country  of  Vaud  to
the  cantons  of  Bern  andFribourg;  and  those  two  cantons,
finding  that  no  payments  were  made,  had  recourse  to  arms,
and  took  possession  of  the  country.  The  duke  of  Savoy,  in-
stead of  immediately  satisfying  their  just  demands,  opposed
force  to  force,  and  gave  them  still  further  grounds  of  com-
plaint :  wherefore  the  cantons,  finally  successful  in  the  con-
test, have  since  retained  possession  of  that  fine  counfry,  as
well  for  the  payment  of  the  debt,  as  to  defray  the  expenses
of  the  war,  and  to  obtain  a  just  indemnification.
;  245.  Finally,  there  is,  in  the  way  of  security,  another  precau-

HoBtages. ^j^^^  ^f  y^^j  ancient  institution,  and  much  used  among  nations
— which  is,  to  require  hostages. These  are  persons  of  conse-
quence, delivered  up  by  the  promising  party,  to  him  with
[  239  ]  whom  he  enters  into  an  engagement,  to  be  detained  by  the
latter  until  the  performance  of  the  promises  which  are  made
to  him. In  this  case,  as  well  as  in  those  above  mentioned,
the  transaction  is  a  pignorary  contract,  in  which  free  men
are  delivered  up,  instead  of  towns,  countries,  or  jewels.  With
respect  to  this  contract,  therefore,  we  may  confine  ourselves
to  those  particular  observations  which  the  difierence  of  the
things  pledged  renders  necessary.
9  246.  What The  sovereign  who  receives  hostages  has  no  other  right
right  we over  them  than  that  of  securing  their  persons,  in  order  to
have  over detain  them  till  the  entire  accomplishment  of  the  promises
oatages. ^£  which  they  are  the  pledge. lie  may  therefore  take  pre-
cautions to  prevent  their  escaping  from  him :  but  those  pre-
cautions  should be moderated by  humanity  towards  men
whom  he  has  no  right  to  use  ill ; and  they  ought  not  to  be
extended  beyond  what  prudence  requires.

It  is  pleasing  to  behold  the  European  nations  in  the  pre-
sent age  content  themselves  with  the  bare  parol  of  their  host-
ages. The  English  noblemen  who  were  sent  to  France  in
that  character,  in  pursuance  of  the  treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,
in  1748,  to  stay  till  the  restitution  of  Cape  Breton,  were
solely  bound  by  their  word  of  honour,  and  lived  at  court,  and
at  Paris,  rather  as  ministers  of  their  nation  than  as  hostages.
J  «4r.  Their rphe  liberty  of  the  hostages  is  the  only  thing  pledged ;  and

u  piedeed'^*  ^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  given  them  breaks  his  promise,  they  may  be
detained  in  captivity.  Formerly  they  were  in  such  cases  put
to  death ; — an  inhuman  cruelty,  founded  on  an  error.  It  was
imagined  that  the  sovereign  might  arbitrarily  dispose  of  the
lives  of  his  subjects,  or  that  every  man  was  the  master  of  his
own  life,  and  had  a  right  to  stake  it  as  a  pledge  when  he  de-
livered himself  up  as  a  hostage.
1 248^  When  As  soon  as  the  engagements  are  fulfilled,  the  cause  for
uYnt'b ^k. ^'^^^^  the  hostages. were  delivered  no  longer  subsists:  they
then  immediately  become  free,  and  ought  to  be  restored  with-
out delay.  They  ought  also  to  be  restored,  if  the  reason  for
which  they  were  demanded  does  not  take  place :  to  detain


THB  OBSERVANCE  OP  TREATIES.  289

them  then  would  be  to  abuse  the  sacred  faith  upon  which  book  h.
they  are  delivered.  The  perfidious  Christiern  II.,  king  of  ^*^^^'  ^V\
Denmark,  being  delayed  by  contrary  winds  before  Stockholm,
and,  together  with  his  whole  fleet,  ready  to  perish  with
famine,  made  proposals  of  peace:  whereupon,  the  adminis-
trator, Steno,  imprudently  trusting  to  his  promises,  furnished
the  Danes  with  provisions,  and  even  gave  Gustavus  and  six
other  noblemen  as  hostages  for  the  safety  of  the  king,  who
pretended  to  have  a  desire  to  come  on  shore :  but,  with  the
first  fair  wind,  Christiern  weighed  anchor,  and  carried  off  the
hostages  ;  thus  repaying  the  generosity  of  his  enemy  by  an
infamous  act  of  treachery.*

Hostages  being  delivered  on  the  faith  of  treaties,  and  he  ?  249.  Whe.
who  receives  them  promising  to  restore  them  as  soon  as  the  ^^^^  ^^^
promise  of  which  they  are  the  surety  shall  be  fulfilled, — ^such  ^^^^^
engagements  ought  to  be  literally  accomplished :  and  the  any  other
hostages  should  be  really  and  faithfully  restored  to  their  for-  account,
mer  condition,  as  soon  as  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise
has  disengaged  them.  It  is,  therefore,  not  allowable  to  de-
tain them  for  any  other  cause ;  and  I  am  astonished  to  find  [  240  ]
that  some  learned  writers  teach  a  contrary  doctrine.f  They
ground  their  opinion  upon  the  principle  which  authorizes  a
sovereign  to  seize  and  detain  the  subjects  of  another  state  in
order  to  compel  their  rulers  to  do  him  justice.  The  prin-
ciple is  true  ;  but  the  application  is  not  just.  These  authors
seemed  to  have  overlooked  the  circumstance,  that,  were  it  not
for  the  faith  of  the  treaty  by  virtue  of  which  the  hostage  has
been  delivered,  he  would  not  be  in  the  power  of  that  sove-
reign, nor  exposed  to  be  so  easily  seized ;  and  that  the  faith
of  such  a  treaty  does  not  allow  the  sovereign  to  make  any
other  use  of  his  hostage  than  that  for  which  he  was  intended,
or  to  take  advantage  of  his  detention  beyond  what  has  been
expressly  stipulated.  The  hostage  is  delivered  for  the  secu-
rity of  a  promise,  and  for  that  alone.  As  soon,  therefore,  as
the  promise  is  fulfilled,  the  hostage,  as  we  have  just  observed,
ought  to  be  restored  to  his  former  condition.  To  tell  him
that  he  is  released  as  a  hostage,  but  detained  as  a  pledge  for
the  security  of  any  other  pretension,  would  be  taking  advan-
tage of  his  situation  as  a  hostage,  in  evident  violation  of  the
spirit  and  even  the  letter  of  the  convention,  according  to
which,  as  soon  as  the  promise  is  accomplished,  the  hostage  is
to  be  restored  to  himself  and  his  country,  and  reinstated  in
his  pristine  rank,  as  if  he  had  never  been  a  hostage.  With-
out a  rigid  adherence  to  this  principle,  it  would  no  longer  be
safe  to  give  hostages,  since  princes  might,  on  every  occasion,
easily  devise  some  pretext  for  detaining  them.  Albert  the
Wise,  duke  of  Austria,  making  war  against  the  city  of  Zurich,

I  . I .  ■

*  History  of  the  Revolutions  of  Sweden.

f  Grotius,  lib.  iii.  cap.  zx.  g  55. — ^Wolfiuis,  Job  Gent  J  503.

«3  2  1>  337


240  OF SECURITIES GIVEN FOR


BOOK  11. in  the  year  1351,  the  two  parties  referi'ed  the  decision  of  their
cHAP^jcvi.  djgputgy  i0  arbitrators,  and  Zurich  gave  hostages. The  arbi-
trators  passed  an  unjust  sentence, dictated by  partiality-
Zurich,  nevertheless,  after  having  made  a  well-grounded  com-
plaint on  the  subject,  determined  to  submit  to  their  decision.
But  the  duke  formed  new  pretensions,  and  detained  the  hos-
tages,* contrary  to  the  faith  of  the  compromise,  and  in  evident
contempt  of  the  law  of  nations.
i  250.  They But  a  hostage  may  be  detained  for  his  own  actions,  for
may  be  de-  crimes  committed,  or  debts  contracted  in  the  country  while  he
theirtwn ^®  ^^  hostage  there. This  is  no  violation  of  the  faith  of  the
actions. treaty. In  order  to  be  sure  of  recovering  his  liberty,  accord-
ing to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  the  hostage  must  not  claim  a
right  to  commit,  with  impunity,  any  outrages  against  the  na-
tion- by  which  he  is  kept ;  and  when  he  is  about  to  depart,  it
is  just  that  he  should  pay  his  debts.
2  251. Of It  is  the  party  who  ^ives  the  hostages  that  is  to  provide
the  support  for  their  support ;  for,  it  is  by  his  order,  and  for  his  service,
of  hostages.  ^}^g^|.  ^y^^j  ^^e  in  postage. He  who  receives  them  for  his  owr
security  is  not  bound  to  defray  the  expense  of  their  subsist-
ence, but  simply  that  of  their  custody,  if  he  thinks  proper  to
r  241  1  set  a  guard  over  them.

i  252. A The  sovereign  may  dispose  of  his  subjects  for  the  service

Bubjoct  can-  of  the  State ;  he  may,  therefore,  give  them  also  as  hostages ;

not  refuse  to  ^^^  ^^^  person  who  is  nominated  for  that  purpose  is  bound

ge.  ^^  qI^qj^  as  he  is,  on  every  other  occasion,  when  commanded

for  the  service  of  his  country. But,  as  the  expenses  ought

to  be  borne  equally  by  the  citizens,  the  hostage'  is  entitled  to

be  defrayed  and  indemnified  at  the  public  charge.

It  is,  evidently,  a  subject  alone  who  can  be  given  as  a  hos-
tage against  his  will.  With  a  vassal,  the  case  is  otherwise.
What  he  owes  to  the  sovereign,  is  determined  by  the  condi-
tions of  his  fief;  and  he  is  bound  to  nothing  more.  Accord-
ingly, it  is  a  decided  point  that  a  vassal  cannot  be  constrained
to  go  as  a  hostage,  unless  he  be  at  the  same  time  a  subject.

Whoever  has  a  power  to  make  treaties  or  conventions,  may

give  and  receive  hostages. For  this  reason,  not  only  the

sovereign,  but  also  the  subordinate  authorities,  have  a  right

to  give  hostages  in  the  agreements  they  make,  according  to

the  powers  annexed  to  their  oflSce,  and  the  extent  of  their

commission. The  governor  of  a  town,  and  the  besieging

general,  give  and  receive  hostages  for  the  security  of  the

capitulation :  whoever  is  under  their  command  is  bound  to

obey,  if  he  is  nominated  for  that  purpose.

^  258.  Rank llostages  ought  naturally  to  be  persons  of  consequence,

of  the  host-  since  they  are  required  as  a  security. Persons  of  mean  con-

•^^'  dition  would  furnish  but  a  feeble  security,  unless  they  were

given  in  great  numbers. Care,  is  commonly  taken  to  settle

*  Tschudi,  yoL  L  p.  421.
388


THE OBSERVANCE  OF  rREATIES.  241

the  rank  of  the  hostages  that  are  to  he  delivered ;  and  the »oo«  n.
riolation  of  a  compact  in  this  particular  is  a  flagrant  derelic- -£!l^!l-5Ih
tion  of  good  faith  and  honour. It  was  a  shameful  act  of
perfidy  in  La  Trimouille  to  give  the  Swiss  only  hostages  from
the  dregs  of  the  people,  instead  of  four  of  the  principal  citi-
zens of  Dijon,  as  had  been  stipulated  in  the  famous  treaty
we  mentioned  above  (§  212). Sometimes  the  principal  per- .
sons  of  the  state,  and  even  princes,  are  given  in  hostage.
Francis  I.  gave  his  own  sons  as  security  for  the  treaty  of
Madrid.

The  sovereiffn  who  gives  hostages  ought  to  act  ingenuously  ?  ^54.  They
in  the  aifair, — ^giving  them  in  reality  as  pledges  of  his  word,  ^^^^  ^^j^
and,  consequently,  with  the  intention  that  they  should  be  kept  esoAp*.
till  the  entire  accomplishment  of  his  promise. He  cannot,
therefore,,  approve  of  their,  making  their  escape :  and,  if  they
take  such  a  step,  so  far  from  harbouring  them,  he  is  bound
to  send  them  back. The  hostage,  on  his  side,  conformably
to  the  presumed  intention  of  his  sovereign,  ought  faithfully
to  remain  with  him  to  whom  he  is  delivered,  without  endea-
vouring to  escape. Cloelia  made  her  escape  from  the  hands
of  Porsenna,  to  whom  she  had  been  delivered  as  a  hostage ;
but  the  Romans  sent  her  back,  that  they  might  not  incur  the
guilt  of  violating  the  treaty.*  [  242  1

If  the  hostage  happens  to  die,  he  who  has  given  him  is  not  g  265.  Wbe-
obliged  to  replace  him,  unless  this  was  made  a  part  of  the  ^^^^  *  ^**"*-
agreement. The  hostage  was  a  security  required  of  him:^®^T  J^^
that  security  is  lost  without  any  fault  on  his  side ;  and  there  replaced,
exists  no  reason  why  he  should  be  obliged  to  give  another.

If  any  one  substitutes  hiAself  for  a  time  in  the  place  of  a  j  256. Of
hostage,  and  the  hostage  happens  in  the  interim  to  die  a^»™^^<*
natural  death,  the  substitute  is  free :  for,  in  this  case,  things  *^'  ^*^
are  to  be  replaced  in  the  same  situation  in  which  they  would  hoatafa.
have  been  if  the  hx>stage  had  not  been  permitted  to  absent
himself  and  substitute  another  in  his  stead :  and,  for  the  same
reason,  the  hostage  is  not  free  by  the  death  of  him  who  has
taken  his  place  only  for  a  time. It  would  be  quite  the  con-
trary, if  the  hostage  had  been  exchanged  for  another :  the
former  would  be  absolutely  free  from  all  engagement ;  and
the  person  who  had  taken  his  place  would  alone  be  bound.

If  a  prince  who  has  been  given  in  hostage  succeeds  to  the  g  257. A
crown,  he  ought  to  be  released  on  the  delivery  of  another  i^ostag©  sm.
sufficient  hostage,  or  a  number  of  others,  who  shall  together  ^^®  l^J^,
constitute  an  aggregate  security  equivalent  to  that  which  he
himself  afforded  when  he  was  originally  given. This  is  evi-
dent from  the  treaty  itself,  which  did  not  import  that  the
king  should  be  a  hostage. The  detention  of  the  king's  per-
son by  a  foreign  power  is  a  thing  of  too  interesting  a  nature
to  admit  a  presumption  that  the  state  had  intended  to  expose

*  Et  Romani  pignos  paoia  ex  foedere  restitaeront Tit  Liv.  lib.  ii.  cap.  ziiL

839


\
242  SBOURITIES GIVEN  FOR  THE OBSERVANCE  OF  TREATIB8.

BOOK  n. herself  to  the  consequences  of  such  an  event. Good  fftith
ea^y.  xyl  Q^g]j(j  ^q  preside  in  all conventions ; and  the  manifest  or
justly  presumed  intention  of  the  contracting  parties  ought
to  be  adhered  to. If  Francis  I.  had  died  after  having  given
his  sons  as  hostages,  certainly  the  dauphin  should  have  been
released:  for,  he  had  been  delivered  only  with  a  view  of  re-
storing the  king  to  his  kingdom ;  and,  if  the  emperor  had
detained  him,  that  view  would  have  been  frustrated,  since  the
king  of  France  would  still  have  been  a  captive. It  is  evi-
dent, that,  in  this  reasoning,  I  proceed  on  the  suppositioo
that  no  violation  of  the  treaty  has  taken  place  on  the  part
of  the  state  which  has  given  a  prince  in  hostage. In  case
that  state  had  broken  its  promise,  advantage  might  reasonably
be  taken  of  an  event  which  rendered  the  hostage  still  more
valuable,  and  his  release  the  more  necessary,
1 268. The The  liability  of  a  hostage,  as  that  of  a  city  or  a  country,
liability  of expires  with the treaty  which it  was intended to secure
Mdi'w^r''  (§§  243,  248) :  and  consequently,  if  the  treaty  is  personal,
iho  treaty, the  hostage  is  free  sat  the  moment  when  one  of  the  contract-
ing powers  happens  to  die.
;  259. The The  sovereign  who  breaks  his  word  after  having  given  host-
Tioiation  of  agcs,  does  an  injury,  not  only  to  the  other  contracting  power,
ao^injiuT  "  ^^^  *^^^  *^  *^®  hostages  themselves. For,  though  subjects
done  to  the  are  indeed  bound  to  obey  their  sovereign  who  gives  them  in
hoatages. hostage,  that  sovereign  has  not  a  right  wantonly  to  sacrifice
[  243  ]  their  liberty,  and  expose  their  lives  to  danger  without  just
reasons. Delivered up  as  a  security  for  their  sovereign's
promise,  not  for  the  purpose  of  suffering  any  harm, — if  he
entails  misfortune  on  them  by  violating  his  faith,  he  covers
himself  with  double  infamy. Pawns  and  mortgages  serve  as
securities  for  what  is  due ;  and  their  acquisition  indemnifies
the  party  to  whom  the  other  fails  in  his  engagements. Post-
ages are  rather  pledges  of  the  faith  of  him  who  gives  them ;
and  it  is  supposed  that  he  would  abhor  the  idea  of  sacrificing
innocent  persons. But,  if  particular  conjunctures  oblige  a
sovereign  to abandon the hostages, — if,  for example,  the
party  who  has  received  them  violates  his  engagements  in  the
first  instance,  and,  in  consequence  of  his  violation,  the  treaty
can  no  longer  be  accomplished  without  exposing  the  state  to
danger, — no  measure  should  be  left  untried  for  the  delivery
of  those  unfortunate  hostages ;  and  the  state  cannot  refuse
to  compensate  them  for  their  sufferings,  and  to  make  them
amends,  either  in  their  own  persons,  or  in  those  of  their
relatives.
;  260. The At  the  moment  when the  sovereign  who  has  given  the
fate  of  the hostage  has  violated  his  faith,  the  latter  ceases  to  retain  th*T
when^he character  of  a  hostage,  and  becomes  a  prisoner  to  the  party
niio  has who  had  received  him,  and  who  has  now  a  right  to  detain  him
ifivenhiminin  perpetual  captivity. But  it  becomes  a  generous  prince  to
fikiis  in  his refrain  from  an  exertion  of  his  rights  at  the  expense  of  an

340


OP  THE  INTERPRETATION OF  TREATIES.  248

innocent  individual. And  as  the  hostage  is. no  longer  boand book  n.
by  any  tie  to  his  own  sovereign  who  has  perfidiously  aban--£5£!!LiEZh
doned  him, — if  he  chooses  to  transfer  his  allegiance  to  the  engage-
prince  who  is  now  the  arbiter  of  his  fate,  the  latter  may  ac-  ^^^^
quire  a  useful  subject,  instead  of  a  wretched  prisoner,  the
troublesome  object  of  his  commiseration. Or  he  may  liberate
and  dismiss  him,  on  settling  with  him  the  conditions.

We  have  already  observed  that  the  life  of  a  hostage  can-  j  261.  or
not  be  lawfully  taken  away  on  account  of  the  perfidy  of  the  t^«  "S^**
party  who  has  delivered  him.  The  custom  of  nations,  the  ^^^^  ^"
most  constant  practice,  cannot  justify  such  an  instance  of
barbarous  cruelty,  repugnant  to  the  law  of  nature.  Even  at
a  time  when  that  dreadful  custom  was  but  too  much  autho*
rized,  the  great  Scipio  publicly  declared  that  he  would  not
suffer  his. vengeance  to  fall  on  innocent  hostages,  but  on  the
persons  themselves  who  had  incurred  the  guilt  of  perfidy,  and
that  he  was  incapable  of  punishing  any  but  armed  enemies.*
^he  emperor  Julian  made  the  same  declaration.f  All  that
such  a  custom  can  produce,  is  impunity  among  the  nations
who  practice  it.  Whoever  is  guilty  of  it  cannot  complain
that  another  is  so  too :  but  every  nation  may  and  ought  to
declare  that  she  considers  the  action  as  a  barbarity  injurious
to  human  nature.


CHAP.  XVII.  [  244  ]

OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OP  TREATIES.  (130)  chap,  xyiu

IP  the  ideas  of  men  were  always  distinct  and  perfectly  g  262. Ne-
determinate, — ^if,  for  the  expression  of  those  ideas,  they  had  cessity  of
none  but  proper  words,  no  terms  but  such  as  were  clear,  pre- ®'**^^"^°«
cise,  and  susceptible  only  of  one  sense, — there  would  never  teroretotion.

*  Tit  Liv.  lib.  xxviii.  cap.  xxxiv.  the  same.  {Ephinatone  v.  Bedreeehund,
f  See  GrotiuSy  lib.  iii.  cap.  xi.  J  18,  Knapp's  Rep.  340;  Lindo  7.  Rodney,
not  2.  DougL  313.)  Political  treaties  be-
(130)  See  farther  as  to  the  constrae-  tween  a  foreign  state  and  subjects  of
tion  of  treaties,  post  B.  IV.  Ch.  IIL  §  32,  the  orown  of  Great  Britain,  acting  a«
post)  443.  This  chapter  is  highly  an  independent  state  under  the  powers
important  to  be  studied,  in  relation  to  granted  by  charter  and  act  of  parlia-
questions  respecting  the  construction  ment,  are  not  a  subject  of  municipal
of  private  contracts,  statutes,  Ac,  as  jurisdiction:  therefore,  a  bill  founded
well  as  of  treaties,  as  many  of  the  rules  on  such  treaties  by  the  nabob  of  Arcot
are  capable  of  general  application,  against  the  East  India  Company,  wab
Questions  respecting  the  eon$truction,  dismissed.  {Nabob  of  Camaiie  v.  Eatt
in/raetiorif  or  obaervance  of  treatietf  are  India  Cknnpanyy  2  Yes.  jun.  56 ;  and
not  in  general  directly  imitated  in  any  see  in  general.  Hill  y.  Reardon^  2  Sim.
municipal  court  of  law  or  equity  of  A  Stu.  437;  Jacob,  Rep.  84;  2  Russ.
Great  Britain,  at  least  as  regards  the  Rep.  608 — 633;  confirming  the  gene-
adjustment  of  any  claims  between  the  ral  rule,  but  admitting  the  jurisdiotion
respective  stntoi  who  were  parties  to  of  a  court  of  equity,  where  there  has

2d  2  841


244  OF  THE INTERPRETATION OP  TREATIBfl.


BOOK  n.
CHAP,  xvn


be  any  difficulty. in  discovering  their  meaning  in  the  vordfl
Lby  which  they  intended  to  express  it :  nothing  more  would  be

necessary  than  to  understand  the  language. But,  even  on

been  a  trust.) But,  collateralli/,  courts  Collect,  of  OpinionB,  vol.  2,  345,  S46.)

of  law  very  frequently  have  to,  discuss  Therefore,  the.  rules  of  eustomary  eon-

and  to  construe  and  give  efifect  to  trea-  tracts  between  private  individnals  mjij

ties, as  regards  the  private  rights  of  in  general  be  called  in  aid. However,

subjects ;  and,  after  ascertaining  the  par-  in  debating  any  question  upon  treaties

ticular  object  of  the  treaty,  the  courts  arising  between  nation  and  natiouj  in

then  construe  it  nearly  by  the  same  the  age  we  live  in,  it  is  necessary  to

rules  as  affect  contracts  between  private  keep  in  view  the  general  state  and  e<»-

individuals. (Per  Eyre,  G.  J.  in  Mar-  dition  of  the  contracting  powers,  froA

ryatt  v.  Wilson,  1  Bos.  A  Pul.  436—439.  whence the arguments of public  law

And  see  in  general,  as  to  the  construe-  can  only  be  drawn  with  any  just  deci-

tion of treaties, Marriotts case of  sion. (2  Chalmer's Col.  Op.  347.) It

Dutch  ship,  12,  13,  Ac.) One  general  has  also  been  considered  that  a  genecal

rule  to  be  ever  kept  in  view  is,  that  it  is  commercial  treaty,  not  limited  bj  its

the  essence  of a  definitive treaty  of  terms  to  a  particular  time,  is  only  sns-

peaoe  that  the  commercial  friendly  in-  pended  by  a  war;  and  that,  upon  iha

tercourse of the contracting powers  return  of  peace,  it  will  tacitly  revive  by

must  be  replaced  in  its  former  state. (2  implication,  unless  there  bo  an  express

Chalmer's  Opinion,  849.)  declaration  to  the  contrary. (2  Chal-

Vattel,  in pages 244—274,  '  elabo-  mer's CoL Op. 344—355.) In the

rately  lays  down  several  ndes  for  con-  great  case  of  Marry att  v.  Wilson,  upon

struing  treaties. In  a  learned  opinion  the  construction  of  the  treaty  between

upon  the  subject^  it  has  been  weU  ob-  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,  in

served, that treaties,  being in  their  error  in  the  Exchequer  Chamber,  £yi^

nature  compacts  superseding  the  com-  Ch.  J.,  after  observing  that  a  treaty

mon  usage,  which  is,  strictly  speaking,  should  be  construed  liberally,  and  con-

the  law  of  nations,  by  particular  stipu-  sistent  with  the  good  faith  whieh  al-

lations,  are  to  be  argued  upon  the  foot-  ways  distingnishes  a  great  nation,  said,

ing  of  all  obligations  which  arise  from  that  courts of  law,  although  not  the

contract, expressed or  tacit, whether  expounders  of  a  treaty,  yet  when  it  is

quasi  ex  contractu,  or  necessarily  implied  brought  under  their consideration t»-

by  general  words  of comprehension;  cidentally, they must say how the

and  the  principles  of  the  civil  law  de  treaty  is  to  be  understood  between  the

o6/t<^at»ont5u«,  which  is  the  law  admitted  parties  to  the action,,  and in doiDg

by  all  nations  in Europe,  by  most  in  which,  they have but one rule by

their  domestic  and  by  all  in  national  which  to  govern  themselves. We  axe

questions,  must  be  allowed  to  arbitrate  to  construe  this treaty  as  we  would

in  deciding  the  validity,  existence,  and  construe  any  other  instrument,  public

meaning  of  a  public  treaty,  by  the  same  or  private ;  we  are  to  collect  from  the

rules  and  reasonings  as  whon  applied  nature  of  the  subject,  from the  words

to  any  other  contract  of  private  life,  and the  context,  the true  intent  and

Words or  characters  are  merely  used  meaning of the contracting parties,

to  convey, by marks  or  sounds, the  whether  they  are  A.  and  B.,  or  happen

ideas  of  consent,  and  to  preserve  the  to  be  two independent  states. (Pejr

memory of compacts: now, the end  Eyre,  Ch.  J., in Marryatt  v.  Wilson,

being  thus  principally  to  bo  considered,  1  Bos.  A  Pul.  436 — 439. {  The  United

and  the  means  being  regarded  only  as  States  v.  Arredondo  et  aL,  6  Potera'  S.  C.

declarative  of  the  end,  if  by  any  other  Rep.  610.  |

means  than  by  strict  words  a  contract With  respect to  the general  roles

is  implied,  it  is  undoubtedly  valid  when-  for  construing private  y  contracts,  and

ever  there  appears,  from  any  acts  or  which equally apply to treaties, see

reasonable  interpretations  of  signs,  an  oases  collected,  Chitty  on  Bills,  8  ea

acknowledged consent, and equitable  190 — 194. Paley  on  Moral  Phil.  126.

foundations  of  contracting ;  these  cir-  The  editor  has  purposely  refrained  from

eumstances  making  the  very  substance  fortifying  the  excellent  rules  laid  down

of  a  contract. (Sir  James Marriott's  in  the  context,  by  numerous  instances.

Opinion  on  the  Duration  of  the  Treaty  feeling  that  that  attempt  might  rather  ea-

of  Neutrality in 1686,  in Chalmer's  cumber  than  improve  this  edition. — C
342


OF  THE  INTBRPRETATIOK  OE  TESATIES.  244

this  supposition,  the  art  of  interpretation  would  still  not  be  b*  oa  a.
useless.  In  concessions,  conventions,  and  treaties,  in  all  con-  c-*^**-  ^^^[i
tracts,  as  well  as  in  the  laws,  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  and
point  out  all  the  particular  cases  that  may  arise  ;  we  decree,
we  ordain,  we  agree  upon  certain  things,  and  express  them  in
general  terms ;  and,  though  all  the  expressions  of  a  treaty
should  be  perfectly  clear,  plain,  and  determinate,  the  true  in-
terpretation would  still  consist  in  making,  in  all  the  particular
cases  that  present  themselves,  a  just  application  of  what  has
been  decreed  in  a  general  manner.  But  this  is  not  all : —
conjectures  vary,  and  produce  new  kinds  of  cases,  that  can-
not be  brought  within  the  terms  of  the  treaty  or  the  law,
except  by  inferences  drawn  from  the  general  views  of  the
contracting  parties,  or  of  the  legislature.  Between  different
clauses,  there  will  be  found  contradictions  and  inconsistencies,
real  or  apparent ;  and  the  question  is,  to  reconcile  such  clauses,
and  point  out  the  path  to  be  pursued.  But  the  case  is  much
worse  if  we  consider  that  fraud  seeks  to  take  advantage  even
of  the  imperfection  of  language,  and  that  men  designedly
throw  obscurity  and  ambiguity  into  their  treaties,  in  order  to
be  provided  with  a  pretence  for  eluding  them  upon  occasion.
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  establish  rules  founded  on  reason,
and  authorized  by  the  law  of  nature,  capable  of  diffusing  light
over  what  is  obscure,  of  determining  what  is  uncertain,  and
of  frustrating  the  views  of  him  who  acts  with  duplicity  in
forming  the  compact.  Let  us  begin  with  those  that  tend  par-
ticularly to  this  last  end, — with  those  maxims  of  justice  and
equity  which  are  calculated  to  repress  fraud,  and  to  prevent
the  effect  of  its  artifices.

The  first  general  maxim  of  interpretation  is,  that  It  is  not  i  26a. igt
allowable  to  interpret  what  has  no  need  of  interpretation.  ««°®"^
When  a  deed  is  worded  in  clear  and  precise  terms, — when  i^"o™aiiow-
its  meaning  is  evident,  and  leads  to  no  absurd  conclusion, —  able  to  in.
there  can  be  no  reason  for  refusing  to  admit  the  meaning  terpret  what
which  such  deed  naturally  presents. To go elsewhere in  ^^^^  "<*  ^^'^^^
search  of  conjectures,  in  order  to  restrict  or  extend  it,  is  but  Jation*(i3i)
an  attempt  to  elude  it. If  this  dangerous  method  be  once
admitted,  there  will  be  no  deed  which'  it  will  not  render  use-
less. However  luminous  each  clause  may  be, — however  cleai*
and  precise  the  terms  in  which  the  deed  is  couched, — all  this  [  245  ]
will  be  of  no  avail,  if  it  be  allowed  to  go  in  quest  of  extrane-
ous arguments,  to  prove  that  it  is  not  to  be  understood  in  the
sense  which  it  naturally  presents.*

Those  canllers  who  dispute  the  sense  of  a  clear  and  deter-

(131)  See  the  same  maxim,  Paley's  *  Standum  omoino  est  iis,  qase  verbis
Moral  Philos.  126 ;  Chit  on  Bills,  8  ed.  expressis,  quorum  manifestus  est  sig-
190  to  194.  There  is  another  rule,  (post,  nificatus,  indicata  fuerunt,  nisi  omnem
443,  J  32),  to  construe  against  the  party  a  negodis  humanis  certitudinem  re-
prescribing  the  terms  of  treaty,  or  the  movere  volueris.  Wour.  Jus  Nat.  par
luponor  tIL  n.  822.


245


OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF TREATlKb.


BOOK  n.
CHAP. XVII.

^  2(54. 2d
genend
maxim :  if
he  who
could  and
ought  to
have  ex-
plaiued
himself  has
not  done  it,
it  is  to  hia
own  detri-
ment


i  265. 3d
general
maxim :
neither  of
the  con-
tracting par-
ties has  a
right  to  in-
terpret the
treaty  ac-
cording to
his  own
fancy.


§  266. 4th
general
maxim :
what  is  Buf-
flciontly  do-
elarod,  is  to
he  taken  for
true.


}  267.  We
ought  to  at-
tond  rather
to  the  words
of  the  per-
son promis-
ing, than  to


niinate  article,  are  accustomed  to  seek  their  frivolous  subter-
fuges in  the  pretended  intentions  and  views  which  they  attri-
bute to  its  author.  It  would  be  very  often  dangerous  to  enter
with  them  into  the  discussion  of  those  supposed  views  that  are
not  pointed  out  in  the  piece  itself.  The  following  rule  is  better
calculated  to  foil  such  cavillers,  and  will  at  once  cut  short  all
chicanery: — If  he  who  CQuld  and  ought  to  have  explained
Iiimself  clearly  an  i  fully  has  not  done  it,  it  is  the  worse  for
him :  he  cannot  he  allowed  to  introduce  subsequent  restrictionB
which  he  has  not  expressed.  This  is  a  maxim  of  the  Roman
law :  Pactionem  ohscuram  iis  nocere  in  quorum  fuit  potestaie
legem  apertiv^s  conscribere.*  The  equity  of  this  rule  is  glar-
ingly obvious,  and  its  necessity  is  not  less  evident.  There
will  be  no  security  in  conventions,  no  stability  in  grants  or
concessions,  if  they  may  be  rendered  nugatory  by  subsequent
limitations,  which  ought  to  have  been  originally  specified  in
the  deed,  if  they  were  in  the  contemplation  of  the  contract-
ing parties.

The  third  general  maxim  or  principle  on  the  subject  of  in-
terpretation is,  that  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  the  parties
interested  in  the  contract  has  a  right  to  interpret  the  deed  or
treaty  according  to  his  own  fancy.  For  if  you  are  at  liberty
to  affix  whatever  meaning  you  please  to  my  promise,  you  will
have  the  power  of  obliging  me  to  do  whatever  you  choose,
contrary  to  my  intention,  and  beyond  my  real  engagements :
and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  I  am  allowed  to  explain  my  pro-
mises as  I  please,  I  may  render  them  vain  and  illusory,  by
giving  them  a  meaning  quite  different  from  that  which  they
presented  to  you,  and  in  which  you  must  have  understood
them  at  the  time  of  your  accepting  them.

On  every  occasion  when  a  person  could  and  ought  to  have
made  knoum  his  intention,  we  assume  for  true  against  him
what  he  has  sufficiently  declared.  This  is  an  incontestable
principle,  applied  to  treaties :  for,  if  they  are  not  a  vain  play
of  words,  the  contracting  parties  ought  to  express  themselves
in  them  with  truth,  and  according  to  their  real  intentions.
If  the  intention  which  is  sufficiently  declared  were  not  to  be
taken  of  course  as  the  true  intention  of  him  who  speaks  and
enters  into  engagements,  it  would  be  perfectly  useless  to  form
contracts  or  treaties.

But  it  is  here  asked,  which  of  the  contracting  parties  ought
to  have  his  expressions  considered  as  the  more  decisive,  with
respect  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  contract, — ^whether  we
should  lay  a  greater  stress  on  the  words  of  him  who  makes
the  promise,  than  on  those  of  the  party  who  stipulates  for  ita
performance. As  the  force  and  obligation  of  every  contract

*  Digest,  lib.  ii.  tit  xiv.  de  Paotis, nocere  potins debere  vend!  tori  qui  id
leg.  39. — See  likewise  Digest,  lib.  xviii. dixerit,  quam  emptori ;  qoia  p«  ^t  M
tit  i.  de Contrahenda Emptione,  leg. Integra  apertius  dicere.
31. Labeo  scripsit  obscoritatem  paetl
344


UF  THK  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.  246

•

wrise  from  a  perfect  promise, — and  the  person  who  makes  b(iok  n.
the  promise  is  no  further  engaged  than  his  will  is  suflBcientJy chap,  xvn.
declared, — it  is  very  certain,  that,  in  order  to  discover  the '^<>*«  <>^,  ***•
true  meaning  of  the  contract,  attention  ought  principally  to  ^^^  '**^*'
be  paid  to  the  words  of  the  promising  party.  For,  he  volun-
tarily binds  himself  by  his  words ;  and  we  take  for  true  against
him  what  he  has  sufficiently  declared.  This  question  seems
to  have  originated  from  the  manner  in  which  c^onventions  are
sometimes  made :  the  one  party  offers  the  conditions,  and
the  other  accepts  them ;  that  is  to  say,  the  former  proposes
what  he  requires  that  the  other  shall  oblige  himself  to  perform,
and  the  latter  declares  the  obligations  into  which  he  really
enters.  If  the  words  of  him  who  accepts  the  conditions  bear
relation  to  the  words  of  him  who  offers  them,  it  is  certainly
true  that  we  ought  to  lay  our  principal  stress  on  the  expres-
sions of  the  latter :  but  this  is  because  the  person  promisincc
is  considered  is  merely  repeating  them  in  order  to  form  hi!
promise.  The  capitulations  of  besieged  towns  may  here  serve
us  for  an  example.  The  besieged  party  proposes  the  condi-
tions on  which  he  is  willing  to  surrender  the  place :  the  be-
sieger accepts  them :  the  expressions  of  the  former  lay  no
obligation  on  the  latter,  unless  so  far  as  he  adopts  them.  He
who  accepts  the  conditions  is  in  reality  the  promising  party ;
and  it  is  in  his  words  that  we  ought  to  seek  for  the  true  mean-
ing of  the  articles,  whether  he  has  himself  chosen  and  formed
his  expressions,  or  adopted  those  of  the  other  party,  by  refer-
ring to  them  in  his  promise.  But  still  we  must  bear  in  mind
the  maxim  above  laid  down,  viz.,  that  what  he  has  sufficiently
declared  is  to  be  taken  as  true  against  him.  I  proceed  to
explain  myself  more  particularly  on  this  subject.  •

In  the  interpretation  of  a  treaty,  or  of  any  other  deed  what-  g  268. sth
soever,  the  question  is,  to  discover  what  the  contracting  parties  general
have  agreed  upon, — ^to  determine  precisely,  on  any  particular  ™"*"*'^*
occasion,  what  has  been  promised  and  accepted, — ^that  is  to  ^on'ought
say,  not  only  what  one  of  the  parties  intended  to  promise,  to  be  made
but  also  what  the  other  must  reasonably  and  candidly  have  according  u>
supposed  to  be  promised  to  him, — what  has  been  sufficiently  ^^^^
declared  to  him,  and  what  must  have  influenced  him  in  his  ac-
ceptance. Every  deedy  therefore,  and  every  treaty,  must  be
interpreted  by  certain  fixed  rules  calculated  to  determine  its
meaning,  as  naturally  understood  by  the  parties  concerned  at
the  time  when  the  deed  was  dravm  up  and  accepted. This  is
a  fifth  principle.

As  these  rules  are  founded  on  right  reason,  and  are  conse-
quently approved  and  prescribed  by  the  law  of  nature,  every
man,  every  sovereign,  is  obliged  to  admit  and  to  follow  them.
Unless  certain  rules  be  admitted  for  determining  the  sense  in
which  the  expressions  are  to  be  taken,  treaties  will  be  only
empty  words ;  nothing  can  be  agreed  upon  with  security,  and

U  346


24T  OF  THE  DTTERPBETATION  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  II. it  will  be  almost  ridiculous  to  place  any  dependence  on  the
S!L^J^-  effect  of  conventions.

§  269.  The  But,  as  Sovereigns  acknowledge  no  common  judge,  no  sn-
faith  of  perior  that  can  oblige  them  to  adopt  an  interpretation  founded
treaties  lays  ^^  j^g^.  mi^g^  (;hg  faj^ij  q{  treaties  constitutes  in  this  respect

tion  to  foi-  ^^^  ^^^  security  of  the  contracting  powers.  That  faith  is  no
low  these  less  violated  by  a  refusal  to  admit  an  evidently  fair  interpre-
ruios.  tation,  than  by  an  open  infraction. It  is  the  same  injustice,

the  same  want  of  good  faith ;  nor  is  its  turpitude  rendered
less  odious  by  being  choked  up  in  the  subtilties  of  fraud.
;  270.  Qe-  Let  us  now  enter  into  the  particular  rules  on  which  the
rai  rule  of  interpretation  ought  to  be  formed,  in  order  to  be  just  and
^^J^  fair.  Since  the  sole  object  of  the  lawful  interpretation  of  a
deed  ought  to  be  the  discovery  of  the  thoughts  of  the  author
or  authors  of  that  deed, — whenever  we  meet  with  any  obscu-
rity in  it,  we  are  to  consider  what  probably  were  the  ideas  of
those  who  drew  up  the  deed,  and  to  interpret  it  accordingly
This  is  the  general  rule  for  all  interpretations.  It  particu-
larly serves  to  ascertain  the  meaning  of  particular  expression*
whose  signification  is  not  sufficiently  determinate.  Pursuant
to  this  rule,  we  should  take  those  expressions  in  their  utmost
latitude  when  it  seems  probable  that  the  person  speaking  had
in  contemplation  every  thing  which,  in  that  extensive  sense,
they  are  capable  of  designating :  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we
ought  to  restrict  their  meaning,  if  the  author  appears  to  have
confined  his  idea  to  what  they  comprehend  in  their  more
limited  signification.  Let  us  suppose  that  a  husband  has  be-
queathed to  his  wife  all  his  money.  It  is  required  to  know
whether  this  expression  means  only  his  ready  money,  or  whe-
ther it  extends  also  to  that  which  is  lent  out,  and  is  due  on
notes  and  other  securities.  If  the  wife  is  poor, — if  she  was
beloved  by  her  husband, — if  the  amount  of  the  ready  money
be  inconsiderable,  and  the  value  of  the  other  property  greatly
superior  to  that  of  the  money  both  in  specie  and  in  paper, —
there  is  every  reason  to  presume  that  the  husband  meant  to
bequeath  to  her  as  well  the  money  due  to  him  as  that  actu-
ally contained  in  his  coffers.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  woman
be  rich, — if  the  amount  of  the  ready  specie  be  very  consider-
able, and  the  money  due  greatly  exceeds  in  value  all  the
other  property, — the  probability  is,  that  the  husband  meant
to  bequeath  to  his  wife  his  ready  money  only.

By  the  same  rule,  we  are  to  interpret  a  clause  in  the  utmost
latitude  that  the  strict  and  appropriate  meaning  of  the  words
will  admit,  if  it  appears  that  the  author  had  in  view  every
thing  which  that  strict  and  appropriate  meaning  comprehends:
but  we  must  interpret  it  in  a  more  limited  sense  when  it  ap-
pears probable  that  the  author  of  the  clause  did  not  mean  to
extend  it  to  every  thing  which  the  strict  propriety  of  the
terms  might  be  made  to  include.  As,  for  instance,  a  father,
who  has  an  only  son,  bequeaths  to  the  daughter  of  his  friend

346


OP  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES,  243

all  his  jewels.  He  has  a  sword  enriched  with  diamonds,  book  n.
given  him  by  a  sovereign  prince.  In  this  case  it  is  certainly  ^hap.  xvu
very  improbable  that  the  testator  had  any  intention  of  making
over  that  honorable  badge  of  distinction  to  a  family  of  aliens.
That  sword,  therefore,  together  with  the  jewels  with  which
it  is  ornamented,  must  be  excepted  from  the  legacy,  and  the
meaning  of  the  words  be  restricted  to  his  other  jewels.  But,
if  the  testator  has  neither  son  nor  heir  of  his  own  name,  and
bequeaths  his  property  to  a  stranger,  there  is  no  reason  to
limit  the  signification  of  the  terms :  they  should  be  taken  in
their  full  import,  it  being  probable  that  the  testator  used  them
in  that  sense.

The  contracting  parties  are  obliged  to  express  themselves  §  271.  Tho
in  such  manner  that  they  may  mutually  understand  each  ^^^^  are  t^
other.  This  is  evident  from  the  very  nature  of  the  transac-  ^^^fo^JIJ,^"*
tion.  Those  who  form  the  contract  concur  in  the  same  in-  to  common^
tentions ;  they  agree  in  desiring  the  same  thing ;  and  how  usage.
shall  they  agree  in  this  instance,  if  they  do  not  perfectly
understand  each  other  ?  Without  this,  their  contract  will  be
no  better  than  a  mockery  or  a  snare.  If,  then,  they  ought
to  speak  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  understood,  it  is  necessary
that  they  should  employ  the  words  in  their  proper  signifi-
cation,— the  signification  which  common  usage  has  afBxed  to
them, — and  that  they  annex  an  established  meaning  to  every
term,  every  expression  they  make  use  of.  They  must  not,
designedly  and  without  mentioning  it,  deviate  from  the
common  usage  and  the  appropriate  meaning  of  words :  and  it
is  presumed  that  they  have  conformed  to  established  custom
in  this  particular,  as  long  as  no  cogent  reasons  can  be  ad-
duced to  authorize  a  presumption  to  the  contrary ;  for,  the
presumption  is,  in  general,  that  things  have  been  done  as
they  ought.  From  all  these  incontestable  truths,  results  this
rule :  In  the  interpretation  of  treaties,  compacts,  and  promises,
we  ought  not  to  deviate  from  the  common  use  of  the  language,
unless  we  have  very  strong  reasons  for  it.  In  all  human
afiairs,  where  absolute  certainty  is  not  at  hand  to  point  out
the  way,  we  must  take  probability  for  our  guide.  In  most
cases,  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the  parties  have  expressed
themselves  conformably  to  the  established  usage :  and  such
probability  ever  affords  a  strong  presumption,  which  cannot
be  overruled  but  by  a  still  stronger  presumption  to  the  con-
trary. Camden*  gives  us  a  treaty,  in  which  it  is  expressly
said  that  the  treaty  shall  be  precisely  understood  according
to  the  force  and  appropriate  signification  of  the  terms.  After
such  a  clause,  we  cannot,  under  any  pretence,  deviate  from
the  proper  meaning  which  custom  has  affixed  to  the  terms, —
the  will  of  the  contracting  parties  being  thereby  formally  de-
clared in  the  most  unambiguous  manner.

*  Hifltoiy  of  Queen  EUsabeth.

W


284  OF  THE INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n. The  usage  we  here  speak  of  is  that  of  the  time  when  the
cuAP.  xviT.  treaty,  or  the  deed,  of  whatever  kind,  was  drawn  np  and  con-
2  272. In-  eluded. Languages  incessantly  vary,  and  the  signification
• oHmcient"  *^^  force  of  words  change  with  time. When,  therefore,  an
treaties. ancient  deed  is  to  be  interpreted,  we  should  be  acquainted
with  the  common  use  of  the  terms  at  the  time  when  it  was
[  249  ]  written ;  and  that  knowledge  is  to  be  acquired  from  deeds
of  the  same  period,  and  from  contemporary  writers,  by  dili-
gently comparing  them  with  each  other. This  is  the  only
source  from  which  to  derive  any  information  that  can  be  de-
pended on. The  use  of  the  vulgar  languages  being,  as  every
one  knows,  very  arbitrary, — etymological  and  grammatical
investigations,  pursued  with  a  view  to  discover  the  true  im-
port of  a  word  in  common  usage,  would  furnish  but  a  vain
theory,  equally  useless  and  destitute  of  proof.
J 273. Of Words  are  only  designed  to  express  the  thoughts:  thus,
quibbicB  on  the  true  signification  of  an  expression  in  common  use  is  the
'^ * • idea  which  custom  has  aflSxed  to  that  expression. It  is  then
a  gross  quibble  to  aflix  a  particular  sense  to  a  word,  in  order
to  elude  the  true  sense  of  the  entire  expression. Mahomet,
emperor  of  the  Turks,  at  the  taking  of  Negropont,  having
promised  a  man  to  spare  his  head,  caused  him  to  be  cut  in
two  through  the  middle  of  the  body. Tatnerlane,  after  having
engaged  the  city  of  Sebastia  to  capitulate,  under  his  promise
of  shedding  no  blood,  caused  all  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison
to  be  buried  alive  :*  gross  subterfuges  which,  as  Cicero  re-
marks, f  only  serve  to  aggravate  the  guilt  of  the  perfidious
wretch  who  has  recourse  to  them. To  spare  the  head  of  any
one^  and  to  shed  no  bloody  are  expressions  which,  according  to
common  custom,  and  especially  on  such  an  occasion,  mani-
festly imply  to  spare  the  lives  of  the  parties,
{  274. A All  these  pitiful  subtilties  are  overthrown  by  this  unerring
rule  on  thiB  yvXq  :  When  we  evidently  see  what  is  the  sense  that  agrees  with
•u  ject ^^^  intention  of  the  contracting  parties^  it  is  not  allowable  to
wrest  their  words  to  a  eowtrary  meaning. The  intention,
sufficiently  known,  furnishes  the  true  matter  of  the  conven-
tion,— ^what  is  promised  and  accepted,  demanded  and  granted.
A  violation  of  the  treaty  is  rather  a  deviation  from  the  inten-
tion which  it  sufficiently  manifests,  than  from  the  terms  in
which  it  is  worded :  for  the  terms  are  nothing  without  the
intention  by  which  they  must  be  dictated.
1 275.  Men- Is  it  necessary,  in  an  enlightened  age,  to  say  that  mental
tfu  reaerva-  reservations  cannot  be  admitted  in  treaties  ? This  is  mani*
*'®°*'  fest,  since,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  treaty,  the  parties  are


' *  See Puffendorf's  Law  of  Naturn  thing of the perfidy which other*

and  Nations,  book y.  ohap.  xii.  J 8.  attribute  to  him.

La  Croix, in  his Hist,  of  Timarbec,  -f  Fraus  enim adgtringit, non dlB-

book  V.  cbap.  xv.  speaks  of  this  cruelty  solvit peijurium. Be Offic. Ub. iU.

of  Timurbee, or Tamerlane, towards  chap.  xxxiL
4000  Armenian  horsemen,  bat  says  no^
«18


07  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.*  249

bound  to  express  themselves  in  such  manner  that  they  may  book  n.
mutually  understand  each  other  (§  271).  There  is  scarcely  c^^p-  ^^n-
an  individual  now  to  be  found  who  would  not  be  ashamed  of
"building  upon  a  mental  reservation.  What  can  be  the  use  of
Buch  an  artifice,  unless  to  liill  the  opposite  party  into  a  false
security,  under  the  vain  appearance  of  a  contract  ?  It  is,
then,  a  real  piece  of  knavery.

Technical  terms,  or  terms  peculiar  to  the  arts  and  sciences,  ?  276. In-
ought  commonly  to  be  interpreted  according  to  the  definition  ^^'T''®***?^'*
given  of  them  by  masters  of  the  art,  or  persons  versed  in  the  ^^^  °^
knowledge  of  the  art  or  science  to  which  the  terms  belong. I  r  £50  1
say  commonly y  for  this  rule  is  not  so  absolute  but  that  we  may
and  even  ought  to  deviate  from  it,  when  we  have  good  rea-
sons for  such  deviation ;  as,  for  instance,  if  it  were  proved
that  he  who  speaks  in  a  treaty,  or  in  any  other  deed,  did  not
understand  the  art  or  science  from  which  he  borrowed  the
term, — that  he  was  unacquainted  with  its  import  as  a  techni-
cal word, — that  he  employed  it  in  a  vulgar  acceptation,  &c.

If,  however,  the  technical  or  other  terms  relate  to  things  j  27t  Of
that  admit  of  diflFerent  degrees,  we  ought  not  scrupulously  to  terms  wboM
adhere  to  definitions,  but  rather  to  take  the  terms  in  a  sense  "^nification
agreeable  to  the  context ;  for  a  regular  definition  describes  a  degrees,
thing  in  its  most  perfect  state ;  and  yet  it  is  certain  that  we
do  not  always  mean  it  in  that  state  of  its  utmost  perfection,
whenever  we  speak  of  it.  Now,  the  interpretation  should
only  tend  to  the  discovery  of  the  will  of  the  contracting
parties  (§  268) :  to  each  term,  therefore,  we  should  afiix  that
meaning  which  the  party  whose  words  we  interpret  probably
had  in  contemplation.  Thus,  when  the  parties  in  a  treaty
have  agreed  to  submit  their  pretensions  to  the  decision  of  two
or  three  able  civilians,  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  endeavour  to
elude  the  compromise  under  the  pretence  that  we  can  find  no
civilian  accomplished  in  every  point,  or  to  strain  the  terms  so
far  as  to  reject  all  who  do  not  equal  Cujas  or  Grotius.  Would
he  who  had  stipulated  for  the  assistance  of  ten  thousand  good
troops,  have  any  reason  to  insist  upon  soldiers  of  whom  the
very  worst  should  be  comparable  to  the  veterans  of  Julius
Caesar  ?  And  if  a  prince  had  promised  his  ally  a  good  gene-
ral, must  he  send  him  none  but  a  Marlborough  or  a  Turenne  ?

There  are  figurative  expressions  that  are  become  so  familiar  g  278. Of
in  the  common  use  of  language,  that,  in  numberless  instances,  figurative
they  supply  the  place  of  proper  terms,  so  that  we  ought  to  ^^P'®"^®"*
take  them  in  a  figurative  sense,  without  paying  any  attention
to  their  original,  proper,  and  direct  signification :  the  subject
of  the  discourse  suflBciently  indicates  the  meaning  that  should
be  affixed  to  them. To  hatch  a  plot^  to  carry  fire  and  sword
into  a  country ^^  are  expressions of  this  sort; and there

•  The  French  expression,  "oudir  une of  a  loeb;" — **/ire  and  sword"  literally,
frame, '* which is rendered "  hatch a "Jire  and  tteel,"  (or  iron).
plot,"  literally  "lignifies,  "  to  lay  the  toarp

2E  849


eases.


25C  OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n. scarcely  can  occur  an  instance  where  it  would  not  be  absurd
CHAP.  xviL  |.Q  |.^j^g  them  in  their  direct  and  literal  sense.

1 279  Of  There  is  not  perhaps  any  language  that  does  not  also  con-
equivocai  tain  words  which  signify  two  or  more  different  things,  and
expreeaions.  pjj^ases  which  are  susceptible  of  more  than  one  sense.  Thence
arises  ambiguity  in  discourse.  The  contracting  parties  ought
carefully  to  avoid  it.  Designedly  to  use  it  with  a  view  to
elude  their  engagements  in  the  sequel,  is  downright  perfidy,
since  the  faith  of  treaties  obliges  the  contracting  parties
r  £51  1  *^  express  their  intentions  clearly  (§  271).  But,  if  an  am-
biguous expression  has  found  its  way  into  a  deed,  it  is  the
part  of  the  interpreter  to  clear  up  any  doubt  thereby  occa-
sioned,
a  280.  The  The  following  is  the  rule  that  ought  to  direct  the  interpre-
ruiefor  tation  in  this  as  well  as  in  the  preceding  case:  we  ought
these  two  always  to  affix  9uch  meanings  to  the  expressions  as  is  most
suitable  to  the  subject  or  matter  in  question.  For,  by  a  true
interpretation,  we  endeavour  to  discover  the  thoughts  of  the
persons  speaking,  or  of  the  contracting  parties  in  a  treaty.
Now,  it  ought  to  be  presumed  that  he  who  has  employed  a
word  which  is  susceptible  of  many  different  significations,  has
taken  it  in  that  which  agrees  with  his  subject.  In  proportion
as  he  employs  his  attention  on  the  matter  in  question,  the
terms  proper  to  express  his  thoughts  present  themselves  to
his  mind ;  this  equivocal  word  could  therefore  only  present
itself  in  the  sense  proper  to  express  the  thoughts  of  him  who
makes  use  of  it,  that  is,  in  the  sense  agreeable  to  the  subject.
It  would  be  a  feeble  objection  to  this,  to  allege  that  a  man
sometimes  designedly  employs  equivocal  expressions,  with  a
view  of  holding  out  ideas  quite  different  from  his  real  thoughts,
and  that,  in  such  case,  the  sense  which  agrees  with  the  sub-
ject is  not  that  which  corresponds  with  the  intention  of  the
person  speaking.  We  have  already  observed,  that,  whenever
a  man  can  and  ought  to  make  known  his  intention,  we  assume
for  true  against  him  what  he  has  suflSciently  declared  (§  266).
And  as  good  faith  ought  to  preside  in  conventions,  they  are
always  interpreted  on  the  supposition  that  it  actually  did  pre-
side in  them.  Let  us  illustrate  this  rule  by  examples.  The
word  day  is  understood  of  the  natural  day,  or  the  time  dur-
ing which  the  sun  affords  us  his  light,  and  of  the  civil  dag,  or
the  space  of  twenty-four  hours.  When  it  is  used  in  a  con-
vention to  point  out  a  space  of  time,  the  subject  itself  mani-
festly shows  that  the  parties  mean  the  civil  day,  or  the  term
of  twenty-four  hours.  It  was  therefore  a  pitiful  subterfuge,
or  rather  a  notorious  perfidy,  in  Cleomenes,  when,  having
concluded  a  truce  of  some  days  with  the  people  of  Argos,
and  finding  them  asleep  on  the  third  night,  in  reliance  on  the
faith  of  the  treaty,  he  killed  a  part  of  their  number,  and
made  the  rest  prisoners,  alleging  that  the  nights  were  not

360


OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.  *  251

comprehended  in  the  tmce.*  The  word  steel  may  be  nnder-  book  n.
stood  of  the  metal  itself,  or  of  certain  instruments  made  of  ^^^^'  ^^
It : — in  a  convention  which  stipulates  that  the  enemy  shall  lay
down  their  steely  it  evidently  means  their  weapons:  where-
fore, Pericles,  in  the  example  related  above  (§  233),  gave  a
fraudulent  interpretation  to  those  words,  since  it  was  con-
trary to  what  the  nature  of  the  subject  manifestly  pointed
out.  Q.  Fabius  Labeo,  of  whom  we  made  mention  in  the
same  section,  showed  equal  dishonesty  in  the  interpretation
of  his  treaty  with  Antiochus  ;  for,  a  sovereign  who  stipulates
that  the  half  of  his  fleet  or  of  his  vessels  shall  be  restored  to  [  252  J
him,  undoubtedly  means  that  the  other  party  shall  restore  to
him  vessels  which  he  can  make  use  of,  and  not  the  half  of
each  vessel  when  sawed  into  two.  Pericles  and  Fabius  are
also  condemned  by  the  rule  established  above  (§  274),  which
forbids  us  to  wrest  the  sense  of  the  words  contrary  to  the
evident  intention  of  the  contracting  parties.

If  any  one  of  those  expressions  which  are  susceptible  of  dif-  ?  281.  Not
ferent  sianifications  occurs  more  than  once  in  the  same  piece,  necessary  t«
we  cannot  make  it  a  rule  to  take  it  everywhere  in  the  same  ^^


same


signification.  For,  we  must,  conformably  to  the  preceding  sense  evcry-
rule,  take  such  expression,  in  each  article,  according  as  the  where  in
subject  requires, — pro  substrata  materia,  as  the  masters  of  the***®^*™*
art  say.  The  word  day,  for  instance,  has  two  significations,
as  we  have  jast  observed  f§  280).  If  therefore  it  be  said  in
a  convention,  that  there  shall  be  a  truce  of  fifty  days,  on  con-
dition that  commissioners  from  both  parties  shall,  during  eight
successive  days,  jointly  endeavour  to  adjust  the  dispute, —
the  fifty  days  of  the  truce  are  civil  days  of  twenty-four  hours ;
but  it  would  be  absurd  to  understand  them  in  the  same  sense
in  the  second  article,  and  to  pretend  that  the  commissioners
should  labour  eight  days  and  nights  without  intermission.

Every  interpretation  that  leads  to  an  absurdity  ought  to  be  ?  282. w«
rejected  ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  should  not  give  to  any  piece  'J^Kht  to  n
a  meaning  from  which  any  absurd  consequences  would  follow,  1*016/1011.
but  must  interpret  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  absurdity,  tion  that
As  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  any  one  means  what  is  a b- leads  toai
surd,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  person  speaking  intended  a^swrdity.
that  his  words  should  be  understood  in  a  manner  from  which
an  absurdity  would  follow. Neither  is  it  allowable  to  pre-
sume that  he  meant  to  indulge  a  sportive  levity  in  a  serious «
deed :  for  what  is  shameful  and  unlawful  is  not  to  be  pre-
sumed. We  call  absurd  not  only  what  is  physically  impossible,
bat  what  is  morally  so, — that  is  to  say,  what  is  so  contrary
to  reason  that  it  cannot  be  attributed  to  a  man  in  his  right
senses. Those  fanatic  Jews  who  scrupled  to  defend  them-
selves when  the  enemy  attacked  them  on  the  Sabbath  day,
gave  an  absurd  interpretation  to  the  fourth  commandment,

*  Pafiendorf,  lib.  ▼.  ciqp.  zii.  {  7.

U3


252  *  OF  THE  INTERPRETATION OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n.  Wliy  did  they  not  also  abstain  from  dressing,  walking,  and
CHAP,  xvn.  eating?  These  also  are  ^^workB^''  if  the  term  he  strained  to
its  utmost  rigour.  It  is  said  that  a  man  in  England  married
three  wives,  in  order  that  he  might  not  be  subject  to  the  pe-
nalty of  the  law  which  forbids  marrying  two.  This  is  doubt-
less a  popular  tale,  invented  with  a  view  to  ridicule  the  ex-
treme circumspection  of  the  English,  who  will  not  allow  the
smallest  departure  from  the  letter  in  the  application  of  the
law.  That  wise  and  free  people  have  too  often  seen,  by  the
experience  of  other  nations,  that  the  laws  are  no  longer  a
firm  barrier  and  secure  defence,  when  once  the  executive
power  is  allowed  to  interpret  them  at  pleasure.  But  surely
they  do  not  mean  that  the  letter  of  the  law  should  on  any
occasion  be  strained  to  a  sense  that  is  manifestly  absurd.

The  rule  we  have  just  mentioned  is  absolutely  necessary,
and  ought  to  be  followed,  even  when  the  texi  of  the  law  ox
[  253  ]  treaty  does  not,  considered  in  itself,  present  either  obscurity
or  ambiguity  in  the  language.  For,  it  must  be  observed,  that
the  uncertainty  of  the  sense  we  are  to  give  to  a  law  or  a  treaty,
does  not  solely  proceed  from  the  obscurity  or  other  defect  in
the  expression,  but  also  from  the  limited  nature  of  the  human
mind,  which  cannot  foresee  all  cases  and  circumstances,  nor
take  in  at  one  view  all  the  consequences  of  what  is  decreed
or  promised, — and,  finally,  from  the  impossibility  of  entering
into  that  immense  detail.  Laws  and  treaties  can  only  be
worded  in  a  general  manner ;  and  it  is  the  interpreter's  pro-
vince to  apply  them  to  particular  cases,  conformably  to  the
intention  of  the  legislature,  or  of  the  contracting  powers.
Now,  we  are  not  in  any  case  to  presume  that  it  was  their  iii-
tention  to  establish  an  absurdity :  and  therefore,  when  their
expressions,  taken  in  their  proper  and  ordinary  meaning,
would  lead  to  absurd  consequences,  it  becomes  necessary  to
deviate  from  that  meaning,  just  so  far  as  is  sufficient  to  avoid
absurdity.  Let  us  suppose  a  captain  has  received  orders  to
advance  in  a  right  line  with  his  troops  to  a  certain  post :  he
finds  a  precipice  in  his  way :  surely  his  orders  do  not  oblige
him  to  leap  headlong  down :  he  must,  therefore,  deviate  from
the  right  line,  so  far  as  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  precipice,
but  no  further.

The  application  of  the  rule  is  more  easy,  when  the  expres-
sions of  the  law  or  of  the  treaty  are  susceptible  of  two  differ-
ent meanings. In  this  case  we  adopt  without  hesitation  that
meaning  from  which  no  absurdity  follows. In  the  same  manner,
when  the  expression  is  such  that  we  may  give  it  a  figurative
sense,  we  ought  doubtless  to  do  this,  when  it  becomes  neces-
sary, in  order  to  avoid  falling  into  an  absurdity.
;  283. And It  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  sensible  persons,  in  treating
that  which together,  or  transacting  any  other  serious  business,  meant
^®^**®"  *^®  that  the  result  of  their  proceedings  should  prove  a  mere  nul-
lity. The  interpretation^  therefore,  which  would  render  a

352  i


OP  IHE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.  *  25S

ir^att/  null  and  inefficient^  cannot  be  admitted.  We  may  con-  book  n.
lider  this  rule  as  a  branch  of  the  preceding ;  for,  it  is  a  kind  S^^V.*
of  absurdity  to  suppose  that  the  very  terms  of  a  deed  should  ^^^  ^^  *''
reduce  it  to  mean  nothing.  It  ought  to  be  interpreted  in  8u>ch
a  manner  as  that  it  may  have  itB  effect,  and  not  prove  vain
and  nugatory :  and  in  this  interpretation  we  proceed  accord-
ing to  the  mode  pointed  out  in  the  foregoing  section.  In
both  cases,  as  in  all  interpretations,  the  question  is,  to  give
tlie  words  that  sense  which  oo^ht  to  be  presumed  most  con-
formable to  the  intention  of  the  parties  speaking.  If  many
diflferent  interpretations  present  themselves,  by  ^hich  we  can
conveniently  avoid  construing  the  deed  into  a  nullity  or  an
absurdity,  we  are  to  prefer  that  which  appears  the  most  agree-
able to  the  intention  of  those  who  framed  the  deed :  the  par-
ticular circumstances  of  the  case,  aided  by  other  rules  of  in-
terpretation, will  serve  to  point  it  out.  Thucydides  relates,*
that  the  Athenians,  after  having  promised  to  retire  from  the  [  254  ]
territories  of  the  Boeotians,  claimed  a  right  to  remain  in  the
country  under  pretence  that  the  lands  actually  occupied  by
their  army  did  not  belong  to  the  Boeotians ;— ^a  ridiculous
quibble,  since,  by  giving  that  sense  to  the  treaty,  they  re-
duced it  to  nothing,  or  rather  to  a  puerile  play.  The  terri-
tories of  the  Boeotians  should  evidently  have  been  construed
to  mean  all  that  was  comprised  within  their  former  boundaries,
without  excepting  what  the  enemy  had  seized  during  the  war.

If  he  who  has  expressed  himself  in  an  obscure  or  equivocal  i  284. Ob-
manner  has  spoken  elsewhere  more  clearly  on  the  same  sub-**"^.**-.
ject,  he  is  the  best  interpreter  of  his  own  words. We  o^ht^^^^^^"^'
to  interpret  his  obscure  or  equivocal  expressions  in  such  abyothen
manner  that  they  may  agree  with  those  clear  and  unequivocal  more  clear
terms  which  he  has  elsewhere  tised,  either  in  the  same  deed,  '^  ^*  *•*•
(^  on  some  other  similar  occasion. In  fact,  while  we  have  no  *"  ^'*
proof  that  a  man  has  changed  his  mind  or  manner  of  think-
ing, it  is  presumed  that  his  thoughts  have  been  the  same  on
similar  occasions ;  so  that,  if  he  has  anywhere  clearly  shown
his  intention  with  respect  to  a  certain  thing,  we  ought  to  a£Sx
the  same  meaning  to  what  he  has  elsewhere  obscurely  said
on  the  same  subject. Let  us  suppose,  for  instance,  that  two
allies  have  reciprocally  promised  each  other,  in  case  of  ne-
cessity, the  assistance  of  ten  thousand  foot  soldiers,  who  are
to  be  supported  at  the  expense  of  the  party  that  sends  them,
and  that,  by  a  posterior  treaty,  they  agree  that  the  number
of  the  auxiliary  troops  shall  be  fifteen  thousand,  without  men-
tioning their  support :  the  obscurity  or  uncertainty  which  re-
mains in  this  article  of  the  new  treaty,  is  dissipated  by  the
clear  and  express  stipulation  contained  in  the  former  one.
As  the  allies  do  not  give  any  indication  that  they  have
changed  their  minds  with  respect  to  the  support  of  the  auxi*

*  Lib.  ir.  oap.  zoriiL
46  2m2  ttS


254  OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  ri. liary  troops,  we  are  not  to  presume  any  such  change ;  and
CHAP.  xviT.  ^jjQgg  fifteen  thousand  men  are  to  be  supported  as  the  ten
thousand  promised  in  the  first  treaty. The  same  holds  good,
and  with  much  stronger  reason,  when  there  is  question  of
two  articles  of  the  same  treaty, — when,  for  example,  a  prince
promises  to  furnish  ten  thousand  men,  paid  and  maintained
at  his  own  expense,  for  the  defence  of  the  states  of  his  ally, —
and  in  another  article,  only  promises  four  thousand  men,  in
case  that  ally  be  engaged  in  an  offensive  war.
§  285. In-* It  frequently  happens,  that,  with  a  view  to  conciseness,
terpretation  people  cxprcss  imperfectly,  and  with  some  degree  of  obscu-
the^connoc-  ^^^7'  ^^^^^^gs  which  they  suppose  to  be  sufficiently  elucidated
tion  of  the  by  the  preceding  matter,  or  which  they  intend  to  explain  in
discourse, the  sequel : and  moreover,  words  and  expressions have  a
different  force,  sometimes  even  a  quite  different  signification,
according  to  the  occasion,  their  connection,  and  their  rela-
tion to  other  words. The  connection  and  train  of  the  dis-
course is  therefore  another source  of  interpretation. We
must  consider  the  whole  discourse  together^  in  order  pcTfectly
to  conceive  the  sense  of  it,  and  to  give  to  each  expression,  not
so  much  the  signification  which  it  may  individually  admit
of  as  that  which  it  ought  to  have  from  the  context  and  spirit
[  255  ]  of  the  discourse. Such  is  the  maxim  of  the  Roman  law,
Incivile  est^  nisi  totd  lege  perspectd^  und  dliqud  •  partieuJd
ejus  propositdy  judicare^  vel  respondere,*
{  286. In- The  very  connection  and  relation  of  the  things  in  qnes-
terpretation  tion  help  also  to  discovcr  and  establish  the  true  sense  of  a
drawn  ft-om  treaty,  or  of  any  other  piece. The  interpretation  ought  to
tion^nd  re-  *^  wad«  in  such  a  msmner^  that  all  the  parts  may  appear
lation  of consonant  to  each  other^ — that  what  follows  may  agree  with
the  things what  preceded^ — unless  it  evidently  appear^  that^  by  the  sttbse-
themBoirea.  q^ent  clauseSy  the  parties  intended  to  make  some  alteration
in  the  preceding  ones. For  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the
authors  of  a  deed  had  a  uniform  and  steady  train  of  think-
ing,— ^that  they  did  not  aim  at  inconsistencies  and  contradic-
tions,— ^but  rather  that  they  intended  to  explain  one  thing
by  another, — and,  in  a  word,  that  one  and  the  same  spirit
reigns  throughout  the  same  production  or  the  same  treaty.
Let  us  render  this  more  plain  by  an  example. A  treaty  of
alliance  declares,  that,  in -case  one  of  the  allies  be  attacked,
each  of  the  others  shall  assist  him  with  a  body  of  ten  thou-
sand foot,  paid  and  supported ;  and  in  another  article,  it  is
said  that  the  ally  who  is  attacked  shall  be  at  liberty  to  de-
mand the  promised  assistance  in  cavalry  rather  than  in  in-
fantry. Here  we  see,  that,  in  the  first  article,  the  allies  have
determined  the  quantum  of  the  succour,  and  its  value, —  that
of  ten  thousand  foot ;  and,  in  the  latter  article,  without  ap-
pearing to  intend  any  variation  in  the  value  or  number,  thoy


*  Digest  Ub.  L  tit  UL  Be  Legibus,  leg.  24.


OP  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES.  255

leave  the  nature  of  the  succours  to  the  choice  of  the  party  book  n.
"who  may  stand  in  need  of  them.  If,  therefore^  the  ally  who  <^°^^-  ^^"^
is  attacked  calls  upon  the  others  for  cavalry,  they  will  give
him,  according  to  the  established  proportion,  an  equivalent
to  ten  thousand  foot.  But  if  it  appears  that  the  intention
of  the  latter  article  was,  that  the  promised  succours  should
in  certain  cases  be  augmented, — if,  for  instance,  it  be  said,
that,  in  case  one  of  the  allies  happen  to  be  attacked  by  an
enemy  of  considerably  superior  strength,  and  more  powerful
in  cavalry,  the  succours  should  be  furnished  ifi  cavalry,  and
not  in  infantry, — ^it  appears  that,  in  this  case,  the  promised
assistance  ought  to  be  ten  thousand  horse.

As  two  articles  in  one  and  the  same  treaty  may  bear  rela-
tion to  each  other,  two  different  treaties  may  in  like  manner
have  a  relative  connection ;  and,  in  this  case,  each  serves  to
explain  the  other.  For  instance,  one  of  the  contracting  par-
ties has,  in  consideration  of  a  certain  object,  promised  to
deliver  to  the  other  ten  thousand  sacks  of  wheat.  By  a  sub-
sequent agreement,  it  is  determined,  that,  instead  of  wheat,
he  shall  give  him  oats.  The  quantity  of  oats  is  not  ex-
pressed ;  but  it  is  determined  by  comparing  the  second  con-
vention with  the  first.  If  there  be  no  circumstance  to  prove
that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  parties,  in  the  second  agree-
ment, to*  diminish  the  value  of  what  was  to  be  delivered,  we
are  to  understand  a  quantity  of  oats  proportioned  to  the
price  of  ten  thousand  sacks  of  wheat;  but  if  it  evidently  [  256  ]
appears  from  the  circumstances  and  motives  of  the  second
convention,  that  it  was  their  intention  to  reduce  the  value  of
what  was  due  under  the  former  agreement, — in  this  case,  ten
thousand  sacks  of  oats  are  to  be  substituted  in  lieu  of  the
ten  thousand  sacks  of  wheat.

I  _

The  reason  of  the  law^  or  of  the  treaty ^ — ^that  is  to  say,  j  287. In-
the  motive  which  led  to  the  making  of  it,  and  the  object  in  terpretation
contemplation  at  the  time, — ^is  the  most  certain  clue  to  lead  ^'*"*«^  <>»
us  to  the  discovery  of  its  true  meaning ;  and  great  attention  of*^*deed.
should  be  paid  to  this  circumstance,  whenever  there  is  ques-
tion either  of  explaining  an obscure,  ambiguous,  indetermi-
nate passage  in  a  law  or  treaty,  or  of  applying  it  to  a  parti-
cular case. When  once  we  certainly  know  the  reason  which
alone  has  determined  the  will  of  the  person  speaking^  we
ought  to  interpret  and  apply  his  words  in  a  manner  suitable
to  that  reason  alone. Otherwise  he  will  be  made  to  speak
and  act  contrary  to  his  intention,  and  in  opposition  to  his
own  views. Pursuant  to  this  rule,  a  prince,  who,  on  grant-
ing his  daughter  in  marriage,  has  promised  to  assist  his  in-
tended son-in-law  in  all  his  wars,  is  not  bound  to  give  him
any  assistance  if  the  marriage  does  not  take  place.

But  we  ought  to  be  very  certain  that  we  know  the  true
find  only  reason  of  the  law,  the  promise,  or  the  treaty.  In
matters  of  this  nature^  it  is  not  allowable  to  indulge  in  vague

366


256


OF  THE  INTSRPEETATION  OS*  TBEATIB&


BOOK  XI.  a:ad  uncertain  conjectures,  and  to  suppose  reasons  and  vie^ra
S^^iiEIfL  where  there  are  aone  certainly  known.  If  the  piece  in  ques-
tion is  in  itself  obscure, — if,  in  order  to  discover  its  meaning,
we  have  no  other  resource  than  the  investigation  of  the  au-
thor's views,  or  the  motives  of  the  deed, — we  may  then  have
recourstf  to  conjecture,  and,  in  default  of  absolute  certainty,
adopt  as  the  true  meaning,  that  which  has  the  greatest  de-
gree of  probability  on  its  side.  But  it  is  a  dangerous  abuse,
to  go^  without  necessity,  in  search  of  motives  And  uncertain
views,  in  order  to  wrest,  restrict,  or  extend  the  meaning  of  a
deed  which  is  of  itself  sufficiently  clear,  and  carries  no  ab-
surdity on  the  face  of  it.  Such  a  procedure  is  a  violation
of  that  incontestable  maxim, — ^that  it  is  not  allowable  to  in-
terpret what  has  no  need  of  interpretation  (§  263).  Much
less  are  we  allowed, — ^when  the  author  of  a  piece  has  in  the
piece  itself  declared  his  reasons  and  motives, — to  attribute
to  him  some  secret  reason,  which  may  authorize  us  in  giving
an  interpretation  repugnant  to  the  natural  meaning  of  the
expressions.  Even  though  Jie  should  have  entertained  the
views  which  we  attribute  to  him, — ^yet,  if  he  has  concealed
them,  and  announced  different  ones,  it  is  upon  the  latter
alone  that  we  must  build  our  interpretation,  and  not  upon
those  which  the  author  has  not  expressed : — ^we  assume,  as
true,  against  him,  what  he  has  sufficiently  declared  (§  266).

We  ought  to  be  the  more  circumspect  in  this  kina  of  inter-
pretation, as  it  frequently  happens  that  several  motives  con-
cur to  determine  the  will  of  the  party  who  speaks  in  a  law  or
a  promise.  Perhaps  the  combined  influence  of  all  those
to  determme  motives  was  ncccssary  in  order  to  determine  his  will ; — per-
the  wiU.  j^j^pg  gagjj  Qj^Q  Qf  them,  taken  individually,  would  have  been
[  257  ]  sufficient  to  produce  that  effect.  In  the  former  case,  if  we  are
perfectly  certain,  that  it  wa9  only  in  conMeration  of  several
concurrent  reasons  and  motives  that  the  legislature  or  the  cof^
tracting  parties  consented  to  the  law  or  the  contract^  the  inter-
pretation and  application  ought  to  be  made  in  a  manner
agreeable  to  all  those  concurrent  reasonSy  and  none  of  them
must  be  overlooked.  But  in  the  latter  case,  when  it  is  evi-
dent that  each  of  the  reasons  which  have  concurred  in  deter-
mining the  will  was  sufficient  to  prodiice  that  effect^  so  thai
the  author  of  the  piece  in  question  would,  by  each  of  the  rea-
sons separately  considered,  have  been  induced  to  form  the
same  determination  which  he  has  formed  upon  all  the  reasons
taken  in  the  aggregate,  his  words  must  be  so  interpreted  and
applied,  as  to  make  them  accord  with  each  of  those  reasons
taken  individually.  Suppose  a  prince  has  promised  certain
advantages  to  all  foreign  Protestants  and  artisans  who  will
come  and  settle  in  his  estates :  if  that  prince  is  in  no  want  of
subjects,  but  of  artisans  only, — and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it
appears  that  he  does  not  choose  to  have  any  other  subjects
than  Protestants, — ^his  promise  must  be  so  interpreted,  as  to

356


{288.
Whero
many  rea-
sons hare
oonourred


OT  THE INTERPRETATION OP  {TREATIES.  267

relate  only  to  such  foreigners  as  unite  those  two  characters,  book  u.
of  Protestants  and  artisans.  But  if  it  is  evident  that  this  ohap.  xyii.
prince  wants  to  people  his  country,  and  that,  although  he
would  prefer  Protestant  subjects  to  others,  he  has  in  particu-
lar so  great  a  want  of  artisans,  that  he  would  gladly  receive
them,  of  whatever  religion  they  be, — ^his  words  should  be
taken  in  a  disjunctive  sense,  so  that  it  will  be  sufficient  to  be
either  a  Protestant  or  an  artisan,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  pro-
mised advantages.

To  avoid  tedious  and  complex  circumlocution,  we  shall  make  §289.  What
use  of  the  term,  '^sufficient  reason  for  an  act  of  the  will,"  to  co'^stitutes
express  whatever  has  produced  that  act, — whatever  has  de-  jeason^for
termined  the  will  on  a  particular  occasion,  whether  the  will  an  act  of  the
has  been  determined  by  a  single  reason,  or  by  many  concur-  wilL
rent  reasons. That  sufficient  reasbn,  then,  will  be  sometimes
found  to  consist  in  a  combination  of  many  different  reasons,
so  that,  where  a  single  one  of  those  reasons  is  wanting,  the
sufficient  reason  no  longer  exists :  and  in  those  cases  where
we  say  that  many  motives,  many  reasons,  have  concurred  to
^determine  the  will,  yet  so  as  that  each  in  particular  would
have  been  alone  capable  of  producing  the  same  effect, — there
will  then  be  many  sufficient  reasons  for  producing  one  single
act  of  the  will. Of  this  we  see  daily  instances. A  prince,
for  example,  declares  war  for  three  or  four  injuries  received,
each  of  which  would  have  been  sufficient  to  have  produced
the  declaration  of  war.

The  consideration  of  the  reason  of  a  law  or  promise  not  §290. Ex.
only  serves  to  explain  the  obscure  or  ambiguous  expressions  tensive  in-
which  occur  in  the  pieco,  but  also  to  extei^d  or  restrict  its  J^rp'^tation
several  provisions  independently  of  the  expressions,  and  in  ^j^^  yeason
conformity  to  the  intention  and  views  of  the  legislature  or  the  of  the  act
contracting  parties,  rather  than  to  their  words. For,  accord-  [  258  1
ing  to  the  remark  of  Cicero,*  the  language,  invented  to
explain  the  will,  ought  not  to  hinder  its  effect. When  the
sufficient  and  only  reason  of  a  provision^  either  in  a  law  or  a
promise,  is  perfectly  certain  and  well  understands  we  extend
that  provision  to  cases  to  which  the  same  reason  is  applijable,
although  they  be  not  comprised  within  the  signification  of  the
terms. This  is  what  is  called  extensive  interpretation. It  is
commonly  said,  that  we  ou^ght  to  adhere  rather  to  the  spirit
than  to  the  letter. Thus,  the  Mohammedans  justly  extend  the
prohibition  of  wine,  in  the  Koran,  to  all  intoxicating  liquors ;
that  dangerous  quality  being  the  only  reason  that  could  in-
duce their  legislator  to  prohibit  the  use  of  wine. Thus,  also,
if,  at  the  time  when  there  were  no  other  fortifications  than
walls,  it  was  agreed  not  to  enclose  a  certain  town  with  walls,

*  Quid  ?  verbis  satis  hoc  cautum  mur.  Quia  non  potest,  verba  reperta
erat  1  Minime.  Que  res  igitur  valuit  1  sunt,  non  qus  impedirent,  sed  quae  in-
Volunta^ :  qus  si,  tacitis  nobis,  intel-  dicarent  voluntatem.  Cicer.  Orat  pro
ligi  posset,  verbis  omnino  non  utere- Csdna.

867


258  OF  THE  INTERPBETATION  OF  TBEATISS.

BOOK  u. it  would  not  be  allowable  to  fortify  it  with  fosses  and  ram-
CHAP.  XVII.  parts,  since  the  only  view  of  the treaty  evidently  was,  to
prevent  its  being  converted  into  a  fortified  place.

But  we  should  here  observie  the  same  caution  above  recom-
mended (§  287),  and  even  still  greater,  since  the  question  re-
lates to  an  application  in  no  wise  authorized  by  the  terms  of
the  deed.  We  ought  to  be  thoroughly  convinced  that  we
know  the  true  and  only  reason  of  the  law  or  the  promise,  and
that  the  author  has  taken  it  in  the  same  latitude  which  must
be  given  to  it  in  order  to  make  it  reach  the  case  to  which  we
mean  to  extend  the  law  or  promise  in  question.  As  to  the
rest,  I  do  not  here  forget  what  I  have  said  above  {%  268),
that  the  true  sense  of  a  promise  is  not  only  that  which  the
person  promising  had  in  his  mind,  but  also  that  which  has
been  suflSciently  declared, — that  which  both  the  contracting
parties  must  reasonably  have  understood.  In  like  manner,
the  true  reason  of  a  promise  is  that  which  the  contract,  tbe
nature  of  the  things  in  question,  and  other  circumstances,
sufficiently  indicate :  it  would  be  useless  and  ridiculous  to
allege  any  by-views  which  the  person  might  have  secretly
entertained  in  his  own  mind.
J  291.  The  rule  just  laid  down  serves  also  to  defeat  the  pretexts

Frauds and  pitiful  evasions  of  those  who  endeavour  to  elude  laws  or
*i°d°u*" treaties. Good-faith  adheres  to  the  intention:  fraud  insists
or  promiauB.  ^^  ^^®  terms,  when  it  thinks  that  they  can  furnish  a  cloak  for
its  prevarications: The  isle  of  Pharos  near  Alexandria  was,
with  other  islands,  tributary  to  the  Rhodians. The  latter
having  sent  collectors  to  levy  the  tribute,  the  queen  of  Egypt
amused  them  for  some  time  at  her  court,  using  in  the  mean
while  every  possible  exertion  to  join  Pharos  to  the  main  land
by  means  of  moles :  after  which  she  laughed  at  the  Rhodians,
and  sent  them  a  message,  intimating  that  it  was  very  unrea-
•  sonable  in  them:to  pretend  to  levy  on  the  main  land  a  tribute

which  they  had  no  title  to  demand  except  from  the  islands.*
[  259  ]  There  existed  a  law  which  forbade  the  Corinthians  to  give  ves-
sels to  the  Athenians: — they  sold  them  a  number  at  five
drachmae  each.f  The  following  was  an  expedient  worthy  of
Tiberius :  custom  not  permitting  him  to  cause  a  virgin  to  be
strangled,  he  ordered  the  executioner  first  to  deflower  the
young  daughter  of  Sejanus,  and  then  to  strangle  her. J  To
violate  the  spirit  of  the  law  while  we  pretend  to  respect  the
letter,  is  a  fraud  no  less  criminal  than  an  open  violation  of
it :  it  is  equally  repugnant  to  the  intention  of  the  law-maker,
and  only  evinces  a  more  artful  and  deliberate  villany  in  the
person  who  is  guilty  of  it.

Restrictive  interpretation^  which  is  the  reverse  of  exten^ve

*  Puffendorf,  lib.  y.  cap.  xii.  J  18.  He  j*  Paffend.  ibid.  Herodotaiiy  Ubw  tL
quotes  Ammianus  MaroeUinuB,  lib.  ziui.  Five  drachmsB  amounted  to  litde  mon
cap.  zvi.  than  three  shillings  sterling.

I  Tacit  Annal.  Ub.  y.  9.
868


OF  THE  INTERI BSTATION  OF  fEEATIES.  25i^

tnterpretation^  is  founded  on  the  same  principle. As  we  ex- book  h.
lend  a  clause  to  those  cases,  which,  though  not  comprised  chap,  xvu.
within  the  meaning  of  the  terms,  are  nevertheless  comprised  §  292.  Re-
in the  intention  of  that  clause,  and  included  in  the  reasons  strictive  in-
that  produced  it, — in  like  manner,  we  restrict  a  law  or  a  pro-  terpretatioi*.
mise,  contrary  to  the  literal  signification  of  the  termd,— our
judgment  being  directed  by  the  reason  of  that  law  or  that
promise :  that  is  to  say,  if  a  case  occurs^  to  which  the  well
known  reason  of  a  law  or  promise  is  utterly  inapplicable^  that
case  ought  to  be  excepted^  although^  if  we  were  barely  to  con-  *
sider  the  meaning  of  the  terms,  it  should  seem  to  fall  within
the  purview  of  the  law  or  promise. It  is  impossible  to  think
of  every  thing,  to  foresee  every  thing,  and  to  express  every
thing:  it  is sufficient  to  enounce  certain  things  in  such  a
manner  as  to  make  known  our  thoughts  concerning  things  of
which  we  do  not  speak :  and,  as  Seneca  the  rhetorician  says,*
there  are  exceptions  so  clear,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  express
them. The  law  condemns  to  sufier  death  whoever  strikes
his  father:  shall  we  punish  him  who  has  shaken  and  struck
his  father,  to  recover  him  from  a  lethargic  stupor? Shall
we  punish  a  young  child,  or  a  man  in  a  delirium,  who  has
lifted  his  hand  against  the  author  of  his  life  ? In  the  former
case  the  reason  of  the  law  does  not  'hold  good ;  and  to  the
two  latter  it  is  inapplicable. We  are  bound  to  restore  what
is  intrusted  to  us :  shall  I  restore  what  a  robber  has  intrusted
to  me,  at  the  time  when  the  true  proprietor  makes  himself
known  to  me,  and  demands  his  property  ? A  man  has  left
his  sword  with  me :  shall  I  restore  it  to  him,  when,  in  a  trans-
port of  fury,  he  demands  it  for  the  purpose  of  killing  an  inno-
cent  person  ?

We  have  recourse  to  restrictive  interpretation,  in  order  to  §  293.  Its
avoid  falling  into  absurdities  (see  §  282). A  man  bequeaths  a»e,  in  order
his  house  to  one,  and  to  another  his  earden,the  only  entrance  ?*  *^°"^  **^*'

insr  into  fl.b"

into  which  is  through  the  house. It  would  be  absurd  to  sup-  gurdities  or
pose that  he  had  bequeathed  to  the  latter  a  garden into  into  what  ia
which  he  could  not  enter: we  must  therefore  restrict the  unlawful,
pure  and  simple  donation  of  the  house,  and  understand  that
It  was  given  only  upon  condition  of  allowing  a  passage  to  the  [  260  ]
garden. The  same  mode  of  interpretation  is  to  be  adopted,
whenever  a  case  occurs,  in  which  the  law  or  the  treaty,  if  in-
terpreted according  to  the  strict  meaning  of  the  terms,  would
lead  to  something  unlawful. On  such  an  occasion,  the  case
in  question  is  to  be  excepted,  since  nobody  can  ordain  or
promise  wHat  is  unlawful. For  this  reason,  though  assist-
ance has  been  promised  to  an  ally  in  all  his  warsj  no  assist-
ance ought  to  be  given  him  when  he  undertakes  one  that  is
manifestly  unjust.

When  a  case  arises  in  which  it  would  be  too  severe  and  too

*  I«ib.  Iy.  Dedain.  zxvii.

369


260  OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OP  TBBATXKS.

BOOK  II. prejudicial  to  any  one  to  interpret  a  law  or  a  promise  accotd-
cHAP.  XVII.  jjj^g  ^Q  tjjg  rigour  of  the  terms,  a  restrictive  interpretation

^  294.  Or  is  then  also  used,  and  we  except  the  case  in  question,  agree-
what  is  too  ably  to  the  intention  of  the  legislature,  or  of  him  who  made
bTrden-"*^  the  promise :  for  the  legislature  intends  only  what  ifi  just
»ome,  ^^^  equitable ;  and,  in  contracts,  no  one  can  enter  into  such

engagements  in  favour  of  another,  as  shall  essentially  super-
sede the  duty  he  owes  to  himself. It  is  then  presumed  with
reason,  that  neither  the  legislature  nor  the  contracting  parties
have  intended  to  extend  their  regulations  to  cases  of  this
nature,  and  that  they  themselves,  if  personally  present,  would
except  them. A  prince  is  no  longer  obliged  to  send  succours
to  his  allies,  when  he  himself  is  attacked,  and  has  need  of  all
his  forces  for  his  own  defence. He  may  also,  without  the
slightest  imputation  of  perfidy,  abandon  an  alliance,  when,
through  the  ill  success  of  the  war,  he  sees  his  state  threateneil
with  impending  ruin  if  he  does  not  immediately  treat  with
the  enemy. Thus,  towards  the  end  of  the  last  century,  Victor
Amadeus,  duke  of  Savoy,  found  himself  under  the  necessity
of  separating  from  his  allies,  and  of  receiving  law  from  France,
to  avoid  losing  his  states. The  king  his  son  would  have  had
good  reasons  to  justify  a  separate  peace  in  the  year  1745;
but  upheld  by  his  courage,  and  animated  by  just  views  of  his
true  interest,  he  embraced  the  generous  resolution  to  struggle
against  an  extremity  which  might  have  dispensed  with  his
persisting  in  his  engagements.
§  296.  How We  have  said  above  (§  280),  that  we  should  take  the  ex-
it ought  to pressions  in  the  sense  that  agrees  with  the  subject  or  the
wgiiTfication  ^^^^^^^^^r. Restrictive  interpretation  is  also  directed  by  this
agreeably  to  rule. If  the  subject  OT  the  matter  treated  of  will  not  allow
the  subject,  that  the  terms  of  a  clavAie  should  be  taken  in  their  full  extenty
we  should  limit  the  sense  according  as  the  subject  requires.
Let  us  suppose  that  the  custom  of  a  particular  country  con-
fines the  entail  of  fiefs  to  the  male  Une  properly  so  called :
if  an  act  of  enfeoffment  in  that  country  declares  that  the  fief
is  given  to  a  person  for  himself  and  his  male  descendants,
the  sense  of  these  last  words  must  be  restricted  to  the  males
descending  from  males ;  for  the  subject  will  not  admit  of  our
understanding  them  also  of  males  who  are  the  issue  of  females,
though  they  are  reckoned  among  the  male  descendants  of  the
first  possessor.
{  396.  How The  following  question  has  been  proposed  and  debated :
a  change «  Whether  promises  include  a  tacit  condition  of  the  state  of
iiTthe^stote  *^*^^s  Continuing  the  same, — or  whether  a  change  happen-
of  things i^g  ^^  ^^6  state  of  afiairs  can  create  an  exception  to  the  pro-
may  form mise,  and  even  render  it  void  ?" The  principle  derived  from
til  excep- the  reason  of  the  promise  must  solve  the  question. If  it  be
***^'**  certain  and  manifest  that  the  consideration  of  the  present

state  of  things  was  one  of  the  reasons  which  occasioned  the
promiscy — that  the  promise  was  made  in  cwnsideration  or  in

360


OF  THE  INTERPRETATION OF  TREATIES.  261

consequence  of  that  state  of  things^ — it  depends  on  the  pre-  book  n.
servation  of  things  in  the  same  state.  This  is  evident,  since  ohai.  xvit.
the  promise  was  made  only  upon  that  supposition.  When
therefore  that  state  of  things  which  was  essential  to  the  pro-
mise, and  without  which  it  certainly  would  not  have  been
made,  happens  to  be  changed,  the  promise  falls  to  the  ground
when  its  foundation  fails.  And  in  particular  cases,  where
things  cease  for  a  time  to  be  in  the  state  that  has  produced
or  concurred  to  produce  the  promise,  an  exception  is  to  be
made  to  it.  An  elective  prince,  being  without  issue,  has  pro-
mised to  an  ally  that  he  will  procure  his  appointment  to  the
succession.  He  has  a  son  born :  who  can  doubt  that  the  pro-
mise is  made  void  by  this  event  ?  He  who  in  a  time  of  peace
has  promised  succours  to  an  ally,  is  not  bound  to  give  him
any  when  he  himself  has  need  of  all  his  forces'  for  the  de-
fence of  his  own  dominions.  A  prince,  possessed  of  no  very
formidable  power,  has  received  from  his  allies  a  promise  of
faithful  and  constant  assistance,  in  order  to  his  aggran-
dizement,— in  order  to  enable  him  to  obtain  a  neighboaring
state  by  election  or  by  marriage :  yet  those  allies  will  have
just  grounds  for  refusing  him  the  smallest  aid  or  support,
and  even  forming  an  alliance  against  him,  when  they  see  him
elevated  to  such  a  height  of  power  as  to  threaten  the  liberties
of  all  Europe.  If  the  great  Gustavus  had  not  been  killed  at
Lutzen,  cardinal  de  Richelieu,  who  had  concluded  an  alliance
for  his  master  with  that  prince,  and  who  had  invited  him  into
Germany,  and  assisted  him  with  money,  would  perhaps  have
found  himself  obliged  to  traverse  the  designs  of  that  conqueror,
when  become  formilable, — to  set  bounds  to  his  astonishing
progress,  and  to  support  his  humbled  enemies.  The  states-
general  of  the  United  Provinces  conducted  themselves  on
these  principles  in  1668.  In  favour  of  Spain,  which  before
had  been  their  mortal  enemy^  they  formed  the  triple  alliance
against  Louis  XIV.  their  former  ally.  It  was  necessary  to
raise  a  barrier  to  check  the  progress  of  a  power  which  threat-
ened to  inundate  and  overwhelm  all  before  it.

But  we  ought  to  be  very  cautious  and  moderate  in  the  ap-
plication of  the  present  rule  :  it  would  be  a  shameful  perver-
sion of  it,  to  take  advantage  of  every  change  that  happens
in  the  state  of  affairs,  in  order  to  disengage  ourselves  from
our  promises :  were  such  conduct  adopted,  there  could  be  no
dependence  placed  on  any  promise  whatever.  That  state  of
thmgs  alone,  in  consideration  of  which  the  promise  was  made,
is  essential  to  the  promise :  and  it  is  only  by  a  change  in  that
state,  that  the  effect  of  the  promise  can  be  lawfully  prevented  [  262  J
or  suspended.  Such  is  the  sense  in  which  we  are  to  under-
stand that  maxim  of  the  civilians,  canventio  omnis  inteUigitur
Jehus  sic  stantilms.

WhaL  we  say  of  promises,  must  also  be  understood  as  ex-
tending to  laws. A  law  which  relates  to  a  certain  situation

43  2  F  361


262  OF  THE  INTERPBETATION OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n of  affairs  can  only  take  place  in  that  situation. We  ought  to
CHAP.  XVII.  reason  in  the  same  manner  with  fespect  to  a  commission.
Thus,  Titus  being  sent  by  his  father  to  pay  his  respects  to
the  emperor,  turned  back  on  being  informed  of  the  death  of
Galba.
§  297.  In- In  unforeseen  cases^  that  is  to  say,  when  the  state  of  thin^
terpretation  happens  to  be  such  as  the  author  of  a  deed  has  not  foreseen,
of  a  deed  iiig^jjj  could  not  have  thought  of,  we  should  rather  he  guided  by
jjgg^g^  his  ixdention  than  by  his  words,  and  interpret  the  instrument

as  he  himself  would  interpret  it  if'  lie  were  on  the  spot,  cr
conformahly  to  what  he  would  have  done  if  he  had  foreseen
the  circumstances  which  are  at  present  known. This  rule  is
of  great  use  to  judges,  and  to  all  those  in  society  who  are
appointed  to  carry  into  effect  the  testamentary  regulations
of  the  citizens. A  father  appoints  by  will  a  guardian  for  his
children,  who  are  under  age. After  his  death  the  magistrate
finds  that  the  guardian  he  has  nominated  is  an  extravagant
profligate,  without  property  or  conduct:  he  therefore  dis-
misses him,  and  appoints  another,  according  to  the  Roman
laws,*  adhering  to  the  intention  of  the  testator,  and  not  to
his  words ;  for  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose, — and  we  are
to  presume  it  as  a  fact, — that  the  father  never  intended  to
give  his  children  a  guardian  who  should  ruin  them,  and  that
he  would  have  nominated  another,  had  he  known  the  vices  of
the  person  he  appointed.
§  298.  Rea- When  the  things  which  constitute  the  reason  of  a  law  or
sons  arking  convention  are  considered,  not  as  actually  existing,  but  simply
™i?t1, ««  possible. — or,  in  other  words,  when  the  fear  of  an  event  is
and  not  the  ^he  reason  of  a  law  or  a  promise,  no  other  cases  can  be  ex-
existence  of  cepted  from  it  than  those  in  which  it  can  be  proved  to  demon-
a  thing. stration  that  the  event  is  really  impossible. The  bare  possi-
bility of  the  event  is  suflScient  to  preclude  all  exceptions. If,
for  instance,  a  treaty  declares  that  no  army  or  fleet  shall  be
conducted  to  a  certain  place,  it  will  not  be  allowable  to  conduct
thither  an  army  or  a  fleet,  under  pretence  that  no  harm  is  in-
tended by  such  a  step :  for  the  object  of  a  clause  of  this  nature
is  not  only  to  prevent  a  real  evil,  but  also  to  keep  all  danger
at  a  distance,  and  to  avoid  even  the  slightest  subject  of  un-
easiness. It  is  the  same  with  the  law  which  forbids  walking
the  streets  by  night  with  a  lighted  torch  or  candle. It  would
be  an  unavailing  plea  for  the  transgression  of  that  law  to
allege  that  no  mischief  has  ensued,  and  that  he  carried  his
torch  with  such  circumspection  that  no  ill  consequence  was
to  be  apprehended. The  bare  possibility  of  causing  a  confla-
[  26S  ]  gration  was  sufficient  to  have  rendered  it  his  duty  to  obey  the
law ;  and  he  has  transgressed  it  by  exciting  fears  which  it
was  the  intention  of  the  legislature  to  prevent.
$299.  Ex. At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  we  observed  that  men's

*  Digest  lib.  zxvL  tit  iiL  De  Confinn.  Tutoii  leg.  10
868


OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OP  TREATIES.  263

ideas  and  language  are  not  always  perfectly  determinate,  book  n.
There  is,  doubtless,  no  language  in  which  there  do  not  occur  chap,  xvu.
expressions,  words,  or  entire  phrases,  susceptible  of  a  more  or  capable  of
less  extensive  signification.  Many»a  word  is  equally  appli-*'*®*^'**!^*
cable  to  the  genus  or  the  species : — the  word  fault  implies  ^  *J^^
intentional  guilt  or  simple  error : — several  species  of  animals
have  but  one  name  common  to  both  sexes,  as  partridge^  larky
sparrow^  &c, ;  when  we  speak  of  horseSj  merely  with  a  view
to  the  services  they  render  to  mankind,  mares  also  are  com-
prehended under  that  name.  In  technical  language  a  word
has  sometimes  a  more  and  sometimes  a  less  extensive  sense,
than  m  vulgar  use :  the  word  deaths  among  civilians,  signifies
not  only  natural  death,  but  also  civil  death :  verhum^  in  the
Latin  grammar,  signifies  only  that  part  of  speech  called  the
verb,  but,  in  common  use,  it  signifies  any  word  in  general.
Frequently,  also,  the  same  phrase  implies  more  things  on  one
occasion,  and  fewer  on  another,  according  to  the  nature  of
the.  subject  or  matter:  thus,  when  we  talk  of  Bending  8uc-
courSj  sometimes  we  understand  a  body  of  auxiliary  troops
maintained  and  paid  by  the  party  who  sends  them,  at  other
times  a  body  whose  expenses  are  to  be  entirely  defrayed  by
the  party  who  receives  them.  It  is  therefore  necefssary  to
establish  rules  for  the  interpretation  of  those  indeterminate
expressions,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  cases  in  which  they  are
to  be  understood  in  the  more  extensive  sense,  and  those  in
which  they  are  to  be  restricted  to  their  more  limited  meaning.
Many  of  the  rules  we  have  already  given  may  serve  for  this
purpose.

But  it  is  to  this  head  that  the  famous  distinction,  between  §  300.  Of
things  of  2i,  favourable  and  those  of  an  odious  nature,  particu-  ^^^«^  ^-
larly  belongs. Some  writers  have  rejected  the  distinction,*  ^^  thinlrt
doubtless  for  want  of  properly  understanding  it. In  fact,  odious,
the  definitions  that  have  been  given  of  what  is  favourable  and
what  is  odious^  are  not  fully  satisfactory,  nor  easily  applied.
After  having  maturely  considered  what  the  most  judicious
authors  have  written  on  the  subject,  I  conceive  the  whole  of
the  question  to  be  reducible  to  the  following  positions,  which
convey  a  just  idea  of  that  famous  distinction. When  the
provisions  of  a  law  or  a  convention  are  plain,  clear,  determi-
nate, and  attended  with  no  doubt  or  difficulty  in  the  applica-
tion, there  is  no  room  for  any  interpretation  or  comment  (§  263).
The  precise  point  of  the  will  of  the  legislature  or  the  con-
tracting parties,  is  what  we  must  adhere  to. But  if  their  ex-
pressions are  indeterminate,  vague,  or  susceptible  of  a  more
or  less  extensive  sense, — ^if  that  precise  point  of  their  inten-
tion cannot,  in  the  particular  case  in  question,  be  discovered
and  fixed  by  the  other  rules  of  interpretation, — we  must  pre-
sume it  according  to  the  laws  of  reason  and  equity :  and,  for

*  See  Barbe3nrac's  remarks  on  Grotius  and  Piiffeiidor£


264  OF  THE  I^TTERPRETATION  OF  TBBATIB8.

BOOK  n.  this  purpose,  it  is  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  the  nature  of
^9HAp.  XVII.  -fc^^e  things  to  which  the  question  relates.  There  are  certam
things  of  which  equity  admits  the  extension,  rather  than  the
restriction ;  that  is  to  safr,  that,  with  respect  to  those  things,
the  precise  point  of  the  will  not  being  discovered  in  the  ex-
pressions of  the  law  or  the  contract,  it  is  safer  aud  more  con-
sistent with  equity,  to  suppose  and  fix  that  point  in  the  more
extensive,  than  in  the  more  limited  sense  of  the  terms ;  to
give  a  la4;itude  to  the  meaning  of  the  expressions,  than  to
restrict  it.  These  are  the  things  called  favourable.  Odioui
things,  on  the  other  hand,  are  those,  of  which  the  restriction
tends  more  certainly  to  equity  than  the  extension.  Let  us
figure  to  ourselves  the  intention  or  the  will  of  the  legislature
or  the  contracting  parties.'  as  a  fixed  point.  At  that  point
precisely  should  we  stop,  if  it  be  clearly  known ; — if  uncer-
tain, we  should  at  least  endeavour  to  approach  it.  In  things
favourable,  it  is  better  to  pass  beyond  that  point,  than  not  tc
reach  it ;  in  things  odious,  it  is  better  not  to  reach  it,  than  U
pass  beyond  it.
§301.  What  It  ^iii  not  now  be  difficult  to  show,  in  general,  what  things
common  ad-  ^^®  favourable,  and  what  are  odious.  In  the  first  place,  every
vantage,and  taking  that  tends  to  the  common,  advantage  in  conveiition^^  or
to  equality,  that  has  a  tendency  to  place  the  contracting  parties  on  a  foot-
**  |*y°*J^"  ing  of  equality,  is  favourable.  The  voice  of  equity,  and  the
contrary  *ifl  g^^^^^^^  ^^^^  of  contracts,  require  that  the  conditions  betw^een
odious.  ^^^  parties  should  be  equal.  We  are  not  to  presume,  without
very  strong  reasons,  that  one  of  the  contracting  parties  in-
tended to  favour  the  other  to  his  own  prejudice;  but  thereis
no  danger  in  extending  what  is  for  the  common  advantage.
If,  therefore,  it  happens  that  the  contracting  parties  have  not
made  known  their  will  with  sufficient  clearness,  and  with  all
the  necessary  precision,  it  is  certainly  more  conformable  to
equity  to  seek  for  that  will  in  the  sense  most  favourable  to
equality  and  the  common  advantage,  than  to  suppose  it  in  the
contrary  sense.  For  the  same  reason,  every  thing  that  is  not
for  the  common  advantage,  every  thing  that  tends  to  d^troy
the  equality  of  a  contract,  every  thing  that  onerates  oidy  one
of  the  parties,  or  that  onerates  the  one  more  than  the  other,  is
odious.  In  a  treaty  of  strict  friendship,  union,  and  alliance,
every  thing  which,  without  being  burdensome  to  any  of  the
parties,  tends  to  the  common  advantage  of  the  confederacy,
and  to  draw  the  bonds  of  union  closer,  is  favourable.  In
unequal  treaties,  and  especially  in  unequal  alliances,  all  the
clauses  of  inequality,  and  principally  those  that  oneratc  the
inferior  ally,  are  odious.  Upon  this  principle,  that  we  ought
in  case  of  doubt  to  extend  what  leads  to  equality,  and  restrict
what  destroys  it,  is  founded  that  well-known  rule — Incom-
moda  vitantis  melior  quam  commoda  petentis  est  eausa^*^

*  Qmnt.ilian»  Instit  Orat.  lib.Yii.  capwiv
3U


07  THB  DTTBRPRSTATION  OF  TREATIES.  2^i

the  party  who  endeavours  to  avoid  a  loss  Jias  a  better  eavse  to book  n.
support  than  he  who  aims  at  obtaining  an  advantage*  ohap.  xvii.

All  those  things  whichy  without  proving  too^  burdensome  to  §302.  What
any  one  in  particular y  are  useful  and  salutary  to  human  so-  '^  usefiil  to
ciety,  are  to  be  ranked  in  the  class  of  favourable  things :  for  a  ^.^™^  ■?"
natk)u  is  already  under  a  natural  obligation  with  respect  to^yj^yg.*'
things  of  this  nature :  so  that  if  she  has  entered  into  any  the  contrary
particular  engagements  of  this  kind,  we  run  no  risk  in  giving  i»  odioua.
those  engagements  the  most  extensive  meaning  of  which  they  [  265  }
are  susceptible. Can  we  be  afraid  of  violating  the  rules  of
equity  by  following  the  law  of  nature,  and  giving  the  utmost
extent  to  obligations  that  tend  to  the  common  advantage  of
mankind  ? Besides,  things  which  are  useful  to  human  society
are,  from  that  very  circumstance,  conducive  to  the  common
advantage  of  the  contracting  parties,  and  are  consequently
favourable  (see  the  preceding  section). On  the  other  hand,
let  us  consider  as  odious  every  thing  that  is,  in  its  own  nature,
rather  injurious  than  useful  to  mankind. Those  things  which
have  a  tendency  to  promote  peace  are  favourable ;  those  that
lead  to  war  are  odious.

Every  thing  that  contains  a  penalty,  is  odious. With  re-  §303. What-
spect  to  the  laws,  it  is  universally  agreed,  that,  in  case  of  ^^^  ^^'
doubt,  the  judge  ought  to  incline  to  the  merciful  side,  and^^^*.^
that  it  is  indisputably  better  to  suffer  a  guilty  person  to  escape,  odioiw.
than  to  punish  one  who  is  innocent. Penal  clauses  in  trea-
ties lay  a  burden  upon  one  of  the  parties ;  they  are  there-
fore odious  (§  301).

Whatever  tends  to  render  a  deed  void  and  ineffectuc.l  either  §  304.
in  the  whole,  or  in  part,  and  consequently,  whatever  in  -  )duces  Whatever
any  change  in  things  already  agreed  upon,  is  odioi^s :  for  J[e!Li^^id  if
men  treat  together  with  a  view  to  their  common  benefit ;  and  odious,
if  I  enjoy  any  particular  advantage  acquired  by  a  lawful  con-
tract, I  must  not  be  deprived  of  it  except  by  my  own  renun-
ciation. When,  therefore,  I  consent  to  new  clauses  that  seem
to  derogate  from  it,  I  can  lose  my  right  only  so  far  as  I  have
clearly  given  it  up ;  and  consequently  these  new  clauses  are
to  be  understood  in  the  most  limited  sense  they  will  admit
of;  as  is  the  case  in  things  of  an  odious  nai^ure  (§300). If
that  which  tends  to  render  a  deed  void  and  ineffectual  is  con-
tained in  the  deed  itself,  it  is  evident  that  such  passages
ought  to  be  construed  in  the  most  limited  sense,  in  the  sense
best  calculated  to  preserve  the  deed  in  force. We  have  al-
ready seen,  that  we  should  reject  every  interpretation  which
tends  to  render  a  deed  void  and  ineffectual  (§  283).

Whatever  tends  to  change  the  present  state  of  things  is  §  306.
also  to  be  ranked  in  the  class  of  odious  things :  for  the  pro-  Whatevei
prietor  cannot  be  deprived  of  his  right,  except  so  far,  pre-*f^^*  "V
cisely,  as  he  relinquishes  it  on  his  part ;  and,  in  case  of  doubt,  presentBtate
the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  the  possessor. It  is  less  re- of  things,  is
pugnant  to  equity  to  withhold  from  the  owner  a  possession  o^o'M;th#

2r  3  365


236  OF  THE  INTERPRBTATIOK OP  TREATIES,

BOOK  n. which  he  has  lost  through  his  own  neglect,  than  to  strip  the
CHAP.  XVII.  just  possessor  of  what  lawfully  belongs  to  him. In  the  inter-
contrary  is pretation,  thertfore,  we  ought  rather  to  hazard  the  former  in-
Atvourable. convenience  than  the  latter. Here  also  may  be  applied,  in
many  cases,  the  rule  we  have  mentioned  in  §  301,  that  the
party  who  endeavours  to  avoid  a  loss,  has  a  better  cause  to
support  than  he*  who  aims  at  obtaining  an  advantage.
§306.  Finally,  there  are  things  which  are  at  once  oi  s,  favourable

Things  of  a  or  an  odiouB  nature,  according  to  the  point  of  view  in  which
oiixedna-  they  are  considered.  Whatever  derogates  from  treaties,  or
?^fiR  1  ^^*^g^s  *^®  state  of  things,  is  odious ;  but  if  it  is  conducive
L  ^""  J  to  peace,  it  is,  in  that  particular,  favourable.  A  degree  of
.  odium  always  attaches  to  penalties :  they  may,  however,  be
viewed  in  a  favourable  light  on  those  occasions  when  they  are
particularly  necessary  for  the  safety  of  society.  When  there
is  question  of  interpreting  things  of  this  nature,  we  ought  to
consider  whether  what  is  favourable  in  them  greatly  exceeds
what  appears  odious, — whether  the  advantage  that  arises  from
their  being  extended  to  the  utmost  latitude  of  which  the  terms
are  susceptible,  will  materially  outweigh  the  severe  and  odious
circumstances  attending  them ;  and  if  that  is  the  case,  they
are  to  be  ranked  in  the  class  of  favourable  things.  Thus,  an
inconsiderable  change  in  the  state  of  things,  or  in  conven-
tions, is  reckoned  as  nothing,  when  it  procures  the  inesti-
mable, blessings  of  peace.  In  the  same  manner,  penal  laws
may  be  interpreted  in  their  most  extensive  meaning,  on  cri-
tical occasions,  when  such  an  instance  of  severity  becomes
neces*'*^ry  to  the  safety  of  the  state.  Cicero  caused  the  sc-
comp  es  of  Catiline  to  be  executed  by  virtue  of  a  decree  of
the  senate, — the  safety  of  the  republic  rendering  it  improper
to  wait  till  they  should  be  condemned  by  the  people.  But
where  there  is  not  so  great  a  disproportion  in  the  case,  and
where  things  are  in  other .  respects  equal,  favour  inclines  to
that  side  of  the  question  which  presents  nothing  odious ; —
that  is  to  say,  we  ought  to  abstain  from  things  of  an  odious
nature,  unless  the  attendant  advantage  so  far  exceed  the  odi-
ous part  as  in  a  manner  to  conceal  it  from  view.  If  there
be  any  appearance,  however  small,  of  an  equilibrium  between
the  odious  and  the  favourable  in  one  of  those  things  of  a
mixed  nature,  it  is  ranked  in  the  class  of  odious  things,  by  a
natural  consequence  drawn  from  the  principle  on  which  we
have  founded  the  distinction  between  things  of  a  favourable
and  things  of  an  odious  nature  (§  300),  because,  in  case  of
doubt,  we  should,  in  preference,  pursue  that  line  of  conduct
by  which  we  are  least  exposed  to  deviate  from  the  principles
of  equity.  In  a  doubtful  case,  we  may  reasonably  refuse  to
give  succours  (though  a  thing  favourable),  when  there  is  ques-
tion of  giving  them  against  an  ally, — ^which  would  be  odious.
The  following  are  the  rules  of  interpretation,  which  flow
from  the  principles  we  have  just  laid  down.

966


OF  THE INTERPRETATION  OF  TRBATIBB.  266

1.  When  the  question  relates  to  things  favourahU^  we  ought book  ii,
to  give  the  terms  the  utmost  latitude  of  which  they  are  suscep-  chap,  xvil
tihle  according  to  the  common  usage  of  the  language  ;  and  if  a^  307.  Intcr-
tervi  has  more  than  one  signification^  the  most  extensive  mean-  pietaticn  of
ing  is  to  be  preferred :  for  equity  ought  to  be  the  rule  of  con-  ^^*^^*
duct  with  all  mankind  wherever  a  perfect  right  is  not  exactly ^'
determined  and  known  in  its  precise  extent. When  the  legis-
lature or  the  contracting  parties  have  not  expressed  their  will

in  terms  that  are  precise  and  perfectly  determinate,  it  is  to  be
presumed  that  they  intended  what  is  most  equitable.  Now,  [  267  J
when  there  is  question  of  favourable  things,  the  more  exten-
sive signification  of  the  terms  accords  better  with  equity  than
the  more  confined  signification.  Thus  Cicero,  in  pleading
the  cause  of  Caecina,  justly  maintains  that  the  interlocutory
decree,  ordaining,  "  that  the  person  expelled  from  his  inhe-
ritance be  reinstated  in  the  possession"  should  be  understood
as  extending"  to  the  man  who  has  been  forcibly  pr<5vented  from
entering  upon  it  :*  and  the  Digest  decides  it  in  the  same
manner,  f  It  is  true  that  this  decision  is  also  founded  on  the
rule  taken  from  parity  of  reasoning  (§  290).  For  it  amounts
to  the  same  thing  in  effect,  to  drive  a  person  from  his  inhe-
ritance, or  forcibly  to  prevent  him  from  entering  upon  it;
and,  in  both  cases,  the  same  reason  exists  for  putting  him  in
possession.

2.  In  questions  relating  to  favourable  things^  all  terms  of
art  are  to  be  interpreted  in  the  fullest  latitude  of  which  they
are  susceptible^  not  only  in  common  usages  but  also  as  tech-
nical termSj  if  the  person  speaking  understands  the  art  to
which  those  terms  belong,  or  conducts  himself  by  the  advice
of  men  who  understand  that  art.

3.  But  we  ought  not,  from  the  single  reason  that  a  thing
is  favourable,  to  take  the  terms  in  an  improper  signification :
this  is  not  allowable,  except  when  necessary  in  order  to  avoid
absurdity,  injustice^  or  the  nullity^  of  the  instrument,  as  is
practised  on  every  subject  (§§  282,  283) :  for  we  ought  to
take  the  terms  of  a  deed  in  their  proper  sense,  conformably
to  custom,  unless  we  have  very  strong  reasons  for  deviating
from  it  (§  271).

4.  Though  a  thing  appears  favourable  when  viewed  in
one  particular  light, — yet,  where  the  proper  meaning  of  the
terms  would,  if  taken  in  its  utmost  latitude,  lead  to  absurdity
or  injustice,  their  signification  must  be  restricted  according
to  the  rules  given  above  (§§  293,  294).  For  here,  in  this  par-
ticular case,  the  thhig  becomes  of  a  mixed  nature,  and  even
such  as  ought  to  be  ranked  in  the  class  of  odious  things.

5.  For  the  same  reason,  although  neither  absurdity  nor
injustice  results  from  the  proper  meaning  of  the  terms, — tfj

■  ^ ■ I  11  ■■■  ■  ■ ■  ■  ■■■■■■MM  m^^^^^  I — ^^■^^l^^^^.fci^^— ^»^^M^^W^— ^^^^^l^^^i^^^

*  Orat.  pro  Cecina,  cap.  xxiii.

t  Digest  lib.  zliii*  tit  xvi De  Vi,  et  Yi  Aimata,  legg.  a  ^  8.

867  .


267  OF  THE  INTERPKETATION  OP  TREATIES.

BOOK  n. nevertheless^  manifest  equity  or  a  great  common  advantage
S^^IlJ^  requires  their  restriction^  we  ought  to  adhere  to  the  most  li-
mited sense  which  the  proper  signification  will  admits  even  in
an  affair  that  appears  favourable  in  its  own  nature^ — ^because
here  also  the  thing  is  of  a  mixed  kind,  and  ought,  in  this
particular  case,  to  be  esteemed  odious. As  to  the  rest,  it  is
to  be  carefully  remembered  that  all  these  rules  relate  only  to
doubtful  cases ;  since  we  are  not  allowed  to  go  in  quo.st  of
interpretations  for  what  is  already  clear  and  determinate
(§  263). If  any  one  has  clearly  and  formally  bound  him-
self to  burdensome  conditions,  he  has  knowingly  and  will-
ingly done  it,  and  cannot  afterwards  be  admitted  to  appeal  to
equity.
;  308.  .In- Since  odious  things  are  those  whose  restriction  tends  more
terj»retation  certainly  to  equity  than  their  extension,  and  since  we  ought
Unnes!*"" to  pursuc  that  line  which  is  most  conformable  to  equity,  when
i 268  1  *^®  ^^^^  ^^  ^^®  legislature  or  of  the  contracting  parties  is  not
exactly  determined  and  precisely  known, — we  should^  when
there  is  question  of  odious  things^  interpret  the  terms  in  the
most  limited  sense :  we  may  even  to  a  certain  degree  adopt
a  figurative  meaning,  in  order  to  avert  the  oppressive  co-nse-
quences  of  the  proper  and  literal  sense,  or  any  thing  of  an
odious  nature,  which  it  would  involve:  for  we  are  to  fsivour
equity,  and  to  do  away  every  thing  odious,  as  far  as  that  can
be  accomplished,  without  going  in  direct  opposition  to  the
tenor  of  the  instrument,  or  visibly  wresting  the  text. Now,
. neither  the  limited  nor  even  the  figurative  sense  offers  any
violence  to  the  text. If  it  is  said  in  a  treaty,  that  one  of  the
allies  shall  assist  the  other  with  a  certain  number  of  troops
at  his  own  expense,  and  that  the  latter  shall  furnish  the  same
number  of  auxiliary  troops  at  the  expense  of  the  party  to
whom  they  are  sent,  there  is  something  odious  in  the  engage-
ment of  the  former  ally,  since  he  is  subject  to  a  greater  bur-
den than  the  other :  but  the  terms  being  clear  and  express,
there  is  no  room  for  any  restrictive  interpretation. But  if  it
were  stipulated  in  this  treaty,  that  one  of  the  allies  shall  fur-
nish a  body  of  ten  thousand  men,  and  the  other  only  of  five
thousand,  without  mentioning  the  expense,  it  ought  to  be  un-
derstood that  the  auxiliary  troops  shall  be  supported  at  the
expense  of  the  ally  to  whose  assistance  they  are  sent ;  this
interpretation  being  necessary,  in  order  that  the  inequality
between  the  contracting  powers  may  not  be  carried  too  far.
Thus,  the  cession  of  a  right,  or  of  a  province,  made  to  a  con-
queror in  order  to  obtain  peace,  is  interpreted  in  its  mosi
confined  sense. If  it  be  true  that  the  boundaries  of  Acadia
have  always  been  uncertain,  and  that  the  French  were  the
lawful  possessors  of  it,  that  nation  will  be  justified  in  main-
taining that  their  cession  of  Acadia  to  the  English,  by  the
treaty  of  Utrecht,  did  not  extend  beyond  the  narrowest  limits
of  that  province.

368


OF  THE  INTBRPRLTATION OP  TREATIES.  268


In  point  of  penalties,  in  particular,  when  thej  are  really  book  h.
odious,  we  ought  not  only  to  restrict  the  terms  of  the  law,  or  ^"^^-  ^^"-
of  the  contract,  to  their  most  limited  signification,  and  even
adopt  a  figurative  meaning,  according  as  the  case  may  require
or  authorize  it, — ^but  also  to  admit  of  reasonable  excuses;
which  is  a  kind  of  restrictive  interpretation,  tending  to  exempt
the  party  from  the  penalty.

The  same  conduct  must  be  observed  with  respect  to  what
may  render  an  act  void  and  without  effect.  Thus,  when  it  is
agreed  that  the  treaty  shall  be  dissolved  whenever  one  of  the
contracting  parties  fails  in  the  observance  of  any  article  of  it,
it  would  be  at  once  both  unreasonable  and  contrary  to  the
end  proposed  in  making  treaties,  to  extend  that  clause  to  the
slightest  faults,  and  to  cases  in  which  the  defaulter  can  allege
well-grounded  excuses.

Grotius  proposes  the  following  question — "  Whether  in  a  g  309.
treaty  which  makes  mention  of  allies,  we  are  to  understand  Examples,
those  only  who  were  in  alliance  at  the  time  when  the  treaty  [  269  ]
was  made,  or  all  the  allies  present  and  future  ?"*  And  he
gives,  as  an  instance,  that  article  of  the  treaty  concluded  be-
tween the  Romans  and  Carthaginians,  after  the  war  of  Sicily,
— ^that,  "  neither  of  the  two  nations  should  do  any  injury  to
the  allies  of  the  other.*'  In  order  to  understand  this  part
of  the  treaty,  it  is  necessary  to  call  to  mind  the  barbarous
law  of  nations  observed  by  those  ancient  people.  They  thought
themselves  authorized  to  attack,  and  to  treat  as  enemies,  all
with  whom  they  were  not  united  by  any  alliance.  The  article
therefore  signifies,  that  on  both  sides  they  should  treat  as
friends  the  allies  of  their  ally,  and  abstain  from  molesting  or
invading  them :  upon  this  footing  it  is  in  all  respects  so  favour-
able, so  conformable  to  humanity,  and  to  the  sentiments  which
ought  to  unite  two  allies,  that  it  should,  without  hesitation,
be  extended  to  all  the  allies,  present  and  future.  The  clause
cannot  be  said  to  involve  any  thing  of  an  odious  nature,  as
cramping  the  freedom  of  a  sovereign  state,  or  tending  to  dis-
solve an  alliance :  for,  by  engaging  not  to  injure  the  allies
of  another  power,  we  do  not  deprive  ourselves  of  the  liberty
to  make  war  on  them  if  they  give  us  just  case  for  hostilities ;
and  when  a  clause  is  just  and  reasonable,  it  does  not  become
odious  from  the  single  circumstance  that  it  may  perhaps
eventually  occasion  a  rupture  of  the  alliance.  Were  that  to
be  the  case,  there  could  be  no  clause  whatever  that  might
not  be  deemed  odious.  This  reason,  which  we  have  touched
upon  in  the  preceding  section  and  in  §  304,  holds  good  only
in  doubtful  cases ;  in  the  case  before  us,  for  instance,  it  ought
to  hare  prevented  too  hasty  a  decision  that  the  Carthaginians
had  causelessly  attacked  an  ally  of  the  Romans.  The  Car-
thaginians, therefore,  might,  without any  violation  of  the


*  Lib.  U.  oap.  zvL  }  13.
47  809


269  OF  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  TREATIES


BOOK  IT.  treaty,  attack  Saguntum,  if  they  had  lawful  grounds  for  suclk
CHAP,  xvn.  ^^  attack,  or  (in  virtue  of  the  voluntary  law  of  nations)  evcL
apparent  or  specious  grounds  (Prelim.  §  21).  But- they  might
have  attacked  in  the  same  manner  the  most  ancient  allv  of  the
Romans ;  and  the  Romans  might  also,  without  brealying  the
treaty  of  peace,  have  confined  themselves  to  the  succouring
of  Saguntum.  At  present,  treaties  include  the  allies  on  both
sides :  but  this  does  not  imply  that  one  of  the  contracting
powers  may  not  make  war  on  the  allies  of  the  other  if  they
give  him  cause  for  it — but  simply,  that,  in  case  of  any  quar-
rel arising  between  them,  each  of  the  contracting  parties  re-
serves to  himself  a  power  of  assisting  his  more  ancient  ally :
and,  in  this  sense,  the  future  allies  are  not  included  in  the
treaty.

Another  example  mentioned  by  Grotius  is  also  taken  from
a  treaty  concluded  between  Rome  and  Carthage. When  the
latter  city  was  reduced  to  extremities  by  Scipio  ^roilianus,
and  obliged  to  capitulate,  the  Romans  promised  "that  Car-
thage should  remain  free,  or  in  possession  of  the  privilege  of
governing  herself  by  her  own  laws."* In  the  sequel,  how-
ever, these  merciless  conquerors  pretended  that  the  promised
liberty  regarded  the  inhabitants,  and  not  the  city : '  they  in-
sisted that  Carthage  should  be  demolished,  and that'  the
wretched  inhabitants  should  settle  in  a  place  at  a  greater  dis-
tance from  the  sea. One  cannot  read  the  account  of  this  per-
fidious and  cruel  treatment,  without  being  concerned  that  the
great,  the  amiable  Scipio  w6,s  obliged  to  be  the  instrument
[  270  ]  of  it. Tosay  nothing  of  the  chicanery  of  the  Romans  respect-
ing the  meaning  to  be  annexed  to  the  word  "  Carthage,'' —
certainly,  the  ^^  liberty'*  promised  to  the  Carthaginians,  though
narrowly  circumscribed  by  the  existing  state  of  affairs,  should
at  least  have  extended  to  the  privilege  of  remaining  in  their
city. To  find  themselves  obliged  to  abandon  it  and  settle
elsewhere, — ^to  lose  their  houses,  their  port,  and  the  advan-
tages of  their  situation, — ^was  a  subjection  incompatible  with
the  smallest  degree  of  liberty,  and  mvolved  such  considerable
losses  as  they  could  not  have  bound  themselves  to  submit  to,
unless  by  a  po^tive  engagement  in  the  most  express  and
formal  terms.
;  310.  How Liberal  promises,  benefactions,  and  rewards  naturally  come
wo  ought  to  under  the  class  of  favourable  things,  and  receive  an  extensive  in-
interpret torprotation,  unless  they  prove  onerous  or  unreasonably  charge-
*^re*ibe ^^^^  ^ ^^®  benefactor,  or  that  other  circumstances  evidently
miity.  • Bhow  they  are  to  be  taken  in  a  limited  sense. For  kindness,
benevolence,  beneficence,  and  generosity  are  liberal  virtues ;
they  do  not  act  in  a  penurious  manner,  and  know  no  other
bounds  than  those  set  by  reason. But  if  the  benefaction  falls
too  heavy  upon  him  who  grants  it,  in  this  respect  it  parukes

♦  Avrovo/iof. Appian.  de  BeUo  Punico.
370


OP  THE  INTERPBETATION  OP  TREATIES.  270

of  the  odious ;  and,  in  case  of  doubt,  equity  will  not  admit bwk  n.
the  presumption  that  it  has  been  granted  or  promised  in  the  EEHiJEI^
utmost  extent  of  the  terms  :  we  ought  therefore,  in  such  case,
to  confine  ourselves  to  the  most  limited  signification  which  the
words  are  capable  of  receiving,  and  thus  reduce  the  bene-
faction within  the  bounds  of  reason. The  same  mode  should  '
be  adopted  when  other  circumstances  evidently  point the
more  limited  signification  as  the  more  equitable.

Upon  these  principles,  the  bounties  of  a  sovereign  are
usually  taken  in  the  fullest  extent  of  the  terms.*  It  is  not
presumed  that  he  finds  himself  over-burdened  by  them  ;  it  is
a  respect  due  to  majesty,  to  suppose  that  he*  had  good
reasons  to  induce  him  to  confer  them.  They  are  therefore,
in  their  own  nature,  altogether  favourable ;  and,  in  order  to
restrict  them,  it  must  be  proved  that  they  are  burdensome  to
the  prince,  or  prejudicial  to  the  state.  On  the  whole,  we
ought  to  apply  to  deeds  of  pure  liberality  the  general  rule
established  above  (§  270) ;  if  those  instruments  are  not  pre-
cise and  very  determinate,  they  should  be  interpreted  as
meaning  what  the  author  probably  had  in  his  mind.  [  271  ']

Let  us  conclude  this  subject  of  interpretation  with  what  §  sir. Coi-
relates  to  the  collision  or  opposition  of  laws  or  treaties. Weiisio^^o^^*^
do  not  here  speak  of  the  collision  of  a  treaty  with  the  law  of  **^  t'®*^*"*
nature :  the  latter  is  unquestionably  paramount,  as  we  have
proved  elsewhere  (§§  160,  161,  170,  and  293). There  is  a
collision  or  opposition  between  two  laws,  two  promises,  or  two
treaties,  when  a  case  occurs  in  which  it  is  impossible  to  fulfil
both  at  the  same  time,  though  otherwise  the  laws  or  treaties
in  question  are  not  contradictory,  and  may  be  both  fulfilled
under  different  circumstances. They  are  considered  as  con-
trary in  this  particular  case  ;  and  it  is  required  to  show  which
deserves  the  preference,  or  to  which  an  exoeption  ought  to
be  made  on  the  occasion. In  order  to  guard  against  all  mis-
take in  the  business,  and  to  make  the  exception  conformably
to  reason  and  justice,  we  should  observe  the  following  rules :

1.  In  all  cases  where  what  is  barely  permitted  is  found  in-  j  312.  Fint
compatible  with  what  is  positively  prescribed^  the  latter  claims  ^^  in  awes
a  preference :  for  the  mere  permission  imposes  no  obligation  ^^  c<>^"<>"-
to  do  or  not  to  do :  what  is  permitted  is  left  to  our  own  option
— we  are  at  liberty  either  to  do  it  or  to  forbear  to  do  it. But
we  have  not  the  same  liberty  with  respect  to  what  is  pre-
scribed :  we  are  obliged  to  do  that :  nor  can  the  bare  per-
mission in  the  former  case  interfere  with  the  discharge  of  our
obligation  in  the  latter ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  which
was  before  permitted  in  general,  ceases  to  be  so  in  this  par-

*  Saoh  ia  th«  decision  of  ibe  Roman  for  it :  "  quod  a  divina  ejus  indnlgentia

law. — JavolenoB Bays : "  Beneficium  proficiscatnr." — Digest  lib.  L  Ut.  iv.  de

imperatoris  qnam  plenissime  interpre-  Constit  Prino.  leg.  3.
tKn  debemoB ;"  and  he  giyes  thia  reason

371


271  OF  THE  I17TEBPBETATI0N  OF  TBEATIE8.

BOOK  n. ticular  instance,  where  we  cannot  take  advantage  of  the  per«
55^-  JEIE:  mission  without  violating  a  positive  duty.
{  313. ^d 2.  In  the  same  manner,  the  law  or  treaty  which  permiti^
Rule.  ought  to  give  way  to  the  law  or  treaty  which  forbids :  for  the

prohibition  must  be  obeyed ;  and  what  was,  in  its  own  nature,
•  or  in  general,  permitted,  must  not  be  attem|.ted  when  it  can-
not be  done  without  contravening  a  prohibition :  the  permis-
sion, in  that  case,  ceases  to'  be  available.
2  314. 3d 3^  All  circumstances  being  otherwise  equal,  the  law  or  tite
Buie.  treaty  which  ordains^  gives  way  to  the  law  or  the  treaty  which

forbids.  I  say,  "all  circumstances  being  otherwise  equal;"
for  many  other  reasons  may  occur,  which  will  authorize  the
exception  being  made  to  the  prohibitory  law  or  treaty.  The
rules  are  general ;  each  relates  to  an  abstract  idea,  and  shows
what  follows  from  that  idea,  without  derogation  to  the  other
rules.  Upon  this  footing,  it  is  evident  that,  in  general,  if  we
cannot  obey  an  injunctive  law  without  violating  a  prohibitory
one,  we  should  abstain  from  fulfilling  the  former :  for  the  pro-
hibition is  absolute  in  itself,  whereas  every  precept,  every
injunction,  is  in  its  own  nature  conditional,  and  supposes  the
power,  or  a  favourable  opportunity,  of  doing  what  is  pre-
scribed. Now  when  that  cannot  be  accomplished  without
contravening  a  prohibition,  the  opportunity  is  wanting,  and
this  collision  of  laws  produces  a  moral  impossibility  of  acting;
for  what  is  prescribed  in  general,  is  no  longer  so  in  the  case
[  272  ]  where  it  cannot  be  done  without  committing  an  action  that
is  forbidden.*  Upon  this  ground  rests  the  generally  received
maxim  that  we  are  not  justifiable  in  employing  unlawful  means
to  accomplish  a  laudable  end, — ^as,  for  instance,  in  stealing
with  a  view  to  give  alms.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  question
here  regards  an  absolute  prohibition,  or  those  cases  to  which
the  general  prohibition  is  truly  applicable,  and  therefore  equi-
valent to  an  absolute  one :  there  are,  however,  many  prohi-
bitions to  which  circumstances  form  an  exception.  Our  mean-
ing will  be  better  explained  by  an  example.  It  is  expressly
fcTrbidden,  for  reasons  to  me  unknown,  to  pass  through  a  cer-
tain place  under  any  pretence  whatsoever.  .1  am  ordered  to
carry  a  message ;  I  find  every  other  avenue  shut ;  I  there-
fore turn  back  rather  than  take  my  passage  over  that  ground
which  is  so  strictly  forbidden. But  if  the  prohibition  to  pass

•  be  only  a  general  one,  with  a  view  to  prevent  any  injury  being
done  to  the  productions  of  the  soil,  it  is  easy  for  me  to  judge
that  the  orders  with  which  I  am  charged  ought  to  form  an

•  exception.

As  to  what  relates  to  treaties,  we  are  not  obliged  to  ac-
complish what  a  treaty  prescribes,  any  farther  than  we  have

*  The  pr  )hibitorj  law  creates,  in  that Tetat^ quasi  excepdone  quadam,  cor-
particalar  instance,  an  exception  to  the rigore  videtur  illam  qnsB  jubet." — Ci«
injunctive law. "  Deinde utra lex cero,  de  Inventionc,  lib  ii.  146.
iabeaty  utra  vetet Kam  suepe  ea  quae
372


OP  THE  INTERPRETATION  OP  TREATIES.  272

the  power. Now,  we  have  not  a  power  to  do  what  another book  n.
treaty  forbids :  wherefore,  in  case  of  collision,  an  exception  SE^^lII^
is  made  to  the  injunctive  treaty,  and  the  prohibitory  treaty
has  a  superior  claim  to  our  observance, — provided,  however,
that  all  circumstances  be  in  other  respects  equal ;  for  it  will
presently  appear,  for  instance,  that  a  subsequent  treaty  can-  ■
not  derogate  from  a  prior  one  concluded  with  another  state,
nor  hinder  its  effect  directly  or  indirectly.

4.  The  dates  of  laws  or  treaties  furnish  new  reasons  for  g  316. 4th
establishing  the  exception  in  cases  of  collision. If  the  eol-^^^*
lision  happen  between  two  affirmative  laws,  or  two  affirmative
treaties  concluded  between  the  same  persons  or  the  same  states^

that  which  is  of  more  recent  date  claims  a  preference  over
the  older  one :  for  it  is  evident,  that  since  both  laws  or  both
treaties  have  emanated  from  the  same  power,  the  subsequent
act  was  capable  of  derogating  from  the  former.  But  still  this
is  on  the  supposition  of  circumstances  being  in  other  respects
equal. — If  there  be  a  collision  between  two  treaties  made  with
two  different  powers^  the  more  ancient  claims  the  preference :
for  no  engagement  of  a  contrary  tenor  could  be  contracted
in  the  subsequent  treaty ;  and  if  this  latter  be  found,  in  any
case,  incompatible  with  that  of  more  ancient  date,  its  execu-
tion is  considered  as  impossible,  because  the  person  promis-
ing had  not  the  power  of  acting  contrary  to  his  antecedent
engagements.

5.  Of  two  laws  or  two  conventions^  we  ought  {all  other  cir-  j  316. 5th
eumstances  being  equal)  to  prefer  the  one  which  is  less  general^  Rule.
and  which  approaches  nearer  to  the  point  in  question :  be-
cause special  matter  admits  of  fewer  exceptions  than  that  [  273  ]
which  is  general ;  it  is  enjoined  with  greater  precision,  and
appears  to  have  been  more  pointedly  intended. Let  us  make

use  of  the  following  example  from  Puffendorf  :* — One  law
forbids  us  to  appear  in  public  with  arms  on  holidays ;  another
law  commands  us  to  turn  out  under  arms,  and  repair  to  our
posts,  as  soon  as  we  hear  the  sound  of  the  alarm-bell.  The
alarm  is  rung  on  a  holiday.  In  such  case  we  must  obey  the
latter  of  the  two  laws,  which  creates  an  exception  to  the
former.

6.  What  will  not  admit  of  delay ^  is  to  be  preferred  to  what^zi7, 6th
may  be  done  at  another  time. For  this  is  the  mode  to  recon-  Rule,
cile  every  thing,  and  fulfil  both  obligations ;  whereas,  if  we •
gave  the  preference  to  the  one  which  might  be  fulfilled  at  an-
other time,  we  would  unnecessarily  reduce  ourselves  to  the
alternative  of  failing  in  our  observance  of  the  other.

7.  When  two  duties  stand  in  competition^  that  one  which  is  j  318. 7th
the  more  considerable^  the  more  praiseworthy y  and  productive  R«ie»

of  the  greater  utility^  is  entitled  to  the  preference.  This  rule
has  no  need  of  proof. But  as  it  relates  to  duties  that  are


*  Ju8  Gent  lib.  v.  cap.  xiL  J  23.

2G  878


278  OF  THE  INTEBPBETATIOK  OF  TREATIES.

BOOK  n.  equally  in  our  power,  and,  as  it  were,  at  our  option,  we  should
CHAP.  xvii._  carefully  guard  against  the  erroneous  application  of  it  to  two
duties  which  do  not  really  stand  in  competition,  but  of  which
the  one  absolutely  precludes  the  other,^— our  obligation  to
fulfil  the  former  wholly  depriving  us  of  the  liberty  to  perform
the  latter.  For  instance,  it  is  a  more  praiseworthy  deed  to
defend  one  nation  against  an  unjust  aggressor,  than  to  assist
another  in  an  offensive  war.  But,  if  the  latter  be  the  more
ancient  ally,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  refuse  her  our  assist-
ance and  give  it  to  the  former ;  for  we  stand  pre-engaged.
There  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  any  competition  between  these
two  duties :  they  do  not  lie  at  our  option :  the  prior  engage-
ment renders  the  second  duty,  for  the  present,  impracticable.
However,  if  there  were  question  of  preserving  a  new  ally  from
certain  ruin,  and  that  the  more  ancient  ally  were  not  reduced
to  the  same  extremity,  this  would  be  the  case  to  which  the
foregoing  rule  should  be  applied.

As  to  what  relates  to  laws  in  particular,  the  preference  is
undoubtedly  to  be  given  to  the  more  important  and  necessary
ones. This  is  the  grand  rule  to  be  observed  whenever  they
are  found  to  clash  with  each  other ;  it  is  the  rule  which  claims
the  greatest  attention,  and  is  therefore  placed  by  Cicero  at
the  head  of  all  the  rules  he  lays  down  on  the  subject.'*' It  is
counteracting  the  general  aim  of  the  legislature,  and  the  great
end  of  the  laws,  to  neglect  one  of  great  importance,  under
[  274  ]  pretence  of  observing  another  which  is  less  necessary,  and  of
inferior  consequence :  in  fact,  such  conduct  is  criminal ;  for,
a  lesser  good,  if  it  exclude  a  greater,  assumes  the  nature  of
an  evil.
{  319. 8th 8.  If  we  cannot  acquit  ourselves  at  the  same  time  of  two
Kuie.  things  promised  to  the  same  person,  it  rests  with  him  to  choose

which  of  the  two  we  are  to  perform;  for  he  may  dispense  with
the  other  on  this  particular  occasion ;  in  which  case  there  will
no  longer  be  any  collision  of  duties.  But  if  we  cannot  obtain
a  knowledge  of  his  will,  we  are  to  presume  that  the  more  im-
portant one  is  his  choice  ;  and  we  should  of  course  give  that
the  preference.  And,  in  case  of  doubt,  we  should  perforin  the
one  to  which  we  are  the  more  strongly  bound; — ^it  being  pre-
sumable that  he  chose  to  bind  us  more  strongly  to  that  in
which  he  is  more  deeply  interested.
;  820.  Dth  9,  Since  the  stronger  obligation  claims  a  preference  over
*"^®'  the  weaker, — if  a  treaty  that  has  been  confirmed  by  an  oath

happens  to  clash  with  another  treaty  that  has  not  been  sworn
to, — all  circumstances  being  in  other  respects  equal,  the  prefer-
ence is  to  be  given  to  the  former;  because  the  oath  adds  a


*  **  Primum  igitar  le^s  oportet  oon-  dute,  aut  si  pliireB,  ant  qnotqtict  emnt,

tendere, oonsidcraDdo utra lex ad  conservari  non  possint  quia  di»crepent

majores,  hoc  est,  ad  utiliores,  ad  ho-  inter  ee,  ea  maxime  conservanda  puto-

nestioros,  ao  magis  necessarias  res  per-  tur,  que  ad  maximas  res  pertinere  ride*

tineat Bx  quo  oonfioitor  uty  si  legei  atur." Cioero,  ubi  aapra.
374


m

OF  THE MODE  OP  TERMINATING  DISPUTES.  274


new  force  to  the  obligation. But  as  it  makes  no  change  in book  h.
the  nature  of  treaties  (§§  221,  &c.),  it  cannot,  for  instance,  c"^''-  ^^"-
entitle  a  new  ally  to  a  preference  over  a  more  ancient  ally,
whose  treaty  has  not  been  confirmed  by  an  oath.

10.  For  the  same  reason,  and,  all  circumstances  being  in  5  321.  lOth
other  respects  equals  what  is  enjoined  under*  a  penalty  claims  ^"^^*
a  preference  over  that  which  is  not  enforced  by  one, — a7id  what
is  enjoined  under  a  greater  penalty,  over  that  which  is  enforced
by  a  lesser;  for  the  penal  sanction  and  convention  give  addi-
tional force  to  the  obligation :  they  prove  that  the  object  in
question  was  more  earnestly  desired,*  and  the  more  so  in  pro-
portion as  the  penalty  is  more  or  less  severe.

All  the  rules  contained  in  this  chapter  ought  to  be  com- ;  322.  Qo-
bined  together,  and  the  interpretation  be  made  in  such  manner  n**^!  "-
as  to  accord  with  them  all,  so  far  as  they  are  applicable  to  ^^^  ®"^*^*
the  case.  When  these  rules  appear  to  clash,  they  reciprocally  ^^^g^rvingaU
counterbalance  and  limit  each  other,  according  to  their  strength  the  preced-
and  importance,  and  according  as  they  more  particularly  be-  ^e  ™i«8-
long  to  the  case  in  question.


CHAP.  xvm.

OP  THE  MODE  OF  TERMINATING  DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS,  chap,  xviil

THE  disputes  that  arise  between  nations  or  their  rulers,  j  323.  Oe.
originate  either  from  contested  rights  or  from  injuries  received,  nemi  direc-
A  nation  ought  to  preserve  the  rights  which  belong  to  her ;  ^^^,  ®°  *^"
and  the  care  of  her  own  safety  and  glory  forbids  her  to  sub-  ^^  ^^
mit  to  injuries. But  in  fulfilling  the  duty  which  she  owes  to
herself,  she  must  not  forget  her  duties  to  others. These  two  [  275  ]
views,  combined  together,  will  furnish  the  maxims  of  the  law
of  nations  respecting  the  mode  of  terminating  disputes  be-
tween different  states.

What  we  have  said  in  Chap.  I.  IV.  and  V.  of  this  book,  ?  324.
dispenses  with  our  proving  here,  that  a  nation  ought  to  do  ^^^^  ^*-
justice  to  all  others  with  respect  to  their  pretensions,  and  to  ^^^^  ^
remove  all  their  just  subjects  of  complaint. She  is  therefore  give  satis-
bound  to  render  to  each  nation  what  is  her  due,— to  leave  her  faction  re-
in the  peaceable  enjoyment  of  her  rights, — to  repair  any  ■pecting  the
damage  that  she  herself  may  have  caused,  or  any  injury  she^"**^^*^™"^
may  have  done, — ^to  give  adequate  satisfaction  for  such  inju-  another.
ries  as  cannot  be  repaired,  and  reasonable  security  against
any  injury  which  she  has  given  cause  to  apprehend. These
are  so  many  maxims  evidently  dictated  by  that  justice  which

*  This  is  also  the  reason  which  Cioero ea  [lex]  qu8»  dUigentissime  sancta  est"
gives :  **  Nam  maxime  conserronda  est Cicero,  ubi  sapra.

876


275  OF  THE MODE OF  TERMINATINa

BOOK  11. nations  as  well  as  individuals  are,  by  the  law  of  nature,  bound
^«^'--^^«"- to  observe.

^  325.  How  Every  one  is  at  liberty  to  recede  from  his  right,  to  relin-
nations  may  qujgh  a  jug^  subject  of  Complaint,  and  to  forget  an  injury.
aioir*ri"htfl  ^^  *^®  ruler  of  a  nation  is  not,  in  this  respect,  so  free  as  a
and  just  private  individual.  The  latter  may  attend  solely  to  the  voice
complaints,  of  generosity ;  and,  in  an  affair  which  concerns  none  but  him-
self alone,  he  may  indulge  in  the  pleasure  which  he  derives
from  doing  good,  and  gratify  his  love  of  peace  and  quiet.
The  representative  of  a  nation,  the  sovereign,  must  not  con-
sult his  own  gratification,  or  suffer  himself  to  be  guided  by
his  private  inclinations.  All  his  actions  must  be  directed  to
the  greatest  advantage  of  the  state,  combined  with  the  ge-
neral interests  of  mankind,  from  which  it  is  inseparable.  It
behooves  the  prince,  on  every  occasion,  wisely  to  consider  and
firmly  to  execute,  whatever  is  most  salutary  to  the  state,  most
conformable  to  the  duties  of  the  nation  towards  other  states, —
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  consult  justice,  equity,  humanity,
sound  policy,  and  prudence.  The  rights  of  the  nation  are  a
property  of  which  the  sovereign  is  only  the  trustee ;  and  he
ought  not  to  dispose  of  them  in  any  other  manner  than  he
has  reason  to  presume  the  nation  herself  would  dispose  of  them.
And,  as  to  injuries,  it  is  often  laudable  in  a  citizen  generously
to  pardon  them :  he  lives  under  the  protection  of  the  laws ;
the  magistrates  are  capable  of  defending  or  avenging  him
against  those  ungrateful  or  unprincipled  wretches  whom  his
indulgence  might  encourage  to  a  repetition  of  the  offence.  A
.  nation  has  not  the  same  security :  it  is  seldom  safe  for  her  to
overlook  or  forgive  an  injury,  unless  she  evidently  possess
suflScient  power  to  crush  the  rash  aggressor  who  has  dared
to  offend  her.  In  such  a  case,  indeed,  it  will  reflect  glory  on
her  to  pardon  those  who  acknowledge  their  faults, —

r 276 1  Parcere  subjectis,  et  debeUare  saperbos ;

The  duty ai^d  she  may  do  it  with  safety. But  between  powers  that
of  a  sove- are  nearly  equal,  the  endurance  of  an  injury  without  insist
reign  of  an  {^g  q^  complete  satisfaction  for  it,  is  almost  always  iuiputed
i^tote^to  ?n°*  *^  weakness  or  cowardice,  and  seldom  fails  long  to  subject
iist  on  com-  *^be  injured  party  to  further  vnrongs  of  a  more  atrocious  nature.
pensation Why  do  WO  oftcn  SCO  the  very  reverse  of  this  conduct  pursued
for  wrongs }yj  {hose  who  faucy  themselves  possessed  of  souls  so  highly
to  isBub- gxalted  above  the  level  of  the  rest  of  mankind? Scarcely
can  they  receive  concessions  sufficiently  humble  from  weaker
states  who  have  had  the  misfortune  to  offend  them ;  but  to
those  whom  they  would  find  it  dangerous  to  punish,  they  be-
have with  greater  moderation.
;  326.  If  neither  of  the  nations  who  are  engaged  in  a  dispute

^-s?cd  r^'  *^^^'^^  proper  to  abandon  her  right  or  her  pretensions,  the
Uie  law  of contending  parties  are,  by  the  law  of  nature,  which  recom
nsf  ire,  for mends  peacc,  concord,  and  charity,  bound  to  try  the  gentlesit

376


DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  278

metliods  of  terminating  their  differences. These  are — ^first, book  n.
an  amicable  accommodation. Let  each  party  coolly  and  can-  chap.  xvnL
didly  examine  the  subject  of  the  dispute,  and  do  justice  to  the^^^^^°'
other ;  or  let  him  whose  right  is  too  uncertain,  voluntarily  putea.
renounce  it. There  are  even  occasions  when  it  may  be  pro- 1.  Amica-
per  for  him  who  has  the  clearer  right,  to  renounce  it,  for  the  **^®  accom.
sake  of  preserving  peace,— occasions,  which  it  is  the  part  of  ™^ ^^^
prudence  to  discover. To  renounce  a  right  in  this  manner,
is  not  abandoning  or  neglecting  it. People  are  under  no
obligation  to  you  for  what  you  abandon  :  but  you  gain  a  friend
in  the  party  to  whom  you  amicably  yield  up  what  was  the
subject  of  a  dispute.

Compromise  is  a  second  method  of  bringing  disputes  to  a  §  327. 2.
peaceable  termination. It  is  an  agreement,  by  which,  with-  Compro-
out  precisely  deciding  on  the  justice  of  the  jarring  preten-  °^^
sions,  the  parties  recede  on  both  sides,  and  determine  what
share  each  shall  have  of  the  thing  in  dispute,  or  agree  to  give
it  entirely  to  one  of  the  claimants  on  condition  of  certain  in-
demnifications granted  to  the  other.

Mediation,  in  which  a  common  friend  interposes .  his  good  j  328.  s.
oflSces,  frequently  proves  efficacious  in  engaging  the  contend-  Mediation,
ing  parties  to  m^et  each  other  halfway, — to  come  to  a  good
understanding, — to  enter  into  an  agreement  or  compromise
respecting  their  rights,  and,  if  the  question  relates  to  an  in-
jury, to  offer  and  accept  a  reasonable  satisfaction.  The  office
of  mediator  requires  as  great  a  degree  of  integrity,  as  of  pru-
dence and  address.  He  ought  to  observe  a  strict  impar-
tiality ;  he  should  soften  the  reproaches  of  the  disputants,  calm
their  resentments,  and  dispose  their  minds  to  a  reconcilia-
tion. His  duty  is  to  favour  well-founded  claims,  and  to
effect  the  restoration,  to  each  party,  of  what  belongs  to  him  :
but  he  ought  not  scrupulously  to  insist  on  rigid  justice.  He
is  a  conciliator,  and  not  a  judge  :  his  business  is  to  procure
peace  ;  and  he  ought  to  induce  him  who  has  right  on  his  side
to  relax  something  of  his  pretensions,  if  necessary,  with  a
view  to  so  great  a  blessing.

The  niediator  is  not  guarantee  for  the  treaty  which  he  has
conducted,  unless  he  has  expressly  undertaken  to  guarantee
it.  That  is  an  engagement  of  too  great  consequence  to  be  [  277  ]
imposed  on  any  one,  without  his  own  consent  clearly  mani-
festei.  At  present,  when  the  affairs  of  the  sovereigns  of
Europe  are  so  connected,  that  each  has  an  eye  on  what  passes
between  those  who  are  the  most  distant,  mediation  is  a  mode
of  conciliation  much  used.  Does  any  dispute  arise  ?  The
friendly  powers,  those  who  are  afraid  of  seeing  the  flames
of  war  kindled,  offer  their  mediation,  and  make  overtures  of
peace  and  accommodation.

When  sovereigns  cannot  agree  about  their  pretensions  and  g  329. 4.
are  nevertheless  desirous  of  preserving  or  restoring  peace,  Arbitration,
they  sometimes  submit  the  decision  of  their  disputes  to  arbi-

48  2  a  2  377


277  OF  THE MODE OP  TERMINATING

booK  IT. trators  chosen  by  common  agreement. When  once  the  con*

CHAP.  xvni.  |;gnding  parties  have  entered  into  articles  of  arbitration,  thej

are  bound  to  abide  by  the  sentence  of  the  arbitrators :  they

have  engaged  to  do  this ;  and  the  faith  of  treaties  should  be

religiously  observed.

If,  however,  the  arbitrators,  by  pronouncing  a  sentence
evidently  unjust  and  unreasonable,  should  forfeit  the  cha-
racter with  which  they  were  invested,  their  judgment  would
deserve  no  attention :  the  parties  had  appealed  to  it  only
with  a  view  to  the  decision  of  doubtful  questions.  Suppose
a  board  of  arbitrators  should,  by  way  of  reparation  for  some
offence,  condemn  a  sovereign  state  to  become  subject  to  the
state  she  has  offended,  will  any  man  of  sense  assert  that  she
is  bound  to  submit  to  such  decision  ?  If  the  injustice  is  of
small  consequence,  it  should  be  borne  for  the  sake  of  peace .
and  if  it  is  not  absolutely  evident,  we  ought  to  endure  it,  as
an  evil  to  which  we  have  voluntarily  exposed  ourselves.  For
if  it  were  necessary  that  we  should  be  convinced  of  the  jus-
tice of  a  sentence  before  we  would  submit  to  it,  it  would  be
of  very  little  use  to  appoint  arbitrators.

There  is  no  reason  to  apprehend,  that,  by  allowing  the
parties  a  liberty  of  refusing  to  submit  to  a  manifestly  unjust
and  unreasonable  sentence,  we  should  render  arbitration  use-
less :  our  decision  is  by  no  means  repugnant  to  the  nature
of  recognisances  or  arbitration  articles.  There  can  be  no
diflSculty  in  the  affair,  except  in  case  of  the  parties  having
signed  vague  and  unlimited  articles,  in  which  they  have  not
precisely  specified  the  subject  of  the  .dispute,  or  marked  the
bounds  of  their  opposite  pretensions.  It  may  then  happen,
as  in  the  example  just  alleged,  that  the  arbitrators  will  ex-
ceed their  power,  and  pronounce  on  what  has  not  been  really
submitted  to  their  decision.  Being  called  in  to  determine
what  satisfaction  a  state  ought  to  make  for  an  offence,  they
may  condemn  her  to  become  subject  to  the  state  she  has
offended.  But  she  certainly  never  gave  them  so  extensive  a
power ;  and  their  absurd  sentence  is  not  binding.  In  order
to  obviate  all  difficulty,  and  cut-off  every  pretext  of  which
fraud  might  make  a  handle,  it  is  necessary  that  the  arbitra-
tion articles  should  precisely  specify  the  subject  in  dispute,
.  the  restrictive  and  opposite  pretensions  of  the  parties,  the
demands  of  the  one,  and  the  objections  of  the  other.  These
constitute  the  whole  of  what  is  submitted  to  the  decision  of
the  arbitrators ;  and  it  is  upon  these  points  alone  that  the
[  278  ]  parties  promise  to  abide  by  their  judgment.  If,  then,  their
sentence  be  confined  within  these  precise  bounds,  the  dispu-
tants must  acquiesce  in  it.  They  cannot  say  that  it  is  mani-
festly unjust,  since  it  is  pronounced  on  a  question  which  they
have  themselves  rendered  doubtful  by  the  disordance  of  their
claims,  and  which  has  been  referred,  as  such,  to  the  decision

of  the  arbitrators. Before  they  can  pretend  to  evade  such
srs


DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  278

a  sentence,  they  should  prove,  by  incontestable  facts,  that  it book  n.
was  the  offspring  of  corruption  or  flagrant  partiality.  chap,,!!!";

Arbitration  is  a  very  reasonable  mode,  and  one  that  is  per-
fectly conformable  to  the  law  of  nature,  for  the  decision  of
every  dispute  which  does  not  directly  interest  the  safety  of
the  nation.  Though  the  claim  of  justice  may  be  mistaken
by  the  arbitrators,  it  is  still  more  to  be  feared  that  it  will  be
overpowered  in  an  appeal  to  the  sword.  The  Swiss  have  had
the  precaution,  in  all  their  alliances  among  themselves,  and
even  in  those  they  have  contracted  with  the  neighbouring
powers,  to  agree  beforehand  on  the  manner  in  which  their
disputes  were  to  be  submitted  to  arbitrators,  in  case  they
could  npt  adjust  them  in  an  amicable  manner.  (132)  This
wise  precaution  has  not  a  little  contributed  to  maintain  the
Helvetic  republic  in  that  flourishing  state  which  secures  her
liberty,  and  renders  her  respectable  throughout  Europe.

In  order  to  put  in  practice  any  of  these  methods,  it  is  ne-  g  330.  oon-
cessary  to  speak  with  each  other,  and  to  confer  together. Con-  ferencea  an<l
ferences  and  congresses  are  therefore  a  mode  of  conciliation,  congreswa.
which  the  law  of  nature  recommends  to  nations,  as  well  cal-
culated to  bring  their  differences  to  an  amicable  termination.
Congresses  are  assemblies  of  plenipotentiaries  appointed  to
find  out  means  of  conciliation,  and  to  discuss  and  adjust  the
reciprocal  pretensions  of  the  contending  parties. To  afford
the  prospect  of  a  happy  issue  of  their  deliberations,  such
meetings  should  be  formed  and  directed  by  a  sincere  desire
of  peace  and  concord. In  the  present  century,  Europe  has
witnessed  two  general  congresses, — ^that  of  Cambray,*  and
that  of  SoissonSjf  both  tedious  farces  acted  on  the  political
theatre,  in  which  the  principal  performers  were  less  desirous
of  coming  to  an  accommodation  than  of  appearing  to  desire  it.

In  order  at  present  to  ascertain  in  what  manner  and  how  j  331. Dis.
far  a  nation  is  bound  to  resort  or  accede  to  these  various  tinotion  to
modes  of  accommodation,  and  which  of  them  she  ought  to  J®  »»»'d«^}>e-
prefer,  it  becomes  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to  distinguish  ^j^^^  ^^ '
between  cases  that  are  evident,  and  those  that  are  doubtful,  doabtfai
Does  the  question  relate  to  a  right  that  is  clear,  certain,  and  cm©"-
incontestable  ? A  sovereign,  if  he  possesses  sufiicient  strwgth,
may  peremptorily  prosecute  and  defend  that  right,  without  ex-
posing it  to  the  doubtful  issue  of  an  arbitration.  Shall  he  submit
to  negotiate  and  compound  for  a  thing  that  evidently  belongs
to  him,  and  which  is  disputed  without  the  least  shadow  of  jus-  [  279  ]
tice  ? Much  less  will  he  subject  it  to  arbitration. But  he
ought  not  to  neglect  those  methods  of  conciliationy  which,


(132)  The  sUpolatioiiB  between  pri-  parties  as  obligatory,  in  point  of  honour,

rate  partners  and  others  in  anticipation  to  endeayour  to  arbitrate  the  existing

of  mere  possible  disputes  is  analogous,  dispute. — G.

and  though  not  legally  binding,  yet,  in  *  In  1724.

practice,  in  case  of  differences,  the  mere  f  In  1728.
Itipulation  is  usnally  considered  by  the

879


279  OF  THE  MODB  OF  TERMINATUfa

BOOK  n.  without  endangering  his  own  right,  may  induce  Jiis  opponent
CHAP,  xvni.  ^^  listen  to  reason, — such  as  mediation  and  conferences.  Na-
ture gives  us  no  right  to  have  recourse  to  forcible  means,
•  except  where  gentle  and  pacific  methods  prove  ineffectual.  It
is  not  permitted  to  be  so  inflexible  in  uncertain  and  doubtful
questions.  Who  will  dare  to  insist  that  another  shall  imme-
diately, and  without  examination,  relinquish  to  him  a  dis-
putable right  ?  This  would  be  a  means  of  rendering  wars
perpetual  and  inevitable.  Both  the  contending  parties  may
be  equally  convinced  of  the  justice  of  their  claims :  why,
therefore,  should  either  yield  to  the  other  ?  In  such  a  case,
they  can  only  demand  an  examination  of  the  question,  pro-
pose a  conference  or  an  arbitration,  or  offer  to  settle  the  point
by  articles  of  agreement.
2  332.  Of  In  the  disputes  th^t  arise  between  sovereigns,  it  is  more-
essential  over  necessary  to  make  a  proper  distinction  between  essential
tighte,  and  rights  and  rights  of  inferior  importance :  for,  according  to
impwtonce**  *^®  difference  in  the  two  cases,  a  different  line  of  conduct  is
to  be  pursued.  A  nation  is  under  many  obligations  of  duty
towards  herself,  towards  other  nations,  and  towards  the  great
society  of  mankind.  We  know  that  the  duties  we  owe  to
ourselves  are,  generally  speaking,  paramount  to  those  we  owe
to  others ;  but  this  is  to  be  understood  only  of  such  duties  as
bear  some  proportion  to  each  other.  We  cannot  refuse,  in
some  degree,  to  forget  ourselves  with  respect  to  interests  that
are  not  essential,  and  to  make  some  sacrifices,  in  order  to
assist  other  persons,  and  especially  for  the  greater  benefit  of
human  society :  and  let  us  even  remark,  that  we  are  invited
by  our  own  advantage,  by  our  own  safety,  to  make  these  ge-
nerous sacrifices ;  for  the  private  good  of  each  is  intimately
connected  with  the  general  happiness.  What  idea  should  we
entertain  of  a  prince  or  a  nation  who  would  refuse  to  give  up
the  smallest  advantage  for  the  sake  of  procuring  to  the  world
the  inestimable  blessings  of  peace  ?  Every  power  therefore
owes  this  respect  to  the  happiness  of  human  society,  to  show
himself  open  to  every  mode  of  conciliation,  in  questions  re-
lating to  interests  which  are  neither  essential  nor  of  great
importance.  If  he  exposes  himself  to  the  loss  of  something
by  an  accommodation,  by  a  compromise,  or  by  an  arbitration,
he  ought  to  be  sensible  what  are  the  dangers,  the  evils,  the
calamities  of  war,  and  to  consider  that  peace  is  well  worth  a
small  sacrifice.

But  if  any  one  would  rob  a  nation  of  one  of  her  essential
rights,  or  a  right  without  which  she  could  not  hope  to  support
her  national  existence, — if  an  ambitious  neighbour  threatens
f  280  ]  the  liberty  of  a  republic, — if  he  attempts  to  subjugate  and
enslave  her, — ^she  will  take  counsel  only  from  her  own  cou-
rage. She  will  not  even  attempt  the  mode  of  conferences  on
so  odious  a  pretension ;  she  will,  in  such  a  quarrel,  exert  her
utmost  efforts,  exhaust  every  resource,  and  gloiuou^ly  lavish

380


DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS,  280

her  blood  to  the  last  drop  if  necessary.  •  To  listen  to  the book  ii.
smallest  proposition,  is  putting  every  thing  to  the  risk. On  £5fl_£[Hf-
such  an  occasion  she  may  truly  say —

Una  salos ^nullam  sperare  salatem :

and  if  fortune  prove  unfavourable,  a  free  people  will  prefer
death  to  servitude.  What  would  have  become  of  Rome,  had
she  listened  to  timid  counsels,  when  Hannibal  was  encamped
before  her  walls  ?  The  Swiss,  ever  so  ready  to  embrace  pacific
measures  or  submit  to  legal  decisions  in  disputes  respecting
less  essential  points,  have  uniformly  spurned  at  all  idea  of
compromise  with  those  who  harboured  designs  against  their
liberty.  They  even  refused  on  such  occasions  to  submit  their
disputes  to  arbitration,  or  to  the  judgment  of  the  emperors.*

In  doubtful  causes  which  do  not  involve  essential  points,  ?  333.  How
if  one  of  the  parties  will  not  accede  either  to  a  conference,  ^e  acquire
an  accommodation,  a  compromise,  or  an  arbitration,  the  ^^l^^^^havL***
has  only  the  last  resource  for  the  defence  of  himself  and  his  course  to
rights, — an  appeal  to  the  sword ;  and  he  has  justice  on  his  force  in  a
side  in  taking  up  arms  against  so  untractable  an  adversary.  doai>tfui
For,  in  a  doubtful  cause,  we  can  only  demand  all  the  reason-  *^*^*®'
able  methods  of  elucidating  the  question,  and  of  deciding  or
accommodating  the  dispute  (§  331).

But  let  us  never  lose  sight  of  what  a  nation  owes  to  her  j  334. and
own  security,  nor  of  that  prudence  by  which  she  ought  con-  ^^^^  ^'^^'
stantly  to  be  directed. To  authorize  her  to  have  recourse  to  ?"*  *!I*™^*'

< .  ,  .  .,.  ing  other

arms,  it  is  not  always  necessary  that  every  conciliatory  mea-  measures,
sure  be  first  expressly  rejected :  it  is  su£Scient  that  she  have
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  would  not  enter  into
those  measureswith  sincerity^ — that  they  could  not  be  brought
to  terminate  in  a  happy  result, — and  that  the  intervening
delay  would  only  expose  her  to  a  greater  danger  of  being  over-
powered. This  maxim  is  incontestable;  but  its  application
in  practice  is  very  delicate.  A  sovereign  who  would  not  be
considered  as  a  disturber  of  the  public  peace,  will  not  be  in-
duced abruptly  to  attack  him  who  has  not  refused  to  accede
to  pacific  measures,  unless  he  be  able  to  justify  his  conduct
in  the  eyes  of  all  mankind^  by  proving  that  he  has  reason  to
consider  those  peaceable  appearances  as  an  artifice  employed
for  the  purpose  of  amusing  him,  and  taking  him  by  surprise.
To  make  his  bare  suspicions  serve  as  sufficient  authority  for
such  a  step,  would  be  sapping  every  foundation  on  which
rests  the  security  of  nations.

The  faith  of  one  nation  has  ever  been  suspected  by  an.,

*  When,  in  tho  year  1355,  they  sub-  should  not  touch  the  liberty  of  those

mitted  their  differences  with  the  dukes  countries,  nor  their alliance  with the

of  Austria,  in  relation  to  the  countries  other  cantons. Tschudi,  p.  429,  Ac. —

of  Zug  and  Glaris,  to  the  arbitration  Stettler,  p.  77. — History  of  the  Helvetio /

of  Charles  IV.,  it  was  not  without  this  Confederacy,  by  De  Watte ville,  book  iv.

preliminary  C4)ndition,  that  the  emperor  at  the  beginning.

881


280  OF  THE  MODE  OF  TURMINATDrCh

BOOK  n.  other,  and  sad  experience  but  too  plainly  proved  that  this  dis-
CHAP.  xvin.  ^j^gij  ig  jjQi-  ill-founded.  Independence  and  impunity  are  a
i  336.  Vo-  touchstone  that  discovers  the  alloy  of  the  human  heart :  the
luntary  law  private  individual  assumes  the  character  of  candour  and  pro-
®^  t^^^^l  hity ;  and,  in  default  of  the  reality,  his  dependence  frequently
ject  obliges  him  to  exhibit  in  his  conduct  at  least  the  appearance

[  281  ]  ^f  those  virtues. The  great  man,  who  is  independent,  boasts
still  more  of  them  in  his  discourse ;  but  as  soon  as  he  finds
himself  possessed  of  superior  strength,  he  scarcely  endeavours
to  save  appearances,  unless  his  heart  be  moulded  of  materials
which,  unfortunately,  are  very  rare  indeed:  and,  if  powerful
interest  intervene,  he  will  give  himself  a  latitude  in  the  pur-
suit of  measures  that  would  cover  a  private  person  with  shame
and  infamy. When,  therefore,  a  nation  pretends  that  it  would
be  dangerous  for  her  to  attempt  pacific  measures,  she  can  find
abundance  of  pretexts  to  give  a  colour  of  justice  to  her  pre-
cipitation in  having  recourse  to  arms. And  as,  in  virtue  of
the  natural  liberty  of  nations,  each  one  is  free  to  judge  in  her
own  conscience  how  she  ought  to  act,  and  has  a  right  to  make
her  own  judgment  the  sole  guide  of  her  conduct  with  respect
to  her  duties  in  every  thing  that  is  not  determined  by  the
perfect  rights  of  another  (Prelim.  §  20),  it  belongs  to  each
nation  to  judge  whether  ner  situation  will  admit  of  pacific
measures,  before  she  has  recourse  to  arms. Now,  as  the  vo-
luntary law  of  nations  ordains,  that,  for  these  reasons,  we
should  esteem  lawful  whatever  a  nation  thinks  proper  to  do
in  virtue  of  her  natural  liberty  (Prelim.  §  21),  by  that  same
voluntary  law,  nations  are  bound  to  consider  as  lawful  the
conduct  of  that  power  who  suddenly  takes  up  arms  in  a  doubt-
ful cause,  and  attempts  to  force  his  enemy  to  come  to  terms,
without  having  previously  tried  pacific  measures. Louis  XIV.
was  in  the  heart  of  the  Netherlands  before  it  was  known  in
Spain  that  he  laid  claim  to  the  sovereignty  of  a  part  of  those
rich  provinces  in right  of  the  queen his  wife. The  king
of  Prussia,  in  1741,  published  his  manifesto  in  Silesia,  at  the
head  of  sixty  thousand  men. Those  princes  might  have  wise
and  just  reasons  for  acting  thus :  and  this  is  sufficient  at  the
tribunal  of  the  voluntary  law  of  nations. But  a  thing  which
that  law  tolerates  through  necessity,  may  be  found  very  un-
just in  itself:  and  a  prince  who  puts  it  in  practice  may  render
himself  very  guilty  in  the  sight  of  his  own  conscience,  and
very  unjust  towards  him  whom  he  attacks,  though  he  is  not
accountable  for  it  to  other  nations,  as  he  cannot  be  accused
of  violating  the  general  rules  which  they  are  bound  to  observe
towards  each  other. But  if  he  abuses  this  liberty.  He  gives
all  nations  cause  to  hate  and  suspect  him ;  he  authorizes  them
to  confederate  against  him ;  and  thus,  while  he  thinks  he  is  pro-
moting his  interests,  he  sometimes  irretrievably  ruins  them.
A  sovereign  ought,  in  all  his  quarrels,  to  entertain  a  sin
cere  desire  of  rendering  justice  and  preserving  peace. He

382


DI8PUTBS  BBTWEBN  NATIONS.  281

is  bound,  before  he  take  up  arms,  and  also  after  having  taken book  n.
them  up,  to  offer  equitable  conditions ;  and  then  alone  he  ^^^^'  ^^°'
is  justifiable  in  appealing  to  the  sword  against  an  obstinate  ^  ^^f'
enemy  who  refuses  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  justice  or  equity,  con^^i^^ng^

It  is  the  business  of  the  appellant  to  prove  his  right;  for  be  offered,
he  ought  to  show  a  good  foundation  for  demanding  a  thing  [  282  1
which  he  does  not  possess. He  must  have  a  title :  and  peo-  ^  337. Pos-
pie  are  not  obliged  to  respect  that  title  any  farther  than  he  sf 88or|»
shows  its  validity. The  possessor  may  therefore  remain  J^^^^J^
in  possession  till  proof  be  adduced  to  convince  him  that  his  cases,
possession  is  unjust. As  long  as  that  remains  undone,  he
has  a  right  to  maintain  himself  in  it,  and  even  to  recover  it
by  force,  if  he  has  been  despoiled  of  it. Consequently  it  is
not  allowable  to  take  up  arms  in  order  to  obtain  possession
of  a  thing  to  which  the  claimant  has  but  an  uncertain  or
doubtful  right. He  is  only  justifiable  in  compelling  the  pos-
sessor, by  force  of  arms  if  necessary,  to  come  to  a  discussion
of  the  question,  to  accede  to  some  reasonable  mode  of  deci-
sion or  accommodation,  or,  finally,  to  settle  the  point  by  arti-
cles of  agreement  upon  an  equitable  footing  (§  383).

If  the  subject  of  the  dispute  be  an  injury  received,  the ;  338.  How
offended  party  ought  to  follow  the  rules  we  have  just  esta-  reparation  of
Wished.  His  own  advantage,  and  that  of  human  society,  ^"J^^'yi*
require,  that,  previous  to  taking  up  arms,  he  should  try  every  *^*'*
pacific  mode  of  obtaining  either  a  reparation  of  the  injury,
or  a  just  satisfaction,  unless  there  be  substantial  reasons  to
dispense  with  his  recurrence  to  such  mea8ures.(§  334).  This
moderation,  this  circumspection,  is  the  more  becoming,  and
in  general  even  indispensable,  as  the  action  which  we  look
upon  as  an  injury  does  not  always  proceed  from  a  design  to
offend  us,  and  is  sometimes  rather  a  mistake  than  an  act  of
malice.  It  even  frequently  happens  that  the  injury  is  done
by  inferior  persons,  without  their  sovereign  having  any  share
in  it :  and  on  these  occasions  it  is  natural  to  presume  that  he
will  not  refuse  us  a  just  satisfaction.  When  some  petty  ofS-
cers,  not  long  since,  violated  the  territory  of  Savoy  in  order
to  carry  off  from  thence  a  noted  smuggling  chief,  the  King
of  Sardinia  caused  his  complaints  to  be  laid  before  the  court
of  France ;  and  Louis  XY.  thought  it  no  derogation  to  his
greatness  to  send  an  ambassador  extraordinary  to  Turin  to
give  satisfaction  for  that  violence.  Thus  an  affair  of  so  deli-
cate a  nature  was  terminated  in  a  manner  equally  honour-
able to  the  two  kings.

When  a.  nation  cannot  obtain  justice,  whether  for  a  wrong  ;  339.  B«
or  an  injury,  she  has  a  right  to  do  herself  justice.  But  be- ***»*'»<>*>•
fore  she  declares  war  (of  which  we  shall  treat  in  the  follow-
ing book),  there  are  various  methods  practised  among  nations^
which  remain  to  be  treated  of  here.  Among  those  methods
of  obtaining  satisfaction,  has  been  reckoned  what  is  called
the  law  of  retaliation,  according  to  which  we  make  another


282  '  OF  THB  MODS  OF  TERMINATINQ

BOOK  n. Buffer  precisely  as  much  evil  as  he  has  done. Many  hav«
CHAP.  ^^ "^- extolled  that  law,  as  being  founded  in  the  strictest  justice: —
and  can  we  be  surprised  at  their  having  proposed  it  to  princes,
[  283  ]  since  they  have  presumed  to  make  it  a  rule  even  for  the  deitj
himself? The  ancients  called  it  the  law  of  Rhadamanthus.
The  idea  is  wholly  derived  from  the  obscure  and  false  noiion
which  represents  evil  as  essentially  and  in  its  own  nature  wor-
thy of  punishment. We  have  shown  above  (Book  I.  §  lt»l*),
what  is  the  true  origin  of  the  right  of  punishing;*  whence
we  have  deduced  the  true  and  just  proportion  of  penalties
(Book  I.  §  171). Let  us  say,  then,  that  a  nation  may  punish
another  which  has  done  her  an  injury,  as  we have  4?hoTi.Ti
above  (see  Chap.  IV.  and  VL  of  this  book),  if  the  latter  re-
fuses to  give  her  a  just  satisfaction :  but  she  has  not  a  right
to  extend  the  penalty  beyond  what  her  own  safety  requires.
Retaliation^  which  is  unjust  between  private  persons^  would
he  much  more  so  between  nations^  because  it  would,  in  the  lot-
ter  case,  be  difficult  to  make  the  punishment  fall  on  those  who
had  done  the  injury. What  right  have  you  to  cut  off  the
nose  and  ears  of  the  ambassador  of  a  barbarian  who  had
treated  your  ambassador  in  that  manner  ? As  to  those  repri-
sals in  time  of  war  which  partake  of  the  nature  of  retalia-
tion, they  are  justified  on  other principles ; and  we  -shall
speak  of  them  in  their  proper  place. The  only  truth  in  this
idea  of  retaliation  is,  that,  all  circuinstances  being  in  other
respects  equal,  the  punishment  ought  to  bear  some  proportion
to  the  evil  for ^ which  we  mean  to  inflict  it, — the  very  object
and  foundation  of  punishment  requiring  thus  much.
J  340. Va- It  is  not  always  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  arms,  in
riouB  modes  order  to  punish  a  nation. The  offended  party  may,  by  way
!?  ^^t^oui;  of  punishment,  deprive  her  of  the  privileges  she  enjoyed  in
ha^g  re- liis  dominions,— seize  on  some  of  her  property,  if  he  has  an
ootirse  to opportunity, — and  detain  it  till  she  has  given  him  sufficient
•™*-  satisfaction.

;  341.  R«-  When  a  sovereign  is  not  satisfied  with  the  manner  in  which
tortioii.  tig  subjects  are  treated  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  another
nation,  he  is  at  liberty  to  declare  that  he  will  treat  the  sub-
jects of  that  nation  in  the  same  manner  as  his  arc  treated.
This  is  what  is  called  retortion.  There  is  nothing  in  this,
but  what  is  conformable  to  justice  and  sound  policy.  No  one
can  complain  on  receiving  the  same  treatment  which  he  gives
to  others.  Thus  the  king  of  Poland,  elector  of  Saxony,  en*
forces  the  law  of  escheatage  only  against  the  subjects  of  those
princes  who  make  the  Saxons  liable  to  it.  The  retortion  may
also  take  place  with  respect  to  certain  regulations,  of  which
we  have  no  right  to  complain,  and  which  we  are  even  obliged
to  approve,  though  it  is  proper  to  guard  against  their  effect

*  "  Nam,  ut  Plato  ait^  nemo  prudens  punit  quia  peccatum  esty  sed,  ne  peooe*
tor.'' Seneca,  de  Ira.
884


DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  288

by  imitating  them. Such  are  the  orders  relating  to  the  im- book  n.
portation  or  exportation  of  certain  commodities  or  merchan-2iiLiLIEf"
disc. On  the  other  hand,  circumstances  frequently  forbid  us
to  have  recourse  to  retortion. In  this  respect,  each  nation
may  act  according  to  the  dictates  of  her  own  prudence.

Reprisals  are  used  between  nation  and  nation  in  order  to  do  1 342.  Re-
themselves  justice  when  they  cannot  otherwise  obtain  it.  (133)  P"**^
If  a  nation  has  taken  possession  of  what  belongs  to  another, —
if  she  refuses  to  pay  a  debt,  to  repair  an  injury,  or  to  give
adequate  satisfaction  for  it, — the  latter  may  seize  something  [  284  ]
belonging  to  the  former,  and  apply  it  to  her  own  advantage
till  she  obtains  payment  of  what  is  due  to  her,  together  with
interest  and  damages,  or  keep  it  as  a  pledge  till  she  has  re-
ceived ample  satisfaction.  In  the  latter  case,  it  is  rather  a
stoppage  or  a  seizure,  than  reprisals :  but  they  are  frequently
confounded  in  common  language.  The  effects  thus  seized  on
are  preserved  while  there  is  any  hope  of  obtaining  satisfac-
tion or  justice.  As  soon  as  that  hope  disappears,  they  are
confiscated,  and  then  the  reprisals  are  accomplished.  If  the
two  nations,  upon  this  ground  of  quarrel,  come  to  an  open
rupture,  satisfaction  is  considered  as  refused  from  the  mo-
ment that  war  is  declared  or  hostilities  commenced ;  and  then
also  the  effects  seized  may  be  confiscated.

It  is  only  upon  evidently  just  grounds,  or  for  a  well-ascer-  i  3^3.  WbM
tained  and  undeniable  debt,  that  the  law  of  nations  allows  us""^®**"*"^
to  make  reprisals. For  he  who  advances  a  doubtful  preten-  them  uir.
sion,  cannot  in  the  first  instance  demand  any  thing  more  than  foL
an  equitable  examination  of  his  right. In  the  next  place,
before  he  proceed  to  such  extremities,  he  should  be  able  to
show  that  he  has  ineffectually  demanded  justice,  or  at  least
that  he  has  every  reason  to  tlunk  it  would  be  in  vain  for  him
to  demand  it. Then  alone  does  it  become  lawful  for  bim  to
take  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  and  do  himself  justice. It
would  be  too  inconsistent  with  the  peace,  the  repose,  and  the
safety  of  nations,  with  their  mutual  commerce,  and  the  duties
which  bind  them  to  each  other,  that  each  one  should  be  author-
ized to  have  immediate  recourse  to  violent  measures,  without
knowing  whether  there  exist  on  the  other  side  a  disposition  to
do  her  justice,  or  to  refuse  it.

But,  in  order  perfectly  to  understand  this  article,  it  must
be  observed,  that  if,  in  a  disputable  case,  our  adversary  either
refuses  to  pursue,  or  artfully  evades  the  necessary  steps  for
bringing  the  matter  to  the  proof, — if  he  does  not  candidly
and  sincerely  accede  to  some  pacific  mode  of  terminating  the
dispute, — especially  if  he  is  foremost  in  adopting  violent  mea-
sures,— he  gives  justice  to  our  cause  which  before  was  proble-
matical:  we  may  then  have  recourse  to  reprisals,  or  the

(133)  See  further,  m  to  repriflals  and thereon,  1  CiuUfB  Commercial  Law,
lettera  of  marque,  and  English  deoisione 418—423. — C.

40  2H  S86


284  OF  THE  MODE  OF  TEEMINATDTG

BOOK  n. BeizTire  of  his  effects,  in  order  to  compel  him  to  embrace  the
CHAP.  xvm.  jjjg^ijQ jg  Qf  conciliation  which  the  law  of  nature  prescribes.
This  is  the  last  remaining  effort  previous  to  a  commencement
of  open  hostilities.
J  344.  Upon We  have  observed  above  (§  81),  that  the  wealth  of  the  citi-
whftt  effecia  gens  Constitutes  a  part  of  the  aggregate  wealth  of  a  nation, —
"LT  a34^^  that,  between  state  and  state,  the  private  property  of  the
members  is  considered  as  belonging  to  the  body,  and  is  an-
swerable for  the  debts  of  that  body  (§  82):  (134)  whence  it
follows,  that  in  reprisals  we  seize  on  the  property  of  the  sub-

i'ect  just  as  we  would  on that  of  the  state  or  sovereign.
Jvery  thing  that  belongs  to  the  nation  is  subject  to  reprisals,
whenever  it  can  be  seized,  provided  it  be  not  a  deposit  in-
trusted to  the  public  faith. As  it  is  only  in  consequence  of
that  confidence  which  the  proprietor  has  placed  in  our  good-
[  285  ]  faith,  that  we  happen  to  have  such  deposit  in  our  hands,  it
ought  to  be  respected,  even  in  case  of  open  war. Such  is
the  conduct  observed  in  France,  England,  and elsewhere,
with  respect  to  the  money  which  foreigners  have  placed  in
the  public  funds.
i  346. The He  who  makes  reprisals  against  a  nation  on  the  property
state  ought  ^f  j^g  members  indiscriminately,  cannot  be  taxed  with  seising
■Btrttiose*  ^^^  property  of  an  innocent  person  for  the  debt  of  another :
who  miflfer for.  in  this  case,  the  sovereign  is  to  compensate  those  of  his
by  reprisals,  subjects  on  whom  the  reprisals  fall ;  it  is  a  debt  of  the  state
or  nation,  of  which  each  citizen  ought  only  to  pay  his  quota.*
^  34*. The It  is  only  between  state  and  state  that  all  the  property
•ov^reigc ^f  ^^q  individuals  is  considered  as  belonging  to  the  nation,
a  one  can goyereigns  transact  their  affairs  between  themselves;  they

(134) The ancient law of nations  payment  is  Btupended  during  the  wsr,

perhaps was so; Attorney-General  t.  and  rehires again  on the retam of

Weeden, Parke's Rep. 267 ', but see  peace. 1  Rob.  Rep.  196 ;  2  Rob.  Bep.

posty  book  iii.  chap.  t.  |  17,  p.  323,  as  200. Ex  parte  Boutanutker,  13  Ves.  J.

to the  change  in practice. See  fur-  71. Furlado  t.  Bodgera,  3  Bos.  A  PoL

ther, Ghittj's Commercial Law, 421,  191. Antoine  y.  Morethend,  6  Taunt

423,  425. {The  right is undoubted.  239. Brandon  v.  Curling,  4  East,  410.

The Emulous,  1 OaU. Rep.  576 — see  Emerigon,  vol.  1,  p.  567. M&rlen*e  L.

the  authorities,  American  a^d  Foreign,  N.  277. {It  is  the  modem  ueage,  bat

cited  by  Story,  J.,  and  his  remarks  on  it  does  not  constitute  a  m^. Brmn  t.

the  opinion  of  Vattel.] But  such  an-  The United States, 8 Cranch, 110.)

cient  law of  nations,  with  respect  to  See  further.  Wolf  t.  Oxholm,  6  Maule

oonftscation  and  reprisals,  has  in  more  k 8elw. 92,  where  an  ordinance in

modem  times  been  greatly  relaxed,  and  Denmark  for  confiscating  priyate  debts

indeed  treaties  usually  provide  that,  in  and  property  was  held  illegal  and  ia-

case  of  war,  the property  of  private  valid. — C.

individuals  of  each  state  shall  be  pro- *  On  the  subject  of  reprisals,  it  ii

tected,  and  ample  time for  their  re-  necessary  to observe, that when i*6

moval  be  allowed. But  independently  adopt  that  expedient,  as  being  a  gactl^r

of  such  express  treaties,  and  by  the  ge-  mode  of  proceeding  than  that  of  war.

neral  modem  law  of  nations,  the  right  the  reprisals  ought  not  to  be  genera,

to  debte  and  choses  in  actions  is  not  The grand pensionary  De Witt  rerr

forfeited  by  way  of  reprisal  or  otber-  properly  remarked,  ''I  do  not  see  anj

wise  on  the  breaking  out  of  war,  but  difference  between  general  reprisals  aad

merely  the  ^medy  or  right  to  enforce  open  war."
386


DISPUTES BETWEEN  FATIONS.  285

carry  on  business  with  each  other  directly,  and  can  only book  u.
consider  a  foreign  nation  as  a  society  of  men  who  have  but  one  chap,  xvuu
common  interest. It  belongs  therefore  to  sovereigns  alone  °''^®'  ^®p^"
to  make  and  order  reprisals  on  the  footing  we.  have  just  de- '  ""
scribed. Besides,  this  violent  measure  approaches  very  near
to  an  open  rupture,  and  is  frequently  followed  by  one. It  is, ^
therefore,  an  affair  of  too  serious  a  nature  to  be  left  to  the
discretion  of  private  individuals. And  accordingly  we  see,
that  in  every  civilized  state,  a  subject  who  thinks  himself
injured  by  a  foreign  nation,  has  recourse  to  his  sovereign,  in  Letters  of
order  to  obtain  permission  to  make  reprisals. This  is  what  ™arq«®-
the  French  call  applying  for  letters  of  marque.  (135)  ^^'^^^

We  may  make  reprisals  against  a  nation  not  only  for  the  |  U7. Re-
actions of  the  sovereign,  but  also  for  those  of  his  subjects :  P"8^«
and  this  may  take  place  when  the  state  or  the  sovereign  par-  ^l*^^^*!.*
ticipates  in  the  act  of  his  subject,  and  takes  it  upon  himself,  actions  of
which  he  may  do  in  several  ways,  as  we  have  shown  in  Chap,  its  subjects,
VI.  of  this  Book.  »"'! '""  ^^

In  the  same manner  the  sovereign  demands  justice,  or  ^^.^red
makes  reprisals,  not  only  for  his  own  concerns,  but  also  for  aubjects.
those  of  his  subjects,  whom  he  is  bound  to  protect,  and  whose
cause  is  that  of  the  nation.

But  to  grant  reprisals  against  a  nation  in  favour  of  fo-  J  348. But
reign ers,  is  to  set  himself  up  as  a  judge  between  that  nation  ^ot"»
and  those  foreicners ;  which  no  sovereim  has  a  right  to  do.  Jj*^**."'  ®^

mi  /• ® • 1  ^  1 • ° 1  1  foreigners.

The  cause  of  reprisals  ought  to  be  just :  they  ought  even  to

be  grounded  on  a  denial  of  justice, — either  an  actual  denial,

or  one  which  there  is  good  reason  to  apprehend  (§  343). Now,

what right  have  we to  judge  whether  the  complaint  of  a

stranger  against  an  independent  state  is  just,  if  he  has  really

been  denied  justice  ? If  it  be  objected,  that  we  may  espouse

the  quarrel  of  another  state  in  a  war  that  appears  to  us  to  be

just, — ^to  assist  her,  and  even  to  unite  with  her, — the  case  is

different. In  granting  succours  against  a  nation,  we  do  not  [  286  [|

detain  her  property  or  her  people  that  happen  to  be  within

our  territories  under  the  public  faith ;  and  in  declaring  war

against  her,  we  suffer  her  to  withdraw  her  subjects  and  her

effects,  as  will  hereafter  appear. In  the  case  of  reprisals

granted  to  our  own  subjects,  a  nation  cannot  complain  that

we  violate  the  public  faith  in  seizing  on  her  people  or  her

property  ;  because  we  are  under  no  other  obligation  to  grant

security  to  that  property  and  those  people,  than  what  arises

from  a  reasonable  supposition  that  their  nation  will  not,  in

the  first  instance,  violate,  with  respect  to  us  or  our  subjects,

the  rules  of  justice  which  nations  ought  to  observe  towards

each  other. If  she  violate  them,  we  have  a  right  to  obtain

satisfaction ;  and  the  mode  of  reprisals  is  more  easy,  tofe,

and  mild,  than  that  of  war. We  cannot  urge  the  same  arga-

(135)  As  to  decisions  on  letters  of Law, 41S— 422. Chitty's  L.  N.  78—
marque, see 1 Chitty's Commercial 86. — C.

S87


J


286  OP  THE*  MODE OF  TERMIXATIKG

BOOK  n. menta  in  justification  of  reprisals  ordered  in  favom-  of  foreign*
OHAP.  xvrn.  ^j.g^ Pqp  ^Yie  security  we  owe  to  the  subjects  of  a  foreign
power  does  not  depend,  as  a  condition,  on  the  security  which
that  power  shall  grant  to  all  other  nations,  to  people  who  do
not  belong  to  us,  and  are  not  under  our  protection. Eng-
land having,  in  1662,  granted  reprisals  against  the  United
Provinces  in  favour  of  the  knights  of  Malta,*  the  states  of
Holland  asserted,  with  good  reason,  that,  according to  the
law  of  nations,  reprisals  can  only  be  granted  to  maintain  the
rights  of  the  state,  and  not  for  an  aifair  in  which  the  nation
has  no  concern,  f
;  849.  Those The  individuals,  who  by  their  actions  have  given  cause  for
who  have just  reprisals,  are  bound  to  indemnify  those  on  whom  they
given  cause  fg^y  .  ^^^  ^j^^  sovereign  ought  to  compel  them  to  do  it. For
ough?*to  in-  ^®  *^®  under  an  obligation  to  repair  the  damage  we  have  oe-
demnify casioned  by  our  own  fault. And,  although  the  sovereign,  by
those  who refusing  justice  to  the  offended  party,  has  brought  on  the
wflFer  by reprisals  against  his  subjects,  those  who  were  the  first  cause
*"*  of  them  do  not  become  the  less  guilty :  the  fault  of  the  sove-

reign does  not  exempt  them  from  repairing  the  consequences
of  theirs. However,  if  they  were  ready  to  give  satisfaction  f

to  the  party  whom  they  had  injured  or  offended,  and  their
sovereign  has  prevented  their  doing  it,  they  are  not  bound  to
do  any  thing  more  in  that  case,  than  they  would  before  have
been  obliged  to  do  in  order  to  prevent  the  reprisals ;  and  it
is  the  sovereign's  duty  to  repair  the  additional  damage,  which
is  the  consequence  of  his  own  fault  (§  345).
i  350.  What We  have  said  (§  343)  that  we  ought  not  to  make  reprisals,
maybe except  when  WO  are  unable  to  obtain  justice. Now,  justice
**T^^*ii  is  refused  in  several  ways: — First,  by  a  denial  of  justice,
iufltioe. °  properly  so  called,  or  by  a  refusal  to  hear  your  complaints
or  those  of  your  subjects,  or  to  admit  them  to  establish  their
right  before  the  ordinary  tribunals. Secondly,  by  studied
[  287  ]  delays,  for  which no good reasons can  be  given— delays

*  On  that  subject,  the  grand  pen-  except  in  case  of  an  open  denial  of  jns-

sionary  De  Witt  wrote  as  follows : —  .  tice. Finally,  it  is  also  evident,  thati

"  Nothing  ean be  more absurd  than  even  in  case  of  a  denial  of  justice,  he

that  grant  of  reprisals :  for,  to  say  no-  cannot  empower  his  subjects  to  mnke

thing  of  its  proceeding  from  a  board  reprisals,  until  he  has  repeatedly  de-

of  admiralty,  who  have  no  power  to  manded  justice for  them,  and  added,

grant it without infringing on the  that,  in  the  event  of  a  refusal,  ho  wiD

sovereign  authority  of  their  prince,  it  be obliged to grant them lett«»T3  of

is  evident  that  no  sovereign  can  grant  marque  and  reprisal."  From  the  answers

or  make  reprisals,  except  for  the  do-  of  M.  Boreel,  it  appears  that  this  eon>

fence or  indemnification of  his own  duct of the British admiralty was

subjects,  whom  he  is,  in the sight  of  strongly  condemned by  the court  of

God,  bound  to  protect;  but  he  never  France. The  king  of  England  testified

can  grant  reprisals  in  favour  of  any  his  disapprobation  of  it,  and  gave  orders

foreigner  who  is  not  under  his  protec-  for  the  release  of  the  Dutch  vessels

tion,  and  with  whose  sovereign  he  has  whose seisure  had  been  permitted  by

not  any  engagement  to  that  effect,  ex  way  of  reprisal. — Edit  1797

pacta  vel  foedere. Besides,  it  Is  certain  f See Bynckershoek's GompietenS

that  reprisals  ought  not  to  be  granted  Judge  of  Bmbassadors,  chap.  xxii.
388


DISPUTES  BETWEEN  NATIONS.  287


t


equivalent  to  a  refusal,  or  still  more  ruinous.  Thirdly,  by  book  n.
an  evidently  unjust  and  partial  decision.  But  it  is  necessary  chap.  :cvm.
that  this  injustice  should  be  manifest  and  palpable.  In  all
cases  dusceptible  of  doubt,  a  sovereign  ought  not  to  listen  to
the  complaints  of  his  subjects  against  a  foreign  tribunal,  nor
to  attempt  to  screen  them  from  the  effects  of  a  sentence  passed
in  due  form :  for  that  would  be  the  means  of  exciting  continual
troubles.  The  law  of  nations  directs  that  states  should  re-
ciprocally pay  that  kind  of  deference  to  each  other's  juris-
diction, for  the  same  reason  as  the  civil  law  ordains,  within
the  state,  that  every  definitive  sentence,  passed  in  due  form,
shall  be  esteemed  just.  Between  nation  and  nation  the  obli-
gation is  neither  so  express  nor  so  extensive :  but  it  cannot  be
denied,  that  it  is  highly  conducive  to  their  peace  and  con-
formable to  their  duties  towards  human  society,  to  oblige
their  subjects,  in  all  doubtful  cases,  and,  unless  where  there
is  a  manifest  wrong  done  to  them,  to  submit  to  the  sentences
of  the  foreign  tribunals  before  which  their  causes  have  been
tried. (See  above,  §  84).

As  we  may  seize  the  things  which  belong  to  a  nation,  in  g  351.  Sub-
order to  compel  her  to  do  justice,  we  may  equally,  for  the  j«ct8  arre«i.
same  reason,  arrest some  of  her  citizens,  and  not  release  *^  **y  T*^
them  till  we  have  received  full  satisfaction. This  is  what  the  °  "^ "*
Greeks  called  AndroUp%ia,* At  Athens  the  law  permitted
the  relatives  of  him  who  had  been  assassinated  in  a  foreign
country,  to  seize  three  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country,
and  to  detain  them  till  the  murderer  was  punished  or  delivered
up.f But,  in  the  practice  of  modern  Europe,  this  method  is
seldom  resorted  to,  except  with  a  view  to  obtain  satisfaction
for  an  injury  of  the  same  nature — ^thatis  to  say,  to  compel
a  sovereign  to  release  a  person  whom  he  detains  unjustly.

The  persons,  however,  who  are  thus  arrested,  being  detained
only  as  a  security,  or  pledge,  in  order  to  oblige  a  nation  to
do  justice — if  their  sovereign  obstinately  persists  in  refusing
it,  we  cannot  take  away  their  lives,  or  inflict  any  corporal
punishment  upon  them,  for  a  refusal  of  which  they  are  not
guilty.  Their  property,  their  liberty  itself,  may  be  staked
for  the  debts  of  the  state ;  but  not  their  lives,  of  which  man
has  not  the  power  of  disposing.  A  sovereign  has  no  right  to
put  to  death  the  subjects  of  a  state  which  has  done  him  an
injury,  except  when  they  are  engaged  in  war ;  and  we  shall
see,  elsewhere,  what  it  is  that  gives  him  that  right.

But  the  sovereign  is  authorized  to  employ  forcible  means  g  852. Oar
against  those  who  resist  him  in  the  exertion  of  his  right,  and"g^**P"""*
to  pursue  such  means  as  far  as  is  necessary  to  overcome  their  ^°"  ^^*
unjust  resistance. It  is  therefore  lawful  to  repel  those  whOpr^X"**
undertake  to  oppose  the  making  of  just  reprisals :  and  if,  for
that  purpose,  it  be  necessary  to  proceed  even  so  far  as  to


•  AyiftoKn^ta,  ieueure  of  mtn,  f  DemostheneSy  Orat  adv.  Aristocrat

b2  a89


288  OF  THE MODE  OF  TERMINATIHTO

BOOK  IT.  put  them  to  death,  the  whole  blame  of  that  misfortune  is  im-
oBAP.  xvin.  putable  to  their  unjust  and  inconsiderate  resistance.  In  such
a  case,  Grotius  would  have  us  rather  abstain  from  making
reprisals.*  Between  private  persons,  and  for  things  that  are
not  of  the  highest  importance,  it  is  certainly  worthy,  not  only
of  a  Christian,  but,  in  general,  of  every  man  of  principle,
rather  to  abandon  his  right  than  to  kill  the  person  who  un
justly  resists  him.  But,  between  sovereigns,  the  case  is  other-
wise. To  suffer  themselves  to  be  bullied,  would  be  attended
with  consequences  of  too  serious  a  nature.  The  true  and  just
welfare  of  the  state  is  the  grand  rule :  moderation  is  ever  lau-
dable in  itself;  but  the  conductors  of  nations  ought  to  practise
^  that  virtue  so  far  only  as  it  is  consistent  with  the  happiness

and  safety  of  their  people.
;  353.  Just  After  having  demonstrated  the  lawfulness  of  making  re-
reprisals  prisals  when  we  can  no  otherwise  obtain  justice,  we  may
do  notaf.  theucc  readily  conclude  that  a  sovereign  is  not  justifiable  in
oaus^fo"*  Daaking  forcible  opposition  to,  or  waging  war  against,  the
war.  P^i^ty,  who,  by  ordering  or  making  reprisals  in  such  a  case,

only  exerts  his  just  right.
;  354.  Hoir And  as  the  law  of  humanity  directs  nations  as  well  as  in-
we  ought  to  dividuals  ever  to  prefer  the  gentlest  measures,  when  they  are
confine  our-  guj^cient  to  obtain  justice — whenever  a sovereign  can,  by
Trila'sror"  *^®  ^^^®  ?f  reprisals,  procure  a  just  indemnification  or  a
at  length Suitable  sati^faction,  he  ought  to  confine  himself  to  this  method,
proceed  to which  is  Icss  violent  and  less  fatal  than  war. On  this  subject,
hostilities. J  cannot  avoid  noticing  an  error  which  is  too  general  to  be
wholly  disregarded. If  it happens that a  prince,  having
reason  to  complain  of  some  injustice  or  some  acts  of  hostility,
and  not  finding  his  adversary  disposed  to  give  him  satisfaction,
determines  to  make  reprisals  with  the  view  of  endeavouring
to  compel  him  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  justice  before  he  proceeds
to  an  open  rupture, — if,  without  a  declaration  of  war,  he  seizes
on  his  effects,  his  shipping,  and  detains  them  as  pledges, — ^yoa
hear  certain  men  cry  out  that  this  is  robbery. If  that  prince
had  at  once  declared  war,  they  would  not  have  said  a  word ;
they  would  perhaps  have  praised  his  conduct. Strange  for-
getfulness  of  reason,  and  of  every  sound  principle ! Would
we  not,  at  this  rate,  be  tempted  to  suppose  that  nations  were
bound  to  observe  the  laws  of  chivalry, — to  challenge  each
other  to  the  lists, — and  decide  their  quarrels  like  a  pair  of
doughty  champions  engaged  in  regular  duel  ? It  is  the  duty
of  sovereigns  attentively  to  maintain  the  rights  of  their  people,
and  to  obtain  justice  by  every  lawful  means — still,  however,
r  289  1  preferring  the  gentlest  methods :  and  we  again  repeat  the  as-
sertion— it  is  evident  that  the  mode  of  reprisals,  of  which  we
are  speaking,  is  infinitely  more  gentle  and  less  fatal  than  that
of  war. But  since,  between  powers  whose  strength  is  nearly
■ '  ■  ' ...  y ■

*  Qrotiui  De  Jure  Belli  et  Paois,  lib.  ili.  cap.  ii.  {  6b
890


DISPUTES BETWEEN  NATIONS.  289

equal,  reprisals  often  lead  to  war,  they  ought  not  to  be  attempt- book  u.
ed,  except  in  the  last  extremity. La  such  circumstances,  the  ^HAP^jrvm
prince  who  has  recourse  to  that  expedient,  instead  of  proceed-
ing to  an  open  rupture,  is  undoubtedly  entitled  to  praise  for
his  moderation  and  prudence.

Those  who  run  to  arms  without  necessity,  are  the  scourges
of  the  human  race,  barbarians,  enemies  to  society,  and  re-
bellious violators  of  the  laws  of  nature,  or  rather,  the  laws  of
the  Gommpn  father  of  mankind.

There  are  cases,  however,  in  which  reprisals  would  be  justly
condemnable,  even  when  a  declaration  of  war  would  not  be
so :  and  these  are  precisely  those  cases  in  which  nations  may
with  justice  take  up  arms.  When  the  question  which  con-
stitutes the  ground  of  a  dispute,  relates,  not  to  an  act  of
violence,  or  an  injury  received,  but  to  a  contested  right, —
after  an  ineffectual  endeavour  to  obtain  justice  by  conciliatory
and  pacific  measures, — ^it  is  a  declaration  of  war  that  ought
to  follow,  and  not  pretended  reprisals,  which,  in  such  a  case,
would  only  be  real  acts  of  hostility  without  a  declaration  of
war,  and  would  be  contrary  to  public  faith  as  well  as  to  the
mutual  duties  of  nations.  This  will  more  evidently  appear,
when  we  shall  have  explained  the  reasons  which  establish  the
obligation  of  declaring  war  previous  to  a  commencement  of
hostilities.*

But  if,  from  particular  conjunctures,  and  from  the  obstinacy
of  an  unjust  adversary,  neither  reprisals,  nor  any  of  the
methods  of  which  we  have  been  treating,  should  prove  sufiS-  .
cient  for  our  defence,  and  for  the  protection  of  our  rights,
there  remains  only  the  wretched  and  melancholy  alternative
of  war,  which  will  be  the  subject  of  the  following  book.

•  Sm  Book  IIL  ohap.  ir.


391


291


BOOK  IIL


OF  WAK.


CHAR  I.

*  HA^.™.' OF  WAR, — ITS  DIFFERENT  KINDS, — AND  THE  RIGHT  OF  MAEXXe


WAR.


^  1. Deft- W  AR  is  that  state  in  which  we  prosecute  our  right  by  force.
nition  of We  also  understand,  by  this  term,  the  act  itself,  or  the  man-
war.  a36) j^^j.  ^f  prosecuting  our  right  by  force :  but  it  is  more  con-
formable to  general  usage,  and  more  proper  in  a  treatise  on
the  law  of  war,  to  understand  this  term  in  the  sense  we  hare
annexed  to  it.
§  2. Public Public  war  is  that  which  takes  place  between  nations  or
war.  (136) sovereigns,  and  which  is  carried  on  in  the  name  of  the  public
power,  and  by  its  order. This  is  the  war  we  are  here  to  con-
sider:— private  war,  or  that  which  is  carried  on  between  pri-
vate individuals,  belongs  to  the  law  of  nature  properly  so
called.
1 3. Right In  treating  of  the  right  to  security  (Book  II.  Chap.  IV.),
of  making -^fe  havc  showu  that  nature  gives  men  a  right  to  employ  force,
war.  (136) ^j^g^  [^  jg  necessary  for  their  defence,  and  for  the  preserva-
tion of  their  rights. This  principle  is  generally  acknowledged:
reason  demonstrates  it ;  and  nature  herself  has  engraved  it
on  the  heart  of  man. Some  fanatics  indeed,  taking  in  a  literal
sense  the  moderation  recommended  in  the  gospel,  have  adopted
the  strange  fancy  of  suffering  themselves  to  be  massacred  or
[  292  ]  plundered,  rather  than  oppose  force  to  violence. But  we
need  not  fear  that  this  error  will  make  any  great  progress.
The  generality  of  mankind  will,  of  themselves,  guard  against
its  contagion — ^happy,  if  they  as  well  knew  how  to  keep  within
the  just  bounds  which  nature  has  set  to  a  right  that  is  granted
only  through  necessity ! To  mark  those  just  bounds, — ^and,
. by  the  rules  of  justice,  equity,  and  humanity,  to  moderate  the
exercise  of  that  harsh,  though  too  often  necessary  right, — ^is
the  intention  of  this  third  book.

(136)  See  definition  of  war  and  of  4  Rob.  Rep.  252 ; Bro.  Ab.  tit  Deni-

the  king'g  sole  right  to  declare  it,  as  sen,  pi.  20,  and  Chitty's  L.  N.  28,  29

regards  England,  per Sir  Wm.  Scott,  SO. — 0.
The  Hoop,  1  Rob.  R.  196; Nayade,
392


OF  WAR, ETC.  292

As  nature  has  given  men  no  right  to  employ  force,  unless book  in.
when  it  becomes  necessary  for  self  defence  and  the  preserva- ^°^^'  '*


•tion  of  their  rights  (Book  II.  §  49,  &c.),  the  inference  is  mani-  i  *•  ^^  *>•-
fest,  that,  since  the  establishment  of  political  societies,  a  right,  J^°^  ^°^^
80  dangerous  in  its  exercise,  no  longer  remains  with  private  reign  poweit
persons  except  in  those  rencounters  where  society  cannot  pro-  (137)
tect  or  defend  them.  In  the  bosom  of  society,  the  public
authority  decides  all  the  disputes  of  the  citizens,  represses
violence,  and  checks  every  attempt  to  do  ourselves  justice
with  our  own  hands.  If  a  private  person  intends  to  prosecute
his  right  against  the  subject  of  a  foreign  power,  he  may  apply
to  the  sovereign  of  his  adversary,  or  to  the  magistrates  in-
vested with  the  public  authority  :  and  if  he  is  denied  justice
by  them,  he  must  have  recourse  to  his  own  sovereign,  who  is
obliged  to  protect  him.  It  would  be  too  dangerous  to  allow
every  citizen  the  liberty  of  doing  himself  justice  against  for-
eigners ;  as,  in  that  case,  there  would  not  be  a  single  member
of  the  state  who  might  not  involve  it  in  war.  And  how  could
peace  be  preserved  between  nations,  if  it  were  in  the  power
of  every  private*  individual  to  disturb  it?  A  right  of  so
momentous  a  nature, — ^the  right  of  judging  whether  the  na-
tion has  real  grounds  of  complaint,  whether  she  is  authorized
to  employ  force,  and  justifiable  in  taking  up  arms^  whether
prudence  will  admit  of  such  a  step,  and  whether  the  welfare
of  the  state  requires  it, — that  right,  I  say,  can  belong  only
to  the  body  of  the  nation,  or  to  the  sovereign,  her  repre-
sentative. It  is  doubtless  one  of  those  rights,  without  which
there  can  be  no  salutary  government,  and  which  are  therefore
called  rights  of  majesty  (Book  I.  §  45).

Thus  the  sovereign  power  alone  is  possessed  of  authority
to  make  war.  But,  as  the  different  rights  which  constitute
this  power,  originally  resident  in  the  body  of  the  nation,  may
be  separated  or  limited  according  to  the  will  of  the  nation
(Book  I.  §  31  and  45),  it  is  from  the  particular  constitution
of  each  state,  that  we  are  to  learn  where  the  power  resides,
that  is  authorized  to  make  war  in  the  name  of  the  society  at
large.  The  kings  of  England,  whose  power  is  in  other  re-  [  293  j
spects  so  limited,  have  the  right  of  making  war  and  peace.*
Those  of  Sweden  have  lost  it.  The  brilliant  but  ruinous  ex-
ploits of  Charles  XII.  suflSciently  warranted  the  states  of
that  kingdom  to  reserve  to  themselves  a  right  of  such  im-
portance to  their  safety.

(137)  The  right  of  declaring  war  is,  in  itself. But  as  a  king  of  England '  *

by  his  prerogati^ei  vested  in  the  king  cannot,  without the concurrence of

of  Uie  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  parliament,  either  raise  money  or  com-

and  Ireland. Bro.  Ab.  tit.  Denizen,  pi.  pel  his  subjects  to  take  up  arms,  his

20. The  i-hip  IJoop,  per  Sir  W.  Scott,  1  right  of  making  war  is,  in  fact,  but  a

Rob.  R.  196,  post,  432. — G. {And,  by  slender  prerogative,  unless  the  j>arlia-

'iie  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  ment  second him  with  supplies. — Ed.

in  Congress. Art.  1,  g  8. }  1797.

*  I  here  speak  of  the  right  considered

50  zn


293  OF  THE INSTRUMENTS OF WAR, ETC.

BOOK  iiL  War  18  either  defensive  or  offensive.  He  who  t^kes  up
^^^^'  '•  arms  to  repel  the  attack  of  an  enemy,  carries  on  a  defensive
2  5.  Dofen-  War.  He  who  is  foremost  in  taking  up  arms,  and  attacks  a
sive  and  of-  nation  that  lived  in  peace  with  him,  wages  offensive  war.
fensive  war.  Q^j^g  object  of  a  defensive  war  is  very  simple  ;  it  is  no  other
than  self  defence :  in  that  of  offensive  war  there  is  as  great
a  variety  as  in  the  multifarious  concerns  of  nations  ;  but,  in
general,  it  relates  either  to  the  prosecution  of  some  rights,  or
to  safety.  We  attack  a  nation  with  a  view  either  to  obtain
something  to  which  we  lay  claim,  to  punish  her  for  an  injury
she  has  done  us,  or  to  prevent  one  which  she  is  preparing  to
do,  and  thus  avert  a  danger  with  which  she  seems  to  threaten
us.  I  do  not  here  speak  of  the  justice  of  war : — that  shall
make  the  subject  of  a  particular  chapter : — all  I  here  propose
is  to  indicate,  in  general,  the  various  objects  for  which  a  na-
tion takes  up  arms — objects  which  may  furnish  lawful  reasons,
or  unjust  pretences,  but  which  are  at  least  susceptible  of  a
colour  of  right.  I  do  not,  therefore,  among  the  objects  of
offensive  war,  set  down  conquest,  or  the  desire  of  invading
the  property  of  others :,  views  of  that  nature,  destitute  even
of  any  reasonable  pretext  to  countenance  them,  do  not  con-
stitute the  object  of  regular  warfare,  but  of  robbery,  which
we  shall  consider  in  its  proper  place.


CHAP.  n.  CHAP. II.


OF  THE  INSTRUMENTS  OP  WAR, — THE  RAISING  OP  TROOPS,  &C.,
— ^THEIR  COMMANDERS,  OR  THE  SUBORDINATE  POWERS  IX
WAR.  (138)

{  e.  Instru-  THE  sovereign  is  the  real  author  of  war,  which  is  carried
menteof  on  in  his  name,  and  by  his  order.  The  troops,  officers,
soldiers,  and,  in  general,  all  those  by  whose  agency  the  sove-
reign makes  war,  are  only  instruments  in  his  hands.  They
execute  his  will  and.  not  their  own.  The  arms,  and  all  the
apparatus  of  things  used  in  war,  are  instruments  of  an  in-
ferior order.  For  the  decision  of  questions  that  will  occur
in  the  sequel,  it  is  of  importance  to  determine  precisely  what
are  the  things  which  belong  to  war.  Without  entering  here
into  a  minute  detail,  we  shall  only  observe  that  whatever  is
peculiarly  used  in  waging  war,  is  to  be  classed  among  the


(138)  What  are  instniments  of  war,  le  croit  vulgairement,  Tart  de  detrairt

or  contraband,  and  of  the  prohibitions  mals  Vart  de  paralytr  des forces  d«

respecting  them,  as  regards  neutral  com-  Tennemi. Cours le Droit Pubtie. —

xneroe,  see  Chitt/s  L.  N.  119  to  128 ;  1  Paris,  1830 ;  torn.  2,  pages  85,  86,  A  Id.

Chitty's Commercial  Law,  445  to  449.  406. — C.
L'art  de  la  gaene  n'est  pas  ainsi  qu'on
S94


OP  THE  INSTRUMENTS OP  WAR, ETC.  298

instruments  of  war ;  and  things  which  are  equally  used  at  all book  m.
times,  such  as  provisions,  belong  to  peace,  unless  it  be  in  cer- ^'^^-  "•
tain  particular  junctures,  when  those  things  appear  to  be
specially  destined  for  the  support  of  war. Arms  of  all  kinds,
artillery,  gun-powder,  salt-petre  and  sulphur  of  which  it  is
composed,  ladders,  gabions,  tools  and  all  other  implements  [  294  ]
for  sieges,  materials  for  building  ships  of  war,  tents,  soldiers'
clothes,  &c. :  these  always  belong  to  war.

As  war  cannot  be  carried  on  without  soldiers,  it  is  evident  J  7.  Right
that  whoever  has  the  right  of  making  war,  has  also  naturally  of  lerying
that  of  raising  troops.  The  latter,  therefore,  belongs  likewise  ff^^'
to  the  sovereign  (§  4),  and  is  one  of  the  prerogatives  of  ma-
jesty (Book  I.  §  45).  The  power  of  levying  troops,  or  rais-
ing an  army,  is  of  too  great  consequence  in  a  state,  to  be
intrusted  to  any  other  than  the  sovereign.  The  subordinate
authorities  are  not  invested  with  it ;  they  exercise  it  only  by
order  or  coipmission  from  the  sovereign.  But  it  i^  not  always
necessary  that  they  should  have  an  express  order  for  the
purpose.  On  those  urgent  exigencies  which  do  not  allow
time  to  wait  for  the  supreme  order,  the  governor  of  a  pro-
vince, or  the  commandant  of  a  town,  may  raise  troops  for
the  defence  of  the  town  or  province  committed  to  their  care :
and  this  they  do  by  virtue  of  the'  power  tacitly  given  them
by  their  commission  in  cases  of  this  nature.

I  say  that  this  important  power  is  the  appendage  of  sove-
reignty ;  it  makes  a  part  of  the  supreme  authority.  But  wo
have  already  seen  that  those  rights  which  together  constitute
the  sovereign  power,  may  be  divided  (Book  I.  §§  31,  45),  if
such  be  the  will  of  the  nation.  It  may  then  happen  that  a
nation  does  not  intrust  her  chief  with  a  right  so  dangerous  to
her  liberty  as  that  of  raising  and  supporting  troops,  or  at
least  that  she  limits  the  exercise  of  it,  by  making  it  depend
on  the  consent  of  her  representatives.  The  king  of  England,
who  has  the  right  of  making  war,  has  also,  indeed,  that  of
granting  commissions  for  raising  troops  ;  but  he  cannot  com-
pel any  person  to  enlisty  nor,  without  the  concurrence  of  par-
liament, keep  an  army  on  foot.  (140)

Every  citizen  is  bound  to  %erve  ana  defend  the  state  as  far  as  j  g.  Oblig*.
he  is  capable.  (140) Society  cannot  otherwise  be  maintained ;  Uon  of  the
and  this  concurrence  for  the  common  defence  is  one  of  the  °^^^^^'  ^r
principal  objects  of  every  political  association. Every  man  ^40^*"

(139)  But  semble,  that  ftnoientlj  the  346 ;  2  Camp.  320,  and  see  Barring-
king  might  press  men  to  serve  on  land  ton's  Observations  on  Ancient  Statutes,
as  soldiers.  Barrington's  Observations  334,  5  edit ;  1  Bla.  Com.  420,  n.  13.  It
on  Ancient  Statutes,  334.  The  right  should  seem  that  every  passenger  on
of  pressing  men  to  serve  in  the  JViavy  board  a  merchant  ship  is  bound  to
constitutes  an  exception.  Its  legality  assist  in  her  defence ;  and  if  he  reflise,
cannot  now  be  effectually  disputed,  per  he  may  be  confined  until  all  danger  from
Lord  Mansfield,  King  v.  Jubbt,  Oowp.  the  attack  has  subsided.  Boyce  T.
517^;  per  Lord  Kenyon,  6  Term  R.  Bailiff,  1  Campb.  60. — C.
874;  9  Easty  466;  5  East,  477;  14  Eait»  (140)  See  note  (139)  anie.

395


294  OF  THE  INSTRUMENTS OF  WAR, ETC.

BOOK  m. capable  of  carrying  arms  should  take  them  up  at  the  first
cHAP^ji^  QYdeT  of  him  who  has  the  power  of  making  war.
^  y Eniut- In  former  times,  and  especially  in  small  states,  immediately
ing  or  rais-  q^  ^  declaration  of  war,  every  man  became  a  soldier ; the
ingo  troops.  ^^q\q  community  took  up  arms,  and  engaged  in  the  war.  Soon
after,  a  choice  was  made,  and  armies  were  formed  of  picked
men, — the  remainder  of  the  people  pursuing  their  usual  occu-
pations. At  present,  the  use  of  regular  troops  is  almost
everywhere adopted, especially  in powerful states. The
public  authority  raises  soldiers,  distributes  them  into  different
bodies  under  the  command  of  generals  and  other  oflScers,  and
keeps  them  on  foot  as  long  as  it  thinks  necessary. As  every
citizen  or  subject  is  bound  to  serve  the  state,  the  sovereign
has  a  right  to  enlist  whom  he  pleases. But  he  ought  to
choose  such  only  as  are  fit  for  the  occupation  of  war ;  and  it
is  highly  proper  that  he  should,  as  far  as  possible,  confine
his  choice  to  volunteers,  who  enlist  without  compulsion.
2  10. Who- No  person  is  naturally  exempt  from  taking  up  arms  in  de-
ther  there fence  of  the  State, — the  obligation  of  every  member  of  society
em*tion^^' ^®^^S  *^®  same. Those  alone  are  excepted, who  are  in-
from  carry-  Capable  of  handling  arms,  or  supporting  the  fatigues  of  war.
Jng  arms. This  is  the  reason  why  old  men,  children,  and  women  are  ex-
[  295  ]  empted. Although  there  be  some  women  who  are  equal  to
men  in  strength  and  courage,  such  instances  are  not  usual;
and  rules  must  necessarily  be  general,  and  derived  from  the
ordinary  course  of  things. Besides,  women  are  necessary  for
other  services  in  society ;  and,  in  short,  the  mixture  of  both
sexes  in  armies  would  be  attended  with  too  many  inconveniences.
A  good  government  should,  as  far  as  possible,  so  employ
all  the  citizens,  and  distribute  posts  and  employments  in  such
manner,  that  the  state  may  be  most  effectually  sersxd  in  all
its  affairs. Therefore,  when  not  urged  by  necessity,  it  should
exempt  from  military  service  all  those  who  are  employed  in
stations  useful  or  necessary  to  society. Upon  this  ground,
magistrates are usually  exempted, — their  whole time not
being  too  much  for  the  administration  of  justice  and  the
maintenance  of  order.

The  clergy  cannot  naturally,  and,  as  matter  of  right,  arro-
gate to  themselves  any  peculiar  exemption.  To  defend  one's
country  is  an  action  not  unworthy  of  the  most  sacred  hands.
That  article  of  the  canon  law  which  forbids  ecclesiastics  to
shed  blood,  is  a  convenient  device  to  exempt  from  personal
danger  those  men  who  are  often  so  zealous  to  fan  the  flame
of  discord  and  excite  bloody  wars.  Indeed,  for  the  same  rea-
sons which  we  have  above  alleged  in  favour  of  magistrates,
an  exemption  from  bearing  arms  should  be  allowed  to  such
of  the  clergy  as  are  really  useful, — ^to  thosewho  are  employed
in  teaching  religion,  governing  the  church,  and  celebrating
the  public  worship.*

*  I'ormerly  bishops  went  to  wax  in  yirtae  of  their  fiefs,  and  led  ?rith  them
3»6


OF  THB  INSTRUMENTS  OP  WAR, ETC.  295

But  those  immense  multitudes  of  useless  monks  and  friars,  book  m.
—those  drones,  who,  under  pretence  of  dedicating  themselves  ^^^^'  "'
to  God,  dedicate  themselves  in  fact  to  sloth  and  effeminacy, —
by  what  right  do  they  pretend  to  a  prerogative  that  is  ruinous
to  the  state  ?  And  if  the  prince  exempts  them  from  military
service,  is  he  not  guilty  of  injustice  to  the  other  members,  on
whom  he  thus  throws  the  whole  burthen  ?  I  do  not  here
mean  to  advise  a  sovereign  to  fill  his  armies  with  monks,  but
gradually  to  diminish  a  useless  class  of  men,  by  depriving
them  of  injurious  and  ill-founded  privileges.  History  men-
tions a  martial  bishop*  whose  weapon  was  a  club,  with  which  [  296  ]
he  knocked  down  the  enemy,  to  avoid  incurring  the  censure
of  the  canon  law  by  shedding  their  blood.  It  would  be
much  more  reasonable,  when  monks  are  exempted  from  carry-
ing arms,  that  they  should  be  employed  in  the  work  as  pioneers,
and  thus  made  to  alleviate  the  toil  of  the  soldiers.  They  have,
on  many  occasions,  zealously  undertaken  the  task  in  cases
of  necessity.  I  could  mention  more  than  one  famous  siege
where  monks  have  usefully  served  in  defence  of  their  country.
When  the  Turks  besieged  Malta,  the  ecclesiastics,  the  women,
the  very  children,  all,  according  to  their  respective  strength
or  capacity,  contributed  to  that  glorious  defence,  which  baffled
the  utmost  efforts  of  the  Ottoman  empire.

There  is  another  class  of  idle  drones,  whose  exemption  is
a  still  more  glaring  abuse, — I  mean  those  swarms  of  useless
footmen  who  crowd  the  dwellings  of  the  great  and  the  wealthy,
— and  who,  by  the  very  nature  of  their  employment,  are  them-
selves corrupted  in  displaying  the  luxury  of  their  masters.

Among  the  Romans,  while  every  citizen  took  his  turn  to  ?  ii. SoU
serve  in  the  army,  their  service  was  gratuitous. But  when  a  ^®"'  P*y
choice  is  made,  and  standing  armies  are  kept  on  foot,  the  state  ^^  ^^^^''
is  bound  to  pay  them,  as  no  individual  is  under  an  obligation
to  perform  more  than  his  quota  of  the  public  service :  and  if
the  ordinary  revenues  are  not  sufficient  for  the  purpose,  the
deficiency  must  be  provided  for  by  taxation. It  is  but  rea-
sonable that  those  who  do  not  serve  should  pay  their  defenders.

them  their  vassals.  The  Danish  bishops  the  attack  of  the  pass  of  Snsa.  This  in
were  not  inattentive  to  a  function  which  an  abuse  which  Uie  church  very  justly
pleased  them  better  than  the  peaceful  opposes.  A  bishop  makes  a  better  ap-
cares  of  episcopacy.  The  famous  Ab-  pearance  in  his  proper  station,  m  his
salom,  bishop  of  Roschild,  and  after-  diocese,  than  in  the  army;  and,  at
wards  archbishop  of  Lunden,  was  the  present,  sovereigns  are  in  no  want  of
principal  general  of  king  Waldemar  I.  generals  and  officers,  who  wiU  perform
And  since  the  use  of  regular  troops. has  more  useful  services  thim  can  be  ex-
superseded  that  feudal  service,  there  pected  from  churchmen.  In  shorty  let
have  not  been  wanting  some  martial  every  person  keep  to  his  vocation.  All
prelates  who  eagerly  courted  the  com-  I  dispute  with  the  clergy,  is  their  ex-
mand  of  armies.  The  cardinal  De  la  emption  as  matter  of  right  and  in  cases
Valette,  and  Sourdis,  archbishop  of  of  necessity. — Ed.  1797.
Boardeauz,  appeared  in  ajrms  under  the  *  A  bishop  of  Beauvais,  under  Philip
ministry  of  cardinal  Richelieu,  who  also  Augustus.  He  fought  at  the  battle  of
acted  himself  in  a  military  capacity  at  Bouvines.

2t  397


296  OF  THE  INSTRUMKNTS  OF  WAR, ETC.


BOOK  in. When  the  soldier  is  not  in  the  field,  he  must  necessarilj  be
J^^i.—  provided  with  quarters. The  burthen,  in  such  case,  natnrallj
fails  on  housekeepers :  but  as  that  is  attended  with  many  in-
conveniences, and  proves  very  distressing  to  the  citizens,  it
becomes  a  good  prince,  or  a  wise  and  equitable  government,
to  ease  them  of  it  as  far  as  possible. In  this  particular,  the
king  of  France  has  made  magnificent  and  ample  prorision  in
many  towns,  by  the  erection  of  barracksfor  the  accommodation
of  the  garrison.
;  12. Hob- The  asylums  prepared  for  indigent  soldiers  and ofBcers
pitaisfor ^Jjq  are  grown  gray  in  the  service,  and  whom  toil  or  the
"*^  enemy's  sword  has  rendered  ilicapable  of  providing  for  their

own  subsistence,  may  be  considered  as  part  of  the  military  pay.
In  France  and  England,  magnificent  establishments  have  been
made  in  favour  of  invalids,  which,  while  they  discharge  a  debt
of  a  sacred  nature,  do  honour  to  the  sovereign  and  the  nation.
The  care  of  those  unfortunate  victims  of  war  is  the  indis-
pensable duty  of  every  state,  in  proportion  to  its  ability.
It  is  repugnant,  not  only  to  humanity,  but  to  the  strictest
justice,  that  generous  citizens,  heroes  who  have  shed  their
blood  for  the  safety  of  their  country,  should  be  left  to  perish
with  want,  or  unworthily  forced  to  beg  their  bread.  The
honourable  maintenance  of  such  persons  might  very  properly
be  imposed  upon  rich  convents  and  large  ecclesiastical  benefices.
Nothing  can  be  more  just  than  that  those  citizens  who  avoid
[  297  ]  all  the  dangers  of  war,  should  bestow  part  of  their  riches  for

the  relief  of  their  valiant  defenders.
1 13. Mer- Mercenary  sojdiers  are  foreigners  voluntarily  engaging  to
tenary  boI- serve  the  State  for^money,  or  a  stipulated  pay. As  they  owe  •
^.**""  no  service  to  a  sovereign  whose  subjects  they  are  not,  the

advantages  he  offers  them  are  their  sole  motive.  By  en-
listing, they  incur  the  obligation  to  serve  him ;  and  the  prince,
on  his  part,  promises  them  certain  conditions,  which  are  settled
in  the  articles  of  enlistment.  Those  articles,  being  the  rule
and  measure  of  the  respective  obligations  and  rights  of
the  contracting  parties,  are  to  be  religiously  observed.
The  complaints  of  some  French  historians  against  the
Swiss  troops,  who  on  several  occasions  formerly  refused
to  march  against  the  enemy,  and  even  withdrew  from  the
service,  because  they  were  not  paid, — those  complaints,  I
say,  are  equally  ridiculous  and  unjust.  Why  should  the
articles  of  enlistment  be  more  strongly  binding  on  one  of  the
parties  than  on  the  other?  Whenever  the  prince  fails  to
perform  what  he  has  promised,  the  foreign  soldiers  are  dis-
charged from  any  further  duty  to  him.  I  own  it  would  be
ungenerous  to  forsake  a  prince  who,  without  any  fault  on  his
own  part,  is  by  accident  alone  rendered  for  a  while  unable
to  make  good  his  payments.  There  may  even  be  occa^sions
when  such  an  inflexibility  on  the  part  of  the  soldier  would  be,
if  not  contrary  to  strict  justice,  at  least  very  repugnant  to

398


OP  THE  INSTRUMENTS  OP  WAR, ETC.  297

equity.  But  this  was  never  the  case  with  the  Switzers :  they  book  m.
never  were  known  to  quit  the  service  on  the  first  failure  of  ^^^^'  "*■
payment ;  and  when  they  perceived  the  good  intentions  of  a
sovereign  labouring  under  a  real  inability  to  satisfy  them,
their  patience  and  zeal  always  supported  them  under  such
difficulties.  Henry  the  Fourth  owed  them  immense  sums:
yet  they  did  not,  in  his  greatest  necessities,  abandon  him ;
and  that  hero  found  the  nation  equally  generous  as  brave.
I  here  speak  of  the  Switzers,  because,  in  fact,  those  above
alluded  to  were  often  mere  mercenaries.  But  a  distinction
is  to  be  made  between  troops  of  this  kind  and  those  Switzers
who  at  present  serve  different  powers,  and  with  the  permission
of  their  sovereign,  and  in  virtue  of  alliances  subsisting  between
those  powers  and  the  Helvetic  body,  or  some  particular  can-
ton. The  latter  are  real  auxiliaries,  though  paid  by  the  sove-
reigns whom  they  serve.

Much  has  been  said  on  the  question — ^Whether  the  pro-
fession of  a  mercenary  soldier  be  lawful  or  not  ?  Whether
individuals  may,  for  money  or  any  other  reward,  engage  to
serve  a  foreign  prince  in  his  wars  ?  This  question  does  not
to  me  appear  very  difficult  to  be  solved.  Those  who-  enter
into  such  engagements  without  the  express  or  tacit  consent
of  their  sovereign,  offend  against  their  duty  as  citizens.  But
if  their  sovereign  leaves  them  at  liberty  to  follow  tjjeir  in-
clination for  a  military  life,  they  are  perfectly*  free  in  that
respect.  Now,  every  free  man  may  join  whatever  society  he
pleases,  according  as  he  finds  it  most  to  his  advantage.  He  [  298  ]
may  make  its '  cause  his  own,  and  espouse  its  quarrels.  He
becomes  in  some  measure,  at  least  for  a  time,  a  member  of
the  state  in  whose  service  he  engages :  and  as  an  officer  is
commonly  at  liberty  to  quit  the  service  when  he  thinks
proper,  and  the  private  soldier  at  the  expiration  of  his  en-
gagement,— if  that  state  embark  in  a  war  which  is  evidently
unjust,  the  foreigner  may  quit  its  service.  And  the  mer-
cenary soldier,  having  now  learned  the  art  of  war,  has
rendered  himself  more  capable  of  serving  his  country,  if  ever
she  require  his  assistance.  This  last  consideration  will  fur-
nish us  with  an  answer  to  a  question  proposed  on  this  head —
Whether  the  sovereign  can  with  propriety  permit  his  subjects
to  serve  foreign  powers  indiscriminately  for  money  ?  He  can
for  this  simple  reason — that  his  subjects  will  thus  learn  an
art,  of  which  a  thorough  knowledge  is  both  useful  and  neces-
sary. The  tranquillity,  the  profound  peace  which  Switzerland
has  so  long  enjoyed  in  the  midst  of  all  the  commotions  and
wars  which  have  agitated  Europe, — ^that  long  repose  would
soon  become  fatal  to  her,  did  not  her  citizens,  by  serving
foreign  princes,  qualify  themselves  for  the  operations  of  war,
ind  keep  alive  their  martial  spirit.

Mercenary  soldiers  enlist  voluntarily. The  sovereign  has  ?  14. Whai
no  right  to  compel  foreigners :  he  must  not  even  employ  strata-  ia  to  bo  oV-

$99


298  ,  OF  THE  INSTRUMENTS OF  WAR, ETC.

BOOK  in. gem  or  artifice,  in  order  to  induce  them  to  engage  in  a  cob-
,  ^^^^'  "• tract,  which  like  all  others,  should  be  founded  on  candour  and

good  faith,
theb  enHat- '^^  ^^^  right  of  levying  soldiers  belongs  solely  to  the  nation
ment.  or  the  sovereign  (§  7),  no  person  must  attempt  to  enlist  soldiers,

^  16. En- in  a  foreign  country,  without  the  permission  of  the  sovereign ;
listing  in ^nd,  even  with  that  permission,  none  but  volunteers  are  to  be
oomaSei. onlisted ;  for  the  service  of  their  country  is  out  of  the  question
here ;  and  no  sovereign  has  a  right  to  give  or  sell  his  subjects
to  another.

The  man  who  undertakes  to  enlist  soldiers  in  a  foreign
country,  without  the  sovereign's  permission, — and,  in  gene-
ral, whoever entices away  the  subjects  of  another state,
violates  one  of  the  most  sacred  rights  of  the  prince  and  the
nation. This  crime is  distinguished by  the  name  of  kid-
napping, or  man-stealing,  and  is  punished  with  the  utmost
severity  in  every  well-regulated  state. Foreign recruiters
are  hanged  without  mercy,  and  with  great  justice. It  is  nut
presumed  that  their  sovereign  has  ordered  them  to  commit  a
crime ;  and,  supposing  even  that  they  had  received  such  an
order,  they  ought  not  to  have  obeyed  it, — their  sovereign
• having  no  right  to  command  what  is  contrary  to  the  law  of
nature. It  is  not,  I  say,  presumed  that  these  recruiters  act
by  order  of  their  sovereign ;  and  with  respect  to  such  of  them
as  have  practised  seduction  only,  it  is  generally  thought  suffi-
cient to  punish  them  when  they  can  be  detected  and  caught :
if  they  have  use(l  violence,  and  made  their  escape,  it  is  usual
to  demand  a  surrender  of  the  delinquents,  and  to  claim  the
persons  they  have  carried  off. But  if  it  appears  that  they
[  299  ]  acted by  order,  such  a  proceeding in  a  foreign sovereign
is  justly  considered  as  an  injury,  and  as  a  sufficient  cause
for declaring  war against him,  unless he makes suitable
reparation.
{ 16. ObU- All  soldiers,  natives  or  foreigners,  are  to  take  an  oath  to
gation  of gerve  faithfully,  and  not  desert  the  service. This  is  no  more
soldiers. ^^^^  ^j^^^^  ^Yiqj  are  already  obliged  to,  the  former  as  subjects,
the  latter  by  their  engagement;  but  their  fidelity  is  of  so
great  importance  to  the  state,  that  too  many  precautions  cannot
be  taken  for  rendering  it  secure. Deserters  merit  severe  and
exemplary  punishment ;  and  the  sovereign  may,  if  he  thinks
it  necessary,  annex  the  penalty  of  death  to  desertion. The
emissaries  who  solicit  them  to  desert  are  far  more  guilty
than  the  recruiters  mentioned  in  the  preceding  section.
{  17. Mill- Good  order  and  subordination,  so  useful  in  all  places,  are
toryiaws. nowhere so necessary as in the army. The sovereign
should  exactly  specify  and  determine  the  functions,  duties,
and  rights  of  military  men, — of  soldiers,  officers,  commanders
of  corps,  and  generals. He  should  regulate  and  fix  the  au-
thority of  commanders  in  all  the  gradations  of  rank, — the
punishments  to  be  inflicted  on  offenders, — ^the  form  of  trials,

400


OF  THE  INSTBUMENTS  OF  WAR, ETC.  299

&c. The  laws  and  ordinances  relative  to  these  several  par- book  in.
ticnlars  form  the  military  code.  chap,  n.

Those  regulations,  whose  particular  tendency  is  to  main-
tain order  among  the  troops,  and  to  enahle  them  to  perform
their  military  service  with  advantage  to  the  state,  constitute  ?  i^. Miii-
what  is  called  military  discipline. This  is  of  the  highest  ^*7  ^^®'"
importance. The  Switzers  were  the  first  among  the  modern '*^°^*
nations  that  revived  it  in  its  ancient  vigour. It  was  a  good
discipline,  added  to  the  valour  of  a  free  people,  that  produced,
even  in  the  infancy  of  their  republic,  those  brilliant  achieve-
ments which  astonished  all  Europe. Machiavel  says  that  the
Switzers  are  the  masters  of  all  Europe  in  the  art  of  war.*
In  our  times,  the  Prussians  have  shown  what  may  be  expected
from  good  discipline  and  assiduous  exercise :  soldiers,  collected
from  all  quarters,  have,  by  the  force  of  habit,  and  the  in-
fluence of  command,  performed  all  that  could  be  expected
from  the  most  zealous  and  loyal  subjects.

Every  military  oflBcer,  from  the  ensign  to  the  general,  en-
joys the  rights  and  authority  assigned  him  by  the  sovereign  ;
and  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  in  this  respect,  is  known  by  his  ?  i^-  S^lbo^
express  declarations,  contained  either  in  the  commissions  he  ^°**®  ^'^'
conters  or  in  the  military  code,— or  is,  by  fair  deduction,  in-  ®"  "*  ^^V'
ferred  from  the  nature  of  the  functions  assigned  to  each
offioer ;  for  every  man  who  is  intrusted  with  an  employment  is
presumed  to  be  invested  with  all  the  powers  necessary  to
enable  him  to  fill  his  station  with  propriety,  and  successfully
discharge  the  several  functions  of  his  office.

Thus,  the  commission  of  a  commander  in  chief,  when  it  is
simple  and  unlimited,  gives  him  an  absolute  power  over  the
army — a  right  to  march  it  whither  he  thinks  proper,  to  un-
dertake such  operations  as  he  finds  conducive  to  the  service
of  the  state,  &c.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  powers  of  a
general  are  often  limited ;  but  the  example  of  Marshal  Turenne
sufficiently  shows,  that,  when  the  sovereign  is  certain  of  having  [  300  ]
made  a  good  choice,  the  best  thing  he  can  do  in  this  respect
is  to  give  the  general  an  unlimited  power.  Had  the  opera-
tions of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  depended  on  the  directions
of  the  cabinet,  there  is  little  probability  that  all  his  campaigns
would  have  been  crowned  with  such  distinguished  success.

When  a  governor  is  besieged  in  the  place  where  he  com-
mands, and  all  communication  with  his  sovereign  is  cut  off,
that  very  circumstance  confers  on  him  the  whole  authority
of  the  state,  so  far  as  respects  the  defence  of  the  town  and
the  safety  of  the  garrison.

These  particulars  merit  the  utmost  attention,  as  they  fur-
nish a  principle  for  determining  what  the  several  commanders,
who  are  the  subordinate  or  inferior  powers  in  war,  may  exe-
cute with  sufficient  authority. Exclusive  of  the  consequences

*  Disc,  on  JAvj.
M  2i2  401  >


•

500  OF  THE  INSTRUMENTS  OF  WAR,  ETC.


mises  bi'
the  80


BOOK  ni. which  may  be  deduced  from  the  very  nature  of  their  employ
^°^*''  "• ments,  we  are  likewise  to  consider  the  general practice  and
established  usage  in  this  respect. If  it  be  a  known  fact,  that,
m  the  service  of  a  particular  nation,  officers  of  a  certain  rank
have  been  uniformly  invested  with  such  or  such  powers,  it
may  reasonably  be  presumed  that  the  person  we  are  engaged
with  is  furnished  with  the  same  powers.
i  20. How Every  promise  made  by  any  of  the  subordinate  powers,  by
their  pro- any  commander  within  his  department,  in  conformity  to  the
terms  of  his  commission  and  to  the  authority  which  be  natii-
rally  derives  from  his  office  and  the  functions  intrusted  to  his
jare, — every  such  promise,  I  say,  is,  for  the  reasons  above
alleged,  made  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  sove-
reign, and  equally  obligatory  on  him  as  if  he  had  himself  per-
sonally made  it. Thus,  a  governor  capitulates  for  the  town
which  he  commands,  and  for  the  garrison ;  and  what  he  has
promised,  the  sovereign  cannot  invalidate. In  the  last  war,
the  general  who  commanded  the  French  at  Lintz,  engaged  to
march  back  his  troops  on  this  side  the  Rhine. Governors  of
towns  have  often  promised  that,  for  a  limited  time,  their  gar-
risons should  not  carry  arms  against  the  enemy  with  whom
they  capitulated :  and  these  capitulations  have  always  been
faithfully  observed.
;  21. In But,  if  a  subordinate  power  allows  himself  a  greater  lati-
what  cases tude,  and  exceeds the authority  annexed  to  his  oflSce,  hi?
*  \b^  ^hid P^^^^s®  becomes  no  more  than  a  private  engagement,  or  what
only  them- IS  Called  spo'^sio^  of  which  we  have  already  treated. (Book
•eirea. II.  Chap.  XIV.) This  was  the  case  with  the  Roman  consnk
at  the  FurcsB  Caudinae. They  might,  indeed,  agree  to  deliver
hostages,  and  that  their  army  should  pass  under  the  yoke,
&c.,  but  they  were  not  authorized  to  conclude  a  peace,  as
they  took  care  to  signify  to  the  Samnites.
2  22. Their If  a  subordinate  power  assumes  an  authority  which  he  does
•wumption  not  possess,  and  thus  deceives  the  party  treating  with  him,
of  an  au- though  an  enemy, — ^he  is  naturally  responsible  for  .the  damage
whic/they  caused  by  his  deception,  and  bound  to  make  reparation, I
do  notpos-  say  "  though  an  enemy :"  for  the  faith  of  treaties  is  to  be  ob-
B688.  served  between  enemies,  as  all  men  of  principle  agree,  and  as

we  shall  prove  in  the  sequel. The  sovereign  of  that  fraudn-
[  801  ]  lent  officer  ought  to  punish  him,  and  oblige  him  to  repair  his
fault :  it  is  a  duty  which  the  prince  owes  to  justice,  and  to
his  own  character.
J  23. How Promises  made  by  insubordinate  power  are  obligatory  on
they  bind those  who  are  subject  to  his  control,  and  bind  them  in  every
jheir  in- particular  in  which  he  is  authorized  and  accustomed  to  com-
enora. mand  their  obedience :  for,  with  respect  to  such  particulars,
he  is  vested  with  the  sovereign  authority,  which  his  inferiors
are  bound  to  respect  in  his  person. Thus,  in  a  capitulation,
the  governor  of  a  town  stipulates  and  promises  for  his  garri-
son, and  even  for  the  magistrates  and  citizens^

40?


a?  THB  JXrST  CAtSSS  OF  WAB.  301


CHAP.  ni.

BOOK  m.
OP  THB  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAR.  (141)  chap,  hi,

"WHOEVER  entertains  a  true  idea  of  war, — ^whoever  con- j  24.  War
eiders  its  terrible  effects,  its  destructive  and  unhappy  conse-  o®ver  to  be
quences,  will  readily  agree  that  it  should  never  be  undertaken  ^°1*^^"
without  the  most  cogent  reasons.  Humanity  revolts  against  ^^^y  cogeni
a  sovereign,  who,  without  necessity  or  without  very  powerful  reasons,
reasons,  lavishes  the  blood  of  his  most  faithful  subjects,  and
exposes  his  people  to  the  calamities  of  war,  when  he  has  it  in
his  power  to  maintain  them  in  the  enjoyment  of  an  honour-
able and  salutary  peace.  And  if  to  this  imprudence,  this
want  of  love  for  his  people,  he  moreover  adds  injustice  to-
wards those  he  attacks, — of  how  great- a  crime,  or  rather,  of
what  a  frightful  series  of  crimes,  does  he  not  become  guilty !
Besponsible  for  all  the  misfortunes  which  he  draws  down  o^
his  own  subjects,  he  is  moreover  loaded  with  the  guilt  of  all
those  which  he  inflicts  on  an  innocent  nation.  The  slaughter
of  men,  the  pillage  of  cities,  the  devastation  of  provinces,—
such  is  the  black  catalogue  of  his  enormities.  He  is  respon-
sible to  God,  and  accountable  to  human  nature,  for  every
individual  that  is  killed,  for  every  hut  that  is  burned  down.
The  violences,  the  crimes,  the  disorders  of  every  kind,  atten-
dant on  the  tumult  and  licentiousness  of  war,  pollute  his
conscience,  and  are  set  down  to  his  account,  as  he  is  the  origi-
nal author  of  them  all.  Unquestionable  truths!  alarming
ideas !  which  ought  to  affect  the  rulers  of  nations,  and,  in  all
their  military  enterprises,  inspire  them  with  a  degree  of  cir-
cumspection proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  subject !

Were  men  always  reasonable,  they  would  terminate  their  2  26.  Jnsti*
contests  by  the  arms  of  reason  only: natural  justice  and ^"^^^'y ^®*^
equity  would be their rule, or  their  judge. Force is  a  motive  for
wretched  and  melancholy  expedient  against  those  who  spurn  making
at  justice,  and  refuse  to  listen  to  the  remonstrances  of  reason :  war.
but,  in  short,  it  becomes  necessary  to  adopt  that  mode,  when  [  802  ]
every  other  proves  ineffectual. It  is  only  in  extremities  that
a  just  and  wise  nation,  or  a  good  prince,  has  recourse  to  it,  as
we  have  shown  in  the  concluding  chapter  of  the  second  book.
The  reasons  which  may  determine  him  to  take  such  a  step  are
of  two  classes. Those  of  the  one  class  show  that  he  has  a
right  to  make  war, — that  he  has  just  grounds  for  undertaking
it : — these  are  called  jtistificatort/  reasons. The  others,  found-
ed on  fitness  and  utility,  determine  whether  it  be  expedient
for  the  sovereign  to  undertake  a  war, — ^these  are  called  mo-
tives.

(141)  See  farther,  as  to  what  are,  or to  be  here  appUcable,  pot,  B.  4,  oh.  4»
•re  not,  just  causes  for  rescinding  a {  44,  45,  p.  449.
treaty  of  peace^  and  which  seem  also

4«S


MS  '  09  THB  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAH.


BOOK.  in. The  right  of  employing  force,  or  making  T?ar,  belongs  Xa
CBAP.  in.  na^i^iQpg  jjQ  farther  than  is  necessary  for  their  own  defence,
;  2(. What  and  for  the  maintenance  of  their  rights  (§  3). Now,  if  ariv
ill  in  gene- q^^  attacks  a  nation,  or  violates  her  perfect  rights,  he  d«*5
•auM  of  war.  ^®^  *^  i^y^ry. Then,  and  not  till  then,  that  nation  has  i
right to repel the aggressor,  and  reduce  him to  reason.
Further,  she  has  a  right  to  prevent  the  intended  injury,  wbea
she  sees  herself  threatened  with  it  (Book  11.  §  50). Let  m
then  say  in  general,  that  the  foundation,  or  cause  of  every
just  war  is  injury,  either  already  done  or  threatened To*
justificatory  reasons  for  war  show  that  an  injury  has  been  re-
ceived, or  so  far  threatened  as  to  authorize  a  prevention  of  it
by  arms. It  is  evident,  however,  that  here  the  question  re-
gards the  principal  in  the  war,  and  not  those  who  join  in  it
as  auxiliaries. When,  therefore,  we  would  judge  whether  t
war  be  just,  we  must  consider  whether  he  who  undertakec^  i;
has  in  fact  received  an  injury,  or  whether  he  be  really  threat-
ened with  one. And,  in  order  to  determine  what  is  to  be  cor-
sidered  as  an  injury,  we  must  be  acquainted  with  a  nation's
rights^  properly  so  called, — that  is  to  say,  her  perfect  rights.
These  are  of  various  kinds,  and  very  numerous,  but  may  all
be  referred  to  the  general  heads  of  which  we  have  already
treated,  and  shall  further  treat  in  the  course  of  this  work.
Whatever  strikes  at  these  rights  is  an  injury,  and  a  just  cause
of  war.
1 27 What The  immediate  consequence  of  the  premises  is,  that  if  a  na-
var  u  an- tion  takes  up  arms  when  she  has  received  no  injury,  nor  u
^"^  threatened  with  any,  she  undertakes  an  unjust  war. Those

alone,  to  whom  an  injury  is  done  or  intended,  have  a  right  to
make  war.
1 28. Tho From  the  same  principle  we  shall  likewise  deduce  the  just
object  of and  lawful  object  of  every  war,  which  is,  to  avenge  or  prt-
^"'  vent  injury. To  avenge  signifies  here  to  prosecute  the  repa-

ration of  an  injury,  if  it  be  of  a  nature  to  be  repaired,— or,  if
the  evil  be  irreparable,  to  obtain  a  just  satisfaction, — ^and  also
to  punish  the  offender,  if  requisite,  with  a  view  of  providing
for  our  future  safety. The  right  to  security  authorizes  us  to
do  all  this  (Book  II.  §§  49 — 52^. We  may  therefore  distinct-
ly point  out,  as  objects  of  a  lawful  war,  the  three  follow-
ing:— 1.  To  recover  what  belongs,  or  is  due  tons.' 2.  To
provide  for  our  future  safety  by  punishing  the  aggressor  or
offender.  3.  To  defend  ourselves,  or  to  protect  ourselves  from
S03  ]  injury,  by  repelling  unjust  violence. The  two  first  are  the
objects  of  an  offensive,  the  third  of  a  defensive  war. Camil-
\  when  on  the  point  of  attacking  the  Gauls,  concisely  set
h  to  his  soldiers  all  the  subjects  on  which  war  can  be
nded or  justified — omnia, quoe  defendij repetique, ^
ifa%  sit*


*  lAvy,  lib.  T.  oap.  49.


OP  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OP  WAR.  MS


As  the  nation,  or  her  ruler,  ought,  in  every  undertaking, book  m.

not  only  to  respect  justice,  but  also  to  keep  in  view  the  ad-  -SE^

vantage  of  the  state,  it  is  necessary  that  proper  and  com-  f  29. Both
mendable  motives  should  concur  with  the  justificatory  reasons,  ^^^^^^J^'J
to  induce  a  determination  to  embark  in  a  war. These  rea-  proper  mo-
sons  show  that  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  take  up  arms,  tivea  requi-
that  he  has  just  cause  to  do  so. The  proper  motives  show,  sit®  i°  «»-
that  in  the  present  case  it  is  advisable  and  expedient  to  make  ^^^^"**  *
use  of  his  right. These  latter  relate  to  prudence,  as  the
justificatory  reasons  come  under  the  head  of  justice.

I  call  proper  and  commendable  motives  those  derived  from  g  30.  Proper
the  good  of  the  state,  from  the  safety  and  common  advantage  moUvoa.
of  the  citizens.  They  are  inseparable  from  the  justificatory
reasons, — a  breach  of  justice  being  never  truly  advantageous.
Though  an  unjust  war  may  for  a  time  enrich  a  state,  and  ex-
tend her  frontiers,  it  renders  her  odious  to  other  nations,  and
exposes  her  to  the  danger  of  being  crushed  by  them.  Besides,
do  opulence  and  extent  of  dominion  always  constitute  the
happiness  of  states?  Amidst  the  multitude  of  examples
which  might  here  be  quoted,  let  us  confine  our  view  to  that
of  the  Romans.  The  Roman  republic  ruined  herself  by  her
triumphs,  by  the  excess  of  her  conquests  and  power.  Rome,
when  mistress  of'  the  world,  but  enslaved  by  tyrants  and  op-
pressed by  a  military  government,  had  reason  to  deplore
the  success  of  her  arms,  and  to  look  back  with  regret  on
those  happy  times  when  her  power  did  not  extend  beyond  the
bounds  of  Italy,  or  even  when  her  dominion  was  almost  con-
fined within  the  circuit  of  her  walls.

Vicious  motives  are  those  which  have  not  for  their  object  Vicious
the  good  of  the  state,  and  which,  instead  of  being  drawn  from  motives,
that  pure  source^  are  suggested  by  the  violence  of  the  passions.
Such  are  the  arrogant  desire  of  command,  the  ostentation  of
power,  the  thirst  of  riches,  the  avidity  of  conquest,  hatred,
and  revenge.

The  whole  right  of  the  nation,  and  consequently  of  the  j  31. wm
sovereign,  is  derived  from  the  welfare  of  the  state ;  and  by  undertaken
this  rule  it  is  to  be  measured. The  obligation  to  promote  and  "P®°  JJ***
maintain  the  true  welfare  of  the  society  or  state  gives  the  b^t^^oni
nation  a  right  to  take  up  arms  against  him  who  threatens  or  yicioas  mo-
attacks  that  valuable  enjoyment. But  if  a  nation,  on  an  in-  tives.
jury  done  to  her,  is  induced  to  take  up  arms,  not  by  the  ne-  [  304  ])
cessity  of  procuring  a  just  reparation,  but  by  a  vicious  motive,
she  abuses  her  right. The  viciousness  of  the  motive  tarnishes
the  lustre  of  her  arms,  which  might  otherwise  have  shone  in
the  cause  of  justice : — the  war  is  not  undertaken  for  the  law-
ful cause  which  the  nation  had  to  engage  in  it :  that  cause  is
now  no  more  than  a  pretext. As  to  the  sovereign  in  particu-
lar, the  ruler  of  the  nation — what  right  has  he  to  expose  the
safety  of  the  state,  with  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  the  citizens,
to  gra  tify  his  passions  7 It  is  only  for  the  good  of  the  nation

405


304  OF  THE  JUST CAUSES OF  WAK.

BOOK  III. that  the  supreme  power  is  intrusted  to  him ;  and  it  is  wiifc
CHAP,  in^  ^Yx^^  view  that  he  ought  to  exert  it :  that  is  the  object  pr?


scribed  to  him  even  in  his  least  important  measures :  and  hhsll
he  undertake  the  most  important  and  the  most  dan£erc*iL%
from  motives  foreign  or  contrary  to  that  great  end  i  Yrt
nothing  is  more  common  than  such  a  destructive  inversion  (.4
'  views ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that,  on  this  account,  the  jndicic>si
Polybius  gives  the  name  of  causes'^  to  the  motives  on  whirh
war  is  undertaken, — and  of  pretextsf  to  the  justificatory  rea-
sons alleged  in  defence  of  it.  Thus  he  informs  ns  that  the
cause  of  the  war  which  Greece  undertook  against  the  Persiaia
was  the  experience  she  had  had  of  their  weakness,  and  tba:
1  he  pretext  alleged  by  Philip,  or  by  Alexander  after  him,  was
the  desire  of  avenging  the  injuries  which  the  Greeks  had  so
often  suffered,  and  of  providing  for  their  future  safety.
{  32.  Pre-  Let  US,  however,  entertain  a  better  opinion  of  nations  and
texts.  their  rulers. There  are  just  causes  of  war,  real  justificatorr

reasons ;  and  why  should  there  not  be  sovereigns  who  sincere:/
consider  them  as  their  warrant,  when  they  have  besides  rea-
sonable motives  for  taking  up  arms  ?  We  shall  therefore  give
the  name  o{  pretexts  to  those  reasons  alleged  as  justificatory,
but  which  are  so  only  in  appearance,  or  which  are  even  abso-
lutely destitute  of  all  foundation.  The  name  of  pretexts  may
likewise  be  applied  to  reasons  which  are,  in  themselves,  troe
and  well-founded,  but,  not  being  of  suflScient  importance  for
undertaking  a  war,  are  made  use  of  only  to  cover  ambidoia
views,  or  some  other  vicious  motive.  Such  was  the  complaint
of  the  czar  Peter  I.  that  sufficient  honours  had  not  been  paid
him  on  his  passage  through  Riga.  His  other  reasons  for  de-
claring war  against  Sweden  I  here  omit.

Pretexts  are  at  least  a  homage  which  unjust  men  pay  to
justice.  He  who  screens  himself  with  them  shows  that  he
still  retains  some  sense  of  shame.  He  does  not  openij
trample  on  what  is  most  sacred  in  human  society :  he  tacitlj
acknowledges  that  a  flagrant  injustice  merits  the  indignation
of  all  mankind.
i  83.  War  Whoever,  without  justificatory  reasons,  undertakes  a  war
undertaken  merely  from  motives  of  advantage,  acts  without  any  right,

^^^^^  Uff'  ^^^  ^^®  ^^^  ^®  unjust.  And  he,  who,  having  in  reality  just
grounds  for  taking  up  arms,  is  nevertheless  solely  actuated
by  interested  views  in  resorting  to  hostilities,  cannot  indeed
be  charged  with  injustice,  but  he  betrays  a  vicious  disposition:
his  conduct  is  reprehensible,  and  sullied  by  the  badness  of
his  motives.  War  is  so  dreadful  a  scourge,  that  nothing  le^fl
than  manifest  justice,  joined  to  a  kind  of  necessity,  can
authorize  it,  render  it  commendable,  or  at  least  exempt  it  from
reproach.

I S4. Na- Nations  that  are  always  ready  to  take  up  arms  on  any  pros-

*  Airiac Histor.  lib.  iiL  cap.  6.  f  nfo^Mtcf.

406


OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAE  305

pect  of  adyantage,  are  lawless  robbers  :  but  those  who  seem  book  m.
to  delight  in  the  ravages  of  war,  who  spread  it  on  all  sides,  ^^^^'  *"•


without  reasons  or  pretexts,  and  even  without  any  other  mo-  ^^^^  ^^^
tive  than  their  own  ferocity,  are  monsters,  unworthy  the  name  J^^hout  w».
of  men. They  should  be  considered  as  enemies  to  the  human  joq  ot  ap-
race,  in  the  same  manner  as,  in  civil  society,  professed  assas-  parent  mo-
sins  and  incendiaries  are  guilty,  not  only  towards  the  parti-  ^^^^
cular  victims  of  their  nefarious  deeds,  but  also  towards  the
state,  which  therefore  proclaims  them  public  enemies. All
nations  have  a  right  to  join  in  a  confederacy  for  the  purpose
of  punishing  and  even  exterminating  those  savage  nations.
Siich  were  several  German  tribes  mentioned  by  Tacitus —
such  those  barbarians  who  destroyed  the  Roman  empire :  nor
was  it  till  long  after  their  conversion  to  Christianity  that  this
ferocity  wore  off. Such  have  been  the  Turks  and  other  Tar-
tars— Genghis-khan,  Timur  Bee  or  Tamerlane,  who,  like  At-
tila,  were  scourges  employed  by  the  wrath  of  Heaven,  and  who
made  war  only  for  the  pleasure  of  making  it. Such  are,  in  po-
lished ages  and  among  the  most  civilized  nations,  those  supposed
heroes,  whose  supreme  delight  is  a  battle,  and  who  make  war
from  inclination  purely,  and  not  from  love  to  their  country.

Defensive  war  is  just  when  made  against  an  unjust  aggres-  ?  35. How
sor. This  requires  no  proof. Self-defence  against unjust  **®^®?"7®
violence  is  not  only  the  right,  but  the  duty  of  a  nation,  and  or*u^u°"
one  of  her  most  sacred  duties. But  if  the  enemy  who  wages
offensive  war  has  justice  on  his  side,  we  have  no  right  to
make  forcible  opposition ;  and the  defensive  war  then  be-
comes unjust :  for  that  enemy  only  exerts  his  lawful  right : —
he  took  arms  only  to  obtain  justice  which  was  refused  to  him ;
and  it  is  an  act  of  injustice  to  resist  any  one  in  the  exertion
of  his  right.

All  that  remains  to  be  done  in  such  a  case  is,  to  offer  the  i  36. How
invader  a  just  satisfaction. If  he  will  not  be  content  with  ^^  ™*^  ^®"
this, a  nation  gains  one  great  advantage — that  of  having  ^g^^^^^^^
turned  the  balance  of  justice  on  her  own  side;  and  his  hos- offensive
tilities,  now  becoming  unjust,  as  having  no  longer  any  founda-  ^»^  which
tion,  may  very  justly  be  opposed.  f*  ^""^  ^^

The  Samnites,  instigated  by  the  ambition  of  their  chiefs,  ^^
had  ravaged  the  lands  of  the  allies  of  Rome.  When  they
became  sensible  of  their  misconduct,  they  offered  full  repara-
tion for  the  damages,  with  every  reasonable  satisfaction :  but
all  their  submissions  could  not  appease  the  Romans  ;  where-
upon Caius  Pontius,  general  of  the  Samnites,  said  to  his  men,
"  Since  the  Romans  are  absolutely  determined  on  war,  neces-
sity justifies  it  on  our  side;  an  appeal  to  arms  becomes
lawful  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  deprived  of  every  other
resource.'* — Justum  est  helium j  quibus  neceasarium;  et  pia
amuij  quibus  nulla  nisi  in  armis  relinquitur  apes,*

*  Livy,  lib.  ue.  inlt.

407


805  OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAR.

BOOK.  in. In  order  to  estimate  the  justice  of  an  offensive  wan  Ae
CHAP.  III.  i^ature  of  the  subject  for  which  a  nation  takes  up  arm^j  mnst


'^.  ii7. How  ije  first  considered. We  should  be  thoroughly  assured  of  oor
an  offensive  ^x^t^  before  WO  proceed  to  assert  it  in  so  dreadful  a  manner.
in  an  evi- I^i  therefore,  the  question  relates  to  a  thing  which  is  evident-
ient  cause.  Ijr  just,  as  the  recovcry  of  our  property,  the  assertion  of  a
r  306  ]  clear  and  incontestable  right,  or  the  attainment  of  just  satis-
faction for  a  manifest  injury,  and  if  we  cahnot  obtain  justiec
otherwise  than  by  force  of  arms,  offensive  war  becomes  law-
ful. Two  things  are  therefore  necessary  to  render  it  just:
1,  some  right  which  is  to  be  asserted — that  is  to  say,  that  we
be  authorized  to  demand  something  of  another nation : 2,
that  we  be  unable  to  obtain  it  otherwise  than  by  force  of
arms. Necessity  alone  warrants  the  use  of  force. It  is  a
dangerous  and  terrible  resource. Nature,  the  common  pa-
rent of  mankind,  allows  of  it  only  in  cases  of  the  last  ex-
tremity, and  when  all  other  means  fail. It  is  doing  wrong  to
a  nation,  to  make  use  of  violence  against  her,  before  we  know
whether  she  be  disposed  to  do  us  justice,  or  to  refuse  it.

Those  who,  without  trying  pacific  measures,  run  to  arms
on  every  trifling  occasion,  suflSciently  show  that  justificatory
re^ons  are,  in  their  mouths,  mere  pretexts: they  eagerly
seize  the  opportunity  of  indulging  their  passions  and  gratify-
ing their  ambition  under  some  colour  of  right.
;  38. In  a In  a  doubtful  cause,  where  the  rights  are  uncertain,  ob-
doubtfoi scure  and  disputable,  all that  can  be reasonably  required
*»™*®' is,  that  the  question  be  discussed  (Book  II.  §  831),  and  that,
if  it  be  impossible  fully  to  clear  it  up,  the  contest  be  termi-
nated by  an  equitable  compromise. If,  therefore,  one  of  the
parties  should  refuse  to  accede  to  such  conciliatory  measures,
the  other  is  justifiable  in  taking  up  arms  to  compel  him  to  an
accommodation. And  we  must  observe,  that  war  does  not
decide  the  question :  victory  only  compels  the  vanquished  to
subscribe  to  the  treaty  which  terminates  the  difference. It  is
an  error,  no  less  absurd  than  pernicious,  to  say  that  war  is  to
decide  controversies  between  those  who  acknowledge  no  supe-
rior judge — as  is  the  case  with  nations. Victory  usually  fii-
vours  the  cause  of  strength  and  prudence,  rather  than  that
of  right  and  justice. It  would  be  a  bad  rule  of  decision ;  but
it  is  an  effectual  mode  of  compelling  him  who  refuses  to  ac-
cede to  such  measures  as  are  consonant  to  justice ;  and  it
becomes  just  in  the  hands  of  a  prince  who  uses  it  seasonably,
and  for  a  lawful  cause.
\  Vi. War War  cannot  be  just  on  both  sides. One  party  claims  a
cannot  be right ;  the  other  disputes  it :  the  one  complains  of  an  injury ;
jMt  on  both  ^^  other  denies  having  done  it. They  may  be  considered
as  two  individuals  disputing  on  the  truth  of  a  proposition;
and  it  is  impossible  that  two  contrary  sentiments  should  bo
true  at  the  same  time.
)  10.  Some- It  may  however  happen  that  both  the  contending  parties

408


OF THF  JUST  CAUSES  OP  WAR.  806

are  candid  and  sincere  in  their  intentions ;  and,  in  a  doubtful bock  m.
cause,  it  is  still  uncertain  which  side  is  in  the  right. Where-  JEHlI"!.
fore,  since  nations  are  equal  and  independent  (Book  II.  §  36,  **™®*  '®-
and  Prelim.  §§  18,  19),  and  cannot  claim  a  right  of  judgment  ^^^^^  ^''•
over  each  other,  it  follows,  that  in  every  case  susceptible  of  r '  gQ^  1
doubt,  the  arms  of  the  two  parties  at  war  are  to  be  accounted
equally  lawful,  at  least  as  to  external  effects,  and  until  the
decision  of  the  cause. But  neither  does  that  circumstance
deprive  other  nations  of  the  liberty  of  forming  their  own
judgment  on  the  case,  in  order  to  determine  how  they  are  to
act,  and  to  assist  that  party  who  shall  appear  to  have  right  on
his  side ;  nor  does  that  effect  of  the  independence  of  nations
operate  in  exculpation  of  the  author  of  an  unjust  war,  who
certainly  incurs  a  high  degree  of  guilt. But  if  he  acts  in
consequence  of  invincible  ignorance  or  error,  the  injustice  of
his  arms  is  not  imputable  to  him.

When  offensive  war  has  for  its  object  the  punishment  of  a  ?  4i.  Wm
nation,  it  ought,  like  every  other  war,  to  be  founded  on  right  undertaken
and  necessity.  1.  On  right : — an  injury  must  have  been  ac-*®  ^^^°"^  *
tually  received.  Injury  alone  being  a  just  cause  of  war
^§  2S),  the  reparation  of  it  may  be  lawfully  prosecuted :  or
if,  in  its  nature,  it  be  irreparable  (the  only  case  in  which  we
are  allowed  to  punish),  we  are  authorized  to  provide  for  our
own  safety,  and  even  for  that  of  all  other  nations,  by  inflict-
ing on  the  offender  a  punishment  capable  of  correcting  him,
and  serving  as  an  example  to  others.  2.  A  war  of  this  kind
must  have  necessity  to  justify  it :  that  is  to  say,  that,  to  be
lawful,  it  must  be  the  only  remaining  mode  to  obtain  a  just
satisfaction  ;  which  implies  a  reasonable  security  for  the  time
to  come.  If  that  complete  satisfaction  be  offered,  or  if  it
may  be  obtained  without  a  war,  the  injury  is  done  away,  and
the  right  to  security  no  longer  authorizes  us  to  seek  ven-
geance for  it.— (See  Book  II.  §§  49,  52.)

The  nation  in  fault  is  bound  to  submit  to  a  punishment
which  she  has  deserved,  and  to  suffer  it  by  way  of  atonement :
but  she  is  not  obliged  to  give  herself  up  to  the  discretion  of
an  incensed  enemy.  Therefore,  when  attacked  she  ought  to
make  a  tender  of  satisfaction,  and  ask  what  penalty  is  re-
quired ;  and  if  no  explicit  answer  be  given,  or  the  adversary
attempts  to  impose  a  disproportionate  penalty,  she  then  ac-
quires a  right  to  resist,  and  her  defence  becomes  lawful.

On  the  whole,  however,  it  is  evident  that  the  offended  party
alone  has  a  right  to  punish  independent  persons.  We  shall
not  here  repeat  what  we  have  said  elsewhere  (Book  II.  §  7)
of  the  dangerous  mistake,  or  extravagant  pretensions,  of  those
who  assume  a  right  of  punishing  an  independent  nation  for
faults  which  do  not  concern  them — who,  madly  setting  them-
selves up  as  defenders  of  the  cause  of  God,  take  upon  them
to  punish  the  moral  depravity,  or  irreligion,  of  a  people  not

committed  to  their  superintendency.

62  2K  4M


807  OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAR,  ETC, ,

BOOK  ITT. Here  a  very  celebrated  question,  and  of  the  highest  imprjT-
CHAP.  iii^_  tance,  presents  itself. It  is  asked,  whether  the  a^^randiz^-


f  42.  Whe-  ment  of  a  neighbouring  power,  by  whom  a  nation  fears  sLe
ther  the  ag-  may  one  day  be  crushed,  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  maidii^
^randize-  ^^^^  against  him — whether  she  be  justifiable  in  taking  up
neighbour-  ^^ms  to  oppose  his  aggrandizement,  or  to  weaken  him,  with
ing  power  the  sole  view  of  securing  herself  from  those  dangers  which
canantho-  the  weaker  states  have  almost  always  reason  to  apprehend
™*^"  from  an  overgrown  power.  To  the  majority  of  politicians
agaiDB  im.  ^j^.^  qufestion  is  no  problem  :  it  is  more  difficult  of  solution  to
[  308  ]  those  who  wish  to  see  justice  and  prudence  ever  inseparably
uniteS.

On  the  one  hand,  a  state  that  increases  her  power  by  all
the  arts  of  good  government,  does  no  more  than  what  is  com-
mendable— she fulfils her duties towards herself without
violating  those  wliich  she  owes  to  other  nations. The  sove-
reign, who,  by  inheritance,  by  free  election,  or  by  any  other
just  and  honourable  means,  enlarges  his  dominions  by  the  ad-
dition of  new  provinces  or  entire  kingdoms,  only  makes  use
of  his  right,  without  injuring  any  person. How  then  shonld
it  be  lawful  to  attack  a  state  which,  for  its  aggrandizement,
makes  use  only  of  lawful  means  ? We  must  either  have  actu-
ally suffered  an  injury  or  be  visibly  threatened  with one,
before  we are authorized  to  take up arms,  or have  just
grounds  for  making  war  (§§  26,  27). On  the  other  hand,  it  is
but  too  well  known,  from  sad  and  uniform  experience,  that
predominating  powers  seldom  fail  to  molest  their  neighbours,
to  oppress  them,  and  even  totally  subjugate  them,  whenever
an  opportunity  occurs,  and  they  can  do  it  with  impunity.
Europe  was  on  the  point  of  falling  into  servitude  for  want  of
a  timely  opposition  to  the  growing  fortune  of  Charles  V. Is
the  danger  to  be  waited  for  ? Is  the  storm,  which  might  be
dispersed  at  its  rising,  to  be  permitted -to  increase? Are  we
to  allow  of  the  aggrandizement  of  a  neighbour,  and  quietly
wait  till  he  makes  his  preparations  to  enslave  us  ? Will  it
be  a  time  to  defend  ourselves  when  we  are  deprived  of  the
means  ? Prudence  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  all  men,  and  most
pointedly  so  on  the  heads  of  nations,  as  being  commissioned
to  watch  over  the  safety  of  a  whole  people. Let  us  endea-
vour to  solve  this  momentous  question,  agreeably  to  the  sacred
principles  of  the  law  of  nature  and  of  nations. We  shall  find
that  they  do  not  lead  to  weak  scruples,  and  that  it  is  an  inva-
riable truth  that  justice  is  inseparable  from  sound  policy.
;  i3.  Alone, And  first,  let  us  observe,  that  prudence,  which  is,  no  doubt,
aud  of  itsoif,  ^  virtue  highly  necessary  in  sovereigns,  can  never  recommend
riyeTri  ht  ^^®  "®^  ^^  unlawful  means  for  the  attainment  of  a  just  and
to  attack laudable  end. Let  not  the  safety  of  the  people,  that  supreme
him.  ,  law  of  the  state,  be  alleged  here  in  objection ;  for  the  very

safety  of  the  people  itself,  and  the  common  safety  of  nations,
prohibit  the  use  of  means  which  are  repugnant  to  justice  and

4U


OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAR, ETC,  808

probity. Why  are  certain  means  unlawful  ? If  we  closely ^^^^  "'-
consider  the  point,  if  we  trace  it  to  its  first  principles,  we  shall  ^
see  that  it  is  purely  because  the  introduction  of  them  would
be  pernicious  to  human  society,  and  productive  of  fatal  con-
sequences to  all  nations. See  particularly  what  we  have  said
concerning  the  observance  of  justice  (Book  II.  Chap.  V.).
For  the  interest,  therefore,  and  even  the  safety  of  nations,
we  ought  to  hold  it  as  a  sacred  maxim,  that  the  end  does  not
sanctify  the  means. And  since  war  is  not  justifiable  on  any  [  309  ]
other  ground  than  that  of  avenging  an  injury  received,  or
preserving  ourselves  from  one  with  which  we  are  threatened
(§  26),  it  is  a  sacred  principle  of  the  law  of  nations,  that  an
increase  of  power  cannot,  alone  and  of  itself,  give  any  one  a
right  to  take  up  arms  in  order  to  oppose  it.

No  injury  has  been  received  from  that  power  (so  the  question  i  ^»  How
supposes) ;  we  must,  therefore,  have  good  grounds  to  think  *^®  appear-
ourselves  threatened  by  him,  before  we  can  lawfully  have  re- danger  give
course  to  arms.  Now  power  alone  does  not  threaten  an  in-  that  right,
jury : — ^it  must  be  accompanied  by  the  will.  It  is,  indeed,
very  unfortunate  for  mankind,  that  the  will  and  inclination
to  oppress  may  be  almost  always  supposed,  where  there  is  a
power  of  oppressing  with  impunity.  But  these  two  things
are  not  necessarily  inseparable :  and  the  only  right  which  we
derive  from  the  circumstance  of  their  being  generally  or  fre-
quently united,  is,  that  of  taking  the  first  appearances  for  a
sufficient  indication.  When  once  a  state  has  given  proofs  of
injustice,  rapacity,  pride,  ambition,  or  an  imperious  thirst  of
rule,  she  becomes  an  object  of  suspicion  to  her  neighbours,
whose  duty  it  is  to  stand  on  their  guard  against  her.  They
may  come  upon  her  at  the  moment  when  she  is  on  the  point
of  acquiring  a  formidable  accession  of  power, — may  demand
securities, — and  if  she  hesitates  to  give  them,  may  prevent
her  designs  by  force  of  arms.  The  interests  of  nations  are,
in  point  of  importance,  widely  difiFerent  from  those  of  indi-
viduals :  the  sovereign  must  not  be  remiss  in  his  attention  to
them,  nor  suffer  his  generosity  and  greatness  of  soul  to  super-
sede his  suspicions.  A  nation  that  has  a  neighbour  at  once
powerful  and  ambitious  has  her  all  at  stake.  As  men  are
under  a  necessity  of  regulating  their  conduct  in  most  cases
by  probabilities,  those  probabilities  claim  their  attention  in
proportion  to  the  importance  of  the  subject :  and  (to  make
use  of  a  geometrical  expression)  their  right  to  obviate  a  dan-
ger is  in  a  compound  ratio  of  the  degree  of  probability  and
the  greatness  of  the  evil  threatened.  If  the  evil  in  question
be  of  a  supportable  nature, — ^if  it  be  only  some  slight  loss, —
matters  are  not  to  be  precipitated :  there  is  no  great  danger
in  delaying  our  opposition  to  it  till  there  be  a  certainty  of
our  being  threatened.  But  if  the  safety  of  the  state  lies  at
6take,  our  precaution  and  foresight  cannot  be  extended  too

far. Must  we  delay  to  avert  our  ruin  till  it  is  become  inevi-

411


109  .  OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OP  WAR,  ETC.

looK  in. table  ? If  the  appearances  are  so  easily  credited,  it  is  the
^EtEiJE.  fault  of  that  neighbour  who  has  betrayed  his  ambition  by
several  indications. If  Charles  the  Second,  King  of  Spain,
instead  of  settling  the  succession  on  the  Duke  of  Anjou,  had
appointed  for  his  heir  Louis  XIV.  himself — to  have tamely
suffered  the  union  of  the  monarchy  of  Spain  with  that  of
France,  would,  according  to  all  the  rides  of  human  foresight,
have  been  nothing  less  than  delivering  up  all  Europe  to  ser-
vitude, or  at  least  reducing  it  to  the  most  critical  and  preca-
rious situation. But  then,  if  two  independent  nations  think
fit  to  unite,  so  as  afterwards  to  form  one  joint  empire,  have
they  not  a  right  to  do  it  ? And  who  is  authorized  to  oppose
[  310  ]  them  ? I  answer,  they  have  a  right  to  form  such  a  union,  pro-
vided the  views  by  which  they  are  actuated  be  not  prejudicial
to  other  states. Now,  if  each  of  the  two  nations  in  question
be,  separately  and  without  assistance,  able  to  govern  and  sup-
port herself,  and  to  defend  herself  from  insult  and  oppression,
it  may  be  reasonably  presumed  that  the  object  of  their  coali-
tion is  to  domineer  over  their  neighbours. And,  on  occasions
where  it  is  impossible  or  too  dangerous  to  wait  for  an  abso-
lute certainty,  we  may  justly  act  on  a  reasonable  presumption.
If  a  stranger  levels  a  musket  at  me  in  the  middle  of  a  forest,
I  am  not  yet  certain  that  he  intends  to  kill  me :  but  shall  I,
in  order  to  be  convinced  of  his  design,  allow  him  time  to  fire?
What  reasonable  casuist  will  deny  me  the  right  to  anticipate
him  ?  But  presumption  becomes  nearly  equivalent  to  certainty,
if  the  prince  who  is  on  the  point  of  rising  to  an  enormous
power  has  already  given  proofs  of  imperious  pride  and  insa-
tiable ambition. In  the  preceding  supposition,  who  could
have  advised  the  powers  of  Europe  to  suffer  such  a  formidable
accession  to  the  power  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth  ? Too  certain
of  the  use  he  would  have  made  of  it,  they  would  have  joined
in  opposing  it :  and  in  this  their  safety  warranted  them. To
say  that  they  should  have  allowed  him  time  to  establish  his
dominion  over  Spain,  and  consolidate  the  union  of  the  two
monarchies, — and  that,  for  fear  of  doing  him  an  injury,  they
should  have  quietly  waited  till  he  crushed  them  all,—  would
not  this  be,  in  fact,  depriving  mankind  of  the  right  to  regulate
their  conduct  by  the  dictates  of  prudence,  and  to  act  on  the
ground  of  probability  ? Would  it  not  be  robbing  them  of  the
liberty  to  provide  for  their  own  safety,  as  long  as  they  have
not  mathematical  demonstration  of  its  being  in  danger  ? It
would  have  been  in  vain  to  have  preached  such  a  doctrine.
The  principal  sovereigns  of  Europe,  habituated,  by  the  ad-
ministration of  Louvois,  to  dread  the  views  and  power  of  Louis
XIV.,  carried  their  mistrust  so  far,  that  they  would  not  even
suffer  a  prince  of  the  house  of  France  to  sit  on  the  throne  of
Spain,  though  invited  to  it  by  the  nation,  whose  approbation
had  sanctioned  the  will  of  her  former  sovereign. He  ascend-
ed it,  however,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  those  who  so


OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAR, ETC.  310

Strongly  dreaded  his  elevation ;  and  it  has  since  appeared  that book  m.
their  policy  was  too  suspicious.  chap,  ni.

It  is  still  easier  to  prove,  that,  should  that  formidable  pow-  J  45. An-
er  betray  an  unjust  and  ambitious  disposition,  by  doing  the  ®^^®'  *^»f®
least  injustice  to  another,  all  nations  may  avail  themselves  of  ^^^^  ®^^"
the  occasion,  and,  by  joining  the  injured  party,  ^hus  form  a
coalition  of  strength,  in  order  to  humble  that  ambitious  poten-
tate, and  disable  him  from  so  easily  oppressing  his  neighbours,
or  keeping  them  in  continual  awe  and  fear. For  an  injury
gives  us  a  right  to  provide  for  our  future  safety,  by  depriving
the  unjust  aggressor  of  the  means  of  injuring,  us ;  and  it
is  lawful  and  even  praiseworthy  to  assist  those  who  are  op-
pressed, or  unjustly  attacked.

Enough  has  been  said  on  this  subject,  to  set  the  minds  of
politicians  at  ease,  and  relieve  them  from  all  apprehension
that  a  strict  and  punctilious  observance  of  justice  in  this  par-  [  811  ]
ticular  would  pave  the  way  to  slavery.  It  is  perhaps  wholly
unprecedented  that  a  state  should  receive  any  remarkable  ac-
cession of  power,  without  giving  other  states  just  causes  of
complaint.  Let  the  other  nations  be  watchful  and  alert  in
repressing  that  growing  power,  and  they  will  have  nothing
to  fear.  The  emperor  Charles  V.  laid  hold  on  the  pretext  oi
religion,  in  order  to  oppress  the  princes  of  the  empire,  and
subject  them  to  his  absolute  authority.  If,  by  following  up
his  victory  over  the  elector  of  Saxony,  he  had  accomplished
that  vast  design,  the  liberties  of  all  Europe  would  have  been
endangered.  It  was  therefore  with  good  reason  that  France
assisted  the  protestants  of  Germany : — the  care  of  her  own
safety  authorized  and  urged  her  to  the  measure.  When  the
same  prince  seized  on  the  duchy  of  Milan,  the  sovereigns  of
Europe  ought  to  have  assisted  France  in  contending  with
him  for  the  possession  of  it,  and  to  have  taken  advantage  of
the  circumstance,  in  order  to  reduce  his  power  within  just
bounds.  Had  they  prudently  availed  themselves  of  the  just
causes  which  he  soon  gave  them  to  form  a  league  against  him,
they  would  have  saved  themselves  the  subsequent  anxieties
for  their  tottering  liberty.

But,  suppose  that  powerful  state,  by  the  justice  and  circum-  ^  46.  other
spection  of  her  conduct,  affords  us  no  room  to  take  exception  *iio^*We
to  her  proceedings,  are  we  to  view  her  progress  with  an  eye  ^^^^^^
of  indifference  ? Are  we  to  remain  quiet  spectators  of  the  against  a
rapid  increase  of  her  power,  and  imprudently  expose  ourselves  formidable
to  such  designs  as  it  may  inspire  her  with  : — ^No,  beyond  all  power,
doubt. In  a  matter  of  so  high  importance,  imprudent  supine-
ness  would  be  unpardonable. The  example  of  the  Romans
is  a  good  lesson  for  all  Sovereigns. Had 'the  potentates  of
those  times  concerted  together  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on
the  enterprises  of  Rome,  and  to  check  her  incroachments,
they  would  not  have  successively  fallen  into  servitude. But
force  of  arms  is  not  the  only  expedient  by  which  we  may

2  K  2  413


811  * OF  THE  JUST  CAUSES  OF  WAB, ETC,


BOOK  m.  guard  against  a  formidable  power.  There  are  otber  iLeans,
CHAP.  III.  ^^  ^  gentler  nature,  and  which  are  at  all  times  lawful.  The
most  effectual  is  a  confederacy  of  the  less  powerful  sovereigns,
who,  by  this  coalition  of  strength,  become  able  to  hold  the
balance  against  that  potentate  whose  power  excites  .their
alarms.  Let  them  be  firm  and  faithful  in  their  alliance ;  and
their  union  will  prove  the  safety  of  each.

They  may  also  mutually  favour  each  other,  to  the  exclusion
of  him  whom  they  fear ;  and  by  reciprocally  allowing  various
advantages  ^  the  subjects  of  the  allies,  especially  in  trade,
and  refusing  them  to  those  of  that  dangerous  potentate,  they
will  augment  their  own  strength,  and  diminish  his,  without
affording  him  any  just  cause  of  complaint,  since  every  one  is
at  liberty  to  grant  favours  and  indulgences  at  his  own  pleasure.
{  47.  Poiiti- Europe  forms  a  political  system,  an  integral  body,  closely
eaiequiiibri- connected  by  the  relations  and  different  interests  of  the  n»-
'*™*  tions  inhabiting  this  part  of  the  world.  It  is  not,  as  formerly,

[  812  ]  a  confused  heap  of  detached  pieces,  each  of  which  thought
herself  very  little  concerned  in  the  fate  of  the  others,  and
seldom  regarded  things  which  did  not  immediately  concern
her.  The  continual  attention  of  sovereigns  to  every  occnr-
rence,  the  constant  residence  of  ministers,  and  the  perpetual
negotiations,  make  of  modern  Europe  a  kind  of  republic,  of
which  the  members^— each  independent,  but  all  linked  together
by  the  ties  of  common  interest — unite  for  the  maintenance
of  order  and  liberty.  Hence  arose  that  famous  scheme  of
the  political  balance,  or  the  equilibrium  of  power ;  by  which
IS  understood  such  a  disposition  of  things,  as  that  no  one  po-
tentate be  able  absolutely  to  predominate,  and  prescribe  laws
to  the  others.
}  A  ^»yi  The  suresj;  means  of  preserving  that  equilibrium  would  be,
Of  main-  ^}^^f^  ^0  powcr  should  be  much  superior  to  the  others,  that  all,
**  *  ^  or  at  least  the  greater  part,  should  be  nearly  equal  in  force.
Such  a  project  has  been  attributed  to  Henry  the  Fourth  :*
but  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  carry  it  into  execution
without  injustice  and  violence.  Besides,  suppose  such  equality
once  established,  how  could  it  always  be  maintained  by  lawful
means  ?  Commerce,  industry,  military  pre-eminence,  would
soon  put  an  end  to  it.  The  right  of  inheritance,  vesting  even
in  women  and  their  descendants, — a  rule,  which  it  was  so
absurd  to  establish  in  the  case  of  sovereignties,  but  which
nevertheless  is  established, — ^would  completely  overturn  the
whole  system.

It  is  a  more  simple,  an  easier,  and  a  more  equitable  plan,
to  have  recourse  to  the  method  just  mentioned,  of  forming
confederacies  in  order  to  oppose  the  more  powerful  potentate,
and  prevent  him  from  giving  law  to  his  neighbours.  Such  is
the  mode  at  present  pursued  by  the  sovereigns  of  Europe.

*  Of  Franoo.
414


OF  THE  JUST CAUSES OF  WAR, ETC. *  812

They  consider  the  two  principal  powers,  which,  on  that  very  book  in.
account,  are  naturally  rivals,  as  destined  to  be  checks  on  each  ^°^p-  "'^
other ;  and  they  unite  with  the  weaker,  like  so  many  weights
thrown  into  the  lighter  scale,  in  order  to  keep  it  in  equilibrium
with  the  other.  The  house  of  Austria  has  long  been  the
preponderating  power :  at  present  France  is  so  in  her  turn.
England,  whose  opulence  and  formidable  fleets  have  a  power-
ful influence,  without  alarming  any  state  on  the  score  of  its
liberty,  because  that  nation  seems  cured  of  the  rage  for  con-
quest,— England,  I. say,  has  the  glory  of  holding  the  political
balance.  She  is  attentive  to  preserve  it  in  equilibrium : — a
system  of  policy,  which  is  in  itself  highly  just  and  wise,  and
will  ever  entitle  her  to  praise,  as  long  as  she  continues  to
pursue  it  only  by  means  of  alliances,  confederacies,  and  other
methods  equally  lawful.

Confederacies  would  be  a  sure  mode  of  preserving  the  equi-  J  49. How
librium,  and  thus  maintaining  the  liberty  of  nations,  did  all  *^«  ^^®  <*•-
princes  thoroughly  understand  their  true  interests,  and  make  f ^"i,rium
the  welfare  of  the  state  serve  as  the  rule  in  all  their  proceed-  may  be  re-
ings. Great  potentates,  however,  are  but  too  successful  in  atrained,  or
gaining  over  partisans  and  allies,  who  blindly  adopt  all  their  «^®"  ^®*^-
views. Dazzled  by  the  glare  of  a  present  advantage,  seduced  ®°®
by  their  avarice,  deceived  by  faithless  ministers — how  many  [  313  ]
princes become the  tools  of  a  power  which  will  one  day
swallow  up  either  themselves  or  their  successors  ! The  safest
plan,  therefore,  is  to  seize  the  first  favourable  opportunity,
when  we  can,  consistently  with  justice,  weaken  the  potentate
who  destroys  the equilibrium  (§  45)— or  to employ  every
honourable  means  to  prevent  his  acquiring  too  formidable  a
degree  of  power. For  that  purpose,  all  the  other  nations
should  be  particularly  attentive  not  to  suffer  him  to  aggrandize
himself  by  arms :  and  this  they  may  at  all  times  do  with  jus-
tice. For,  if  this  prince  makes  an  unjust  war,  every  one  has
a  right  to  succour  the  oppressed  party. If  he  makes  a  just
war,  the  neutral  nations  may  interfere  as  mediators  for  an  ac-
commodation— they  may  induce  the  weaker  state  to  propose
reasonable  terms  and  ofler  a  fair  satisfaction,  and  may  save
her  from  falling  under  the  yoke  of  a  conqueror. On  the  ofier
of  equitable  conditions  to  the  prince  who  wages  even  the  most
justifiable  war,  he  has  all  that  he  can  demand.  The  justice  of
his  cause,  as  we  shall  soon  see,  never  gives  him  a  right  to  subju-
gate his  enemy,  unless  when  that  extremity  becomes  necessary
to  his  own  safety,  or  when  he  has  no  other  mode  of  obtaining
indemnification  for  the  injury  he  has  received. Now,  that  is
not  the  case  here,  as  the  interposing  nations  can  by  other
means  procure  him  a  just  indemnification,  and  an  assurance
of  safety.

In  fine,  there  cannot  exist  a  doubt,  that,  if  that  formidable
potentate  certainly  entertain  designs  of  oppression  and  con
quest, — ^if  he  betray  his  views  by  his  preparations  and  other

416


813  OF  THB  JUST CAUSES OF  WAR, ETC.

BOOK  m. proceedings, — the  other  states  have  a  right  to  anticipate  hini ,
^^^'  "'•  and  if  the  fate  of  war  declares  in  their  favour,  they  are  justi-
fiable in  taking  advantage  of  this  happy  opportunity  to  weak-
en and  reduce  a  power  too  contrary  to  the  equilibrium,  and
dangerous  to  the  common  liberty.

This  right  of  nations  is  still  more  evident  against  a  sove-
reign, who,  from  an  habitual propensity  to  take  up  arms
without  reasons,  or  even  so  much  as  plausible  pretexts,  is  con-
tinually disturbing  the  public  tranquillity.
}  50. Bo- This  leads  us  to  a  particular  question,  nearly  allied  to  the
haviourai-  preceding. When  a  neighbour,  in  the  midst  of  a  profound
warda^a***'  P®*^®»  erects  fortresscs  on  our  frontier,  equips  a  fleet,  aug-
neighbour nients  his  troops,  assembles  a  powerful  army,  fills  his  maga-
preparing zines, — ^in  a  word  when  he  makes  preparations  for  war, — are
for  war. yfQ  allowed  to  attack  him,  with  a  view  to  prevent  the  danger
with  which we think ourselves threatened  ? The answer
greatly  depends  on  the  manners  and  character  of  that  neigh-
bour. We  must  inquire  into  the  reasons  of  those  preparations,
and  bring  him  to  an  explanation : — such  is  the  mode  of  pro-
ceeding in  Europe :  and  if  his  sincerity  be  justly  suspected,
securities  may  be  required  of  him. His  refusal  in  this  case,
would  furnish  ample  indication  of  sinister  designs,  and  a  suf-
ficient reason  to  justify  us  in  anticipating  them. But  if  that
[  &14  ]  sovereign  has  never  betrayed  any  symptoms  of  baseness  and
perfidy,  and  especially  if  at  that  time  there  is  no  dispute  sub-
sisting between  him  and  us,  why  should  we  not  quietly  resf
on  his  word,  only  taking  such  precautions  as  prudence  ren-
ders indispensable  ? We  ought  not,  without  sufiicient  cause,
to  presume  him  capable  of  exposing  himself  to  infamy  by  add-
ing perfidy  to  violence. As  long  as  he  has  not  rendered  his
sincerity  questionable,  we  have  no  right  to  require  any  othci
security  frocft  him.

It  is  true,  however,  that,  if  a  sovereign  continues  to  keep
up  a  powerful  army  in  profound  peace,  his  neighbours  must
not  suffer  their  vigilance  to  be  entirely  lulled  to  sleep  by  his
bare  word;  and  prudence  requires  that  they  should  keep
themselves  on  their  guard.  However  certain  they  may  be  of
the  good  faith  of  that  prince,  unforeseen  differences  may  in-
tervene ;  and  shall  they  leave  him  the  advantage  of  being  pro-
vided, at  that  juncture,  with  a  numerous  and  well  disciplined
army,  while  they  themselves  will  have  only  new  levies  to  op-
pose it  ?  Unquestionably  no.  This  would  be  leaving  them-
selves almost  wholly  at  his  discretion.  They  are,  therefore,
under  the  necessity  of  following  his  example,  and  keeping,  as
he  does,  a  numerous  army  on  foot :  and  what  a  burden  is  this
to  a  state !  Formerly,  and  without  going  any  further  back
than  the  last  century,  it  was  pretty  generally  made  an  article
in  every  treaty  of  peace,  that  the  belligerent  powers  should
disarm  on  both  sides — that  they  should  disband  their  troops.
If»  in  a  time  of  profound  peace,  a  prince  was  disposed  to  keep

416


OF  THE  DECLARATION  OF  WAR, ETC.  814


CHAP.  ni.


up  any  considerable  number  of  forces,  his  neighbours  took  their  book  m.
measures  accordingly,  formed  leagues  against  him,  and  obliged
him  to  disarm.  Why  has  not  that  salutary  custom  been  pre-
served? The  constant  maintenance  of  numerous  armies
deprives  the  soil  of  its  cultivators,  checks  the  progress  of
population,  and  can-  only  serve  to  destroy  the  liberties  of  the
nation  by  whom  they  are  maintained.  Happy  England !
whose  situation  exempts  it  from  any  qpnsiderable  charge  in
supporting  the  instruments  of  despotism.  Happy  Switzer-*
land!  if,  continuing  carefully  to  exercise  her  militia,  she
keeps  herself  in  a  condition  to  repel  any  foreign  enemies,
without  feeding  a  host  of  idle  soldiers,  who  might  one  day
crush  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and  even  bid  defiance  to
the  lawful  authority  of  the  sovereign.  Of  this  the  Roman
legions  furnish  a  signal  instance.  This  happy  method  of  a
free  republic, — the  custom  of  training  up  all  her  citizens  to
the  art  of  war, — renders  the  state  respectable  abroad,  and
eaves  it  from  a  very  pernicious  defect  at  home.  It  would
have  been  everywhere  imitated,  had  the  public  good  been
everywhere  the  only  object  in  view.

Sufficient  has  now  been  said  on  the  general  principles  for
estimating  the  justice  of  a  war.  Those  who  are  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the .  principles,  and  have  just  ideas  of  the
various  rights  of  nations,  will  easily  apply  the  rules  to  par-
ticular cases.


war.


CHAP.  rV.  [  815  ]

OF  THE  DECLARATION  OF  WAR, — ^AND  OF  WAR  IS DUB  chap,  it.

FORM.  (142)

THE  right  of  making  war  belongs  to  nations  only  as  a  j  6i. De-
remedy  against  injustice: it is the offspring  of  unhappy ci»™tion oi
necessity. This remedy  is  so dreadful in its  effects,  so
destructive  to  mankind,  so  grievous  even  to  the  party  who  .
has recourse  to  it,  that  unquestionably  the  law  of  nature
allows  of  it  only  in  the  last  extremity, — that  is  to  say,  when
e\ery  other  expedient  proves  ineffectual  for  the  maintenance
of  justice. It  is  demonstrated  in  the  foregoing  chapter,  that,
in  order  to  be  justifiable  in  taking  up  arms,  it  is  necessary —
1.  That  we  have  a  just  cause  of  complaint. 2.  That  a  rea-
sonable satisfaction  have  been  denied  us. 3.  The  ruler  of
the  nation,  as  we  have  observed,  ought  maturely  to  consider

(142)  See  in  general,  Orotins,  B.  iii.  c.  iv.  a.  S;  and  1  Chitt/s  Com.  Law,  378.
-C.

63  4lf


ai5  OF  THE  DECLARATION  OP  WAR,

BOOK  m. whether  it  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  state  to  prosecute  hi
CHAP.  IV. rigjji;  ijy  force  of  arms. But  all  this  is  not  suflScient. As  it


is  possible  that  the  present  fear  of  our  arms  may  make  as
NeoesBity  impression  on  the  mind  of  our  adversary,  and  induce  him  tj
do  us  justice, — we  owe  this  further  regard  to  humanity,  an4
especially  to  the  lives  and  peace  of  the  subjects,  to  declare
to  that  unjust  nation,  or  its  chief,  that  we  are  at  length  going
to  have  recourse  to  the  last  remedy,  and  make  use  of  c»f«fL
force,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  him  to  reason.  This  is
called  declaring  ttrar.  All  this  is  included  in  the  Romaa
manner  of  proceeding,  regulated  in  their  fecial  lair,  Tlicj
first  sent  the  chief  of  the  feeiales,  or  heralds,  called  pater  f-^
tratus,  to  demand  satisfaction  of  the  nation  who  had  offended
them  ;  and  if,  within  the  space  of  thirty-three  days,  that  na-
tion did  not  return  a  satisfactory  answer,  the  herald  cal]€^^
the  gods  to  be  witnesses  of  the  injustice,  and  came  away.  Fay-
ing that  the  Romans  would  consider  what  measures  thej
should  adopt.  The  king,  and  in  after  times  the  consul,  here-
.upon  asked  the  senate's  opinion :  and  when  war  was  r^olrt^
on,  the  herald  was  sent  back  to  the  frontier,  where  be  de-
clared it.*  It  is  surprising  to  find  among  the  Romans  such  jus-
tice, such  moderation  and  prudence,  at  a  time  too  when,  aj>-
parently,  nothing  but  courage  and  ferocity  was  to  be  expect«i
from  them.  By  such  scrupulous  delicacy  in  the  conduct  of
her  wars,  Rome  laid  a  most  solid  foundation  for  her  subsequent
greatness.
;  52.  Wh!»4  A  declaration  of  war  being  necessary,  as  a  further  effort  to
It  is  to  con-  terminate  the  difference  without  the  effusion  of  blooil,  by
^'^^  making  use  of  the  principle  of  fear,  in  order  to  bring  the

enemy  to  more  equitable  sentiments, — it  ought,  at  the  same
time  that  it  announces  our  settled  resolution  of  making  war,
[  31P  ]  to  set  forth  the  reasons  which  have  induced  us  to  take  up  arms.
This  is,  at  present,  the  constant  practice  among  the  powers
of  Europe.
^  6S. It  18 After  a  fruitless  application  for  justice,  a  nation  may  pro-
aimpj*  or cecd  to  a  declaration  of  war,  which  is  then  pure  and  simpJf.
oonaiuonai.  g^^^  ^^  include  the  whole  business  in  a  single  act,  instead  of
two  separate  ones,  the  demand  of  justice  (called  by  the  Ro-
mans rerum  repetitio)  may,  if  we  think  proper,  be  accompa-
nied by  a  conditional  declaration  of  war,  notifying  that  we
will  commence  hostilities  unless  we  obtain  immediate  satisfac-
tion on  such  or  such  subject. In  this  case  there  is  no  neces-
sity for  adding  a  pure  and  simple  declaration  of  war, — the
conditional  one  suflScing,  if  the  enemy  delays  giving  satis-
faction.
;  64. Tho If  the  enemy,  on  either  declaration  of  war,  offers  equitable
right  to conditions  of  peace,  we  are  bound  to  refrain  from  hostilities ;
"t!!f.^*' for  as  soon  as  justice  is  done  to.  us,  that  immediately  super-

*  Livy,  Ub.  L  cap.  31.
418


AND OF  WAR  IN  DTTE  FORM.  816

Bedes  all  right  to  employ  force,  which  we  are  not  allowed  to book  m.
use  unless  for  the  necessary  maintenance  of  our  rights. To ^^^^'  ^^'-
these  offers,  however,  are  to  be  added  securities ;  for  we  are  *^®  !^^^  ^^
under  no  obligation  to  suffer  ourselves  to  be  amused  by  empty  ^onditioM.
proposals. The  word  of  a  sovereign  is  a  sufficient  security,  as
long  as  he- has  not  disgraced  his  credit  by  any  act  of  perfidy:
and  we  should  be  contented  with  it. As  to  the  conditions
themselves, — ^besides  the  principal  subject,  we  have  a  right  to
demand  a  reimbursement  of  the  expenses  incurred  in  our  pre-
parations for  war.

It  is  necessary  that  the  declaration  of  war  be  known  to  the  ?  55. For-
state  against  whom  it  is  made. This  is  all  which  the  natural  ™*\^^*^®.**^*

1  r 1.*  •  XT  1.1- 1  "ii» X 1- • i declaration

law  of  nations  requires.  JXevertneless,  if  custom  has  intro-  ^^  vftr.(i43)
duced  certain  formalities  in  the  business,  those  nations  who,
by  adopting  the  custom,  have  given  their  tacit  consent  to  such
formalities,  are  under  an  obligation  of  observing  them,  as  long
as  they  have  not  set  them  aside  by  a  public  renunciation
(Prelim.  §  26).  Formerly,  the  powers  of  Europe  used  to  send
heralds,  or  ambassadors  to  declare  war ;  at  present,  they  con-  *
tent  themselves  with  publishing  the  declaration  in  the  capital,
in  the  principal  towns,  or  on  the  frontiers :  manifestoes  are
issued ;  and,  through  the  easy  and  expeditious  channels  of
communication  which  the  establishment  of  posts  now  affords,
the  intelligence  is  soon  spread  on  every  side.

Besides  the  foregoing  reasons,  it  is  necessary  for  a  nation  1 56. Ot&et
to  publish  the  declaration  of  war  for  the  instruction  and  direc-  re^ons  for
tion  of  her  own  subjects,  in  order  to  fix  the  date  of  the  rights  f^^^" ^j^'^
which  belong  to  them  from  the  moment  of  this  declaration,  pubiica-
and  in  relation  to  certain  effects  which  the  voluntary  law  of  tion.(i43)
nations  attributes  to  a  war  in  form. Without  such  a  public
declaration  of  war,  it  would,  in  a  treaty  of  peace,  be  too  diffi-
cult to  determine  those  acts  which  are  to  be  considered  as  the
effects  of  war,  and  those  that  each  nation  may  set  down  as  in-
juries of  which  she  means  to  demand  reparation. In  the  last
treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  between  France  and  Spain  on  the
one  side,  and  England  on  the  other,  it  was  agreed  that  all  the
prizes  taken  before  the  declaration  of  war  should  be  restored.

He  who  is  attacked  and  only  wages  defensive  war,  needs  ?  57. Do-
not  to  make  any  hostile  declaration, — the  state  of  warfare  be-  *®"^7®  ^*'
ing  sufficiently  ascertained  by  the  enemy's  declaration,  or  d^^Ura-tion,

(143)  But  there  seems  to  be  no  ab-  was  declared  bj  Act  of  Con^p-efis,  June

solute  necessity  for  a  formal  declaration  18th,  1812. (Laws  U.  S.  1812,  p.  22T.)

of  war  to  render  it  legal. See  obser-  But  war  had  existed,  in  fact,  from  Maruh

miions  of  8iT  William  Scott,  in  Nayede,  4th until*  May 13th, 1846, between

4 Rob.  Rep.  252 ; Chitty's  Law Nat.  Mexito  and  the  United  States,  without

29,  3. Bat,  in  England,  the  king  must  any  formal  declaration The act of

have  assented  to a  war  to  render  it  Congress  of  13th  May,  1846,  declares

strictly legal. Brooke's Abrid. tit  that,  "by  the  act  of  the  Republic  of

«  Denizen,"  pi.  26 ;  The  J7oo;j,  1  Rob.  Mexico,"  war  existed  between  the  coun-

Rep.  196.— 0. jThe  late  war  between  tries. (Laws  U.  States,  1846,  p.  14.)}
U&e  United  States  and Great  Britain

419


817  OF  THE DBCLABATIOK  OF  WAB,  j

■

BOOK  m. open  hostilities. In  modern  times,  however,  the  soTern^ I
CHAP.  IV.  ^Yio  is  attacked,  seldom  omits  to  declare  war  in  his  tsnL
whether  from  an  idea  of  dignity,  or  for  the  direction  of  bb
subjects.
{  58 When If  the  nation  on  whom  We  have  determined  to  make  w
it  may  bo ^\\\  not  admit  any  minister  or  herald  to  declare  it, — whaiere? ■
omitted  in ^^^  custom  may  otherwise  be,  we  may  content  ourselves  vhi I
war.  publishing  the  declaration  of  hostilities  within  our  own  teri-

tories,  or  on  the  frontier;  and  if  the  declaration  does  &jt
come  to  the  knowledge  of  that  nation  before  hostilities  an
commenced,  she  can  only  blame  herself. The  Turks  impri*oE
and  maltreat  oven  the ambassadors  of  those powers  wid
whom  they  are  determined  to  come  to  a  rupture  :  it  would  be
a  perilous  undertaking  for  a  herald  to  go  and  declare  war
against  them  in  their  own  country. Their  savage  dispositioa.
therefore,  supersedes  the  necessity  of  sending  one.
J59.  Itisnot But  no  person  being  exempted  from  his  duty  for  the  sole
to  be  omit-  reason  that  another  has  been  wanting  in  hiSy  we  are  noc  to
ted  by  way  q^\i  declaring  war  against  a  nation,  previous  to  a  commezice-
tio"**^ inent  .of  hostilities,  because  that  nation  has,  on  a  former  oc-
casion, attacked  us  without  any  declaration. That  nation,  m
so  doing,  has  violated  the  law  of  nature  (§  51) ;  and  her  fault
does  not  authorize  us  to  commit  a  similar  one.  i
{  60. Time The  law  of  nations  does  not  impose  the  obligation  of  declar-
of  the  de- ing  war,  with  a  view  to  give  the  enemy  time  to  prepare  for
eiantion. ^^  unjust  defence. The  declaration,  therefore,  need  not  ht
made  till  the  army  has  reached  the  frontiers ;  it  is  even  law-
ful to  delay  it  till  we  have  entered  the  enemy's  territories
and  there  possessed  ourselves  of  an  advantageous  post :  it  must
however,  necessarily  precede  the  commission  of  any  act  of
hostility. For thus  we provide for our own  safety,  and
equally  attain  the  object  of  a  declaration  of  war,  which  is.  to
give  an  unjust  adversary  the  opportunity  of  seriously  consi-
dering his  past  conduct,  and  avoiding  the  horrors  of  war,  bj
doing  justice. Such  was  the  conduct  of  that  generous  prince.
Henry  the  Fourth,  towards  Charles  Emanuel  duke  of  Sarov ;
.  who  had  wearied  his  patience  by  vain  and  fraudulent  nego-
tiations.*
;  «1. Dnty If  he,  who  enters  a  country  with  an  army  kept  under  strict
of  the  inha-  discipline,  declares  to  the  inhabitants  that  he  does  not  come
ituita  on  a  ^^  ^^  enemy,  that  he  will  commit  no  violence,  and  will  ac-
army'8  en- quaint  the  sovereign  with  the  cause  of  his  coming, — ^the  in-
tering  a habitants  are  not  to  attack  him  ;  and  should  they  dare  to  at-
oonntry  be-  tempt  it,  he  has  a  right  to  chastivse  them. But  they  are  not
daraaon^of  *^  ^dmit  him  into  any  strong-holds,  nor  can  he  demand  ad-
^ar,  mission. It  is  not  the  business  of  subjects  to  commence  hos-

tilities without  orders  from  their  sovereign :  but  if  they  are
brave  and  loyal,  they  will,  in  the  mean  time,  seize  on  all  the


*  See  SuUy'B  Meootoin.
430


AND  OF  WAB  IN  DUE  FOBM.  818


ftdvantageons  posts,  and  defend  themselves  against  any  at- book  m.
tempt  made  to  dislodge  them.


CHAP. lY.


After  a  declaration  of  war  on  the  part  of  the  sovereign  who  J  62. Com-
lias  thus  invaded  the  country,  if  equitable  conditions  are  not  mon««m«nt
offered  him  without  delay,  he  may  commence  his  operations ;  ®^*'®*^^«■•
for,  I  repeat  it,  he  is  under  no  obligation  to  suffer  himself  to
be  amused. But,  at  the  same  time,  we  are  never  to  lose
Bight  of  the  principles  before  laid  down  (§§  26  and  51)  concern-
ing the  only  legitimate  causes  of  war. To  march  an  army
into  a  neighbouring  country  by  which  we  are  not  threatened,
and  without  having  endeavoured  to  obtain,  by  reason  and  jus-
tice, an  equitable  reparation  for  the  wrongs  of  which  we  com-
plain, would  be  introducing  a  mode  pregnant  with  evils  to
mankind,  and  sapping  the  foundations  of  the  safety  and  tran-
quillity of  states. If  this  mode  of  proceeding  be  not  exploded
and  proscribed  by  the  public  indignation  and  the  concurrence
of  every  civilized  people,  it  will  become  necessary  to  continue
always  in  a  military  posture,  and  to  keep  ourselves  constantly
on  our  guard,  no  less  in  times  of  profound  peace,  than  during
the  existence  of  declared  and  open  war.

The  sovereign  declaring  war  can  neither  detain  the  persons  j  63. Con-
nor  the  property  of  those  subjects  of  the  enemy  who  are^««**<>^*
within  his  dominions  at  the  time  of  the  declaration. They  ®^'Y^®f  *^
came  into  his  country  under  the  public  faith. By  permitting  gubjecta  of
them  to  enter  and  reside  in  his  territories,  he  tacitly  promised  an  enemy,
them  full  liberty  and  security  for  their  return. He  is  there-  ^*»®  "« *«
fore  bound  to  allow  them  a  reasonable  time  for  withdrawing  '^^l^"?'^
with  their  effects ;  and,  if  they  stay  beyond  the  term  prescribed,  ^f  ^h^  ^^.
Le  has  a  right  to  treat  them  as  enemies, — as  unarmed  enemies,  daration  of
however. But,  if  they  are  detained  by  an  insurmountable '^w.  (144)
impediment,  as  by  sickness,  he  must  necessarily,  and  for  the
same  reasons,  grant  them  a  sufficient  extension  of  the  time.
At  present,  so  far  from  being  wanting  in  this  duty,  sovereigns
carry  their  attention  to  humanity  still  farther,  so  that  foreign-
ers, who  are  subjects  of  the  state  against  which  war  is  de-
clared, are  very  frequently  allowed  full  time  for  the  settlement
of  their  affairs. This  is  observed  in  a  particular  manner  with
regard  to  merchants ;  and  the  case  is  moreover  carefully  pro-
vided for  in  commercial  treaties. The  king  of  England  has
done  more  than  this. In  his  last  declaration  of  war  against
France,  he  ordained  that  all  French  subjects  who  were  in  his
dominions  should  be  at  liberty  to  remain,  and  be  perfectly
secure  in  their  persons  and  effects,  "provided  they  demeaned
themselves  properly.**

We  have  said  (§  56),  that  a  sovereign  is  to  make  the  de- 1 64. Pub.
claration  of  war  public  within  his  dominions,  for  the  informa-  l><»^o»  of
tion  and  direction  of  his  subjects. He  is  also  to  make  known  mlnifel'toefc
his  declaration  of  war  to  the  neutral  powers,  in  order  to  ao-


(144'  See  in  general  1  Chitty's  Com.  L.  414.— 0.

2L  4n


818  OF  THE DECLARATION  OF  WAR,


BOOK  nr. quaint  them  with  the  justificatory  reasons  whicli

^££££:  JIi  it, — the  cause  which  obliges  him  to  take  up  arms, — ^and  u

notify  to  them  that  such  or  such  a  nation  is  his enemy,  iLs

they  may  conduct  themselves  accordingly. We  shall  even  j*?e

[  819  ]  that  this  is  necessary  in  order  to  obviate  all  difficnlly,  wt-a

we  come  to  treat  of  the  right  to  seize  certain things  wLic:i

neutral  persons  are  carrying  to  the  enemy,  and  of  whati*

termed  contraband^  in  time  of  war. This  publication  of  tbe

war  may  be  called  declaration^  and  that  which  is  notified  di-

■  rectly  to  the  enemy,  denunciation;  and,  indeed,  the  Lacn

term  is  denunciatio  belli.

War  is  at  present  published  and  declared  by  manifestrics.
These  pieces  never  fail  to  contain  the  justificatory  reasons,
good  or  bad,  on  which  the  party  grounds  his  right  to  take  up
arms. The  least  scrupulous  sovereign  would  wish  to  be  thoogiu
just,  equitable,  and  a  lover  of  peace :  he  is  sensible  that  i
contrary  reputation  might  be  detrimental  to  him. The  maiu-
festo  implying  a  declaration  of  war,  or  the  declaration  itse^,
printed,  published,  and  circulated  throughout  the  whole  stat^
contains  also  the  sovereign's  general  orders  to  his  subjects,  re-
lative to  their  conduct  in  the  war.*
{  65.  Deoo- In  so  civilized  an  age,  it  may  be  unnecessary  to  observe,
"*™  *°^ that,  in  those  pieces  which  are  published  on  the  subiect  of  war,
to  be  ob- ^^  ^^  proper  to  abstain  from  every  opprobrious  expression  in-
served  in dicative  of  hatred,  animosity,  and  rage,  and  only  calculated  to
the  mani- excitc  similar  sentiments  in  the  bosom  of  the  enemy. A  pnnee
fescoes. ought  to  preserve  the  most  dignified  decorum,  both  in  hi«
words  and  in  his  writings. He  ought  to  respect  himself  in  ibe
person  of  his  equals  :  and,  though  it  is  his  misfortune  to  be  at
variance  with  a  nation,  shall  he  inflame  the  quarrel  by  offen-
sive expressions,  and  thus  deprive  himself  even  of  the  hope*
of  a  sincere  reconciliation  ? Homer's  heroes  call  each  other

a

"  dog*'  and  "  drunkard: "  but  this  was  perfectly  in  character,
since,  in  their  enmity,  they  knew  no  bounds.  Frederic  Bar-
barossa,  and  other  emperors,  and  the  popes  their  enemies,
treated  each  other  with  as  little  delicacy.  Let  us  congratc-
late  our  age  on  the  superior  gentleness  of  its  manners,  and
not  give  the  name  of  unmeaning  politeness  to  those  attentions
which  are  productive  of  real  and  substantial  effects.
}  66.  What  Those  formalities,  of  which  the  necessity  is  deducible  from
is  a  lawful  the  principles  and  the  very  nature  of  war,  are  the  cha^a^
teristics  of  a  lawful  war  in  due  form  {jristum  bellum.)  Grotius
says,t  that,  according  to  the  law  of  nations,  two  things  are
requisite  to  constitute  a  solemn  or  formal  war — first,  that  it  be

*  It  is  remarked  as  a  very  singular  thetn»elve9 pr(»perliff'* — and, raonorcr,

circumstanoe, that Charles the Se-  bis  protection  and  favour  to  such  of  tb^a

cond,  king  of  Great  Britain,  in  his  de-  as  might  choose  to  emignite  to  hii  do-

olaration  of  war  against  France,  dated  minions.

February  9,  1668,  promised  security  to  f  De  Jure  Belli  et  Paoia,  libw  L  mf.

French subjects  who should  **  demean  ill.  {  i*
422


war  in  due
form.


AND OF  WAR  IN  DUE  FORM.  SlV


on  both  sides,  made  by  the  sovereign  authority, — secondly, book  m.
that  it  be  accompanied  by  certain  formalities. These  formali- ^"^^'  '^'
ties  consist  in  the  demand  of  a  just  satisfaction  {^erum  repe-
tition and  in  the  declaration  of  war,  at  least  on  the  part  of
him  who  attacks ; — for  defensive  war  requires  no  declaration
(§  57),  nor  even,  on  urgent  occasions,  an  express  order  from
the  sovereign. In  effect,  these  two  conditions  are  necessarily  [  320  j
required  in  every  war  which  shall,  according  to  the  law  of
nations,  be  a  *  legitimate  one,  that  is  to  say,  such  a  war  as
•  nations  have  a  right  to  wage. The  right  of  making  war  be-
longs only  to  the  sovereign"  (§  4) ;  and  it  is  only  after  satis-
faction has  been  refused  to  him  (§  37),  and  even  after  he  has
made  a  declaration  of  war  (§  51),  that  he  has  a  right  to  take
up  arms.  (145)

A  war  in  due  form  is  also  called  a  regular  war,  because  cer-  What  a  re-
tain  rules,  either  prescribed  by  the  law  of  nature,  or  adopted  p*^  ^^^

1 "  .  1  J  • 'j.  and  to  bo

by  custom,  are  observed  m  it.  noticed  in

Legitimate  and  formal  warfare  must  be  carefully  distin- courta  of
guished  from  those  illegitimate  and  informal  wars,  or  rather  jnstioe,  Ac.
predatory  expeditions,  undertaken  either  without  lawful  au-  (^^^O
thority  or  without  apparent  cause,  as  likewise  without  the  |^  ^\^^^,  ^
usual  formalities,  and  solely  with  a  view  to  plunder. Grotius  guished
relates  several  instances  of  the  latter.* Such  were  the  enter- from  in-
prises  of  the  grandes  compagnies  which  had  assembled  in  fo"n»i  *^<*
France  during  the  wars  with  the  English, — armies  of  banditti,  ^^^^
who  ranged  about  Europe,  purely  for  spoil  and  plunder :  such
were  the  cruises  of  the  buccaneers,  without  commission,  and
in  time  of  peace ;  and  such  in  general  are  the  depredations  of
pirates. To  the  same  class  belong  almost  all  the  expeditions
of  the  Barbary  corsairs :  though  authorized  by  a  sovereign,

(145)  Ante,  the  notes  to  the  same  eec-  62 ;  Blaekbume  v.  Thompson,  15  East^
tions. — C.  90,  S.  P.)  observed,  that,  in  order  to  as-

(146)  It  has  been  laid  down,  that  certain  whether  or  not  a  war  or  state
whenever  the  king's  courts  are  open  in  of  amity  or  neutrality  subeisjis,  it  always
a  given  country,  it  is  time  of  peace  in  belongs  to  the  Government  of  the  coun-
judgment  of  law ;  but,  when  by  hostile  try  to  determine  in  what  relation  any
measures  such  courts  are  shut  up  or  in-  other  country  stands  towards  it;  and
torrupted,  then  it  is  said  to  be  time  of  that  is  a  point  upon  which  courts  of  jus-
war.  Earl  Lancaster's  case,  Hale's  Pleas  tice  cannot  decide ;  (t.  e.  without  evi-
Grown,  Part  I.  c.  26,  p.  344;  Go.  Litt.  dence  aliunde  as  to  the  declarations  or
249,  b.  cited,  and  other  points  as  to  what  resolutions  of  Government;)  and  the
is  war;  Elphinatone  v.  Bedreechund,  most  potent  evidence  upon  such  a  sub-
Knapp's  Jlep.  316.  But  at  present,  ject  is  the  declaration  of  the  state.  And
when  in  courts  of  justice,  whether  of  if  the  state  recognises  any  place  as  be-
Gommon  Law,  Equity,  Admiralty,  or  ing  or  as  not  being  in  the  relation  of
Prize  Court,  it  becomes  necessary  to  hostility  to  this  country,  that  is  obliga-
asoertain  what  is,  or  not)  evidence  of  a  tory  on  courts  of  justice.  Per  Lord  EU
war,  or  a  pecuse,  or  neutrality ,  the  same  lenborough,  3  Camp.  66 ;  and  see  other
is  now  usually  determined  by  distinct  instances  and  authorities,  1  Chitty'a
acts  of  the  stcUe,  Upon  this  question.  Commercial  Law,  393-4. — G.  |  See,  also,
the  following  cases  are  material  i — Sir  The  U.  States  v.  Palmer,  3  Wheat  Rep.

Wm,  Chant  (in  case  of  Pelham  Burke, 634,  635.}  -r

1  Edward's  Bep.  Appendix  D ;  3  Camp. *  Lib.  ilL  cap.  iv.

423


820  OF  THE  DECLARATION  OF  WAR,  ETC.

BOOK  ni. they  are  undertaken  without  any  apparent  cause,  and  from  m
^^^^'  '^'  other  motive  than  the  lust  of  plunder. These  two  species  of


war,  I  say, — ^the  lawful  and  the  illegitimate, — are  to  be  care-
fully distinguished,  as  the  effects  and  the  rights  arising  frum
each  are  very  different,
g  68.  In  order  fully  to  conceive  the  grounds  of  this  distinction.

Grounds  of  {^  is' ncccssary  to  recollect  the  nature  and  object  of  lawful

tion.  ^^^'  ^'^^*  ^^  ^®  ^^^y  *^  ^^®  '^^^  remedy  against  obstinate  injustice
that  the  law  of  nature  allows  of  war. Hence  arise  the  rights
which  it  gives,  as  we  shall  explain  in  the  sequel : hence,  lJk^
wise,  the  rules  to  be  observed  in  it. Since  it  is  equally  poea-
ble  that  either  of  the  parties  may  have  right  on  his  side,—
and  since,  in  consequence  of  the  independence  of  nations,  that
point  is  not  to  be  decided  by  others  (§  40), — ^the  condition  of
the  two  enemies  is  the  same,  while  the  war  lasts. Thus,  wien
a  nation,  or  a  sovereign,  has  declared  war  against  another
sovereign  on  account  of  a  difference  arisen  between  them,  their
war  is  what  among  nations  is  called  a  lawful  and  formal  war;
and  its  effects  are,  by  the  voluntary  law  of  nations,  the  same
on  both  sides,  independently  of  the  justice  of  the  cause,  bs  we
shall  more  fully  show  in  the  sequel.* Nothing  of  this  kind  Ls
the  case  in  an  informal  and  illegitimate  war,  which  is  more
properly  called  depredation. Undertaken  without  any  right,
without  even  an  apparent  cause,  it  can  be  productive  of  do
lawful  effect,  nor  give  any  right  to  the  author  of  it.  A  nation
attacked  by  such  sort  of  enemies  is  not  under  any  obligation
to  observe  towards  them  the  rules  prescribed  in  formal  war-

[  821  ]  fare.  She  may  treat  them  as  robbers.  (1)  The  inhabitants  of
Geneva,  after  defeating  the  famous  attempt  to  take  their  city
by  escaladef,  caused  all  the  prisoners  whom  they  took  from
the  Savoyards  on  that  occasion  to  be  hanged  up  as  robbers,
who  had  come  to  attack  them  without  cause  and  without  a  de-
claration of  war.  Nor  were  the  Genevese  censured  for  thia
proceeding,  which  would  have  been  detested  in  a  formal  war,

*  See  chap.  zii.  of  this  book.  are  hottea  humani  generU, The  Man-

{(1)  Pirates  may  be  lawfully  captured anna  Flora,  11  Wheat  Rep.  1.}

by  the  public  or  priTate  armed  ships  of j-  In  the  year  160JL

•ny  nation,  in  peace  or  war;  for  they
424


OF  THI  ENEMT,  ETC.  821

'BOOK  HI.
CHAP. T.

CHAP.  V.

OP  THE  ENEMY,  AND  OP  THINGS  BELONGINa  TO  THE ENEMT.

THE  enemy  is  he  with  whom  a  nation  is  at  open  war. The  ? «». Who
Latins  had  a  particular  term  (Sostis)  to  denote  a  public  enemy,  **  *"  ®°*"
and  distinguished  him  from  a  private  enemy  {Inimieua). Our  ™^'  ^ '
language  affords  but  one  word  for  these  two  classes  of  per-
sons, who  ought,  nevertheless,  to  be  carefully  distinguished*

(147)  As  to  the  dejinition  of  an  alien  Eaati  489 ; Willan  y.  Patteton,  7  Taunt

«nemj,  and  of  what  is  less  than  a  gene-  439 ;  Grotins,  B.  3,  e.  4,  s.  8 ;  Binker-

ral  enemy,  and  merely  an  hottile  cha-  shoek,  B.  1,  e.  3 ;  Chitty's  L.  Nat  I  to

racter,  or hostile reaideneey  or hoetile  27. The  exceptions  to  that  rule are

fratfe,  and  of  the  modem  decisions  on  the  sometimes by  express treaty; (see 2

diversities ;  see  Boedee  Luet,  5  Rob.  Rep.  Ward's  Law  of  Nat  358 ;)  and  in  Great

233;  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  394  Britain  have  been  permitted  by  tempo*

to  412,  Id.  Index,  tit  Hoetile  Cfkar<Mcter,  rary  acts,  or  by  orders  in  council,  author*

and  Chitty's  L.  Nat  30  to  64.  izing  the  privy  council  to  grant  licenses.

In  some  cases,  the  generous  and  be-  (See  Phillimore  on  Licenses,  5.) The

neficial  conduct  of  an  enemy  will  obli-  case  of  prisoners  at  war  contracting  for

Urate  his  hostile  charaoter,  and  preclude  necessaries, constitutes an  exception,

his  property  from  bec<Mning  subject  to  Antoine  y.  Morehead, 6  Taunt 237 —

seizure,  as was  beautifully  illustrated  447 ;  1  Marsh.  Rep.  558 ;  Danby  v.  Mort-

by  Sir  W.  Scotft  decision  in  Jonge  J,  head,  6  Taunt  332;  Vattel, />o«t,  {  264,

Baumanrif where  an English  frigate,  p.  414.

with  her  officers  and  crew,  having  been Questions sometimes arise,  whether

saved from shipwreck by  a foreign  a  commercial  transaction  between  par-

I  neutral  \ vessel  and  crew,  the  former  ties in different  countries,  afterwards

ungratefully  carried  the  latter  into  port  at  war  with  each  other,  as  for  instance,

as prize; {aj<serting she had  French  Great  Britain and America, pending

property  on  board ; }  but  a  restoration  war,  or  on the eve  of  war,  between

was  decreed,  on  the  ground  that  such  a  these  countries,  waa  pactum  illicitiun^

service  had  blotted  out  and  obliterated  If  it  be  pending  war,  or  in  contempla-

the  character  of  an  enemy,  |  if  it  had  tion  of  it,  and  against  its  spirit,  and  not .

ever  existed,  which  was  not  the  fact }  expressly  licensed  by  the  Government,

1  Rob.  Rep.  245;  and  see  JJ  178,  post,  then  it  is  illegal. See  the  rule  in  the

pp.  374-5.  case of  McOavon  y. Stewart,  in the

0/  the  illegality  of  commerce  hettoeen  House  of  Lords,  (14  July,  1830,)  4  Wils.
eubjeeta  of  belligerent  etatee, — Vattel  is  &  Shaw,  193-4.  An  alien  carrying  on
very  succinct  upon  this,  in  modem  trade  in  an  enemy's  country,  though
times,  the  most  important  consequence  resident  there  also  in  the  character  of
of  war.  In  general  it  is  illegal  for  the  consul  of  a  neutral  state,  has  been  con-
private  subjects  of  belligerents  to  have  sidered  an  alien  enemy,  and  as  such
any  commercial  transactions  or  deal-  disabled  to  sue,  and  liable  to  confisca-
ings  between  each  other,  in  expecta-  *  tion.  Albrebtcht  v.  Susemann,  2  Yes.  A
tion  of  or  pending  the  war;  for  other-  Beames,  323.

wise  assistance  might  be  rendered  to But these rules prohibiting com-

the  enemy,  enabling  Chem  to  protract  merce  between  the  subjects  of  bellige-

the war, and,  under colour of com-  rent  states,  do  not  affect  neutrals ;  (ex-

merce,  secret communications might  oepting,  indeed,  the  liability  to  visitation

be  made  ii^jurious  to  the  states  of  each  and search ;) and, therefore, actions

eountry ;  and  therefore  there  is  no  such  may  be  sustained  in  England  by  a  neu-

thing  as  a  war  for  arms,  and  a  peace  tral  on  a  promissory  note  given  to  him

for  commerce. The  rule  and  the  prin-  by  a  British subject  in an enemy's

ciple  upon  which  it  is  founded,  are  fully  oountry,  for  goods  sold  by  the  neutral

commented  upon  in  the case  of The  to  the  latter  there. Gowp.  363 ;  Hour.

Hoop,  1  Rob.  Rep.  196 ;  Potts  v.  Bell,  8  ret  v.  Morris,  3  Gamp.  803. And  it  has

Term  Rep.  548 ;  McnneU  y.  Bonkamf  16  even been  held,  that  an  Englishman

54  2l2  425


821  OF  THE  SNEMf,  AND  OF  THIXGS

BOOK  iiL A  private  enemy  is  one  who  seeks  to  hurt  us,  and  takes  pW
CHAP,  v.^  gjj^.g  jjj  |.j^^  ^Yil  that  befals  us. A  public  enemy  forms  ckinu

against  us,  or  rejects  ours,  and  maintains  his  real  or  pretendd
rights  by  force  of  arms. The  former  is  never  innocent ;  be
fosters  rancour  and  hatred  in  his  heart. It  is  possible  that
the  public  enemy  may  be  free  from  such  odious sentiments,
that  he  does  not  wish  us  ill,  and  only  seeks  to  maintain  his
rights. This  observation  is  necessary  in  order  to  regulate  the
dispositions  of  our  heart  towards  a  public  enemy,
g  70. AU When  the  sovereign  or  ruler  of the  state  declares  war
the  subjects  against  another  sovereign,  it  is  understood  that  the  whole  na-
rtates^^at  ^ ^^^^  declares  war  against  another  nation ;  for  the sovereign
w»r  are.  ene- represents  the  nation,  and  acts  in  the  name  of  the  Trhole  so-
mies,  ciety  (Book  I.  §§  40,  41 ;)  and  it  is  only  in  a  body,  and  in  her

national  character,  that  one  nation  has  to  do  with  aDOther.
Hence,  these  two  nations  are  enemies,  and  all  the  subjects  of
the  one  are  enemies  to  all  the  subjects  of  the  other. In  this
particular,  custom  and  principle  are  in  accord.
2  71. and Enemies  continue  such  wherever  they  happen  to  be- The
continue  to  placc  of  abodc  is  of  no  consequence  here. It  is  the  political
be  enemies ^jgg  -^tich  determine  the  character. Whilst  a  man  continues
^  *^®^'  a  citizen  of  his  own  country,  he  is  the  enemy  of  all  those  with
whom  his  nation  is  at  war. But  we  must  not  hence  conclude
that  these  enemies  may  treat  each  other  as  such,  wherever
they  happen  to  meet. Every  one  being  master  in  his  respect-
ive country,  a  neutral  prince  will  not  allow  them  to  use  any
violence  in  his  territories.
i  T2. Whe- Since  women  and  children  are  subjects  of  the  state,  and
ther  women  members  of  the  nation,  they  are  to  be  ranked  in  the  class  of
^"^to^b^'^"  enemies. But  it  does  not  thence  follow  that  we  are  justifiable
connted*  ^'  ^^  treating  them  like  men  who  bear  arms,  or  are  capable  of
enemies. bearing  them. It  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  that  we  have  not
[  322  ]  the  same  rights  against  all  classes  of  enemies.
i  73.  Things When  once  we  have  precisely  determined  who  our  enemies
Ulonging  to  ^j,q^  j^  jg  gg^gy  ^Q  kuow  what  are  the  things  belonging  to  the
fi-«nemy ^j^^^y  /^^^  hostiles). We  have  shown  that  not  only  the  sove-
reign with  whom  we  are  at  war  is  an  enemy,  but  also  his  whole
nation,  even  the  very  women  and  children. Every  thing,
therefore,  which  belongs  to  that  nation, — to  the  state,  to  the
sovereign,  to  the  subjects,  of  whatever  age  or  sex, — every
thing  of  that  kind,  I  say,  falls  under  the  description  of  things
belonging  to  the  enemy.

domiciled  in  a  foreign state  in  amity  c<taimcrce  in  a  hontiU  conntry,  is  to  be

with  this  country  may  lawfully  exer>  considered  as  impressed  with  a  hostile

oise  the  privileges  of  a  subject  of  the  character,  with  reference  at  least  to  so

place  where  he  is  resident,  to  trade  with  much  of  his  commerce  as  may  be  eoa-

a  nation  in  hostility  with  England,  1  nected  with  that establishment; and

Maule  A  Selwyn,  726,  «e(i  <2u<ere. {See  this,  whether  he  maintains  that  esta-

Livingston  v.  The  Maryland  Ins,  Co,  7  blishment  as  a  partner,  or  as  a  solo  trade.

Cranch,  506.} But,  in  general  he  who  The  Citto,  3  Rob.  38;  Th*  Portland,  LL

maintains  an  establishment  or  house  of  41  to  44. — 0.
42«


OF  THI  EKBMT, BTC.  822

And,  with  respect  to  things,  the  case  is  the  same  as  with kook  hi.
respect  to  persons : — ^things  belonging  to  the  enemy  continue  _-£.'!f!l_l--
Buch,  wherever  they  are.  (1) But  we  are  not  hence  to  con-  g  74. con-
clude, any  more  than  in  the  case  of  persons  (§  71),  that  we  tinue  such
everywhere  possess  a  right  to  treat  those  things  as  things  be-  »v«'y^^«'*-
longing  to  the  enemy.

Since  it  is  not  the  place  where  a  thing  is,  which  determines
the  nature  of  that  thing,  but  the  character  of  the  person  to
whom  it  belongs, — things  belonging  to  neutral  persons,  which  §  75. Neu-
happen  to  be  in  an  enemy's  country,  or  on  board  an  enemy's  ^^^  ^^^p
ships,  are  to  be  distinguished  from  those  which  belong  to  the  ^""ngmy.
enemy. But  it  is  the  owner's  business  to  adduce  evident  proof
that  they  are  his  property:  for,  in  default  of  such  proof,  a
thing  is  naturally  presumed  to  belong  to  the  nation  in  whose
possession  it  is  found.  (148)

The preceding  section  relates  to  movable  property:  but
the  rule  is  different  with  respect  to  immovable  possessions,
such  as  landed  estates. Since  all  these  do  in  some  measure  j  76.  Luidi
belong  to  the  nation,  are  part  of  its  domain,  of  its  territory,  possessed  by
and  under  its government  (Book  I.  §§  204,  235,  Book  ii.  ^'^^'^g"
§  114) — and  since  the  owner  is  still  a  subject  of  the  country  ^u^^
as  possessor  of  a  landed  estate, — ^property  of  this  kind  does
not  cease  to  be  enemy's  property  (res  hostiles),  though  pos-
sessed by  a  neutral  foreigner. Nevertheless,  war  being  now
carried  on  with  so  much  moderation  and  indulgence,  protec-  .
tions  are  granted  for  houses  and  lands  possessed  by  foreigners
in  an  enemy's  country. For  the  same  reason,  he  who  declares
war  does  not  confiscate  the  immovable  property  possessed  in
his  country  by  his  enemy's  subjects. By  permitting  them  to
purchase  and  possess  such  property,  he  has  in  that  respect
admitted  them  into  the  number  of  his  subjects. But  the  in-
come may  be  sequestrated,  in  order  to  prevent  its  being  re-
mitted to  the  enemy's  country.

Among  the  things  belonging  to  the  enemy,  are  likewise  in- ;  77.  Thingi
corporeal  things, — all  his  rights,  claims,  and  debts,  excepting,  <*«®  ^  *^«
however,  those  kind  of  rights  granted  by  a  third  party,  and  in  ^^^^^  *
which  the  grantor  is  so  far  concerned,  that  it  is  not  a  matter
of  indifference  to  him,  in  what  hands  they  are  vested. Such,  [  323  "]
for  instance,  are  the  rights  of  commerce. But  as  debts  are
not  of  this  number,  war  gives  us  the  same  rights  over  any  sums
of  money  due  by  neutral  nations  to  our  enemy,  as  it  can  give
over  his  other  property.(149)

{(1)  See  Johiuon  et  oL  r.  Twenty-one (149)  This  was the  ancient  law  of •

BtUeSf Ao. Van  Ness,  Prize Causes,  nations,  Att. Gen,  v. Weedon,  Parker

pw  7.}  Rep.  267,  though  certainly  denied  by

(148)  As  to  protdetion  to  neutrals'  RolU,  J. At  all  events,  it  is  now  al-

property  and  modem  decisions,  see  1  tered; see authorities, anttf 284, n.

Chitty's Commeroial Law,  885 — 440;  (134;) 1 Chitty's Commercial Law,

Id.  Index,  tit  Neutral*;  1  Ghitty's  L.  423;  1 Chitty's  L.  Nat  82  to  80.— G.

Nat  34,  54,  110—113, 183;  Id.  Index,  {But  see  Fairfax  v.  Hunter,  6  Cranch,

tit  IfeutraU^^O.  19.}

427


823  OF  THE  enbmt's  allies,  etc.

BOOK  nr.  When  Alexander,  by  conquest,  became  absolute  master  of
*^"^fi_L«  Thebes,  he  remitted  to  the  Thcssalians  a  hundred  talenti
which  they  owed  to  the  Thebans.'*'  The  sovereign  has  natu-
rally the  same  right  over  what  his  subjects  may  owe  to  ene-
mies, he  may  therefore  confiscate  debts  of  this  nature,  if  the
term  of  payment  happen  in  the  time  of  war ;  or  at  least  he
may  prohibit  his  subjects  from  paying  while  the  war  continues.
But,  at  present,  a  regard  to  the  advantage  and  safety  of  com-
merce has  induced  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  to  act  with
less  rigour  in  this  point.  (150)  And  as  the  custom  has  been
generally  received,  he  who  should  act  contrary  to  it  would
violate  the  public  faith ;  for  strangers  trusted  his  subjects  only
from  a  firm  persuasion  that  the  general  custom  would  be  ob-
served. The  state  does  not  so  much  as  touch  the  sufns  which
it  owes  to  the  enemy :  Tnoney  lent  to  the  public  is  everywhere
exempt  from  confiscation  and  seizure  in  case  of  war.


CHAP.  VL

CHAP,  vi, OF  THE  enemy's  ALLIES — OF  WARLIKE  ASSOCIATIONS — OP

AUXILIARIES  AND SUBSIDIES.

;  78. Tre*. WE  have  suflSciently  spoken  of  treaties  in  general,  and
ties  relatiTe  shall  here  touch  on  this  subject  only  in  its  particular  relatioM
^  ^^' to  war. Treaties  relating  to  war  are  of  several  kinds,  and
vary  in  their  objects  and  clauses,  according  to  the  will  of  those
who  make  them. Besides  applying  to  them  all  that  we  have
said  of  treaties  in  general  (Book  II.  Ch.  XII.  &c.),  they  may
also  be  divided  into  treaties  real  and  personal,  equal  and  un-
equal, &c. But  they  have  also  their  specific  difierences,  viz.
those  which  relate  to  their  particular  object,  war.
(  79.  Defen- Under  this  relation,  alliances  made  for  warlike  purposes  are
■ive  and  of-  divided  in  general  into  defensive  and  offensive  alliances. In
fenrivo  aiu-  ^j^^  former,  the  nation  engages  only  to  defend  her  ally  in  case
^^^^ he  be  attacked :  in  the  latter,  she  unites  with  him  for  the  pur-
pose of  making  an  attack, —  of  jointly  waging  war  against
another  nation. Some  alliances  are  both  ofiensive  and  de-
fensive ;  and  there  seldom  is  an  offensive  alliance  which  is  not
also  a  defensive  one. But  it  is  very  usual  for  alliances  to  be
I B24  1  purely  defensive :  and  these  are  in  general  the  most  natural
and  lawful. It  would  be  a  tedious  and  even  a  useless  tsisk  t^
enumerate  in  detail  all  the  varieties  incident  to  such  alliances.


*  Orotias,  de  Jure  Belli  A  Paols,  Ub.  iiL  oftp.  vUL  {  ^
(150)  See  tupra,  n.  (149).
428


OF  THE  EKEMT'S  ALLIES, ETC.  824

Some  are  made,  without  restriction,  against  all  opponents :  in  book  m.
others,  certain  states  are  excepted :  others  again  are  formed  '^^^^'  ^''
against  such  or  such  a  nation  expressly  mentioned  by  name.

But  a  difference  of  great  importance  to  be  observed,  espe- 1  so. Dif-
cially  in  defensive  alliances,  is  that  between  an  intimate  and  f^renee  bo-
complete  alliance,  in  which  we  agree  to  a  union  of  interests, —  |^*®'*  ^""
and  another,  in  which  we  only  promise  a  stated  succour.  The  ti^ng  ^^
alliance  in  which  we  agree  to  a  union  of  interests  is  a  warlike  auxiUary
association :  each  of  the  parties  acts  with  his  whole  force ;  all  treaties,
the  allies  become  principals  in  the  war ;  they  have  the  same
friends  and  the  same  enemies. But  an  alliance  of  this  nature
is  more  particularly  termed  a  warlike  association,  when  it  is
offensive.

When  a  sovereign,  without  directly  taking  part  in  the  war  }  si.  Anxi-
made  by  another  sovereign,  only  sends  him  succours  of  troops  liary  troops.
or  ships,  these  are  called  auxiliaries.

The  auxiliary  troops  serve  the  prince  to  whom  they  are  sent,
according  to  their  sovereign's  orders.  If  they  are  purely  and
simply  Sent  without  restriction,  they  are  to  serve  equally  on
the  offensive  and  the  defensive ;  and  for  the  particulars  of  their
operations,  they  are  to  obey  the  directions  of  the  prince  to
whose  assistance  they  come.  Yet  this  prince  has  not  the  free
and  entire  disposal  of  them,  as  of  his  own  subjects :  they  are
granted  to  him  only  for  his  own  wars ;  and  he  has  no  right  to
transfer  them,  as  auxiliaries,  to  a  third  power.

Sometimes,  this  succour  from  a  potentate  who  does  not  di- }  82.  BuhA-
rectly  take  part  in  the  war,  consists  in  money :  and  then  it  is  ^*®"-
called  a  subsidy.  This  term  is  now  often  taken  in  another
sense,  and  signifies  a  sum  of  money  annually  paid  by  one
sovereign  to  another,  in  return  for  a  body  of  troops  which  the
latter  furnishes  to  the  other  to  carry  on  his  wars,  or  keeps  in
readiness  for  his  service.  The  treaties  for  procuring  such  a
resource  are  called  subsidiary  treaties.  France  and  England
have  at  present  such  treaties  existing  with  several  of  the
northern  powers  and  princes  in  Germany,  and  continue  them
even  in  times  of  peace.

In  order,  now,  to  judge  of  the  morality  of  these  several  trea-  j  83.  Whem
ties  or  alliances,— of  their  legitimacy  according  to  the  law  of  »  nation  u
nations,  we  must,  in  the  first  place,  lay  down  this  incontro-  »^^^^®^  ^^
vertible  principle,  that  It  is  lawful  and  commendable  to  suc^  ^^g,
eour  and  assist,  by  all  possible  means,  a  nation  engaged  in  a
just  war  ;  and  it  is  even  a  duty  incumbent  on  every  nation,
to  give  such  assistance,  when  she  can  give  it  without  injury
to  herself. But  no  assistance  whatever  is  to  be  afforded  to
him  who  is  engaged  in  an  unjust  War. There  is  nothing  in
this  which  is  not  demonstrated  by  what  we  have  said  of  the
common  duties  of  nations  towards  each  other.  (Book  II.  Gh.  I.)
To  support  the  cause  of  justice  when  we  are  able,  is  always
commendable :  but,  in  assisting  the  unjust,  we  partake  of  his
crime,  and  become,  like  him,  guilty  of  injustice.

42^


824  OF  THE  enemy's  allies,  etc.

BOOK  m. If,  to  the  principle  we  have  now  laid  down,  you add  thf
CHAP.  VI.  consideration  of  what  a  nation  owes  to  her  own  safetv,  and


\  84.  and  to  of  the  Care  which  it  is  so  njitural  and  so  fit  that  she  should

make  aiu- |;ake  to  put  herself  in  a  condition  to  resist  her  enemies,  you

anises  or ^j|j  ^j^^  more  readily  perceive  how  clear  a  right  a  nation  has

r  325  1  ^^  ^ake  warlike  alliances,  and  especially  defensive  alliances,

^  whose  sole  tendency  is  to  maintain  all  parties  in  the  quiet

and  secure  possession  of  their  property.

But  great  circumspection  is  to  be  used  in  forming  such
alliances. Engagements  by  which  a  nation  may  be drawn
into  a  war  at  a  moment  when  she  least  expects  it,  ought  not
to  be  contracted  without  very  important  reasons,  and  a  direct
view  to  the  welfare  of  the  state. We  here  speak  of  alliances
made  in  time  of  peace,  and  by  way  of  precaution against
future  contingencies.
1 85. AUi- If  there  be  question  of  contracting  an  alliance  with  a  na-
anceftmade  ^^^^n  already  engaged  in  a  war,  or  on  the  point  of  engaging
tion  i^tuaiiy  ^^  ^^®'  *^^  things  are  to  be  considered :  1.  The  justice  of
engaged  in  that  nation's  quarrel. 2.  The  welfare  of  the  state. 'If  the
war.  war  which  a  prince  wages,  or  is  preparing  to  wage,  he  un-

just, it  is  not  allowable  to  form  an  alliance  with  him ;  for
injustice  is  not  to  be  supported.  If  he  is  justifiable  in
taking  up  arms,  it  still  remains  to  be  considered  whether  the
welfare  of  the  state  allows  or  requires  us  to  embark  in  his
quarrel :  for  it  is  only  with  a  view  to  the  welfare  of  the
state  that  the  sovereign  ought  to  use  his  authority :  to  that
all  his  measures  should  tend,  and  especially  those  of  the
most  important  nature.  What  other  consideration  can
authorize  him  to  expose  his  people  to  the  calamities  of
war?
{  86.  Tacit  As  it  is  Only  for  the  support  of  a  just  war  that  we  are  al-
ciaase  in  lowed  to  givc  assistance  or  contract  alliances, — every  alliance,
-yar-  gy^ry  warlike  association,  every  auxiliary  treaty,  contracted
by  way  of  anticipation  in  time  of  peace,  and  with  no  view  to
any  particular  war,  necessarily  and  of  itself  includes  this
tacit  clause — that  the  treaty  shall  not  be  obligatory  except
in  case  of  a  just  war.  On  any  other  footing,  the  alliance
could  not  be  validly  contracted. (Book  II.  §§  161,  168.)

But  care  must  be  taken  that  treaties  of  alliance  be  not
thereby  reduced  to  empty  and  delusive  formalities.  The
tacit  restriction  is  to  be  understood  only  of  a  war  which  is
evidently  unjust ;  for  otherwise  a  pretence  for  eluding  treaties
would  never  be  wanting.  Is  there  question  of  contracting
an  alliance  with  a  power  actually  at  war  ?  It  behooves  you
most  religiously  to  weigh  the  justice  of  his  cause :  the  judg-
ment depends  solely  on  you,  since  you  owe  him  no  assistance
any  further  than  as  his  quarrel  is  just,  and  your  own  circum-
stances make  it  convenient  for  you  to  embark  in  it.  But
when  once  engaged,  nothing  less  than  the  manifest  injustice
of  his  cause  can  excuse  you  from  assisting  him. In  a  doubt-

430


every  war-
like  alii
inoe.


OF  THB  enemy's  ALLIES, ETC,  325

ful  case,  you  are  to  presume  that  your  ally  has  justice  on  his t^ook  m.
Ride ;  that  being  his  concern.  chap.  vi.

But  if  you  entertain  strong  doubts,  you  may  very  fairly
and coroinendably interpose to effect an accommodation.
Thus  you  may  bring  the  justice  of  the  cause  to  the  test  of
evidence,  by  discovering  which  of  the  contending  parties  re-  [  326  ]
fuses  to  accede  to  equitable  conditions.

As  every  alliance  implies  the  tacit  clause  above  mentioned,  j  57.  To  w-
he  who  refuses  to  succour  his  ally  in  a  war  that  is  manifestly  fuse  buo-
unjust  is  not  chargeable  with  a  breach  of  alliance.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^

When  alliances  have  thus  been  contracted  beforehand,  the  ^g"^"*^,™!^
question  is,  to  determine,  in  the  course  of  events,  those  cases  of  aUiance.
in  which  our  engagements  come  in  force,  and  we  are  bound
to  act  in  consequence  of  the  alliance. This  is  what  is  called  ?  88. Whai
casus  foederis,  or  case  of  the  alliance,  and  is  to  be  discovered  ^^®  f*****.
in  the  concurrence  of  the  circumstances  for  which  the  treaty  •'"
has  been  made,  whether  those  circumstances  have  been  ex-
pressly specified  in  it,  or  tacitly  supposed. Whatever  has
been  promised  in  the  treaty  of  alliance  is  due  in  the  casits
foederis,  and  not  otherwise.

As  the  most  solemn  treaties  cannot  oblige  any  one  to  favour  g  89. It
an  unjust  quarrel  (§  86):  the  casus  foederis  never  takes  place  "ever  takes
in  a  war  that  is  manifestly  unjust.  place  m  an

In  a  defensive  alliance,  the  casus  foederis  does  not  exist  im-  '^^1^*
mediately  on  our  ally  being  attacked. It  is  still  our  duty  to  §  90. How
examine  whether  he  has  not  given  his  enemy  just  cause  to  ^*  ^^^^^  *°  •
make  war  against  him :  for  we  cannot  have  engaged  to  un-  ®  ®°**^*
dertake  his  defence  with  the  view  of  enabling  him  to  insult
others,  or  to  refuse  them  justice. If  he  is  in  the  wrong,  we
must  induce  him  to  offer  a  reasonable  satisfaction ;  and  if  his
•enemy  will  not  be  contented  with  it,  then,  and  not  till  then,
the  obligation  of  defending  him  commences.

But  if  the  defensive  alliance  contains  a  guarantee  of  all  §  91.  and  19
the '  territories  at  that  time  possessed  by  the  ally,  the  casus  *  ^^^^^y  ^^
foederis  immediately  takes  place  whenever  those  territories  ^*''*°^*
are  invaded  or  threatened  with an  invasion. If  they  are
attacked  for  a  just  cause,  we  must  prevail  on  our  ally  to  give
satisfaction ;  but  we  may  on  good  grounds  oppose  his  being
deprived  of  his  possessions,  as  it  is  generally  with  a  view  to
our  own  security  that  we  undertake  to  guaranty  them. On
the  whole,  the  rules  of  interpretation,  which  we  have  given
in  an  express  chapter,*  are  to  be  consulted,  in  order  to  de-
termine, on  particular  occasions,  the  existence  of  the  casus
•foederis.

If  the  state  that  has  promised  succours  finds  herself  un-  g  02. Th^
able  to  furnish  them,  her  inability  alone  is  suflBcient  to  dis-  «uccour  !■


not  due


pense  with  the  obligation ; and  if  she  cannot  give  her  as-
eistance  without exposing herself  to evident  danger,  this  "°^j,*jjjj^  ^^^

•  —■■■■■■  ■■ U I  11 ^^^^^ ■■■ — ■ I  ^  ■ ■ ■^ ■■■»»!  ■ ■  -  .  ■■ ■  I ■■  ■  I  M  »

*  Book  IL  oHap.  zriL

481


826  OF  THE  ekemt's  allies,  etc.

BOOK  in. circumstance  also  dispenses  with  it. This  would  be  one  of
CHAP.  VI.  tjjQg^ cases in  which  a  treaty  becomes pernicious to th*


ftirnish  it, gtate,  and  therefore  not  obligatory  (Book  II. §  160 y, But
pubiio^aafety  ^®  here  spcak  of  an  imminent  danger,  threatening  the  very
would  be existence  of  the  state. The  case  of  such  a  danger  is  tacitly
exposed. and  necessarily  reserved in every  treaty. A&  to remote
dangers, or those of no extraordinary  magnitude, — eince
[  327  ]  they  are  inseparable  from  every  military  alliance,  it  'would
be  absurd  to  pretend  that  they  should  create  an  exception ;
and  the  sovereign  may  expose  the  nation  to  them  in  consider-
ation of  the  advantages  which  she  reaps  from  the  alliance.

In  virtue  of  these  principles,  we  are  absolved from the
obligation  of  sending assistance to an ally  wliile  we are
ourselves engaged in a war which requires our whole
strength. If  we  are  able  to  oppose  our  own  enemies and
to  assist  our  ally  at  the  same  time,  no  reason  can  be  pleaded
for  such  dispensation. But,  in  such  cases,  it  rests  with  our-
selves to  determine  what  our  circumstances  and  strength  will
allow. It  is  the  same  with  other things  which  may  have
been  promised,  as,  for instance,  provisions. There  is no
obligation  to  furnish  an  ally  with  them  when  we  want  them
for  our  own  use.
{  83. Other We  forbear  to  repeat  in  this  place  what  we  have  said  of
oMoi.  various  other  cases,  in  discoursing  of  treaties  in  general,  as,

for  example,  of  the  preference  due  to  the  more  ancient  ally
(Book  II.  §  167),  and  to  a  protector  (ibid. §  204),  of  the
meaning  to  be  annexed  to  the  term  "aWtea,"  in  a  treaty  in
which  they  are  reserved  (ibid.  §  309). Let  us  only  add,  on
this  last  question,  that,  in  a  warlike  alliance  made  against  all
opponents,  the  allies  excepted^  this  exception  is  to  be  understood
only  of  the  present  allies. Otherwise,  it  would  afterwards  be*
easy  to  elude the  former  treaty  by  new  alliances ; and  it
would  be  impossible  for  us  to  know  either  what  we  are  doing
in  concluding  such  a  treaty,  or  what  we  gain  by  it.
Two  of  the A  case  which  we have not  spoken  of  is this : — Three
parties  in pqwcrs  havc  entered  into  a  treaty  of  defensive  alliance  :  two
ooi^ng  to*a  ^^  *^®™  quarrel,  and  make  war  on  each  other : — how  is  the
rupture. third  to  act  ? The  treaty  does  not  bind  him  to  assist  either
the  one  or  the  other;  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that  he
has  promised  his  assistance  to  each  against  the  other,  or  to
one  of  the  two  in  prejudice  of  the  other. The  only  obliga-
tion, therefore,  which  the  treaty  imposes  on  him,  is  to  en-
deavour, by  the  interposition  of  his  good  offices,  to  effect  a
reconciliation  between  his  allies ;  and  if  his  mediation  proves,
unsuccessful,  he  remains  at  liberty  to  assist  the  party  who
appears  to  have  justice  on  his  side.
^  04. Re- To  refuse  an  ally  the  succours  due  to  him,  without  having
fiuai  of  the  any  just  cause  to  allege  for  such  refusal,  is  doing  him  an  in-
SSTin"' . j'^^y^  since  it  is  a  violation  of  the  perfect  right  which  we  gave
him  by  a  formal  engagement. I  speak  of  evident  cases,  it

i32


OF  THE enemy's ALLIES, ETC.  327

being  then  only  that  the  right  is  perfect ;  for,  in  those  of  a boor  in.
doubtful  nature,  it  rests  with  each  party  to  judge  what  he  is ^^^^'  ^V-.
able  to  do(§  92) :  but  he  is  to  judge  maturely  and  impartially,  *"*;  ^^  •■
and  to  act  with  candour.  And  as  it  is  an  obligation  naturally *"^®*'
incumbent  on  us,  to  repair  any  damage  caused  by  our  fault,
and  especially  by  our  injustice,  we  are  bound  to  indemnify
an  ally  for  all  the  losses  he  may  have  sustained  in  consequence
of  our  unjust  refusal. How  much  circumspection,  therefore,
is  to  be  used  in  forming  engagements,  which  we  cannot  re-
fuse to  fulfil  without  material  injury  to  our  affairs  or  our  [  328  ]
honour,  and  which,  on  the  other  hand,  if  complied  with,  may
be  productive  of  the  most  serious  consequences.

An  engagement,  which  may  draw  us  into  a  war,  is  of  great  ^  95.  Th«
moment :  in  it  the  very  existence  of  the  state  is  at  stake,  enemy's  •
He  who  in  an  alliance  promises  a  subsidy  or  a  body  of  auxilia-  a»«o«^*®"*
ries,  sometimes  imagines  that  he  only  risks  a  sum  of  money
or  a  certain  number  of  soldiers ;  whereas  he  often  exposes
himself  to  war  and  all  its  calamities.  The  nation  against
whom  he  furnishes  assistance  will  look  upon  him  as  her
enemy ;  and  should  her  arms  prove  successful,  shfe  will  carry
the  war  into  his  country.  But  it  remains  to  be  determined
whether  she  can  do  this  with  justice,  and  on  what  occasions.
Some  authors*  decide  in  general,  that  whoever  joins  our
enemy,  or  assists  him  against  us  with  money,  troops,  or  in
any  other  manner  whatever,  becomes  thereby  our  enemy,  and
gives  us  a  right  to  make  war  against  him : — a  cruel  decision,
and  highly  inimical  to  the  peace  of  nations !  It  cannot  be
supported  by  principles ;  and  happily  the  practice  of  Europe
stands  in  opposition  to  it.

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  every  associate  of  my  enemy  is
himself  my  enemy.  It  is  of  little  consequence  whether  any
one  makes  war  on  me  directly,  and  in  his  own  name,  or
under  the  auspices  of  another.  Whatever  rights  war  gives
me  against  my  principal  enemy,  the  like  it  gives  me  against
all  his  associates :  for  I  derive  those  rights  from  the  right  to
security, — from  the  care  of  my  own  defence ;  and  I  am
equally  attacked  by  the  one  ana  the  other  party.  But  the
question  is,  to  know  whom  I  may  lawfully  account  my  ene-
my's associate,  united  against  me  in  war.

First,  in  that  class  I  shall  rank  all  those  who  are  really  ?  96.  Thow
united  in  a  warlike  association  with  my  enemy,  and  who  ^^^  ™*^*  •
make  a  common  cause  with  him,  though  it  is  only  in  the  *^°"™°'^.^.

!•,  ..  '  o  .  •'.-  cause  if  ith

name  of  that  prmcipal  enemy  that  the  war  is  carried  on.  the  enemy
There  is  no  need  of  proving  this. In  the  ordinary  and  open  are  his  asso-
warlike  associations,  the  war  is  carried  on  in  the  name  of  all^^^^^^i
the  allies,  who  are  all  equally  enemies  (§  80).

In  the  second  place,  I  account  as  associates  of  my  enemy,  g  97. And
those  who  assist  him  in  his  war  without  being  obliged  to  it  ^^^^  ^^^


*  See  Wolf,  Jus  Gontiam,  J  J  730  and  737.
65  2M  433


828  OF  THE  enemy's  allies,  etc.


BOOK  in. by  any  fypntj. Since  they  freely  and  voluntarily  declare
against  m  ,  they,  of  their  own  accord,  choose  to  become  my


CHAP. VI.


»


ftMist  him, enemies. If  they  go  no  farther  than  furnishing  a  determined
without  be-  guccour,  allowing some troops  to  be  raised,  or  advancing
to^it^  *^*^  money,— and,  in  other  respects,  preserve  towards  me  the  ac-
treaUesj customcd relations of friendship and ,  neutrality, — I may
overlook  that  ground  of  complaint ;  but  still  I  have  a  right
to  call  them  to  account  for  it. This  prudent  caution  of  not
always  coming  to  an  open  rupture  with  those  who  give  such
assistance  to  our  enemy,  that  we  may  not  force  them  to  join
him  with  all  their strength, — this forbearance,  I  say,  has
gradually  introduced  the  custom  of  not  looking  on  such  as-
sistance as  an  act  of  hostility,  especially  when  it  consists
[  329  ]  only  in  the  permission  to  enlist  volunteers. How  often  have
the  Switzers  granted  levies  to  France,  at  the  same  time  that
they  refused  such an indulgence  to  the  house  of  Austria,
though  both  powers  were  in  alliance  with  them  ! How  often
have  they  allowed  one  prince  to  levy  troops  in  their  country,
and  refused  the  same  permission  to  his  enemy,  when  they
were  not  in  alliance  with  either ! They  granted  or  denied
that  favour  according  as  they  judged  it  most  expedient  for
themselves ;  and  no  power  has  ever  dared  to  attack  them  on
that  account. But  if  prudence  dissuades  us  from  making
use  of  all  our  right,  it  does  not  thereby  destroy  that  right.
A  cautious  nation  chooses  rather  to  overlook  certain  points,
than  unnecessarily  to  increase  the  number  of  her  enemies.
{  98. Or Thirdly,  those,  who,  being  united  with  my  enemy  by  an
who  are  in offensive  alliance,  actively  assist  him  in  the  war  which  he
an  oflFenBive  (j^clares  against  me, — those,  I  say,  concur  in  the  injury  in-
with^hka. tended  against  me. They  show  themselves  my  enemies,  and
I  have  a  right  to  treat  them  as  such. Accordingly, the
Switzers,  whose  exampl^  we  have  above  quoted,  seldom  grant
troops  except  for  defensive  war. To  those  in  the  service  of
France,  it  has  ever  been  a  standing  order  from  their  sove-
reigns, not  to  carry  arms  against  the  empire,  or  against  the
states  of  the  house  of  Austria  in  Germany. In  1644,  the
captains  of  the  Neufchatel  regiment  of  Guy,  on  information
that  they  were  destined  to  serve  under  Marshal  Turenne,  in
Germany,  declared  that  they  would  rather  die  than  disobey
their sovereign and  violate  the alliances  of  the Helvetic
body. Since  France  has  been  mistress  of  Alsace,  the  Swit-
zers who  serve  in  her  armies  never  pass  the  Rhine  to  attack
the  empire. The  gallant  Daxelhoffer,  captain  of  s.  Berne
company  in  the  French  service,  consisting  of  200  men,  and
of  which  his  four  sons  formed  the  first  rank,  seeing  the  gene-
ral would  oblige  him  to  pass  the  Rhine,  broke  his  espoutoon,
and  marched  back  with  his  company  to  Berne.
^  M. How Even  a  defensive  alliance  made  expressly  against  mc,  or
a  iefenrire  (y^hich  amounts  to  the  Same  thing)  concluded  with  my  enemy
aUiuiee  as-  buying  the  War,  or  on  the  certain  prospect  of  its  speedy  de

434


OP  THE  enemy's allies, ETC.  829

claratlon,  is  an  act  of  association  against  me ;  and  if  followed book  hl
by  effects,  I  may  look  on  the  party  who  has  contracted  it  as ^^^^^  ^


my  enemy. The  case  is  here  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  a  sociatei
nation  assisting  my  enemy  without  being  under  any  obliga-  ^^^  *^*
tion  to  do  so,  and  choosing  of  her  own  accord  to  become  my  ^^^^^'
enemy. (See  §  97.)

A  defensive  alliance,  though  of  a  general  nature,  and  made  ?  lOO.  Au-
before  any  appearance  of  the  present  war,  produces  also  the  ^^^^  ^^®'
same  effect,  if  it  stipulates  the  assistance  of  the  whole-
strength  of  the  allies :  for  in  this  case  it  is  a  real  league,  or
warlike  association ;  and,  besides,  it  were  absurd  that  I
should  be  ^debarred  from  making  war  on  a  nation  who  op^
poses  me  with  all  her  might,  and  thus  exhausting  the  source
of  those  succours  with  which  she  furnishes  my  enemy.  In
what  light  am  I  to  consider  an  auxiliary  who  comes  to  make
war  on  me  at  the  head  of  all  his  forces  f  It  would  be  mock-
ery on  his  part,  to  pretend  that  he  is  not  my  enemy.  What  [  330  ]
more  could  he  do,  were  he  openly  to  declare  himself  such  ?
He  shows  no  tenderness  for  me  on  the  occasion :  he  only
wishes  that  a  tender  regard  should  be  paid  to  himself.  And
shall  I  suffer  him  to  preserve  his  provinces  in  peace,  and
secure  from  all  danger,  whilst  he  is  doing  me  all  the  mischief
in  his  power  ?  No !  the  law  of  nature,  the  law  of  nations,
obliges  us  to  be  just ;  but  does  not  condemn  us  to  be  dupes.

But,  if  a  defensive  alliance  has  not  been  made  against  me  ^  loi. in
in  particular,  nor  concluded  at  the  time  when  I  was  openly  ^^^^  c«*«  »*
preparing  for  war,  or  had  already  begun  it, — and  if  the  allies  ^**®^  °^*^
have  only  stipulated  in  it  that  each  of  them  shall  furnish  a  ^^^3^^^^^^^
stated  succour  to  him  who  shall  be  attacked, — I  cannot  require
that  they  should  neglect  to  fulfil  a  solemn  treaty,  which  they
had  an  unquestionable  right  to  conclude  without  any  injury
to  me. In  furnishing  my  enemy  with  assistance,  they  only
acquit  themselves  of  a  debt :  they  do  me  no  wrong  in  dis-
charging- it; and, consequently, they afford me no  just
grounds  for  making  war  on  them(§  26). Neither  can  I  say
that  my  safety  obliges  me  to  attack  them;  for  I  should
thereby  only  increase the  number  of  my  enemies,  and,  in-
stead of  a  slender  succour  which  they  furnish  against  me,
should  draw  on  myself  the  whole  power  of  those  nations.
It  is,  therefore,  only  the  troops  which  they  send  as  auxili-
aries, that  I  am  to  consider  as  enemies. These  are  actually
united  with  my  enemies  and  fighting  against  me.

The  contrary  principles  would  tend  to  multiply  wars,  and
spread  them  beyond  all  bounds,  to  the  common  ruin  of  na-
tions. It  is  happy  for  Europe,  that,  in  this  instance,  the
established  custom  is  in  accord  with  the  true  principles.  A
prince  seldom  presumes  to  complain  of  a  nation's  contributing
to  the  defence  of  her  ally  by  furnishing  him  with  succours
which  were  promised  in.  former  treaties, — in  treaties  that
were  not  made  against  that  prince  in  particular. In  the  last


i


330  OF  THE  enemy's  ALLIES, ETC.

BOOK  m.  war,  the  United  Provinces  long  continued  to  supply  the  qceea
CHAP.  Yi.  Qf  Hungary  with  subsidies,  and  even  with  troops  ;  and  Yj^u,-:
never  complained  of  these  proceedings  till  those  tT*jf»u
marched  into  Alsace  to  attack  the  French  frontier.  Switirr-
land,  in  virtue  of  her  alliance  with  France,  furnishes  tlia:
crown  with  numerous  bodies  of  troops,  and,  neverthtitsa.
lives  in  peace  with  all  Europe.

There  is  one  case,  however,  which  might  form  an  excepu- 1
.  to  the  general  rule ;  it  is  that  of  a  defensive  war  wbick  ^
evidently  unjust. For  in  such  case  there  no  longer  e.x>*3
any  obligation  to  assist  an  ally  (§§  86,  87,  89). If  you  malt:'
take  to  do  it  without  necessity,  and  in  violation  of  your  doTT.
you  do  an  injury  to  the  enemy,  and  declare  against  him  ict
of  mere  wantonness. But  this  is  a  case  that very  rarely
occurs  between  nations. There  are  few  defensive  wars  wits-
out  at  least  some  apparent  reason  to  warrant  their  justice  tc
necessity. Now,  on  any  dubious  occasion,  each  state  is  k>>
judge  of  the  justice  of  her  own  cause ;  and  the  presumpiiti
is  in  favour  of  your  ally  (§  86).. Besides,  it  belongs  to  jja
alone  to  determine  what  conduct  on  your  part  will  be  ojl-
L  831  ]  formable  to  your  duties  and  to  your  engagements ;  and  <x£-
sequently  nothing  less  than  the  most  palpable  evidence  tub
authorize  the  enemy  of  your  ally  to  charge  you  with  sup^
porting  an  unjust  war,  contrary  to  the  conviction  of  T>jr
own  conscience.  In  fine,  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  ordaia^:.
that,  in  every  case  susceptible  of  doubt,  the  arms  of  lN>:i:t
parties  shall,  with  regard  to  external  effects,  be  accouniei
equally  lawful  (§  40).
f  103.  Whe- The  real  associates  of  my  enemy  being  my  enemies.  I
ther  it  be have  against  them  the  same  rights  as  against  the  principal
neoessary  to  enemy  (§  95). And  as  their  own  conduct  proclaims  them
animit  ^o'  ™y  enemies,  and  they  take  up  arms  against  me  in  the  fii^t
enemy's  as- ii^stancc,  I  may  make  war  on  them  without  any  declaratiqii :
ffooUtes. the  war  being  sufficiently  declared  by  their  own  act. Thi^  ij
especially  the  case  of  those  who  in  any  manner  whatever
concur  to  make  an  offensive  war  against  me  ;  and  it  is  lilt-
wise  the  case  of  all  those  whom  we  have  mentioned  in  §§  v«6,
97,  98,  99,  100.

But  it  is  not  thus  with  those  nations  which  assist  my  ene-
my in  a  defensive  war :  I  cannot  consider  them  as  his  asso-
ciates (§  101).  If  I  am  entitled  to  complain  of  their  famish-
ing him  with  succours,  this  is  a  new  ground  of  quarrel  between
me  and  them.  I  may  expostulate  with  them,  and,  on  not  re-
ceiving satisfaction,  prosecute  my  right,  and  make  war  on
them.  But  in  this  ci\9,e  there  must  be  a  previous  declaration
(§  51).  The  example  of  Manlius,  who  made  war  on  tiie
Galatians  for  having  supplied  Antiochus  with  troops,  is  not
a  case  in  point. Grotius*  censures  the  Roman  general  for

*  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  lib.  ilL  019.  iii.  {  10.
43«


OF NEUTRALITY, BTC.  881

liavinor  begun  that  war  without  a  declaration. The  Galatians, boof  m,

^j  O  ' ran  A  D ^n

in  furnishing  troops  for  an  offensive  war  against  the  Romans, '

liad  declared  themselves  enemies  to  Rome.  It  would  appear,
indeed,  that,  on  peace  being  concluded  with  Antiochus,  Man-
lius  ought  to  have  waited  for  orders  from  Rome  before  he
attacked  the  Galatians ;  and  then,  if  that  expedition  was  con-
sidered as  a  fresh  war,  he  should  have  not  only  issued  a  de-
claration, but  also  made  a  demand  of  satisfaction,  previous
to  the  commencement  of  hostilities  (§  61).  But  the  treaty
-with  the  king  of  Syria  had  not  yet  received  its  consummation :
and  it  concerned  that  monarch  alone,  without  making  any
mention  of  his  adherents.  Therefore  Manlius  undertook  the
expedition  against  the  Galatians,  as  a  consequence  or  a
remnant  of  the  war  with  Antiochus.  This  is  what  he  himself
very  well  observed  in  his  speech  to  the  senate;*  and  he  even
added,  that  his  first  measure  was  to  try  whether  he  could
bring  the  Galatians  to  reasonable  terms.  Grotius  more  appo-
sitely quotes  the  example  of  Ulysses  and  his  followers, —
blaming  them  for  having,  without  any  declaration  of  war,
attacked  the  Giconians,  who  had  sent  succours  to  Priam
during  the  siege  of  Troy.f


CHAP.  Vn.  [  332  ]

OP  NEUTRALITY — ^AND  THE  PASSAGE  OF  TROOPS  THROUGH  A  _£EfEl-!!L

NEUTRAL  COUNTRY.  (161)

NEUTRAL  naticms  are  those  who,  in  time  of  war,  do  not  ?  ^^^-  ?^®""
take  any  part  in  the  contest,  but  remain  common  friends  to '^****»'*"*
both  parties,  without  favouring  the  arms  of  the  one  to  the
prejudice  of  the  other. Here  we  are  to  consider  the  obliga-
tions and  rights  flowing  from  neutrality.

In  order  rightly  to  understand  this  question,  we  must  avoid  g  104.  Con-
confounding  what  may  lawfully  be  done  by  a  nation  that  is  ^"ct  to  be
free  from  HI  engagements,  with  what  she  may  do  if  she  ex-°*^*®'^®^^^
pects  to  be  treated  as  perfectly  neutral  in  a  war. As  long  as  nation.
a  neutral  nation  wishes  securely  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of
her  neutrality,  she  must  in  all  things  show  a  strict  impartial-
ity towards  the  belligerent  powers :  for,  should  she  favour  one  •
of  the  parties  to  the  prejudice  of  the  other,  she  cannot  com-


•  Livy,  lib.  zxzviii.  ,  mercial Law, 43 — 64,  383 — 490; Id.

f  Grotius,  ubi  eupra,  not  3.  Index,  tit  NeutraU,  and  in  Chitty's  L.

(161)  The  modern illustrating  deci- Nat  14,  34 — 5^  153;  and  Id.  Index,
nons  upon  neutrals,  and  neutrality,  wiU tit  NeutraU. — 0.
be  found  collected  in  1  Chitty's  Gom-

2u2  437


J


332  OF  NEUTRALITY, ETC.

•  BOOK  ni. plain  of  being  treated  by  him  as  an  adherent  and  confederBt*

cHAr  vii.  ^f  jjjg  enemy.  Her  neutrality  would  be  a  fraudnlen:  L'^.'.
trality,  of  which  no  nation  will  consent  to  be  .the  dupe.  I:  i
sometimes  suflfered  to  pass  unnoticed,  merely  for  want  of  j'  r
lity  to  resent  it ;  we  choose  to  connive  at  it,  rather  than  ei'.  >
a  more  powerful  opposition  against  us.  But  the  present  iJi^t-
tion  is,  to  determine  what  may  lawfully  be  done,  not  tLa*
prudence  may  dictate  according  to  circumstances.  L^:  e?
therefore  examine,  in  what  consists  that  impartiality  wtici  &
neutral  nation  ought  to  observe.

It  solely  relates  to  war,  and  includes  two  articles, — 1.  I.
give  no  assistance  when  there  is  no  obligation  to  give  ii^— n  :
voluntarily  to  furnish  troops,  arms,  ammunition,  or  any  liir.;
of  direct  use  in  war.  I  do  not  say,  "to  give  assiiUr-
equally,"  but  "to  ^ve  no  assistance:"  for  it  would  be  al'ss::
that  a  state  should  at  one  and  the  same  time  assist  two  natk*-<
at  war  with  each  other ;  and,  besides,  it  would  be  impossibW :
do  it  with  equality.  The  same  things,  the  like  numl/er  :
troops,  the  like  quantity  of  arms,  of  stores,  &c-,  fumisLeJ  ^
diflferent  circumstances,  are  no  longer  equivalent  succour.
2.  In  whatever  does  not  relate  to  war,  a  neutral  and  imparia.
nation  must  not  refuse  to  one  of  the  parties,  on  accoant  of  b
present  quarrel,  what  she  grants  to  the  other.  This  does  l  :
deprive  her  of  the  liberty  to  make  the  advantage  of  the  statj?
still  serve  as  her  rule  of  conduct  in  her  negotiations,  l-r
friendly  connections,  and  her  commerce.  When  this  res>«~^
induces  her  to  give  preferences  in  things  which  are  ever  at  tb.
free  disposal  of  the  possessor,  she  only  makes  use  of  her  rigs:.
and  is  not  chargeable  with  partiality. But  to  refuse  anj  •  *

[  333  ]  those  things  to  one  of  the  parties  purely  because  he  is  at  "^^
with  the  other,  and  because  she  wishes  to  favour  the  larici,
wouM  bo  departing  from  the  line  of  strict  neutrality.

i  105. An I  have  said  that  a  neutral  state  ought  to  give  no  assistac.'?

ally  may to  either  of  the  parties,  when  "  under  no  obligation  to  give  it.

furnish  the rpj^jg  restriction  is  necessary. We  have  already  seen,  mi

succour  due i  '^ • o •  y A  j^  ^•'

from  him when  a  sovereign  furnishes  the  moderate  succour  due  m  virrvic
and  remain  of  a  former  defensive  alliance,  he  does  not  become  an  a.-.--
neuter. ciate  in  the  war(§  101). He  may,  therefore,  fulfil  bis  t>
'  gageraent,  and  yet  observe  a  strict  neutraUty.  Of  this,  Euiopt
affords  frequent  instances.
;  106.  Right When  a  war  breaks  out  between  two  nations,  all  other  siate?
of  remain- that  are  not  bound  by  treaties  are  free  to  remain  neuter;  aiii
big  neuter, jf  either  of  the  belligerent  powers  attempted  to  force  tht-m  t
a  junction  with  him,  he  would  do  them  an  injury,  inasmm :
as  he  would  be  guilty  of  an  infringement  on  their  indefieni-
ency  in  a  very  essential  point. To  themselves  alone  ir  ^-
longs  to  determine  whether  any  reason  exists  to  induce  tlieL
to  join  in  the  contest ;  and  there  are  two  points  which  clajs
their  consideration :  1.  The  justice  of  the  cause. If  that  1<
evident,  injustice  is  not  to  be  countenanced :  on  the  contnrj.

438


OF  NEUTRALTTT, ETC.  833

it  IS  generous  and  praiseworthy  to  succour  oppressed  inno-  book  m
jcence,  when  we  possess  the  ability.  If  the  case  be  dubious,  -£^iL-Ii'-
the  other  nations  may  suspend  their  judgment,  and  not  engage
in  a  foreign  quarrel.  2.  When  convinced  which  party  has
justice  on  his  side,  they  have  still  to  consider  whether  it  be
for  the  advantage  of  the  state  to  concern  themselves  in  this
affair,  and  to  embark  in  the  war.

A  nation  making  war,  or  preparing  to  make  it,  often  pro-  ?  i^^-  Tre*
poses  a  treaty  of  neutrality  to  a  state  of  which  she  entertains  **®"  **^  '*®®
suspicions.  It  is  prudent  to  learn  betimes  what  she  has  to
expect,  and  not  to  run  the  risk  of  a  neighbour's  suddenly  join-
ini;  with  the  enemy  in  the  heat  of  the  war.  In  every  case
where  neutrality  is  allowable,  it  is  also  allowable  to  bind  our-
selves to  it  by  treaty.

Sometimes  even  necessity  renders  this  justifiable.  Thus,
although  it  be  the  duty  of  all  nations  to  assist  oppressed  inno-
cence (Book  II.  §  4),  yet,  if  an  unjust  conqueror,  ready  to  in-
vade his  neighbour's  possessions,  makes  me  an  offer  of  neu-
trality when  he  is  able-  to  crush  me,  what  can  I  do  better  than
to  accept  it  ?  I  yield  to  necessity ;  and  my  inability  dis-
charges me  from  a  natural  obligation.  .  The  same  inability
would  even  excuse  me  from  a  perfect  obligation  contracted  by
an  alliance.  The  enemy  of  my  ally  threatens  me  with  a  vast
superiority  of  force  :  my  fate  is  in  his  hand :  he  requires  me
to  renounce  the  liberty  of  furnishing  any  assistance  against
him.  Necessity,  and  the  care  of  my  own  safety,  absolve  me
from  my  engagements.  Thus  it  was  that  Louis  the  Four-
teenth compelled  Victor  Amadeus,  duke  of  Savoy,  to  quit  the
party  of  the  allies.  But,  then,  the  necessity  must  be  very
urgent.  It  is  only  the  cowardly,  or  the  perfidious,  who  avail
themselves  of  the  slightest  grounds  of  alarm,  to  violate  their
promises  and  desert  their  duty.  In  the  late  war,  the  king  [  334  ]
of  Poland,  elector  of  Saxony,  and  the  king  of  Sardinia,  firmly
hold  out  against  the  unfortunate  course  of  events,  and,  to  their
great  honour,  could  not  be  brought  to  treat  without  the  con-
currence of  their  allies.

Another  reason  renders  these  treaties  of  neutrality  useful,  §  i^s. Ad-
and  even  necessary. A  nation  that  wishes  to  secure  her  own  ^^^^^'^^  '^**
peace,  when  the  flames  of  war  are  kindling  in  her  neighbour-  j^g  ^jj^^^
hood,  cannot  more  successfully  attain  that  object  than  by  con- treaties,
eluding  treaties  with  both  parties,  expressly  agreeing  what
each  may  do  or  require  in  virtue  of  the  neutrality. This  is  a
sure  mode  to  preserve  herself  in  peace,  and  to  obviate  all  dis-
putes and  cavils.

Without  such  treaties,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  disputes  will  2 109.  Foun.
often  arise  respecting  what  neutrality  does  or  does  not  allow.  ^'*^^**^°**^^'^*
This  subject  presents  many  questions  which  authors  have  dis-  ^^^^^
cussed  with  great  heat,  and  which  have  given  rise  to  the  most
dangerous  quarrels  between  nations. Yet  the  law  of  nature
and  of  nations  has  its  invariable  principles,  and  affords  rules

439


1


834  OF  NEUTRALITY, ETC.


CHAP. Vll.


BOOK  m. on  this  head,  as  well  as  on  the  others. Some  things  also  hare
~' grown  into  custom  among  civilized  nations,  and  are  to  be  con-
formed to  by  those  who  would  not  incur  the  reproach  of  un-
justly breaking  the  peace.* As  to  the  rules  of  the  natural
•  law  of  nations,  they  result  from  a  just  combination  of  the  law^

of  war,  with  the  liberty,  the  safety,  the  advantages,  the  com-
merce, and  the  other  rights  of  neutral  nations. It  is  on  thia
principle  that  we  shall  lay  down  the  following  rules  : —
^  110 How First,  no  act  on  the  part  of  a  nation,  which  falls  within  the
levies  may exercise  of  her  rights,  and  is  done  solely  with  a  view  to  ber
inoneyTent,  ^^'^^  g^^^?  without  partiality,  without  a  design  of  favouring
aud  every One  power  to  the  prejudice  of  another, — ^no  act  of  that  kini
kind  of I  say,  can  in  general  be  considered  as  contrary  to  neutrality;
things  sold,  nor  does  it  become  such,  except  on  particular  occasions,  when
breaoh^f ^^  cannot  take  place  without  injury  to  one  of  the  parties,  who
nouHiiity. ^^rS  then  a  particular  right  to  oppose  it. Thus,  the  besieger
has  a  right  to  prohibit  access  to  the  place  besieged  (see  §  117
in  the  sequel). Except  in  cases  of  this  nature,  shall  the  quar-
rels of  others  deprive  me  of  the  free  exercise  of  my  rights  in
the  pursuit  of  measures  which  I  judge  advantageous to  my
people  ? Therefore,  .when  it  is  the  custom  of  a  nation,  for  the
purpose  of  employing  and  training  her  subjects,  to permit
levies  of  troops  in  favour  of  a  particular  power  to  whom  she
thinks  proper  to  intrust  them, — ^the  enemy  of  that  power  can-
not look  upon  such  permissions  as  acts  of  hostility,  unless  they
are  given  with  a  view  to  the  invasion  of  his  territories,  or  the
[  335  ]  support  of  an  odious  and  evidently  unjust  cause. He  cannot
even  demand,  as  matter  of  right,  that  the  like  favour  be
granted  to  him, — because  that  nation  may  have  reas^ons  for
refusing  him,  which  do  not  hold  good  with  regard  to  his  ad-
versary ;  and  it  belongs  to  that  nation  alone  to  judge  of  what
best  suits  her  circumstances. The  Switzers,  as  we  have  al-
ready observed,  grant  levies  of  troops  to  whom  they  please ;
and  no  power  has  hitherto  thought  fit  to  quarrel  with  them  on
that  head. It  must,  however,  be  owned,  that,  if  those  levies
were  considerable,  and  constituted  the  principal  strength  of
my  enemy,  while,  without  any  substantial  reason  being  al-
leged, I  were  absolutely  refused  all  levies  whatever, — I  should
have  just  cause  to  consider  that  nation  as  leagued  with  my
enemy ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  care  of  my  own  safety  would
authorize  me  to  treat  her  as  such.

The  case  is  the  same  with  respect  to  money  which  a  nation
may  have  been  accustomed  to  lend  out  at  interest.  If  the
sovereign,  or  his  subjects,  lend  money  to  my  enemy  on  that

*  The  foUowing  is  an  instance : — It  at  liberty,  because  they  were  then  &UeB

was  determined  by  the  Dutch,  that,  on  into  the  power  of  a  nation  that  was  in

a  vessel's  entering  a  neutral  port,  after  neutrality  with  the  beUigerent  parties. —

having  taken  any  of  the  enemies  of  her  The  same  rule  had  been  observed  by

nation  prisoners  on  the  high  seas,  she  England  in  the  war  between  Spain  aad

should  be  obliged  to  set  those  prisoners  the  United  Prorinces.


OF  NEUTRALITY, ETC.  885


looting,  and  refuse  it  to  me  because  they  have  not  the  same ^^^^  "'•

confideuce  in  me,  this  is  no  breach  of  neutrality. They  lodge '

their  property  where  they  think  it  safest.  If  such  preference
be  not  founded  on  good  reasons,  I  may  impute  it  to  ill-will
against  me,  or  to  a  predilection  for  my  enemy. Yet  if  I  «

should  make  it  a  pretence  for  declaring  war,  both  the  true
principles  of  the  law  of  nations,  and  the  general  custom  hap-
pily established  in  Europe,  would  join  in  condemning  me.
While  it  appears  that  this  nation  lends  out  her  money  purely
for  the  sake  of  gaining  an  interest  upon  it,  she  is  at  liberty
to  dispose  of  it  according  to  her  own  discretion ;  and  I  have
no  right  to  complain.

But  if  the  loan  were  evidently  granted  for  the  purpose  of
enabling  an  enemy  to  attack  me,  this  would  be  concurring  in
the  war  against  me.

If  the  troops,  above  alluded  to,  were  furnished  to  my  enemy
by  the  state  herself,  and  at  her  own  expense,  or  the  money
in  like  manner  lent  by  the  state,  without  interest,  it  would  no
longer  be  a  doubtful  question  whether  such  assistance  were
incompatible  with  neutrality.

Further,  it  m«ay  be  affirmed  on  the  same  principles,  that  if  a
nation  trades  in  arms,  timber  for  ship-building,  vessels,  and
warlike  stores, — I  cannot  take  it  amiss  that  she  sells  such
things'to  my  enemy,  provided  she  does  not  refuse  to  sell  them
to  me  also  at  a  reasonable  price.  She  carries  on  her  trade
without  any  design  to  injure  me ;  and  by  continuing  it  in  the
same  manner  as  if  I  were  not  engaged  in  war,  she  gives  me
no  just  cause  of  complaint.

In  what  I  have  said  above,  it  is  supposed  that  my  enemy  |  ill.  Tntda
goes  himself  to  a  neutral  country  to  make  his  purchases. Let  °^  neutral^
us  now  discuss  another  case , — that  of  neutral  nations  resort-  "hole'whicii
ing  to  my  enemy's  country  for  commercial  purposes. It  is  are  at  war.
certain,  that,  as  they  have  no  part  in  my  quarrel,  they  are
under  no  obligation  to  renounce  their  commerce  for  the  sake
of  avoiding  to  supply  my  enemy  with  the  means  of  carrying  [  886  ]
on  the  war  against  me. Should  they  aflfect  to  refuse  selling
me  a  single  article,  while  at  the  same  time  they  take  pains  to
convey  an  abundant  supply  to  my  enemy,  with  an  evident  in-
tention to  favour him,  such  partial  conduct  would  exclude
them  from  the  neutrality  they  enjoyed. But  if  they  only  con-
tinue their  customary  trade^  they  do  not  thereby  declare  them-
selves attains t  my  interest :  they  only  exercise  a  right  which
they  are  under  no  obligation  of  sacrificing  to  me.  (152)

(152)  It  must  be  a  continuance  only  Deb.  935. It  has  even  been  holden  that

of  sneh  etutomary  trade. See  Home  on  a  British-bom  subject^  while  domiciled

Captarcs,  216 — 233 ;  De  Tcmtet  v.  TViy-  in  a  neutral  country,  may  legally  trade

lor,  4  Tnunt.  238 ;  Bell  v.  Eeidf  1  Maule  from  that  country  with  n  state  at  war

k  Selw.  727; and  an  able  speech  of  with  this  country. BeUY.Beid,!  Mavdt

Lord  Erskine,  8th March,  1808,  upon  A  Selwyn.  727. — C.
the  orders  in  Council ;  10  Cobbett's  ParL

56  441


836  OP  NEUTRALITY, ETC.

BOOK  m. On  the  other  hand,  whenever  I  am  at  war  with  a  natioo,
CHAP.  viL  jj^|.jj  ^y  safety  and  welfare  prompt  me  to  deprive  her,  as  far
as  possible,  of  every  thing  which  may  enable  her  to  resist  &r
injure  me.  In  this  instance,  the  law  of  necessity  exerts  its  foil
force.  If  that  law  warrants  me,  on  occasion,  to  seize  what  be-
longs to  other  people,  will  it  not  likewise  warrant  me  to  inter
cept  every  thing  belonging  to  toar^  which  neutral  nations  are
carrying  to  my  enemy  ?  Even  if  I  should,  by  taking  such  mea-
sures, render  all  those  neutral  nations  my  enemies,  I  had  belter
run  that  hazard,  than  suffer  him  who  is  actually  at  war  with  me
thus  freely  to  receive  supplies  and  collect  additional  strength
to  oppose  me. It  is,  therefore,  very  proper,  and  perfectly
conformable  to  the  law  of  nations  (which  disapproves  of  mul-
tiplying the  causes  of  war),  not  to  consider  those  seizures  of
thegoods  of  neutral  nations  as  acts  of  hostility.

When  I  have  notified  to  them  my  declaration  of  war  against
such  or  such  a  nation,  if  they  will  afterwards  expose them-
selves to  risk  in  supplying  her  with  things  which  serve  to
carry  on  war,  they  will  have  '  no  reason  to  complain  if  their
goods  fall  into  my  possession ;  and  I,  on  the  other  hand,  do
not  declare  war  against  them  for  having  attempted  to  convey
such  goods. They  suffer,  indeed,  by  a  war  in  which  they  have
no  concern ;  but  they  suffer  accidentally. I  do  not  oppose
their  right : I  only  exert  my  own ;  and  if  our  rights*  clash
with  and  reciprocally  injure  each  other,  that  circumstance  is
the  effect  of  inevitable  necessity. Such  collisions  daily  hap-
pen in  war. When,  in  pursuance  of  my  rights,  I  exhaust  a
country  from  which  you  derive  your  subsistence, — ^when  I  be-
siege a  city  with  which  you  carried  on  a  profitable  trade,  I
doubtless  injure  you; I  subject  you  to  losses  and  inconve-
niences ;  but  it  is  without  any  design  of  hurting  you. I  only
make  use  of  my  rights,  and  consequently  do  you  no  injustice.
But  that  limits  may  fte  set  to  these  inconveniences,  and  that
the  commerce  of  neutral  nations  may  subsist  in  as  great  a  de-
gree of  freedom  as  is  consistent  with  the  laws  of  war,  there
are  certain  rules  to  be  observed,  on  which  Europe  seems  to  be
generally  agreed.
f  112.  Con- The  first  is,  carefully  to  distinguish  ordinary  goods  which
traband have  no  relation  to  war,  from  those  that  are  peculiarly  sub-
gooda. servient  to  it. Neutral  nations  should  enjoy  pej-feet  liberty  to
trade  in  the  former :  the  belligerent  potvers  cannot  with  any  rea-
r  837  ]  9071  refuse  it,  or  prevent  the  importation  of  such  goods  into  the
enemy's  country :  the  care  of  their  own  safety,  the  necessity  of
self-defence,  does  not  authorize  them  to  do  it,  since  those  things
will  not  render  the  enemy  more  formidable. An  attempt  to
interrupt  or  put  a  stop  to  this  trade  would  be  a  violation
of  the  rights  of  neutral  nations,  a  flagrant  injury  to  them  ; —
necessity,  as  we  have  above  observed,  being  the  only  reason
which  can  authorize  any  restraint  on  their  trade  and  navigation
to  the  ports  of  the  enemy.  England  and  the  United  Provinces

442


OP  NEUTRALITY, ETC.  S3  7

"having  agreed,  in  the  treaty  of  Whitehall,  signed  on  the  22d  of book  m.
August,  1689,  to  notify  to  all  states  not  at  war  with  France.  ^"^^'  ^"^
that  they  would  attack  every  ship  bound  to  or  coming  from
any  port  of  that  kingdom,  and  that  they  beforehand  declared
every  such  ship  to  be  a  lawful  prize, — Sweden  and  Denmark, .
from  whom  some  ships  had  been  taken,  entered  into  a  coun-
ter-treaty on  the  17th  of  March,  1693,  for  the  purpose  of
maintaining  their  rights  and  procuring  just  satisfaction. And
the  two  maritime  powers,  being  convinced  that  the  complaints
of  the  two  crowns  were  well  founded,  did  them  justice.*

Commodities  particularly  useful  in  war,  and  the  importation
of  which  to  an  enemy  is  prohibited,  are  called  contraband
goods.  Such  are  arm%^  ammunition^  timber  for  ship-building^
every  hind  of  naval  stores^  horses^ — and  even  provisions,  in  cer-
tain junctures,  when  we  have  hopes  of  reducing  the  enemy
by  famine,  t  (163)

But,  in  order  to  hinder  the  transportation  of  contrcAandi'^^^-  ^^••
goods  to  an  enemy,  are  we  only  .to  stop  and  seize  them,  pay- *^®'^***^^
ing  the  value  to  the  owner,^-or  have  we  a  right  to  confiscate  frconSwL
them  ? Barely  to  stop  those  goods  would  in  general  prove  ted.
an  ineffectual  mode,  especially  at  sea,  where  there  is  no  pos-
sibility of  entirely  cutting  ofi*  all  access  to  the  enemy's  har-
bours. Recourse  is  therefore  had  to  the  expedient  of  confis-
cating all  contraband  goods  that  we  can  seize  on,  in  order  that
the  fear  of  loss  may  operate  as  a  check  on  the  avidity  of  gain,
and  deter  the  merchants  of  neutral  countries  from  supplying
the  enemy  with  such  commodities. And,  indeed,  it  is  an  ob-
ject of  such  high  importance  to  a  nation  at  war  to  prevent,  as
far  as  possible,  the  enemy's  being  supplied  with  such  articles

*  See  other  inatanoes  in  Grotius  de  sold  both  arms  and  provisions  to  the

Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  lib.  ili.  cap.  C  J  5,  Spaniards,  they  could  not  with  propri-

not  6.  ety  have  attempted  to  forbid  neutral

f  The  Pensionary  De  Witt,  in  a  let-  nations to  carry  on  a  similar  trade,

ter  of  January  14,  1654,  acknowledges  (Orotins,  Hist  of  the  Disturbances  in

that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  Low  Countries,  book  vi.) Nevcr-

nations  to  prevent  neutrals  from  carry-  theless,  in  1646,  the  United  Provinces

ing  corn  to  an  enemy's  country;  but  published an  edict  prohibiting their

be  says  that  we  may  lawfully  prevent  own  subjects  in  general,  and  even  neu-

them  from  supplying  the  enemy  with  tral  nations,  to  carry  either  provisions

cordage  and  other  material*  for  the  rig-  or  any  other  merchandise  to  Spain,  be->

ging  and  equipment  of  ship*  of  war,  cause the Spaniards, "after having,

In  1597,  queen  Elizabeth  would  not  under  the  appearance  of  commerce,  al-
allow  the  Poles  and  Danes  to  furnish  lured  foreign  vessels  to  their  ports,  de-
Spain  with  provisions,  much  less  with  tained  them,  and  made  use  of  them  as
«rms,  alleging  that,  "according  to  the  ships  of  war."  And  for  this  reason,
rules  of  war,  it  is  lawful  to  reduce  an  the  same  edict  declared  that  "  the  con-
enemy  even  by  famine,  with  the  view  federates,  when  blocking  up  their  ene-
of  obliging  him  to  sue  for  peace."  The  mies'  ports,  would  seize  upon  every
United  Provinces,  finding  it  necessary  vessel  ^they  saw  steering  towards  those
to  observe  u  greater  degree  of  circum-  places/* — Ibid,  book  xv.  p.  572. — Ed.
spection,  did  not  prevent  neutral  na-  ▲.D.  1797.

Uons  from  carrying  on  every  kind  of (153) What  are contraband goods,

commerce  with  Spain. It  is  true,  in-  see 1 Ohitty's Gomml. L.  441 149 ,

i«ed,  that,  while  their own subjects  and  Ohitty's  L.  Nat  110— 128.— -0.

443


338  OF  NBUTRALITT, ETC.


BOOK  m. as  will  add  to  his  strength  and  render  him  more  dangeroni,
■  ^°^'*'  ^"'  that  necessity  and  the  care  of  her  own  welfare  and  safety  au-
thorize her  to  take  effectual  methods  for  that  purpose,  and  to
declare  that  all  commodities  of  that  nature,  destined  for  the
enemy,  shall  be  considered  as  lawful  prize. On  this  account
she  notifies  to  the  neutral  states  her  declaration  of  war  (§  63 ;)
whereupon,  the  letter  usually  give  orders  to  their  subjects  to
refrain  from  all  contraband  commerce  with  the  nations  at  war,
declaring,  that  if  they  are  captured  in  carrying  on  such,  trade,
the  sovereign  will  not  protect  them. This  rule  is  the  point
where  the  general  custom  of  Europe  seems  at  present  fixed,
after  a  number  of  variations,  as  will  appear  from  the  note  of
Grotius,  which  we  have  just  quoted,  and  particularly  from  the
ordinances  of  the  kings  of  France,  in  the  years  1543  and  1584,
which  only  allow  the  French  to  seize  contraband  goods,  and
to  keep  them  on  paying  the  value. The  modern  usage  is  cer-
tainly the  most  agreeable  to  the  mutual  duties  of  nations,  and
the  best  calculated  to  reconcile  their  respective  rights. The
nation  at  war  is  highly  interested  in  depriving  the  enemy  of
.  all  foreign  assistance ;  and  this  circumstance  gives  her  a  right
to  consider  all  those,  if  not  absolutely  as  enemies,  at  least  as
people  that  feel  very  little  scruple  to  injure  her,  who  carry  to
her  enemy  the  articles  of  which  he  stands  in  need  for  the  sup-
port of  the  war. She,  therefore,  punishes  them  by  the  con-
fiscation of  their  goods. Should  their  sovereign  undertake  to
protect  them,  such  conduct  would  be  tantamount  to  his  fur-
nishing the  enemy  with  those  succours  himself: — a  measure
which  were  undoubtedly  inconsistent  with  neutrality. When
a  nation,  without  any  other  motive  than  the  prospect  of  gain,
is  employed  in  strengthening  my  enemy,  and  regardless  of  the
irreparable  evil  which  she  may  thereby  entail  upon  me,*  she
is  certainly  not  my  friend,  and  gives  me  a  right  to  consider
and  treat  her  as  an  associate  of  my  enemy. In  order,  there-
fore, to  avoid  perpetual  subjects  of  complaint  and  rupture,  it
has,  in  perfect  conformity  to  sound  principles,  been  agreed  '
that  the  belligerent  powers  may  seize  and  confiscate  all  con-
traband goods  which  neutral  persons  shall  attempt  to  carry  to
their  enemy,  without  any  complaint  from  the  sovereign  of
those  merchants ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  power  at  war
does  not  impute  to  the  neutral  sovereigns  these  practices  of
their  subjects. Care  is  even  taken  to  settle  every  particular
of  this  kind  in  treaties  of  commerce  and  navigation.
I  114.  We  cannot  prevent  the  conveyance  of  contraband  goods,

0eanhikff without  Searching  neutral  vessels  that  we  meet  at  sea :  we
[  839  ]  have  therefore  a  right  to  search  them.  Some  powerful  nations

*  In  oar  time,  the  king  of  Spain  pro-  with military stores ; and thus b«

hibited  all  Hamburgh  ships  from  en-  obliged  the  Hambnrghers  to  cancel  their

tering  bis  harbours,  because  that  city  treaty  with  the  BarbariMU. — ^Sd.  ▲.]».

had  engaged  to  furnish  the  Algerines  1797.
. 444


OF  NBTJTBALITT, ETC.  889

have  indeed,  at  diflferent  times,  refused  to submit  to  this book  m.
search. "After  the  peace  of  Vervins,  Queen  Elizabeth,  con-  ^^^^'  ^"'
tinuing  the  war  against  Spain,  requested  permission  of  the  neutral
king  of  France  to  cause  all  French  ships  bound  for  Spain  to^^'P**^^^*^
be  searched,  in  order  to  discover  whether  they  secretly  car-
ried any  military  stores  to  that  country :  but  this  was  refused,
as  an  injury  to  trade,  and  a  favourable  occasion  for  pillage."*
At  preaenty  a  neutral  ship  refusing  to  be  searched^  would  from
that  proceeding  alone  be  condemned  as  a  lawful  prize.  (154)
But,  to  avoid  inconveniences,  oppression,  and  every  other
abuse,  the  manner  of  the  search  is  settled  in  the  treaties  of
navigation  and  commerce. It  is  the  established  custom  at
present  to  give  full  credit  to  the  certificates,  bills  of  lading,
&c.,  produced  by  the  master  of  the  ship,  unless  any  fraud
appear  in  them,  or  there  be  good  reasons  for  suspecting
it.  (155)

if  we  find  an  enemy's  efiocts  on  board  a  neutral  ship,  we  i  115.  En^
seize  them  by  the  rights  of  war :  (156)  but  we  are  naturally  ^t*"  p«>-

(154)  As  to  the  right  of  vinting  and  a  deliberate  and  continued  resistance .

^earchififf  neutral  ships,  see the cele-  of  search,  on  the  part  of  a  neutral  ves-

brated  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  sel,  to  a  lawful  cruiser,  is  followed  by

to  the  Prussian  Secretary,  ▲.  d.  1752;  the  legal  consequences  of  confiscation."

1 Collect  Jurid.  138;  and  Halliday's  And  see  Ditpateh,  3  Rob.  Rep.  278;

Life of  Lord  Mansfield; Elements  of  f^^a&e,  4  Rob.  Re;}.  408 ;  Penntnflvania,

General  History,  voL  iii.  p.  222 ;  Mar-  1 Acton's  Rep.  33 ; Saint  Juan  Bap-

shall  on  Insurance,  book  i.  ch.  8,  sect,  tista,  5  Rob.  Rep.  33 ;  Maria,  1  Rob.

5 ;  OarreU  v.  Kensington,  8  Term  Rep.  Rep.  340 ;  Mentor,  1  Edward,  268 ;  Ca-

230  ;  Lord  Erskine's  Speech  upon  Or-  therina  Elizabeth,  5  Rob.  Rep.  232. See

den  in council,  8 March,  1808; 10  the  modem  French  view  of  the  right

Cobbott's  Pari.  Deb.  955 ;  Baring  upon  of visitation and search, Cours de

Orders  in  Council,  p.  102. Clearly  at  Droits  Public,  tom.  i.  p.  84. Paris ;  A.  d.

this  day  the  right  of  search  exists  prao-  1830. — C— (And the American, The

tically  a«  well  as  theoretically. ^  Eleanor,  2 Wheat  Rep.  345 ; The  U.

The  right  of  search,  and  of  the  con-  States  v.  La  Jeune  EugSnie,  2  Mass.  Rep.

sequence  of  resistance,  and  of  the  pa-  409 ;  The  Marianna  Flora,  3  Mass.  Rep.

pers  and  documents  that  ought  to  be  116;  J/aZey  v.  j^affucA-,  3  Cranch,  458. }
found  on  board  the  neutral  vessels,  are *  Qrotius,  ubi  supra,
most clearly  established by  the  best (155)  As  to  papers  and  documents

modem  decisions ;  see  Barker  v.  JSlakes,  that  ought  to  be  on  board,  see  1  Chit-

9  East  Rep.  283,  and  numerous  other  ty's Commercial  Law, 487 — 489,  and

cases,  collected  in  1  Chitty's  Commer-  Chitty's  L.  Nat  196—199,  and  autho-

oial  Law,  482 — 489 ; Chitty's  L.  Nat  rities  there  collected. The  owner  of  the

190  — 199. The international law  neutral  vessel  has  no  remedy  for  loss

upon  the  subject  wiU  be  found  admi-  of  voyage,  or  other  injury  occasioned

rably  summed  up  by  Sir  Wm.  Scott,  in  by  the  reasonable  exercise  of  the  right

his  Judgment  in  the  case  of  the  Maria,  of  search  (infra  note),  but  he  may  in-

]  Rob.  Rep.  346,  and  1  Edwards's  Rep.  sure  against  the  risk ;  Barker  v.  JBlakee,

208,  confirming  the  authority  of  Vat-  9  East,  283.— C— j  See  Maley  r.  Shat-  ,

tel,  and on  which he  thus  concludes :  tuck,  3  Cranch,  458. }
<<  I  stand  with  confidence  upon  all  fair (156)  Particular  states  have  relaxed  -

principles  of  reason, — upon  the  distinct  the  rigour  of  this  role,  and,  by  express

authority  of  Vattel,  and  upon  the  insti-  treaty,  granted  immunity,  by  establish*

J tutes  of  other  great  maritime  countries,  ing  a  maxim,  "  Free  ships,  free  goods ;"

as  well  as  those  of  our  own  country,  see  instances,  5  Rob.  Rep.  52 ;  6  Rob.

when  I  venture  to  lay  it  down  that,  by  Rep.  24,  41 — 358. — C.
the  ]«w  of  nations,. as  now  understood,

2N  446


389  OP  NEUTRALITT, ETC.

BOOK  m. bound  to  pay  the  freight  to  the  master  of  the  vessel,  who  i?
not  to  suffer  by  such  seizure.*  (157)


CHAP. TIT.


board  aneu-  The  effecU  of  neutrals,  found  iri  an  enemy^s  ships,  are  to
trai  ship.  \yQ  restored  to  the  owners,  against  whom  there  is  no  right  of
^'^^" confiscation;  but  without  any  allowance  for  detainer,  decay,
on  board  an  &c.  (158)  The  loss  Sustained  by  the  neutrals  on  this  occa-
•nemy'a  sion  is  an  accident  to  which  they  exposed  themselves  by  em-
»^P-  barking  their  property  in  an  enemy's  ship ;  and  the  captor,

in  exercising  the  rights  of  war,  is  not  responsible  for  the  ac-
cidents which  may  thence  result,  any  more  than  if  his  cann?>n
kills  a  neutral  passenger  who  happens  unfortunately  to  be  on
board  an  enemy's  vessel.  (158)
2 117.  Trade Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  commerce  of  neutral  na-
with  a  be- tions  with  the  territories  of  the  enemy  in  general. There  is  a
^(\W ^^^  particular  case  in  which  the  rights  of  war  extend  still  farther.
All  commerce  with  a  besieged  town  is  absolutely  prohiljited.
Blockade. If  I  lay  siege  to  a  place,  or  even  simply  blockade  it,  I  hare  a
right  to  hinder  any  one  from  entering,  and  to  treat  as  an
enemy  whoever  attempts  to  enter  the  place,  or  carry  any
• thing  to  the  besieged,  without  my  leave ;  for  he  opposes  my
undertaking,  and  may  contribute  to  the  miscarriage  of  it,  and
thus  involve  me  in  all  the  misfortunes  of  an  unsuccessful  war.
[  8i0  ] King  Demetrius  hanged  up  the  master  and  pilot  of  a  vessel
carrying  provisions  to  Athens  at  a  time  when  he  was  on  the
point  of  reducing  that  city  by  famine.f In  the  long  and
bloody  war  carried  on  by  the  U  nited  Provinces  against  Spain

*  {See  the  rale  as  reoof^nised  by  the  1  Molloy,  1 — 18;  and  TwUling  Buet,  S
United  States.  The  Nereide,  0  Cranch,  Rob.  Rep.  82.— G.
110.}— "I  have  obtained,"  said  the  am-  (158)  1  Chitty*9  Commercial  Law,
^  bassador  Boreei,  in  a  letter  to  the  Orand  440  ,*  GrotiuSf  b.  iii.  c.  vL  §  vi. ;  Mar-
Pensionary,  De  Witt,  "the  abrogation  shall  on  Insurance, b.  L  o.  viiL  |  t.  The
of  that  pretended  French  law,  that  ene-  loss  of  voyage  and  damage  may  be  ic-
mie/  property  involves  in  eonfi$eaiion  the  snred  against;  Barker  v.  Blaktt,  9  £as^
property  of  friend* ;  so  that^  if  hence-  Rep.  283. — C.

forward  any  effects belonging  to  the  (159)  As  to  yiolatioh  of  blockade  in

enemies  of  France  be  found  in  a  free  general,  see  the  modern decisions,  I

Dutch  vessel,  those  effects  alone  shall  Ohitty's Commercial Law, 449 and

be  liable  to  confiscation;  and  the  vessel  460 — 492; Chitty's L.  Nat  129— 144,

shall  be  released,  together  with  all  the  and  259 ;  and  see,  as  to  the  distinction

other  property  on  board. But  I  find  it  between a military and commertial

impossible  to  obtain  the  object  of  the  blockade,  and  their  effect,  1  Acton's  Rep.

twenty -fourth  article  of  my  instructions,  128. On  a  question of  violation of

which  says,  that  the  immunity  of  the  ve9-  blockade, Sir W.  Scott said, "  Three

• §el  shall  extend  to  the  cargo,  even  if  ene-  things  must  be  proved — Ist,  the  exist-

miee*  property." De  Witt's  Letters  and  ence  of  an  actual  blockade ;  2dl7, the

Negotiations,  vol.  i.  p.  80. — Such  a  law  knowledge  of  the  party  supposed  to  have

as  the  latter  would  be  more  natural  than  offended ;  and  3dly,  some  act  of  vioU-

the  former. — Edit  a.  d.  1797.  tion,  either  by  going  in  or  coming  ont

(157) [Sehtoartx  V. The  Ina.  Co,  of  with  a  cargo  laden  after  the  commence*

North  America,  3 Wash. C. C. Rep.  ment  of  blockade." In  case  of  Befsy,

117. }— But,  in  these  cases,  the  freight  1  Rob.  Rep.  92,  and  Nancy,  1  ActonV

to  be  paid  is  not  necessarily  to  be  mea-  Rep.  59. — C. — { Fitztimmont  r.  I%eNff^

0ured  by  the  terms  of  the  charter-party,  port  Ina.  Co.,  4  Cranch|  185.}

f  Plutarch,  in  Demetrio.
440


OP  NEUTRALITY, ETC.  840

for  the  recovery  of  their  liberties,  they  would  not  suffer  the  book  m.
English  to  carry  goods  to  Dunkirk,  before  which  the  Dutch  °"^^'  ^^^
fleet  lay.*

A  neutral  nation  preserves,  towards  both  the  belligerent  |  lis. im-
powers,  the  several  relations  which  nature  has  instituted  be-  partial  offi-
tween  nations. She  ought  to  show  herself  ready  to  render  ^^^  "®"'*
them  every  office  of  humanity  reciprocally  due  from  one  na-
tion to  another :  she  ought,  in  every  thing  not  directly  relat-
ing to  war,  to  give  them  all  the  assistance  in  her  power,  and
of  which  they  may  stand  in  need. Such  assistance,  however,
must  be  given  with  impartiality ;  that  is  to  say,  she  must  not
refuse  any  thing  to  one  of  the  parties  on  account  of  his  being
at  war  with  the  other  (§  104). But  this  is  no  reason  why  a
neutral  state,  under  particular  connections  of  friendship  and
good  neighbourhood  with  one  of  the  belligerent  powers,  may
not,  in  every  thing  that  is  unconnected  with  war,  grant  him
all  those  preferences  which  are  due  to  friends:  much  less
does  she  afford  any  grounds  of  exception  to  her  conduct,' if,  in
commerce,  for  instance,  she  continues  to  allow  him  such  indul-
gences as  have  been  stipulated  in  her  treaties  with  him. She
ought,  therefore, as  far  as  the  public  welfare  will  permit,
equally  to  allow  the  subjects  of  both  parties  to  visit  her  terri-
tories on  business,  and  there  to  purchase  provisions,  horses,
and,  in  general,  every  thing  they  stand  in  need  of, — ^unless
she  has,  by  a  treaty  of  neutrality,  promised  to  refuse  to  both
parties  such  articles  as  are  used  in  war. Amidst  all  the  wars
which  disturb  Europe,  the  Switzers  preserve  their  territories
m  a  state  of  neutrality. Every  nation  indiscriminately  is  al-
lowed free  access  for  the  purchase  of  provisions,  if  the  coun-
try has  a  surplus,  and  for  that  of  horses,  ammunition,  and
arms.

An  innocent  passage  is  due  to  all  nations  with  whom  a  state  ?  119. Pu-
is at  peac€  (Book  II.  §  123) ;  and  this  duty  extends  to  troops  8a«®  ©^
as  well  as  to  individuals. But  it  rests  with  the  sovereign  of  ^^^
the  country  to  judge  whether  the  passage  be  innocent ;  and  it  neutral
is  very  difficult  for  that  of  an  army  to  be  entirely  so. In  the  country,
late  wars  of  Italy  the  territories  of  the  republic  of  Venice  and
those  of  the  pope  sustained  very  great  damage  by  the  passage
of  armies,  and  often  became  the  theatre  of  the  war.

Since,  therefore,  the  passage  of  troops,  and  especially  that  J  120. Pas-
of  a  whole  army,  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  indifference,  he**K«*®^
who  desires  to  march  his  troops  through  a  neutral  country, "  *  *
must  apply  for  the  sovereign's  permission. To  enter  his  ter-
ritory without  his  consent,  is  a  violation  of  his  rights  of  sove-
reignty and  supreme  dominion,  by  virtue  of  which,  that  coun-
try is  not  to  be  dispjsed  of  for  any  use  whatever,  without
his  express  or  tacit  permission. Now,  a  tacit  permission  for  [  841  ]
the  entrance  of  a  body  of  troops  is  not  to  be  presumed,  since


*  GrotiuB,  nbi  supra.

U7


841  OP NEUTRALITY, ETC.

BOOK  III. their  entrance  may  be  productive,  of  the  most  serious  cona^
CHAP.  VII.  quej^ces.


122. In ^^®  proprietor  respecting  the  innocence  of  the  use  wo  desire
hat  case  it  to  make  of  things  belonging  to  another  (Book*  11.  §§  128,  130),


z  121. It  ^^  ^^®  neutral  sovereign  has  good  reasons  for  refusing  »

may  be  re-  passage,  he  is  not  obliged  to  grant  it, — the  passage  in  that

fused  for  cftse  being  no  longer  innocent,

good  rea-  j^  j^jj  doubtful cases  we  must  submit  to  the  iudgment  of

ions.  «'»:;_.

i

what  _  , _

may  be and  must  acquiescc  in  his  refusal,  even  though  we think  it
forced. unjust. If  the  refusal  be  evidently  unjust, — if  the  use,  and,
in  the  case  now  before  us,  the  passage  be  unquestionably  in-
nocent,— a  nation  may  do  herself  justice,  and  take  by  force
what  is  unjustly  denied  to  her. But  we  have  already  observed,
that  it  is  very  diflScult  for  the  passage  of  an  army  to  be  ab-
solutely innocent,  and  much  more  so  for  the  innocence  to  be
very  evident. So  various  are  the  evils  it  may  occasion,  and
the  dangers  that  may  attend  it, — so  complicated  are  they  in
their  nature,  and  so  numerous are  the  circumstances  with
which  they  are  connected, — that,  to  foresee  and  provide  for
every  thing,  is  next  to  impossible. Besides,  self-interest  has
so  powerful  an  influence  on  the  judgments  of  men,  that  if  he
who  requires  the  passage  is  to  be  the  judge  of  its  innocence,
he  will  admit  none  of  the  reasons  brought  against  it ;  and
thus  a  door  is  opened  to  continual  quarrels  and  hostilities.
The  tranquillity,  therefore,  and  the  common  safety  of  nations
require  that  each  should  be  mistress  of  her  own  territory,  and
at  liberty  to  refuse  every  foreign  army  an  entrance,  when  she
has  not  departed  from  her  natural  liberties  in  that  respect,  by
treaties. From  this  rule,  however,  let  us  except  those  very
uncommon  cases  which  admit  of  the  most  evident  demonstra-
tion that  the  passage  required  is  wholly  unattended  with  in-
convenience or  danger. If,  on  such  an  occasion,  a  passage  be
forced,  he  who  forces  it  will  not  be  so  much  blamed  as  the  na-
tion that  has  indiscreetly  subjected  herself  to  this  violence.
Another  case,  which  carries  its  own  exception  on  the  very
face  of  it,  and  admits  not  of  the  smallest  doubt,  is  that  of  ex-
treme necessity. Urgent  and  absolute  necessity  suspends  all
the  rights  of  property  (Book  11.  §§  119, 123) :  and  if  the  pro-
prietor be  not  under  the  same  pressure  of  necessity  as  you,  it
is  allowable  for  you,  even  against  his  will,  to  make  use  of  what
belongs  to  him. When,  therefore,  an  army  find  themselves
exposed  to  imminent  destruction,  or  unable  to  return  to  their
own  country,  unless  they  pass  through  neutral  territories,  they
have  a  right  to  pass  in  spite  of  the  sovereign,  and  to  force
their  way,  sword  in  hand. But  they  ought  first  to  request  a
passage,  to  ofier  securities,  and  pay  for  whatever  damages  they
may  occasion. Such  was  the  mode  pursued  by  the  Greeks  oc
their  return  from  Asia,  under  the  conduct  of  Agesilaus.*

*  Plutarch's  Life  of  AgesUaus.
448


OP  NEUTRALITY, ETC.  342

4

Extreme  necessity  may  even  authorize  the  temporary  seizure  book  m.
of  a  neutral  town,  and  the  putting  a  garrison  therein,  with  a  <^"^p-  ^"',
view  to  cover  ourselves  from  the  enemy,  or  to  prevent  the  exe-
cution of  his  designs  against  that  town,  when  the  sovereign  is
not  able  to  defend  it.  But  when  the  danger  is  over,  we  must
immediately  restore  the  place,  and  pay  all  the  charges,  in-
conveniences, and  damages,  which  we  have  occasioned  by
seizing  it.

When  the  passage  is  not  of  absolute  necessity,  the  bare  { 123. The
danger  which  attends  the  admission  of  a  powerful  army  into  ^^^  ^^  ^*°-
our  territory,  may  authorize  us  to  refuse  them  permission  to  ^^^  o"*^^-
enter. We  may  have  reason  to  apprehend  that  they  will  be  f^gai
tempted  to  take  possession  of  the  country,  or  at  least  to  act
as  masters  while  they  are  in  it,  and  to  live  at  discretion.  Let
it  not  be  said,  with  Grotius,*  that  he  who  requires  the  passage  >

is  not  to  be  deprived  of  his  right  on  account  of  our  unjust
fears.  A  probable  fear,  founded  on  good  reasons,  gives  us  a
right  to  avoid  whatever  may  realize  it ;  and  the  conduct  of
nations  aiTords  but  too  just  grounds  for  the  fear  in  question.
Besides,  the  right  of  passage  is  not  a  perfect  right,  unless  in
a  case  oT  urgent  necessity,  or  when  we  have  the  most  perfect
evidence  that  the  passage  is  innocent.

But,  in  the  preceding  section,  I  suppose  it  impracticable  to  ?  124.  or  •
obtain  suflScient  security  which  shall  leave  us  no  cause  to  ap-  ^«™and  of
prehend  any  hostile  attempts  or  violent  proceedings  on  the  g^n^je^i^,
part  of  those  who  ask  permission  to  pass. If  any  such  secu-  curity.
rity  can  be  obtained,  (and  the  safest  one  is,  to  allow  them  to
pass  only  in  small  bodies,  and  upon  delivering  up  their  arms,
as  has  been  sometimes  required,*!*)  the  reason  arising  from  fear
no  longer  exists. But  those  who  wish  to  pass  should  consent
to  give  every  reasonable  security  required  of  them,  and  con-
sequently submit  to  pass  by  divisions  and  deliver  up  their  arms,
if  the  passage  be  denied  them  on  any  other  terms.  The  choice
of  the  security  they  are  to  give  does  not  rest  with  them. Host-
ages, or  a  bond,  would  often  prove  very  slender  securities. Of
what  advantage  will  it  be  to  me  to  hold  hostages  from  one
who  Vfill  render  himself  master  over  me  ? And  as  to  a  bond,
it  is  of  very  little  avail  against  a  prince  of  much  superior
power.

But,  is  it  always  incumbent  on  us  to  give  every  security  a  j  i2» n\^
nation  may  require,  when  we  wish  to  pas?  through  her  terri-  ^^^^  »i»<ayi
tories? — In  the  first  place,  we  are  to  make  a  distinction  be- "*^*'*^  *•
tween  the  diflFerent  reasons  that  may  exist  for  our  passin^^  ^„^  o^**^
through  the  country ;  and  we  are  next  to  consider  the  mah-  curity  re-
ners  of  the  people  whose  permission  we  ask. If  the  passt^ge  quired,
be  not  essentially  necessary,  and  can  be  obtained  only  on  sus-
picious or  disagreeable  conditions,  we  must  relinquish  all  idea


*  Book  ii.  ohap.  ii  }  13,  note  6.

f  By  the  Eleans,  sod  the  aaoient  iohabitaats  of  Cologne. See  Carotins,  ibid.
67  1ml  4i9


342  OP  KEUTKALITT, ETC.


BOOK  in. of  it,  as  in  the  case  of  a  refusal  (§  122). But,  if  necessit j  t*
CHAP.  Yii.  tj^Qj-izes  me  to  pass,  the  conditions  on  which  the  passage  wij
be  granted  may  be  accepted  or  rejected,  according  to  the  man-
ners of  the  people  I  am  treating  with. Suppose  I  am  to  cix-^
[  343  ]  the  country  of  a  barbarous,  savage,  and  perfidious  nation. —
shall  I  leave  myself  at  their  discretion,  by  giving  up  my  arcs
and  causing  my  troops  to  march  in  divisions  ?  No  one,  I  pre-
sume, will  condemn  me  to  take  so  dangerous  a  step. Si&ee
necessity  authorizes  me  to  pass,  a  kind  of  new  necessity  ari-ts
for  my  passing  in  such  a  posture  as  will  secure  me  from  atj
ambuscade  or  violence. I  will  offer  every  security  that  can
be  given  without  foolishly  exposing  myself;  and  if  the  offer  i«
rejected,  I  must  be  guided  by  necessity  and  prudence, — ^aai
let  me  add,  by  the  most  scrupulous  moderation,  in  order  to
avoid  exceeding  the  bounds  of  that  right  which  I  derive  froai
necessity.
;  126. E- If  the  neutral  state  grants  or  refuses  a  passage  to  one  of  the
quality  to  be  parties  at  war,  she  ought,  in  like  manner,  to  grant  or  refiee
wardTboth'  ^*  *^  ^^®  Other,  uulcss  a  change  of  circumstances  affords  her
parties  as  to  Substantial  reasons  for  acting  otherwise. Without  such  rta-
tbe  passage.  SOUS,  to  grant  to  One  party  what  she  refuses  to  the  other,  woui<i
be  a  partial  distinction,  and  a  departure  from  the  line  of  siric:
neutrality.
i  107. No When  I  have  no  reason  to  refuse  a  passage,  the  party  agaiD5S
complaint whom  it  is  granted  has  no  right  to  complain  of  my  conduct,
lies  against  jq^^]^  j^gg  ^o  make  it  the  ground  of  a  hostile  attack  upon  me,
state  for sinco  I  havc  done  no  more  than  what  the  law  of  nations  en-
granting  a joins  (§  119). Neither  has  he  any  right  to  require  that  I
passage. should  deny  the  passage ;  for  he  must  not  pretend  to  hinder
me  from  doing  what  I  think  agreeable  to  my  duty.  And  even
on  those  occasions  when  I  might  with  justice  refuse  permission
to  pass,  I  am  at  liberty  to  abstain  from  the  exertion  of  mv
right. But  especially  when  I  should  be  obliged  to  suppon
my  refusal  by  the  sword,  who  will  take  upon  him  to  complain
of  my  having  permitted  the  war  to  be  carried  into  his  country,
rather  than  draw  it  on  myself?  No  sovereign  can  require  ihat
I  should  take  up  arms  in  his  favour,  unless  obliged  to  it  bj
treaty. But  nations,  more  attentive  to  their  own  intere&ti
than  to  the  observance  of  strict  justice,  are  often  very  loud  on
this  pretended  subject  of  complaint. In  war,  especially,  thev
stick  at  no  measures ;  and  if  by  their  threats  they  can  induce
a  neighbouring  state  to  refuse  a  passage  to  their  enemy,  the
generality  of  their  rulers  consider  this  conduct  only  as  a  stroke
of  good  policy.
s  ate  may  " ^  powcrful  State  will  despisc  these  unjust  menaces :  firm
r.  fuse  it and  unshaken  in  what  she  thinks  due  to  justice  and  to  her  own
from  a  fear  reputation,  she  will  not  suffer  herself  to  be  diverted  by  the  fear
of  tbe  re- of  ^  groundless  resentment :  she  will  not  even  bear  the  menace,
the  opw>sito  -^^^  *  wcak  natiou,  unable  to  support  her  rights,  will  be  under
party; a  necessity  of  consulting  her  own  safety;  and  this  important

450


OF  NEUTRALITT, ETC,  34S

concern  will  authorize  her  to  refuse  a  passage,  which  would book  m.
expose  her  to  dangers  too  powerful  for  her  to  repel.  ^°^'^'  ^"


Another  fear  may  also  warrant  her  in  refusing  a  passage,  g  129. And
namely,  that  of  involving  her  country  in  the  disorders  and  ^^s*  ^®r
calamities  of  war. For,  even  if  the  party  against  whom  a  T^°[J^v
passage  is  requested,  should  observe  such  moderation  as  not  ^^^^^  4^^
to  employ  menaces  for  the  purpose  of  intimidating  the  neutral  theatre  of
nation  into  a  refusal,  he  will  hardly  fail  to  demand  a  passage  ^<^-
for  himself  also :  he  will  march  to  meet  his  enemy ;  and  thus  [  344  ]
the  neutral  country  will  become  the  theatre  of  war. The  in-
finite evils  of  such  a  situation  are  an  unexceptionable  reason
for  refusing  the  passage. In  all  these  cases,  he  who  attempts
to  force  a  passage,  does  an  injury  to  the  neutral  nation,  and
gives  her  most  just  cause  to  unite  her  arms  with  those  of  his
adversary.  The  Switzers,  in  their  alliances  with  France,  have
promised  not  to  grant  a  passage  to  her  enemies. They  ever
refuse  it  to  all  sovereigns  at  war,  in  order  to  secure  their  fron-
tiers from  that  calamity ;  and  they  take  care  that  their  terri-
tory shall  be  respected.  But  they  grant  a  passage  to  recruits,
who  march  in  small  bodies,  and  without  arms.

The  grant  of  permission  to  pass  includes  a  grant  of  every  g  130.  what
thing  which  is  naturally  connected  with  the  passage  of  troops,  is  included
and  without  which  the  passage  would  be  impracticable ;  such  ^^  ^^  «'*°*
as  the  liberty  of  carrying  with  them  whatever  may  be  neces-  °  P*"*^*-
sary  for  an  army, — that  of  exercising  military  discipline  on
the  soldiers  and  officers,  and  of  purchasing,  at  a  fair  price,
every  thing  the  army  may  want,  unless,  through  fear  of  scar-
city, a  particular  exception  has  been  made,  to  oblige  them  to
carry  with  them  their  own  provisions.

He  who  grants  the  passage  is  bound  to  render  it  safe,  as  far  j  1.31.  Safe-
as  depends  on  him. Good  faith  requires  this ;  and  to  act  ty  of  the
otherwise  would  be  ensnaring  those  to  whom  the  passage  is  p**«^»®-
granted.

For  this  reason,  and  because  foreigners  can  do  nothing  in  §  132. No
a  territory  against  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  it  is  unlawful  to  hoetaity  to
attack  an  enemy  in  a  neutral  country,  or  to  commit  in  it  any  J*«  «<>™n»*<^
other  act  of  hostility. The  Dutch  East-India  fleet  having  put  t^ai  eonn-
into  Bergen,  in  Norway,  in  1666,  to  avoid  the  English,  the  try.  (leo)
British  admiral  had  the  temerity  to  attack  them  there. But
the  governor  of  Bergen  fired  on  the  assailants ;  and  the  court
of  Denmark  complained,  though  perhaps  too  faintly,  of  an  at-
tempt so  injurious  to  her  rights  and  dignity.*  (160)

*  The  aothor  of  the  "  Present  State  sea,  within  cannon-shot  of  the  coast,  is

of  Denmark/'  written  in  English,  pre-'  considered  as  making  a  part  of  the  ter-

tends  that  the  Danes  had  engaged  to  ritory;  and,  for  that  reason,  a  vessel

deliver  np  the  Dutch  fleet,  bnt  that  some  taken  under  the  cannon  of  a  neutral

seasonable  presents,  made  to  the  court  fortress,  is  not  a  lawful priae. Ante,

of  Copenhagen,  saved  it. Chap.  x.  book  i.  chap,  xxiii.  s.  289,  p.  129 ;  Mar-

(160)  At present, by the general  ten's  L.  N.  b.  viiL  chap.  vL  s.  6 ;  and

law  of  nations^  the  whole  space  of  the  see  1  MoUoji  b.  L  chap.  li!.  s.  7 ;  and

461


844  OP  NEUTRALITY, BTC.

B«oK.  m. To  conduct  prisoners,  to  convey  spoil  to  a  place  of  safetr,
CHAP,  yii.  ^j.g  j^g^g  ^f  ^^^^  consequently  not  to  be  done  in  a  neutral  cooi-

try  ;  and  whoever  should  permit  them,  would  depart  from  d<
line  of  neutrality,  by  favouring  one  of  the  parties.  But  I  here
speak  of  prisoners  and  spoil  not  yet  perfectly  in  the  cnemj  t
* power,  and  whose  capture  is,  as  it  were,  not  yet  fully  de-
pleted. A  flying  party,  for  instance,  cannot  make  use  of  &
neighbouring  and  neutral  country  as  a  place  of  deposit  to  se-
cure their  prisoners  and  spoil. To  permit this,  would  k
giving  countenance  and  support  to  their  hostilities. ^Vhti
the  capture  is  completed,  and  the  booty  absolutely  in  tie
enemy's  power,  no  inquiry  is  made  how  he  came  by  sncb
effects,  and  he  may  dispose  of  them  in  a  neutral  country. A
privateer  carries  his  prize  into  a  neutral  port,  and  there  freeW
[  845  ]  sells  it ;  but  he  cannot  land  his  prisoners  there,  for  the  par-
pose  of  keeping  them  in  confinement,  because  the  detentioo
and  custody  of  prisoners  of  war  is  a  continuation  of  hostilities
i  133.  Neu- On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  that,  if  my  neighbour  af-
trai  oountrj  fo|.(jg  a  retreat  to  my  enemies,  when  defeated  and  too  much
a  retreat  to  weakened  to  escape  me,  and  allows  them  time  to  recover,  and
troops,  that  watch  a  favourable  opportunity  of  making  a  second  attack  on
they  may my  territories,  this  conduct,  so  prejudicial  to  my  safety  auJ
afaiii  attack  interests,  would  be  incompatible  with  neutrality.  If,  therefore,
mfel^"*" ™y  enemies,  on  suffering  a  discomfiture,  retreat  into  his  coun-
try, although  charity  will  not  allow  him  to  refuse  them  permis-
sion to  pass  in  security,  he  is  bound  to  make  them  contfiiQe
their  march  beyond  his  frontiers  as  soon  as  possible,  and  no;
suffer  them  to  remain  in  his  territories  on  the  watch  for  a  coo-
venient  opportunity  to  attack  me  anew ;  otherwise  he  gives
me  a  right  to  enter  his  country  in  pursuit  of  them.  Such  treat-
ment is  often  experienced  by  nations  that  are  unable  to  com-
mand respect. Their  territories  soon  become  the  theatre  of
war ;  armies  march,  encamp,  and  fight  in  it,  as  in  a  coimtrj
open  to  all  comers.
f  isi.  Con- Troops  to  whom  a  passage  is  granted  are  not  to  occasion
*u«r^db ^^^  ^^^^  damage  in  the  country ;  they  are  to  keep  to  the  pub-
* ^  lie  roads,  and  not  enter  the  possessions  of  private  persons,—

ehap.i.  8. 16.  {  The  Ann,  1  OaU.  Rep.  62. }  allowed  to  originate  on  neatnl  gioui

And Professor Marten obsenres,  that  and  explains- and  elucidates  what  pre*

when  two  vessels,  the  enemies  of  eaoh  paratory  acts  of  warfare  there  oogLk

other,  meet  in  a  neutral  port,  or  where  or  ought  not,  to  be  tolerated ;  and  m

one  pursues  the  other  into  such  port,  not  1 Chitty's Com.  L.  441 to  444. ^

only  must  they  refrain  from  all  hostili*  we have  seen that  even a  sentcDCt

ties  while  they  remain  there,  but  should  of  condemnation of  ship  or  goods  u

one  set  sail,  Uie  other  must  not  sail  in  prise  cannot  legally  take  place  in  •

less  than  twenty-four  hours  after. Mar-  neutral  country. Ante,  and  Flad  Oy^

ten's  L.  Nat  b.  viiL  c.  vi.  s.  6. Sir  W.  1  Rob.  Rep.  116;  8  T.  R.  270;  Alch*-

Seott,  in  the Twee  OebroecUre,  3  Rob.  son's  Rep. 8,  not«  0 ; and  see  Hat*-

Rep.  162 — S36 ;  and  the  Anna,  5  Rob.  loch  v.  Roekwood,  Atchesoa's  B«p.  4

Rep.  37S,  observes,  that  no  proximate  43. — C.
acts  of  war  are  in  any  manner  to  be
462


OP NEUTRALITY, ETC.  846


to  observe  the  most  exact  discipline,  and  punctually  pay  for book  in.
everything  with  which  the  inhabitants  supply  them. And  if


CHAP.  yn.


the  licentiousness  of  the  soldiers,  or  the  necessity  of  certain  ^<>p*  P""-
operations, as encamping  or intrenching,  has  caused ^'^J  ^"neutxai**
damage,  their  commander  or  their  sovereign  is  bound  to  make  country,
reparation. All  this  requires  no  proof. What  right  have  an
army  to  injure  a  country,  when  the  most  they  could  require
was  an  innocent  passage  through  it  ?

There  can  be  no  reason  why  the  neutral  state  should  not
stipulate  for  a  sum  of  money,  as  an  indemnification  fur  certain
damages  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  estimate,  and  for  the
inconveniences  naturally  resulting  from  the  passage  of  an
army.  But  it  would  be  scandalous  to  sell  the  very  grant  of
passage, — nay,  even  unjust,  if  the  passage  be  attended  with
no  damage,  since,  in  that  case,  the  permission  is  due.  As  to
t)ie  rest,  the  sovereign  of  the  country  is  to  take  care  that  the
compensation  be  paid  to  the  parties  who  have  suffered  the
damage;  for  no  right  authorizes  him  to  reserve  for  his  own
use  what  is  given  for  their  indemnification.  It  is,  indeed,  too
often  the  case,  that  the  weak  sustain  the  loss,  and  the  power-
ful receive  the  compensation.

Finally,  as  we  are  not  bound  to  grant  even  an  innocent  i  135. A
passage?,  except  for  just  causes,  we  may  refuse  it  to  him  who  p*"»k®  ™«y
requires  it  for  a  war  that  is  evidently  unjust, — as,  for  instance,  for"  wm
to  invade  a  country  without  any  reason,  or  even  colourable  evidently
pretext. Thus  Julius  Caesar  denied  a  passage  to  the  Helvetii,  uiyuBU
who  were  quitting  their  country  in  order  to  conquer  a  better.
I  conceive,  indeed,  that  policy  had  a  greater  share  in  his  re-
fusal than  the  love  of  justice ;  but,  in  short,  justice  authorized
him  on  that  occasion  to  obey  the  dictates  of  prudence. A
sovereign  who  is  in  a  condition  to  refuse  without  fear,  should
doubtless  refuse  in  the  case  we  now  speak  of. But  if  it  would
be  dangerous  for  him  to  give  a  refusal,  he  is  not  obliged  to  [  846  ]
draw  down  the  impending  evil  on  his  own  head  for  the  sake  of
averting  it  from  that  of  his  neighbour :  nay,  rashly  to  hazard
the  quiet  and  welfare  of  his  people,  would  be  a  very  great
breach  of  his  duty.


4tt


846  OP  THE RIGHTS OF  NATIONS IN WASU


300K  ni.

CHAP. VIII.


CHAP  vin.

OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  NATIONS  IN  WAR, — ^ANI>,  FTRST,  OF  THl!
WE  HAVE  A  RIGHT  TO  DO,  AND  WHAT  WE  ARB  ALLOITID  >
DO  TO  THE  enemy's  PERSON,  IN  A  JUST  WAR-  (161)

^  136. Ge- WHAT  we  have  hitherto  said,  concerns  the  right  of  maki;
nerai  prin- '^ar  I — let  US  now  proceed  to  those  rights  which  are  to  he  it-
oipies  of  thegpgQ^g^  during  the  war  itself,  and  to  the  rules  which  natixa
•gainst  an should  reciprocslly  observe,  even  when  deciding  their  diffci-
enemy  in  a  cnces  by  arms. Let  us  begin  by  laying  down  the  rights  of  i
juat  war. nation  engaged  in  a  just  war :  let  us  see  what  she  is  alluYH
to  do  to  her  enemy. The  whole  is  to  be  deduced  from  ud«
single  principle, — from  the  object  of  a  just  war : for,  whs
the  end  is  lawful,  he  who  has  a  right  to  pursue  that  end  has.
of  course,  a  right  to  employ  all  the  means  which  are  necesst.7
for  its  attainment. The  end  of  a  just  war  is  to  avenge  or  pre-
vent injury  (§  28) — that  is  to  say,  to  obtain  justice  bf  force,
when  not  obtainable  by  any  other  method, — to  compel  aB  eb-
just  adversary  to  repair  an  injury  already  done,  or  give  x&
securities  against  any  wrong  with  which  we  are  threatened  tj
him. As  soon,  therefore,  as  we  have  declared  war,  we  ta«
a  right  to  do  against  the  enemy  whatever  we  find  necessary
for  the  attainment  of  that  end, — for  the  purpose  of  bring-
ing him  to  reason,  and  obtaining  justice  and  security  froD
him.
J  i37. Dif- The  lawfulness  of  the  end  does  not  give  us  a  real  right  to
ference  be- any  thing  further  than  barely  the  means  necessary  for  the  si-
tween  what  tainment  of  that  end. Whatever  we  do  beyond  that,  is  reprtr

we  nave  a  .

right  to  do  l>8.ted  by  the  law  of  nature,  is  faulty,  and  condemnable  at  ik
and  what  is  tribunal  of  conscicflce.  Hence  it  is  that  the  right  to  such  or
barely  ai-  guch  acts  of  hostility  varics  according  to  circumstances.  Wliat
lowed  to  be  jg  j^y^  ^^^  perfectly  innocent  in  war,  in  one  particular  sirai-
impunity  ^^^^»  ^^  ^^*  always  SO  ou  Other  occasions.  Right  goes  hand
between in  hand  with  necessity  and  the  exigency  of  the  case,  but  never

enemies, exCCcds  them.

But  as  it  is  very  difiBcult  always  to  form  a  precise  judgment
of  what  the  present  case  requires,  and  as,  moreover,  it  belongs
to  each  nation  to  judge  of  what  her  own  particular  situation
authorizes  her  to  do  (Prelim.  §  16) — it  becomes  absolutelv
necessary  that  nations  should  reciprocally  conform  to  general
[  847  ]  rules  on  this  subject  Accordingly,  whenever  it  is  certain
and  evident  that  such  a  measure,  such  an  act  of  hostility,  is
necessary,  in  general,  for  overpowering  the  enemy's  resist-

(161)  See,  in  general,  the  Rights  of Commercial  Law,  377  to  437;  and  CJufr
War ;  Grotius,  oh.  vL ;  and  1  Chitty's ty's  Law  of  Kationa,  per  (ot — C
464


I


.A.^


OF  THB  RiaHTS  OP  Ni^TIONS  IN  WAR.  347

ance,  and  attaining  the  end  of  a  lawful  war, — ^that  measare, book  in.
tlius  viewed  in  a  general  light,  is,  by  the  law  of  nations,  ^^^^'  ^"''
deemed  lawful  in  war,  and  consistent  with  propriety,  although
he  who  unnecessarily  adopts  it,  when  he  might  attain  his  end
by  gentler  methods,  is  not  innocent  before  God  and  his  own
conscience. In  this  lies  the  difference  between  what  is  just,
equitable,  irreprehensible  in  war,  and  what  is  only  allowed
between  nations,  and  suffered  to  pass  with  impunity. The
sovereign  who  would  preserve  a  pure  conscience,  and  punctu-
ally discharge  the  duties  of  humanity,  ought  never  to  lose
sight  of  what  we  already  have  more  than  once  observed, —
that  nature  gives  him  no  right  to  make  war  on  his  fellow-men,
except  in  cases  of  necessity,  and  as  a  remedy,  ever  disagree-
able, though  often  necessary,  against  obstinate  injustice  or
violence. If  his  mind  is  duly  impressed  with  this  great  truth,
he  will  never  extend  the  application  of  the  remedy  beyond  its
due  limits,  and  will  be  very  careful  not  to  render  it  more
harsh  in  its  operation,  and  more  fatal  to  mankind,  than  is
requisite  for  his  own  security  and  the  defence  of  his  rights.

Since  the  object  of  a  just  war  is  to  repress  injustice  and  j  138. Tht
violence,  and  forcibly  to  compel  him  who  is  deaf  to  the  voice  "k^*  *<>
of  justice,  we  have  a  right  to  put  in  practice,  against  the  ^®*^®^  *°
enemy,  every  measure  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  weaken  eve^^ustifi.
him,  and  disable  him  from  resisting  us  and  supporting  his  able  me-
injustice ;  and  we  may  choose  such  methods  as  are  the  most  ^^^
efficacious  and  best  culculated  to  attain  the  end  in  view,  pro-
vided they  be  not  of  an  odious  kind,  nor  unjustifiable  in  them-
selves, and  prohibited  by  the  law  of  nature.

The  enemy  who  attacks  me  unjustly,  gives  me  an  undoubted  j  139. Th«
right  to  repel  his  violence;  and  he  who  takes  up  arms  to"«^t«>^®''
.oppose  me  when  I  demand  only  my  right,  becomes  himself  *^®  «n«™J'»
the  real  aggressor  by  his  unjust  resistance : he  is  the  first  ^"^^'
author  of  the  violence,  and  obliges  me  to  employ  forcible
i^eans  in  order  to  secure  myself  against  the  wrong  which  he
intends  to  do  me  either  in  my  person  or  my  property. If  the
forcible  means  I  employ  produce  such  effect  as  even  to  take
away  his  life,  he  alone  must  bear  the  whole  blame  of  that
misfortune : for,  if  I  were  obliged  to  submit  to  the  wrong
rather  than  hurt  him,  good  men  would  soon  become  the  prey
of  the  wicked. Such  is  the  origin  of  the  right  to  kill  our
enemies  in  a  just  war. When  we  find  gentler  methods  insuf-
ficient to  conquer  their  resistance  and  bring  them  to  terms,
we  have  a  right  to  put  them  to  death. Under  the  name  of
enemies,  as  we  have  already  shown,  are  to  be  comprehended,
not  only  the  first  author  of  the  war,  but  likewise  all  those  who
join  him,  and  who  fight  in  support  of  his  cause.

But  the  very  manner  in  which  the  right  to  kill  our  enemies  J 140.
is  proved,  points  out  the  limits  of  that  right. On  an  enemy's  i-imi*f  o^
Bubmitting  and  laying  down  his  arms,  we  cannot  with  justice  *^"  '**
take  away  his  life. Thus,  in  a  battle,  quarter  is  to  be  given

466


348  OP  THE  RIGHTS OF  NATIONS  IN  WAR.


DOOR  in.  to  those  who  lay  down  their  arms ;  and,  in  a  siege,  a  garriwi
OH  A  p.  VIII.  Qflfgj.jjjg  ^Q  capitulate  are  never  to  be  refused  their  lives.  The
An  enemy  humanity  with  which  most  nations  in  Europe  carry  on  their
killed  after  ^^^^  **  present  Cannot  be  too  much  commended.  If,  some-
ceasing  to  times,  in  the  heat  of  action,  the  soldier  refuses  to  give  quarter,
reawt.  it  is  always  contrary  to  the  inclination  of  the  officers,  wk.

eagerly  interpose  to  save  the  lives  of  such  enemies  as  hart
laid  down  their  arms.*
;  141. A There  is,  however,  one  •  case  in  which  we  may  refuse  to
particular spare  the  life  of  an  enemy  who  surrenders,  or  to  allow  anj
*^®»  *^ capitulation  to  a  town  reduced  to  the  last  extremity. It  is,
ter  may"be ^^^^  ^^^^  enemy  has  been  guilty  of  some  enormous  breach
refused. of  the  law  of  nations,  and  particularly  when  he  has  violated
the  laws  of  war. This  refusal  of  quarter  is  no  natural  con-
sequence of  the  war,  but  a  punishment  for  his  crime, — a  pu-
nishment which  the  injured  party  has  a  right  to  inflict. But,
in  order  that  it  be  justly  inflicted,  it  must  fall  on  the  guilty.
When  we  are  at  war  with  a  savage  nation,  who  observe  no
rules,  and  never  give  quarter,  we  may  punish  them  in  the
persons  of  any  of  their  people  whom  we  take,  (these  belonging
to  the  number  of  the  guilty,)  and  endeavour,  by  this  rigorous
proceeding,  to  force  them  to  respect  the  laws  of  humanity.
But,  wherever  severity  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  clemency
becomes  a  duty. Corinth  was  utterly  destroyed  for  having
violated  the  law  of  nations  in  the  person  of  the  Roman  am-
bassadors. That  severity,  however,  was  reprobated  by  Cicero
and  other  great  men. He  who  has  even  the  most  just  cause
to  punish  a  sovereign  with  whom  he  is  in  enmity,  will  ever
incur  the  reproach  of  cruelty,  if  he  causes  the  punishment  to
fall  on  his  innocent  subjects. There  are  other  methods  of
chastising  the  sovereign, — ^such  as  depriving  him  of  some  of
his  rights,  taking  from  him  towns  and  provinces. The  evil
which  thence  results  to  the  nation  at  large,  is  the  consequence
of  that  participation  which  cannot  possibly  be  avoided  by
those  who  unite  in  political  society.
^  143. Be- This  leads  us  to  speak  of  a  kind  of  retaliation  sometimes
prisais. practised  in  war,  under  the  name  of  reprisals. If  the  hostile
^ ^  general  has,  without  any  just  reason,  caused  some  prisoners

to  be  hanged,  we  hang  an  equal  number  of  his  people,  and  of
the  same  rank,-^notifying  to  him  that  we  will  continue  thus

*  From  serenl  passages  of  Grotius's  destined  for  Flanders,  thej  despatehed

History of the Disturbances in the  a  squadron  to  wait  for  them  in the

Low  Countries,  it  appears  that  the  war  strait  of  Calais,  with  orders  to  drown

between  the  Dutch  and  Spaniards  was  without  mercy  every  soldier that  was

carried  on  with  unrelenting  cruelty  at  taken; and  the  order  was  punctually

sea,  although  the  parties  had  agreed  to  executed. — ^Book  iir.  p.  550. — ^Edit  JL.S.

obserre  the  usual  rules  of  moderation  1797.

on  land. Intelligence  being  received (162)  As  to  reprisals  and  letters  o&

by  the  confederate  states,  that  the  Spa-  marque  in  general,  see  ante,  b.  iL  dk

Biard:  had,  by  the  advice  of  Spinola,  xviii.  J  8S4. — G.  -
•mbarked  at  Lisbon  a  body  of  troops
46d


OTf  THE  RIGHTS OP  NATIONS  IN  WAR..  483

to  retaliate,  for  the  purpose  of  obliging  him  to  observe  the  book  m.
laws  of  war.  It  is  a  dreadful  extremity  thus  to  condemn  a  ^!H1j_Z!5*.
prisoner  to  atone,  by  a  miserable  death,  for  his  general's
crim.e :  and  if  we  had  previously  promised  to  spare  the  life
of  that  prisoner,  we  cannot,  without  injustice,  make  him  the  [  349  ]
Bubject  of  our  reprisals.*  Nevertheless,  as  a  prince,  or  his
general,  has  a  right  to  sacrifice  his  enemy's  lives  to  his  own
safety  and  that  of  his  men, — it  appears,  that,  if  he  has  to  do^
with  an  inhuman  enemy,  who  frequently  commits  such  enor-
mities, he  is  authorized  to  refuse  quarter  to  some  of  the  pri-
soners he  takes,  and  to  treat  them  as  his  people  have  been
treated. f  But  Scipio's  generosity  is  rather  to  be  imitated :
— that  great  man,  having  reduced  some  Spanish  princes,  who
had  revolted  against  the  Romans,  declared  to  them  that,  on  a
breach  of  their  faith,  he  would  not  call  the  innocent  hostages
to  an  account,  but  themselves :  and  that  he  would  not  avenge
it  on  an  unarmed  enemy,  but  on  those  who  should  be  found
in  arms.J  Alexander  the  Great,  having  cause  of  complaint
against  Darius  for  some  malpractices,  sent  him  word,  that  if
he  continued  to  make  war  in  such  a  manner,  he  would  proceed
to  every  extremity  against  him,  and  give  him  no  quarter. §  It
is  thus  an  enemy  who  violates  the  laws  of  war  is  to  be  checked,
and  not  by  causing  the  penalty  due  to  bis  crime  to  fall  on
innocent  victims.

How  could  it  be  conceived,  in  an  enlightened  age,  that  it  is  §  148.  wt*-
lawful  to  punish  with  death  a  governor  who  has  defended  his  *^®'  *  Mo-
town to  the  last  extremity,  or  who,  in  a  weak  place,  has  had  ^^°^  *
the  courage  to  hold  out  against  a  royal  army  ? In  the  last  be  punishod
century,  this  notion  still  prevailed ;  it  was  looked  upon  as  one  with  death
of  the  laws  of  war,  and  is  not,  even  at  present,  totally  exploded.  ^^J  *°  ^^'
What  an  idea !  to  punish  a  brave  man  for  having  performed  ^^^^  *"
his  duty  ! Very  difierent  were  the  principles  of  Alexander
the  Great,  when  he  gave  orders  for  sparing  some  Milesians,
on  account  of  their  courage  and  fidelity. \\ "As  Phyton  was
led  to  execution,  by  order  of  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  for  having
obstinately  defended  the  town  of  Rhegium,  of  which  he  was
governor,  he  cried  out,  that  he  was  unjustly  condemned  to  die
for  having  refused  to  betray  the  town,  and  that  heaven  would
'  ■  >

*  In  the  FroQoh,  we  here  flhd  (ap-  •prisoner,  in  case  of  victory  declaring  on

parently  very  much  out  of  place)  a  ver-  their  side.  He  spared  Adeimantns  alone,

batim  repetition  of  the  long  note  which  who  had  opposed  that  infamous  reso-

has  already  appeared  in  page 286. —  lution. Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsso.  lib.  ii.  cap.

Sdit.  A.D.  1797.  L— Edit  a.d.  1797.

f  Lysander, having captured the  %  Neque  se  in  obsides  innoxios,  sed

Athenian fleet,  put  the prisoners to  in  ipsos,  si  defecerint,  sseyiturum ;  neo

death,  on  account  of  various  cruelties  ab  inermi,  sed  ah  armato  hoste,  poenaa

practised  by  the  Athenians  during  the  expetiturum. — ^Tit.  Liv.  lib.  xxviii.

course  of  the  war,  but  principally  on  §  Quint.  Curt  lib.  iv.  cap.  i.  and  it

account of the barbarous resolution  |  Arrian.  de  Exped.  Alexand.  Ub.  L

which  they  were  known  to  have  adopt-  cap.  xz.
ed,  of  cutting  off  th«  right  hand  of  every

58 2  0 467


349  OF THE KIQHTB OF  NATIONS  IN  TTAB.

BOOK  in. soon  avenge  his  death." Diodorns  Siculus  terms  this  -a^

.*?fIiZEL  unjust  punishment."* It  is  vain  to  object,  that  an  obstiofttr

defence,  especially  in  a  weak  place,  against  a  royal  armj,  onh

causes  a  fruitless  effusion  of  blood. Such  a  defence  may.


the  state,  by  delaying  the  enemy  some  days  longer  ;  and,  Vi^
sides,  courage  supplies  the  defects  of  the  fortifications,  f  TJi*
f  850  ]  chevalier  Bayard  having  thrown  himself  into  Mezieres,  de-
fended it  with  his  usual  intrepidity,^  and  proved  that  a  brave
man  is  sometimes  capable  of  saving  a  place  which  another
would  not  think  tenable.  The  history  of  the  famous  siege  of
Malta  is  another  instance  how  far  men  of  spirit  may  defend
themselves,  when  thoroughly  determined.  How  many  places
have  surrendered,  which  might  still  have  arrested  the  enemy'*
progress  for  a  considerable  time,  obliged  him  to  consume  Lis
strength  and  waste  the  remainder  of  the  campaign,  and  even
finally  saved  themselves,  by  a  better-supported  and  more  vigor-
ous defence !  In  the  last  war,  whilst  the  strongest  places
in  the  Netherlands  opened  their  gates  in  a  few  days,  the  va-
liant general  Leutrum  was  seen  to  defend  Coni  against  the
utmost  efforts  of  two  powerful  armies, — to  hold  out,  in  so  in
different  a  post,  forty  days  from  the  opening  of  the  trenches,
— and,  finally,  to  save  the  town,  and,  together  with  it,  all
Piemont.  If  it  be  urged,  that,  by  threatening  a  commandant
with  death,  you  may  shorten  a  bloody  siege,  spare  your  troops
and  make  a  valuable  saving  of  time, — ^my  answer  is,  that  &
brave  man  will  despise  your  menace,  or,  incensed  by  such  ig-
nominious treatment,  will  sell  his  life  as  dearly  as  he  can, —
will  bury  himself  under  the  ruins  of  his  fort,  and  make  you
pay  for  your  injustice.  But,  whatever  advantage  you  might
promise  yourself  from  an  unlawful  proceeding,  that  will  not
warrant  you  in  the  use  of  it.  The  menace  of  an  unjust  pun-
ishment is  unjust  in  itself:  it  is  an  insult  and  an  injury.  But,
above  all,  it  would  be  horrible  and  barbarous  to  put  it  in  execu-
tion ;  and,  if  you  allow  that  the  threatened  consequences  must
not  be  realized,  the  threat  is  vain  and  ridiculous. Just  and

*  Lib.  xiv.  cap.  oxiii.,  quoted  bj  Gro-  ill-fortified  ^ace  against  a  rojral  army,

tius,  lib.  ill.  cap.  ii.  ^  xvi.  n.  v.  and  when,  refusing  to  accept  of  re&soe-

f  The false  maxim  which formerly  able conditions  oficred  to them. %hej

prevailed  on  this  subject,  is  noticed  in  undertake  to  arrest  the progress  of  a

the relation  of  the  battle  of  Mussel-'  power  which  they  arc  unable  to  resist"

burgh  (De  Thou,  vol.  i.  p.  287). "  The  — Pursuant  to  that  maxim, Ca^snr  an-

genoral  (the  duke  of  Somerset),  the  re-  swered the Aduatici that he wocld

gent  of  England,  was  on  this  occasion  spare their town,  if  they  enrrender^

much  admired  for  his<  clemency,  which  before  the  battering-ram  touched  thtrir

induced  him  to  spare  the  lives  of  the  walls;  and  the  duke  of  Alva  stronglj

besieged  (the  garrison of  a  castle  in  blamed prosper Colon na for baring

Scotland,)  notwithstanding  that  ancient  granted  terms of  capitulation to  tbt

maxim  in  war,  which  declares that  a  garrison  of  a  castle,  who  had  refused

weak  garrison  forfeit  all  claim  to  mercy  to  treat  of  a  surrender  until  the  cannon

on the  part  of  the  conqueror,  when,  had  been  employed  against  them. — ^Edit

with  more  courage  than  prudence,  they  A.  D.  1797.

obstinately  persevere  in  defending on  J  See  his  life.
458


OF  THE  RIGHTS OP  NATIONS  IN  WAR.  850

honourable  means  may  be  employed  to  dissuade  a  governor book  m.
from  ineffectually  persevering  to  the  last  extremity  ;  and  such  ch^^-  ^"t.
is  the  present  practice  of  all  prudent  and  humane  generals.  •
At  a  proper  stage  of  the  business,  they  summon  a  governor  to
B»rrender ;  they  offer  him  honourable  and  advantageous  terms
of  capitulation, — accompanied  by  a  threat,  that,  if  he  delays
too  long,  he  will  only  be  admitted  to  surrender  as  a  prisoner
of  war,  and  at  discretion. If  he  persists,  and  is  at  length  [  851  ]
forced  to  surrender  at  discretion, — they  may  then  treat  both
himself  and  his  troops  with  all  the  severity  of  the  law  of  war.*
But  that  law  can  never  extend  so  far  as  to  give  a  right  to  take
away  the  life  of  an  enemy  who  lays  down  his  arms  (§  140),
unless  he  has  been  guilty  of  some  crime  against  the  con-
queror (§  141).

Resistance  carried  to  extremity  does  not  become  punishable
in  a  subaltern,  except  on  those  occasions  only  when  it  is  evi-
dently fruitless.  It  is  then  obstinacy,  and  not  firmness  or
valour : — true  valour  has  always  a  reasonable  object  in  view.
Let  us,  for,  instance,  suppose  that  a  state  has  entirely  sub-
mitted to  the  conqueror *s  arms,  except  one  single  fortress, —
that  no  succour  is  to  be  expected  from  without, — ^no  neighbour,
no  ally,  concerns  himself  about  saving  the  remainder  of  that
conquered  state :— on  such  an  occasion,  the  governor  is  to  be
made  acquainted  with  the  situation  of  affairs,  and  summoned
to  surrender ;  and  he  may  be  threatened  with  death  in  case
of  his  persisting  in  a  defence  which  is  absolutely  fruitless,  and
which  can  only  tend  to  the  effusion  of  human  blood.*  Should
this  make  no  impression  on  him,  he  deserves  to  suffer  the  pu-
nishment with  which  he  has  been  justly  threatened.  I  suppose
the  justice  of  the  war  to  be  problematical,  and  that  it  is  not  an
insupportable  oppression  which  he  opposes :  for  if  this  gover-
nor maintains  a  cause  that  is  evidently  just, — if  he  fights  to
save  his  country  from  slavery, — his  misfortune  will  be  pitied ;
and  every  man  of  spirit  will  applaud  him  for  gallantly  perse-
vering to  the  last  extremity,  and  determining  to  die  free.

Fugitives  and  deserters,  found  by  the  victor  among  his  ene^  j  i44. Pu-
mies,  are  guilty  of  a  crime  against  him  ;  and  he  has  undoubt-  gitives  and
edly  a  right  to  put  them  to  death. But  they  are  not  properly  <i«"«^*«"
considered  as  enemies:  they  are  rather  perfidious  citizens


*  But It  is not  lawful to employ'  in Louis's  hands) should  be put to

menaces  of  everj  kind  in  order  to  in-  death  in  his  sight Philip  replied  that

duce  the  governor  or  commandant  of  a  he  would  feel  the  most  poignant  regret

town  to  surrender. There  are  some,  to  lose  his  father,  but  that  his  honour

againk  which  nature  revolts  with  hor-  was  still  dearer  to  him,  and  that  he

ror. Louis the Eleventh,  being en-  wa9 too well acquainted with the

gaged  in  the  siege  of  St  Omer,  and  king's  disposition, to apprehend  that

incensed  at  the  long  resistance  he  ex-  he  would  disgrace  himself  by  the  per-

perienced,  informed  the  governor,  Phi-  petration of  so  barbarous a deed.—

lip,  son  of  Antony,  the  Bastard  of  Bur-  Hist  of LouIa XI.  book  viii* — ^Edit

gundy,  that  if  he  did  not  surrender  the  A.D.  1797.
place,  hlB  father  (who  was  a  prisoner

459


851  OP  THE  RIGHTS  OF  NATIONS  IN  WAB-


BooK  m. traitors  to  their  country ;  and  their  enlistment  with  the  enemy
CHAP,  vm.  cannot  obliterate  that  character,  or  exempt  them  from  the
punishment  they  have  deserved. At  present,  however,  descr-
»tion  being  unhappily  too  common,  the  number  of  the  delin-
quents renders  it  in  some  measure  necessary  to  show  clemencr;
and,  in  capitulations,  it  is  usual  to  indulge  the  evacaating
garrison  with  a  certain  number  of  covered  wagons,  in  which
they  save  the  deserters.
;  14$. Wo- Women,  children,  feeble  old  men,  and  sick  persons,  come
men,  chU- under  the  description  of  enemies  (§§  70 — 72) ;  and  we  hare
dren,  the certain  rights  over  them,  inasmuch  as  they  belong to  the
Biok-  nation  with  whom  we  are  at  war,  and  as,  between  nation  and

r  352  ]  nation,  all  rights  and  pretensions  affect  the  body  of  the  society,
together  with  all  its  members  (Book  II.  §§  81,  82—344). But
these  are  enemies  who  make  no  resistance ;  and  consequently
we  have  no  right  to  maltreat  their  persons  or  use  any  violence
against  them,  much  less  to  take  away  their  lives  (§  140). This
is  so  plain  a  maxim  of  justice  and  humanity,  that  at  present
every  nation  in  the  least  degree  civilized,  acquiesces  in  it*
If,  sometimes,  the  furious  and  ungovernable  soldier  carries  his
brutality  so  far  as  to  violate  female  chastity,  or  to  massacre
women,  children,  and  old  men,  the  officers  lament  those  ex-
cesses ;  they  exert  their  utmost  efforts  to  put  a  stop  to  them  ;
and  a  prudent  and  humane  general  even  punishes  them  when-
ever he  can. But,  if  the  women  wish  to  be  spared  altogether,
they  must  confine  themselves  to  the  occupations  peculiar  to
their  own  sex,  and  not  meddle  with  those  of  men,  by  taking
up  arms. Accordingly,  the  military  law  of  the  Switzers,  which
forbids  the  soldier  to  maltreat  women,  formally  excepts  those
females  who  have  committed  any  acts  of  hostility.*
{  148.  Cier- The  like  may  be  said  of  the  public  ministers  of  religion,  of
gy,  men  of  men  of  letters,  and  other  persons  whose  mode  of  life  is  very
k)Uersy  Ac. remote  from  military  affairs : — not  that  these  people,  nor  even
the  ministers  of  the  altar,  are,  necessarily,  and  by  virtue  of
their  functions,  invested  with  any  character  of  inviolability,
or  that  the  civil  law  can  confer  it  on  them  with  respect  to  the
enemy :  but,  as  they  do  not  use  force  or  violence  to  oppose
him,  they  do  not  give  him  a  right  to  use  it  against  them.
Among  the  ancient  Romans,  the  priests  carried  arms :  Julius
Caesar  himself  was  sovereign  pontiff": — and  among  the  Chris-
tians, it  has  been  no  rare  thing  to  see  prelates,  bishops,  and
cardinals  buckle  on  their  armor,  and  take  the  command  of
armies. From  the  instant  of  their  doing  so,  they  subjected
themselves  to  the  common  fate  of  military  men. While  deal-
ing out  their  blows  in  the  field  of  battle,  they  did  not,  it  is  to
be  presumed,  lay  claim  to  inviolability.
f  U7.  Pe»- Formerly,  every  one  capable  of  carrying  arms  became  a
unu,  And, soldier  when  his  nation  was  at  war,  and  especially  when  it

*  See  Simler,  de  Repub.  Helvek
460


OF  THB  RIGHTS  OF  NATIONS  IN  WAR.  852

was attacked. Grotius,  however,*  produces instances of book  m.
several  nations  and  eminent  commanders, f  who  spared  the  ■  ^°^'''  ^'"^
peasantry,  in  consideration  of  the  immediate  usefulness  of  in  general,
their  labours.  { At  present,  war  is carried  on by  regular  *^ '^^^^  ^®
troops:  the  people,  the  peasants,  the  citizens,  take  no  pa^t^J^^^"^
in  it,  and  generally  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  sword  of
the  enemy. Provided  the  inhabitants  submit  to  him  who  is
master  of  the  country,  pay  the  contributions  imposed,  and  [  358  ]
refrain  from  all  hostilities,  they  live  in  as  perfect  safety  as  if
they  were  friends :  they  even  continue  in  possession  of  what
belong^  to  them :  the  country  people  come  freely  to  the  camp
to  sell  their  provisions,  and  are  protected,  as  far  as  possible,
from  the  calamities  of  war. A  laudable  custom,  truly  worthy
of  those  nations  who  value  themselves  on  their  humanity,
and  advantageous  even  to  the  enemy  who  acts  with  such
moderation. By  protecting  the  unarmed  inhabitants,  keeping
the  soldiery  under  strict  discipline,  and  preserving  the  coun-
try, a  general  procures  an  easy  subsistence  for  his  army,  and
avoids  many  evils  and  dangers. If  he  has  any  reason  to  mis-
trust the  peasantry  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns,  he  has
a  right  to  disarm  them,  and  to  require  hostages  from  them :
and  those  who  wish  to  avoid  the  calamities  of  war,  must  sub-
mit to  the  laws  which  the  enemy  thinks  proper  to  impose  on
them.

But  all  those  enemies  thus  subdued  or  disarmed,  whom  the  i  148.  Th«
principles  of  humanity  oblige  him  to  spare, — all  those  persons  "^^^  **^
belonging  to  the  opposite  party,  (even  the  women  and  chil-  ^ne«^f
dren,)  he  may  lawfully  secure  and  make  prisoners,  either  with  war.
a  view  to  prevent  them  from  taking  up  arms  again,  or  for  the
purpose  of  weakening  the  enemy  (§  138),  or,  finally,  in  hopes
that,  by  getting  into  his  power  some  woman  or  child  for  whom
the  sovereign  has  an  affection,  he  may  induce  him  to  accede
to  equitable  conditions  of  peace,  for  the  sake  of  redeeming
those  valuable  pledges.  At  present,  indeed,  this  last-men-
tioned expedient  is  seldom  put  in  practice  by  the  polished
nations  of  Europe :  women  and  children  are  suffered  to  enjoy
perfect  security,  and  allowed  permission  to  withdraw  wherever
they  please.  But  this  moderation,  this  politeness,  though
undoubtedly  commendable,  is  not  in  itself  absolutely  obliga-
tory ;  and  if  a  general  thinks  fit  to  supersede  it,  he  cannot  be
justly  accused  of  violating  the  laws  of  war.  He  is  at  liberty
to  adopt  such  measures,  in  this  respect,  as  he  thinks  most
conducive  to  the  success  of  his  affairs.  If  without  reason,
and  from  mere  caprice,  he  refuses  to  indulge  women  with  this
Uberty,  he  will  be  taxed  with  harshness  and  brutality, — he

*  Book  iii;  ch.  xi.  J  xi.  and  make  war  only  against  those  who

|-  Cyrus,  Belisnrius,  Ae.  appeared  in  arms : — and  the  proposal

t  Cyrus  proposed  to  the  king  of  As- was  agreed  to. Xenoph.  Cyrop.  lib.  t.

lyria,  that  both  parties  should  recipro- cap.  i.

eally  spare  the  cultivators  of  the  soil,

2o2  Ml


853  OF  THE  RIGHTS OF  NATIONS  IN  WAK.

BOOK  m. will  be  censured  for  not  conforming  to  a  custom  establish
oH^r.  vm.  j^y  humanity-:  but  he  may  have  good  reasons  for  disregarding.
in  this  particular,  the  rules  of  politeness,  and  even the  sug-
gestions of  pity. If  there  are  hopes  of  reducing  by  famine  a
strong  place,  of  which  it  is  very  important  to  gain  possession,
the  useless  mouths  are  not  permitted  to  come  out. And  ii
this  there  is  nothing  which  is  not  authorized  by  the laws  of
war. Some  great  men,  however,  have,  on  occasions  of  this
nature,  carried  their  compassion  so  far  as  to  postpone  their
interests  to  the  motions  of  humanitv. We  have  already  men-
tioned,  in  another  place,  how  Henry  the  Great  acted daring
the  siege  of  Paris. To  such  a  noble  example  let  us  add  that
of  Titus  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem :  at  first  he  was  inclined  to
drive  back  into  the  city  great  numbers  of  starving  wretches,
I  854  J  ^ho  came  out  of  it ;  but  he  could  not  withstand  the  compas-
sion which  such  a  sight  raised  in  him ;  and  he  sufifered  the
sentiments  of  humanity  and  generosity  to  prevail  over  the
maxims  of  war.
f  149. A As  soon  as  your  enemy  has  laid  down  his  arms  and  snr-
prisoner  of  rendered  his  person,  you  have  no  longer  any  right  orer  his
11^1)0^10** ^^^^  (§  ^^^\  unless  he  should  give  you  such  right by  some
death. HCw  attempt,  or  had  before  committed  against  you  a  crime
deserving  death  (§  141). It  was  therefore  a  dreadful  error
of  antiquity,  a  most  unjust  and  savage  claim^  to  assume  a
right  of  putting  prisoners  of  war  to  death,  and  even  by  the
hand  of  the  executioner. More  just  and  humane  principles,
however,  have  long  since  been  adopted. Charles  I.,  king  of
Naples,  having  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  Conradin,  his
competitor,  caused  him  to  be  publicly  beheaded  at  Naples,
together  with  Frederic  of  Austria,  his  fellow-prisoner. This
barbarity  raised  a  universal  horror ;  and  Peter  III.,  king  of
Arragon,  reproached  Charles  with  it  as  a  detestable  crime,
and  till  then  unheard  of  among  Christian  princes.* The
case,  however,  was  that  of  a  dangerous  rival,  who  contended
with  him  for  the  throne.  But  supposing  even  the  claims  of  that
rival  were  unjust,  Charles  might  have  kept  him  in  prison  till
he  had  renounced  them,  and  given  security  for  his  future
behaviour.
;  150.  How Prisoners  may  be  secured ;  and  for  this  purpose  they  may
prisoners  of  be  put  into  Confinement,  and  even  fettered,  if  there  be  reason
•trtwatei *^  apprehend  that  they  will  rise  on  their  captors,  or  make
their  escape. But  they  are  not  to  be  treated  harshly,  unless
personally  guilty  of  some  crime  against  him  who  has  them  in
his  power. In  this  case,  he  is  at  liberty  to  punish  them :
otherwise,  he  should  remember  that  they  are  men,  and  unfor-
tunate, f A  man  of  exalted  soul  no  longer  feels  any  emotions

*  Epist.  Pet  Arrag. apud  Petr.  de therlands, at the persuasion of the

Vineis.  count  de Fuentes,  resolved  no  longer

+  In  1593,  the  council of  the  Ke- to  obserye towards  the  United Pro-
462


OF  THE RIGHTS OP  NATIONS IN  WAR,  854

but  those  of  compassion  towards  a  conquered  enemy  who  has book  m.
Bubmitted  to  his  arms. Let  us,  in  this  particular,  bestow  on  fH^i-™'
the  European  nations  the  praise  to  which  they  are  justly
entitled. Prisoners of  war are seldom ill-treated among
them. We  extol  the  English  and  French ;  we  feel  our  bosoms
glow  with  love  for  them,  when  we  hear  the  accounts  of  the
treatment  which  prisoners  of  war,  on  both  sides,  have  experi-
enced from  those  generous  nations. And  what  is  more,  by  a
custom  which  equally  displays  the  honour  and  humanity  of
the  Europeans,  an  officer,  taken  prisoner  in  war,  is  released
on  his  parole,  and  enjoys  the  comfort  of  passing  the  time  of  [  356  ]
his  captivity  in  his  own  country,  in  the  midst  of  his  family ;
and  the  party  who  have  thus  released  him  rest  as  perfectly
sure  of  him  as  if  they  had  him  confined  in  irons.

Formerly,  a  question  of  an  embarrassing  nature  might  have  ?  151.  Wbe-
been  proposed. When  we  have  so  great  a  number  of  pri-  ^^^  prison-
Boners  that  we  find  it  impossible  to  feed  them,  or  to  keep  them  ^J^^^^^^^
with  safety,  have  we  a  right  to  put  them  to  death  ?  or  shall  we  kept  or  fed,
send  them  back  to  the  enemy, — thus  increasing  his  strength,  may  i»e  put
and  exposing  ourselves  to  the  hazard  of  being  overpowered '<><^®*^-'
by  him  on  a  subsequent  occasion  ? At  present,  the  case  is
attended  with  no  difficulty. Such  prisoners  are  dismissed  on
their  parole, — bound  by  promise  not  to  carry  arms  for  a  cer-
tain time,  or  during  the  continuance  of  the  war. And  as  every
commander  necessarily  has  a  power  of  agreeing  to  the  condi-
tions on  which  the  enemy  admits  his  surrender,  the  engage-
ments entered  into  by  him  for  saving  his  life  or  his  liberty,
with  that  of  his  men,  are  valid,  as  being  made  within  the
limits  of  his  powers  (§§  19,  &c.);  and  his  sovereign  cannot
annul  them. Of  this,  many  instances  occurred  during  the
last  war : — several  Dutch  garrisons  submitted  to  the  condition
of  not  serving  against  France  or  her  allies  for  one  or  two
years: a  body  of  French  troops  being  invested  in Lintz,
were  by  capitulation  sent  back  across  the  Rhine,  under  a
restriction  not  to  carry  arms  against  the  queen  of  Hungary
for  a  stated  time:  and  the  sovereigns  of  those  troops  re-
spected the  engagements  formed  by  them. But  conventions
of  this  kind  have  their  limits,  which  consist  in  not  infringing
the  rights  of  the  sovereign  over  his  subjects. Thus  the
enemy,  in  releasing  prisoners,  may  impose  on  them  the  con-

▼inces  that  moderation  which  humanity  hands,  obliged  the  Spaniardg  to  re-es-

renders so necessary  in  war. They  tablish those indispensable asages,

gave  orders  for  putting  to  death  every  which,  in  the  words  of  Virgil  [JEn.  x.

man who should be made prisoner,  632],  are  called belli  commerdaf — ^the

and, ander  the  same  penalty,  prohl-  ransom  or  exchange  of  prisoners,  and

bited  the  pnyment  of  any  contributions  the  payment  of  contribntions  to  avert

to  the  enemy. But  the  complaints  of  pillage  and  devastation. The  ransom

the  nobility  and  clergy,  and  still  more  of  each  prisoner  was  then  settled  at  a

the  murmurs  of  the  military,  who  saw  month's  pay. — Grotius, Hist, of Ne-

ibemsclvcs exposed to an infamous  therlands,  book  iiL
4«ath  io  case  of  falling  into  the  .enemy's


866  OP  THE  RIGHTS  OP  NATIONS  IN  WAR.

BOOK  m.  difion  of  not  carrying  arms  against  him  till  the  conclusion  of
CHAP,  vm.  ^jj^  war;  since  he  might  justly  keep  them  in  confinement  tiil
that  period :  but  he  cannot  require  that  they  shall  for  ever
renounce  the  liberty  of  fighting  for  their  country ;  because,
on  the  termination  of  the  war,  he  has  no  longer  any  reasi»n
for  detaining  them;  and  they,  on  their  part,  cannot  enter
into  an  engagement  absolutely  inconsistent  with  their  cha-
racter of  citizens  or  subjects.  If  their  country  abandons
them,  they  become  free  in  that  respect,  and  have  in  their
turn  a  right  to  renounce  their  country.

But  if  we  have  to  do  with  a  nation  that  is  at  once  savage,
perfidious,  and  formidable,  shall  we  send  her  back  a  number
of  soldiers  who  will  perhaps  enable  her  to  destroy  us  ? — ^When
our  own  safety  is  incompatible  with  that  of  an  enemy — even
of  an  enemy  who  has  submitted — the  question  admits  not  of
a  doubt. But  to  justify  us  in  coolly  and  deliberately  putting
to  death  a  great  number  of  prisoners,  the  following  ccuditiond
are  indispensably  necessary : — 1.  That  no  promise  have  been
made  to  spare  their  lives ;  and,  2.  That  we  be  perfectly  assured
that  our  own  safety  demands  such  a  sacrifice. If  it  is  at  all
consistent  with  prudence  either  to  trust  to  their  parole,  or  to
disregard  their  perfidy,  a  generous  enemy  T?ill  rather  listen
to  the  voice  of  humanity  than  to  that  of  a  timid  circumspec-
[  866  ]  tion. Charles  XII.,  being  encumbered  with his prisoners
after  the  battle  of  Narva,  only  disarmed  them  *and  set  ihem
at  liberty :  but  his  enemy,  still  impressed  with  the  apprehen-
sions which  his  warlike  and  formidable  opponents  had  excited
in  his  mind,  sent  into  Siberia  all  the  prisoners  he  took  at
Pultowa. The  Swedish  hero  confided  too  much  in  his  own
generosity :  the  sagacious  monarch  of  Russia  united,  perhaps,
too  great  a  degree  of  severity  with  his  prudence :  but  neces-
sity furnishes  an  apology  for  severity,  or  rather  throws  a  veil
over  it  altogether. When  Admiral  Anson  took  the  rich  Aca-
pulco  galleon,  near  Manilla,  he  found  that  the  prisoners  out-
numbered his  whole  ship's  company:  he  was  therefore  under
a  necessity  of  confining  them  in  the  hold,  where  they  suffered
cruel  distress.* But  had  he  exposed  himself  to  the  risk  of
being  carried  away  a  prisoner,  with  his  prize  and  his  own  ship
together,  would  the  humanity  of  his  conduct  have  justified
the  imprudence  of  it  ? Henry  V.,  king  of  England,  after  his
victory  in  the  battle  of  Agincourt,  was  reduced,  or  thought
himself  reduced,  to  the  cruel  necessity  of  sacrificing  the  pri-
soners to  his  own  safety. "In this  universal  •rout,"  says
Father  Daniel,  "  a  fresh  misfortune  happened,  which  cost  the
lives  of  a  great  number  of  French. A  remainder  of  their  van
was  retreating  in  some  order,  and  many  of  the  stragglers
rallied  and  joined  it. The  king  of  England,  observing  their

*  Bee  Anson's  Voyage  round  the  World. jP.  382,  383.  Lend. Ed.  4ta.
1766. }
464


OP  THE  BIGHTS OF  NATIONS  IN  WAR.


356


motions  from  an  eminence,  supposed  it  was  their  intention  to
return  to  the  charge.  At  the  same  moment,  he  received  in-
formation of  an  attack  being  made  on  his  camp,  where  the
"baggage  was  deposited.  In  fact,  some  noblemen  of  Picardy,
having  armed  about  six  hundred  peasants,  had  fallen  upon
the  English  camp.  Thus  circumstanced,  that  prince,  appre-
hensive of  some  disastrous  reverse,  despatched  his  aides-de-
camp to  the  different  divisions  of  the  army,  with  orders  for
putting  all  the  prisoners  to  the  sword,  lest,  in  case  of  a  re-
newal of  the  battle,  the  care  of  guarding  them  should  prove
an  impediment  to  his  soldiers,  or  the  prisoners  should  escape
and  join  their  countrymen.  The  order  was  immediately  car-
ried into  execution,  and  all  the  prisoners  were  put  to  the
Bword."*  Nothing  short  of  the  greatest  necessity  can  justify
80  terrible  an  execution;  and  the  general  whose  situation
requires  it,  is  greatly  to  be  pitied.

Is  it  lawful  to  condemn  prisoners  of  war  to  slavery?  Yes,
in  cases  which  give  a  right  to  kill  them, — ^when  they  have
rendered  themselves  personally  guilty  of  some  crime  deserv-
ing of  death.  The  ancients  used  to  sell  their  prisoners  of
war  for  slaves.  They,  indeed,  thought  they  had  a  right  to
put  them  to  death.  In  every  circumstance,  when  I  cannot
innocently  take  away  my  prisoner's  life,  I  have  no  right  to
make  him  a  slave.  If  I  spare  his  life,  and  condemn  him  to
a  state  so  contrary  to  the  nature  of  man,  I  still  continue  with
him  the  state  of  war.  He  lies  under  no  obligation  to  me :
for,  what  is  life  without  freedom  ?  If  any  one  counts  life  a
favour  when  the  grant  of  it  is  attended  with  chains, — ^be  it
so :  let  him  accept  the  kindness,  submit  to  the  destiny  which
awaits  him,  and  fulfil  the  duties  annexed  to  it.  ^  But  he  must
apply  to  some  other  writer  to  teach  him  those  duties :  there
have  been  authors  enough  who  have  amply  treated  of  them.
I  shall  dwell  no  longer  on  the  subject ;  and,  indeed,  that  dis-
grace to  humanity  is  happily  banished  from  Europe.

Prisoners  of  war,  then,  are  detained,  either  to  prevent  their
returning  to  join  the  enemy  again,  or  with  a  view  to  obtain
from  their  sovereign  a  just  satisfaction,  as  the  price  of  their
liberty.  There  is  no  obligation  to  release  those  who  are  de-
tained with  the  latter  view,  till  after  satisfaction  is  obtained.
As  to  the  former,  whoever  makes  a  just  war  has  a  right,  if  he
thinks  proper,  to  detain  his  prisoners  till  the  end  of  the  war :
and  whenever  he  releases  them,  he  may  justly  require  a  ran-
som, either  as  a  compensation  at  the  conclusion  of  a  peace,
or,  if  during  the  continuance  of  the  war,  for  the  purpose  of
at  least  weakening  his  enemy's  finances  at  the  same  time  that
he  restores  him  a  number  of  soldiers.  The  European  nations,
who  are  ever  to  be  commended  for  their  care  in  alleviating  the


BOuK  III.
CRAP.  mi.


i  152.  Whe-
ther  prison-
ers of  war
may  be
made  slayei.


[357]


?1W. Ex-
change and
ransom  of
prisoners.


69


*  Hist  of  France,  Reign  of  Charlea  VL


4<6


857  OF  THE RIGHTS OF  NATIONS  TBI  WAK.

BOOK  ni. evils  of  war,  have,  with  regard  to  prisoners,  introduced  lii3as&«
caAi*.  Tiir.  g^^  J  salutary  customs. They  are  exchanged  or  ransomed,  e*-.-:
during  the  war :  and  this  point  is  generally  settled  befor^tx- :
by  cartel. However,  if  a  nation  finds  a  considerable  a«iri:.
tage  in  leaving  her  soldiers  prisoners  with  the  enemy  dur.T
the  war  rather  than  exchanging thera,  she  may  certa  I'r.
unless  bound  by  cartel,  act  in  that  respect  as  is  most  comic- -
to  her  interest. Such  would  be  the  case  of  a  state  ab*?-  !-
ing  in  men,  and  at  war  with  a  nation  more  formidable  bjr  ih-
courage  than  the  number  of  her  soldiers. It  would  hare  l
suited  the  interests  of  the  czar,  Peter  the  Great,  to  rt^i  •:•
his  prisoners  to  the  Swedes  for  an  equal  number  of  Rus^iaib.
f  154. The But  the  state  is  bound  to  procure,  at  her  own  expens^e,  t^-
iit*t6  is release  of  her  citizens  and  soldiers  who  are  prisoners  of  wi-.
procure ^^  ^^^^  ^  ®^®  ^*^  ^^^  means  of  accomplishing  it,  and  can  ■
their  re- it  without  danger. It  was  only  by  acting  in  her  service  ai-
leMe.  supporting  her  cause  that  they  were  involved  in  their  pre=t-L:

misfortune. For  the  same  reason,  it  is  her  duty  to  pror:->
for  their  support  during  the  time  of  their  captivity. Fc-
merly,  prisoners  of  war  were  obliged  to  redeem  themselve-:
but  then  the  ransom  of  all  those  whom  the  oflScers  or  soldi  r?
might  take,  was  the  perquisite  of  the  individual  captors. V-
modern  custom  is  more  agreeable  to  reason  and  justice. If
prisoners  cannot  be  delivered  during  the  course  of  the  w.
at  least  their  liberty  must,  if  possible,  make  an  article  in  l:c
treaty  of  peace. This  is  a  care  which  the  state  owes  to  thi-^c
who  have  exposed  themselves  in  her  defence. It  must,  L^
vertheless,  be  allowed,  that  a  nation  may,  after  the  examKe
of  the  Romans,  and  for  the  purpose  of  stimulating  her  solilien
to  the  most  pgorous  resistance,  enact  a  law  to  proliibit  }»:'-
[  858  ]  soners  of  war  from  ever  being  ransomed. When  this  is  agrtf^:
to  by  the  whole  society,  nobody  can  complain. But  such  i
law  is  very  severe,  and  could  scarce  suit  any  but  those  am-
bitious heroes  who  were  determined  on  sacrificing  every  thiiz
in  order  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the  world.
i  165.  Whe- Since  the  present  chapter  treats  of  the  rights  which  wsr
ther  an  ene-  gives  US  over  the  person  of  the  enemy,  this  is the  prop^T
™y  ™*y place  to  discuss  a  celebrated  question,  on  which  authors  bare
MHassinated  ^®®^  much  divided, — and  that  is,  whether  we  may  lawfnllj
or  fK)i8oned.  employ  all  sorts  of  means  to  take  away  an  enemy's  liff?
whether  we  be  justifiable  in  procuring  his  death  by  assassina-
tion or  poison  ? Some  writers  have  asserted,  that,  where  v?
have  a  right  to  take  away  life,  the  manner  is  indifferent. A
strange  maxim !  but  happily  exploded  by  the  bare  ideas  of
honour,  confused  and  indefinite  as  they  are. In  civil  socierv,
I  have  a  right  to  punish  a  slanderer, — to  cause  my  propertj
to  be  restored  by  him  who  unjustly  detains  it :  but  shall  the
manner  be  indifferent  ? Nations  may  do  themselves  ju?'tico
sword  in  hand,  when  otherwise  refused  to  them :  shall  it  be
indifferent  to  human  society  that  they  employ  odious  means


OP  THE  RIGHTS  OP  NATIONS  IN  WAR.  S58


«3apable  of  spreading  desolation  over  the  whole  face  of  the book  m.
earth,  and  against  which  the  most  just  and  equitable  of  sove-  ^"^^-  ^'":
ireigns, even though supported by  the  majority  of other
princes,  cannot  guard  himself?

But,  in  order  to  discuss  this  question  on  solid  grounds,  as-
eassination  is  by  all  means  to  be  distinguished  from  surprises,
^which are,  doubtless,  very  allowable  in  war. Should  a  re-
solute soldier  steal  into  the  enemy's  camp  by  night, — should
lie  penetrate  to  the  general's  tent,  and  stab  him, — in  such
conduct  there  is  nothing  contrary  to  the  natural  laws  of  war, —
nothing  even  but  what  is  perfectly  commendable  in  a  just
and  necessary  war. Mutius  Scsevola  has  been  praised  by  all
"the  great  men  of  antiquity ;  and  Forsenna  himself,  whom  he
intended  to  kill,  could  not  but  commend  his  courage.* Pepin,
father  of  Charlemagne,  having  crossed  the  Rhine  with  one  of
his  guards,  went  and  killed  his  enemy  in  his  chamber,  f If
any  one  has  absolutely  condemned  such  bold  strokes,  his  cen-
sure only  proceeded  from  a  desire  to  flatter  those  among  the
great,  who  would  wish  to  leave  all  the  dangerous  part  of  war
to  the  soldiery  and  inferior  officers. It  is  true,  indeed,  that
the  agents  in  such  attempts  are  usually  punished  with  some
painful  death. But  that  is,  because  the  prince  or  general  who
is  thus  attacked  exercises  his  own  rights  in  turn, — has  an  eye
to  his  own  safety,  and  endeavours,  by  the  dread  of  a  ctuel
punishment,  to  deter  his  enemies  from  attacking  him  other-
wise than  by  open  force. He  may  proportion  his  severity
towards  an  enemy  according  as  his  own  safety  requires. In-
deed, it  would  be  more  commendable  on  both  sides  to  renounce
every  kind  of  hostility  which  lays  the  enemy  under  a  neces-  [  359  ]
sity  of  employing  cruel  punishments,  in  order  to  secure  him-
self against  it. This  might  be  made  an  established  custom,
— a  conventional  law  of  war. The  generous  warriors  of  the
present  age  dislike  such  attempts,  and  would  never  willingly
undertake them,  except on those  extraordinary  occasions,
when  they  become  "necessary  to  the  very  safety  and  being  of
their  country. As  to  the  six  hundred  Lacedaemonians,  who,
under  the  conduct  of  Leonidas,  broke  into  the  enemy's  camp,
and  made  their  way  directly  to  the  Persian  monarch's  tent,J
their  expedition  was  justifiable  by  the  common  rules  of  war,
and  did  not  authorize  the  king  to  treat  them  more  rigorously
than  any  other  enemies. In  order  to  defeat  all  such  attempts,
it  is  sufficient  to  keep  a  strict  watch ;  and  it  would  be  unjust
to  have  recourse  to  cruel  punishments  for  that  purpose :  ac-
cordingly, such  punishments  are  reserved  for  those  only  who
gain  admittance  by  stealth  alone,  or  in  very  small  number,
and  especially  if  under  cover  of  a  disguise.

*  See  Livy,  lib.  ii.  eap.  zii. — Cicero, f  Grotias,  lib.  ilL  cap.  4,  |  xriii.  n.  L
p)0  P.  Sextio. — ^Valer.  Max.  lib.  iiL  cap. j  JuBiin,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xL
ill— Platarch,  in  PopliooL


SS8  or  THB  BIGHTS  OF  NATIONS IN  WAR.

MOK  nr.  I  give,  then,  the  name  of  assassination  to  a  treacherons
—AP.  Tin,  nmrdei.^  whether  the  perpetrators  of  the  deed  be  subjects  of
the  party  whom  we  cause  to  be  assassinated,  or  of  our  own
sovereign, — or  that  it  be  executed  by  the  hand  of  any  othei
emissary,  introducing  himself  as  a  supplicant,  a  refugee,  a
deserter,  or,  in  fine,  as  a  stranger ;  and  such  an  attempt,  I
say,  is  infamous  and  execrable,  both  in  him  who  executes  and
in  him  who  commands  it.  Why  do  we  judge  an  act  to  be
Criminal,  and  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,  but  because  such
act  is  pernicious  to  human  society,  and  that  the  practice  of  it
would  be  destructive  to  mankind  ?  Now,  what  could  be  more
terrible  than  the  custom  of  hiring  a  traitor  to  assassinate  our
enemy  ?  Besides,  were  such  a  liberty  once  introduced,  the
purest  virtue,  the  friendship  of  the  majority  of  the  reigning
sovereigns,  would  no  longer  be  sufficient  to  insure  a  prince's
safety.  Had  Titus  lived  in  the  time  of  the  old  man  of  the
mountain^ — though  the  happiness  of  mankind  centred  in  him,
— ^though  punctual  in  the  observance  of  peace  and  equity,  he
was  respected  and  adored  by  all  potentates, — ^yet,  the  very
first  time  that  the  prince  of  the  Assassins  might  have  thought
proper  to  quarrel  with  him,  that  universal  affection  would  have
proved  insufficient  to  save  him ;  and  mankind  would  have  lost
their  "darling."  Let  it  not  here  be  replied,  that  it  is  only
in  favour  of  the  cause  of  justice  that  such  extraordinary
measures  are  allowable :  for  all  parties,  in  their  wars,  main-
tain that  they  have  justice  on  their  side.  Whoever,  by  setting
the  example,  contributes  to  the  introduction  of  so  destructive
a  practice,  declares  himself  the  enemy  of  mankind,  and  de-
serves the  execration  of  all  ages.*  The  assassination  of
[  860  ]  William,  prince  of  Orange,  was  regarded  with  universal  detest-
ation, though  the  Spaniards  had  declared  that  prince  a  rebel.
And  the  same  nation  denied,  as  an  atrocious  calumny,  the
charge  of  having  had  the  least  concern  in  that  of  Henry  the
Great,  who  was  preparing  for  a  war  against  them,  which  might
have  shaken  their  monarchy  to  its  very  folindations.

In  treacherously  administering  poison  there  is  something

*  See  the  dialogae  between  Julius  on  the  traitor's  own  head/'  he  ordensd

Csesar  and  Cicero,  in  the  M61ange8  de  him to  be  despatched  with  the  same

Liit^rature  et  Podsies. — Farrudge,  sul-  poniard  with  which  he  had  intended  to

tan  of Egypt, sent  to l^imur-bec an  perpetrate  the  abominable  deed. The

ambassador,  accompanied  by  two  viU  body  of  the  traitor  was  then  committed

lains, who were to assassinate  that  to  the  flames,  as  an  example  to  others,

conqueror  during  the  audience. This  The  two  assassins  were  only  condemned

infamous  plot  being  discovered,  "  It  is  to  suffer  the  amputation  of  their  noses

not^"  said  Timur,  "  the  maxim  of  kings  and  earsj Timur contenting  himself

to  put  ambassadors  to  death  :  but  as  to  with this  punishment,  and  forbearing

this  wretch,  who,  under  the  sacred  garb  to  put  them  to  death,  because  he  wished

of  religion,  is  a  monster  of  perfidy  and  to  send  them  back  with  a  letter  to  the

corruption,  it  would  be  a  crime  to  suffer  sultan. — {Petis  de  la  Croix.) Hist,  of

him  and  his  accomplices  to  live." Pur-  Timur -bee,  book  t.  chap.  xxir.  {{)•  313.

luant,  therefore,  to  that  passage  of  the  Ed.  Delf.  1723.)
Koran  which  says  that  **  treachery  falls
MS


OF  THS  BIGHTS OF  NATIONS  IN  WA&.  360

Btill  more  odious than  in  assassination:  it  would  be  more book  m.
difficult  to  guard  against  the  consequences  of  such  an  attempt ;  ^'^^'  ^"''.
fii^nd  the  practice  would  be  more  dreadful ;  accordingly,  it  has
l>€en more  generally detested. Of  this Grotius has ac-
oumulated  many instances.* The  consuls  Gains  Fabricius
a.Tid  Quintus  -Slmilius  rejected  with  horror  the  proposal  of
l?yrrhus's physician,  who made  an  offer  of poisoning his
master ;  they  even  cautioned  that  prince  to  be  on  his  guard
a  «]^ainst  the  traitor, — ^haughtily  adding :  *'  It  is  not  to  ingra^
tiate  ourselves  with  you  that  we  give  this  information,  but  to
avoid  the  obloquy  to  which  your  death  would  expose  U8.*'t
And  they  justly  observe,  in  the  same  letter,  that  it  is  for  the
common  interest  of  all  nations  not  to  set  such  examples.]!
Jt  was  a  maxim  of  the  Roman  Senate,  that  war  was  to  be
carried  on  with  arms,  and  not  with  poison. § Even  under
Tiberius,  the  proposal  of  the  prince  of  the  Gatti  was  rejected,
vrho  offered  to  destroy  Arminius,  if  poison  were  sent  him  for
that  purpose :  and  he  received  for  answer,  that  "  it  was  the
practice  of  the  Romans  to  take  vengeance  on  their  enemies  by
open  force,  and  not  by  treachery  and  secret  machinations  ;''||
Tiberius  thus  making  it  his  glory  to  imitate  the  virtue  of  the
ancient  Roman  commanders. This  instance  is  the  more  re-
markable, as  Arminius  had  treacherously  cut  off  Varus,  to-
gether with three  Roman  legions. The senate,  and  even
Tiberius  himself,  thought it  unlawful to  adopt the  use  of
poison,  even  against  a  perfidious  enemy,  and  as  a  kind  of  re-
taliation or  reprisals.

Assassination  and  poisoning  are  therefore  contrary  to  the
laws  of  war,  and  equally  condemned  by  the  law  of  nature
and  the  consent  of  all  civilized  nations.  The  sovereign  who  [  361  ]
has  recourse  to  such  execrable  means  should  be  regarded  as
the  enemy  of  the  human  race ;  and  the  common  safety  of
mankind  calls  on  all  nations  to  unite  against  him,  and  join
their  forces  to  punish  him.  His  conduct  particularly  au-
thorizes the  enem^,  whom  he  has  attacked  by  such  odious
means,  to  refuse  him  any  quarter.  Alexander  declared,  that
"he  was  determined  to  proceed  to  the  utmost  extremities
against  Darius,  and  no  longer  to  consider  him  as  a  fair  enemy,
but  as  a  poisoner  and  an  assassin.''^

The  interest  and  safety  of  men  in  high  command  require,
that,  so  far  from  countenancing  the  introduction  of  such  prac-

*  Book  iiL  chap,  iv,  |  XT.  |  Armis  beUa,  non  yenenis,  geri  de-

tOii^  yap  ravra  vy  xaptri  fuivvofLtv,  bere. — Valer. Mftxim. lib. tL ch. t.

aXX'  oTixuf  fill  TO  aov  xadoi ^/ttp  6ia6o\tiif  num.  i.

iveyxTf. — Plat  in  Pyrr.  ||  Non  frande,  neqne  occnltis,  sed  pa-

^  Sed  communis  exempli  et  fidei  ergo  lam,  et  armatnm, — ^populum  Romanum

risum  est,  uti  te salvnm  yelimos ;  at  hostes  saos  ulcisci. — Tacit.  AnnaL  lib.  IL

esact,  quern armis  vineere possemas.  cap.  Ixxxviii.

— AaL  GelL  Noct  Attic  lib.  iiL  cap.  %  Quint  Curt  Ub.  It.  cap.  zi.  traia.

flil.  XTIU.

2P  ««9


66±  OF  THB  BIGHTS  07  NATIONS  IK  WAR.

BOOK  m. tices,  they  should  use  all  possible  care  to  prevent  it. It  was
CHAP.  TiiL  ^jseiy  gaid  by  Eumenes,  that  "  he  did  not  think  any  general
wished  to  obtain  a  victory  in  such  manner  as  should  set  a
pernicious  example  which  might  recoil  on  himself."* And  it
was  on  the  same  principle  that  Alexander  formed  his  judg
ment  of  Bessus,  who  had  assassinated  Darius,  f
}  156.  Whe- The  use  of  poisoned  weapons  may  be  excused  or  defended
ther  poison-  with  a  little  more  plausibility. At  least,  there  is  no  treachery
ed  weapons  -jj  the  case,  uo  clandestine  machination. But  the  practice  is
in*wAr!  "**  nevertheless  prohibited  by  the  law  of  nature,  which  does  not
allow  us  to  multiply  the  evils  of  war  beyond  all  bounds. You
must  of  course  strike  your  /enemy  in  order  to  get  the  better
of  his  efforts :  but  if  he  is  once  disabled,  is  it  necessary  that
he  should  inevitably  die  of  his  wounds  ? Besides,  if  you  poi-
son your  weapons,  the  enemy  will  follow  your  example ;  and
thus,  without  gaining  any  advantage  on  your  side  for the
decision  of  the  contest,  you  have  only  added  to  the  cruelty
and  calamities  of  war. It  is  necessity  alone  that  can  at  all
justify  nations  in  making  war:  they  ought  universally  to
abstain  from  every  thing  that  has  a  tendency  to  render  it
more  destructive :  it  is  even  a  duty  incumbent  on  them  to
oppose  such  practices. It  is  therefore  with  good  reason,  and
in  conformity  to  their  duty,  that  civilized  nations  have  classed
among  the  laws  of  war  the  maxim  which  prohibits  the  poison-
ing of  weapons  ;J  and  they  are  all  warranted  by  their  com-
mon safety  to  repress  and  punish  the  first  who  should  offer  to
break  through  that  law.
{  157.  Wbe- A  still  more  general  unanimity  prevails  in  condemning  the
tber  springs  practice  of  poisoning  waters,  wells,  and  springs,  because  (say
poisonod. some  authors)  we  may  thereby  destroy  innocent  persons, —
we  may  destroy  other  people  as  well  as  our  enemies. This  is
indeed  an  additional  reason :  but  it  is  not  the  only  nor  even
[  362  ]  the  true  one ;  for  we  do  not  scruple  to  fire  on  an  enemy's
ship,  although  there  be  neutral  passengers  on  board. But
though  poison  is  not  to  be  used,  it  is  very  allowable  to  divert
the  water, — ^to  cut  off  the  springs,— or  by  ^ny  other  means  to
render  them  useless,  that  the  enemy  may  be  reduced  to  sur-
render.§ This  is  a  milder  way  than  that  of  arms.  (163)
{  158. Dis- I  cannot  conclude  this  subject,  of  what  we  have  a  right  to
posiUons  to  (Jo  against  the  person  of  the  enemy,  without  speaking  a  few

^  I  —  !■■ » ^» !■■■■-■  .-I...  ^.  —  — — ■ ■ ■  I ip ■ I ■ ■  ■  ■  —  I  ■■

*  Nec Antif^onum, neo qnemquam  (163)  But,  in  modem  warfare,  irfa&t-

ducum,  sic  velle  vincere,  ut  ipse  in  se  ever  may  be  the  necessary  practice  ia

exemplam possimum  statuat. — Justin,  starving  the besieged  fortress  into  a

Ub.  xiv.  cap.  i.  num.  xii.  surrender,  we  have  instanced  the  Sog-

1  Quern  quiUcm  [Be»»utn]  cruci  ad-  Ush  supplying  the  French  army  m\h
fixum  videre  festino,  omnibus  regibus  medicine,  to  prevent  the  progress  of  a
gentibusque  fidei,  quam  violavit,  me-  destructive  disorder,  although,  if  a  pettj
ritas  poenas  solventum. — Q.  Cart  lib.  policy  were  allowed  to  prevail,  such  aa
yi.  ch.  iii.  num.  xiv.  indulgence  of  humane  feeling  might  ajH

{  Grotius,  book  iiu  ch.  iv.  J  xtL  pear  ix^judicious  (ante). — C.

2  GrothiB,  ibid.  |  zviL

470


OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  NATIONS  IN  WAB.  8Gi


words  concerning  the  dispositions  we  ought  to  preserve  to- book  m
"wards  him. They  may  already  be  deduced  from  what  I  have


CHAP. VIII.


hitherto  said,  and  especially  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  second  ^®  preserved
book.  Let  us  never  forget  that  our  enemies  are  men.  Though  ^J^^  *  *°
reduced to the disagreeable  necessity  of  prosecuting  our
right  by  force  of  arms,  let  us  not  divest  ourselves  of  that
charity  which  connects  us  with  all  mankind. Thus  shall  we
courageously  defend  our  country's  rights  without  violating
those  of  human  nature.* Let  our  valour  preserve  itself  from
every  stain  of  cruelty,  and  the  lustre  of  victory  will  not  be
tarnished  by  inhuman  and  brutal  actions. Marius  and  Attila
are  now  detested ;  whereas  we  cannot  forbear  admiring  and
loving  CsBsar ;  his  generosity  and  clemency  almost  tempt  us
to overlook  the  injustice  of  his  undertaking. Moderation
and  generosity  redound  more  to  the  glory  of  a  victor  than
his  courage ;  they  are  more  certain  marks  of  an  exalted  soul.
Besides  the  honour  which  infallibly  accompanies  those  virtues,
humanity  towards  an  enemy  has  been  often  attended  with
immediate  and  real  advantages. Leopold,  duke  of  Austria,
besieging  Soleure,  in  the  year  1318,  threw  a  bridge  over  the
Aar,  and  posted  on  it  a  large  body  of  troops. Soon  after,
the  river  having,  by  an  extraordinary  swell  of  its  waters,  car-
ried away  the  bridge  together  with  those  who  were  stationed
on  it, — the  besieged  hastened  to  the  relief  of  those  unfortunate
men,  and  saved  the  greatest  part  of  them. Leopold,  relent-
ing at  this  act  of  generosity,  raised  the  siege  and  made  peace
with  the  city.f The  duke  of  Cumberland,  after  his  victory
at  Dettingen,J  appears  to  me  still  greater  than  in  the  heat  of
battle. As  he  was  under  the  surgeon's hands,  a  French  [  363  ]
officer,  much  more  dangerously  wounded  than  himself,  being
brought  that  way,  the  duke  immediately  ordered  his  surgeon
to  quit  him,  and  assist  that  wounded  enemy. If  men  in  ex-
alted stations  did  but  conceive  how  great  a  degree  of  aflfec-
tion  and  respect  attends  such  actions,  they  would  study  to

*  The  laws  of  joBtice  and  eqaity  are  of  a  bribe,  bat  with  a  view  to  save  the

noi  to  be  less  respected  even  in  time  women and children, whom he saw

of  \ifiT. The following  I  quote  as  a  perishing  with famine;  for  Clearchus,

remarkable instance : — AlcibiadeSi at  who  commanded  the  garrison,  had  given

the  head  of  an  Athenian  army,  was  to  the soldiers  aU  the com  that  was

engaged  in the  siege of  Byzantium,  found  in  the  city. The  Lacedsemoni-

tben  occupied  by  a  Lacedaemonian  gar-  ans,  with  a  noble  regard  to  justice,  and

ripon ;  and  finding  that  he  could  not  such  as  seldom  prevails  on  similar  oc-

reduce  the  city  by force, he gained  casions,  acquitted  the  culprit,  observing

over  gome  of  the  inhabitants,  who  put  that  he  had  not  betrayed,  but  saved

him  in  possession  of  IL One  of  the  the  city,  and  particularly  attending  to

persons  concerned  in this  transaction  the circumstance of his being a

was  Anaxilaus,  a  citizen  of  Byzantium,  Byzantine, not a Lacedaemonian. —

who,  being  afterwards  brought  to  ^al  Xenoph. Hist  GrsBO.  lib.  i.  cap.  iii. —

for  it  at  LacedsBmon,  pleaded  in his  Edit  A.  d.  1797.

defence,  that,  in  surrendering  the  city,  f  Watteville's Hist  of  the  Helvetio

he  had  not  acted  through  ill-will  to  the  Confederacy,  vol.  i.  p.  126.

Lacedaemonians,  or  under  the  influence  J  In  the  year  1743.

471


363  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  KATI0K8  IN  WAB.


BOOK  in. imitate  them,  even  when  not  prompted  to  the  practice  It
CHAP.  Yiii.  native  elevation  of  sentiment. At  present,  the  Euryf^i.
nations  generally  carry  on  their  wars  with  great  moderatia
and  generosity. These  dispositions  have  given  rise  to  tt-ven]
customs  which  are  highly  commendable,  and  frequentlj  csr-
ried  to  the  extreme  of  politeness.* Sometimes  refreshmtiits
are  sent  to  the  governor  of  a  besieged  town ;  and  i^  is  n^uil
to  avoid  firing  on  the  king's  or  the  general's  quarters. ^\  c
are  sure  to  gain  by  this  moderation,  when  we  have  to  do  viiL
a  generous  enemy :  but  we  are  not  bound  to  observe  it  anj
further  than  can  be  done  without  injuring  the  cause  we  »!>
fend; and  it  is  clear  that  a  prudent general  wUi,  in  tLii
respect,  regulate  his  conduct  by  the circumstances of  lie
case,  by  an  attention  to  the  safety  of  the  army  and  of  tie
state,  by  the  magnitude  of  the  danger,  and  by  the  characitr
and  behaviour  of  the  enemy. Should  a  weak  nation  or  to»a
be  attacked  by  a  furious  conqueror  who  threatens  to  destroj
it,  are  the  defenders  to  forbear  firing  on  his  quarters  ? Far
from  it :  that  is  the  very  place  to  which,  if  possible,  everr
shot  should  be  directed,
f  159.  Ten- Formerly,  he  who  killed  the  king  or  general  of  the  enemj
derneas  for was  commeuded  and  greatly  rewarded :  the  honours  annex^f
the  poreon ^jjg  spoUa  opima  are  well  known. Nothing  was  more  natural:
1,  * .  ?* in  former  times,  the  belligerent  nations  had,  almost  in  everr

who  18  in,  !•/•  J  •  -I  ii'

vms  against  mstance,  their  safety  and  very  existence  at  stake ;  and  rhe
»8.  death  of  the  leader  often  put  an  end  to  the  war. In  dot

days,  a  soldier  would  not  dare  to  boast  of  having  killed  tbe
enemy's  king.  Thus  sovereigns  tacitly  agree  to  secure  their
own  persons.  It  must  be  owned,  that,  in  a  war  which  is  car-
ried on  with  no  great  animosity,  and  where  the  safety  and
existence  of  the  state  are  not  involved  in  the  issue,  this
regard  for  regal  majesty  is  perfectly  commendable,  and  even
consonant  to  the  reciprocal  duties  of  nations.  In  such  a  war,
to  take  away  the  life  of  the  enemy's  sovereign,  when  it  might
be  spared,  is  perhaps  doing  that  nation  a  greater  degree  of
harm  than  is  necessary  for  bringing  the  contest  to  a  happv
issue. But  it  is  not  one  of  the  laws  of  war  that  we  should  on


*  Timnr-beo made  war on Joseph  share  those  new  fruits  with  that  priiMV

Sofy,  king  of Carezem, and  snbdued  when  so  near  him :  and  accordinglj  ks

his kingdom. During the  oourse of  ordered  them to be put-  inti)  a  gvld

the  war,  that  great  man  proved  him-  basin,  and  carried  to  him. The  Irnif

self  to  be  possessed  of  all  that  modera>  of  Carezem reoeived  this  instance  of

Uon and  politeness  which is  thought  politeness  in  a  brutal  manner;  he  or-

peculiax  to  our  modem  warriors. Some  dered the  melons  to  be thr&irn  inu

melons  being  brought  to  him  whilst  he  the  foss^,  and gave the  basin  to  thi

was besieging  Joseph in  the  city  of  city  gate-keeper. — La Croix,  Hi^  oi

Eskiskus,  he  resolved  to  send  a  part  Timar-bec,  book  y. oh. zzviL-'Bdit

of them to his enemy, thinking it  ▲.!>.  1797.
woold  be  a  breach of  oivUity  not  to
472


OF  THB  BIGHT  OVER  BNBMIBS' PROPERTY.  868

every  occasion  spare  the  person  of  the  hostile  king :  we  are  book.  m.
not  bound  to  observe  that  moderation  except  where  we  have-£21£iZ2!:
A  fail*  opportunity  of  making  him  prisoner.*


CHAP.  IX.  *  [  364  ]

OF  THB  RIGHT  OF  WAR,  WITH REGARD TO THINGS  BELONGING chap,  ii.

TO THB ENEMY.  (164)

A  STATE  taking  up  arms  in  a  just  cause  has  a  double  j,i60.  Prin.
right  against  her  enemy, — 1.  a  right  to  obtain  possession  of  cipi«8  of  tii«
her  property  withheld  by  the  enemy ;  to  which  must  be  added  "?^*  **^®'
the expenses incurred  in  the pursuit  of  that object, thei^n^ngto
charges  of  the  war,  and  the  reparation  of  damages :  for,  were  the  enemy
she  obliged  to  bear  those  expenses  and  losses,  she  would- not
fully  recover  her  property,  or  obtain  her  due. 2.  She  has  a
right  to  weaken  her  enemy,  in  order  to  render  him  incapable
of  supporting  his  unjust  violence  (§  138) — a  right  to  deprive
him  of  the  means  of  resistance. Hence,  as  from  their  source,
originate  all  the  rights  which  war  gives  us  over  things  belong-
ing to  the  enemy. I  speak  of  ordinary  cases,  and  of  what

*  On  this  subjeoty  let  us  notice  a  287 ;  and  the  modem  decisions,  1  Chit-
trait  of  Charles  XIL  of  Sweden,  in  ty's  Commercial  Law,  377—437;  and
which  sound  reason  and  the  most  ox-  Chitty's  Law  of  Nations,  per  tot  And
alted  courage  are  equally  conspicuous,  as  to  the  legal  right  of  embargo  and
That  prince,  being  engaged  in  the  siege  capture,  as  it  affects  commerce,  and  ez-
of  Thorn  in  Poland,  and  frequently  ceptions,  as  respects  small  fiahing  vesteU,
walking  round  the  city,  was  easily  dis-  1  Chitty's  C.  L.  426.  But,  that  exemp>
tinguished  by  the  cannoneers,  who  tion  is  matter  of  forbearance,  rather  than
regularly  fired  upon  him  as  soon  as  of  right,  and  seems  analogous  to  hu8>
they  saw  him  make  his  appearance,  bandmen  and  cnlUvators  of  land  being
The  principal  officers  of  his  army,  great-  usually  spared,  see  Vattel,  J  147,  ante,
ly  alarmed  at  their  sovereign's  danger,  352 ;  and  see  Young,  Jacob,  and  Johorea,
wished  to  have  information  sent  to  the  1  Rob.  Rep.  19,  as  to  fishing-boats  and
governor,  that,  if  the  practice  was  con-  fishermen,  per  Sir  Wtn,  Scott,
tinued,  no  quarter  should  be  granted  Questions  respecting  captures  and
either  to  him  or  to  the  garrison.  But  prizes,  or  even  imprisonment  of  the
the  Swedish  monarch  would  never  per-  person  incident  to  the  seizure  as  prize,
mit  such  a  step  to  be  taken,  telling  his  cannot  in  general  become  the  subject
officers  that  the  governor  and  the  Saxon  of  litigation,  directly,  in  any  of  the  mu-
cannoneers  were  perfectly  right  in  act-  nicipal  courts  of  this  country,  but  must
ing  as  they  did,  that  it  was  himself  be  investigated  in  a  prize  court,  which,
who  madc^  the  attack  upon  them,  and  in  this  country,  is  holden  under  a  dis-
that  the  war  woald  bo  at  an  end  if  tinct  authority  from  that  of  the  court
they  could  kill  him ;  whereas  they  of  Admiralty,  viz.  under  a  special  com-
would  reap  very  little  advantage  even  mission  from  the  king,  who  would
from  killing  the  principal  officers  of  his  otherwise  preside  in  person  over  prize
army. — Ilistoire  du  Nord,  p.  26. — Edit,  questions :  and  from  such  commission
A.  b.  1797.  there  is  usually  an  appeal  to  the  king

(164) See,  in general,  Grotius,  ch.  in  council;  see  eases  in  note  (166),  jmm^

.  Home  ou  Captures ;  Mai  ten's  L.  Nat  365. — 0.

60 2p2  47«


^


8G4  OP  THE  RIGHT  OVER  ENEMIES* PROPERTY.

BOOK  m. particularly  relates  to  the  enemy's  property. On  certain  op-
S^^LJ^  casions,  the  right  of  punishing  him  produces  new  rights  ova
the  things  which  belong  to  him,  as  it  also  does  over  his  persoa.
These  we  shall  presently  consider.
2  181. The We  have  a  right  to  deprive  our  enemy  of  his  poss^^ioik-,
right  of Qf  every  thing  which  may  augment  his  strength and  enabk
thlm*^  ^ ^™  *®  make  war. This  every  one  endeavours  to  aecompliak
in  the  manner  most  suitable  to  him. Whenever  ¥re have  an
opportunity,  we  seize  on  the  enemy's  property,  and conren
it  to  our  own  use :  and  thus,  besides  diminishing  the  enemvi
power,  we  augment  our  own,  and  obtain  at  least  a  partial  in-
demnification or  equivalent,  either  for  what  constitutes the
subject  of  the  war,  or  for  the  expenses  and  losses  incurred  ia
•  its  prosecution : — in  a  word,  we  do  ourselves  justice.
2 162.  What The  right  to  security  often  authorizes  us  to  punish  injostice
is  taken qp  violence. It  is  an  additional  plea  for  depriving  an  enemy
from  the ^f  some  part  of  his  possessions. This  manner  of  cha^tisib^  a
way  of  pe-  nation  is  more  humane  than  making  the  penalty  to  fall  on  the
naity.  persons  of  the  citizens. With  that  view,  things  of  value  maj

[  865  ]  be  taken  from  her,  such  as  rights,  cities,  provinces. But  all
wars  do  not  afibrd  just  grounds  for  inflicting  punishment. A
nation  that  has  with  upright  intentions  supported  a  bad  cause,
and  observed  moderation  in  the  prosecution  of  it,  is  entitled
rather  to  compassion  than  resentment  from  a  generous  con-
queror :  and  in  a  doubtful  cause  we  are  to  suppose  that  the
4  enemy  sincerely  thinks  himself  in  the  right. (Prelim.  §  21 ;
Book  III.  §  40.) The  only  circumstance,  therefore,  which
gives  an  enemy  the  right  to  punish  his  adversaries,  is  their
evident  injustice,  unsupported  even  by  any  plausible  pretext,
or  some  heinous  outrage  in  their  proceedings :  and,  on  every
occasion,  he  ought  to  confine  the  punishment  to  what  his  own
security  and  the  safety  of  nations  require.  As  far  as  consistent
with  prudence,  it  is  glorious  to  obey  the  voice  of  clemency :
that  amiable  virtue  seldom  fails  of  being  more  useful  to  the
party  who  exerts  it,  than  inflexible  rigour. The  clemency  of
Henry  the  Great  was  of  singular  advantage  in  co-operating
with  his  valour,  when  that  good  prince  found  himself  com-
pelled to  conquer  his  own  kingdom. Those  who  would  have
continued  his  enemies  if  only  subdued  by  arms,  were  won  by
his  goodness,  and  became  afiectionate  subjects.
2  163.  What In  fine,  we  seize  on  the  enemy's  property,  his  towns,  his
is  withheld  provinces,  in  order  to  bring  him  to  reasonable  conditions,  and
f^™?"^ compel  him  to  accept  of  an  equitable  and  solid  peace. Thus
oblige  him ^^^^  more  is  taken  from  him  than  he  owes,  more  'than  is
to  give  just  claimed  of  him :  but  this  is  done  with  a  design  of  restoring
fatiafootioxi.  the  surplus  by  a  treaty  of  peace. The  king  of  France*  was,
in  the  last  war,  known  to  declare  that  he  aimed  at  nothing  for

*  The  peace  was  become  absolutely  with  all  its  dependencies,  whi«h  wen

necessary  to  liim ;  and  he  had,  in  re-  of  more  importance  to  him. [Kote  hj

torn  for  hia  few  oonquests,  Loui«boui|^  the  former  translatoz.]
474


^1^


OF  THE  EIGHT  OVBR  BNEMIES' PROI'ERTT.  865

himself: and  by  the  treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  he  actually book  m.
restored  all  his  conquests.  ^^^^'  '^•


As  the  towns  and  lands  taken  from  the  enemy  are  called  §  164
conquests^  all  movable  property  taken  from  him  comes  under Poot7(i65)
the  denomination  of  booty.  This  booty  naturally  belongs  to
the  sovereign  making  war,  no  less  than  the  conquests ;  for  he
alone  has  such  claims  against  the  hostile  nation  as  warrant
him  to  seize  on  her  property  and  convert  it  to  his  own  use.  (165)
His  soldiers,  and  even  his  auxiliaries,  are  only  instruments
"which  he  employs  in  asserting  his  right. He  maintains  and

?ays  them.  Whatever  they  do  is  in  his  name,  and  for  him.
'bus,  there  is  no  diflBculty,  even  with  regard  to  the  auxiliaries.
If  they  are  not  associates  in  the  war,  it  is  not  carried  on  for
their  benefit ;  and  they  have  no  more  right  to  the  booty  than
to  the  conquests.  But  the  sovereign  may  grant  the  troops
what  share  of  the  booty  he  pleases.  At  present  most  nations
allow  them  whatever  they  can  make  on  certain  occasions  when  [  866  1
the  general  allows  of  plundering, — such  as  the  spoil  of  ene-
mies fallen  in  the  field  of  battle,  the  pillage  of  a  camp  which

(165)  That  they  belong  to  the  king,  £100,  the  claim  may  be  setUed  in  the

unless  delegated  to  a  subject,  see  fur-  prize  court,  summarily,  and  without  a

ther,  pout,  §  202,  page  391. But  to  the  formal  suit;  but  not  so,  if  it  bo  even  a

king  for  the  benefit  of  the  community ,  trifle  aboYO  that  amount.  The  J/ercuritw,

and  jDot  as  his  own  private  property.  5  Rob.  127.

Id.  ibid. In  case  a  territory  of  a  fo- In  the  case  of  Elphinatone  r.  Bedree^
reign  sovereign,  or  a  part  of  it,  be  cap-  chund,  Enapp's Rep.  316, where the
tured,  the  sovereign  of  the  conquering  members  of  the  provisional  government
state  is  entitled  to  all  the  property  there  of  a  recently  conquered country  had
of  the  conquered  sovereign ; Advocate  seized  the  property  of  a  native,  who
General  v. Amerehundj  Knapp's Rep.  had  been  refused  the  benefit  of  the  ar-
of  Cases  before  the  Privy  Council,  329 ;  tides  of  capitulation  of  a  fortress,  of
and the same case establishes that  which  he  was  the  governor,  but  who
there  is  no  distinction,  in  this  respect,  had  been permitted to  reside under
bi>tween  the  public  and  private  property  mUitary  surveillance  in  his  own  house
of  an absolute monarch; and that^  in  the  city,  in  which  the  seizure  was
therefore,  money  in  the  hands  of  the  made, and which was at  a  distance
banker  of  a  prince,  whose territories  from  the  scene  of  actual  hostilities,  it
have  been conquered  by  the  British,  was  held  that  such  seizure  must  be  re-
may  be  recovered  on  an information  garded  in  the  light  of  a  hostile  seizure,
by  the  English  attorney-general  from  and  that^  therefore,  a  municipal  court
the  banker. Decided  in  Privy  Council,  bad'  no jurisdiction on the subject,
reversing  the  judgment  of  the  court  be-  And  it  was  further  considered,  in  the
low  at  Bombay. See  Holfs  case,  Ni.  same  case,  that  the  circumstance  that,
Pri. 113; Lindo  v.  Rodney, Douglas,  at  the time of  the seizure, the city
813 ;  Caux  v.  Eden,  Douglas,  594 ;  El-  where  it  was  made  bad  been,  for  some
phinstone  v.  Bedreechund,  Kni^pp's  Rep.  months  previously,  in  the  undisturbed
316 ;  Chitty's  Gen.  Practice,  2  n.  {b),  possession  of  the  provisional  govern- '
16  n. (e),  Id. 818. But  to  this  rule  ment,  and  that  courts  of  justice,  under
there  is  an  exception,  as  regards  any  the  authority  of  that  government,  were
trust  which  may  be  enforced  in  a  court  sitting  in  It  for  the  administration  of
of  equity ;  Pearson  v.  Belcher,  4  Ves.  justice,  did  not  alter  the  character  of
627 ;  Chaloner  v.  Samson,  1  Bro.  pi.  149 ;  the  transaction ;  and  that,  consequently,
and  see  Hill  v.  Jteardon,  2  Russell's  whatever  might  be  the  legality  of  the
Rep.  608,  qualifying  2  Sim.  A  Stu.  Rep.  capture,  or  hostile  seizure,  stil)  the  party
437 — 451 ;  Chitty'a  Gen.  Practice,  818.  had  mistaken  his  remedy  in  prosecuting
When the property  seixed  ii under  it  in  the  supreme  court  of  Bombay. — G.

475


S66  OF  THE  RIGHT  OVER  ENEMIES* PROPERTT.

BOOK  in.  has  been  forced,  and  sometimes  that  of  a  town  taken  by  so*
CHAP.  IX.  gjj^nit^  jj^  several  services,  the  soldier  has  also  the  property
of  what  he  can  take  from  the  enemy's  troops  when  he  is  out
on  a  party,  or  in  a  detachment,  excepting  artillery,  military
stores,  magazines,  and  convoys  of  provisions  and  forage,  which
are  applied  to  the  wants  and  use  of  the  army.  This  custom
being  once  admitted  in  an  army,  it  would  be  injustice  to  ex-
clude the  auxiliaries  from  the  right  allowed  to  the  national
troops.  Among  the  Romans,  the  soldier  was  obliged  to  bring
in  to  the  public  stock  all  the  booty  he  had  taken.  This  the
goneral  caused  to  be  sold ;  and,  after  distributing  a  part  of
the  produce  among  the  soldiers,  according  to  rank,  he  con-
signed the  residue  to  the  public  treasury.
{ t65.  Con-  Instead  of  the  custom  of  pillaging  the  open  country  and
tribntioDs.  defenceless  places,  another  mode  has  been  substituted,  which
is  at  once  more  humane,  and  more  advantageous  to  the  bel-
ligerent sovereign — I  mean  that  of  contributions.  Whoever
carries  on  a  just  war  has  a  right  to  make  the  enemy's  country
contribute  to  the  support  of  his  army,  and  towards  defraying
all  the  charges  of  the  war.  Thus,  he  obtains  a  part  of  what
is  due  to  him ;  and  the  enemy's  subjects,  by  consenting  to
pay  the  sum  demanded,  have  their  property  secured  from  pil-
lage, and  the  country  is  preserved.  But  a  general  who  wishes
to  enjoy  an  unsullied  reputation,  must  be  moderate  in  his  de-
mand of  contributions,  and  proportion  them  to  the  abilities  of
those  on  whom  they  are  imposed.  An  excess  in  this  point
does  not  escape  the  reproach  of  cruelty  and  inhumanity :  al-
though there  is  not  so  great  an  appearance  of  ferocity  in  it  aa
in  ravage  and  destruction,  it  displays  a  greater  degree  of
avarice  or  greediness.  Instances  of  humanity  and  moderation
cannot  be  too  often  quoted.  A^very  commendable  one  oc-
curred during  those  long  wars  which  France  carried  on  in  tho
reign  of  Louis  XIV.  The  sovereigns,  seeing  it  was  their  mu-
tual interest  as  well  as  duty  to  prevent  ravage,  made  it  a
practice,  on  the  commencement  of  hostilities,  to  enter  into
treaties  for  regulating  the  contributions  on  a  supportable  foot-
ing :  they  determined  the  extent  of  hostile  territory  in  which
each  might  demand  contributions,  the  amount  of  them,  and
the  manner  in  which  the  parties  sent  to  levy  them  were  to  be-
have. In  these  treaties  it  was  expressed,  that  no  body  of
men  under  a  certain  number  should  advance  into  the  enemy's
country  beyond  the  limits  agreed  on,  under  the  penalty  of  be-
ing treated  as  freebooters.  By  such  steps  they  prevented  a
multitude  of  disorders  and  enormities,  which  entail  ruin  ou
the  people,  and  generally  without  the  least  advantage  to  tha
belligerent  sovereigns.  Whence  comes  it  that  so  noble  an  ex-
ample is  not  universally  imitated  ?
{  »M.  Waste  If  it  is  lawful  to  take  away  the  property  of  an  unjust  enemy
aod^aoeuoc  j^  order  to  weaken  or  punish  him,  (§§  161, 162),  the  same  mo*
tives  justify  us  in  destroying  what  we  cannot  conveniently

471


OF  THE  BIGHT  OVEB  SNBMIES' PBOPEBTT.  366

carry  away. Thus,  we  waste  a  country,  and  destroy  the  pro- book  iit
visions  and  forage,  that  the  enemy  may  not  find  a  subsistence  ^^^^'  "v.
there :  we  sink  his  ships  when  we  cannot  take  them  or  bring  [  867  ]
them  off. All  this  tends  to  promote  the  main  object  of  the
war :  but  .such  measures  are  only  to  be  pursued  with  modera-
tion, *and  according  to  the  exigency  of  the  case. Those  who
tear  up  the  vines  and  cut  down  the  fruit-trees  are  looked  upon
as  savage  barbarians,  unless  when  they  do  it  with  a  view  to
punish  the  enemy  for  some  gross  violation  of  the  law  of  na-
tions. They  desolate  a  country  for  many  years  to  come,  and
beyond  what  their  own  safety  requires. Such  conduct  is  not
dictated  by  prudence,  but  by  hatred  and  fury.

On  certain  occasions,  however,  matters  are  carried  still }  16^  R«-
farther:  a  country  is  totally  ravaged,  towns  and  villages  are  ^^s:*"*  *^*
sacked,  and  delivered  up  a  prey  to  fire  and  sword.  Dread- ^'*™^'^"
ful  extremities,  even  when  we  are  forced  into  them  !  Savage
and  monstrous  excesses,  when  committed  without  necessity !
There  are  two  reasons,  however,  which  may  authorize  them, —
1.  the  necessity  of  chastising  an  unjust  and  barbarous  nation,
of  checking  her  brutality,  and  preserving  ourselves  from  her
depredations.  Who  can  doubt  that  the  king  of  Spain  and  the
powers  of  Italy  have  a  very  good  right  utterly  to  destroy  those
maritime  towns  of  Africa,  those  nests  of  pirates,  that  are  con-
tinually molesting  their  commerce  and  ruining  their  subjects  ?
But  what  nation  will  proceed  to  such  extremities  merely  for
the  sake  of  punishing  the  hostile  sovereign  ?  It  is  but  in-
directly that  he  will  feel  the  punishment :  and  how  great  the
cruelty,,  to  ruin  an  innocent  people  in  order  to  reach  him !
The  same  prince  whose  firmness  and  just  resentment  was  com-
mended in  the  bombardment  of  Algiers,  was,  after  that  of
Genoa,  accused  of  pride  and  inhumanity.  2.'  We  ravage  a
country  and  render  it  uninhabitable,  in  order  to  make  it  serve
us  as  a  barrier,  and  to  cover  our  frontier  against  an  enemy
whose  incursions  we  are  unable  to  check  by  any  other  means.
A  cruel  expedient,  it  is  true :  but  why  should  we  not  be  al-
lowed to  adopt  it  at  the  expense  of  the  enemy,  since,  with  the
same  view,  we  readily  submit  to  lay  waste  our  own  provinces  ?

The  czar  Peter  the  Great,  in  his  flight  before  the  formidable
Charles  the  Twelfth,  ravaged  an  extent  of  above  fourscore
leagues  of  his  own  empire,  in  order  to  check  the  impetuosity
of  a  torrent  which  he  was  unable  to  withstand.  Thus,  the
Swedes  were  worn  down  with  want  and  fatigue ;  and  the  Rus-
sian monarch  reaped  at  Pultowa  the  fruits  of  his  circumspec-
tion and  sacrifices.  But  violent  remedies  are  to  be  sparingly
applied :  there  must  be  reasons  of  suitable  importance  to  jus-
tify the  use  of  them.  A  prince  who  should,  wijhout  necessity,
imitate  the  czar^s  conduct,  would  be  guilty  of  a  crime  against
his  people :  and  he  who  does  the  like  in  an  enemy's  country,
when  impelled  to  it  by  no  necessity,  or  induced  by  feeble  rea-
sons, becomes  the  scourge  of  mankind. In  the  last  century,

4^7


868  OF  THE  RiaHT OVER  ENEMIES' PROPERTY.


BOOK  in.  the  French  ravaged  and  burnt  the  Palatinate.*  All  Europe
CHAP.  IX.  resounded  with  invectives  against  such  a  mode  of  waging  war.
It  was  in  vain  that  the  couft  attempted  to  palliate  their  con-
duct, by  alleging  that  this  was  done  only  with  a  view  to  cover
their  own  frontier : — ^that  was  an  end  to  which  the  ravaging
of  the  Palatinate  contributed  but  little :  and  the  whole  pro-
ceeding exhibited  nothing  to  the  eyes  of  mankind  but  the
revenge  and  cruelty  of  a  haughty  and  unfeeling  minister.
2 168.  What  For  whatever  cause  a  country  is  ravaged,  we  ought  to
things  are  to  spare  thosc  edifices  which  do  honour  to  human  society,  and
be  spared.  ^Jq  ^^^  contribute  to  increase  the  enemy's  strength, — ^such  as
temples,  tombs,  public  buildings,  and  all  works  of  remarkable
beauty.  What  advantage  is  obtained  by  destroying  them  ?
It  is  declaring  one's  self  an  enemy  to  mankind,  thus  wantonly
to  deprive  them  of  these  monuments  of  art  and  models  of
taste ;  and  in  that  light  Belisarius  represented  the  matter  to
Tottila,  king  of  the  &oths.t  We  still  detest  those  barbarians
who  destroyed  so  many  wonders  of  art,  when  they  overran
the  Roman  empire.  However  just  the  resentment  with  which
the  great  Gustavus  was  animated  against  Maximilian,  duke
of  Bavaria,  he  rejected  with  indignation  the  advice  of  those
who  wished  him  to  demolish  the  stately  palace  of  Munich,
and  took  particular  care  to  preserve  that  admirable  structure.
Nevertheless,  if  we  find  it  necessary  to  destroy  edifices  of
that  nature  in  order  to  carry  on  the  operations  of  war,  or  to
advance  the  works  in  a  siege,  we  have  an  undoubted  right  to
take  such  a  step.  The  sovereign  of  the  country,  or  his
general,  makes  no  scruple  to  destroy  them,  when  necessity  or
the  maxims  of  war  require  it.  The  governor  of  a  besieged
town  sets  fire  to  the  suburbs,  that  they  may  not  afford  a  lodg-
ment to  the  besiegers.  Nobody  presumes  to  blame  a  general
who  lays  waste  gardens,  vineyards,  or  orchards,  for  the  pur-
pose of  encamping  on  the  ground,  and  throwing  up  an  en-
trenchment. If  any  beautiful  production  of  art  be  thereby
destroyed,  it  is  an  accident,  an  unhappy  consequence  of  the
war;  and  the  general  will  not  be  blamed,  except  in  those
cases  when  he  might  have  pitched  his  camp  elsewhere  without
the  smallest  inconvenience  to  himself.
;  169.  Bom-  ^^  bombarding  towns,  it  is  difficult  to  spare  the  finest  edi*
hording  fices.  At  present  we  generally  content  ourselves  with  batter-
towns  jjjg  the  ramparts  and  defences  of  a  place. To  destroy  a  town

with  bombs  and  red-hot  balls,  is  an  extremity  to  which  we  do
not  proceed  without  cogent  reasons.  But  it  is  nevertheless
warranted  by  the  laws  of  war,  when  we  are  unable  by  any
other  mode  to  reduce  an  important  post,  on  which  the  suc-
cess of  the  war  may  depend,  or  which  enables  the  enemy  t4>

*  In  1674y  and  a  second  time,  much is  quoted  hj  Grotius,  Ub.  iiL  e^  lit
more  dreadfully,  in  1689.  {  IL  note  zi.

f  See  his  letter  in  ProcopiuB. It

4!n


OF  THE  RIGHT OVER  ENEMIES' PROPBRTT.  868

annoy  us  in  a  dangerous  manner. It  is  also  sometimes  prac- book  ni.
tised  when  we  have  no  other  means  of  forcing  an  enemy  to ^^^^'  "'  ■
make  war  with  humanity,  or  punishing  him  for  some  instance
of  outrageous  conduct. But  it  is  only  in  cases  of  the  last
extremity,  and  with  reluctance,  that  good princes exert  a
right  of  so  rigorous  a  nature. In  the  year  1694,  the  English  [  369  ]
bombarded  several  maritime  towns  of  France,  oh  account  of
the  great  injury  done  to  the  British  trade  by  their  privateers.
But  the  virtuous  and  noble-minded  consort  of  William  the
Third  did  not  receive  the  news  of  these  exploits  with  real
satisfaction. She  expressed  a  sensible concern that  war
should  render  such  acts  of  hostility  necessary, — adding,  that
she  hoped  such  operations  would  be  viewed  in  so  odious  a
light,  as  to  induce  both  parties  to  desist  from  them  in  future.*

Fortresses,  ramparts,  and  every  kind  of  fortification  are  g  170. De-
Bolely  appropriated  to  the  purposes  of  war :  and  in  a  just  moution  of
war,  nothing  is  more  natural,  nothing  more  justifiable,  than  ^^^'™**®"'
to  demolish  those  which  we  do  not  intend  to  retain  in  our  own
possession. We  so  far  weaken  the  enemy,  and  do  not  involve
an  innocent  multitude  in  the  losses  which  we  cause  him. This
was  tha  grand  advantage  that  France  derived  from  her  vic-
tories in  a  war  in  which  she  did  not  aim  at  making  conquests.

Safe-guards  are  granted  to  lands  and  houses  intended  to  g  171.  8af^
be  spared,  whether  from  pure  favour,  or  with  the  proviso  of  goarda.
a  contribution.  These  consist  of  soldiers,  who  protect  them
against  parties,  by  producing  the  general's  orders.  The  per-
sons of  these  soldiers  must  be  considered  by  the  enemy  as
sacred :  he  cannot  commit  any  hostilities  against  them,  since
they  have  taken  their  station  there  as  benefactors,  and  for
the  safety  of  his  subjects.  They  are  to  be  respected  in  the
same  manner  as  an  escort  appointed  to  a  garrison,  or  to  pri-
soners of  war,  on  their  return  to  their  own  country.

What  we  have  advanced  is  sufficient  to  give  an  idea  of  the  ?  172. Ge-
moderation  which  we  ought  to.  observe,  even  in  the  most  just  ^^^  ™|«  ^^
war,  in  exerting  our  right  to  pillage  and  ravage  the  enemy's  ™g^^^**"
country. Except  the  single  case  in  which  there  is  question  the  evil
of  punishing  an  enemy,  the  whole  is  reducible  to  this  general  which  may
rule. — All  damage  done  to  the  enemy  unnecessarily,  every  ^  ^^^^  ^
act  of  hostility  which  does  not  tend  to  procure  victory  and  *"  ^'^^^y-
bring  the  war  to  a  conclusion,  is  a  licentiousness  condemned
by  the  law  of  nature.

But  this  licentiousness  is  unavoidably  sufi'ered  to  pass  with  j  173.  Rult
impunity,  and  to  a  certain  degree,  tolerated,  between  nation  ®^  ***«  ^^
and  nation. How  then  shall  we,  in  particular  cases,  deter-  "°**7 ^

.  ,  .  .  Ill*  <>*  naUons

jfime  with  precision  ta  what  lengths  it  was  necessary  to  carry  ^n  the  samo
hostilities,  in  order  to  bring  the  war  to  a  happy  conclusion  ?  subject
And  even  if  the  point  could  be  exactly  ascertained,  nations
acknowledge  no  common  judge:  each  forms  her  own  judg-

*  HiBtoire  de  Ga'Uaame  HL  liv.  vL  torn.  IL  p.  66.

479


86?  OF  THE  RIGHT  OVBB  BNEMISS' PBOPERTT.


CHAP. IX.


BOOK  ni.  ment  ot  the  conduct  she  is  to  pursue  in  fulfilling  her  duties.
If  you  once  open  a  door  for  continual  accusations  of  outrage-
ous excess  in  hostilities,  you  will  only  augment  the  number
of  complaints,  and  inflame  the  minds  of  the  contending  parties
with  increasing  animosity :  fresh  injuries  will  be  perpetually
springing  up ;  and  the  sword  will  never  be  sheathed  till  one

[  870  ]  of  the  parties  be  utterly  destroyed. The  whole,  therefore,
should,  between  nation  and  nation,  be  confined  to  general
rules,  independent  of  circumstances,  and  sure  and  easy  in  the
application. Now  the  rules  cannot  answer  this  description,
unless  they  teach  us  to  view  things  in  an  absolute  sense, — tn
consider  them  in  themselves  and  in  their  own  nature. As,
therefore,  with  respect  to  hostilities  against  the  enemy's  per-
son, the  voluntary  law  of  nations  only  prohibits  those  mea-
sures which  are  in  themselves  unlawful  and  odious,  such  a.<4
poisoning,  assassination,  treachery,  the  massacre  of  an  enemy
who  has  surrendered  and  from  whom  we  have  nothing  to
fear, — so  the  same  law,  in  the  question  now  before  us,  con-
demns every  act  of  hostility  which,  of  its  own  nature,  and  in-
dependently of  circumstances,  contributes  nothing  to  the  suc-
cess of  our  arms, and  does  not  increase  our  strength  or
weaken  that  of  the  enemy:  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  per-
mits or  tolerates  every  act  which  in  itself  is  naturally  adapted
to  promote  the  object  of  the  war,  without  considering  whether
such  act  of  hostility  was  unnecessary,  useless,  or  superfluous,
in  that  particular  instance,  unless  there  be  the  clearest  evi-
dence to  prove  that  an  exception  ought  to  have  been  made  in
the  case  in  question :  for  where  there  is  positive  evidence,  the
freedom  of  judgment  no  longer  exists. Hence,  the  pillaging
of  a  country,  or  ravaging it  with  fire,  is  not,  in  a  general
view  of  the  matter,  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  war :  but  if  an
enemy  of  much  superior  strength  treats  in  this  manner  a
*  town  or  province  which  he  might  easily  keep  in  his  possession
as  a  means  of  obtaining  an  equitable  and  advantageous  peace,
he  is  universally  accused  of  making  war  like  a  furious  barba-
rian. Thus  the  wanton  destruction  of  public  monuments,
temples,  tombs, statues,  paintings,  &c.,  is  absolutely  con-
demned, even  by  the  voluntary  law  of  nations,  as  never  be-
ing conducive  to  the  lawful  object  of  war. The  pillage  and
destruction  of  towns,  the  devastation  of  the  open  country,
ravaging,  setting  fire  to  houses,  are  measures  no  less  odious
and  detestable  on  every  occasion  when  they  are  evidently  put
in  practice  without  absolute  necessity,  or  at  least  very  cogent
reasons. But  as  the  perpetrators  of  such  outrageous  deeds
might  attempt  to  palliate  them  under  pretext  of  deservedly
punishing  the  enemy, — ^be  it  here  observed,  that  the  natural
and  voluntary  law  of  nations  does  not  allow  us  to  inflict  such
punishments,  except  for  enormous  offences  against  the  law  of
nations :  and  even  then,  it  is  glorious  to  listen  to  the  voice
of  humanity  and  clemencyi  when  rigour  is  not  absolutely  no*

4S0


OF  7AITH  BETWEEN ENEMIES.  870

cessary. Cicero  condemns  the  conduct  of  his  countrymen  in  boor  iu.
destroying  Corinth  to  avenge  the  unworthy  treatment  oflfered  c"ap.  ix.
to  the  Roman  ambassadors,  because  Rome  was  able  to  assert
the  dignity  of  her  ministers  without  proceeding  to  such  ex-
treme rigour.


CHAP.  X.  [  371  ]

OP  FAITH  BETWEEN  ENEMIES, — OF  STRATAGEMS,  ARTIFICES  IN chap,  x

WAR,  SPIES,  AND SOME OTHER PRACTICES.

THE  faith  of  promises  and  treaties  is  the  basis  of  the  peace  §  174.  Faith
of  nations,  as  we  have  shown  in  an  express  chapter  (Book  II.  |°  **  Bacreii
Ch.  XV.)  It  is  sacred  among  men,  and  absolutely  essential  enen^
to  their  common  safety.  Are  we  then  dispensed  from  it  to-
wards an  enemy  ?  To  imagine  that  between  two  nations  at
war  every  duty  ceases,  every  tie  of  humanity  is  broken,  would
be  an  error  equally  gross  and  destructive.  Men,  although  re-
duced to  the  necessity  of  taking  up  arms  for  their  own  de-
fence, and  in  support  of  their  rights,  do  not  therefore  cease  to
be  men.  They  are  still  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  nature : —
otherwise  there  would  be  no  laws  of  war.  Even  he  who  wages
an  unjust  war  against  us  is  still  a  man :  we  still  owe  him  what-
ever that  quality  requires  of  us.  But  a  conflict  arises  between
our  duties  towards  ourselves,  and  those  which  connect  us  with
other  men.  The  right  to  security  authorizes  us  to  put  in  prac-
tice, against  this  unjust  enemy,  every  thing  necessary  for  re-
pelling him,  or  bringing  him  to  reason.  But  all  those  duties,
the  exercise  of  which  is  not  necessarily  suspended  by  this  con-
flict, subsist  in  their  full  force :  they  are  still  obligatory  on  us,
both  with  respect  to  the  enemy  and  to  all  the  rest  of  mankind.
Now,  the  obligation  of  keeping  faith  is  so  far  from  .ceasing  in
time  of  war  by  virtue  of  the  preference  which  the  duties  to-
wards ourselves  are  entitled  to,  that  it  then  becomes  more  ne-
cessary than  ever.  There  are  a  thousand  occasions,  even  in
the  course  of  the  war,  when,  in  order  to  check  its  rage,  and
alleviate  the  calamities  which  follow  in  its  train,  the  mutual
interest  and  safety  of  both  the  contending  parties  requires
that  they  should  agree  on  certain  points.  What  would  be-
come of  prisoners  of  war,  capitulating  garrisons,  and  towns
that  surrender,  if  the  word  of  an  enemy  were  not  to  be  relied
on  ?  War  would  degenerate  into  an  unbridled  and  cruel  licen-
tiousness :  its  evils  would  be  restrained  by  no  bounds ;  and
how  could  we  ever  bring  it  to  a  conclusion  and  re-establish
peace  ?  If  faith  be  banished  from  among  enemies,  a  war  can
never  be  terminated  with  any  degree  of  safety,  otherwise  than
by  the  total  destruction  of  one  of  the  parties. The  slightest

61  3Q  ■  481


371  OF  FAITH BETWEEN  ENEMIES.

BOOK  HI. difference,  the  least  quarrel,  would  produce  a  war  similar  to
o^^r-  ^' that  of  Hannibal  against  the  Romans,  in  which  the  parties
fought,  not  for  this  or  that  province,  not  for  sovereignty  or
for  glory,  but  for  the  very  existence  of  their  respective  na-
[  372  ]  tions.* Thus  it  is  certain  that  the  faith  of  promises  and  trea-
ties is  to  be  held  sacred  in  war  as  well  as  in  peace,  between
enemies  as  well  as  between  friends.  (166)
§  175.  What The  conventions,  the  treaties  made  with  a  nation,  are  broken
treaties  are  or  annulled  by  a  war  arising  between  the  contracting  parties,
to  be  ob- either  because  those  compacts  are  jsrounded  on  a  tacit  suppo-

served  De>  «

tween  ene-  sition  of  the  Continuance  of  peace,  or  because  each  of  the  par-
raies.  ties,  being  authorized  to  deprive  his  enemy  of  what  belongs  to

him,  takes  from  him  those  rights  which  he  had  conferred  on
him  by  treaty.  Yet  here  we  must  except  those  treaties  by
which  certain  things  are  stipulated  in  case  of  a  rupture, — as,
for  instance,  the  length  of  time  to  be  allowed  on  each  side  for
the  subjects  of  the  other  nation  to  quit  the  country, — the  neu-
trality of  a  town  or  province,  insured  by  mutual  consent,  &c.
Since,  by  treaties  of  this  nature,  we  mean  to  provide  for  what
shall  be  observed  in  case  of  a  rupture,  we  renounce  the  right
of  cancelling  them  by  a  declaration  of  war.

For  the  same  reason,  all  promises  made  to  an  enemy  in  the
course  of  a  war  are  obligatory.  For  when  once  we  treat  with
him  whilst  the  sword  is  unsheathed,  we  tacitly  but  necessarily
renounce  all  power  of  breaking  the  compact  by  way  of  com-
pensation or  on  account  of  the  war,  as  we  cancel  antecedent
treaties,  otherwise  it  would  be  doing  nothing,  and  there  would
be  an  absurdity  in  treating:  with  the  enemy  at  all.
y'^\  But  conventions  made  during  a  war  are  like  all  other  com-

slons  the* pacts  and  treaties,  of  which  the  reciprocal  observance  is  a  tacit
may  be condition  (Book  II.  §  202) :  we  are  no  longer  bound  to  observe
broken. them  towards  an  enemy  who  has  himself  been  the  first  to  vio-
late them. And  even  w^here  there  is  question  of  two  separate
conventions  which  are  wholly  unconnected  with  each  other, —
although  we  are  never  justifiable  in  using  perfidy  on  the  plea
^  of  our  having  to  do  with  an  enemy  who  has  broken  his  word
on  a  former  occasion,  we  may  nevertheless  suspend  the  effect
of  a  promise  in  order  to  compel  him  to  repair  his  breach  of
faith ;  and  what  we  have  promised  him  may  be  detained  by
.  way  of  security,  till  he  has  given  satisfaction  for  his  perfidy.
Thus,  at  the  taking  of  Namur,  in  1695,  the  King  of  England
caused  Marshal  Boufflers  to  be  put  under  arrest,  and,  notwith-
standing the  capitulation,  detained  him  prisoner,  for  the  pur-
pose of  obliging  France  to  make  reparation  for  the  infractions
of  the  capitulations  of  Dixmude  and  Deinse.f

*  De  salute  oertatum  est  Britain  of  contracts  of  ranfom,  consti>

(166)  To  this  doctrine,  the  prohibit  tute  exceptions,  post^  403 — 4  4- — C.

tion of  subjects  of  belligerent  states f  HUtoire  de  Guillaume  III.  tom.  ii

having  commercial  contracts  with  each  p.  148.

other, and the prohibition  in  Grea*

4S2  —


OF  FAITH  BETWEEN  ENEMIES.  S72

Good-faith  consists  not  only  in  the  observance  of  our  pro-  book  m.
mises,  but  also  in  not  deceiving  on  such  occasions  as  lay  us  chap,  x.
under  any  sort  of  obligation  to  speak  the  truth.  From  this  ^  ^,^  q^
subject  arises  a  question  which  has  been  warmly  debated  in  Ues.
former  days,  and  which  appeared  not  a  little  intricate  at  a
time  when  people  did  not  entertain  just  or  accurate  ideas  re-
specting the  nature  of  a  lie.  Several  writers,  and  especially
divines,  have  made  truth  a  kind  of  deity,  to  which,  for  its  own
sake,  and  independently  of  its  consequences,  we  owe  a  certain
inviolable  respect.  They  have  absolutely  condemned  every  [  373  ]
speech  that  is  contrary  to  the  speaker's  thoughts :  they  have
pronounced  it  to  be  our  duty,  on  every  occasion  when  we  can-
not be  silent,  to  speak  the  truth  according  to  the  best  of  our
knowledge,  and  to  sacrifice  to  their  divinity  our  dearest  in-
terests rather  than  be  deficient  in  respect  to  her.  But  philo-
terests,  of  more  accurate  ideas  and  more  profound  penetra-
tion have  cleared  up  that  notion,  so  confused,  and  so  false  in  its
consequences.  They  have  acknowledged  that  truth  in  general
is  to  be  respected,  as  being  the  soul  of  human  society,  the  basis
of  all  confidence  in  the  mutual  intercourse  of  men, — and,  con-
sequently, that  a  man  ought  not  to  speak  an  untruth,  even
in  matters  of  indifference,  lest  he  weaken  the  respect  due  to
truth  in  general,  and  injure  himself  by  rendering  his  veracity
questionable  even  when  he  speaks  seriously.  But  in  thus
grounding  the  respect  due  to  truth  on  its  effects,  they  took  the
right  road,  and  soon  found  it  easy  to  distinguish  between  the
occasions  when  we  are  obliged  to  speak  the  truth,  or  declare
our  thoughts,  and  those  when  there  exists  no  such  obligation.
The  appellation  of  lies  is  given  only  to  the  words  of  a  man
who  speaks  contrary  to  his  thoughts,  on  occasions  when  he  is
under  an  obligation  to  speak  the  truth.  Another  name  (in
Latin,  falsiloquium*)  is  applied  to  any  false  discourse  to  per-
sons who  have  no  right  to  insist  on  our  telling  them  the  truth
in  the  particular  case  in  question.

These  principles  being  laid  down,  it  is  not  di£Scult  to  ascer-
tain the  lawful  use  of  truth  or  falsehood  towards  an  enemy  on
particular  occasions.  Whenever  we  have  expressly  or  tacitly
engaged  to  speak  truth,  we  are  indispensably  obliged  to  it  by
that  faith  of  which  we  have  proved  the  inviolability.  Such  is
the  case  of  conventions  and  treaties : — it  is  indispensably  ne-
cessary that  they  should  imply  a  tacit  engagement  to  speak*
the  truth ;  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  allege  that  we  do  not  en-
ter into  any  obligation  of  not  deceiving  the  enemy  under
colour  of  treating  with  him  : — it  would  be  downright  mockery,
— it  would  be  doing  nothing.  We  are  also  bound  to  speak  the
truth  to  an  enemy  on  all  occasions  when  we  are  naturally
obliged  to  it  by  the  laws  of  humanity, — that  is  to  say,  when-
ever the  success  of  our  arms,  and  the  duties  we  owe  to  our-

*  FaUiloquy,  false  Bpeaking,  untruth,  fabehood.

483


873


OF  FAITH BETWEEN  BKEMIB8.


BOOK  ni.

OHAP.  X.


selves,  do  not  clash  with  the  common  duties  of  hnmanitj,  so
as  to  suspend  their  force  in  the  present  case,  and  dispense
with  our  performance  of  them.  Thus,  when  we  disiniss  pri-
soners, either  on  ransom  or  exchange,  it  would  be  infamous
to  point  out  the  worst  road  for  their  march,  or  to  put  them  in
a  dangerous  one :  and  should  the  hostile  prince  or  general  in-
quire after  a  woman  or  child  who  is  dear  to  him,  it  would  be
scandalous  to  deceive  him.
1 178.  Stra-  But  when,  by  leading  the  enemy  into  an  error,  either  by
Ugenui  and  ^ords  in  which  we  are  not  obliged  to  speak  truth,  or  by  some
war.*^  "^  feint,  we  can  gain  an  advantage  in  the  war,  which  it  would  be
lawful  to  *seek  by  open  force,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  such
[  374  ]  a  proceeding  is  perfectly  justifiable.  Nay,  since  humanity
obliges  us  to  prefer  the  gentlest  methods  in  the  prosecution
of  our  rights, — if,  by  a  stratagem,  by  a  feint  void  of  perfidy,
we  can  make  ourselves  masters  of  a  strong  place,  surprise  the
enemy,  and  overcome  him,  it  is  much  better,  it  is  really  more
commendable,  to  succeed  in  this  manner,  than  by  a  bloody
siege  or  the  carnage  of  a  battle.*  But  the  desire  to  spare  the
effusion  of  blood  will  by  no  means  authorize  us  to  employ  per-
fidy, the  introduction  of  which  would  be  attended  with  conse-
quences of  too  dreadful  a  nature,  and  would  deprive  sove-
reigns, once  embarked  in  war,  of  all  means  of  treating  to-
gether, or  restoring  peace  (§  174).

Deceptions'  practised  on  an  enemy,  either  by  words  or
actions,  but  without  perfidy, — ^snares  laid  for  him  consistent
with  the  rights  of  war, — are  stratagems^  the  use  of  which  has
always  been  acknowledged  as  lawful,  and  had  often  a  great
share  in  the  glory  of  celebrated  commanders.  The  king  of
England  (William  III.)  having  discovered  that  one  of  his  se-
cretaries regularly  sent  intelligence  of  every  thing  to  the  hos-
tile general,  caused  the  traitor  to  be  secretly  put  under  ar-
rest, and  made  him  write  to  the  duke  of  Luxembourg  that  the
next  day  the  allies  would  make  a  general  forage,  supported
by  a  large  body  of  infantry  with  cannon :  and  this  artifice  he


*  There  was  a  time  when  those  who
were  taken  in  attempting  to  BUrprise  a
town,  were  put  to  death.  In  1597,
prince  Maurice  attempted  to  take  Ven-
*  loo  by  surprise :  the  attempt  failed ;  and
■ome  of  his  men,  being  made  prisoners
on  the  occasion,  "  were  condemned  to
death, — the  mutual  consent  of  the  par-
ties having  introduced  that  new  rule,
in  order  to  obviate  dangers  of  this
kind."  (Grotius  Hist,  of  the  Disturb,
in  the  Netherlands.)  Since  that  time,
the  rule  has  been  changed :  at  present,
military  men  who  attempt  to  surprise
a  town  in  time  of  open  war,  are  not,
in  case  of  being  taken,  treated  in  a^dif-
ferent  manner  from  otiier  prisoners:
4M


and  this  custom  is  more  consonai<t  t«
reason  and  humanity.  Nevertheless
if  they  were  in  disguise,  or  bad  em-
ployed treachery,  they  would  be  treated
as  spies;  and  this  is,  perhaps,  wbmt
Grotius  means;  for  I  do  not,  in  any
other  instance,  find  that  such  sereritj
was  used  towards  troops  who  wen
simply  come  to  surprise  a  town  in  the
silence  of  the  night.  It  would  be  quite
another  affair,  if  such  an  attempt  were
made  in  a  time  of  profound  peac« ;  and
the  Savoyards,  who  were  taken  in  the
escalade  of  Geneva,  deserved  the  pu*
nishment  of  death  which  was  inflideil
on  them. [See  page  321.]


OF  FAITH BETWEEN ENEMIES.  374

t

employed  for  the  purpose  of  surprising  the  French  army  at  book  ui.
Steinkirk. But,  through  the  activity  of  the  French  general, chap,  x.
and  the  courage  of  his  troops,  though  the  measures  were  so
artfully  contrived,  the  success  was  not  answerable.*

In  the  use  of  stratagems,  we  should  respect  not  only  the
faith  due  to  an  enemy,  but  also  the  rights  of  humanity,  and
carefully  avoid  doihg  things  the  introduction  of  which  would
be  pernicious  to  mankind.  Since  the  commencement  of  hos*
tilities  between  France  and  England,  an  English  frigate  is  said
to  have  appeared  off  Calais,  and  made  signals  of  distress,  with
a  view  of  decoying  out  some  vessel,  and  actually  seized  a  boat
and  some  sailors  who  generously  came  to  her  assistance.  (167)
If  the  fact  be  true,  that  unworthy  stratagem  deserves  a  severe
punishment.  It  tends  to  damp  a  benevolent  charity,  which  [  81 6  ]
should  be  held  so  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  mankind,  and  which  is
80  laudable  even  between  enemies.  Besides,  making  signals
of  distress  is  asking  assistance,  and,  by  that  very  action,  pro-
mising perfect  security  to  those  who  give  the  friendly  succour.
Therefore  the  action  attributed  to  that  frigate  implies  an
odious  perfidy.

Some  nations  (even  the  Romans)  for  a  long  time  professed
to  despise  every  kind  of  artifice,  surprise,  or  stratagem  in  war ;
and  others  went  so  far  as  to  send  notice  of  the  time  and  place
they  had  chosen  for  giving  battle. f  In  this  conduct  there
was  more  generosity  than  prudence.  Such  behaviour  would,
indeed,  be  very  laudable,  if,  as  in  the  frenzy  of  duels,  the  only
business  was  to  display  personal  courage.  But  in  war,  the  ob-
ject is  to  defend  our  country,  and  by  force  to  prosecute  our .
rights  which  are  unjustly  withheld  from  us :  and  the  surest
means  of  obtaining  our  end  are  also  tl}e  most  commendable,
provided  they  be  not  unlawful  and  odious  in  themselves. j
The  contempt  of  artifice,  stratagem,  and  surprise,  proceeds
often,  as  in  the  case  of  Achilles,  from  a  noble  confidence  in
personal  valour  and  strength;  and  it  must  be  owned  that
when  we  can  defeat  an  enemy  by  open  force,  in  a  pitched  bat-
tle, we  may  entertain  a  better-grounded  belief  that  we  have
subdued  him  and  compelled  him  to  sue  for  peace,  than  if  we
had  gained  the  advantage  over  him  by  surprise, — as  Livy§
makes  those  generous  senators  say,  who  did  not  approve  of  the
insincere  mode  of  proceeding  which  had  been  adopted  towards  •


*  M^moires  de  Feuqui^res,  torn.  ill.  "which  proved  fatal  to  the  Trojans  :~^

p.  87.  Ille  non,  inclosus  equo  Minerrs

(167)  See an instance  of  similar  Sacra  mentito,  male  feriatuK

baseness,  Baumarm,  1  Rob.  Rep.  245 ;  Troas,  et  Istam  Priami  cnoreis

ante,  §  69,  page  321. — C.  Falleret  aulam ;

t  This  was  the  practice  of  the  an-  Sed  palam  captis  gravis,

cient  Gauls. See  Livy. — ^It  is  said  of  Hor.  lib.  iv.  od.  6.

Achilles,  that  he  was  for  fighting  open-  t  Virg.  JEn,  ii.  390.

ly,  and  not  of  a  disposition  to  conceal  §  Tit  Liv.  lib.  xliL  cap.  47.
blniself  in  the  fiimous  waoden  horse,

2(i2  486


S7&  OF  FAITH  BETWEEN  EMSMIES

BOOK  in.'  Perseus. Therefore,  when  plain  and  open  courage  can  secure
CHAP.  X. ^jjg  victory,  there  are  occasions  when  it  is  preferable  to  arti-
fice, because  it  procures  to  the  state  a  greater  and  more  per-
manent advantage.
S179  Spiea. The  employment  of  spies  is  a  kind  of  clandestine  practice
or  deceit  in  war. These  find  means  to  insinuate  themselves
among  the  enemy,  in  order  to  discover  the  state  of  his  affairs,
to  pry  into  his  designs,  and  then  give  intelligence  to  their  em-
ployer. Spies  are  generally  condemned  to  capital  punish-
ment, and  with  great  justice,  since  we  have  scarcely  any  other
means  of  guarding  against  the  mischief  they  may  do  us(§  15-5^
For  this  reason,  a  man  of  honour,  who  is  unwilling  to  expose
himself  to  an  ignominious  death  from  the  hand  of  a  common
executioner,  ever  declines  serving  as  a  spy ;  and,  moreover,  he
looks  upon  the  office  as  unworthy  of  him,  because  it  cannot  be
performed  without  some  degree  of  treachery. The  sovereign,
therefore,  has  no  right  to  require  such  a  service  of  his  sub-
jects, unless,  perhaps,  in  some  singular  case,  and  that  of  the
[  876  ]  highest  importance. It  remains  for  him  to  hold  out  the  tempta-
tion of  a  reward,  as  an  inducement  to  mercenary  souls  to  en-
gage in  the  business. If  those  whom  he  employs  make  a
voluntary  tender  of  their  services,  or  if  they  be  neither  sub-
ject to,  nor  in  any  wise  connected  with  the  enemy,  he  may
unquestionably  take  advantage  of  their  exertions,  without  any
violation  of  justice  or  honour. But  is  it  lawful,  is  it  honour-
able, to  solicit  the  enemy's  subjects  to  act  as  spies  and  betray
him  ? To  this  question  the  following  section  will  furnish  an
answer.
S  180.  Clan- It  is  asked,  in  general,  whether  it  be  lawful  to  seduce  the
destine  se- enemy's  men,  for  the  purpose  of  engaging  them  to  transgress
ductionof^  their  duty  by  an  infamous  treachery? Here  a  distinction
iJople?"'^ "  must  be  made  between  what  is  due  to  the  enemy,  notwith-
standing the  state  of  warfare^  and  what  is  required  by  the  in-
ternal laws  of  conscience  and  the  rules  of  propriety. We  may
lawfully  endeavour to  weaken the  enemy  by  all  possible
means  (§  138),  provided  they  do  not  affect  the  common  safety
of  human  society,  as  do  poison  and  assassination  (§  155).  Now,
in  seducing  a  subject  to  turn  spy,  or  the  governor  of  a  town
to  deliver  it  up  to  us,  we  do  not  strike  at  the  foundation  of  the
common  safety  and  welfare  of  mankind. Subjects  acting  as
spies  to  an  enemy,  do  not  cause  a  fatal  and  unavoidable  evil:
it  is  possible  to  guard  against  them  to  a  certain  degree ;  au«
as  to  the  security  of  fortresses,  it  is  the  sovereign's  busine^
to  be  careful  in  the  choice  of  the  governors  to  whom  he  in-
trusts them. Those  measures,  therefore,  are  not  contrary  to
the  external  law  of  nations ;  nor  can  the  enemy  complain  of
them  as  odious  proceedings. Accordingly,  they  are  practised
in  all  wars. But  are  they  honourable,  and  compatible  with
the  laws  of  a  pure  conscience  ? Certainly  no ;  and  of  thu
the  generals  themselves  are  sensible,  as  they  are  never  heard

486


OF  FAITH BBTWEEK ENEMIB8.


870


to  boast  of  having  practised  them.  Seducing  a  subject  to  be-  book  nr.
tray  his  country,  engaging  a  traitor  to  set  fire  to  a  magazine,  hhap.  x.
tampering  with  the  fidelity  of  a  governor,  enticing  him,  per-
suading him  to  deliver  up  the  toWn  intrusted  to  his  charge,
is  prompting  such  persons  to  .commit  detestable  crimes.  Is  it
honourable  to  corrupt  our  most  inveterate  enemy,  and  tepapt
him  to  the  commission  of  a  crime  ?  If  such  practices  are  at
all  excusable,  it  can  be  only  in  a  very  just  war,  and  when  the
immediate  object  is  to  save  our  country,  when  threatened  with
ruin  by  a  lawless  conqueror.  On  such  an  occasion  (as  it
should  seem)  the  guilt  .of  the  subject  or  general  who  should
betray  his  sovereign  when  engaged  in  an  evidently  unjust
cause,  would  not  be  of  so  very  odious  a  nature.  He  who  him-
self tramples  upon  justice  and  probity,  deserves  in  his  turn  to
feel  the  effects  of  wickedness  and  perfidy.*  Apd  if  ever  it  is
excusable  to  depart  from  the  strict  rules  of  honour,  it  is  against  [  377  ]
such  an  enemy  and  in  such  an  extremity.  The  Romans,
whose  ideas  concerning  the  rights  of  war  were,  in  general,  so
pure  and  elevated,  did  not  approve  of  such  clandestine  prac-
tices. They  made  no  account  of  the  consul  Caepio's  victory
over  Viriatus,  because  it  had  been  obtained  by  means  of  bri-
bery. Valerius  Maximus  asserts  that  it  was  stained  with  a
double  perfidyf ;  and  another  historian  says  that  the  senate
did  not  approve  of  it. J

It  is  a. different  thing  merely  to  accept  of  the  offers  of  a  §181.  Who-
traitor. We  do  not  seduce  him :  and  we  may  take  advantage  J.**®^  ^*  ^^'
of  his  crime,  while  at  the  same  time  we  detest  it. Fugitives  ^^^^  ^^y
and  deserters  commit  a  crime  against  their  sovereign ;  yet  we  [>e  accepted
receive  and  harbour  them  by  the  rights  of  war^  as  the  civil  law
expresses  it.§ If  a  governor  sells  himself,  and  offers  for  a  sum
of  money  to  deliver  up  his  town,  shall  we  scruple  to  take  ad-
vantage of  his  crime,  and  to  obtain  without  danger  what  we
have  a  right  to  take  by  force  ? But,  when  we  feel  ourselves
able  to  succeed  without  the  assistance  of  traitors,  it  is  noble


*  Xenophon  very  properly  expresses
the  reasons  which  render  treachery  de*
testable,  and  which  authorize  us  to  re-
press it  by  other  means  than  open
force.  "  Treachery,"  says  he,  **  is  more
dreadful  than  open  war,  in  proportion
as  it  is  more  difficult  to  guard  against
clandestine  plots  than  against  an  open
attack :  it  is  also  more  odious,  because
men  engaged  in  overt  hostilities  may
again  treat  together^  and  come  to  a
sincere  reconciliation ;  whereas  nobody
can  venture  to  treat  with  or  repose
any  confidence  in  a  man  whom  he  has
onc«  found  guilty  of  treachery." — Hist
G.t^(*.  lib.  ii.  cap.  3.

t  Viriati  etiam  cedes  duplicem  per-
fidin  a«'cusatinnem  recepit,  in  amids,


quod  eorum  manibus  interemptus  est ,
in  Q.  Servilio  Ciepione  consule,  quia  in
sceleris  hujus  auctor,  impunitate  pro-
missa,  fuit,  victoriamque  non  meruit,
sed  emit — Lib.  ix.  cap.  6. — Although
this  instance  seems  to  belong  to  an-
other head  (that  of  assassination),  1
nevertheless  quote  it  here,  because  it
does  not  appear,  from  other  authors,
that  C»pio  had  induced  Viriatus^s  sol-
diers to  assassinate  him.  Among  others,
see  Eutropius,  lib.  vi.  cap.  8.

j;  Quffi  victoria,  quia  empta  erat,  a
senatu  non  probata.  Auctor  de  Viris
Illust.  cap.  71.

§  Transfugam  jure  belli  recipimus.
Digest  1.  xli.  tit  1,  de  adquir.  Rer.
Dom.  leg.  61.

487


377


OF  FAITH BETTTBEN  ENEMIES.


BOOK  ITT.
CHAP.  X,


§  182.  De-
ceitful in-
telligence.


to  reject  their  oiferB  with  detestation.  The  Romans,  in  their
heroic  ages,  in  those  times  when  they  used  to  display  such
illustrious  examples  of  magnanimity  and  virtue,  constantly  re-
jected with  indignation  every  advantage  presented  to  them
by  the  treachery  of  any  of  the  enemy's  subjects.  They  not
only  acquainted  Pyrrhus  with  the  atrocious  design  of  his  phy-
sician, but  also  refused  to  take  advantage  of  a  less  heinous
crime,  and  sent  back  to  the  Falisci,  bound  and  fettered,  a  trai-
tor who  had  offered  to  deliver  up  the  king's  children.*

But  when  intestine  divisions  prevail  among  the  enemy,  we
may  without  scruple  hold  a  correspondence  with  one  of  the
parties,  and  avail  ourselves  of  the  right  which  they  think  they
have  to  injure  the  opposite  party.  Thus,  we  promote  our  own
interests,  without  seducing  any  person,  or  being  in  anywise
partakers  of  his  guilt.  If  we  take  advantage  of  his  error,
this  is  doubtless  allowable  against  an  enemy.

Deceitful  intelligence  is  that  of  a  man  who  feigns  to  betray
his  own  party,  with  a  view  of  drawing  the  enemy  into  a  snare.
If  he  does  this  deliberately,  and  has  himself  made  the  first
[  378  J  overtures,  it  is  treachery,  and  aix  infamous  procedure :  but  an
officer,  or  the  governor  of  a  town,  when  tampered  with  by  the
enemy,  may,  on  certain  occasions,  lawfully  feign  acquiescence
to  the  proposal  with  a  view  to  deceive  the  seducer :  an  insult
is  offered  to  him  in  tempting  his  fidelity ;  and  to'  draw  the
tempter  into  the  snare,  is  no  more  than  a  just  vengeance.  By
this  conduct  he  neither  violates  the  faith  of  promises  nor  im-
pairs the  happiness  of  mankind :  for  criminal  engagements
are  absolutely  void,  and  ought  never  to  be  fulfilled;  and  it
would  be  a  fortunate  circumstance  if  the  promises  of  traitors
could  never  be  relied  on,  but  were  on  all  sides  surrounded
with  uncertainties  and  dangers.  Therefore  a  superior,  on  in-
formation that  the  enemy  is  tempting  the  fidelity  of  an  officer
or  soldier,  makes  no  scruple  of  ordering  that  subaltern  to
feign  himself  gained  over,  and  to  arrange  his  pretended
treachery  so  as  to  draw  the  enemy  into  an  ambuscade.  The
subaltern  is  obliged  to  obey.  But  when  a  direct  attempt  is
made  to  seduce  the  commander-in-chief,  a  man  of  honour
generally  prefers,  and  ought  to  prefer,  the  alternative  of  ex-
plicitly and  indignantly  rejecting  so  disgraceful  a  proposal. f


*  Eadem  fido  indicatum  Pjrrho  regi
medicum  vitie  ojus  insidiantem ;  eadem
Faliscis  vinctum  traditum  proditorem
liberorum  regis.  Tit.  Liv.  lib.  xlii.  cap.  47.

t  When  the  duke  of  Parma  was  en-
gaged in  the  siege  of  Bergen-op-zoom,
two  Spanish  prisoners,  who  were  con-
fined in  a  fort  near  the  town,  attempted
to  gain  over  a  tavern-keeper,  and  an
English  soldier,  to  betray  that  fort  to
the  duke.  These  men,  having  ac-
quainted the  governor  with  the  circum-
488


stance,  received  ordera  from  him  to
feign  acquiescence ;  and,  accordingly,
having  made  all  their  arrangemenls
with  the  duke  of  Parma  for  the  stir*
prisal  of  the  fort,  they  gave  notiop  of
every  particular  to  the  governor.  He,
in  consequence,  kept  himself  prepared
to  give  a  proper  reception  to  the  Spa
niards,  who  fell  into  the  snare,  and  lc«t
near  three  thousand  men  on  the  ooca.
sion. — Grotius,  Hist,  of  the  Dtstori).  in
the  Netherlands,  book  L


OF  THB  SOYSBBIGN  WAGING  UNJUST  WAB.  878


BOOK  ni.

CHAP.  XI.


CHAP.  XL

OF  THB  SOVBKEiaN  WHO  WAGES  AN  UNJUST  WAR.

HE  who  is  engaged  in  war  derives  all  his  right  from  the  §  ^^^'  -An
justice  of  his  cause. The  unjust  adversary  who  attacks  or  "?J^*  ^"

V  ^  V  w/  firiTCfl  no

threatens  him, — who  withholds  what  belongs  to  him, — in  a  ^ght  what,
word,  who  does  him  an  injury, — lays  him  under  the  necessity  ever,
of  defending  himself,  or  of  doing  himself  justice,  by  force  of
arms ;  he  authorizes  him  in  all  the  acts  of  hostility  necessary
for  obtaining  complete  satisfaction.  Whoever  therefore  takes
up  arms  without  a  lawful  cause,  can  absolutely  have  no  right
whatever :  every  act  of  hostility  that  he  commits  is  an  act
of  injustice.

He  is  chargeable  with  all  the  evils,  all  the  horrors  of  the  §  184.  Greai
war :  all  the  etfusipn  of  blood,  the  desolation  of  families,  the  ^^^  ^f  ^^
rapine,  the  acts  of  violence,  the  ravages,  the  conflagrations,  ^ho'under-
are^  his  works  and  his  crimes. He  is  guilty  of  a  crime  against  takes  it
the  enemy,  whom  he  attacks,  oppresses,  and  massacres  with-
out cause :  he  is  guilty  of  a  crime  against  his  people,  whom
he  forces  into  acts  of  injustice,  and  exposes  to  danger,  without
reason  or  necessity, — against  those  of  his  subjects  who  are  r  3Y9  ]
ruined  or  distressed  by  the  war, — who  lose  their  lives,  their
property,  or  their  health,  in  consequence  dt  it :  finally,  he  is
guilty  of  a  crime  against  mankind  in  general,  whose  peace  he
disturbs,  and  to  whom  he  sets  a  pernicious  example. Shocking
catalogue  of  miseries  and  crimes !  dreadful  account  to  be  given
to  the  King  of  kings,  to  the  common  Father  of  men  ! May
this  slight  sketch  strike  the  eyes  of  the  rulers  of  nations, — of
princes  and  their  ministers  ! Why  may  not  we  expect  some
benefit  from  it  ? Are  we  to  suppose  that  the  great  are  wholly
lost  to  all  sentiments  of  honour,  of  humanity,  of  duty,  and  of
religion  ? And,  should  our  weak  voice,  throughout  the  whole
succession  of  ages,  prevent  even  one  single  war,  how  gloriously
would  our  studies  and  our  labour  be  rewarded !

He  who  does  an  injury  is  bound  to  repair  the  damage,  or  to  §  185.  Hi»
make  adequate  satisfaction  if  the  evil  be  irreparable,  and  even  obligation*
to  submit  to  punishment,  if  the  punishment  be  necessary,  either
as  an  example,  or  for  the  safety  of  the  party  offended,  and  for
that  of  human  society.  In  this  predicament  stands  a  prince
who  is  the  author  of  an  unjust  war.  He  is  under  an  obliga-
tion to  restore  whatever  he  has  taken, — to  send  back  the
nrisoners  at  his  own  expense, — to  make  compensation  to  the
enemy  for  the  calamities  and  losses  he  has  brought  on  him,-^
to  reinstate  ruined  families, — to  repair,  if  it  were  possible,  the
loss  of  a  father,  a  son,  a  husband.

6S  j89


379  OI"  THE SOVEREIGN WAGINO UNJUST WAR.

BOOK  m. But  how  can  he  repair  so  many  evils  ? Many  are  in  theu
CHAP.  xi,j  own  nature  irreparable. And  as  to  those  which  may  be  com-


§  186.  Dif-  pensated  by  an  equivalent,  where  ^hall  the  unjust  warrior
ficulty  of  re-  find  means  to  furnish  an  indemnification  for  all  his  acts  of  vio-
iiiTury\e  *  ^^"^®  •  ^^^^  prince's  private  property  will  not  be  sufficient  to
has  done,  answer  the  demands.  Shall  he  give  away  that  of  his  sub-
jects ? — It  does  not  belong  to  him.  Shall  he  sacrifice  the  na-
tional lands,  a  part  of  the  state  ? — But  the  state  is  not  his
patrimony  (Book  I.  §  91) :  he  cannot  dispose  of  it  at  will
And,  although  the  nation  be,  to  a  certain  degree,  responsiblb
for  the  acts  of  her  ruler, — yet  (exclusive  of  the  injustice  of
punishing  her  directly  for  faults  of  which  she  is  not  guilty),
if  she  is  responsible  for  her  sovereign's  acts,  that  responsibility
only  regards  other  nations,  who  look  to  her  for  redress  (Book  I.
§40,  Book  II.  §§  81,  82):  but  the  sovereign  cannot  throw
upon  her  the  punishment  due  to  his  unjust  deeds,  nor  despoil
her  in  order  to  make  reparation  for  them.  And,  were  it  even
in  his  power,  would  this  wash  away  his  guilt  and  leave  him  a
clear  conscience  ?  Though  acquitted  in  the  eyes  of  the  enemy,
would  he  be  so  in  the  eyes  of  his  people  ?  It  is  a  strange  kind
of  justice  which  prompts  a  man  to  make  reparation  for  his
own  misdeeds  at  the  expense  of  a  third  person :  this  is  no  more
than  changing  the  object  of  his  injustice.  Weigh  all  these
things,  ye  rulers  of  nations  !  and,  when  clearly  convinced  that
L  ^°^  J  an  unjust  war  draws  you  into  a  multitude  of  iniquities  which
all  your  power  cannot  repair,  perhaps  you  will  be  less  hasty
to  engage  in  it.  ^
§187.  Whe-  The  restitution  of  conquests,  of  prisoners,  and  of  all  pro-
1*®^  **^j  T"  P^^^-y  *^*^  ^^^^^  exists  in  a  recoverable  state,  admits  of  no
militarY  are  ^^^^^  when  the  injustice  of  the  war  is  acknowledged.  The
bound  to  nation  in  her  aggregate  capacity,  and  each  individual  parti
any  thing,  cularly  concerned,  being  convinced  of  the  injustice  of  their
possession,  are  bound  to  relinquish  it,  and  to  restore  every
thing  which  they  have  wrongfully  acquired.  But,  as  to  the
reparation  of  any  damage,  are  the  military,  the  generals,  of-
ficers and  soldiers,  obliged  in  conscience  to  repair  the  injuries
which  they  have  done,  not  of  their  own  will,  but  as  instru
ments  in  the  hands  of  their  sovereign  ?  I  am  surprised  that
the  judicious  Grotius  should,  without  distinction,  hold  the  af-
firmative.* It  is  a  decision  which  cannot  be  supported,  ex-
cept in  the  case  of  a  war  so  palpably  and  indisputably  unjust,
a?  not  to  admit  a  presumption  of  any  secret  reason  of  state
that  is  capable  of  justifying  it, — a  case  in  politics  which  is
nearly  impossible.  On  all  occasions  susceptible  of  doubt,*  the
whole  nation,  the  individuals,  and  especially  the  military,  are
to  submit  their  judgment  to  those  who  hold  the  reins  of  go-
vernment,— to  the  sovereign :  this  they  are  bound  to  do  by
the  essential  principles  of  political  society,  and  of  govem-


*  De  Jure  Belli  et  Pacuy  lib.  iii  C9p.  z.
41N>


OF  THB  BFJECTS  07  BBGULAR  WAB.  880

«

ment.  What  would  be  the  consequence,  if,  at  every  step  of  wx  in.
the  sovereign,  the  subjects  were  at  liberty  to  weigh  the  justice  fi'^T*  — ^
of  his  reasons,  and  refuse  to  march  to  a  war  which  might  to
them  appear  unjust?  It  often  happens  that  prudence  will
not  permit  a  sovereign  to  disclose  all  his  reasons.  It  is  the
duty  of  subjects  to  suppose  them  just  and  wise,  until  clear
and  absolute  evidence  tells  them  the  contrary.  When,  there*
fore,  under  the  impression  of  such  an  idea,  they  have  lent
their  assistance  in  a  war  which  is  afterwards  found  to  be  unjust,
the  sovereign  alone  is  guilty :  he  alone  is  bound  to  repair  the
injuries.  The  subjects,  and  in  particular  the  military,  are
innocent :  they  have  acted  only  from  a  necessary  obedience.
They  are  bound,  however,  to  deliver  up  what  they  have  ac-
quired in  such  a  war,  because  they  have  no  lawful  title  to
possess  it.  This  I  believe  to  be  the  almost  unanimous  opinion
of  all  honest  men,  and  of  those  ofBcers  who  are  most  distin-
guished for  honour  and  probity.  Their  case,  in  the  present
instance,  is  the  same  as  that  of  all  those  who  are  the  executors
of  the  sovereign's  orders.  Government  would  be  impracticable
if  every  one  of  its  instruments  was  to  weigh  its  commands,
and  thoroughly  canvass  their  justice  before  he  obeyed  them.
But,  if  they  are  bound  by  a  regard  for  the  welfare  of  the  state
to  suppose  the  sovereign's  orders  just,  they  are  not  responsible
for  them.


CHAP.  XIL  [  381  ]

OF THB  VOLUNTARY LAW  OF  NATIONS, AS IT REdAEDS THB chap.  xii.
EFFECTS  OF  REGULAR  WARFARE, INDEP.ENDBNTLT  OF THB
JUSTICE OF  THE CAUSE.

ALL  the  doctrines  we  have  laid  down  in  the  preceding  §  188.  Na-
chapter  are  evidently  deduced  from  sound  principles, — from  ^Y^^^  ^^^
the  eternal  rules  of  justice :  they  are  so  many  separate  articlejs  "f^^  ^u
of  that  sacred  law,  which  nature,  or  the  Divine  Author  of  i^^  of  na-
nature,  has  prescribed  to  nations. He  alone  whom  justice  ture  againai
and  necessity  have  armed,  has  a  right  to  make  war ;  he  alone  ®^*^  ^^*''-
is  empowered  to  attack  his  enemy,  to  deprive  him  of  life,  and
wrest  from  him  his  goods  and  possessions. Such  is  the  deci-
sion of  the  necessary  law  of  nations,  or  of  the  law  of  nature,
which  nations  are  strictly  bound  to  observe  (Prelim.  §  7) :  it
is  the  inviolable  rule  that  each  ought  conscientiously  to  follow.
But,  in  the  contests  of  nations  and  sovereigns  who  live  together
in  a  state  of  nature,  how  can  this  rule  be  enforced  ? They
acknowledge  no  superior. Who  then  shall  be  judge  between
them,  to  assign  to  each  his  rights  and  obligations, — to  say  to
the  one,  '^  You  have  a  right  to  take  up  arms^  to  attack  your

481


381  OF  THE  VOLUNTARY  LAW  OP  NATIONS.

BOOK  m.  enemy,  and  subdue  him  by  force  ;** — ^and  to  the  other,  "Every
ouAP.  MI.  act  of  hostility  that  you  commit  will  be  an  act  of  injustice;
your  victories  will  be  so  many  murders,  your  conquests  rapines
and  robberies  V  Every  free  and  sovereign  state  has  a  right
to  determine,  according  to  the  dictates  of  her  own  conscience,
what  her  duties  require  of  her,  and  what  she  can  or  cannot
do  with  justice  (Prelim.  §  16).  If  other  nations  take  upon
themselves  to  judge  of  her  conduct,  they  invade  her  liberty,
and  infringe  her  most  valuable  rights  (Prelim.  §  15) :  and,
moreover,  each  party,  asserting  that  they  have  justice  on  their
own  side,  w^ill  arrogate  to  themselves  all  the  rights  of  war«
and  maintain  that  their  enemy  has  none,  that  his  hostilities
are  so  many  acts  of  robbery,  so  many  infractions  of  the  law
of  nations,  in  the  punishment  of  which  all  states  should  unite.
The  decision  of  the  controversy,  and  of  the  justice  of  the
cause,  is  so  far  from  being  forwarded  by  it,  that  the  quarrel
will  become  more  bloody,  more  calamitous  in  its  effects,  and
also  more  difficult  to  terminate.  Nor  is  this  all :  the  neutral
nations  themselves  will  be  drawn  into  the  dispute,  and  involved
in  the  quarrel.  If  an  unjust  war  cannot,  in  its  effect,  confer
any  right,  no  certain  possession  can  be  obtained  of  any  thing
taken  in  war,  until  some  acknowledged  judge  (and  there  is
none  such  between  nations)  shall  have  definitively  pronounced
[  382  ]  concerning  the  justice  of  the  cause :  and  things  so  acquired
will  ever  remain  liable  to  be  claimed,  as  property. carried  off
by  robbers.
§189.  Why  Let  us  then  leave  the  strictness  of  the  necessary  law  of
they  ought  nature  to  the  conscience  of  sovereigns ;  undoubtedly  they  are
to  admit  never  allowed  to  deviate  from  it.  But,  as  to  the  external
tary  law  of  ^^^^cts  of  the  law  among  men,  we  must  necessarily  have  re-
nations,  course  to  rules  that  shall  be  more  certain  and  easy  in  the
application,  and  this  for  the  very  safety  and  advantage  of  the
great  society  of  mankind.  These  are  the  rules  of  the  volun-
tary law  of  nations  (Prelim.  §  21).  The  law  of  nature,  whose
object  it  is  to  promote  the  welfare  of  human  society,  and  to
protect  the  liberties  of  all  nations, — which  requires  that  the
affairs  of  sovereigns  should  be  brought  to  an  issue,  and  their
quarrels  determined  and  carried  to  a  speedy  conclusion, — that
law,  I  say,  recommends  the  observance  of  the  voluntary  law
of  nations,  for  the  common  advantage  of  states,  in  the  same
manner  as  it  approves  of  the  alterations  which  the  civil  law
makes  in  the  rules  of  the  law  of  nature,  with  a  view  to  render
them  more  suitable  to  the  state  of  political  society,  and  more
easy  and  certain  in  their  application.  Let  us,  therefore,
apply  to  the  particular  subject  of  war  the  general  observation
made  in  our  Preliminaries  (§  28) — a  nation,  a  sovereign,  when
deliberating  on  the  measures  he  is  to  pursue  in  order  to  fulfil
his  duty,  ought  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  necasary  law,  whose
obligation  on  the  conscience  is  inviolable :  but  in  examining
what  he  may  require  of  other  states,  he  ought  to  pay  a  defer-

492


OF THB EFFECTS  OF  KEGULAR  WAR.  882

ence  to  the  voluntary  law  of  nations,  and  restrict  even  his  book  ra.
just  claims  by  the  rules  of  that  law,  whose  maxims  have  for  c»ap.  xn.
their  object  the  happiness  and  advantage  of  the  universal
aooiety  of  nations.  Though  the  necesmry  law  be  the  rule
which  he  invariably  observes  in  his  own  conduct,  he  should
allow  others  to  avail  themselves  of  the  voluntary  law  of
nations.

The  first  rule  of  that  law,  respecting  the  subject  under  §  190.  Re-
consideration, is,  that  regular  war^  as  to  its  effects^  is  to  bes^^^^^^*
accounted  jvst  on  both  sides. This  is  absolutely  necessary,  g^^J**- ^
as  we  have  just  shown,  if  people  wish  to  introduce  any  order,  be  account-
any  regularity,  into  so  violent  an  operation  as  that  of  arms,  ed  just  on
9r  to  set  any  bounds  to  the  calamities  of  which  it  is  produc-  ^^  »d»'
tive,  and  leave  a  door  constantly  open  for  the  return  of  peace.
It  is  even  impossible  to  point  out  any  other  rule  of  conduct
to  be  observed  between  nations,  since  they  acknowledge  no
superior  judge.

Thus,  the  rights  founded  on  the  state  of  war,  the  lawfulness
of  its  eflfects,  the  validity  of  the  acquisitions  made  by  arms,
do  not,  externally  and  between  mankind,  depend  o<n  the  justice
of  the  cause,  but  on  the  legality  of  the  means  in  themselves, —
that  is,  on  every  thing  requisite  to  constitute  a  regular  war.
If  the  enemy  observes  all  the  rules  of  regular  warfare  (see
Chap.  III.  of  this  Book),  we  are  not  entitled  to  complain  of
him  as  a  violator  of  the  law  of  nations.  He  has  the  same
pretensions  to  justice  as  we  ourselves  have ;  and  all  our  re-
source lies  in  victory  or  an  accommodation.

Second  rule. — The  justice  of  the  cause  being  reputed  equal  §  I9i.
between  two  enemies,  whatever  is  permitted  to  the  07ie  in  virtue  Whatever  ii
of  the  state  of  war^  is  also  permitted  to  the  other. Accord-  ^^^^v  %
ingly,  no  nation,  under  pretence  of  having  justice  on  her  side,  g^  ^q  the '
ever  complains  of  the  hostilities  of  her  enemy,  while  he  con-  other.
fines  them  within  the  limits  prescribed  by  the  common  laws  [  888  ]
of  war. We  have,  in  the  preceding  chapters,  treated  of  what
is  allowable  in  a  just  war. It  is  precisely  that,  and  no  more,
which  the  voluntary  law  equally  authorizes  in  both  parties.
That  law  puts  things  between  both  on  a  parity,  but  allows  to
neither  what  is  in  itself  unlawful :  it  can  never  countenance
unbridled licentiousness. If,  therefore,  nations  transgress
those  bounds, — ^if  they  carry  hostilities  beyond  what  the  inter-
nal and  necessary  law  permits  in  general  for  the  support  of  a
just  cause, — far  be  it  from  us  to  attribute  these  excesses  to  the
voluntary  law  of  nations:  they  are  solely  imputable  to  a
depravation  of  manners,  which  produces  an  unjust  and  barba-
rous custom. Such  are  those  horrid  enormities  sometimes
committed  by  the  soldiery  in  a  town  taken  by  storm.

3.  We  must  never  forget  that  this  voluntary  law  of  nations,  §  192.  The
which  is  admitted  only  through  necessity,  and  with  a  view  to  voluntary
avoid  greater  evils  (§§  188,  189),  does  not,  to  him  who  ^«*«»  ^orf thLT *
up  arms  in  an  unjust  cause,  give  any  real  right  iluit  is  capable

2  R  493


883  OF  THE VOLUNTARY  LAW  OP  NATIONS.

BOOK  in. of  justifying  his  conduct  and  acquitting  Ms  conscience^  hni

CHAP.  XII.  >ff^^^yQiy  entitles  him  to  the  benefit  of  the  external  effect  of  the

mpunitj  to  law^ and  to  impunity  among  mankind. This safficientlj

nim  who appears  from  what  we  have  said  in  establishing  the  voluntfiy

wages  an j^^^  ^f  nations. The  sovereign,  therefore,  whose  arms  are  not

"'  sanctioned  by  justice,  is  not  the  less  unjust,  or  less  guilty  of

violating  the  sacred  law  of  nature,  although  that  law  itself

(with  a  view  to  avoid  aggravating  the  evils  of  human  society

by  an  attempt  to  prevent  them)  requires  that  he  be  allowed

to  enjoy  the  same  external  rights  as  justly  belong  to  his

enemy. In  the  same  manner,  the  civil  law  authorizes  a  debtor

to  refuse  payment  of  his  debts  in  a  case  of  prescription  : but

he  then  violates  his  duty :  he  takes  advantage  of  a  law  which

was  enacted  with  a  view  to  prevent  the  endless  increase  of

lawsuits ;  but  his  conduct  is  not  justifiable  upon  any  grounds

of  genuine  right.

From  the  unanimity  that  in  fact  prevails  between  states  in
observing  the  rules  which  we  refer  to  the  voluntary  law  of
nations,  Grotius  assumes  for  their  foundation  an  actual  con-
sent on  the  part  of  mankind,  and  refers  them  to  the  arbitrary
law  of  nations. But,  exclusive  of  the  difficulty  which  would
often  occur  in  proving  such  agreement,  it  would  be  of  no
validity  except  against  those  who  had  formerly  entered  into
it. If  such  an  engagement  existed,  it  would  belong  to  the
conventional  law  of  nations,  which  must  be  proved  by  history,
not  by  argument,  and  is  founded  on  facts,  not  on  principles*
In  this  work  we  lay  down  the  natural  principles  of  the  law  of
nations. We  deduce  them  from  nature  itself;  ar.d  what  we
call  the  voluntary  law  of  nations  consists  in  rules  of  conduct
and  of  external  right,  to  which  nations  are,  by  the  law  of
nature,  bound  to  consent ;  so  that  we  are  authorized  to  pre-
sume their  consent,  without  seeking  for  a  record  of  it  in  the
[ 384  j  annals  of  the  world ;  because,  even  if  they  had  not  given  it,
the  law  of  nature  supplies  their  omission,  and  gives  it  for
them. In  this  particular,  nations  have  not  the  option  of
giving  or  withholding  their  consent  at  pleasure :  the  refusal
to  give  it  would  be  an  infringement  of  the  common  rights  (^f
nations  (Prelim.  §  21).

This  voluntary  law  of  nations,  thus  established,  is  of  very
extensive  use,  and  is  far  from  being  a  6himera,  an  arbitrary
or  groundless  fiction.  It  flows  from  the  same  source,  and
is  founded  on  the  same  principles,  with  the  natural  and  tieees-
sary  law.  For  what  other  reason  does  nature  prescribe  such
and  such  rules  of  conduct  to  men,  except  because  those  rules
are  necessary  to  the  safety  and  welfare  of  mankind  ?  But
the  maxims  of  the  necessary  law  of  nations  are  founded  imme*
diately  on  the  nature  of  things,  and  particularly  on  that  of
man,  and  of  political  society.  The  voluntary  law  of  nations
supposes  an  additional  principle, — the  nature  of  the  great
society  of  nations, and  of  their  mutual  intercourse. The


OF  ACQUISITIONS  BY  WAR,  ETC.  884

necessary  law  enjoins  to  nations  what  is  absolutely  indispen-  book  m
sable,  and  what  naturally  tends  to  their  perfection  and  common  chap,  xit.
happiness. The  voluntary law^  tolerates  what  cannot be
avoided  without  introducing  greater  evils.


CHAP.  XIII.

OF ACQUISITIONS BY WAR, AND PARTICULARLY OF CON- chap,  xm.

QUESTS.

IF  it  be  lawful  to  carry  off  things  belonging  to  an  enemy,  §  193.  How
with  a  view  of  weakening  him  (§  160),  and  sometimes  of  pu-  ^"" "  ■
nishing  him  (§  162),  it  is  no  less  lawful  in  a  just  war  to  appro-  ™*uj^^
priate  them  to  our  own  use,  by  way  of  compensation,  which
the  civilians  term  expletio  juris  (§  161). They  are  retained
as  an  equivalent  for  what  is  due  by  the  enemy,  for  the  expenses
and  damages  which  he  has  occasioned,  and  even  (when  there
is  cause  to  punish  him)  as  a  commutation  for  the  punishment
he  has  deserved. For,  when  I  cannot  obtain  the  individual
thing  which  belongs  or  is  due  to  me,  I  have  a  right  to  an
equivalent,  which,  by  the  rules  of  expletive  justice,  and  in
moral  estimation,  is  considered  as  the  thing  itself. Thus,
according  to  the  law  of  nature,  which  constitutes  the  neces-
sary law  of  nations,  war,  founded  on  justice,  is  a  lawful  mode
of  acquisition.  i

But  that  sacred  law  does  not  authorize  even  the  acquisitions  §  194.  Mea
made  in  a  just  war,  any  farther  than  as  they  are  approved  by  sj*™  of  tho
justice, — that  is  to  say,  no  farther  than  is  requisite  to  obtain  ".^'^^  *^
complete  satisfaction  in  the  degree  necessary  for  accomplish-  ^
ing  the  lawful  ends  we  have  just  mentioned. An  equitable
conqueror,  deaf  to  the  suggestions  of  ambition  and  avarice,
will  make  a  just  estimate  of  what  is  due  to  him, — that  is  to
say,  of  the  thing  which  has  been  the  subject  of  the  war  (if  the
thing  itself  is  no  longer  recoverable),  and  of  the  damages  and  [  885  ]
expenses  of  the  war, — and  will  retain  no  more  of  the  enemy's
property  than  what  is  precisely  suflScient  to  furnish  the  equiva-
lent. But  if  he  has  to  do  with  a  perfidious,  restless,  and
dangerous  enemy,  he  will,  by  way  of  punishment,  deprive  him
Df  some  of  his  towns  or  provinces,  and  keep  them  to  serve  as
d  barrier  to  his  own  dominions. Nothing  is  more  allowable
than  to  weaken  an  enemy  who  has  rendered  himself  suspected
and  formidable. The  lawful  end  of  punishment  is  future  secu-
rity. The  conditions  necessary  for  rendering  an  acquisition,
made  by  arms,  just  and  irreproachable  before  God  and  our
own  conscience,  are  these, — justice  in  the  cause,  and  equity
Ji  the  measure  of  tho  satisfaction.


885  OF  ACQUISITIONS  BT  ^TARy  ETC.

BOOK  m. But  nations  cannot,  in  their  dealings  with  each  other,  insist
CHAP,  xm.  on  this  rigid  justice. By  the  rules  of  the  voluntary  law  of
§195.  Rules  nations,  every  regular  war  is  on  hoth  sides  accounted  Just,  as
of  the  vo- to  its  effects  (§  190) ;  and  no  one  has  a  right  to  judge  a  nation
luntaiy  law  respecting  the  unreasonableness  of  her  claims,  or  what  she
o  nations, ^ijinj^-g  necessary  for  her  own  safety  (Prelim.  §  21). Every
acquisition,  therefore,  which  has  been  made  in  regular  war-
fare, is  valid  according  to  the  voluntary  law  of  nations,  inde-
pendently of  the  justice  of  the  cause  and  the  reasons  which
may  have  induced  the  conqueror  to  assume  the  property  of
what  he  has  taken. Accordingly,  nations  have  ever  esteemed
conquest  a  lawful  title ;  and  that  title  has  seldom  been  dis-
puted, unless  where  it  was  derived  from  a  war  not  only  unjust
in  itself,  but  even  destitute  of  any  plausible  pretext.
S 196.  Ac- The  property  of  movable  effects  is  vested  in  the  enemy
qaiiiition  of  {yqui  the  moment  they  come  into  his  power  ;  and  if  he  sells
piopeity them  to  neutral  nations,  the  former  proprietor  is  not  entitled
(168)  to  claim  them. But  such  things  must  be  actually  and  truly

(168)  See  further,  as  to  the  effect  of  title-deeds  of  the  ship,  if  he  bujs  a  pn»-

capture,  as  to  mooabln  and  imtnovableSf  vessel. I  believe  there  is  no  instance

and  the  doctrme  of  postliminium,  and  in  which  a  man,  having  purchased  a

the  principle  on  which  it  is  in  general  prize-vesselof  a  belligerent,  has  thought

founded,  post^  392,  §§  204,  205;  and  himself  secure  in  making  that  purcha^^,

the  other  authorities  and  modem  deci-  merely  because  that  ship  had  been  in

lions. Marten's L.  N.  290 — ^293; 1  the  enemy's possession twenty-four

Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  414 — 435;  hours,  or  carried  infra  prtsfidia. At

and  Id.  Index,  tit.  Postliminium,  any  rate,  the  rule  of  condemnation  is

As  to  movables  captured in  a  land  the  general  rule  applied  by  England."

trar,  some  writers  on  the  law  of  nations  So  that,  by  the  general  law  of  nations,

state  it  to  be  merely  requisite  that  the  if  a  vessel  be  retaken  be/are  rondtmna^

property  shall have been  Itvenly-four  tion,  by  any  ship  of  the  nation  of  which

hours  in  the  enemy's  power,  after  which  the  original  owner  is  a  subject  although

they  contend,  that  the  right  of  postli-  even  four  years  after  the  capture,  he

minium  is  completely  (fivested,  so  that  has  a  right  to  have  the  same  restored

immediately  after  the  expiration  of  that  to  him,  subject  to  his  paying  certain

time,  they  may  be  alienated  to  neutrals,  salvage  to  the  re-captor. See  Goss  and

as  indefeasible  property. Others  con-  V^herSy  2  Burr.  683  ; Constant  Mary,

tend,  that  the  property  must  have  been  3  Rob.  Rep.  97 ;  The  Huldah,  Id.  235 ;

brought  infra  prasidia,  that  is,  within  Jimewdo  v. Cambridge^ 10 Mod.  79.

tlie  camps,  towns,  ports,  or  fleets  of  the  And  such  sentence  of  condemnatiMi

enemy :  and  others  have  drawn  lines  must  also  have  been  pronounced  by  a

of  an  arbitrary  nature. Marten's  L.  N.  court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  and  in

290-1 ;  2  Wooddeson's  Vin.  L.  444,  the  country  either  of  the  enemy  him-

§  34.  self,  or  of  some  ally,  and  not  in  a  neu-

■ With  respect  to  maritime  capiwesj  a  tral  country. Flad  Oyen,  1  Rob.  Repi

more  absolute  and  certain  species  of  134 ;  Havelock  v.  Jiockwood,  Atchcson  s

possession  has  been  required. In  the  Rep.  8,  n.  9.

case  of  Flad  Oyen,  1  Rob.  Rep.  1 34 ; But  if,  after  the  time  of  the  enemy's

Atcheson's  Rep.  8,  n.  9 ;  and  8  Term  transferring  his  prize  to  a  neutral,  ■

Rep.  270,  in  notes.  Sir  Wm,  SfoU  said,  peace  be  concluded  l>etween  that  enemj

<*By  the  general  practice  of  the  law  of  and  the  state  from  whose  subject  tht

nations,  a  sentence  of  condemnation  is  at  prize  was  taken,  then  the  transfer  to

present  deemed generally  necessary ;  the  neutral  becomes  valid  and  perfect

and  a  neutral  purchaser in Europe,  even  though  there  was  no  legal  con

during  war,  does  look  to  the  legal  sen-  demnation,  for,  as  observed  by  V'attd

tence  of  condemnation  as  one  of  the  the  light  of  postliminium  no  longei
496


OF  ACQUISITIONS  BT  WAR, BTO.  385

in  the  enemy's  power,  and  carried  to  a  place  of  safety.  Sap-  book  m.
pose  a  foreigner,  coming  into  our  country,  buys  a  portion  of  chap,  xui.
the  booty  which  a  party  of  enemies  have  just  taken  from  us :
our  men,  who  are  in  pursuit  of  this  party,  may  very  justly
seize  on  the  booty  which  that  foreigner  was  over  precipitate
in  buying.  On  this  head,  Grotius  quotes  from  De  Thou  the
instance  of  the  town  of  Lierre  in  Brabant,  which  having  been
captured  and  recaptured  on  the  same  day,  the  booty  taken
from  the  inhabitants  was  restored  to  them,  because  it  had  not
been  twenty-four  hours  in  the  enemy's  hands.*  This  space
of  twenty-four  hours j  together  with  the  practice  observed  at
sea,t  is  an  institution  of  the  law  of  nations  established  by
agreement  or  custom,  and  is  even  a  civil  law  in  some  states.
The  natural  reason  of  the  conduct  adopted  towards  the  in-
habitants of  Lierre  is,  that  the  enemy  being  taken  as  it  were
in  the  fact,  and  before  they  had  carried  off  the  booty,  it  was
not  looked  upon  as  having  absolutely  become  their  property,
or  been  lost  to  the  inhabitants.  Thus,  at  sea,  a  ship  taken  [  886  ]
by  the  enemy  may  be  retaken  and  delivered  by  other  ships
of  her  own  party,  as  long  as  she  has  not  been  carried  into
some  port,  or  into  the  midst  of  a  fleet :  her  fate  is  not  decided,
nor  is  the  owner's  property  irrecoverably  lost,  until  the  ship
be  in  a  place  of  safety  with  regard  to  the  enemy  who  has
taken  her,  and  entirely  in  his  power.  But  the  ordinances  of
every  state  may  tnakc  different  regulations  on  this  head
between  the  citizens,;^  with  a  view  either  to  prevent  disputes.


exists  after  the  conclusion  of  peace,  salra^  to  the  re-captor. 1  Chitty's

And  see  Sir  iV.  ScotCs  decision  on  that  Com.  L.  434 — 6 ; and  see  Franklin,

point,  in  Schooner  Sophie,  6  Rob.  Rep.  4  Rob.  Rep.  147;  1  Edward's  Rep.  68;

142.  San  Francisco,  1  Edward's  Rep.  279 ;

In  cases  arising  between  British  sal>-  the  Two  Friends,  1  Robl  Rep.  271 ;

jects  with  one  another,  and  also  in  Cornu  ▼.  Blackburne,  Dougl.  648.  {itft^

cases arising  between  sach  subjects  ler  v.  The  JResoliUion,  2  Dall.  Rep.  I.}

and  those  of  her  allies,  peculiar  modifi-  In  the  absence  of  express  stipulations

cations  of  the  general  law  of  nations  with  allies,  Sir  Wm.  Scott  observed,  ^*  I

were  introduced  or  acknowledged  by  understand  that  the  actual  rule  of  the

Great  Britain. Thus,  it  was  established  English  maritime  law  is  this : — ^viz.,  that

by  several  arts  of  parliament  (13  Geo.  the  maritime  law  of  England  having

2,  c.  4; 17  Geo.  2,  c  34;  19  Geo.  2,  adopted  a  most  liberal  rule  of  restitu-

c.  34;  43 Geo.  3,  c  1^0; and see  tion  with  respect  to  the  re-captured

Hamilfon  v. Mendes,  2 Burr. 1198;  property  of  its  own  subjects,  gives  the

1  Bla.  Rep. '27),  that  the  maritime  right  benefit  of  that  rule  to  its  aUies,  till  it

of  posiUminium  shall  subsist  even  to  appears  that  they  act  towards  British

the  end  of  the  war;  and,  therefore,  the  property  on  a  less  liberal  principle. In

shijis  or  goods  of  the  subjects  of  this  such  a  case  it  adopts  their  rule,  and

country,  taken  at  sea  by  an enemy,  treats them  according  to  their  own

and afterwards  retaken,  even  at  ^y  measure of  juslice."  —  Santa Cruz,

indefinite  period  of  time,  and  whether  1  Rob.  Rep.  49. — C.

before  or  after  sentence  of  condemns-  *  Grotius,  de  Jure  Belli  et  Paci%

tion,  are  in  general  to  be  restored  to  lib.  ill.  cap.  vi.  §  iii..n.  vii.

the  original  proprietors,  but  subject  to  "f  See  Grotius,  ibid,  and  in  the  text*

certain  specified  exceptions, and,  in  ^  Grotius,  ibid,
general,  also  subject  to  the  payment  of

63 2  B  2 497


386  OF  ACQUISITIONS  BY  WAR, ETC.

BOOK  III. or  to  encourage  armed  vessels  to  retake  merchaut  ships  that
^"'^^•^"i".  have  fallen  into  the  enemy's  hands.

The  justice  or  injustice  of  the  cause  does  not  here  become
an  object  of  consideration. There  would  be  no  stabilitj  in
the  affairs  of  mankind,  no  safety  in  trading  with nations
engaged  in  war,  if  we  were  allowed to  draw  a  distinct ioa
between  a  just  and  an  unjust  war,  so  as  to  attribute  lawful
effects  to  the  one  which  we  denied  to  the  other. It  would
be  opening  a  door  to  endless  discussions  and  quarrels. This
reason  is  of  such  weight,  that,  on  account  of  it,  the  effects  of
a  public  war,  at  least  with  regard  to  movables,  have been
allowed  to  expeditions  which  deserved  no  other  name  than  that
of  predatory  enterprises,  though  carried  on  by  regular  armies.
When,  after  the  wars  of  the  English  in  France,  the  grandti
compagnies  ranged  about  Europe,  sacking  and  pillaging  wher-
ever they  came,  none  of  the  sufferers  was  ever  known  to  claim
the  booty  which  those  plunderers  had  carried  off  and  sold.
At  present,  it  would  be  in  vain  to  claim  a  ship  taken  by  the
Barbary  corsairs,  and  sold  to  a  third  party,  or  retaken  from
the  captors ;  though  it  is  very  improperly  that  the  piracies  of
thosQ  barbarians  can  be  considered  as  acts  of  regular  war.
We  here  speak  of  the  external  right:  the  internal  right  and
the  obligations  of  conscience  undoubtedly  require,  that  we
should  restore  to  a  third  party  the  property  we  recover  from
an  enemy  who  had  despoiled  him  of  it  in  an  unjust  war. —
provided  he  can  recognise  that  property,  and  will  defray  the
expenses  we  have  incurred  in  recovering  it. Grotius  quotes
many  instances  of  sovereigns  and commanders,  who have
generously  restored  such  booty,  even  without  requiring  any
thing  for  their  trouble  or  expense.* But  such  conduct  is
pursued  only  in  cases  where  the  booty  has  been  recently  taken.
It  would  be  an  impracticable  task,  scrupulously  to  seek  out
the  proprietors  of  what  has  been  captured  a  long  time  back ;
and  moreover  they  have,  no  doubt,  relinquished  all  their  right
to  things  which  they  had  no  longer  any  hope  of  recovering.
Such  is  the  usual  mode  of  thinking  with  respect  to  captures
in  war,  which  are  soon  given  up  as  irrecoverably  lost.
§  197.  Ac Immovable  possessions,  lands,  towns,  provinces,  &c.,  become
quisition  or  the  property  of  the  enemy  who  makes  himself  master  of  them :
wMMvablesj  ^^^  •^.  -g  ^^^^  ^^  ^j^^  treaty  of  peace,  or  the  entire  submission

quest.  (169)  ^^^  extinction  of  the  state  to  which  those  towns  and  provinces

belonged,  that  the  acquisition  is  completed,  and  the  property

becomes  stable  and  perfect.

§  198.  How Thus,  a  third  party  cannot  safely  purchase  a  conquered

to  transfer town  or  province,  till  the  sovereign  from  whom  it  was  taken

Iku"*  ^^' ^^®  renounced  it  by  a  treaty  of  peace,  or  has  been  irretrievably

subdued,  and  has  lost  his  sovereignty :  for,  while  the  war  cou-

•  Grotius,  lib.  iii.  cap.  xvi.  post^  chap.  xiv. ;  and  the  case  of  Brtda

(169)  See  further  as  top  sUiminium, Lust,  6  Rob.  Rep.  333— -351.— C.
4<W


OF  ACQUISITIONS BY WAR, ETC.  387

tinuea, — while  the-  sovereign  has  still  hopes  of  recovering  his  book  m.
possessions  by  arms, — is  a  neutral  prince  to  come  and  deprive  ohap.  xm.
him  of  the  opportunity  by  purchasing  that  town  or  province
from  the  conqueror  ?  The  original  proprietor  cannot  forfeit
his  rights  by  the  act  of  a  third  person ;  and  if  the  purchaser
be  determined  to  maintain  his  purchase,  he  will  find  himself
involved  in  the  war.  Thus,  the  king  of  Prussia  became  a
pjirty  with  the  enemies  of  Sweden,  by  receiving  Stettin  from
the  hands  of  the  king  of  Poland  and  the  czar,  under  the  title
of  sequestration.*  But,  when  a  sovereign  has,  by  a  definitive
treaty  of  peace,  ceded  a  country  to  the  conqueror,  he  has
relinquished  all  the  right  he  had  to  it ;  and  it  were  absurd
that  he  should  be  allowed  to  demand  the  restitution  of  that
country  by  a  subsequent  conqueror,  who  wrests  it  from  the
former,  or  by  any  other  prince,  who  has  purchased  it,  or  re-
ceived it  in  exchange,  or  acquired  it  by  any  title  whatever.

The  conqueror,  who  takes  a  town  or  province  from  his  §199.  Con-
enemy,  cannot  justly  acquire  over  it  any  other  rights  than  ditions  on
such  as  belonged  to  the  sovereign  against  whom  he  has  taken  ^Jf*^^
up  iM;ms.  War  authorizes  him  to  possess  himself  of  what  jg  acquired,
belongs  to  his  enemy :  if  he  deprives  him  of  the  sovereignty
of  that  town  or  province,  he  acquires  it  such  as  it  is,  with  all
its  limitations  and  modifications.  Accordingly,  care  is  usually
taken  to  stipulate,  both  in  particular  capitulations  and  in
treaties  of  peace,  that  the  towns  and  countries  ceded  shall
retain  all  their  liberties^  privileges^  and  immunities.  And
•  why  should  they  be  deprived  of  them  by  the  conqueror,  on
account  of  his  quarrel  with  their  sovereign  ?  Nevertheless,
if  the  inhabitants  have  been  personally  guilty  of  any  crime
against  him,  he  may,  by  way  of  punishment,  deprive  them  of
their  rights  and  privileges.  This  he  may  also  do  if  the
inhabitants  have  taken  up  arms  against  him,  and  have  thus
directly  become  his  enemies.  In  that  case,  he  owes  them  no
more  than  what  is  due  from  a  humane  and  equitable  conqueror
to  his  vanquished  foes.  Should  he  purely  and  simply  incor-
porate them  with  his  former  states,  they  will  have  no  cause  of
complaint.

Hitherto  I  evidently  speak  of  a  city  or  a  country  which  is  not
simply  an  integrant  part  of  -a  nation,  or  which  does  not  fully
belong  to  a  sovereign,  but  over  which  that  nation  or  that
sovereign  has  certain  rights.  If  the  conquered  town  or  pro-
vince fully  and  perfectly  constituted  a  part  of  the  domain  of
a  nation  or  sovereign,  it  passes  on  the  same  footing  into  the
power  of  the  conqueror.  Thenceforward  united  with  the  new
state  to  which  it  belongs, — if  it  be  a  loser  by  the  change,
that  is  a  misfortune  which  it  must  wholly  impute  to  the  chance
of  war.  Thus,  if  a  town  which  made  part  of  a  republic  or  a  [  888  ]
limited  monarchy,  and  enjoyed  a  right  of  sending  deputies  to

*  By  the  treaty  of  Schwedt,  October  6, 1713.

409


888


OF  ACQUISITIONS  BY  WAR^ ETC.


pensons.


BAMc  III.  the  supreme  council  or  the  general  assembly  of  the  states,  bs
imAP.  xin.  justly  conquered  by  an  absolute  monarch,  she  must  nerer  in3re
think  of  such  privileges :  they  are  what  the  constitution  of  the
new  state  to  which  she  is  annexed  does  not  permit.
§200.  Lands  In  the  conquests  of  ancient  times,  even  individuals  lost  tbrr
of  prirate  lands.  Nor  is  it  matter  of  surprise  that  in  the  first  ages  of
Rome  such  a  custom  should  have  prevailed.  The  wars  of  tlist
era  were  carried  on  between  popular  republics  and  comni>
nities.  The  state  possessed  very  little,  and  the  quarrel  va-
in reality  the  common  cause  of  all  the  citizens.  But  at  pir-
sent  war  is  less  dreadful  in  its  consequences  to  the  subjer : :
matters  are  conducted  with  more  humanity :  one  soverei^
makes  war  against  another  sovereign,  and  not  against  tbf
unarmed  citizens.  The  conqueror  seizes  on  the  possessions
of  the  state,  the  public  property,  while  private  individuals  are
permitted  to  retain  theirs.  They  suffer  but  indirectly  by  tb^
war ;  and  the  conquest  only  subjects  them  to  a  new  master.
>!80i.  Con-  But  if  the  entire  state  be  conquered,  if  the  nation  be  sab-
qaest  of  the  dued,  in  whot  manner  can  the  victor  treat  ity  without  trac?-
070"^  *^*^  gressing  the  bounds  of  justice  ?  What  are  his  rights  over  the
conquered  country  ?  Some  have  dared  to  advance  this  mon-
strous principle,  that  the  conqueror  is  absolute  master  of  hb
conquest, — ^that  he  may  dispose  of  it  as  his  property, — ^thst
he  may  treat  it  as  he  pleases,  according  to  the  common  expres-
sion of  treating  a  state  as  a  conquered  country ;  and  hence
they  derive  one  of  the  sources  of  despotic  government.  Bu:,
disregarding  such  writers,  who  reduce  men  to  the  state  of
transferable  goods  or  beasts  of  burthen, — who  deliver  them
up  as  the  property  or  patrimony  of  another  man, — let  us
argue  on  principles  countenanced  by  reason  and  conformable
to  humanity.

The  whole  right  of  the  conqueror  is  derived  from  justifiable
self-defence  (§§  3,  26,  28),  which  comprehends  the  8upp»»rt
.  and  prosecution  of  his  rights.  When,  therefore,  he  has  totallj
subdued  a  hostile  nation,  he  undoubtedly  may;  in  the  fii>t
place,' do  himself  justice  respecting  the  object  which  had  given
rise  to  the  war,  and  indemnify  himself  for  the  expenses  anl
damages  he  has  sustained  by  it :  he  may,  according  to  the
exigency  of  the  case,  subject  the  nation  to  punishment,  hj
way  of  example :  he  may  even,  if  prudence  so  require,  rendrr


(170)  When  a  country  has  been
conquered  by  the  British,  or  any  other
arms,  and  having  become  a  dominion
of  the  king  in  right  of  his  crown,  the
conquered  inhabitants,  once  received
by  the  conqueror,  become  bis  subjects,
and  are  universally  to  be  regarded  in
that  light,  and  not  as  enemies  or  aliens.
Slphinstone  v.  Bedietchuud,  Knapp's
Rep.  338 ;  Campbell  v.  Hall,  23  Stale

600


Trials,  p.  322;  and  Cowper,  205:  aod
Fabrigas  v.  Moslyn^  Cowp.  Rep.  165.

But  statutes  previously  pciitsed  do  c<?t
in  genera]  extend  to  a  cowpttrtn  o>a»-
try ;  sec  2  Merivale's  Rep.  156;  4  M*-^
dcrn  Rep.  222;  I  Chitty's  Com.  L.
639,  640;  1  Bla.  Com.  lOS-^  A«
to  the  application  of  the  laws  of  E*sr
land  to  her  foreign  possessions,  9e«
Gardiner  v.  Fell,  I  Jac.  &  Walk.  27;
and  Id.  30,  n.  (a).— -C.


OF  ACQUISITIONS BY  WAR, BTO.  388

her  incapable  of  doing  mischief  with  the  same  ease  in  future,  book  ui..
But,  for  the  attainment  of  these  different  objects,  he  is  to  chap,  xui..
prefer  the  gentlest  methods, — still  bearing  in  mind  that  the
doing  of  harm  to  an  enemy  is  no  further  authorized  by  the
law  of  nature,  than  in  the  precise  degree  which  is  necessary
for  justifiable  self-defence,  and  reasonable  security  for  the
time  to  come. Some  princes  have  contented  themselves  with
imposing  a  tribute  on  the  conquered  nation, — others,  with
depriving  her  of  some  of  her  rights,  taking  from  her  a  pro-
vince, or  erecting  fortresses  to  keep  her  in  awe :  others,  again,
confining  their  quarrel  to  the  sovereign  alone,  have  left  the  [  389  ]
nation  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  their  rights, — only  setting
over  her  a  new  sovereign  of  their  own  appointment.

But  if  tine  conqueror  thinks  proper  to  retain  the  sovereignty
of  the  conquered  state,  and  has  a  right  to  retain  it,  the  same
principles  must  also  determine  the  manner  in  which  he  is  to
treat  that  state.  If  it  is  against  the  sovereign  alone  that  he
has  just  cause  of  complaint,  reason  plainly  evinces  that  he
acquires  no  other  rights  by  his  conquest  than  such  as  belonged
to  the  sovereign  whom  he  has  dispossessed :  and,  on  the  sub-
mission of  the  people,  he  is  bound  to  govern  them  aa^ording
to  the  laws  of  tlie  state.  If  the  people  do  not  voluntarily
submit,  the  state  of  war  still  subsists.

A  conquercr  who  has  taken  up  arms,  not  only  against  the
sovereign,  h\^h  against  the  nation  herself,  and  whose  intention
it  was  to  subdue  a  fierce  and  savage  people,  and  once  for  all
to  reduce  an  obstinate  enemy,— rsuch  a  copqueror  may  with
justice  lay  burthens  on  the  conquered  nation,  both  as  a  com-
ensation  for  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  as  a  punishment,
lie  may,  according  to  the  degree  of  indocility  apparent  in  their
disposition,  govern  them  with  a  tighter  rein,  so  as  to  curb  and
subdue  their  impetuous  spirit :  he  may  even,  if  necessary,
keep  them  for  some  time  in  a  kind  of  slavery.  But  this
forced  condition  ought  to  cease  from  the  moment  the  danger
is  over, — the  moment  the  conquered  people  are  become  citi-  '
zens :  for  then  the  right  of  conquest  is  at  an  end,  so  far  as
elates  to  the  pursuit  of  those  rigorous  measures,  since  the
conqueror  no  longer  finds  it  necessary  to  use  extraordinary
precautions  for  his  own  defence  and  safety.  Then  at  length
every  thing  is  to  be  rendered  conformable  to  the  rules  of  a '
wise  government  and  the  duties  of  a  good  prince.

When  a  sovereign,  arrogating  to  himself  the  absolute  dis-
posal of  a  people  whom  he  has  conquered,  attempts  to  reduce
them  to  slavery,  he  perpetuates  the  state  of  warfare  between
that  nation  and  himself.  The  Scythians  said  to  Alexander
the  Great,  "  There  is  never  any  friendship  between  the  master
nd  slave :  in  the  midst  of  peace  the  rights  of  war  still  subsist."*
-  -— ?  ■  .  ""  -  -

*  Inter,  dominum  et  servum  nulla  amicitia  est ;  etiam  in  pace,  belli  tameii
iura  servantur.^ — Q.  Curt.  lib.  vii.  cap.  viii.

60}


889  OF ACQUISITIONS BT  WAR, BTC.

BOOK  m.  Should  it  be  said,  that  in  such  a  case  there  may  be  peace,  and
CHAP,  xin.  a  tind  of  compact  by  which  the  conqueror  consents  to  spare
the  lives  of  the  vanquished,  on  condition  that  they  acknow-
ledge themselves  his  slaves, — he  who  makes  such  an  assertion
is  ignorant  that  war  gives  no  right  to  take  away  the  life  of
an  enemy  who  has  laid  down  his  arms  and  submitted  (§  140..
But  let  us  not  dispute  the  point :  let  the  man  who  holds  such
principles  of  jurisprudence,  keep  them  for  his  own  use  anl
benefit :  he  well  deserves  to  be  subject  to  such  a  law.  Bat
men  of  spirit,  to  whom  life  is  nothing,  less  than  nothing,  unless
sweetened  with  liberty,  will  always  conceive  themselves  at  war

[  390  ]  with  that  oppressor,  though  actual  hostilities  are  suspended
on  their  part  through  want  of  ability.  We  may,  therefore,
safely  venture  to  add,  that  if  the  conquered  country  is  to  be
really  subject  to  the  conqueror  as  to  its  lawful  sovereign,  he
must  rule  it  according  to  the  ends  for  which  civil  government
has  been  established.  It  is  generally  the  prince  alone  who
.occasions  the  war,  and  consequently  the  conquest.  Surely  i»
is  enough  that  an  innocent  people  suffer  the  calamities  of  war:
must  even  peace  itself  become  fatal  to  them  ?  A  generooi
conqueror  will  study  to  relieve  his  new  subjects,  and  mitigate
their  condition :  he  will  think  it  his  indispensable  duty.  ^^  Con-
quest (says  an  excellent  man)  ever  leaves  behind  it  an  im-
mense debt,  the  discharge  of  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to
acquit  the  conqueror  in  the  eye  of  humanity.*'*

It  fortunately  happens,  that,  in  this  particular  as  in  every
thing  else,  sound  policy  and  humanity  are  in  perfect  accord.
What  fidelity,  what  assistance,  can  you  expect  from  an  op-
pressed people  ?  Do  you  wish  that  your  conquest  may  prove
a  real  addition  to  your  strength,  and  be  well  affected  to  you? —
treat  it  as  a  father,  as  a  true  sovereign.  I  am  charmed  with
the  generous  answer  recorded  of  an  ambassador  from  Priver-
num.  Being  introduced  to  the  Roman  senate,  he  was  asked
by  the  consul — '*  if  we  show  you  clemency,  what  dependence
can  we  have  on  the  peace  you  are  come  to  sue  for  ?"  **  If
(replied  the  ambassador)  you  grant  it  on  reasonable  condi-
tions, it  will  be  safe  and  permanent :  otherwise,  it  will  not  last
long.'*  Some  took  offence  at  the  boldness  of  this  speech  ;  hm
the  more  sensible  part  of  the  senate  approved  of  the  Priver-
nian's  answer,  deeming  it  the  proper  language  of  a  man  and
a  freeman.  ^^Can  it  be  imagined  (said  those  wise  senators t
that  any  nation,  or  even  any  individual,  will  longer  continue
in  an  irksome  and  disagreeable  condition,  than  while  com-
pelled to  submit  to  it  ?  If  those  to  whom  you  give  peace
^receive  it  voluntarily,  it  may  be  relied  on :  what  fidelity  can  you
expect  from  those  whom  you  wish  to  reduce  to  slavery  ?'*t

*  Montesquieu, in his Spirit of  remittimus  vobis,  qualem  nos  pacMn

Laws.  vobiflcum  habituros  sperenius  ? S^  bo>

f  Quid,  si  poenam (inquit  consul)  nam  dederitis,  inqui^  et  fidam  et  yet-
60d


OF  ACQUISITIONS BY  WAR, ETC.  81»0

*'  The  most  secure  dominion,"  said  Camillas,  "is  that  which bookiii.
18  acceptable  to  those  over  whom  it  is  exercised."*  chap,  xm

Such  are  the  rights  which  the  law  of  nature  gives  to  the
conqueror,  and  the  duties  which  it  imposes  on  him.  The
manner  of  exerting  the  one,  and  fulfilling  the  other,  varies
according  to  circumstances.  In  general,  he  ought  to  consult
the  true  interests  of  his  own  state,  and  by  sound  policy  to  [  891  ]
reconcile  them,  as  far  as  possible,  with  those  of  the  conquered
country.  He  may,  in  imitation  of  the  kings  of  France,  unite
and  incorporate  it  with  his  own  dominions.  Such  was  the
practice  of  the  Romans :  but  they  did  this  in  different  modes
according  to  cases  and  conjunctures.  At  a  time  when  Rome
stood  in  need  of  an  increase  of  population,  she  deistroyed  the
town  of  Alba,  which  she  feared  to  have  as  a  rival :  but  she
received  all  its  inhabitants  within  her  walls,  and  thereby
gained  so  many  new  citizens.  In  after  times  the  conquered
cities  were  left  standing,  and  the  freedom  of  Rome  was  given
to  the  vanquished  inhabitants.  Victory  could  not  have  proved
so  advantageous  to  those  people  as  their  defeat.

The  conqueror  may  likewise  simply  put  himself  in  the  place
of  the  sovereign  whom  he  has  dispossessed.  Thus  the  Tartars
have  acted  in  China :  the  empire  was  suffered  to  subsist  in  its
former  condition,  except  that  it  fell  under  the  dominion  of  a
new  race  of  sovereigns.

Lastly,  the  conqueror  may  rule  his  conquest  as  a  separate
state,  and  permit  it  to  retain  its  own  form  of  government.
But  this  method  is  dangerous :  it  produces  no  real  union  of
strength ;  it  weakens  the  conquered  country,  without  making
any  considerable  addition  to  the  power  of  the  victorious  state.

It  is  asked,  to  whon^  the  conquest  belongs, — to  the  prince  §  202.  To
who  has  made  it,  or  to  the  state  ? ThiS  question  ought  never  whom  th«
to  have  been  heard  of. Can  the  prince,  in  his  character  of  J^"^"^j^ijT
sovereign,  act  for  any  other  end  than  the  good  of  the  state  ?
•  Whose  are  the  forces  which  he  employs  in  his  wars  ? Even
if  he  made  the  conquest  at  his  own  expense,  out  of  his  own
revenue or his private and patrimonial estates, does he
not  make  use  of  the  personal  exertions  of  his  subjects  in
achieving  it  ? Does  he  not  shed  their  blood  in  the  contest  ?
But,  supposing  even  that  he  were  to  employ  foreign  or  mer-
cenary troops,  does  he  not  expose  his  nation  to  the  enemy's


petuam;  si  malam,  baud  diuturnam.  esse  fidam,  ubi  voluntarii  pacati  sint;

Turn  vero  minariy  nee  id  ambig^e  Prir  neque  eo  loco,  ubi  servitutem  esse  velint,

vernatem, quidam, ^ iUis  vocibus  ad  fidem  sperandam  esse. — Tit.  Liv.  lib.

rebellandum incitari pacaioi populos.  viii.  cap.  xxi.

Para melioT  senatils ad meliora re-  *  Certe  id  firmissimum  longe.impe-

sponsa  trahere,  et  dicere  viri  et  liberi  rium  est,  quo  obedientes  gaudent — ^Tit*

vocem  auditam :  an  credi  posse  ullum  Liv.  lib.  viii.  cap.  xiii.

populuin,  aut  hominem  denique,  in  ek  ,  (171)  Jinte,  365,  8.  164,  and  note

conditione  cujus  eum  pceniteat,  diutius  (165).

quam  necessu  dt,  mansonim  1  ibi  pacem

603


891  OP  ACQUISITIONS  BY  WAR, ETC.

BOOK  m.  resentment  ? Does  he  not  involve  her  in  the  war  ? And

CHAP.  XIII.  gball  he  alone  reap  all.  the  advantages  of  it?  Is  it  not  for  the

cause  of  the  state,  and  of  the  nation,  that  he  takes  up  arms  ?

The  nation^  therefore,  has  a  just  claim  to  all  the  rights  to

which  such  war  gives  birth.

If  the  sovereign  embarks  in  a  war,  of  which  his  own  per-
sonal interests  are  the  sole  ground, — as,  for  instance,  to  assert
his  right  of  succession  to  a  foreign  sovereignty, — the  question
then  assumes  a  new  face. In  this  affair  the  state  is  wholly
unconcerned :  but  then  the  nation  should  be  at  liberty  either
to  refuse  engaging  in  it,  or  to  assist  her  prince,  at  her  own
option. If  he  is  empowered  to  employ  the  national  force  in
support  of  his  personal  rights,  he  should,  in  such  case,  make
no  distinction  between  these  rights  and  those  of  the  state.
The  French  law,  which  annexes  to  the  erotvn  all  acquisitions
made  by  the  king,  should  be  the  law  of  all  nations.(171)
5203.  Whe- It  has  been  observed  (§  196)  that  we  may  be  obliged,  if  not
ther  we  are  externally,  yet  in  conscience,  and  by  the  laws  of  equity,  to
i^it*'  a* restore  to  a  third  party  the  booty  we  have  recovered  out  of
people *^®  hands  of  an  enemy  who  had  taken  it  from  him  in  an  unjust
whom  the war. The  obligation  is  more  certain  and  more  extensive,  with
enemy  had  regard  to  a  people  whom  our  enemy  had  unjustly  oppressed-
conquered. ^^^  *  people  thus  spoilcd  of  their  liberty,  never  renounce  the
hope  of  recovering  it. If  they  have  not  voluntarily  incorpo-
[  392  ]  rated  themselves  with  the  state  by  which  they  have  been  sub-
dued,— if  they  have  not  freely  aided  her  in  the  war  against
us, — we  certainly  ought  so  to  use  our  victory,  as  not  merely
to  give  them  a  new  master,  but  to  break  their  chains. To
deliver  an  oppressed  people  is  a  noble  fruit  of  victory :  it  is  a
valuable  advantage  gained,  thus  to  acquire  a  faithful  friend.
The  canton  of  Schweilz,  having  wrested  the  country  of  Glaris
from  the  house  of  Austria,  restored  the  inhabitants  to  their
former  liberties ;  and  Glaris,  admitted  into  the  Helvetic  con-
federacy, formed  the  stxth  canton. *(172)

(171)  »Ante,  365,  s.  164,  and  note  tion;  and  this  is  the  principle  of  just
(165).  war. So,  there is  no  regular inter>

*  Histoire  de  la  Confederation  Hel-  national or  even  municipal court to

v^tique,  par  M.  de  Watteville,  liv.  iii.  adjudicate  upon  questions of  laKfui

under  the  year  1351.  capture  or  prize. And  in  Grcsat  Britain,

(172)  As  nations  are  independent  of  no  municipal  court,  whether  of  conunon
each  other,  and  acknowledge  no  supe-  law  or  equity,  can  take  cognixance  of
nor  (ante,  in  several  places),  there  is,  any  questions  arising  out  of  host  tit  kcs^
unfortunately,  no  sovereign  power  ure;  nor  can  any  question  respecting
among  nations  to  uphold  or  enforce  the  infraction  of  treaties  be  tfirecfljf  agi-
the  international  law ;  no  tribunal  to  tated  before  rourls  of  /»ir,  any  more
which  the  oppressed  can  appeal,  as  of  than  questions  respecting  boott  ao-
right,  against  the  oppressor ;  and,  con-  quired  in  a  continental  inland  war.
tequently,  if  either  nation  refuse  to  In  general,  in  all  states,  this  is  a  jaria-
give  effect  to  the  established  principles  diction  assumed  only  by  the  tociereigti,
of  international  law,  the  only  redress  in  whom  the  right  or  power  of  deciaring
is  by  resorting  to  arms,  and  enforcing  war  and  peace,  and  modifying  then
the  performance  of  the  national  obliga-  terms,  is  vested,  excepting  in  some  oesea

604


OF  THB  BIGHT  OF  POSTLIMINIUM.  892

BOOK  nT.
OHAP.  XIY.

CHAP.  XIV.

OF  THE RIGHT OF POSTLIMINIUM.  (173)

THE  right  of  postliminium  is  that  in  virtue  of  which  per-  §  204.  De-
sons  and  things  taken,  by  the  enemy  are  restored  to  their  finition  of

the  right  oi

of  particnlar  facts,  where  the  king  has  not  flagrante,  yet  nondum  cessantt  ^
^bought  nt  to  act  with  the  concurrence  bello,  regard  heing  had  both  to  the
of  his  nation  at  large,  instead  of  pro-  time,  the  place,  and  the  person ;  and,
ceeding  only  upon  his  prerogative.  In  cotisequeiUly,  that  the  municipal  court
Great  Britain,  the  king  usually,  by  a  had  no  jwisdktion  to  adjudge  upon
special  commission,  delegates  his  power  the  subject :  but  that,  if  any  thing
to  decide  upon  questions  of  capture  and  was  done  amiss, — ^recourse  could
prize  to  the  chief  judge  of  the  Admi-  only  be  had  to  the  government  for
ralty  Court,  but  quite  separate  from  his  redress.  We  shall  therefore  re-
ordinary  jurisdiction,  with  an  appeal  to  commend  it  to  his  majesty  to
the  Privy  Council ;  and  before  that  tri-  reverse  -  the  judgment  of  the  Su-
bunal  alone  can  any  question  of  capture  preme  Court  of  Bombay." — Id,  page
or  prize  be  discussed;  (JElpkinftone  v.  360-1. — Again,  it  has  been  held
Bedreethundy  Knapp's  Rep. Privy  Coun-  that  the  circumstances  that  a  recently
cil,  316  to  361;  Le  Caux  t.  Eden,  conquered  city,  where  a  seizure  of  the
Dougl.  594 ;  BUI  v.  Reardon,  2  Rus-  property  of  a  native  is  made  by  the
sell's  Rep.  608  ;)  and  not  in  an  action  at  members  of  a  provisional  government
law  or  court  of  equity,  excepting  in  the  during  time  of  war,  had  been  some
case  of  a  trust.  Id,  ibid, ;  and  Faiih  months  previously  in  the  undisturbed
V.  Pearson,  Holt's  Cas.  Ni.  Pri.  113.  possession  of  that  government,  and
Therefore,  where  the  members  of  the  that  courts  for  the  administration  of
provisional  government  of  a  recent-  justice  were  then  sitting  in  it,  under
ly  conquered  counlry  seized  the  property  the  authority  of  that  government,  do
of  a  native  of  it,  who  had  been  refused  not  alter  the  character  of  the  transac-
the  benefit  of  the  articles  of  capitula-  tion,  so  as  to  make  it  a  subject  of
tion  of  a  fortress  of  which  he  had  been  cognizance  by  a  municipal  court."—
the  governor,  but  had  been  permitted  Id.  316. — And  there  is  no  distinction,
to  reside,  .under ^military  surveillance,  in  this  respect,  between  the  public
in  his  own  house  in  the  city  in  which  and  piivute  property  of  an  absolute
the  seizure  was  made,  and  which  was  monarch ;  and,  therefore,  money  in
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  the  hands  of  the  banker  of  an  absolute
scene  of  actual  hostilities ;  it  was  held  monarch,  whose  territory  has  been
by  the  House  of  Lords,  in  England,  conquered  by  the  British,  may  be
that  the  seizure  having  been  made  recovered  from  the  banker,  on  an
flagrante  ei  nondum  cessante  bello,  information,  on  behalf  of  the  crown,
must  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  ,Bdvocate'General  of  Bombay  v.  jSmer^
koftUe  seizure,  and  that  a  municipal  ckund,  Knapp's  Rep.  329,  note ;  EU
court  had  no  jurisdiction  on  the  sub-  phinslone  v.  Bedreechund,  Knapp's  Rep.
ject  ; {Elphbutone v. Bedreechund,  357.

Knapp's  Rep.  316 to  361; and see As  the  capture,  in  general,  belongs

Hill  V.  Rear  don,  2  Sim.  &;  Stu.  431 ;  to  the  sovereign  of  the  state  ^although,

but  which  on  one  point,  respecting  a  by  municipal regulations,  the  actual

trust,  was afrerwards overruled in  captors  may  acquire  some  subordinate

Chaocery  ; Id.  2 Russ.  608  ;) and  riglrts),  it  also  follows  that  no  British

per Lo.d Tenter  den — *«  We think  subject  can  maintain  an  action  against

She  proper  character  of  the  transaction  the  captor. CauX  v.  Eden,  2  Dougl.

was  that  of  a  hostile  seizure,  made,  if  573. In  a  state  resulting  from  a  state

■  ■  ■  ■ - ■  — ^^^. _ I ■■■ !-■■■■  I  I  ■  ,,■ I ■ l■^  ■■■■■■■  - ■  —^^^^^^^^»^^^»^i^»^^»^^— ^^

(173) See, in  general, 1  Chitty's Commercial Law,  430  to  435;  Id.
Indei,  tit.  Post  'minvmru — C.

64  28  MMV


892


OP THE RIGHT OP POSTLIMINIUM.


BOOK  III.
CHAP.  XIV.

S205.  Foun-
dation of
thlB  right


former  state,  on  coming  again  into  the  power  of  the  nation
to  which  they  belonged.  (174)

The  sovereign  is  bound  to  protect  the  persons  and
property  of  his  subjects,  and  to  defend  them  against  the
enemy.  When,  therefore,  a  subject,  or  any  part  of  hi?
property,  has  fallen  into  the  enemy's  possession,  should  any
fortunate  event  bring  them  again  into  the  sovereign's  power,
it  is  undoubtedly  his  duty  to  restore  them  to  their  former
condition, — to  re-establish  the  persons  in  all  their  rights
and  obligations,  to  give  back  the  eflfects  to  the  owners, —


of  war,  if  property  be  seized  under  an
erroneous  supposition  that  it  belongs
to  the  enemy,  it  may  be  liberated  by
the  proper  authorities ;  but  no  action
can  be  maintained  against  the  party
who  has  taken  it,  in  a  court  of  law.
Caux  V.  Eden,  2  Dougl.  573 ;  Elphin-
stone  V.  Bedreechund,  Knapp's  Rep.
357.  If  an  English  naval  commander
Beize  any  movable  as  enemies*  pro-
perty, that  turns  out  clearly  to  be
British  property,  he  'forfeits  his  prize
to  the  Prize  Court  (sometimes  con-
founded with  the  Court  of  Admiralty),
and  that  court  awards  the  return  of  it
to  the  party  from  whom  it  was  taken.
The  Court  of  Admiralty  is  the  proper
tribunal  for  the  trial  of  questions  of
prize  or  no  prize,  and  it  exercises  this
jurisdiction  as  a  court  of  prize,  under
a  commission  from  his  majesty;  and
if  it  makes  an  unsatisfactory  deter-
mination, an  appeal  lies  to  his  ma-
jesty in  council ;  for,  the  king  reserves
the  ultimate  right  to  decide  on  such
questions  by  his  own  authority,  and
does  not  commit  their  determination
to  any  municipal  court  of  justice.

Booty  taken  under  the  colour  of
military  authority,  falls  under  the
same  rule.  If  property  be  taken  by  an
officer  under  the  supposition  that  it  is
the  property  of  a  hostile  state,  or  of
individuals,  which  ought  to  be  con-
fiscated, no  municipal  court  can  judge
of  the  propriety  or  impropriety  of  the
seizure :  it  can  be  judged  of  only  by
an  authority  delegated  by  his  majesty,
and  by  his  majesty,  ultimately,  as-
sisted by  the  lords  in  council.  There
are  no  direct  decisions  on  such  ques-
tions, because,  as  was  stated  by
Lord  Mansfield,  in  Lindo  v.  Roilneyj
they  are  cases  of  rare  occurrence.
JClphinstone  ▼.  Bedreechund,  Knapp's
Kep.  340,  357-8  ;  Caux  v.  Eden,
Bougl.  592 ;  Lindo  v.  Bodney,  Id.  313.
606


For  these  reasons,  it  is  usual,  vrhen
questions  of  importance  between  tiro
sovereigns,  or  their  subjects,  arise,  by
particuiar treaty,  to constitute a tri-
bunal for  that special  puqK>se ; and
municipal  statutes  have been  passed
in  England in aid of  such treaty.
Thus,  by additional articles of the
definitive treaty of peace between
Great  Britain  and  France,  of  the  30th
May  1814,  certain conventions  were
made for  indemnifying British sub-
jects for  the  confiscation  of  their  pro-
perty  by the French revolutionary
government,  and  certain  commissioD
ers  were  appointed  bet\%een the  two
countries,  to  examine  and  tlecide  upon
such  British  claims ; and  the  statuta
59 Geo.  3,  c.  51,  was passed with
the same object ; and such claiina
were adjudicated uyon  between the
two  countries. It  was  held,  howcTer,
that  these conventions and treaties,
and  the  act  for  carrying  the  same  into
effect,  did  not  exclude  the  jtlrisdiction
of  a  court  of  equity  to  examine  and
enforce  equities attaching upon the
compensation in the hands of the
person in whose favour the award
of the commissioners had been
made; {IIiU  v. Renrdon, 2  Russell's
Rep.  609.  overruling  &  C.  in  2  8iin.
6c Stu. 437;) and it was holden
that,  where  a  person,  in  whose  fa^^our
an  adjudication under such  conven-
tions has been made by the com-
missioners or  by  the  Privj' Council,
is  affected  by  a  trust  or  by  fraud,  t
court of equity has  jurisdiction to
enforce  the  trust  or  relieve  against  the
fraud  (id.  ibid.) ; and  the  same  prin-
ciple would, no doubt, be extended
to  cases  of  capture  or  prize. — ^C.

(174)  See  ante,  a.  196,  page  385,
note  (168),  as  to  mocabies  and
shipi4 — C.


OF  THE  BIGHT  OF  POSTLIMmniM.  892

in  a  word,  to  replace  every  thing  on  the  same  footing  on  book  in.
which  it  stood  previous  to  the  enemy's  capture.  chap,  xiv.

The  justice  or  injustice  of  the  war  makes  no  difference  in
this  case, — not  only  because,  according  to  the  voluntary  law
of  nations,  the  war,  as  to  its  effects,  is  reputed  just  on  both
sides,  but  likewise  because  war,  whether  just  or  not,  is  a
national  concern ;  and,  if  the  subjects  who  fight  or  suffer  in
the  national  cause,  should,  after  they  have,  either  in  their
persons  or  their  property,  fallen  into  the  enemy's  power,
be,  by  some  fortunate  incident,  restored  to  the  hands  of
their  own  people,  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not
be  restored  to  their  former  condition.  It  is  the  same  as  if
they  had  never  been  taken.  If  the  war  be  just  on  the  part
of  their  nation,  they  were  unjustly  captured  by  the  enemy ;
and  thus  nothing  is  more  natural  than  to  restore  them  as
soon  as  it  becomes  possible.  If  the  war  be  unjust,  they  are
under  no  greater  obligation  to  suffer  in  atonement  for  its
injustice  than  the  rest  of  the  nation.  Fortune  brings  down
the  evil  on  their  heads  when  they  are  taken :  she  delivers
them  from  it  when  they  escape.  Here,  again,  it  is  the  same
as  if  they  never  had  been  captured.  Neither  their  own
sovereign,  nor  the  enemy,  has  any  particular  right  over  [  898  ]
them.  The  enemy  has  lost  by  one  accident  what  he  had
gained  by  another.

Persons  return,  arid  things  are  recovered,  by  the  right  of  §  206.  How
postliminium,  when,  after  having  been  taken  by  the  enemy,  i^  ^*^^  ^'
they  come  again  into  the  power  of  their  own  nation  (§  204).
This  right,  therefore,  takes  effect  as  soon  as  such  persons
or  things  captured  by  the  enemy  fall  into  the  hands  of  sol-
diers belonging  to  their  own  nation,  or  are  brought  back  to
the  army,  the  camp,  the  territories  of  their  sovereign,  or  the
places  under  his  command.

Those  who  unite  with  us  to  carry  on  a  war  are  joint  par- §  207.  Whe-
ties with  us : we  are engaged  in  a  common  cause ; our  ther  it  takei
right is  one  and the same; and  they  are  considered as ®^®*^^"?"®'**
making  but  one  body  with  us. Therefore,  when  persons  or  ^j^^v  *®**
things  captured  by  the  enemy  are  retaken  by  our  allies  or
auxiliaries, or  in  %ny  other  manner  fall  into  their  hands,  *
this,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  effect  of  the  right,  is  precisely
the  same  thing as  if  they  were  come  again  into  our  own
power ;  since,  in  the  cause  in  which  we  are  jointly  embark-
ed, our  power  and that  of  our  allies  is but one  and  the
same. The right of  postliminium therefore takes effect
among  those  who  carry  on  the  war  in  conjunction  with  us ;
and  the  persons  and things  recovered  by  them from  the
enemy  are  to  be  restored  to  their  former  condition.  (175)

(175)  As  to  the  general  rule  in  the  Bat,  in  general,  the  precise  rule  is
absence  of  treaty,  see  Santa  Cruz,  fixed  by  treaty  between  allies.  Id
1  Kob.  Rep.  49 ;  ant€,  385,  n.  (168). xineLr-A).

507


898  01  THB  RIQHT  OF  P08TLIMIKIUM.

•

BOOK  in. But,  does  this  right  take  placjd  in  the  territoriea  of  onr
OHAP.  XIV.  allies  ? Here  a  distinction  arises. If  those  allies  make  a
common  cause  with  us, — if  they  are  associates  in  the  war, —
we are necessarily entitled  to the  right  of  postliminioiiL
in  their  territories  as  well  as  in  our  own  :  for,  their  state  is
united  with  ours,  and,  together  with  it,  continues  but  one
party  in  the  war  we  carry  on. But  if,  as  in  our  times  m
frequently  the  practice,  an  ally  only  gives  us  a  stated  sue-
cour  stipulated  by  treaty,  and  does  not  himself  come  to  »
rupture  with  our  enemy,  between  whose  state  and  his  owiu
in  their  immediate  relations,  peace  continues  to  be  observed*
— in  this  case,  only  the  auxiliaries  whom  he  sends  to  our
assistance  are  partakers  and  associates  in  the  war ;  and  Iu»
dominions  remain  in  a  state  of  neutrality.
S208.  Of  no Now,  the  right  of  postliminium  does  not  take  effect  io
validity  in neutral  Countries : for,  when a  nation chooses  to  remalD
tiooB. ^^'  neuter  in  a  war,  she  is  bound' to  consider  it  as  equally  juat
on  both  sides,  so  far  as  relates  to  its  eSecls, — and,  conse-
quently, to  look  upon  every  capture  made  by  either  party
as  a  lawful  acquisition. To  allow  one  of  the  parties,  iu
prejudice  to  the  other,  to  enjoy  in  her  dominions  the  right
[  394  ]  of  claiming  things  taken  by  the  latter;  or  the  right  of  post-
liminium, would  be  declaring  in  favour  of  the  former,  and
departing  from  the  line  of  neutrality.
§209.  What Naturally,  every  kind  of  property  might  be  recovered  by
^^^^  *w *^®  right  of  postliminium ;  and  there  is  no  intrinsic  reason
by^hiB*  ^  ^^y movables should  be excepted  in  this  case, provided
fight  (176)  they  can  be  certainly  recognised and  identified. Accord-
ingly, the.  ancients, on  recovering  such  things from the
enemy,  frequently  restored  them  to  their  former  owners.*
But  the  dii^culty  of  recognising  things  of  this  nature,  and
the  endless  disputes  which  would  arise  from  the  prosecu-
tion of  the  owners'  claims  to  them,  have  been  deemed  mo-
tives of  sufficient  weight  for  the  general  establishment  of  a
contrary  practice. To these considerations we  may  add,
that,  from  the  little  hope  entertained  of  recovering  effects
taken  by  the  enemy  and  once  carried  to  a  place  of  mfetyy  a
reasonable  presumption  arises  that  the  former  owners  have
relinquished  their property. It is  therefore with  reason
that movables or  booty are excepted from the right of
postliminium,  unless  retaken  from  the  enemy  immediately
after  his  capture  of  them; in  which  case,  the  proprietor
neither  finds  a  difficulty  in recognising  his  effects, nor  is
presumed  to  have  relinquished  them. And,  as  the  custom
has  once  been  admitted,  and  is  now  well  established,  there
would  be  an  injustice  in  violating  it  (Prelim.  §  26). Among


(176)  As  to  moTables and  ships, *  See  several  instances  in  GiotiQi^
SMU^  384,  n.— C  book  iii.  ch.  xvL  §  S.

608


OF  THB  RIGHT  OF  POSTLIMHOUM,  894

the  Romans,  indeed,  slaves  were  not  treated  like  other  book  m.
movable  property :  they,  by  the  right  of  postliminium,  chap,  lav.
were  restored  to  their  masters,  even  when  the  rest  of  the
booty  was  detained.  The  reason  of  this  is  evident :  for,  as
it  was  at  all  times  easy  to  recognise  a  slave,  and  ascertain
to  whom  he  belonged,  the  owner,  still  entertaining  hopes
of  recovering  him,  was  not  supposed  to  have  relinquished
Ws  right.

Prisoners  of  war,  who  have  given  their  parole, — territories  §  210.  Of
and  towns  which  have  submitted  to  the  enemy,  and  have^*^*^-
sworn  or  promised  allegiance  to  him, — cannot  of  themselves  ^j^^  ^
return  to  their  former condition  by  the  right  of  postlimi-  turn  by  the
nium  :  for,  faith  is  to  be  kept  even  with  enemies  (§174). rightofposi-

But  if  the  sovereign  retakes  those towns,  countries,  orjf™^^'^™-
prisoners,  who  had  surrendered  to  the  enemy,  he  recovers  ^ ^*
all  his  former  rights  over  them,  and  is  bound  to  re-establish  ^^.^^•'J'W
them  in  their  pristine  condition  (§  205). In  this  case,  they  ^^^J^^^j^^^j^
enjoy  the  right  of  postliminium  without  any  breach  of  their  retaken,
word,  any  violation of  their plighted faith. The enemy
loses  by  the  chance  of  war  a  right  which  the  chance  of  war
had  before  given  him.  ^  But,  concerning  prisoners  of  war,  a
distinction  is  to  be  made.  .  If  they  were  entirely  free  on
their  parole,  the  single  circumstance  of  their  coming  again
into  the  power  of  their  own  nation  does  not  release  them,
— since,  even  if  they  had  returned  home,  they  would  still
have  continued  prisoners. The  consent  of  the  enemy  who
had  captured  them,  or  his  total  subjugation,  can  alone  dis-
charge them. But,  if  they  have  only  promised  not  to  effect
their  escape, — a  promise which  prisoners  frequently  make  [  395  ]
in  order  to  avoid  the  inconveniences  of  a  jail, — the  only
obligation  incumbent  on  them is, that they  shall  not, of
themselves,  quit  the  enemy's  country,  or  the  place  assigned
for their  residence. And if  the troops of  their party .
should  gain  possession  of  the  place  where  they  reside,  the
consequence  is,  that,  by  the  right  of  war,  they  recover  their
liberty,  are  restored  to  their  own  nation,  and  reinstated  in
their  former  condition.  (178)

(177)  In  general,  ae  regards  coun-  absolutely  new. Upon  this  principle

tries  o persons  taken  by  a  belligerent  was decided an important  question

state,  who  were  not  the subjects  of  in the case of  Boedes  Lust,  5  Rob.

that  state  during  any  preceding  part  Rep.  333 ;  and  on  the  same  principle

of  the  same  war,  a  difibrent  rule  pre-  it  was  established,  that,  if  a  neutral

▼ails  than  that  laid down  by  Vattel,  have but  just set his foot  on the

pect.  211 ;  for,  the  law  of  postliminium  colony  of  an  enemy  for  a  few  hours

implies that the party claiming  it  before  its  capture ;  but  if  it  be  proved

returns to his previous character.  tkcU  he went there  for  the  purpose  of

And  he  who,  during  the  whole  war,  settling, then his property will  be

has  been  the  subject  of  the  enemy  subject  to condemnation, as if he

alone,  must  be  considered, when  he  wore  a  native  enemy. And  see  Hm

falls  into  the  hands  oT  the  rival  state,  Diana,  6  Rob.  Rep.  60. — C.
not  as  returning  to a  previous cha- (178)  See  note  (177),  ante,
lacter, but  as  ac<juiring  a  character

382 '  M9


895  OP  THE BIGHT  OF  POSTLIMINIUM.


BOOK  III. When  a  town,  reduced  by  the  enemy's  arms,  is  retaken  by
cHAP^xiv.  those  of  her  own  sovereign,  she  is,  as  we  have  above  seen,
§  212.  Whe- restored  to  her  former  condition,  and  reinstated  in  the  pos-
ther  this session  of  all  her  rights. It  is  asked  whether  she  thus  re-
I^tdl  to" ^^^^^^  such  part  of  her  property  as  had  been  alienated  by
uieir  pro- *^®  enemy  while  he  kept  her  in  subjection. In  the  first  place,
perty  alien-  We  are  to  make  a  distinotion  between  movable  property  not
atedby recoverable  by  the  right  of  postliminium  (§  202), and  im-
enemy,  paovables. The  former  belongs  to  the  enemy  who  gets  it
into  his  hands,  and  he  may  irrecoverably  alienate  it. As  to
immovables,  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  acquisition  of  a
town  taken  in  war  is  not  fulli/  consummated  till  confirmed  by
a  treaty  of  peace^  or  by  the  entire  submission  or  destrux^tion
of  the  state  to  which  it  belonged  (§197). Till  then,  the  sove-
reign of  that  town  has  hopes  of  retaking  it,  or  of  recovering  it
by  a  peace. And  from  the  moment  it  returns  into  his  power,
he  restores  it  to  all  its  rights  (§  205),  and  consequently  it
recovers  all  its  possessions,  as  far  as  in  their  nature  they  are
recoverable. It  therefore  resumes  its  immovable  possessions
from  the  hands  of  those  persons  who  have  been  so  prematurely
forward  to  purchase  them. In  buying  them  of  one  who  had
not  an  absolute  right  to  dispose  of  them,  the  purchasers  made
a  hazardous  bargain  ;  and  if  they  prove  losers  by  the  transac-
tion, it  is  a  consequence  to  which  they  deliberately  ejsposed
themselves. But  if  that  town  had  been  ceded  to  the  enemy  by
a  treaty  of  peace,  or  was  completely  fallen  into  his  power  by
the  submission  of  the  whole  state,  she  has  no  longer  any
claim  to  the  right  of  postliminium ;  and  the  alienation  of  any
of  her  possessions  by  the  conqueror  is  valid  and  irreversible ;
nor  can  she  lay  claim  to  them,  if,  in  the  sequel,  some  fortunate
revolution  should  liberate  her  from  the  yoke  of  the  conqueror.
When  Alexander  made  a  present  to  the  Thessalians  of  the
sum  due  from  them  to  the  Thebans  (see  §  77),  he  was  so  abso-
lutely master  of  the  republic  of  Thebes,  that  he  destroyed  the
city  and  sold  the  inhabitants.

The  same  decisions  hold  good  with  regard  to  the  immov-
able property  of  individuals,  prisoners  or  not,  which  has  been
alienated  by  the  enemy  while  he  was  master  of  the  country.
Grotius  proposes  the  question  with  respect  to  immovable  pro-
perty possessed  in  a  nei^tral  country  by  a  prisoner  of  war.*
L  396  ]  But,  according  to  the  principles  we  have  laid  down,  this
question  is  groundless  :  for,  the  sovereign  who  makes  a  pri-
soner in  war,  has  no  other  right.over  him  than  that  of  detain-
ing his  person  -until  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  or  until  he  be
ransomed  (§§  148,  &c.) ;  but  he  acquires  no  right  to  the  pri-
soner's property,  unless  he  can  seize  on  it.  It  is  impossible  to
produce  any  natural  reason  why  the  captor  should  have  a  right


*  Lib.  uL  cap.  u.  §  tl
610


OP  THE  EIGHT  OP  POSTLIMINIUM.  896

to  dispose  of  his  prisoner's  property,  unless  the  prisoner  has  book  m.
it  about  him.  ohap.  xiy.

When  a  nation,  a  people,  a  state,  has  been  entirely  sub-  §  213. wh«.
dued,  it  is  asked  whether  a  revolution  can  entitle  them  to  the  ther  a  na-
right  of  postliminium. In  order  justly  to  answer  this  ques-  tionthatba*
tion,  there  must again  be  a  distinction  of  cases. If  that^®"®**'
conquered  state  has  not  yet  acquiesced  in  her  new  subjection,  duedMuncn-
has  not  voluntarily  submitted,  and  has  only  ceased  to  resist  joy  the  right
from  inability, — if  her  victor  has  not  laid  aside  the  sword  of  of  postUmi-
conquest  and  taken  up  the  sceptre  of  peace  and  equity, —  ^"*™*
such  a  people  are  not  really  subdued  :  they  are  only  defeated
and  oppressed ;  and,  on  being  delivered  by  the  arms  of  an
ally,  they  doubtless  return  to  their  former  situation  (§  207).
Their  ally  cannot  become  their  conqueror ;  he  is  their  deli-
verer ;  and  all  the  obligation  of  the  party  delivered  is  to  re-
ward him. If  the  subsequent  conqueror,  not  being  an  ally
to  the  state  of  which  we  speak,  intends  to  keep  it  under  his
own  jurisdiction  as  the  reward  of  his  victory,  he  puts  him-
self in  the  place  of  the  former  conqueror,  and  becomes  the
enemy  of  the  state  which  the  other  had oppressed: that
state  may  lawfully  resist  him,  and  avail  herself  of  a  favour-
able opportunity  to  rectover  her  liberty. If  she  had  been
unjustly  oppressed,  he  who  rescues  her  from  the  yoke  of  the
oppressor  ought  generously  to  reinstate  her  in  the  possession
of  all  her  rights  (§  203).

The  question  changes  with  regard  to  a  state  which  has
voluntarily  submitted  to  the  conqueror.  If  "^he  people,  no
longer  treated  as  enemies,  but  as  actual  subjects,  have  sub-
mitted to  a  lawful  government,  they  are  thenceforward  de-
pendent on  a  new  sovereign;  or,  being  incorporated  with
the  victorious  nation,  they  become  a  part  of  it,  and  share  its
fate.  Their  former  state  is  absolutely  destroyed;  all  its
relations,  all  its  alliances  are  extinguished  (Book  II.  §  203).
Whoever,  then,  the  new  conqueror  may  be,  that  afterwards
subdues  the  state  to  which  these  people  are  united,  they
share  the.  destiny  of  that  state,  as  a  part  shares  the  fate  of
the  whole.  This  has  been  the  practice  of  nations  in  all  ages,
— I  say,  even  of  just  and  equitable  nations, — especially  with
regard  to  an  ancient  conquest.  The  most  moderate  conqueror
confines  his  generosity  in  this  particular  to  the  restoration
of  the  liberties  of  a  people  who  have  been  but  recently  sub-
dued, and  whom  he  does  not  consider  as  perfectly  incorporated,
or  well  cemented  by  inclination,  with  the  state  which  he  has
conquered.

If  the  people  in  question  shake  off  the  yoke  and  recover
their  liberty  by  their  own  exertions,  they  regain  all  their
rights  ;  they  return  to  their  former  situation ;  and  foreign
uations  have  no  right  to  determine  whether  they  have  shaken
off  the  yoke  of  lawful  authority,  or  burst  the  chains  of  slavery.
!rhu§,  the  kingdom  of  Portugal, — which  had  been  seized  on

611


399  OF  THE RIGHT  OF


BOOK  in.
CHAP. XV.


CHAP.  XV.

OF  THE  RiaHT OF PRIVATSE PERSONS IN WAR,

5  223.  Sub-  THE  right  of  making  war,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  first
jecta  cannot  chapter  of  this  book,  solely  belongs  to  the  sovereign  power,
oommit  hos-  y^^ich  not  Only  decides  whether  it  be  proper  .to  undertake  the
outTho^o  ^*^»  ^^^  *^  declare  it,  but  likewise  directs  all  its  operations.
vereign'8  '  as  circumstances  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  safety  of
» order.  the  State. Subjects,  therefore,  cannot  of  themselves take

any  steps  in  this  affair ;  nor  are  they  allowed  to  commit  any
act  of  hostility  without  orders  from  their  sovereign. Be  it
understood,  however,  that,  under  the  head  of  "hostilities,"
we  do  not  here  mean  to  include  self-defence. A  subject  may
repel  the  violence  of  a  fellow-citizen  when  the  magistrate's
assistance  is  not  at  hand ;  and  with  much  greater  reason  may
he  defend  himself  against  the  unexpected  attacks  of  foreigners-
i  224.  That The  Sovereign's  order,  which  commands  acts  of  hostiliTv,
order  may and  gives  a  right  to  commit  them,  is  either  general or  parri-
be  general ^.^ij^j^^ rj^Yie  declaration  of  war,  which  enjoins  the  subjects  at
wr^par  icu- ^^^^^  ^^  attack  the  enemy's  subjects,  implies  a  general  onier.
The  generals,  oflBcers,  soldiers,  privateers-men,  and  partisan*,
being  all  commissioned  by  the  sovereign,  make  war  by  virtue
of  a  particular  order.
-  225.  B^^  though  an  order  from  the  sovereign  be  necessary  to

Source  of authorize  the  subjects  to  make  war,  that  necessity  wholly  re-
ihe  necea- sults  from  the  laws  essential  to  every  political  society,  an^l
Kity  of  such  jj^j.  from  any  obligation  relative  to  the  enemy. For,  when
one  nation  takes  up  arms  against  another,  she  from  that  mo-
ment declares  herself  an  enemy  to  all  the  individuals  of  the
latter,  and  authorizes  them  to  treat  her  as  such. What  right
could  she  have  in  that  case  to  complain  of  any  acts  of  h<»-
tility  committed  against  her  by  private  persons  without  orders
from  their  superiors  ? The  rule,  therefore,  of  which  we  here
speak,  relates  rather  to  public  law  in  general,  than  to  the  law
of  nations  properly  so  called,  or  to  the  principles  of  the  re-
ciprocal obligations  of  nations,
a  226.  Why ^^  ^®  confine  our  views  to  the  law  of  nations,  considered  in
the  law  of itself, — ^when  once  two  nations  are  engaged  in  war,  all  the
nations subjccts  of  the  One  may  commit  hostilities  against  those  of
adrl^d^'tMs  *^®  Other,  and  do  them  all  the  mischief  authorized  by  the
rule.  state  of  war. But,  should  two  nations  thus  encounter  each

other  with  the  collective  weight  of  their  whole  force,  the  war
would  become  much  more  bloody  and  destructive,  and  could
hardly  be  terminated  otherwise  than  by  the  utter  extinction
of  one  qf  the  parties.  The  examples  of  ancient  wars  abun-
dantly prove  the  truth  of  this  assertion  to  any  man  who  will
for  a  moment  recall  to  mind  the  first  wars  waged  by  Rome

5U


PRIVATB  PERSONS  IN  WAR.  400

ftgainst  the  popular  republics  by  which  she  was  surrounded,  book  m.
It  is  therefore  with  good  reason  that  the  contrary  practice^ -£5££iJLI:l
has  grown  into  a  custom  with  the  nations  of  Europe, — at  least
with  those  that  l^eep  up  regular  standing  armies  or  bodies  of
militia.  The  troops  alone  carry  on  the  war,  while  the  rest
of  the  nation  remain  in  peace.  And  the  necessity  of  a  special
order  to  act  is  so  thoroughly  established,  that,  even  after  a
declaration  of  war  betwben  two  nations,  if  the  peasants  of
themselves  commit  any  hostilities,  the  enemy  shows  them  no
mercy,  but  hangs  them  up  as  he  would  so  many  robbers  or
banditti.  The  crews  of  private  ships  of  war  stand  in  the  same
predicament :  a  commission  from  their  sovereign  or  admiral  t

can  alone,  in  case  they  are  captured,  insure  them  such  treat-
ment as  is  given  to  prisoners  taken  in  regular  warfare.

In  declarations  of  war,  however,  the  ancient  form  is  still  2«2r. Pre-
retained,  by  which  the  subjects  in  general  are  ordered,  not  f "«  ™*^""-
only  to  break  off  all  intercourse  with  the  enemy,  (179)  but  ^*^^ *
also  to  attack  him. Custom  interprets  this  general  order. It
authorizes,  indeed,  and  even  obliges  every  subject,  of  what-
ever rank,  to  secure  the  persons  and  things,  belonging  to  the
enemy,  when  they  fall  into  his  hands  (179);  but  it  does  not
invite  the  subjects  to  undertake  any  offensive  expedition  with-
out a  commission  or  particular  order.

There  are  occasions,  however,  when  the  subjects  may  reason-  i  228.  Whai
ably  suppose  the  sovereign's  will,  and  act  in  consequence  of  private  p*'"-
his  tacit  comntand. Thus,  although  the  operations  of  war  are  *®°?  "Y
by  custom  generally  confined  to  the  troops,  if  the  inhabitants  presuming
of  a  strong  place,  taken  by  the  enemy,  have  not  promised  or  on  the  sove-
sworn  submission  to  him,'  and  should  find  a  favourable  oppor-  reign^a  will,
tunity  of  surprising  the  garrison,  and  recovering  the  place  for
their  sovereign,  they  may  confidently  presume  that  the  prince
will  approve  of  this  spirited  enterprise. And  where  is  the
man  that  shall  dare  to  censure  it  ? It  is  true,  indeed,  that,
if  the  townsmen  miscarry  in  the  attempt,  they  will  experience
very  severe  treatment  from  the  enemy. But  this  does  not
prove  the  enterprise  to  be  unjust,  or  contrary  to  the  laws  of
war.  The  enemy  makes  use  of  his  right,  of  the  right  of  arms,
which  authorizes  him  to  call  in  the  aid  of  terror  to  a  certain
degree,  in  ord^  that  the  subjects  of  the  sovereign  with  whom

(179)  Henco  it  is  iUegal  to  haye  any  State§  y.  Barker,  Paine's C. C.  Rep.

oommeroial  Interconrse  with  an  enemy,  157. } Thus,  Qreat  Britain  permitted

or  even  to  pay  him  a  just  deht,  daring  commercial  intercourse  with  some  of

war. Grotius,  b.  iii.  o.  iv.  J  8;  Byn-  her  plantations,  whilst  under  Capture

kenhoeky  b.  i.  o. iii.; Dr. Phillimore  by  the  French,  because  she  expected

•n  Licenses,  5;  The  Hoop,  1  Rob.  Rep.  to  recover  them  back. See  observa-

198;  Potta  y.  Bell,  8  Term  Rep.  548;  tions  in The  Hoop,  1  Rob.  Rep.  209;

WHhon  y.  Paiieton, 7 Taunt 439;  but  these exceptions are in general

3 Meriy.  R.  469 ;  2  Yes.  k  Bea.  823 ;  carried  on  under  orders  in  council  and

{ Scholefield  y.  Eichelberger,  7  Pet  S.  0.  licenses.— C. }  See  The  William  Pentt^

Rep.  586.} To  this  general  rule  there  8  Wash.  C.  C.  Rep.  4848.}
are  someiimes exceptions. [Th9 U,

516


400  OF  THE RIGHT OF

BOOK  ni. he  is  at  war  may  not  be  willing  to  venture  on  s  ich  bold  under-
CHAP.  ^^-^ takings,  the success  of  which might prove fatal to  Lim.
During  the  last  war,  the  inhabitants  of  Genoa  suddenly  took
up  arms  of  their  own  accord,  and  drove  the  Austrians  from
the  city :  and  the  republic  celebrates  an  annual  commemora-
tion of  that  event  by  which  she  recovered  her  liberty.
{  229. Pri- Persons  fitting  out  private  ships  to  cruise  against  the  enemy
▼ateera. acquire  the  property  of  whatever  captures  they  make,  as  a
[  401  ]  compensation  foi-  their  disbursements,  and  for  the  risks  they
run :  but  they  acquire  it  by  grant  from  the  sovereign,  who
issues  out  commissions  to  them. The  sovereign  allows  them
either  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  capture :  this  entirely  depends
on  the  nature  of  the  contract  he  has  made  with  them.

As  the  subjects  are  not  under  an  obligation  of  scrupulonsly
* weighing  the  justice  of  the  war,  which  indeed  they  have  not
always  an  opportunity  of  being  thoroughly  acquainted  with,
and  respecting  which  they  are  bound,  in  case  of  doubt,  to  rely
on  the  sovereign's  judgment  (§  187), — they  unquestionably
may  with  a  safe  conscience  serve  their  country  by  fitting  out
privateers,  unless  the  war  be  evidently  unjust. But,  on  the
other hand,  it is an  infamous proceeding  on  the  part  of
foreigners,  to  take  out  commissions  from  a  prince,  in  order  to
commit  piratical  depredations  on  a  nation  which  is  perfectly
innocent  with  respect  to  them. The  thirst  of  gold  is  their
only  inducement ;  nor  can  the  commission  they  have  received
efface  the  infamy  of  their  conduct,  though  it  screens  them
from  punishment. Those  alone  are  excusable,  who  thus  assist
a  nation  whose  cause  is  undoubtedly  just,  and  that  has  taken
up  arms  with  no  other  view  than  that  of  defending  herself
from  oppression. They  would  even  deserve  praise  for  their
exertions  in  such  a  cause,  if  the  hatred  of  oppression,  and  the
love  of  justice,  rather  than  the  desire  of  riches,  stimulated
them  to  generous  efforts,  and  induced  them  to  expose  their
lives  or  fortunes  to  the  hazards  of  war.
^  230. Vo- The  noble  view  of  gaining  instruction  in  the  art  of  war,
ittutoera. j^j^^  ^j^^g  acquiring  a  greater  degree  of  ability  to  render  use-
ful services  to  their  country,  has  introduced  the  custom  of
serving  as  volunteers  even  in  foreign  armies ;  and  the  practice
is  undoubtedly  justified  by  the  sublimity  of  the  motive. At
present,  volunteers,  when  taken  by  the  enemy,  are  treated  as
if  they  belonged  to  the  army  in  which  they  fight. Nothing
can  be  more  reasonable :  they  in  fact  join  that  army,  and
unite  with  it  in  supporting  the  same  cause ;  and  it  makes  little
difference  in  the  case,  whether  they  do  this  in  compliance
with  any  obligation,  or  at  the  spontaneous  impulse  of  their
own  free  choice.
1 231.  What Soldiers  can  undertake  nothing  without  the  express  or  tacit
•«)idier8  and  command  of  their  officers. To  obey  and  execute,  is  their
•u  "^»"^" province, — ^not  to  act  at  their  own  discretion :  they  are  only
instruments  in  the  hands  of  their  commanders. Let  it  be

516


PRIVATE PERSONS  IN WAR.  401

remembered  here,  that,  by  a  tacit  order,  I  mean  one  which  is  book  m.
necessarily  included  in  an  express  order,  or  in  the  functions  .,£5fILJLl!.
with  which  a  person  is  intrusted  by  his  superior.  What  is
said  of  soldiers  must  also  in  a  proper  degree  be  understood
of  officers,  and  of  all  who  have  any  subordinate  command.
Wherefore,  with  respect  to  things  which  are  not  intrusted  to
their  charge,  they  may  both  be  considered  as  private  indi-
viduals, who  are  not  to  undertake  any  thing  without  orders.
The  obligation  of  the  military  is  even  more  strict,  as  the
martial  law  expressly  forbids  acting  without  orders ;  and  this
discipline  is  so  necessary  that  it  scarcely  leaves  any  room  for
presumption. In  war,  an enterprise  which  wears a  very  •

advantageous  appearance,  and  promises  almost  certain  success,
may  nevertheless  be  attended  with  fatal  consequences.  It  [  402  ]
would  be  dangerous,  in  such  a  case,  to  leave  the  decision  to  •
the  judgment  of  men  in  subordinate  stations,  who  are  not
acquainted  with  all  the  views  of  their  general,  and  who  do  not
possess  an  equal  degree  of  knowledge  and  experience :  it  is,
therefore  not  to  be  presumed  that  he  intends  to  let  them  act
at  their  own  discretion.  Fighting  without  orders  is  almost
always  considered,  in  a  military  man,  as  fighting  contrary  to
orders,  or  contrary  to  prohibition.  There  is,  therefore,  hardly
«my  case,  except  that  of  self-defence,  in  which  the  soldiers  and
inferior  officers  may  act  without  orders.  In  that  one  case,
the  orders  may  safely  be.  presumed;  or  rather,  the  right  of
self-defence  naturally  belongs  to  every  one,  and  requires  no
permission.  During  the  siege  of  Prague,  in  the  last  war,  a
party  of  French  grenadiers  made  a  sally  without  orders  and
without  officers, — possessed  themselves  of  a  battery,  spiked  a
part  of  the  cannon,  and  brought  away  the  remainder  into  the
city.  The  Roman  severity  would  have  punished  those  men
with  death.  The  famous  example  of  the  consul  Manlius  is
well  known,  who,  notwithstanding  the  victory  gained  by  his
son,  caused  capital  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  him  for
having  engaged  the  enemy  without  orders.*  But  the  differ-
ence of  times  and  manners  obliges  a  general  to  moderate  such
severity.  The  mareschal  Bellisle  publicly  reprimanded  those
brave  grenadiers,  but  secretly  caused  money  to  be  distributed
among  them,  as  a  reward  for  their  courage  and  alacrity.  At
another  famous  siege  in  the  same  war,  that  of  Coni,  the  private
men  of  some  battalions  that  were  stationed  in  the  fosses,
made,  of  their  own  accord,  during  the  absence  of  their  officers,
a  vigorous  sortie,  which  was  attended  with  success.  Baron
Leutrum  was  obliged  to  pardon  their  transgression,  lest  ho
should  damp  an  ardour  on  which  the  safety  of  the  place  en-
tirely depended.  Such  inordinate  impetuosity  should  never-
theless be  checked  as  far  as  possible ;  since  it  may  eventually
be  productive  of  fatal  consequences. Avidius  Gassius  inflicted

•  Tit  Liv.  lib.  viii.  oKp,  viL

2T  617


402  OF  THE RIGHT OF PRIYATB PERSONS  IN  WAR.

BOOK  m. capital  punishment  on  some  officers  of  his  army,  who  Imi

CHAP.  XV.  without  orders,  marched  forth  at  the  head  of  a  handful  of

men,  to  surprise  a  body  of  three  thousand  enemies^  and  had

succeeded  in  cutting  them  to  pieces. This  rigour  he  justified,

by  saying  that  there  might  have  been  an  ambuscade, — dicen^y

evenire  potuisse  ut  essent  insidice,  ^c*

i  232.  Whe- Is  the  state  bound  to  indemnify  individuals  for  the  damages

ther  the ^jjgy  j^g^yg  sustained  in  war  ? We  may  learn  from  Grotius

bouncTto  in-  *^^^  authors  are  divided on  this  question.f The  damages

demnify  the  undcr  Consideration  are  to  be  distinguished  into  two  kinds, —

aubjecw  fop  those  done  by  the  state  itself  or  the  sovereign,  and  those  done

damages \yj  ^\^q  enemy. Of  the  first  kind,  some  are  done  deliberately

war.  (180)*^  ^^^  ^J  ^^7  ^^  precaution,  as,  when  a  field,  a  house,  or  a
garden,  belonging  to  a  private  person,  is  taken  for  the  pur-
pose of  erecting  on  the  spot  a  town  rampart,  or  any  other

[  403  1  piece  of  fortification, — or  when  his  standing  corn  or  his  store-
houses are  destroyed,  to  prevent  their  being  of  use  to  the
jenemy.  Such  damages  are  to  be  made  good  to  the  indiTidual,
who  should  bear  only  his  quota  of  the  los8.(181)  But  there
are  other  damages,  caused  by  inevitable  necessity,  as,  for
instance,  the  destruction  caused  by  the  artillery  in  retaking  a
town  from  the  enemy.  These  are  merely  accidents, — ^they
are  misfortunes  which  chance  deals  out  to  the  proprietors  orf
whom  they  happen  to  fall.  The  sovereign,  indeed,  ought  to
show  an  equitable  regard  for  the  sufferers,  if  the  situation  of
his  affairs  will  admit  of  it :  but  no  auction  lies  against  the  state
for  misfortunes  of  this  nature, — for  losses  which  she  has  occa-
sioned, not  wilfully,  but  through  necessity  and  by  mere  acci-
dent, in  the  exertion  of  her  rights.  The  same  may  be  said
of  damages  caused  by  the  enemy.  All  the  subjects  are  ex-
posed to  such  damages :  and  wo  to  him  on  whom  they  fall !
The  members  of  a  society  may  well  encounter  such  risk  of
property,  since  they  encounter  a  similar  risk  of  life  itself.
Were  the  state  strictly  to  indemnify  all  those  whose  property
is  injured  in  this  manner,  the  public  finances  would  soon  he
exhausted ;  and  every  individual  in  the  state  would  be  obliged
to  contribute  his  share  in  due  proportion, — a  thing  utterly
impracticable.  Besides,  these  indemnifications  would  be  liable
to  a  thousand  abuses,  and  there  would  be  no  end  of  the  par-

T  — ^  -  ■  -

*  Voloatins Gallicanus, quoted by  tain, the regulating act» 50 O. 3^

Grotius,  book  iii.  chap,  xriii.  J  i.  n.  6.  c.  xxzL  was passed. See  diseussionj

(180)  On  the  conclusion  of  the  late  in  Hill  v.  Heardon,  2  Russell's Repu

war  between  Great  Britain  and  FrancOi  608.— C.

it  was  stipulated  that  the  latter  should  f  Lib.  iii.  cap.  zx.  {  riii.

make  compensation  for  the  amount  of  (181)  It  is  legal  to  take  ponesson

the  confiscations of  British  property,  of  these  for  the  benefit  of  the  eommii>

subject to  certain  qualifications ; and  nity,  and  no  action  lies  for  compeasa-

commissioners  were  appointed  by  each  tion, nor is any recoverable, unleei

state to  examine  and  abjudicate  upon  given  by  act  of  parliament. 4  Tens

the  claims,  and  as  regarded  Great  Bri-  Kep^  SS2. — C.

618


OF  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, ETC.  408


CHAP. XV.


ticulars. It  is  therefore  to  be  presumed  that  no  such  thing book  m.
was  ever  intended  by  those  who  united  to  form  a  society.

But  it  is  perfectly  consonant  to  the  duties  of  the  state  and
the  sovereign,  and,  of  course,  perfectly  equitable,  and  even
strictly  just,  to  relieve,  as  far  as  possible,  those  unhappy
sufferers  who  have  been  ruined  by  the  ravages  of  war,  (182)
as  likewise  to  take  care  of  a  family  whose  head  and  support
has  lost  his  life  in  the  service  of  the  state.  There  are  many
debts  which  are  considered  as  sacred  by  the  man  who  knows
his  duty,  although  they  do  not  afford  any  ground  of  action
against  him.*


r  404  1
CHAP.  XVI.  "•  ^

OF VARIOUS CONVENTIONS MADE DURING THE COURSE OF  chap,  xti.

THE  WAR.

WAR  would  become. too  cruel  and  destructive,  were  all §233.
intercourse  between  enemies  absolutely  broken  off. Accord-  '^^^^  *"^
ing  to  the  observation  of  Grotiu8,f  there still  subsists  aQf^armB*^**
friendly  intercourse  in  war,  as  Virgil  j  and  Tacitus§  have  ex-
pressed it. The  occurrences  and  events  of  war  lay  enemies
under  the necessity  of  entering  into  various conventions.
As  we  have  already  treated  in  general  of  the  observance  of
faith  between  enemies,  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  in  this  place
to  prove  the  obligation  of  faithfully  acting  up  to  those  con-
ventions made  in  war :  it  therefore  only  remains  to  explain

(1S2)  See  note  (180),  p.  402.  etates-goneral  adopted  measures  fraught
*  It  is  in  general  the  indispensable  with  consummate  wisdom.  They  pub-
duty  of  every  sovereign  to  adopt  the  lished  an  edict,  in  which,  aft^r  having
most  efficacious  measures  for  the  pro-  described  the  destructive  consequences
tection  of  his  subjects  engaged  in  war,  of  the  Spanish  barbarity,  they  exhorted
in  order  that  they  may  suffer  .by  it  as  the  Flemings  to  attend  to  their  own
little  as  possible,  instead  of  voluntarily  preservation,  and  threatened  to  retaliate
exposing  them  to  greater  evils.  During  on  all  who  should  obey  the  cruel  ordi-
the  wars  in  the  Netherlands,  Philip  the  nance  of  Philip.  By  such  conduct  they
Second  prohibited  the  release  or  ex-  put  an  end  to  the  dreadful  proceedings
change  of  prisoners  of  war.  He  for-  to  which  it  had  given  birth. — ^Edit  A.  D.
bade  the  peasants,  under  pain  of  death,  1797.
to  pay  any  contributions  with  a  view  to  f  Lib.  iii.  cap.  xxi.  J  i.

purchase  an  immunity  from  piUage  and j:  Belli commercia

conflagration; (183) and, under the  Tumns

same  penaltyi  prohibited  the  use of  Sustnlit  ista  prior. — ^^Bn.  x.  532.

safeguards  and  protections. In  oppo-  {  Ann.  lib.  xlv.  cap.  xxxiiL
sition  to  this  barbarous  ordinance,  the


(183)  Our  enactments  against  ran-  o.  72 ;)  Marshall  on  Insurance,  431 ;  but
Boralng  ships  or  property  taken  by  an  exceptions  in  oases  of  extreme  necessity
enemy  are  in  the  same  spirit;  (22  Qeo.  may  be  allowed  by  tiie  court  of  Ad-
2,  c.  25;  43  Geo.  3,  o.  165;  45  Geo.  3^ miralty. Id,  Ibid,

619


404  OF  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, ETC.

BOOK  iiT. the  nature  of  them. Sometimes  it  is agreed to suspend
CHAP.  xYi.  hostilities  for  a  certain  time ;  and,  if  this  convention  be  made
but  for  a  very  short  period,  or  only  regards  some  particular
place,  it  is  called  a  cessation  or  suspension  of  arms. Such
are  those  conventions  made  for  the  purpose  of  burying  the
dead  after  an  assault  or  a  battle,  and  for  a  parley,  or  a  con-
ference between  the  generals  of  the  hostile  armies. If  the
agreement  be  for  a  more  considerable  length  of  time,  and
especially  if  general,  it  is  more  particularly  distinguished  by
the  appellation  of  a  truce. Many  people  use  both  expressions
indiscriminately.
I  234.  Does The.truce  or  suspension  of  arms  does  not  terminate  the
not  termi- ^^r  ;  it  Only  suspends  its  operations.

nate  t  e  ^  truce  is  either  partial  or  general. By  the  former,  bos-

,  935  ^  tilities  are  suspended  only  in  certain  places,  as  between  a
rruoe  is  town  and  the  army  besieging  it.  By  the  latter,  they  are  to
either  pa^-  ccase  generally,  aud  in  all  places,  between  the  belligerent
tiai  or  gene-  powers.  Partial  truces  may  also  admit  of  a  distinction  with
"'' '  respect  to  acts  of  hostility,  or  to  persons ;  that  is  to  say,  the

parties  may  agree  to  abstain  from  certain  acts  of  hostility
during  a  limited  time,  or  two  armies  may  mutually  conclude
a  truce  or  suspension  of  arms  without  regaVd  to  any  particu-
lar place.  •
^  236. Ge- A  general  truce,  made  for  many  years,  differs  from  a  peace
nerai  truce  jn  little  clse  than  in  leaving  the  question  which  was  the  ori-
for  many ginal  ground  of  the  war  still  undecided. When  two  nations
are  weary  of  hostilities,  and  yet  cannot  agree  on  the  point
which  constitutes  the  subject  of  their  dispute,  they  generally
have  recourse  to  this  kind  of  agreement. Thus,  instead  of
peace,  long  truces  only  have  usually  been  made,  between  the
[  405  ]  Christains  and  the  Turks, — ^sometimes  from  a  false  spirit  of
religion ;  at  other  times,  because  neither  party  were  willing
to  acknowledge  the  other  as  lawful  owners  of  their  respective
possessions.
^  237. By It  is  ncccssary  to  the  validity  of  an  agreement,  that  it  be
ivhom  these  made  by  one  who  possesses  competent  powers. Every  thing
ftgreementa  ^qj^q  [j^  ^^j.  [^  done  bv  the  authority  of  the  sovereien,  who

lUiiv  be  con-  cj '

eiuiiod.  alone  has  the  right  both  of  undertaking  the  war,  and  direct-
ing its  operations.  (§  4)  But,  from  the  impossibility  of  exe-
cuting every  thing  by  himself,  he  must  necessarily  communi-
cate part  of  his  power  to  his  ministers  and  officers.  The
question,  therefore,  is,  to  determine  what  are  the  things  of
which  the  sovereign  reserves  the  management  in  his  own
hands,  and  what  those  are  which  he  is  naturally  presumed  to
intrust  to  the  ministers  of  his  will,  to  the  generals  and  other
officers  employed  in  military  operations.  We  have  above
(Book  II.  §  207)  laid  down  and  explained  the  principle  which
is  to  serve  as  a  general  rule  on  this  subject.  If  the  sovereign
has  not  given  any  special  mandate,  the  person  commanding
in  his  name  is  held  to  be  invested  with  all  the  powers  neces*

520


OP  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, BTO.  405

Bary  for  the  reasooable  and  salutary  exercise  of  his  functions,  book  in.
—for  every  thing  which  naturally  follows  from  his  commission,  /^"^p-  ^'^.
Every  thing  beyond  that  is  reserved  to  the  sovereign,  who  is
not  supposed  to  have  delegated  a  greater  portion  of  his  power
than  is  necessary  for  the  good  of  his  affairs.  According  to
this  rule,  a  general  truce  can  only  be  concluded  by  the  sove-
reign himself,  or  by  some  person  on  whom  he  has  expressly
conferred  a  power  for  that  purpose.  For,  it  is  by  no  means
necessary  to  the  success  of  the  war,  that  a  general  should  be
invested  with  such  an  extensive  authority :  it  would  exceed
the  limits  of  his  functions,  which  consist  in  directing  the  mili-
tary operations  in  the  place  where  he  has  the  command,  and
not  in  regulating  the  general  interests  of  the  state.  The
conclusion  of  a  general  truce  is  a  matter  of  so  high  import-
ance, that  the  sovereign  is  always  presumed  to  have  reserved
it  in  his  own  hands.  So  extensive  a  power  suits  only  the
viceroy  or  governor  of  a  distant  country,  for  the  territories
under  him ;  and  even  in  this  case,  if  the  truce  be  for  a  num-
ber of  years,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  the  sovereign's  ratifica-
tion necessary.  The  Roman  consuls,  and  other  commanders,
had  a  power  to  grant  general  truces  for  the  term  of  their
commission  ;  but,  if  that  term  was  considerable,  or  the  truce
made  for  a  longer  time,  it  required  the  ratification  of  the
senate  and  people.  Even  a  partial  truce,  when  for  a  long
time,  seems  also  to  exceed  the  ordinary  powers  of  a  general ;
and  he  can  only  conclude  it  under  a  reservation  of  its  being
ratified  by  the  sovereign  authority.

But,  as  to  partial  truces  for  a  short  period,  it  is  often  ne-
cessary, and  almost  always  proper,  that  the  general  should
have  a  power  to  conclude  them : — it  is  necessary,  when  he  can-
not wait  for  the  sovereign's  consent ;  it  is  proper  on  those
occasions  when  the  truce  can  only  tend  to  spare  the  effusion
of  blood,  and  to  promote  the  mutual  advantage  of  the  con-
tracting parties.  With  such  a  power,  therefore,  the  general
or  commander  in  chief  is  naturally  supposed  to  be  invested.  [  406  ]
Thus,  the  governor  of  a  town,  and  the  general  besieging  it,
may  agree  on  a  cessation  of  arms,  for  the  purpose  of  burying
the  dead,  or  of  coming  to  a  parley :  they  may  even  settle  a
truce  for  some  months,  on  condition  that  the  town,  if  not
relieved  within  that  time,  shall  surrender,  &c.  Conventions
of  this  kind  only  tend  to  mitigate  the  evils  of  war,  and  are
not  likely  to  prove  detrimental  to  any  one, .

All  these  truces  and  suspensions  of  arms  are  concluded  by  g  238. Tho
the  authority  of  the  sovereign,  who  consents  to  some  of  them  sovereign'a
in  his  own  person,  and  to  others  through  the  ministry  of  his  *^^^^^j"
generals  and  officers. His  faith  is  pledged  by  such  agree-  them,
ments,  and  he  is  bound  to  enforce  their  observance.

The  truce  binds  the  contracting  parties  from  the  moment  j  239.  When
of  its  being  concluded,  but  cannot  have  the  force  of  a  law,  ^»  *™c«
with  regard  to  the  subjects  on  both  sides,  till  it  has  been  so-

66  2t2  62L


406  OP  VARIOUS  CONVBNTIONS, ETC.


BOOK  m. lemnly  proclaimed :  and,  as  an  unknown  law  imposes  no  obb-
-gation,  the  truce  does  not  become  binding  on  the  subjecu


CHAP. XVI.


begins  to  bo  jijxiH  duly  notified  to  them. Hence,  if,  before  they  can  have
o  igatory. ^jj^g^ined  certain  information  of  its  being  concluded,  they  com-
mit any  act  contrary  to  it-^any  act  of  hostility — they  are  not
punishable. But,  as the sovereign  is bound  to  fulfil his
promises,  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to  cause  restitution  to  bf
made  of  all  prizes  taken  subsequent  to  the  period  when  the
truce  should  have  commenced. The  subjects  who,  through
ignorance  of  its  existence,  have  failed  to  observe  it,  are  not
obliged  to  offer  an  indemnification,  any  more  than  their  sove-
reign, who  was  unable  to  notify  it  to  them  sooner :  the  non-
observance  of  the  truce,  in  this  case,  is  merely  an  accident,
not  imputable  tu  any  fault  on  his  part  or  on  theirs. A  ship
being  out  at  sea  at  the  time  when  the  truce  is  published,  meets
with  a  ship  belonging  to  the  enemy,  and  sinks  her :  as  there  is  no
guilt  in  this  case,  she  is  not  liable  to  pay  any  damage. If  she
has  made  a  capture  of  the  vessel,  all  the  obligation  she  lif,-s
under  is  to  restore  the  prize,  as  she  must  not  retain  it  in  vio-
lation of  the  truce. But  those  who  should,  through  their  own
fault,  remain  ignorant  of  the  publication  of  the  truce,  would
be  bound  to  repair  any  damage  they  had  caused,  contrary  t<f
its  tenor. The  simple  commission  of  a  fault,  and  especially
of  a  slight  one,  may,  to  a  certain  degree,  be  suffered  to  pass
with  impunity ;  and  it  certainly  does  not  deserve  to  be  pu-
nished with  equal  severity  as  a  premeditated  transgression :
but  it  furnishes  no  plea  against  the  obligation  to  repair  the
damages  accruing. In  order,  as  far  as  possible,  to  obviate
every  difficulty,  it  is  usual  with  sovereigns,  in  their  truces  as
well  as  in  their  treaties  of  peace,  to  assign  different  periods
for  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  according  to  the  situation  and
distance  of  places.
J  240.  Pub- Since  a  truce  cannot  be  obligatory  on  the  subjects  unless
lieation  of known  to  them,  it  must  be  solemnly  published  in  all  the  places
t  e  truce, ^jj^j.^  [^  jg  intended  that  it  should  be  observed.
J  241. Sub- If  any  of  the  subjects,  .whether  military  men  or  private
jecta  con- citizens,  offend  against  the  truce,  this  is  no  violation  of  the
STtruTe*  *  pul>^ic  faith ;  nor  is  the  truce  thereby  broken. But  the  de-
linquents should  be  compelled  to  make  ample  compensation
for  the  damage,  and  severely  punished. Should  their  sove-
[  407  2  reign  refuse  to  do  justice,  on  the  complaints  of  the  party  injured,
he  thereby  becomes  accessory  to  the  trespass,  aud  violate:^
the  truce.
2  242.  Vio- Now,  if  one  of  the  contracting  parties,  or  any  person  by
Ution  of his  order,  or  even  with  his  simple  consent,  commits  any  act
the  truce, contrary  to  the  truce,  it  is  an  injury  to  the  other  contracting
party :  the  truce  is  dissolved ;  and  the  injured  party  is  en-
titled immediately  to  take  up  arms,  not  only  for  the  purpose
of  renewing  the  operations  of  the  war,  but  also  of  avenging
the  recent  injury  offered  to  him.


OP  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, ETC.  407

Sometimes a  penalty on the infractor  of  the  truce is book  m.
reciprocally stipulated; and then  the  truce is  not  imme-


CHAP. XVI.


diately  broken  on  the  first  infraction.  If  the  party  offending  i  243.  sti-
Bubmits  to  the  penalty,  and  repairs  the  damage,  the  truce  P^^^^^n  ^^
still  subsists,  and  the  offended  party  has  nothing  further  to  against  The
claim.  But,  if  an  alternative  has  been  agreed  on,  viz.  that,  infraotor.
in  case  of  an  infraction,  the  delinquent  shall  suffer  a  certain
penalty,  or  the  truce  shall  be  broken,  it  is  the  injured  party
who  has  the  choice  of  insisting  on  the  penalty  or  taking
advantage  of  his  right  to  recommence  hostilities :  for,  if  this
were  left  at  the  option  of  the  infractor,  the  stipulation  of
the  alternative  would  be  nugatory,  since,  by  refusing  to
submit  to  the  penalty  simply  stipulated,  he  would  break  the
compact,  and  thereby  give  the  injured  party  a  right  to  take
up  arms  again.  Besides,  in  cautionary  clauses  of  this
.  kind,  the  alternative  is  not  supposed  to  be  introduced  in
favour  of  him  who  fails  in  his  engagements ;  and  it  would
be  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  reserves  to  himself  the  ad-
vantage of  breaking  them  by  his  infraction  rather  than  un-
dergo the  penalty.  He  might  as  well  break  them  at  once
openly.  The  only  object  of  the  penal  clause  is  to  secure
the  truce  from  being  so  easily  broken ;  and  there  can  be  no
other  reason  for  introducing  it  with  an  alternative,  than  that
of  leaving  to  the  injured  party  a  right,  if  he  thinks  fit,  to
dissolve  a  compact  from  which  the  behaviour  of  the  enemy
shows  him  he  has  little  security  to  expect.

It  is  necessary  that  the  time  of  the  truce  be  accurately  ?  244.  Timt
specified,  in  order  to  prevent  all  doubt  or  dispute  respecting  ^^  *^*  *™^
the  period  of  its  commencement,  and  that  of  its  expiration.
The  French  language,  extremely  clear  and  precise,  for
those  who  know  how  to  use  it  with  propriety,  furnishes
expressions  which  bid  defiance  to  the  most  subtle  chicanery.
The  words  "  inelusiveli/"  and  "  excltisively"  banish  all
ambiguity  which  may  happen  to  be  in  the  convention,  with
regard  to  the  two  terms  of  the  truce — ^its  beginning  and
end.  For  instance,  if  it  be  said  that  ^^  the  truce  shall  last
from  the  first  of  March  inclusively,  until  the  fifteenth  of
April,  also  inclusively,**  there  can  remain  no  doubt ;  whereas,
if  the  words  had  simply  been,  ^'  from  the  first  of  March  until
the  15th  of  April,"  it  might  be  disputed  whether  those  [  408  [)
two  days,  mentioned  as  the  initial  and  final  terms  of  the
truce,  were  comprehended  in  the  treaty  or  not :  and  indeed
authors  are  divided  on  this  question.  As  to  the  former  of
those  two  days,  it  seems,  beyond  all  question,  to  be  com-
prised in  the  truce  :  for,  if  it  be  agreed,  that  there  shall  be  a
truce  from  the  first  of  March,  this  naturally  means  that
hostilities  shall  cease  on  the  first  of  March.  As  to  the
latter  day,  there  is  something  more  of  doubt, — the  ex-
pression ^^untiV*  seeming  to  separate  it  from  the  time  of  the
armistice. However,  as  we  often  say  ^^  untiP'  such  a  day


408  0^  VARIOUS CONVENTIONS,  BTC.

BOOK  III.  "  inclusively j''  the  word  ^^untiV^  is  not  necessarily  excluiiTe,
cBAP.  xvf.  according  to  the  genius  of  the  language.  And  as  a  tra,*
which  spares  the  effusion  of  human  blood,  is  no  douM  &
thing  of  a  favourable  nature,  perhaps  the  safest  way  U  k
include  in  it  the  very  day  of  the  term.  Circumstances  u  aj
also  help  to  ascertain  the  meaning :  but  it  is  very  wrong  n.ij
to  remove  all  ambiguity,  when  it  may  be  done  by  the  addi-
tion of  a  single  word.

In  national  compacts,  the  wo  id  ^^day'^  is  to  be  underst'^i
of  a  natural  day,  since  it  is  in  this  meaning  that  a  day  is  :Le
common  measure  of  time  among  nations.  The  computativQ
by  civil  days  days  owes  its  origin  to  the  civil  law  of  each  natif.  r.
and  varies  in  different  countries.  The  natural  day  begirt
at  sunrise,  and  lasts  twenty-four  hours,  or  one  diurnal  iv
volution  of  the  sun.  If,  therefore,  a  truce  of  a  hunJretl
days  be  agreed  on,  to  begin  on  the  first  of  March,  the  truce
begins  at  sunrise  on  the  first  of  March,  and  is  to  continue  i
hundred  days  of  twenty-four  hours  each.  But,  as  the  ^aIl
does  not  rise  at  the  same  hour  throughout  the  whole  year.
the  parties,  in  order  to  avoid  an  overstrained  nicety,  and  i
degree  of  chicane  unbecoming  that  candour  which  bbonli
prevail  in  conventions  of  this  kind,  ought  certainly  to  ul-
derstand  that  the  truce  expires,  as  it  began,  at  the  rising  jf
the  sun.  The  term  of  a  day  is  meant  from  one  sun  to  :Le
other,  without  quibbling  or  disputing  about  the  differeuit
of  a  few  minutes  in  the  time  of  his  rising.  He  who,  havia^
made  a  truce  for  a  hundred  days,  beginning  on  the  twenty-
first  of  June,  when  the  sun  rises  about  four  o'clock,  shou.!,
on  the  day  the  truce  is  to  end,  take  up  arms  at  the  baue
hour,  and  surprise  his  enemy  before  sunrise,  would  certaiL.T
be  considered  as  guilty  of  a  mean  and  perfidious  chicanery.

If  no  term  has  been  specified  for  the  commencement  of  tk
truce,  the  contracting  parties,  being  bound  by  it  immeJiatii?
on  its  conclusion  (§  239),  ought  to  have  it  published  with(Hit
delay,  in  order  that  it  may  be  punctually  observed :  for.  it
becomes  binding  op  the  .subjects  only  from  the  time  vheD
it  is  duly  published  with  respect  to  them  (Ibid.);  and  i:
begins  to  take  effect  only  from  the  moment  .of  the  first  )ub-
lication,  unless  otherwise  settled  by  the  terms  of  the  agree-
ment.
\  245. Bf- The  general  effect  of  a  truce  is  that  every  act  of  hostility
fects  of  a shall  absolutely  cease. And,  in  order  to  obviate  all  di^puw
truce,  what  respecting  the  acts  which  may  be  termed  hostile,  the  general
or  notTdur-  ^^^  ^^'  *^*''*»  during  the  truce,  each  party  may,  within  hi§
ing  ito  con-  own  territories,  and  in  the  places  where  he  is  master,  do
tinuance. '\rhatever  he  would  have  a  right  to  do  in  time  of  profound
1st  Rule :—  peace. Thus,  a  truce  does  not  deprive  a  sovereign  of  liie
may  dT^  liberty  of  levying  soldiers,  assembling  an  army  in  his  ovu
br*me  what  dominions,  marching  troops  within the country,  and  eTeo
they  hare  a  calling  in  auxiliaries,  or  repairing  the  fortifications  of  a  towu


or  VABIOTTS  CONVENTIONS, ETC.  409

ifhich  is  not  actually  besieged. As  he  has  a  right  to  do  all book  m.
these  things  in  time  of  peace,  the  truce  does  not  tie  up  his  ^^^^'  ^^'^
hands. Can  it  be  supposed  that,  by  such  a  compact,  he  meant  f iK*;^  to  do
to  debar  himself  from  executing  things  which  the  continuation  ^^  *^™®  ^'
of  hostilities  could  not  prevent  him  from  doing  ?

But  to  take  advantage  of  the  cessation  of  arms  in  order  to  §  246. 2d
execute  without  danger  certain  things  which  are  prejudicial  ^^^^  :—Not
to  the  enemy,  and  which  could  not  have  been  safely  under-  ^  *^®  ***'
taken  during  the  continuance  of  hostilities,  is  circumventing  ^"truce^in
and  deceiving  the  enemy  with  whom  the  compact  has  been  doing  what
made :  it  is  a  breach  of  the  truce. By  this  second  general  hoatiiitiea
rule  we  may  solve  several  particular  cases.  "^^^^^  J*T®

The  truce  concluded  between  the  governor  of  a  town  ^^^^^lll^  p
the  general  besieging  it,  deprives  both  of  the  liberty  of  con-  fngtance,  ^'
tinuing  their  works. With  regard  to  the  latter,  this  is  mani-  continuing
fest, — his  works  being  acts  of  hostility. But  neither  can  the  the  works
governor,  on  his  part,  avail  himself  of  the  armistice,  for  the  ^^  *  **^^f '
purpose  of  repairing  the  breaches  or  erecting  new  fortifica-  brJa/heT"*
tions. The  artillery  of  the  besiegers  does  not  allow  him  to
carry  on  such  works  with  impunity  during  the  continuance  of
hostilities :  it  would  therefore  be  detrimental  to  them  that  he
should  employ  the  truce  in  this  manner :  and  they  are  under
no  obligation  of  submitting  to  be  so  far  imposed  upon :  they
will  with  good  reason  consider  such  an  attempt  as  an  infrac-
tion of  the  truce.  But  the  suspension  of  arms  does  not  hinder
the  governor  from  continuing  within  his  town  such  works  as
were  not  liable  to  be  impeded  by  the  attacks  or  fire  of  the
enemy. At  the  last  siege  of  Tournay,  after  the  surrender  of
the  town,  an  armistice  was  agreed  on ;  during  the  continuance
of  which,  the  governor  permitted  the  French  to  make  all  the
necessary  preparations  for  attacking  the  citadel,  to  carry  on
their  works,  and  erect  their  batteries, — because  the  governor,
on  his  part,  was  in  the  mean  time  busily  employed  within,  in
clearing  away  the  rubbish  with  which  the  blowing  up  of  a  ma- .
gazine  had  filled  the  citadel,  and  was  erecting  batteries  on  the
ramparts. But  all  this  he  might  luive  performed  with  little
or  no  danger,  even  if  the  operations  of  the  siege  had  com-
menced ;  wherea»  the  French  could  not  have  carried  on  their
works  with  such  expedition,  or  made  their  approaches  and
erected  their  batteries  without  losing  a  great  number  of  men.
There  was  therefore  no  equality  in  the  case ;  and,  on  that
footing,  the  truce  was  entirely  in  favour  of  the  besiegers :  and,
in  consequence  of  it,  the  capture  of  the  citadel  took  place
sooner,  probably,  by  a  fortnight,  than  it  would  otherwise  have
happened.

If  the  truce  be  concluded  either  for  the  purpose  of  settling  §  248. or
the  terms  of  the  capitulation  or  of  waiting  for  the  orders  of  introdocing
the  respective  sovereigns,  the  besieged  governor  cannot  make  »^cconr».
use  of  it  as  a  convenient  opportunity  to  introduce  succours  or
ammunition  into  the  town :  for,  this  would  be  taking  an  undue


410  OP  VARIOUS CONVENTIONS, ETC.

BOOK  m. advantage  of  the  armistice  for  the  purpose  of  deceiving  the
CHAP.  xYi.  ^Qgijjy — ^  conduct  which  is inconsistent  with  candour  and
honesty. The  spirit  of  such  a  compact  evidently  inaporta
that  all  things  shall  remain  as  they  were  at  the  moment  of  its
conclusion.
}  249. Dis- But  this  is  not  to  be  extended  to  a  suspension  of  arms
.  ^  *  agreed  on  for  some  particular  circumstance,  as,  for  instance,
f^^^ burying  the  dead. In  this  case,  the  truce  is  to  be  interpreted
with  a  view  to  its  immediate  object. Accordingly,  the  firing
ceases,  either  in  all  quarters,  or  only  in  a  single  point  of
attack,  pursuant  to  agreement,  that  each  party  may  freely
carry  off  their  dead :  and  during  this  intermission  of  the  cin-
nonade,  it  is  not  allowable  to  carry  on  any  works  which  the
firing  would  have  impeded. This  would  be  taking  an  undne
advantage  of  the  armistice,  and  consequently  a  violation  of
it. But  it  is  perfectly  justifiable  in the governor,  during
such  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  silently  to  introduce  a  reinforce-
ment in  some  quarter  remote  from  the  point  of  attack. If  the
besieger,  lulled  by  such  an  armistice,  abates  in  his  vigilance,
he  must  abide  the  consequences. The  armistice  of  itself  does
not  facilitate  the  entrance  of  that  reinforcement.
;  250. Re- Likewise,  if  an  army  in  a  bad  position  proposes  and  con-
troat  of  Kn cludcs  an  armisticc  for  the  purpose  of  burying  the  dead  aft»
asuapen""^^  battle,  it  Cannot  pretend,  during  the  suspension  of  arms,  ro
lioD  of  ho8- extricate  itself  from its disadvantageous  situation,  and  to
tiiitiea. march  off  unmolested,  in  sight  of  the  enemy. This  would  be
availing  itself  of  the  compact  in  order  to  effect  a  purpose
which  it  could  not  otherwise  .have  accomplished. This  would
be  laying  a  snare :  and  conventions  must  not  be  converte*!
into  snares. The  enemy,  therefore,  may  justly  obstruct  the
motions  of  that  army  the  moment  it  attempts  to  quit  its  sta-
tion :  but,  if  it  silently  files  off  in  the  rear,  and  thus  reaches
a  safer  position,  it  will  not  be  guilty  of  a  breach  of  faith ;
since  nothing  more  is  implied  by  a  suspension  of  arms  for  the
burial  of  the  dead,  than  that  neither  party  shall  attack  the
other  whilst  this office of  humanity is performing. The
enemy,  therefore,  can  only  blame  his  own  remissness : — ^he
ought  to  have  stipulated,  that,  during  the  cessation  of  hosti-
lities, neither  party  should  quit  their  post :  or  it  was  his  bu-
siness vigilantly  to  watch  the  motions  of  the  hostile  army:
and  on  perceiving  their  design,  he  was  at  liberty  to  oppose  it.
It  is  a  very  justifiable  stratagem  to  propose  a  cessation  of
arms  for  a  particular  object,  with  a  view  of  lulling  the  enemy's
vigilance,  and  covering  a  design  of  retreating.

But,  if  the  truce  be  not  made  for  any  particular  object
alone,  we  cannot  honourably  avail  ourselves  of  it  in  order  to
gain  an  advantage,  as,  for  instance,  to  secure  an  important
post,  or  to  advance  into  the  enemy's  country.  The  latter
step  would  indeed  be  a  violation  of  the  truce ;  for,  every  advance
into  the  enemy's  country  is  an  act  of  hostility.

526


OF  VARIOUS COinrENTIONS, BTC.  411

Now,  as  a  truce  suspends  hostilities  without  putting  an  end book  m.
to  the  war,  every  thing  must,  during  the  continuance  of  the  ^^^^'  ^^^
truce,  be  suffered  to  remain  in  its  existing  state,  in  all  places  ^  251. 34
of  which  the  possession  is  contested :  nor  is  it  lawful,  in  such  Rule :— No-
places, to  attempt  any  thing  to  the  prejudice  of  the  enemy.  *^J°*  ^J®
This  is  a  third  general  rule.  f^  rn^tested

When  the  enemy  withdraws  his  troops  from  a  place,  and  places,  but
absolutely  quits  it,  his  conduct  suflBciently  shows  that  he  does  every  thing
not  intend  to  occupy  it  any  longer :  and  in  this  case  we  may  ^  ^®  ^®^  ■■
lawfully  take  possession  of  it  during  the  truce. But  if,  by
any  indication,  it  appears  that  a  post,  an  open  town,  or  a  §  2^2.  Piaoei
village,  IS  not  relinquished  by  the  enemy,  and  that,  though  ^g^te^cte^b
he  neglects  to  keep  it  guarded,  he  still  maintains  his  rights  i^q  enemy,
and  claims  to  it,  the  truce  forbids  us  to  seize  upon  it. To
take  away  from  the  enemy  what  he  is  disposed  to  retain,  is
an  act  of  hostility.

It  is  also  an  undoubted  act  of  hostility  to  receive  towns  or  j  253.  Sub-
provinces  inclined  to  withdraw  from  the  sovereignty  of  the  jecte  in-
enemy,  and  give  themselves  up  to  us. We  therefore  cannot  *^^^°®^  ^,  ^
receive  them  during  the  continuance  of  the  truce,  which  wholly  ^^^^"5^^
suspends  all  hostile  proceedings.  not  to  be  r«-

Far  more  unlawful  it  is,  during  that  period,  to  instigate  the  ceived  dnr-
subjects  of  the  enemy  to  revolt,  or  to  tamper  with  the  fidelity  J"^  ^®
of  his  governors  and  garrisons. These  are  not  only  hostile *
proceedings,  but  odious  acts  of  hostility  (§  180). As  to  de- 1^^^^  "'^"^
sorters  and  fugitives,  they  may  be  received  during  the  truce,  solicited  to
since  they  are  received  even  in  time  of  peace,  when  there  is  treason,
no  treaty  to  the  contrary. And,  even  if  such  a  treaty  did
exist,  its  effect  is  annulled,  or  at  least  suspended,  by  the  war
which  has  since  taken  place.

To  seize  persons  or  things  belonging  to  the  enemy,  when  g  255. Per-
he  "has  not,  by  any  particular  fault  on  his  side,  afforded  us  «*^^«  ^^  ^^'
grounds  for  such  seizure,  is  an  act  of  hostility,  and  conse-  ^^  not^uT
quently  not  allowable  during  a  truce.  be  eeiied

Since  the  right  of  postliminium  is  founded  only  on  the  during  the
state  of  war  (Chap.  XIV.  of  this  Book),  it  cannot  take  effect  *^<»«-
during  the  truce,  which  suspends  all  the  acts  of  war,  and  §  256.  Right
leaves  everything  in  its  existing  state  (§  251). Even  pj  i- of  postiimi-
soners  cannot  during  that  season  withdraw  from  the  power  ^^^0©?"*'
of  the  enemy,  in  order  to  recover  their  former  condition :  for
the  enemy  has  a  right  to  detain  them  while  the  war  continues ;
and  it  is  only  on  its  conclusion  that  his  right  over  their  liberty
expires  (§  148)i

During  the  truce,  especially  if  made  for  a  long  period,  it  ?  257. In-
is  naturally  allowable  for  enemies  to  pass  and  repass  to  and  *«j"«®°"«
fram  each  other's  country,  in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  allowed  j^^ng  %
in  time  of  peace,  since  all  hostilities  are  now  suspended. But  Udce.
each  of  the  sovereigns  is  at  liberty,  as  he  would  be  in  time  of
peace,  to  adopt  every  precaution  which  may  be  necessary  to
jv.  event  this  intercourse  from  becoming  prejudicial  to  him.

127


412  OF  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, ETC,

BOOK  m. Ho  has  just  grounds  of  suspicion  against  people  with  wbom
CHAP.  XVI.  j^g  jg  g^Qj^  ^^  recommence  hostilities. H**  may  even  declare^

at  the  time  of  making  the  truce,  that  he  will  admit  none  of
the  enemy  into  any  place  under  his  jurisdiction.
1 258.  Per-  Those  who,  having  entered  the  enemy's  territories  during
sons  de-  the  trucc,  are  detained  there  by  sickness  or  any  other  unsur-
tained  by  mountable  obstacle,  and  thus  happen  to  remain  in  the  country
^°*"''"  after  the  expiration  of  the  armistice,  may  in  strict  justice  be
obstacles  ^^^P^  prisoners :  it  is  an  accident  which  they  might  have  fore-
after  theW  seen,  and  to  which  they  have  of  their  own  accord  expost-d
piration  of  themselves ;  but  humanity  and  generosity  commonly  require
the  truoe. ^y^^^  ^^lej  should  be  aUowcd  a  sufficient  term  for  their  de-

' parture.

§  259. Par- If  the  articles  of  truce  contain  any  conditions  either  more

ticuiarcon-  extensive  or  more  narrowly  restrictive  than  what  we  havt-

ditions  add-  j^^^^  j^^j^  down,  the  transaction  becomes  a  particular  conven-

'  tion. It  is  obligatory  on  the  contracting  parties,  who are

bound  to  observe  what  they  have  promised  in  due  form  : and

the obligations thence resulting constitute  a  conventiouai

right,  the  detail  of  which  is  foreign  to  the  plan  of  this  work.

;  260. At As  the  truce  only  suspends  the  effects  of  war  (§  233),  the

the  expira-  moment  it  expires,  hostilities  may  be  renewed  without  any

tion  of  the fresh  declaration  of  war :  for  every  one  previously  knows  that

truce,  t  e £.^^^  ^^^^  instant  the  war  will  resume  its  course; and  the

newed  with-  reasons  for  the  necessity  of  a  declaration  are  not  applicable

out  any  tO  this  CaSC  (§  51).

ft-esh  dccia-  'Q^^  j^  truce  of  many  years  very  much  resembles  a  peace,
"**®°'  and  only  differs  from  it  in  leaving  the  subject  of  the  war  still
undecided.  *  Now,  as  a  considerable  lapse  of  time  may  have
effected  a  material  alteration  in  the  circumstances  and  dis-
positions of  both  the  parties, — the  love  of  peace,  so  becoming
in  sovereigns,  the  care  they  should  take  to  spare  their  sub-
jects' blood,  and  even  that  of  her  enemies, — these  dispotsitions,
I  say,  seem  to  require  that  princes  should  not  take  up  arms
again  at  the  expiration  of  a  truce  in  which  all  military  pre-
paratives had  been  totally  laid  aside  and  forgotten,  without
making  some  declaration  which  may  invite  the  enemy  to  pre-
vent the  effusion  of  blood.  The  Romans  have  given  us  an
example  of  this  commendable  modjration.  They  had  only
made  a  truce  with  the  city  of  Veii;  and  the  enemy  even
renewed  hostilities  before  the  stipulated  time  was  elapsetL
Nevertheless,  at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  the  college  of  the
fcciales  gave  it  as  their  ^opinion  that  the  Romans  should  send
to  make  a  formal  demand  of  satisfaction,  previous  to  their
taking  up  arms  again.*
J  261.  Ca-  The  capitulations  on  the  surrender  of  towns  are  among
pitaifttionsj  ^j^^  principal  conventions  made  between  enemies  during  the
whom  they  course  of  War. They  are  usually  settled  between  the  general

may  be  con- "^

eluded.  *  Tit.  Liv.  lib.  iv.  cap.  30.

638


OP  VABIOUS CONVENTIONS, ETC.  412

of  the  besieging  army  and  the  governor  of  the  besieeed  town, *<>"*  '"•

•  •  CHAP XT1>

both  acting  in  virtue  of  the  authority  annexed  to  their  respec '■

tive  posts  or  commissions.

We  have  elsewhere  (Book  11.  Ch.  XIV.)  laid  down  the
principles  of  that  authority  which  is  vested  in  the  subordinate
powers,  together  with  general  rules  to  aid  in  forming  a  deci-  [  413  ]
sion  respecting  it.  All  this  has  recently  been  recapitulated
in  a  few  words,  and  particularly  applied  to  generals  and  other
military  commanders  in  chief  (§  237).  Since  the  general  of
an  army,  and  the  governor  of  a  town,  must  naturally  be
invested  with  all  the  powers  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  their
respective  functions,  we  have  a  right  to  presume  that  they
possess  those  powers :  and  that  of  concluding  a  capitulation
is  certainly  one  of  the  number,  especially  when  they  cannot
wait  for  the  sovereign's  order.  A  treaty  made  by  them  on
that  subject  is  therefore  valid,  and  binds  the  sovereigns  in
whose  name  and  by.  whose  authority  the  respective  com-
manders have  acted.

But  let  it  be  observed,  that,  if  those  officers  do  not  mean  ?  2«2.
to  exceed  their  powers,  they  should  scrupulously  confine  ^^*"®f"
themselves  within  the  limits  of  their  functions,  and  forbear  to  ^°^*°**  "
meddle  with  things  which  have  not  been  committed  to  their
charge.  In  the  attack  and  the  defence,  in  the  capture  or  the
surrender  of  a  town,  the  possession  alone  is  the  point  in  ques-
tion, and  not  the  property  and  right :  the  fate  of  the  garrison
is  also  involved  in  the  transaction.  Accordingly,  the  com-
manders may  come  to  an  agreement  respecting  the  manner
in  which  the  capitulating  town  shall  be  possessed :  the  besieg-
ing general  may  promise  that  the  inhabitants  shall  be  spared,
and  permitted*  to  enjoy  their  religion,  franchises,  and  privi-
leges :  and,  as  to  the  garrison,  he  may  allow  them  to  march
out  with  their  arms  and  baggage,  with  all  the  honours  of
war, — to  be  escorted  and  conducted  to  a  place  of  safety,  &c.
The  governor  of  the  town  may  deliver  it  up  at  discretion,  if
reduced  to  that  extremity  by  the  situation  of  affairs :  he  may
surrender  himself  and  his  garrison  prisoners  of  war,  or  engage,
that,  for  a  stipulated  time,  or  even  to  the  end  of  the  war,  they
shall  not  carry  arms  against  the  same  enemy,  or  against  his
allies :  and  the  governor's  promise  is  valid  and  obligatory  on
til  under  his  command,  who  are  bound  to  obey  him  while  he
keeps  within  the  limits  of  his  functions  (§  23).

But,  should  the  besieging  general  take  on  him  to  promise
that  his  sovereign  shall  never  annex  the  conquered  town  to
his  own  dominions,  or  shall,  after  a  certain  time,  be  obliged
to  restore  it,  he  would  exceed  the  bounds  of  his  authority,
in  entering  into  a  contract  resj-ecting  matters  which  are  not
intrusted  to  his  management.  And  the  like  may  be  said  of
a  governor  who  in  the  capitulation  should  proceed  to  such
lengths  as  for  ever  to  alienate  the  town  which  he  commands,
and  to  deprive  his  sovereign  of  the  right  to  retake  it, — or

67  2U  629


418  OS  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS,  ETC.

BOOK  m.  -who  should  promise  that  his  garrison  shall  never  cany  arms,
CHAP.  XVI.  Tint  even  in  another  war.  His  functions  do  not  give  him  so
extensive  a  power.  If,  therefore,  in  the  conferences  for  a
capitulation,  either  of  the  hostile  commanders  should  insist
on  conditions  which  the  other  does  not  think  himself  em-
powered to  grant,  they  have  still  one  expedient  left,  which  is,
to  agree  to  an  armistice,  during  which  every  thing  shall  con-
[  414  ]  tinue  in  its  present  state,  until  they  have  received  orders  from

higher  authority.
;  263. Ob- At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  we  have  given  the  reasons
Mr\ranco  of  ^}iy  ^e  thought  it  Unnecessary  to  prove  in  this  place  that  all
capituia- ^Y^QgQ  conventions  made  during  the  course  of  the  war,  are  to
ite  utuity. ^®  inviolably  adhered  to. We  shall  therefore  only  observe,
with  respect  to  capitulations  in  particular,  that,  as  it  is  unjas>t
and  scandalous  to  violate  them,  so  the  consequences  of  such
an  act  of  perfidy  often  prove  detrimental  to  the  party  who
has  been  guilty  of  it. What  confidence  can  thenceforward
be  placed  in  him  ? The  towns  which  he  attacks  will  endure
the  most  dreadful  extremities,  rather  than  place  any  depend-
ence on  his  word. .  He  strengthens  his  enemies  by  compelling
them  to  make  a  desperate  defence  ;  and  every  siege  that  Le
is  obliged  to  undertake  will  become  terrible. On  the  odh-
trary,  fidelity  attracts  confidence  and  affection ;  it  facilitates
enterprises,  removes  obstacles,  and  paves  the  way  to  glorious
successes. Of  this,  history  furnishes  us  a  fine  example  in
the  conduct  of  George  Baste,  general  of  the  imperialists  :n
1602,  against  Battery  and  the  Turks. The  insurgents  of
Battery's  party  having  gained  possession  of  Bistrith,  other
wise  called  Nissa,  Baste  recovered  the  town  by  a  capitulation,
which  in  his  absence  was  violated  by  some  German  soldiers .
but,  being  informed  of  the  transaction  on  his  return,  he  imme
diately  hanged  up  all  the  soldiers  concerned,  and  out  of  his
own  purse  paid  the  inhabitants  all  the  damages  they  had  sus-
tained. This action  had so powerful  an  influence  on  the
minds  of  the  rebels,  that  they  all  submitted  to  the  emperor,
without  demanding  any  other  surety  than  the  word  of  Genera!
Baste.*
{ 2W. Pro- Individuals,  whether  belonging  to  the  army  or not,  who
miaes  made  happen  singly  to  fall  in  with  the  enemy,  are,  by  the  urgent
to  the  ene- necessity  of  the  circumstance,  left  to  their  own  discretion,  and
dividuiOB. °^8,y,  so  far  as  concerns  their  own  persons,  do  every  thini^
which  a  commander  might  do  with  respect  to  himself  and  the
troops  under  his  command. If,  therefore,  in  consequence  of
the  situation  in  which  they  are  involved,  they  make  any  pro
mise,  such  promise  (provided  it  do  not  extend  to  matters  which
can  never  lie  within  the  sphere  of  a  private  individual)  is  raii^i
and  obligatory,  as  being  made  with  competent  powers, i^or,
when  a  subject  can  neither  receive  his  sovereign's  ordei  s  nv^r


*  Sullj's  Memoirs,  bj  M.  de  TBolase,  roL  ir.  p.  179.
680


OP  VARIOUS  CONVENTIONS, ETC.  414

iMijoy  his  protection,  he  assumes  his  natural  rights,  and  is  to  book  m.
provide  for  his  own  safety  by  any  just  and  honourable  means  SEtlj-l^h
in  his  power.  (184)  Hence,  if  that  individual  has  promised
a  sum  for  his  ransom^  the  sovereign,  so  far  from  having  a
power  to  discharge  him  from  his  promise,  should  oblige  him
to  fulfil  it.  The  good  of  the  state  requires  that  faith  should
be  kept  on  such  occasions,  and  that  subjects  should  have  this
mode  of  saving  their  lives  or  recovering  their  liberty.  (186)

Thus,  a  prisoner  who  is  released  on  his  parole,  is  bound  to  [  415  ]
observe  it  with  scrupulous  punctuality ;  nor  has  the  sovereign
a  right  to  oppose  such  observance  of  his  engagement :  for,
nad  not  the  prisoner  thus  given  his  parole,  he  would  not  have
been  released.

Thus,  also,  the  country  people,  the  inhabitants  of  villages  *
\>T  defenceless towns,  are  bound  to  pay  the  contributions


(184)  In  general,  aU  contracts  in  fa-  (18^)  See  the  same  principle  and
vour  of  alien  enemies  are,  in  Great  reasoning,  ante,  |  174,  p.  371-2.  This
Britain,  void,  both  at  law  and  in  equity ;  doctrine,  as  to  rofttom,  and  ransom-biUs,
(  Williamson  v.  PaUertony  7  Taunton's  is  recognised  aa  part  of  the  law  of  na-
Rep.  439,  1  J.  B.  Moore,  333,  ^.  C;  tions,  in  4  Bla.  Com.  67;  1  Chitty's
2  Ves.  k  B.  332  ,*  anU,  321,  n.  (a),  ) ;  Com.  L.,  32,  428.  But  the  ransoming
unless  the  enemy  come  into  this  conn-  of  any  ships,  or  merchandise  on  board
try  9Hh  aalvo  wmduetu,  or  liye  here  by  the  same,  and  taken  by  an  enemy  of
the  king's  license;  (Cowp.  163;  6  Term  Qreat  Britain,  is  .absolutely  prohibited
Rep.  23 ;  2  Yes.  A  Beam.  332.)  And  by  the  English  statutes,  (22  Qeo.  3,  o.
a  bill  drawn  abroad  by  an  alien  enemy  25;  43  Geo.  3,  c.  150;  45  Geo.  3,  c.
on  a  British  subject  here,  and  endorsed  72 ;)  except  in  cases  of  extreme  neces-
during  war  to  a  British  subject  volun-  eity,  continuing  to  be  aUowed  by  the
tarily  resident  in  the  hostile  country.  Court  of  Admiralty;  and  all  contracts
cannot  be  enforced  by  the  latter  after  for  ransom,  contrary  to  those  statutes,
peace  has  been  restored,  because  it  was  are  declared  void,  and  subjected  to  a
illegal  in  its  concoction ;  (  Williamson  y.  penalty  of  £500.  See  MarshnU  on  In-
Patteraony  ubi  supra;  3  Bos.  k  Pul.  surances,  431.  These  ransom  acts  are
113 ;  3  Maule  A  SeL  533.)  But,  upon  to  be  considered  as  remedial  laws,  and
the  principle  above  laid  down  by  Vat-  must  be  construed  liberally  to  meet  the
tel,  ii  was  decided  that  where  two  mischief,  ffavelock  v.  Rockwood,  8  Terir
British  subjects  were  declared  prisoners  Rep.  277 :  Anthon  v.  Fisher,  2  Dougl.
in  France,  and  one  of  them  drew  a  bill  649,  n. ;  Woodward  v.  Larkins,  3  Esp.
in  favour  of  the  other  on  a  third  British  R.  266.  And  see  decisions,  Corme  v.
subject,  resident  in  England,  and  such  Blackbwme,  2  Dougl.  641 ;  Webb  v.
payee  endorsed  the  same  in  France  to  Brooke,  3  Taunt.  6 ;  Teats  v.  Hali,  and
an  alien  enemy — it  was  held  that  the  Kelly  v.  Grant,  1  Term  Rep.  73,  76.
transaction  was  legal,  and  that  the  And  where  the  master  of  a  British  ship,
alien's  right  of  action  was  only  •!<•-  captured  by  an  American,  induced  the
pended  during  the  war;  and  that,  on  latter  to  release  the  vessel,  on  the  for-
the  return  of  peace,  he  might  recover  mer  drawing  a  biU  on  England  for
the  amount  from  the  acceptor ;  for,  £1000,  by  way  of  ransom,  and  the  pay-
otherwise,  such  persons  would  sustain  ment  of  which  he  countermanded  in
great  privations  during  their  detention :  time,  he  was  even  aUowed  to  recover
aiid,  for  the  same  reason,  it  is  no  ob-  from  his  owners  compensation,  in  the
jection  to  an  action  on  such  biU,  that  nature  of  salvage,  for  his  services —
it  is  brought  as  to  part  in  trust  for  an  morally  speaking,  constituting  a  per-
alien  enemy.  Antoine  v.  Moorshead,  6  fidious  breach  of  faith.  Ship  London,
Taunt  237,  447,  1  Marsh.  Rep.  558,  S.  2  Dodson's  Rep.  74.— C.
C.  Dar.bug  v.  Moorshead,  6  Taunt  332.
— C.

631


415  OF  SAFB-CONDUCTS


CHAP. XVI.


BOOK  m. which  they  have  promised  in  order  to  save  themselves  from
pillage.  (186)

Nay,  more,  a  subject  would  even  have  a  right  to  renounce
his  country,  if  the  enemy,  being  master  of  his  person,  refused
to  spare  his  life  on  any  other  condition:  for,  when  once  the
society  to  which  he  belongs  is  unable  to  protect  and  defend
him,  he  resumes  his  natural  rights.  And  besides,  should  he
obstinately  refuse  compliance,  what  advantage  would  the
state  derive  from  his  death  ?  Undoubtedly,  while  any  hope
remains,  while  we  have  yet  any  means  of  serving  our  countrv,
it  is  our  duty  to  expose  ourselves  and  to  brave  every  danger
for  her  sake.  I  here  suppose  that  we  have  no  alternative  but
that  of  renouncing  our  country,  or  perishing  without  any  ad-
vantage to  her.  If  by  our  death  we  can  serve  her,  it  is  noble
to  imitate  the  heroic  generosity  of  the  Decii.  But  an  engage-
ment to  serve  against  our  country,  were  it  the  only  means  of
saving  our  life,  is  dishonourable ;  and  a  man  of  spirit  would
submit  to  a  thousand  deaths,  rather  than  make  so  disgraceful
a  promise.

If  a  soldier,  meeting  an  enemy  in  a  by-place,  makes  him
prisoner,  but  promises  him  his  life  or  liberty  on  condition  of
his  paying  a  certain  ransom,  this  agreement  is  to  be  respected
by  the  superiors:  for,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  soldier.
left  entirely  to  himself  on  that  occasion,  has  in  any  particular
exceeded  his  powers.  He  might,  on^the  other  hand,  have
thought  it  imprudent  to  attack  that  enemy,  and,  under  that
idea,  have  suffered  him  to  escape.  Under  the  direction  of  hb
superiors,  he  is  bound  to  obey :  when  alone,  he  is  left  to  his
own  discretion.  Procopius  relates  the  adventure  of  two  sol-
diers, the  one  a  Goth  and  the  other  a  Roman,  who,  being
fallen  together  into  a  pit,  mutually  promised  each  other  that
their  lives  should  be  spared :  and  this  agreement  was  approved
by  the  Goths.*


[  416  ]  CHAP.  XVIL

CM  A  p.  XTn. OP  SAFE-CONDUCTS  AND PASSPORTS, — ^WITH QUESTIONS ON

THE BANSOM OF PRISONERS OF  WAR.  (187)

{  265.  Na-  SAFE-CONDUCTS  and  passports  are  a  kind  of  privilege
tore  of  safe-  insuring  safety  to  persons  in  passing  and  repassing,  or  to  cer-
and  paM- **^^  things  during  their  conveyance  from  one  place  to  another.


ports*


(186)  Same  pointy  ante,  403,  in  note. (187)  As  to  the^e, and Meditem-

— C.  nean  passes and  Uconses in general,

*  Hist  Goth.  lib.  ii.  cap.  i.  qnoted  by  see  1  Chitty's  Commercial  Law,  49S—

Puffcndorf,  book  viii.  chap.  viL  14.  513. — C.
632


AND PASSPORTS, ETC.  4H

From  the  usage  and  genius  of  the  {French)  language,  it  ap-  book  in.
pears  that  the  term  '^ passport''  is  used,  on  ordinary  occasions,  i^^Ii^T":
when  speaking  of  persons  who  lie  under  no  particular  excep-
tion as  to  passing  and  repassing  in  safety,  and  to  whom  it  is
only  granted  for  greater  security,  and  in  order  to  prevent  all
debate,  or  to  exempt  them  from  some  general  prohibition.
A  safe-conduct  is  given  to  those  who  otherwise  could  not  safely
pas8  through  the  places  where  he  who  grants  it  is  master, —
as,  for  instance,  to  a  person  charged  with  some  misdemeanour,
or  to  an  enemy. It  is  of  the  latter  that  we  are  here  to  treat.

All  safe-conducts,  like  every  other  act  of  supreme  com-  ?  266.  Prom
mand,  emanate  from  the  sovereign  authority  :  but  the  prince  ^^**  *^-
may  delegate  to  his  officers  the  power  of  granting  safe-con-  ^^^,^0^^^
ducts ;  and  they  are  invested  with  that  power  either  by  an
express  commission,  or  by  a  natural  consequence  of  the  na-
ture of  their  functions. A  general  of  an  army,  from  the  very
nature  of  his  post,  can  grant  safe-conducts :  and,  as  they  are
derived,  though  mediately,  from  the  sovereign  authority,  the
other  generals  or  officers  of  the  same  prince  are  bound  to
respect  them.

The  person  named  in  the  safe-conduct  cannot  transfer  his  j  267. Kot
privilege  to  another :  for  he  does  not  know  whether  it  be  a  transferable
matter  of  indiflFerence  to  the  grantor  of  the  safe-conduct  that  ^''°™  °°®
another  person  should  use  it  in  his  stead :  and,  so  far  from  an"h«.
presuming  that  to  be  the  case,  he  is  even  bound  to  presume
the  contrary,  oh  account  of  the  abuses  which  might  thence
result ;  and  he  cannot  assume  to  himself  any  further  privilege
than  was  intended  for  him. If  the  safe-conduct  is  granted,
not  for  persons,  but  for  certain  effects,  those  effects  may  be
removed  by  others  besides  the  owner. The  choice  of  those
who  remove  them  is  indifferent,  provided  there  do  not  lie
against  them  any  personal  exception  sufficient  to  render  them
objects  of  just  suspicion  in  the  eye  of  him  who  grants  the
safe-conduct,  or  to  exclude  them  from  the  privilege  of  enter-
ing his  territories.

He  who  promises  security  by  a  safe-conduct,  promises  to  j  268. Ex-
afford  it  wherever  he  has  the  command, — not  only  in  his  own  ^nt  of  the
territories,  but  likewise  in  every  place  where any  of  hisP'^™!*®^
troops  may  happen  to  be :  and  he  is  bound,  not  only  to  for-
bear violating  that  security  either  by  himself  or  his  people,
but  also  to  protect  and  defend  the  person  to  whom  he  has  [  4"'  7  ]
promised  it,  to  punish  any  of  his  subjects  who  have  offered
him  violence,  and  oblige  them  to  make  good  the  damage. 'i'

*  At  the  famous  interview  at  Pe-  and  negotiated  th^r  defection  while  he
ronne,  Charles  doke  of  Bnrgnndj,  ez-  was  at  Peronne,  Charles  would  have
asperated  to  find  that  Loais  XI.  had  been  justifiable  in  disregarding  a  safe-
engaged  the  people  of  Liege  to  take  up  conduct  of  which  an  improper  use  had
arms  against  him,  paid  no  respect  to  been  made.  But  the  French  monnreh
the  safe-conduct  which  he  had  granted  had  despatched  agents  to  Ghent  for  that
to  that  prince. If  Louis  had  plotted  purpose,  before  there  was  any  question

?n2  533


417  OP  SAFE-CONDUCTS


BOOK  iiT^ As  the  right  arising  from  a  safe-conduct  proceeds  entirely
from  the  will  of  him  who  grants  it^  that  will  is  the  standaH


CHAP.  xvn.


I  269.  How  jjy  which  the  extent  of  the  right  is  to  be  measured  ;  and  the

the  right  de.  ^'^^  ^  discoverable  in  the  object  for  which  the  safe-conduct

rived  from was  granted. Consequently,  a  person  who  has  barely  ol>-

a  safe-con- tained  permission  to  go  away,  does  not  thence  derive  a  right

d"«'-  to  come  back  again ;  and  a  safe-conduct,  granted  for  the

simple  passage  through  a  country,  does  not  entitle  the  bearer

to  repass  through  it  on  his  return. When  the  safe-conduct

is  granted  for  a  particular  business,  it  must  continue  in  force

until  that  business  is  concluded,  and  the  person  has  had  time

to  depart :  if  it  is  specified  to  be  granted  for  a  journey,  it

will  also  serve  for  the  person's  return,  since  both  passage  and

return  are  included  in  a  journey. As  this  privilege  consists

in  the  liberty  of  going  and  coming  in  safety,  it  differs  from  t

permission  to  settle  in  any  particular  place,  and  consequently

cannot  give  a  right  to  stop  anywhere  for  a  length  of  time,

unless  on  some  special  business,  in  consideration  of  which

the  safe-conduct  was  asked  and  granted.

1 270.  Whe- A  safe-conduct  given  to  a  traveller,  naturally  includes  hh

ther  it  in- baffffage,  or  his  clothes,  and  other  things  necessary  for  hu?

eludes  bag- • ®°  ° -.i  x j  m.-  ^2

and J^^^^^^J)  ^i^h  even  one  or  two  domestics,  or  more,  according
domestics, to  the  rank  of  the  person. But,  in  all  these  respects,  as  we2
as  in  the  others  which  we  have  just  noticed  above,  the  safest
mode,  especially  when  we  have  to  do  with  enemies  or  other
suspected  persons,  is,  to  specify  and  distinctly  enumerate  the
.  particulars,  in  order  to  obviate  every  difficulty. Accordinglj,
such  is  the  practice  which  at  present  prevails ;  and,  in  grant-
ing safe-conducts,  it  is  the  custom  expressly  to  include  the
baggage  and  domestics.
^  271.  Safe- Though  a  permission  to  settle  anywhere,  granted  to  the
conduct father  of  a  family,  naturally  includes  his  wife  and  children,
S^Tth  ^ ^^  ^®  otherwise  with  a  safe-conduct ;  because  it  seldom hz\>
^oes  not  in-  P®^^  *^*^  *  ^^^  Settles  in  a  place  without  having  his  familr
elude  his  fa- with  him  ;  whereas,  on  a  journey,  it  is  more  usual  to  ti"a\tl
mily.  without  them.

1 272.  Safe-  A  safe-conduct,  granted  to  a  person  for  hirmelf  and  hii
-onduct  retinue,  cannot  give  him  a  right  of  bringing  with  him  oersous
given,  in  ge-  ;^g|.Jy  guspected  bv  the  state,  or  who  have  been  banwhed,  or

ueral  to  anv  *'•'*•''

one  ajQd  his  ^^^^  Acd  from  the  country  on  account  of  any  crime ;  n«>i  caL

roiinue. it  serve  as  a  protection  to  such  men  :  for,  the  sovereign  vhi

grants  a  safe-conduct  in  those  general  terms,  does  not  »uu-

pose  that  it  will  be  presumptuously  abusea  for  the  purpose  of

[  418  ]  bringing  persons  into  his  territories  who  have  been  guilty  of

crimes,  or  hav^  particularly  offended  him.
i  273.  Term A  safe-conduct,  given  for  a  stated  term,  evpires  at  the  end

of  the  safe-

^  of  the  meeting  at  Peronne ;  and  Charies, pected  IntelltcrQc^  «H>maiitted » fla-

in  the  transports  of  blind  resentment^ grant  breaoh  Oi  W-e  «aw  of  uatiana.
excited  by  the  disagreeable  and  unex-

634


AND  PASSPORTS, ETC.  418

of  the  term  specified  therein ;  and  the  bearer,  if  he  does  not book  m.
retire  before  that  time,  may  be  arrested,  and  even  punished,  ^°^^'  ^^"'
according  to  circumstances,  especially  if  he  has  given  room
for  suspicion  by  an  affected  delay.

But,  if  forcibly  detained,  as  by  sickness,  so  as  to  be  un- 1 274.  A  per-
able  to  depart  in  time,  a  proper  respite  should  be  allowed  aon  forcibly
him  ;  for  a  promise  of  security  has  been  made  to  him :  and,  J"^^"*'
though  it  was  made  only  for  a  limited  time,  it  is  not  by  any  ^^^^^
fault  of  his  own  that  he  has  been  prevented  from  departing
within  the  term. The  case  is  different  from  that  of  an  enemy
coming  into  our  country  during  a  truce :  to  the  latter  we
have  made  no  particular  promise :  he,  at  his  own  peril,  takes
advantage  of  a  general  liberty  allowed  by  the  suspension  of
hostilities. All  we  have  promised  to  the  enemy  is  to  forbear
hostilities  for  a  certain  time ;  and,  at  the  expiration  of  that
term,  it  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  us  that  we  be  at  liberty
to  let  the  war  freely  take  its  course,  without  being  impeded
by  a  variety  of  excuses  and  pretexts.

The  safe-conduct  does  not  expire  at  the  decease  or  depo-  i  275. The
sition  of  him  who  granted  it ; for  it  was  given  in  virtue  of  B*fe-conduct
the  sovereign  authority,  which  never  dies,  and  whose  ^f^^^^^jJ^eatth^'
exists  independent  of  the  person  intrusted  with  the  exercise  death  of  bim
of  it. It  is  with  this  act  as  with  other  ordinances  of  the  who  gave  it
public  power ;  their  validity  or  duration  does  not  depend  on
the  life  of  him  who  enacted  them,  unless,  by  their  very  na-
ture, or  by  express  declaration,  they  are  personally  confined
to  him.

The  successor,  nevertheless,  may  revoke  a  safe-conduct,  if  ?  276.  How
he  has  good  reasons  for  the  revocation.  Even  he  who  has  ^^  ™**y  ^® '•"
granted  it  may,  in  like  case,  revoke  it :  nor  is  he  always
obliged  to  make  known  his  reasons.  Every  privilege,  when
it  becomes  detrimental  to  the  state^  may  be  revoked, — a  gra-
tuitous privilege,  purely  and  simply, — ^a  purchased  privilege,
on  giving  an  indemnification  to  the  parties  concerned.  Sup-
pose a  prince  or  his  general  is  preparing  for  a  secret  expe-
dition,— must  he  suffer  any  person,  under  cover  of  a  safe-
conduct,  antecedently  obtained,  to  come  and  pry  into  his
preparatives,  and  give  the  enemy  intelligence  of  them  ?  But
a  safe-conduct  is  not  to  be  converted  into  a  snare:  if  it  be
revoked,  the  be'arer  must  be  allowed  time  and  liberty  to
depart  in  safety.  If  he,  like  any  other  traveller,  be  detained
for  some  time,  in  order  to  prevent  his  carrying  intelligence
to  the  enemy,  no  ill-treatment  is  to  be  offered  him ;  nor  is
he  to  be  kept  longer  than  while  the  reasons  for  his  detainder
subsist.

If  a  safe-conduct  contains  this  clause — "  JPor  such  time  as  i  277.  Safe-
we  shall  think  fit^**  it  gives  only  a  precarious  right,  and  is<5o°<ioct
revocable  every  moment :  but,  until  it  has  been expressly  ^^^  ^^^
revoked,  it  remains  valid. It  expires  on  the  death  of  hixnl^^^l
who  gave  it,  who,  from  that  moment,  ceases  to  wiU  the  con-


(Die  Of


419  OF  SAFE  OONDITCTS

BOOK  m.  tinuation  of  the  privilege.  But  it  must  always  be  under-
oHAP.  XVII.  g^QQ j  that,  when  a  safe-conduct  expires  in  this  manner,
iM  ahaU  ii^Q  bearer  is  to  be  allowed  a  proper  time  for  his  safe  d^
'*'»*^'- parture.

1 278.  Con- After  having  discussed  the  right  of  making  prisoners  of
latin to  the  ^^^^ — ^^®  obligation  of  the  captor  to  release  them  at  the
ransom  of peace,  by  exchange  or  ransom, — and  that  of  their  sovereign
prisoners, to  obtain  their  liberty, — it  remains  to  consider  the  nature
of  those  conventions  whose  object  is  the  deliverance  of  ihest
unfortunate  sufferers. If  the  belligerent  sovereigns  have
agreed  on  a  cartel  for  the  exchange  or  ransom  of  prisoners,
they  are  bound  to  obsei've  it  with  equal  fidelity  as  any  other
convention. But  if  (as  was  frequently  the  practice  in  former
times)  the  state  leaves  to  each  prisoner,  at  least  during  the
continuance  of  the  war,  the  care  of  redeeming  himself — ^such
private  conventions  present  a  number  of  questions,  of  which
we  shall  only  touch  on  the  principal  ones.
;  279. The He  who  has  acquired  a  lawful  right  to  demand  a  ransom  from
Tight  of  de-  jjjg  prisoner,  may  transfer  his  right  to  a  third  person. This
wmsoni  may  ^*^  practised  in  the  last  ages. It  was  frequent  for  militarj
be  trans- i^icu  to  rcsigu  their  prisoners,  and  transfer  all  the  rights  they
ferred. had  over  them  into  other  hands. But  as  the  person  who
takes  a  prisoner  is  bound  to  treat  .him  with  justice  and  hu-
manity (§  160),  he  must  not,  if  he  wishes  that  his  condurt
should  be  free  from  censure,  transfer  his  right,  in  an  unli-
mited manner,  to  one  who  might  make  an  improper  use  of  it:
when  he  has  agreed  with  his  prisoner  concerning  the  price
of  his  ransom,  he  may  transfer  to  whom  he  pleases  the  right
to  demand  the  stipulated  sum.
§  280.  Wba* When  once  the  agreement  is  made  with  a  prisoner  for  the
may  annul pj.j^g  ^f  j^jg  ransom,  it  bccomes  a  perfect  contract,  and  can-

tbe  conven-  '^ ^ .  . i i  i  .  i . .i  •  • j'

tion  made  ^^^  "0  rescinded  under  pretence  that  the  prisoner  is  aisco-
for  the  rate  vered  to  be  richer  than  was  imagined :  for  it  is  by  no  meam
of  the  ran-  nccessary  that  the  rate  should  be  proportioned  to  the  wealth
^^'  of  the  prisoner,  since  that  is  not  the  scale  by  which  we  mea-

sure the  right  to  detain  a  prisoner  of  war  (§§  148,  153).
But  it  is  natural  to  proportion  the  price  of  the  ransom  to
the  prisoner's  rank  in  the  hostile  army,  because  the  liberty
of  an  oflScer  of  distinction  is  of  greater  consequence  than
that  of  a  private  soldier  or  an  inferior  officer.  If  the  pri-
soner has  not  only  concealed,  but  disguised  his  rank,  it  is »
fraud  on  his  part,  which  gives  the  captor  a  right  to  annul  the
compact.
z  281.  A  pri-  If  a  prisoner,  having  agreed  on  the  price  of  his  ransom,
Boner  dying  ^jj^g  before  payment,  it  is  asked  whether  the  stipulated  «um
in'ent^f  ren-  ^®  ^^®'  *^^  whether  the  heirs  are  bound  to  pay  it  ?  They
undoubtedly  are,  if  the  prisoner  died  in  the  possession  of  hia
liberty :  for,  from  the  moment  of  his  release,  in  consideration
of  which  he  had  promised  a  sum,  that  sum  becomes  duc^  &n«i
does  not  at  all  belong  to  his  heirs. But,  if  he  had  not  jet

586


•om.


AND PASSPOBTS, ETC.  420

obtained  his  liberty,  the  price  which  was  to  have  been  paid  chap.  in.
for  it  is  not  a  debt  on  him  or  his  heirs,  unless  he  had  made  -£5^£i.fl?*
his  agreement  in  a  different  manner ;  and  he  is  not  reputed
to  have  received  his  liberty  until  the  moment  when  he  is  per-
fectly free  to  depart  at  pleasure, — when  neither  the  person
who  held  him  prisoner,  nor  that  person's  sovereign,  opposes
his  release  and  departure.

If  he  has  only  been  permitted  to  take  a  journey,  for  the
purpose  of  prevailing  on  his  friends  or  his  sovereign  to  fur-
nish him  with  the  means  of  ransoming  himself,  and  dies  be-
fore he  is  possessed  of  his  full  liberty,  before  he  is  finally
discharged  from  his  parole,  nothing  is  due  for  his  ransom.

If,  after  having  agreed  on  the  price,  he  is  detained  in  pri-
son till  the  time  of  payment,  and  there  dies  in  the  interim,
liis  heirs  are  not  bound  to  pay  the  ransom — such  an  agree-
ment being,  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  held  him  prisoner,
no  more  than  a  promise  of  giving  him  his  liberty  on  the
actual  payment  of  a  certain  sum.  A  promise  of  buying  and
selling  does  not  bind  the  supposed  purchaser  to  pay  the  price
of  the  article  in  question,  if  it  happens  to  perish  before  the
completion  of  the  purchase.  But  if  the  contract  of  sale  be
perfect,  the  purchaser  must  pay  the  price  of  the  thing  sold,
though  it  should  happen  to  perish  before  delivery,  provided  >
there  was  no  fault  or  delay  on  the  part  of  the  vendor.  For
this  reason,  if  the  prisoner  has  absolutely  concluded  the
agreement  for  his  ransom,  acknowledging  himself,  from  that
moment,  debtor  for  the  stipulated  sum, — ^and  is,  nevertheless,
still  detained,  no  longer  indeed  as  a  prisoner,  but  a  surety
for  the  payment, — the  price  of  the  ransom  is  due,  notwith-
standing the  circumstance  of  his  dying  in  the  interim.

If  the  agreement  says  that  the  ransom  shall  be  paid  on  a
certain  day,  and  the  prisoner  happens  to  die  before  that  day,
the  heirs  are  bound  to  pay  the  sum  agreed  on :  for  the  ran-
som was  due  ;  and  the  appointed  day  was  assigned  merely  as
the  term  of  payment.

From  a  rigid  application  of  the  same  principles,  it  follows  §  282.  Prf-
that  a  prisoner,  who  has  been  released  on  condition  of  pro-  ^^^^  '®-
curing  the  release  of  another,  should  return  to  prison,  in  ^^^1^^^^"  ^*
case  the  latter  happens  to  die  before  he  has  been  able  to  procuring
procure  him  his  liberty. But  certainly  such  an  unfortunate  the  release
case  is  entitled  to  lenity ;  and  equity  seems  to  require  that  ^f  another*
this  prisoner  should  be  allowed  to  continue  in  the  enjoyment
of  that  liberty  which  has  been  granted  to  him,  provided  he
pays  a  fair  equivalent  for  it,  since  he  is  now  unable  to  pur-
chase it  precisely  at  the  price  agreed  on.

If  a  prisoner,  who  has  been  fully  set  at  liberty,  after  hav-  ?  283.  Pri-
ing  promised  but  not  paid  his  ransom,  happens  to  be  taken  a  ^^^^^  w-
second  time,  it  is  evident  that,  without  being  exempted  from  ^®^  ^^^^f?
the  payment  of  his  former  ransom,  he  will  have  to  pay  ai^^f^^J^
second,  if  he  wishes  to  recover  his  liberty.  ransom.

A«  637


420  OF SAFE-CONDUCTS, ETC.

BOOK  m.  On  the  other  hand,  though  the  prisoner  has  agreed  for  thf
CHAP.  XVII.  ppjQg  Qf  jjig  ransom,  if,  before  the  execution  of  the  com-
?  284. .  Pri-  pact, — ^before  he  is  set  at  liberty  in  virtue  of  it, — ^he  be  nv
^edVefJre  ^^^^^  *^^  delivered  by  his  own  party,  he  owes  nothing.  I
be  has  i^  here  evidently  suppose  that  the  contract  for  his  ransom  was
ceived  hia  li-  not  completed,  and  that  the  prisoner  had  not  acknowledged
i)orty.  hiin^olf  debtor  for  the  sum  agreed  on. The  person  who  held

[  421  ]  him  prisont>*'  had,  as  it  were,  only  made  him  a  promise  of
selling,  and  he  had  promised  to  purchase :  but  the  purch&se
and  sale  had  not  actually  passed  into  effect ;  the  property
was  not  actually  transferred.
J  285.  Whe- The  property  of  a  prisoner's  effects  is  not  vested  in  the
th^'  *'^®. . ,  captor,  except  so  far  as  he  seizes  on  those  effects  at  the  time
a  prS>ner°  ^^  ^^^  Capture. Of  this  there  is  no  doubt,  in  these  modera
has  found times,  when  prisoners  of  war  are  not  reduced  to  slaveir.
means  to And,  even  by  the  law  of  nature,  the  property  of  a  slave's
conceal,  be-  gQQ(jg  (Jq^s  not,  without  somc  Other  reason,  pass  to  the  ma&-
*^"*  ter  of  the  slave. There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  slavenr

which  can  of  itself  produce  that  effect.  Though  a  man
obtains  certain  rights  over  the  liberty  of  another,  does  it
thence  follow  that  he  shall  have  a  right  over  his  property
also  ?  When,  therefore,  the  enemy  has  not  plundered  his
prisoner,  or  when  the  latter  has  found  means  to  couceal
something  from  the  captor's  search,  whatever  he  has  thns
saved  still  continues  to  be  his  own  property,  and  he  may  em-
ploy it  towards  the  payment  of  his  ransom.  At  present,
even  the  plundering  of  prisoners  is  not  always  practised:
the  greedy  soldier  sometimes  proceeds  to  such  lengths ;  but
an  oflScer  would  think  it  an  indelible  stain  on  his  character,
to  have  deprived  them  of  the  smallest  article.  A  party  of
private  French  troopers,  who  had  captured  a  British  general
at  the.  battle  of  Bocoux,  claimed  no  right  to  anything  b^
longing  to  their  prisoner,  except  his  arms  alone.
{  286.  Hos-  The  death  of  the  prisoner  extinguishes  the  captor's  right.
tftges  given  Wherefore,  if  any  person  is  given  as  a  hostage  in  order  to
leLe  o/a'  P^^^^^®  *  prisoner's  enlargement,  he  ought  to  je  rekased  the
prisoner,  moment  the  prisoner  dies ;  and,  on  the  othor  h^iiJ,  if  the
hostage  dies,  his  death  does  not  reinstate  the  "pr i^ouer  in  the
possession  of  his  liberty.  The  reverse  of  th../  is  iraf,  if  the
one,  instead  of  being  simply  a  hostage  foj  cJae  ji  .er,  had
been  substituted  in  his  stead.

538


07  CIVIL  WAR.  421


BOOK.  IIL
OBAP.  XTIII.


CHAP,  XVIIL

OF  CIVIL LAW.

IT  is  a  question  very  much  debated,  whether  a  sovereign  ?  287.  Foun-
^<i  bound  to  observe  the  common  laws  of  war  towards  rebel- '^^t^^'^^^^*^*
lious  subjects  who  have  openly  taken  up  arms  against  him  ?  ^^^^!^^*^  *
A  flatterer,  or  a  prince  of  a  cruel  and  arbitrary  disposition,  against  the
will  immediately  pronounce  that  the  laws  of  war  were  not  rebels.
made  for  rebels,  for  whom  no  punishment  can  be  too  severe.  [  422  ]
Let  us  proceed  more  soberly,  and  reason  from  the  incon- •
testable  principles  above  laid  down. In  order  clearly  to  dis-
cover what  conduct  the  sovereign  ought  to  pursue  towards
revolted  subjects,  we  must,  in  the  first  place,  recollect  that
all  the  sovereign's  rights  are  derived  from  those  of  the  state
or  of  civil  society,  from  the  trust  reposed  in  him,  from  the
obligation  he  lies  under  of  watching  over  the  welfare  of  the
nation,  of  procuring  her  greatest  happiness,  of  maintaining
order,  justice,  and  peace  within her boundaries  (Book  L
Chap.  IV). Secondly,  we  must  distinguish  the  nature  and
degree  of  the  different  disorders  which  may  disturb  the  state,
and  oblige  the  sovereign  to  take  up  arms,  or  substitute  forci-
ble measures  instead  of  the  milder  influence  of  authority.

The  name  of  rebels  is  given  to  all  subjects  who  unjustly  g  288.  Who
take  up  arms  against  the  ruler  of  the  society,  whether  their  are  rebels
view  be  to  deprive  him  of  the  supreme  authority,  or  to  resist
his  commands  in  some  particular  instance,  and  to  impose  con
ditions  on  him.

A  popular  commotion  is  a  concourse  of  people  who  as-?289.  Popu-
semble  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  and  refuse  to  listen  to  the^f'^®™"*^
voice  of  their  superiors,  whether  the  design  of  the  assembled  *^°"'  *°^"'"

I'liiTiT*  1  ^  1  1  rection,  se-

multitude  be  levelled  against  the  superiors  themselves,  ordiuon.
only  against  some  private  individuals.  Violent  commotions
of  this  kind  take  place  when  the  people  think  themselves
aggrieved ;  and  there  is  no  order  of  men  who  so  frequently
give  rise  to  them  as  the  tax-gatherers.  If  the  rage  of  the
malecontents  be  particularly  levelled  at  the  magistrates,  or
others  vested  with  the  public  authority,  and  they  proceed  to
a  Iprmal  disobedience  or  acts  of  open  violence,  this  is  called
a  sedition.  When  the  evil  spreads, — when  it  infects  the  ma-
jority of  the  inhabitants  of  a  city  or  province,  and  gains
such  strength  that  even  the  sovereign  himself  is  no  longer
obeyed, — it  is  usual  more  particularly  to  distinguish  such  a
disorder  by  the  name  of  insurrection.

All  these  violences  disturb  the  public  order,  and  are  state  g  290.  How
crimes,  even  when  arising  from  just  causes  of  complaint.  ^»  sore-


422  OF  CIVIL  WAR-


BOOK  HL For  violent  measures  are  forbidden  in  civil  society :  the  in-
CHAP.  xvin.  j^Yed  individuals  should  apply  to  the  magistrate  for  redress ;
niga  is  to and  if  they  do  not  obtain  justice  from  that  quarter,  they  may
rappwss la^y  i\^q[y  complaints  at  the  foot  of  the  throne. Every  citi-
^"^  zen  should  even  patiently  endure  evils,  which  are  not  insup-

portable, rather  than  disturb  the  public  peace.  A  denial  of
justice  on  the  part  of  the  sovereign,  or  affected  delays,  caa
alone  excuse  the  furious  transports  of  a  people  whose  pa-
tience has  been  exhausted, — ^and  even  justify  them,  if  the
evils  be  intolerable,  and  the  oppression  great  and  manifest.
But  what  conduct  shall  the  sovereign  observe  towards  the  in-
surgents ?  I  answer,  in  general, — ^such  conduct  as  shall  &t
the  same  time  be  the  most  consonant  to  justice,  and  the  most
salutary  to  the  state.  Although  it  be  his  duty  to  repress
those  who  unnecessarily  disturb  the  public  peace,  he  is  bound
to  show  clemency  towards  unfortunate  persons,  to  whom  just
causes  of  complaint  have  been  given,  and  whose  sole  crime
consists  in  the  attempt  to  do  themselves  justice :  they  have
been  deficient  in  patience  rather  than  fidelity.  Subjects  who
[  423  ]  rise  against  their  prince  without  cause  deserve  severe  punish-
ment :  yet,  even  in  this  case,  on  account  of  the  number  of
the  delinquents,  clemency  becomes  a  duty  in  the  sovereign.
Shall  he  depopulate  a  city,  or  desolate  a  province,  in  order
to  punish  her  rebellion  ?  Any  punishment,  however  just  in
itself,  which  embraces  too  great  a  number  of  persons,  becomes
an  act  of  downright  cruelty.  Had  the  insurrection  of  the
Netherlands  against  Spain  been  totally  unwarrantable,  univer-
sal detestation  would  still  attend  the  memory  of  the  duke  of
Alva,  who  made  it  his  boast  that  he  had  caused  twentv  thou-
sand  heads  to  be  struck  off  by  the  hands  of  the  common  exe-
cutioner. Let  not  his  sanguinary  imitators  expect  to  justify
their  enormities  by  the  plea  of  necessity.  What  prince  ever
suffered  more  outrageous  indignities  from  his  subjects  than
Henry  the  Great,  of  France  ?  Yet,  his  victories  were  ever
accompanied  by  a  uniform  clemency;  and  that  excellent
prince  at  length  obtained  the  success  he  deserved :  he  gained
a  nation  of  faithful  subjects ;  whereas  the  duke  of  Alva
caused  his  master  to  lose  the  United  Provinces.  Crimes,  in
which  a  number  of  persons  are  involved,  are  to  be  punished
by  penalties  which  shall  equally  fell  on  all  the  parties  con-
cerned :  the  sovereign  may  deprive  a  town  of  her  privileges,
at  least,  till  she  has  fully  acknowledged  her  fault :  as  to  cor-
poral punishment,  let  that  be  reserved  for  the  authors  of |ihe
disturbances, — for  those  incendiaries  who  incite  the  people
to  revolt.  But  tyrants  alone  will  treat,  as  seditious,  those
brave  and  resolute  citizens  who  exhort  the  people  to  preserve
themselves  from  oppression,  and  to  vindicate  their  rights  and
privileges :  a  good  prince  will  commend  such  virtuous  pa-
triots, provided  their  zeal  be  tempered  with  moderation  and
prudence. If  he  has  justice  and  his  duty  at  heart, — ^if  he

MO


OF  CIVIL  WAR.  428

aspires  to  that  immortal  and  unsullied  glorj  of  being  the book  m.

father  of  his  people,  let  him  mistrust  the  selfish  suggestions  ^"^'''  ^^"^

of  thai  minister  who  represents  to  him  as  rebels  all  those

citizens  who  do  not  stretch  out  their  necks  to  the  yoke  of  J

slavery, — ^who  refuse  tamely  to  crouch  under  the  rod  of  arbi-  '

trary  power.

In  many  cases,  the  safest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most }  291.  He  ii
just  method  of  appeasing  seditions,  is  to  give  the  people  satis- ^®"°^  ^
faction.  And  if  there  existed  no  reasons  to  justify  the  i^is^r- promisea  he
rection  (a  circumstance  which,  perhaps,  never  happens),  even  hu  made  to
in  such  case,  it  becomes  necessary,  as  we  have  above  observed,  the  rebels,
to  grant  an  amnesty  where  the  offenders  are  numerous.  When
the  amnesty  is  once  published  and  accepted,  all  the  past  must
be  buried  in  oblivion ;  nor  must  any  one  be  called  to  account
for  what  has  been  done  during  the  disturbances:  and,  in
general,  the  sovereign,  whose  word  ought  ever  to  be  sacred,
is  bound  to  the  faithful  observance  of  every  promise  he  has
made,  even  to  rebels, — ^I  mean,  to  such  of  his  subjects  as
have  revolted  without  reason  or  necessity.  If  his  promises
are  not  inviolable,  the  rebels  will  have  no  security  in  treating
with  him :  when  they  have  once  drawn  the  sword,  they  must  [  424  ]
throw  away  the  scabbard,  as  one  of  the  ancients  expresses  it ;
and  the  prince,  destitute  of  the  more  gentle  and  salutary
means  of  appeasing  the  revolt,  will  have  no  other  remaining
expedient  than  that  of  utterly  exterminating  the  insurgents.
These  will  become  formidable  through  despair ;  compassion
will  bestow  succours  on  them ;  their  party  will  increase,  and
the  state  will  be  in  danger.  What  would  have  become  of
France,  if  the  leaguers  had  thought  it  unsafe  to  rely  on  the
promises  of  Henry  the  Great?  The  same  reasons  which
should  render  the  faith  of  promises  inviolable  and  sacred  be-
tween individual  and  individual,  between  sovereign  and  sove-
reign, between  enemy  and  enemy  (Book  II.  §§  163,  218,  &c.,
and  Book  III.  §  174),  subsist  in  all  their  force  between  the
sovereign  and  his  insurgent  or  rebellious  subjects.  However,
if  they  have  extorted  from  him  odious  conditions,  which  are
inimical  to  the  happiness  of  the  nation,  or  the  welfare  of  the
state, — as  he  has  no  right  to  do  or  grant  any  thing  contrary
to  that  grand  rule  of  his  conduct,  which  is  at  the  same  time
the  measure  of  his  power,  he  may  justly  revoke  any  perni-
cious concessions  which  he  has  been  obliged  to  make,  pro-
vided the  revocation  be  sanctioned  by  the  consent  of  the
nation,  whose  opinion  he  must  take  on  the  subject,  in  the
manner  and  forms  pointed  out  to  him  by  the  constitution  of
the  state.  But  this  remedy  is  to  be  used  with  great  reserve,
and  only  in  matters  of  high  importance,  lest  the  faith  of  pro-
mises should  be  weakened  and  brought  into  disrepute.*


*  An  instance  of  this  oocnrs  in  the insorreotion at Madrid,  in 1706. At
transactions  which  took  place  after  the the  requisition  of  the  oortes,  the  king

2V  541


424


OF  CIVIL  WAR.


BOOK  m.

CRAP. XVI  (I.


When  a  party  is  formed  in  a  state,  who  no  longer  obey  tKe
~  sovereign,  and  are  possessed  of  suflScient  strength  to  oppose


{  292.  citU  ]^{jq^ — QY  when,  in  a  republic,  the  nation  is  divided  into  two
'*'*  opposite  factions,  and  both  sides  take  up  arms, — this  is  called

a  civil  war.  Some  writers  confine  this  term  to  a  jnst  insur-
rection of  the  subjects  against  their  sovereign,  to  distinguish
that  lawful  resistance  from  rebellion,  which  is  an  open  and
unjust  resistance.  But  what  appellation  will  they  give  to  s
war  which  arises  in  a  republic  torn  by  two  factions,-— or  in  a
monarchy,  between  two  competitors  for  the  crown  ?  Custom
appropriates  the  term  of  ^^  civil  war**  to  every  war  between
the  members  of  one  and  the  same  political  society.  If  it  be
between  part  of  the  citizens  on  the  one  side,  and  the  sove-
reign, with  those  who  continue  in  obedience  to  him,  on  the
other, — provided  the  malecontents  have  any  reason  for  taking
up  arms,  nothing  further  is  required  to  entitle  such  disturb-
ance to  the  name  of  civil  war,  and  not  that  of  rebellion.  This
latter  term  is  applied  only  to  such  an  insurrection  against
lawful  authority  as  is  void  of  all  appearance  of  justice.  The
[  425  ]  sovereign,  indeed,  never  fails  to  bestow  the  appellation  of
rebels  on  all  such  of  his  subjects  as  openly  resist  him :  but,
when  the  latter  have  acquired  sufficient  strength  to  give  him
effectual  opposition,  and  to  oblige  him  to  carry  on  the  war
against  them  according  to  the  established  rules,  he  nust  ne-
cessarily submit  to  the  use  of  the  term  "  civil  war.*'

It  is  foreign  to  our  purpose  in  this  place  to  weigh  ihe
reasons  which  may  authorize  and  justify  a  civil  war :  we  have
elsewhere  treated  of  the  cases  wherein  subjects  may  resist
the  sovereign  (Book  I.  Chap.  IV).  Setting,  therefore,  the
justice  of  the  cause  wholly  out  of  the  question,  it  only  renains
for  us  to  consider  the  maxims  which  ought  to  be  observed  in
a  civil  war,  and  to  examine  whether  the  sovereign  in  parti-
cular is,  on  such  an  occasion,  bound  to  conform  to  the  esta-
blished laws  of  war.

A  civil  war  breaks  the  bands  of  society  and  goTemment.
or,  at  least,  suspends  their  force  and  effect :  it  produces  in  the
nation  two  independent  parties,  who  consider  each  other  as
enemies,  and  acknowledge  no  common  judge.  Those  tiro
parties,  therefore,  must  necessarily  be  considered  aa  thence-
forward constituting,  at  least  for  a  time,  two  separate  bodies,
two  distinct  societies.  Though  one  of  the  parties  may  hare
been  to  blame  in  breaking  the  unity  of  the  state  and  resisting
the  lawful  authority,  they  are  not  the  less  divided  in  fact.
Besides,  who  shall  judge  them  ?  who  shall  pronounce  on  wliich
side  the  right  or  the  wrong  lies?  On  earth  they  have  n'^
common  superior.  They  stand  therefore  in  precisely  th**
same  predicament  as  two  nations,  who  engage  in  a  contes:.


§293. A
eivU  war
produces
two  inde-
pendent
liartiea.


revoked  the  concessions  which  he  had populace,  but  he  suffered  the  anmef:;
been  obliged  to  mako  to  the  insurgent to  remain  in  force.
642


OF  CIVIL  WAR.  425

and,  being  unable  to  come  to  an  agreement,  have  recourse  to book  m.
arms.  chap,  xyiil

This  being  the  case,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  common  ?  294.  Tiity
laws  of  war, — ^those  maxims  of  humanity,  moderation,  ^nd  *^®  ^^^^
honour,  which  we  have  alreadv  detailed  in  the  course  of  this  ^^'^^  *^*

i-i  11  Till  ••  * -t  common

work,-^— ought  to  be  observed  by  both  parties  m  every  civil  i^ws  of  war.
war.  For  the  same  reasons  which  render  the  observance  of
those  maxims  a  matter  of  obligation  between  state  and  state,
it  becomes  equally  and  even  more  necessary  in  the  unhappy
circumstance  of  two  incensed  parties  lacerating  their  common
country.  Should  the  sovereign  conceive  he  has  a  right  to
hang  up  his  prisoners  as  rebels,  the  opposite  party  will  make
reprisals  :* — if  he  does  not  religiously  observe  the  capitula-
tions, and  all  other  conventions  made  with  his  enemies,  they
will  no  longer  rely  on  his  word : — should  he  burn  and  ravage,
they  will  follow  his  example ;  the  war  will  become  cruel,  hor-
rible, and  every  day  more  destructive  to  the  nation.  The  [  426  ]
duke  de  Montpensier's  infamous  and  barbarous  excesses
against  the  reformed  party  in  France  are  too  well  known:
the  men  were  delivered  up  to  the  executioner,  and  the  women
to  the  brutality  of  the  soldiers.  What  was  the  consequence  ?
the  Protestants  became  exasperated;  they  took  vengeance
of  such  inhuman  practices ;  and  the  war,  before  sufficiently
cruel  as  a  civil  and  religious  war,  became  more  bloody  and
destructive.  Who  could  without  horror  read  of  the  savage
cruelties  committed  by  the  Baron  Des  Adrets  ?  By  turns  a
Catholic  and  a  Protestant,  he  distinguished  himself  by  his
barbarity  on  both  sides.  At  length  it  became  necessary  to
relinquish  those  pretensions  to  judicial  authority  over  men
who  proved  themselves  capable  of  supporting  their  cause  by
force  of  arms,  and  to  treat  them,  not  as  criminals  but  as
enemies.  Even  the  troops  have  often  refused  to  serve  in
a  war  wherein  the  prince  exposed  them  to  cruel  reprisals.
Officers  who  had  the  highest  sense  of  honour,  though  ready  to
shed  their  blood  in  the  field  of  battle  for  his  service,  have  not
thought  it  any  part  of  their  duty  to  run  the  hazard  of  an
ignominious  death.  Whenever,  therefore,  a  numerous  body
of  men  think  they  have  a  right  to  resist  the  sovereign,  and
feel  themselves  in  a  condition  to  appeal  to  the  sword,  the  war
ought  to  be  carried  on  by  the  contending  parties  in  the  same


*  The  prinoe  of  Cond€,  commander The  dnke  of  Alra  made  it  a  practice

of  Louis  XIIL'a  forces  against  the  re-  to  condemn  to  death  every  prisoner  be

formed  party,  having  hanged  sixty-four  took  from  the  confederates  in  the  Ne-

officers  whom  he  had made  prisoners  therlands. They,  on  their  part,  rctali-

dnring  the  civil  war,  the  Protestants  re-  ated,  and  at  length  compelled  him  to

solved  upon  retaliation ;  and  the  duke  respect  the  law  of  nations  and  the  rules

de  Rohan,  who  commanded  them,  caused  of  war  in  his  conduct  toward  them*

an  equal  number  of  Catholic  officers  to  Qrotius,  Ann,  lib.  iL
be  hanged. See  Memoires  de  Rohan.

648


426  OF  OIYIL  WAB.

BOOK  m. manner  as  by  two  different  nations :  and  they  ought  to  leaTs
CHAP.  xYm,  Q^Qj^  ti^g  same  means  for  preventing  its  being  carried  to  out-
rageous extremities,  and  for  the  restoration  of  peace.

When  the  sovereign  has  subdued  the  opposite  party,  and
reduced  them  to  submit  and  sue  for  peace,  he  may  except
from  the  amnesty  the  authors  of  the  disturbances, —  the  heads
of  the  party :  he  may  bring  them  to  a  legal  trial,  and  punish
them,  if  they  be  found  guilty. He  may  act  in  this  manner
particularly  on  occasion  of  those  disturbances  in  which  thi
interests  of  the  people  are  not  so  much  the  object  in  view  a:»
the  private  aims  of  some  powerful  individuals,  and  which
rather  deserve  the  appellation  of  revolt  than  of  civil  war.
Such  was  the  case  of  the  unfortunate  duke  of  Montmorency : —
he  took  up  arms  against  the  king,  in  support  of  the  duke  of
Orleans ;  and,  being  defeated  and  tak&n  prisoner  at  the  bat-
tie  of  Castelnaudari,  he  lost  his  life  on  a  scaffold,  by  the  sen-
tence of  the  parliament  of  Toulouse. If  he  was  generally
pitied  by  all  men  of  worth  and  sentiment,  it  was  because  they
viewed  him  rather  as  an  opponent  to  the  exorbitant  power  of
an  imperious  minister,  than  as  a  rebel  against  his  sovereign,
— and  that  his  heroic  virtues  seemed  to  warrant  the  purity
of  his  intentions.*
{  295. The When  subjects  take  up  arms  without  ceasing  to  acknow-
effects  of ledge  the  sovereign,  and  only  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a
tLnraiBhed ^^^^^^^  ^^  theiT  grievances,  there  are  two  reasons  for  observ-
•ccording  to  i^^g  ^hc  commou  laws  of  war  towards  them : — First,  an  ai)pre-
00808.  hension  lest  the  civil  war  should  become  more  cruel  and  de-

structive by  the  insurgents  making  retaliation,  which,  as  we
[  427  ]  have  already  observed,  they  will  not  fail  to  do,  in  return  for
the  severities  exercised  by  the  sovereign.  2.  The  danger
of  committing  great  injustice  by  hastily  punishing  those  who
are  accounted  rebels.  The  flames  of  discord  and  civil  war
are  not  favourable  to  the  proceedings  of  pure  and  sacred  jus
tice :  more  quiet  times  are  to  be  waited  for.  It  will  be  wise
in  the  prince  to  keep  his  prisoners,  till,  having  restored  tran-
quillity, he  is  able  to  bring  them  to  a  legal  trial.

As  to  the  other  effects  which  the  law  of  nations  attributes
to  public  war,  see  Chap.  XII.  of  this  Book,  and  particularly
the  acquisition  of  things  taken  in  war, — subjects  who  take  up
arms  against  their  sovereign  without  ceasing  to  acknowledge
him,  cannot  lay  claim  to  the  benefit  of  those  effects.  The
booty  alone,  the  movable  property  carried  off  by  the  eneray,
is  considered  as  lost  to  the  owners ;  but  this  is  only  on  ac-
count  of  the  difficulty  of  recognising  it,  and  the  numberless
inconveniences  which  would  arise  from  the  attempt  to  recover
it.  All  this  is  usually  settled  in  the  edict  of  pacification,  or
the  act  of  amnesty.

*  See  the  historians  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIIL
544


OF  CIVIL  WAR.  42Y

But,  when  a  nation  becomes  divided  into  two  ])arties  ab- book  m.
fiolutely  independent,  and  no  longer  acknowledging  a  common  ^^liEIli**
superior,  the  state  is  dissolved,  and  the  war  between  the  two
parties  stands  on  the  same  ground,  in  every  respect,  as  a

Eublic  war  between  two  diflferent  nations.  Whether  a  republic
e  split  into  two  factions,  each  maintaining  that  it  alone  con-
stitutes the  body  of  the  state, — or  a  kingdom  be  divided
between  two  competitors  for  the  crown, — the  nation  is  severed
into  two  parties,  who  will  mutually  term  each  other  rebels.
Thus  there  exist  in  the  state  two  separate  bodies,  who  pre-
tend to  absolute  independence,  and  between  whom  there  is
no  judge  (§  293).  They  decide  their  quarrel  by  arms,  as  two
different  nations  would  do.  The  obligation  to  observe  the
common  laws  of  war  towards  each  other  is  therefore  absolute,
— indispensably  binding  on  both  parties,  and  the  same  which
the  law  of  nature  imposes  on  all  nations  in  transactions  be-
tween state  and  state.

Foreign  nations  are  not  to  interfere  in  the  internal  govern-  j  298.  Cot
mont  of  an  independent  state. (Book  II.  §  54,  &c.) It  be-  ^^^^  ^  ^
longs  not  to  them  to  judge  between  the  citizens  whom  discord  ^^*®^^^^  ^>
has  roused  to  arms,  nor  between  the  prince  and  his  subjects :  tklnlf'*  °*
both  parties  are  equally  foreigners  to  them,  and  equally  in-
dependent of  their  authority. They  may,  however,  interpose
their  good  offices  for  the  restoration  of  peace ;  and  this  the
law  of  nature  prescibes  to  them. (Book  II.  Ch.  I.) But,  if
their  mediation  proves  fruitless,  such  of  them  as  are  not
bound  by  any  treaty,  may,  with  the  view  of  regulating  their
own  conduct,  take  the  merits  of  the  cause  into  consideration,
and  assist  the  party  which  they  shall  judge  to  have  right  on  its
side,  in  case  that  party  requests  their  assistance  or  accepts  the
offer  of  it :  they  are  equsdly  at  liberty,  I  say,  to  do  this,  as  [  428  J
to  espouse  the  quarrel  of  one  nation  embarking  in  a  war
against  another. As  to  the  allies  of  the  state  thus  distracted
by  civil  war,  they  will  find  a  rule  for  their  conduct  in  the  na-
ture of  their  engagements,  combined  with  the  existing  cir-
cttJistances. Of  this  we  have  treated  elsewhere. (See  Book
li Chap.  Xn.  and  particularly  §§  196  and  197.)


Sts  la


BOOK  IV.

OF  THE  RESTORATION  OF  PEACE;  AND  OF

EMBASSIES.


BOOK lY.
CHAP. I.


CHAP.  I.

OF  PEACE, AND THE OBLIGATION  TO  CtJLTIVATE IT.

{ 1.  Wh»*  Jr  EACE  18  the  reverse  of  war :  it  is  that  desirable  stite
peace  i«.  in  which  every  one  quietly  enjoys  his  rights,  or,  if  contro-
verted, amicably  discusses  them  by  force  of  argument.  Hobb?
has  had  the  boldness  to  assert,  that  war  is  the  natural  gt&i«
of  man.  But  if,  by  "  the  natural  state  of  man,"  we  un<ier-
stand  (as  reason  requires  that  we  should)  that  state  to  wiiicb
he  is  destined  and  called  by  his  nature,  peace  shoald  rather  ^4
termed  his  natural  state.  For,  it  is  the  part  of  a  ratioLal
being  to  terminate  his  differences  by  rational  methods:
whereas,  it  is  the  characteristic  of  the  brute  creation  to  d^
cide  theirs  by  force.*  Man,  as  we  have  already  observed
(Prelim.  §  10),  alone  and  destitute  of  succours,  would  neces-
sarily be  a  very  wretched  creature.  He  stands  in  need  oi
the  intercourse  and  assistance  of  his  species,  in  order  to  eujoj
the  sweets  of  life,  to  develope  his  faculties,  and  live  in  a  mair
ner  suitable  to  his  nature.  Now,  it  is  in  peace  alone  that  al.
these  advantages  are  to  be  found :  it  is  in  peace  that  men
respect,  assist,  and  love  each  other :  nor  would  they  ever  de-
[  430  ]  part  from  that  happy  state,  if  they  were  not  hurried  on  bj
the  impetuosity  of  their  passions,  and  blinded  by  the  gros?
deceptions  of  self-love.  What  little  we  have  said  of  the
effects  will  be  sufficient  to  give  some  idea  of  its  various  calami-
ties ;  and  it  is  an  unfortunate  circumstance  for  the  hum.nn
race,  that  the  injustice  of  unprincipled  men  should  so  often
render  it  inevitable.
^  2.  Obliga-  Nations  who  are  really  impressed  with  sentiments  of  hu-
tion  ofouiti-mauity^ — ^}^q  scriously  attend  to  their  duty,  and  art*  ac-
vtuug  It quainted  with  their  true  and  substantial  interests, — ^will  never

*  Nam  cnm  sint  duo  genera  decer- endum  est  ad  posterioj,  ri  nti  n«/n  iievi
tandi,  unum  por  disceptationem,  alte- superiore. Cicero,  de  Offic  lib.  L  taf^.
mm  per  Tim,--camqae  illud  proprium 11.
■it  hominifi.  b  >o  beUaarum,— confagi-
646


OF  P£^OS,  AND  THS  OBLIGATION  TO  CULTIVATE  IT.  43G

seek  to  promote  their  own  advantage  at  the  expense  and  de-  book  it.
triment  of  other  nations:  however  intent  they  may  be  on  ^^^^'  ''
their  own  happiness,  they  will  ever  be  careful  to  combine  it
with  that  of  others,  and  with  justice  and  equity.  Thus  dis-
posed, they  will  necessarily  cultivate  peace.  If  they  do  not
live  together  in  peace,  how  can  they  perform  those  mutual
and  sacred  duties  which  nature  enjoins  them?  And  this
state  is  found  to  be  no  less  necessary  to  their  happiness  than
to  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  Thus,  the  law  of  nature
every  way  obliges  them  to  seek  and  cultivate  peace.  That
divine  law  has  no  other  end  in  view  than  the  welfare  of  man-
kind :  to  that  object  all  its  rules  and  all  its  precepts  tend :
they  are  all  deducible  from  this  principle,  that  men  should
seek  their  own  felicity ;  and  morality  is  no  more  than  the  art
of  acquiring  happiness.  As  this  is  true  of  individuals,  it  is
equally  so  of  nations,  as  must  appear  evident  to  any  one  who
will  but  take  the  trouble  of  reflecting  on  what  we  have  said
of  their  common  and  reciprocal  duties,  in  the  first  chapter  of
the  second  book.

This  obligation  of  cultivating  peace  binds  the  sovereign  by  i  s.  The  «o.
a  double  tie. He  owes  this  attention  to  his  people,  on  whom^®"^*"*
war  would  pour  a  torrent  of  evils;  and  he  owes  it  in  thej^j^f*  ^^
most  strict  and  indispensable  manner,  since  it  is  solely  for  the
advantage  and  welfare  of  the  nation  that  he  is  intrusted  with
the  government.  (Book  1.  §  39.) He  owes  the  same  attention
to  foreign  nations,  whose  happiness  likewise  is  disturbed  by
war. The  nation's  duty  in  this  respect  has  been  shown  in
the  preceding  chapter ;  and  the  sovereign,  being  invested  with
the  public  authority,  is  at  the  same  time  charged  with  all  the
duties  of  the  society,  or  body  of  the  nation.  (Book  I.  §  41.)

The  nation  or  the  sovereign  ought  not  only  to  refrain,  on  ?  *•  Bxtem
their  own  part,  from  disturbing  that  peace  which  is  so  salu-  ^^  '^  ^^^
tary  to  mankind :  they  are,  moreover^  bound  to  promote  it  as
far  as  lies  in  their  power, — to  prevent  others  from  breaking
it  without  necessity,  and  to  inspire  them  with  the  love  of  jus-
tice, equity,  and  public  tranquillity, — ^in  a  word,  with  the  love
of  peace. It  is  one  of  the  best  offices  a  sovereign  can  render
to  nations,  and  to  the  whole  universe. What  a  glorious  and
amiable  character  is  that  of  peace-maker ! Were  a  powerful
prince  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  advantages  attending
it, — ^were  he  to  conceive  what  pure  and  effulgent  glory  he
may  derive  from  that  endearing  character,  together  with  the  •
gratitude,  the  love,  the  veneration,  and  the  confidence  of  na-
tions,—did  he  know  what  it  is  to  reign  over  the  hearts  of
men, — he  would  wish thus to  become  the  benefactor,  the  [  431  j
friend,  the  father  of  mankind ;  and  in  being  so,  he  would  find
infinitely  more  delight  than  in  the  most  splendid  conquests.
Augustus;,  shutting  the  temple  of  Janus,  giving  peace  to  the
universe,  and  adjusting  the  disputes  of  kings  and  nations,*—

647


431 OF  PEACH,  AND  THE  OBLiaATIOl^  TO  CULTIVATB  I*,

»ooK  iv. Augustus,  at  that  moment,  appears  the  greatest  of  mortals,
CHAP.  I. ^^^^  ^g  .^  were,  a  god  upon  earth.


;  5.  Of  the  But  those  disturbers  of  the  public  peace, — ^those  scourges
diatarbers  ^f  ^jjg  earth,  who,  fired  by  a  lawless  thirst  of  power,  or  im-
Uo  TOaoo!  "  P®1^6<i  ^7  ^^^  pride  and  ferocity  of  their  disposition,  snatch  up
arms  without  justice  or  reason,  and  sport  with  the  quiet  of
mankind  and  the  blood  of  their  subjects, — those  monstrous
heroes,  though  almost  deified  by  the  foolish  admiration  of  the
vulgar,  are  in  effect  the  most  cruel  enemies  of  the  human
race,  and  ought  to  be  treated  as  such.  Experience  shoivs
what  a  train  of  calamities  war  entails  even  upon  nations  thai
are  not  immediately  engaged  in  it.  War  disturbs  commerce,
destroys  the  subsistence  of  mankind,  raises  the  price  of  all  the
most  necessary  articles,  spreads  just  alarms,  and  obliges  all
nations  to  be  upon  their  guard,  and  to  keep  up  an  armed
force.  He,  therefore,  who  without  just  cause  breaks  the  ge^
neral  peace,  unavoidably  does  an  injury  even  to  those  nations
which  are  not  the  objects  of  his  arms ;  and  by  his  pernicious
example  he  essentially  attacks  the  happiness  and  safety  of
every  nation  upon  earth.  He  gives  them  a  right  to  join  in  a
general  confederacy  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  and  chas-
tising him,  and  depriving  him  of  a  power  which  he  so  enor-
mously abuses.  What  evils  does  he  not  bring  on  his  own
nation,  lavishing  her  blood  to  gratify  his  inordinate  passions,
and  exposing  her  to  the  resentment  of  a  host  of  enemies '.
A  famous  minister  of  the  last  century  has  justly  merited  the
indignation  of  his  country,  by  involving  her  in  unjust  or  un-
necessary wars.  If  by  his  abilities  and  indefatigable  appli-
cation, he  procured  her  distinguished  successes  in  the  field  of
battle,  he  drew  on  her,  at  least  for  a  time,  the  execration  oi
all  Europe.  ^

2  6. How The  love  of  peace  should  equally  prevent  us  from  embark
far  war  may  ^ jj^  ^  ^^^  without  necessity,  and  from  perseverinff  in  it
^  after  the  necessity  has  ceased  to  exist.  W  hen  a  sovereign  has

been  compelled  to  take  up  arms  for  just  and  important  rea-
sons, he  may  carry  on  the  operations  of  war  till  he  has  at-
tained its  lawful  end,  which  is,  to  procure  justice  and  safety.
(Book  III.  §  28.)

If  the  cause  be  dubious,  the  just  end  of  war  can  only  be  to
bring  the  enemy  to  an  equitable  compromise  (Book  III.  §  38):
and  consequently  the  war  must  not  be  continued  beyond  that
point.  The  moment  our  enemy  proposes  or  consenta  to  such
compromise,  it  is  our  duty  to  desist  from  hostilities.

But  if  we  have  to  do  with  a  perfidious  enemy,  it  would  be
[  482  ]  imprudent  to  trust  either  his  words  or  his  oaths.  In  such
case,  justice  allows  and  prudence  requires  that  we  should
avail  ourselves  of  a  successful  war,  and  follow  up  our  advan-
tages, till  we  have  humbled  a  dangerous  and'  excessive  power,
or  compelled  the  enemy  to  give  us  sufficient  seciwity  for  the
time  to  come.  ,

MS


OF  TBEATIES OF  PEAOE.  432

Finally,  if  the  enemy  obstinately  rejects  equitable  condi- book  it.
tions,  he  himself  forces  us  to  continue  our  progress  till  we ^°^'*'  '*
have  obtained  a  complete  and  decisive  victory,  by  which  he
is  absolutely  reduced  and  subjected. The  use  to  be  made
of  victory  has  been  shown  above.  (Book  III.  Chap.  VIII.  IX.
XIII.)

When  one  of  the  parties  is  reduced  to  sue  for  peace,  or  1 7. Tmm
both  are  weary  of  the  war,  then  thoughts  of  an  accommoda-  ^®  '^^  **'
tion  are  entertained,  and  the  conditions  are  agreed  on. Thus  ^^'
peace  steps  in  and  puts  a  period  to  the  war.

The  general  and  necessary  effects  of  peace  are  the  reconci-  ?  8. Gene-
ration of  enemies  and  the  cessation  of  hostilities  on  both™^®^®®**
sides. It  restores  the  two  nations  to  their  natural  state. °  v^^c^


CHAP.  II.  CHAP,  n.

TREATIES OF  PEACE.  (188)

WHEN  the  belligerent  powers  have  agreed  to  lay  down  |  9. Defini.
their  arms,  the  agreement  or  contract  in  which  they  stipulate  ^on  of  »
the  conditions  of  peace,  and  regulate  the  manner  in  which  it  *'®**y  **^
is  to  be  restored  and  supported,  is  called  the  treaty  of  peace.  ^^^^*

The  same  power  who  has  the  right  of  making  war,  of  de-  g  10.  By
termining  on  it,  of  declaring  it,  and  of  directing  its  opera-  whom  it
tions,  has  naturally  that  likewise  of  making  and  concluding  ™*y  ^®  ^^
the  treaty  of  peace.  (189)  These  two  powers  are  connected
together,  and  the  latter  naturally  follows  from  the  former.  If
the  ruler  of  the  state  is  empowered  to  judge  of  the  causes  and
reasons  for  which  war  is  to  be  undertaken, — of  the  time  and
circumstances  proper  for  commencing  it, — of  the  manner  in
which  it  is  to  be  supported  and  carried  on, — it  is  therefore
his  province  also  to  set  bounds  to  its  progress,  to  point  out
the  time  when  it  shall  be  discontinued,  and  to  conclude  a  peace.
But  this  power  does  not  necessarily  include  that  of  granting  or
accepting  whatever  conditions  he  pleases,  with  a  view  to  peace.
Though  the  state  has  intrusted  to  the  prudence  of  her  ruler
the  general  care  of  determining  on  war  and  peace,  yet  she
may  have  limited  his  power  in  many  particulars'  by  the  funda-
mental laws.  Thus,  Francis  the  First,  king  of  France,  had
the  absolute  disposal  of  war  and  peace :  and  yet  the  assembly
of  Cognac  declared  that  he  had  no  authority  to  alienate  any

(188)  Upon  the  suhject  of  treaties  in  are  collected  in Chitty's  Commercial

f  enerali  and  their  oonstrucUon,  eee  anu.  Law,  latter  part  of  vol.  2. — C.

.wok  ii. ch.  xiL  p.  192—274. Whilst  (189)  ^nf«,  291-2;  and  see  Hoop,  1

examining  the  sections  of  Yattel  rela-  Rob.  Rep.  196,  Id.;  1  Chitty's  Com.  L.

uve  to  treaties,  it  will  be  found  advis-  878. — C.
able  to  read  the  modem  treaties,  which


4^3  OF  TREATIES  OF  PEACE.

BOOK  IT. part  of  the  kingdom  by  a  treaty  of  peace. (See Book  L

_CHAP^U^  §  266.)

A  nation  that  has  the  free  disposal  of  her  domestic  affairs,
and  of  the  form  of  her  government,  may  introst  a  single
person,  or  an  assembly,  with  the  power  of  making  peace,  al-
though she  has  not  given  them  that  of  making  war.  Of  this
we  have  an  instance  in  Sweden,  where,  since  the  death  of
[  433  ]  Charles  XII.,  the  king  cannot  declare  war  without  the  conaent
of  the  states  assembled  in  diet ;  but  he  may  make  peace  in
conjunction  with  the  senate.  It  is  less  dangerous  for  a  nation
to  intrust  her  rulers  with  this  latter  power,  than  with  the
former. '  She  may  reasonably  expect  that  they  will  not  make
peace  till  it  suits  with  the  interest  of  the  state.  But  their
passions,  their  own  interest,  their  private  views,  too  often  in-
fluence their  resolutions  where  there  is  question  of  undertaking
a  war.  Besides,  it  must  be  a  very  disadvantageous  peace,  in-
deed, that  is  not  preferable  to  war,  whereas,  on  the  other
hand,  to  exchange  peace  for  war  is  always  very  hazardous.

When  a  prince,  who  is  possessed  only  of  limited  aathority^
has  a  power  to  make  peace,  as  he  cannot  of  himself  grant
whatever  conditions  he  pleases,  it  is  incumbeni;  on  those  who
wish  to  treat  with  him  on  sure  grounds,  to  require  that  the
treaty  of  peace  be  ratified  by  the  nation,  or  by  those  who
are  empowered  to  perform  the  stipulations  contained  in  it.  If,
for  instance,  any  potentate,  in  negotiating  a  treaty  of  peace
with  Sweden,  requires  a  defensive  alliance  or  guarantee  as  the
condition,  this  stipulation  will  not  be  valid,  unless  approved
and  accepted  by  the  diet,  who  alone  have  the  power  of  carry-
ing it  into  effect. The  kings  of  England  are  authorized  to
conclude  treaties  of  peace  and  alliance ;  but  they  cannot,  by
those  treaties,  alienate  any  of  the  possessions  of  the  crown
without  the  consent  of  parliament. Neither  can  they,  without
the  concurrence  of  that  body,  raise  any  money  in  the  kingdom ;
wherefore,  whenever  they  conclude  any  subsidiary  treaty,  it  is
their  constant  rule  to  lay  it  before  the  parliament,  in  order  that
they  may  be  certain  of  the  concurrence  of  that  assembly  to
enable  them  to  make  good  their  engagements. When  the
emperor  Charles  V.  required  of  Francis  the  First,  his  prisoner^
such  conditions  as  that  king  could  not  grant  without  the  con-
sent of  the  nation,  he  should  have  detained  him  till  the
states-general  of  France  had  ratified  the  treaty  of  Madrid,
and  Burgundy  had  acquiesced  in  it :  thus  he  would  not  have
lost>  the  fruits  of  his  victory  by  an  oversight  which  appears
very  surprising  in  a  prince  of  his  abilities.
1 11.  Alien- We  shall  not  repeat  here  what  we  have  said  on  a  former
•fttons  made  occasion  Concerning  the  alienation  of  a  part  of  the  state

**  '  We  shall  therefore  content  ourselves  with  observing,  that,
in  case  of  a  pressing  necessity,  such  as  is  produced  by  the
events  of  an  unfortunate  war,  the  alienations  made  by  the

650


01*  TREATIES  OE  PEACE.  433

pnnce,  in  order  to  save  the  remainder  of  the  state,  are  consi-  bock  it.
dered  as  approved  and  ratified  by  the  mere  silence  of  the  na-  — ^^'  "•
tion,  when  she  has  not,  in  the  form  of  her  government,  retained
some  easy  and  ordinary  method  of  giving  her  express  con-
sent, and  has  lodged  an  absolute  power  in  the  prince's  hands.
The  states-general  are  abolished  in  France  by  disuse  and  by
the  tacit  consent  of  the  nation.  Whenever,  therefore,  that
kingdom  is  reduced  to  any  calamitous  exigency,  it  belongs  to
the  king  alone  to  determine  by  what  sacrifices  he  may  pur-  [  434  ]
chase  peace :  and  his  enemies  will  treat  with  him  on  a  sure
footing,  tt  would  be  a  vain  plea  on  the  part  of  the  people,  to
say  that  it  was  only  through  fear  they  acquiesced  in  'the  abo-
lition of  the  states-general.  The  fact  is,  that  they  did  acqui-
esce, and  thereby  suffered  the  king  to  acquire  all  the  powers
necessary  for  contracting  with  foreign  states  in  the  name  of
the  nation.  In  every  state  there  must  necessarily  be  some
power  with  which  other  nations  may  treat  on  secure  grounds.
A  certain  historian'*'  says,  that,  '*■  by  the  fundamental  laws,
the  kings  of  France  cannot,  to  the  prejudice  of  their  suc-
cessors, renounce  any  of  their  rights,  by  any  treaty,  whether
voluntary  or  compulsory."  The  ^damental  laws  may  indeed
withhold  from  the  king  the  power  of  alienating,  without  the
nation's  consent,  what  belongs  to  the  state ;  but  they  cannot
invalidate  an  alienation  or  renunciation  made  with  that  con-
sent^t  And  if  the  nation  has  permitted  matters  to  proceed  to
such  lengths  that  she  now  has  no  longer  any  means  of  ex-
pressly declaring  her  consent,  her  silence  alone,  on  such  occa
sions,  is  in  reality  a  tacit  consent.  Otherwise  there  would  be
no  possibility  of  treating  on  sure  grounds  with  such  a  state ;
and  her  pretending  thus  beforehand  to  invalidate  all  future
treaties  would  be  an  infringement  of  the  law  of  nations,
which  ordains  that  all  states  should  retain  the  means  of  treat-
ing with  each  other  (Book  I.  §  262),  and  should  observe  their
treaties.  (Book  II.  §§  163,  269,  &c.)

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  in  our  examination
whether  the  consent  of  the  nation  be  requisite  for  alienating
any  part  of  the  state,  we  mean  such  parts  as  are  still  in  the
nation's  possession,  and  not  those  which  have  fallen  into  the
enemy's  hands  during  the  course  of  the  war :  for,  as  these
latter  are  no  longer  possessed  by  the  nation,  it  is  the  sovereign

*  The  abb6  de  ChoUi,  Hist  de  Charles national  approbation,  and  the  oharaoter
V.  p.  492.  .  of  a  law  of  the  state. The  oardinab

f  The  renunciation  made  by  Anne  who  examined  this  affair  by  order  of
of  Austria,  consort  of  Louis  the  Thir-  the  pope,  whom  Charles  II.  had  con-
teenth,  was  good  and  valid,  because  it  suited,  paid  no  regard  to  Maria  The-
was  confirmed  by  the  general  assembly  resa's  renunciation,  as  not  deeming  it
of  the  cortes,  and  registered  in  all  the  of  sufficient  force  to  invalidate  the  lawf
offices.  The  case  was  otherwise  with  of  the  country,  and  to  supersede  the  .
that  mads  by  Anna  Theresa,  which  established  custom. — Memoirs  of  M.
was  not  sanctioned  by  those  formalities,  de  St  Philippe,  toL  L  p.  29. — Sd.
nsequenUy,  not  stamped  with  the ▲.».  1797.

651


434  OF  TREATIES  OF  PEACE,

BOOK  IT.  alone,  if  iDvested  with  the  full  and  absolute  administration  of
^"^^-  '^  the  government,  and  with  the  power  of  making  war  and
peace, — ^it  is  he  alone,  I  say,  who  is  to  judge  whether  it  be
expedient  to  relinquish  those  parts  of  the  state,  or  to  continne
the  Tfar  for  the  recovery  of  them.  And  even  though  it  should
be  pretended  that  he  cannot  by  his  own  single  authority  make
any  valid  alienation  of  them, — he  has,  nevertheless,  according
to  our  supposition,  that  is,  if  invested  with  full  and  absolute
power, — he  has,  I  say,  a  right  to  promise  that  the  nation  shall
never  again  take  up  arms  for  the  recovery  of  those  lands,
towns,  or  provinces,  which  he  relinquishes :  and  this  suffices
for  securing  the  quiet  possession  of  them  to  the  enemy  into
[  435  ]  whose  hands  they  are  fallen.

^  12.  How  The  necessity  of  ^making  peace  authorizes  the  sovereign  to
the  sove-  dispose  of  the  property  of  individuals ;  and  the  eminent  d$-
InTt^Kt  ^^^^  ^ives  him  a  right  to  do  it  (Book  I.  §  244).  He  may
dispose  of  oveu,  to  a  Certain  degree,  dispose  of  their  persons,  by  virtue
what  con-  of  the  powcr  which  he  has  over  all  his  subjects.  But  as  it  is
cerns  indi-  for  the  public  advantage  that  he  thus  disposes  of  them,  the
viduais. state  is  bound  to  indemnify  the  citizens  who  are  sufferers  bj

the  transaction.  (Ibid.)
^  13. Whe- Every  impediment  by  which  the  prince  is  disabled  from
ther  s  king,  administering  the  affairs  of  government,  undoubtedly  deprives
being  a  pn-  j^j^^  ^f  ^j^^  power  of  making^  peace. Thus  a  king  cannot  make

■oner  of  war, ^ ^ /.^  j . i?  • -x  lm '  -l  *. ^f

can  make  ^  treaty  of  peace  during  his  mmonty,  or  while  m  a  state  of
peace.  mental  derangement :  this  assertion  does  not  stand  in  need
of  any  proof:  but  the  question,  is,  whether  a  king  can  con-
clude a  peace  while  he  is  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  whether  the
treaty  thus  made  be  valid  ?  Some  celebrated  authors*  here
draw  a  distinction  between  a  monarch  whose  kingdom  h  pa-
trimonial, and  another  who  has  only  the  tutufructus  of  hi3  do-
minions. We  think  we  have  overthrown  that  false  and  dan-
gerous idea  of  a  patriiponial  kingdom  (Book  I.  §§  6S,  kc.\
and  evidently  shown  that  the  notion  ought  not  to  be  extended
beyond  the  bare  power  with  which  a  sovereign  is  sometimes
intrusted,  of  nominating  his  successor,  of  appointing  a  new
prince  to  rule  over  the  state,  and  dismembering  some  parts  of
it,  if  he  thinks  it  expedient ; — the  whole,  however,  to  be  mii-
formly  done  for  the  good  of  the  nation,  and  with  a  view  to  her
greater  advantage.  Every  legitimate  government,  whatever
it  be,  is  established  solely  for  the  good  and  welfare  of  the
state.  This  incontestable  principle  being  once  laid  down,  the
making  of  peace  is  no  longer-  the  peculiar  province  of  the
king;  it  belongs  to  the  nation.  Now  it  is  certain  that*
captive  prince  cannot  administer  the  government,  or  attend
to  the  management  of  public  affairs.  How  shall  he  who  is
not  free  command  a  nation  ?  How  can  he  govern  it  in  such
'manner  as  best  to  promote  the  advantage  of  the  people,  and

•  8ee  Wolf.  Jus  Gent  {  982.
662


07  TREATIES  OF  PEACE.  485

the  public  welfare  ?  He  does  not,  indeed,  forfeit  his  rights ;  book  it.
but  his  captivity  deprives  him  of  the  power  of  exercising  ^^^^'  "',
them,  as  he  is  not  in  a  condition  to  direct  the  use  of  them  to
its  proper  and  legitimate  end.  He  stands  in  the  same  predir
cament  as  a  king  in  his  minority,  or  labouring  under  a  de-
rangement of  his  mental  faculties.  In  such  circumstances,  it
is  necessary  that  the  person  or  persons  whom  the  laws  of  the
state  designate  for  the  regency  should  assume  the  reins  of
government.  To  them  it  belongs  to  treat  of  peace,  to  settle
the  terms  on  which  it  shall  be  made,  and  to  bring  it  to  a  con-
clusion, in  conformity  to  the  laws.

The  captive  sovereign  may  himself  negotiate  the  peace,
and  promise  what  personally  depends  on  him :  but  the  treaty
does  not  become  obligatory  on  the  nation  till  ratified  by  her-
self, or  by  those  who  are  invested  irith  the  public  authority
during  the  prince's  captivity,  or,  finally,  by  the  sovereign  [  436  ]
himself  after  his  release.

Biit,  if  it  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  the  state  to  use  her  best
efforts  for  procuring  the  release  of.  the  most  inconsiderable
of  her  citizens  who  has  lost  his  liberty  in  the  public  cause,  the
obligation  is  much  stronger  in  the  case  of  her  sovereign,
whose  cares,  attention,  and  labours  are  devoted  to  the  common
safety  and  welfare.  It  was  in  fighting  for  his  people  that  the
prince,  who  has  been  made  prisoner,  fell  into  that  situation,
which,  to  a  person  of  his  exalted  rank,  must  be  wretched  in  the
extreme :  and  ^hall  that  very  people  hesitate  to  deliver  him
at  the  expense  of  the  greatest  sacrifices  ?  On  so  melancholy
an  occasion,  they  should  not  demur  at  any  thing  short  of  the
very  existence  of  the  state.  But,  in  every  exigency,  the  safety
of  the  people  is  the  supreme  law;  and,  in  so  severe  an  extre-
mity, a  generous  prince  will  imitate  the  example  of  Regulus.
That  heroic  citizen,  being  sent  back  to  Rome  on  his  parole,
dissuaded  the  Romans  from  purchasing  his  release  by  an  in-
glorious ^'•efity,  though  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  tortures
prepared  *br  him  by  the  cruelty  of  the  Carthaginians.*

Whe»>  an  unjust  conqueror,  or  any  other  usurper,  has  in-  f  14. Whe-
vaded  the  kingdom,  he  becomes  possessed  of  all  the  powers  ti»«  peace
of  gr'^ernment  when  once  the  people  have  submitted  to  him,  ^^J^^  ™*^*
and, by  a  voluntary  homage, acknowledged him as their  ^^^^
sovereign. Other  states,  as  having  no  right  to  intermeddle
w-th  the  domestic  concerns  of  that  nation,  or  to  interfere  in
her  government,  are  bound  to  abide  by  her  decision,  and  to
look  no  farther  than  the  circumstances  of  actual  possession.
They  may,  therefore,  broach  and  conclude  a  treaty  of  peace
with  the  usurper. They  do  not  thereby  infringe  the  right  of
the  lawful  sovereign :  it  is  not  their  business  to  examine  and
judge  of  that  right:  they  leave  it  as  it  is,  and  only  look  to
ihe  possession,  in  all  the  affairs  they  have  to  transact  with

*  Se)  TiL  Liy.  Epitom.  lib.  xviii.  and  other  historians.
70  2W  558


486  OF  TBBATIES  Of  PEACE.


BOOK  IT.  that  kingdom,  pursuant  to  their  own  rights  and  those  of  lh«
9^^^'  "•  nation  whose  sovereignty  is  contested.  But  this  rule  does  not
preclude  them  from  espousing  the  quarrel  of  the  dethroned
monarch,  and  assisting  him,  if  he  appears  to  hare  jiistiric  on
his  side :  they  then  declare  themselves  enemies  of  the  nation
which  has  acknowledged  his  rival,  as,  when  two  different  states
are  at  war,  they  are  at  liberty  to  assist  either  party  whose  pre-
tensions appear  to  be  best  founded.
2  15.  Allies  The  principal  in  the  war,  the  sovereign  in  whose  name  it
^eluded  in  jjj^g  jy^en  carried  on,  cannot  justly  make  a  peace  without  in-
of^>«iMBef  eluding  his  allies, — I  mean  those  who  have  given  him  assist-
ance without  directly  taking  part  in  the  war.  This  precaution
is  necessary,  in  order  to  secure  them  from  the  resentment  of
the  enemy :  for  though  the  latter  has  no  right  to  take  offence
against  his  adversary's  allies,  whose  engagements  were  purely
of  a  defensive  nature,  and  who  have  done  nothing  more  than
f  437  ]  faithfully  execute  their  treaties  (Book  III.  §  101) — ^yet  it  toe
frequently  happens  that  the  conduct  of  men  is  influenced  by
their  passions  rather  than  by  justice  and  reason.  If  the  alli-
ance was  not  of  prior  date  to  the  commencement  of  the  war,
and  was  formed  with  a  view  to  that  very  war, — although  thest
new  allies  do  not  engage  in  the  contest  with  all  their  force,
nor  directly  as  principals,  they  nevertheless  give  to  the  prince
against  whom  they  have  joined,  just  cause  to  treat  them  as
enemies.  The  sovereign,  therefore,  whom  they  have  assisted,
must  not  omit  including  them  in  the  peace.

But  the  treaty  concluded  by  the  principal  is  no  farther
obligatory  on  his  allies  than  as  they  are  willing  to  accede  to
it,  unless  they  have  given  him  full  power  to  treat  for  them.
By  including  them  in  his  treaty,  he  only  acquires  a  right,  with
respect  to  his  reconciled  enemy,  of  insisting  that  he  shall  not
attack  those  allies  on  account  of  the  succours  they  have  fur-
nished against  him, — ^that  he  shall  not  molest  them,  but  shall
live  in  peace  with  them  as  if  nothing  had  happened.
{ 16. Asao- Sovereigns  who  have  associated  in  a  war, — ^all  those  who
oiAtei  to have  directly  taken  part  in  it, — are  respectively  to  make  their
fo^^jMeUl  treaties of  peace, each  for  himself. Such  was the  mode
adopted  at  Nimeguen,  at  Byswick,  and  at  Utrecht. But  the
alliance  obliges  them  to  treat  in  concert. To  determine  in
what  cases  an  associate  may  detach  himself  from  the  alliance,
and  make  a  separate  peace,  is  a  question  which  we  hare  ex-
amined in  treating  of  associations  in  war  (Book  III.  Chap.  VL),
and  of  alliances  in  general  (Book  II.  Chap.  XII.  and  XV).
{ 17.  Medi- It  frequently  happens  that  two  nations,  though  equally
•*^®°' tired  of  the  war,  do  nevertheless  continue  it  merely  from  a
fear  of  making  the  first  advances  to  an  accommodation,  as
these  may  be  imputed  to  weakness;  or  they  persist  in  it
from  animosity,  and  contrary  to their  real interests. On
such  occasions,  some  common  friends  of  the  parties  effectually
interpose,  by  offering  themselves  as  mediators. There  cannot


09  TREATISS  OJf  PEACE.  137


be  a  more  beneficent  office,  and  mere  becoming  a  great  prince, book  iy.
than  that  of  reconciling  two  nations  at  war,  and  thus  putting  JEE^^iiL.
a  stop  to  the  effusion  of  human  blood :  it  is  the  indispensable
duty  of  those  who  have  the  means  of  performing  it  with  suc-
cess. This  is  the  only  reflection  we*  shall here  make  on  a
subject  we  have  already  discussed  (Book  II.  §  328).

A  treaty  of  peace  can  be  no  more  than  a  compromise,  j  is.  On
Were  the  rules  of  strict  and  rigid  justice  to  be  observed  in  it,  what  footing
00  that  each  party  should  precisely  receive  every  thing  to  which  p®*®*  ^'^
he  has  a  just  title,  it  would  be  impossible  ever  to  make  a  peace,  dadel
Pirst,  with  regard  to  the  very  subject  which  occasioned  the
war,  one  of  the  parties  would  be  under  a  necessity  of  acknow-
ledging himself  in  the  wrong,  and  condemning  his  ovm  just
{)reten8ions :  which  he  will  hardly  do,  unless  reduced  to  the
ast  extremity.  But  if  he  owns  the  injustice  of  his  cause,  he
must  at  the  same  time  condemn  every  measure  he  has  pur-
sued in  support  of  it :  he  must  restore  what  he  has  unjustly
taken,  must  reimburse  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  repair
the  damages.  And  how  can  a  just  estimate  of  all  the  damages
be  formed  ?  What  price  can  be  set  on  all  the  blood  that  has  [  438  ]
been  shed,  the  loss  of  such  a  number  of  citizens,  and  the  ruin
of  families !  Nor  is  this  all.  Strict  justice  would  further
demand,  that  the  author  of  an  unjust  war  should  suffer  a  pe-
nalty proportioned  to  the  injuries  for  which  he  owes  satisfac-
tion, and  such  as  might  insure  the  future  safety  of  him  whom
he  attacked.  How  shall  the  nature  of  that  penalty  be  deter-
mined, and  the  desree  of  it  be  precisely  regulated  ?  In  fine,
even  he  who  had  justice  on  his  side  may  have  transgressed
the  bounds  of  justifiable  self-defence,  and  been  guilty  of  im-
proper excesses  in  the  prosecution  of  a  war  whose  object  was
originally  lawful :  here  then  are  so  many  wrongs,  of  which
strict  justice  would  demand  reparation.  He  may  have  made
conquests  and  taken  booty  beyond  the  value  of  his  claim.
Who  shall  make  an  exact  calculation,  a  just  estimate  of  this  ?
Since,  therefore,  it  would  be  dreadful  to  perpetuate  the  war,
or  to  pursue  it  to  the  utter  ruin  of  one  of  the  parties, — and
since,  however  just  the  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged,  we
must  at  length  turn  our  thoughts  towards  the  restoration  of
peace,  and  ought  to  direct  all  our  measures  to  the  attainment
of  that  salutary  object, — no  other  expedient  remains  than
that  of  cominff  to  a  compromise  respecting  all  claims  and
grievances  on  both  sides,  and  putting  an  end  to  all  disputes
by  a  convention  as  fair  and  equitable  as  circumstances  will
admit  of.  In  such  conventions,  no  decision  is  pronounced  on
the  original  cause  of  the  war,  or  on  those  controversies  to
which  the  various  acts  of  hostility  might  give  rise ;  nor  is
either  of  the  parties  condemned  as  unjust, — a  condemnation
to  which  few  princes  would  submit ; — but,  a  simple  agreement
is  formed,  which  determines  what  equivalent  each  party  shall
receive  in  extinction  of  all  his  pretensions.

65ft


438  OF  TREATIES  0^  PEACE.


BOOK  !▼. The  effect  of  the  treaty  of  peace  is  to  put  an  end  to  the
war,  and  to  abolish  the  subject  of  it. It  leaves  the  contract-


CHAP. IL


i  1%  ^®°*'  ^°g  parties  no  right  to  commit  any  acts  of  hostility  on  account
thotreaty^of  ®^^^®^  ^^  *'^®  subject  itsclf  which  had  given  rise  to  the  war,  or,
peace.  of  any  thing  that  was  done  during  its  continuance :  wherefore
they  cannot  lawfully  take  up  arms  again  for  the  same  subject.
Accordingly,  in  such  treaties,  the  contracting  parties  reci-
procally engage  to  preserve  perpetual  peace :  which  is  not  to
be  understood  as  if  they  promised  never  to  make  war  on  each
other  for  any  cause  whatever.  The  peace  in  question  relates
to  the  war  which  it  terminates :  and  it  is  in  reality  perpetual,
inasmuch  as  it  does  not  allow  them  to  revive  the  same  war,  by
taking  up  arms  again  for  the  same  subject  which  had  origin^
ally  given  birth  to  it.

A  special  compromise,  however,  only  extinguishes  the  par-
ticular means  to  which  it  relates,  and  does  not  preclude  any
subsequent  pretensions  to  the  object  itself,  on  other  grounds.
Care  is  therefore  usually  taken  to  require  a  general  compro-
mise, which  shall  embrace  not  only  the  existmg  controversy,
but  the  very  thing  itself  which  is  the  subject  of  that  contro-
versy :  stipulation  is  made  for  a  general  renunciation  of  all
pretensions  whatever  to  the  thing  in  question:  and  thus,
although  the  party  renouncing  might  in  the  sequel  be  able  to
L  439  ]  demonstrate  by  new  reasons  that  the  thing  did  really  belong

to  him,  his  claim  would  not  be  admitted.
2  20. Am- An  amnesty  is  a  perfect  oblivion  of  the  past ;  and  the  end
nesty. of  peace  being  to  extinguish  all  subjects  of  discord,  this  should
be  the  leading  article  of  the  treaty ;  and  accordingly,  such
is  at  present  the  constant  practice. But  though  the  treaty
should  be  wholly  silent  on  this  head,  the  amnesty,  by  the  very
nature  of  the  peace,  is  necessarily  implied  in  it.
i  21.  Things As  each  of  the  belligerent  powers  maintains  that  he  has
not  men- justice  on  his  side, — and  as  their  pretensions  are  not  liable  to
S''*  *^'  ^®  J^^Sed  by  others  (Book  III.  §  188),— whatever  state  things
happen  to  be  in  at  the  time  of  the  treaty  is  to  be  considered
as  their  legitimate  state ;  and  if  the  parties  intend  to  make
any  change  in  it,  they  must  expressly  specify  it  in  the  tr^ty.
Consequently  all  things  not  mentioned  in  the  treaty  are  to
remain  on  the  same  footing  on  which  they  stand  at  the  period
when  it  is  concluded. This  is  also  a  consequence  of  the  pro-
mised amnesty. All  damages  caused  during  the  war  are
likewise  buried  in  oblivion ;  and  no  action  can  be  brought  for
those  of  which  the  treaty  does  not  stipulate  the  reparation :
they  are  considered  as  having  never  happened.
§  22.  Things But  the  effect  of  the  compromise  or  amnesty  cannot  be  ex-
not  included  tended  to  things  which  have  no  relation  to  the  war  that  is
In  the  com-  terminated  by  the  treaty. Thus,  claims  founded  on  a  debt,
anuwsV^' or  ou  an  injury  which  had  been  done  prior  to  the  war,  but
which  made  no  part  of  the  reasons  for  undertaking  it,  still
stand  on  thnir  former  footing,  and  are  not  abolished  bj


OP  EXECUTION  OF  THE  TREATY  OP  PEACE. * 489


the  treaty,  unless  it  be  expressly  extended  to  the  extinction book  it.
of  every  claim  whatever. The  case  is  the  same  with  debts -^5f£:J!:.
contracted  during  the  war,  but  for  causes  which  have  no  re-
lation to  it,— or  with  injuries  done  during  its  continuance,
but  which  have  no  connection  with  the  state  of  warfare.

Debts  contracted  with  individuals,  or  injuries  which  they
may  have  received  from  any  other  quarter,  without  relation
to  the  war,  are  likewise  not  abolished  by  the  compromise  and
amnesty,  as  these  solely  relate  to  their  own  particular  object, —
that  is  to  say,  to  the  war,  its  causes,  and  its  effects.  Thus,
if  two  subjects  of  the  belligerent  powers  make  a  contract  to-
gether in  a  neutral  country,  or  if  the  one  there  receives  an
injury  from  the  other, — ^the  performance  of  the  contract,  or
the  reparation  of  the  injury  and  damage,  may  be  prosecuted
after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  of  peace.

Finally,  if  the  treaty  expresses  that  all  things  shall  be  re-
stored to  the  state  in  which  they  were  before  the  war,  this
clause  is  understood  to  relate  only  to  immovable  possessions,
and  cannot  be  extended  to  movables,  or  booty,  which  imme-
diately becomes  the  property  of  the  captors,  and  is  looked  on
as  relinquished  by  the  former  owners  on  account  of  the  diffi-  [  440  ]
culty  of  recognising  it,  and  the  little  hope  they  entertain  of
ever  recovering  it.

When  the  last-made  treaty  mentions  and  confirms  other  ?  23.  Former
treaties  of  prior  date,  these  constitute  a  part  of  the  new  on^,  '^'^^ie^*
no  less  than  if  they  were  literally  transcribed  and  included  in™®,!'^^^^
it :  and  any  new  articles  relating  to  former  conventions  are  to  firmed  in
be  interpreted  according  to  the  rules  which  we  have  laid  down  t^e  new,  are
in  a  preceding  part  of  this  work  (Book  II.  Chap.  XVII.  and  ^  P*'*  «^  ^^
particularly  §  286).


CHAP.  III.  CHAP,  m.

OP  THE  EXECUTION  OP  THE  TREATY  OP  PEACE.

A  TREATY  of  peace  becomes  obligatory  on  the  contract-  j  24.  When
ing  parties  from  the  moment  of  its  conclusion, — ^the  moment  it  ^e  ©biiga-
has  passed  through  all  the  necessary  forms :  and  they  are  ^g^^**^^^.
bound  to  have  it  carried  into  execution  without  delay.*  From  meneeB.
that  instant  all  hostilities  must  cease,  unless  a  particular  day


*  It  is  an  essentiiil  point  to  neglect  to  the  Grand  Pensionary  De  Witt,  in

Done  of  the  formalities  which  can  in-  1662, thus ohserres — ''The articles

tare  the  execution  of  the  treaty,  and  and conditions of this alliance con-

preyent new disputes. Accordingly,  tain rarious  matters  of  different  na-

oare  must  be  taken  to  hare it  duly  tares,  the  majority  of  which  fall  nnder

recorded  in  all  the  proper  offices  and  the  cognisance  of  the  privy  council, —

eonrtB. M.  Van  Beuningen, writing  several,  nnder  that  of  the  admiralty,

2w2  667


no  OP  BXBcxrnoN  of  the

BOOK  IT. has  been  specified  for  the  commencement  of  the  peace. But
CHAP.  iiL ^Y^  treaty  does  not  bind  the  subjects  until  it  is  duly  notified  to
them. The  case  is* the  same  in  this  instance  as  in  that  of
a  truce  (Book  II.  §  239). If  it  should  happen  that  military
men,  acting  within  the  extent  of  their  functions  and  pursuant
to  the  rules  of  their  duty,  commit  any  acts  of  hostility  before
they  have  authentic  information  of  the  treaty  of  peace,  it  is  a
misfortune,  for  which  they  are  not  punishable :  but  the  sove-
reign, on  whom  the  treaty  of  peace  is  already  obligatorj,  is
bound  to  order  and  enforce  the  restitution  of  all  captures  made
subsequent  to  its  conclusion :  he  has  no  right  whatever  to
retain  them.
i  25.  PubU- A.nd  in  order  to  prevent  those  unhappy  accidents,  by  which
cation  of  thOjj^^ innocent  persons  may  lose  their  lives,  public  notice  of
the  peace  is  to  be  given  without  delay,  at  least  to  the  troops.
But  at  present,  as  the  body  of  the  people  cannot  of  themselves
undertake  any  act  of  hostility,  and  do  not  personally  engage
in  the  war,  the  solemn  proclamation  of  the  peace  may  be  de-
ferred, provided  that  care  be  taken  to  put  a  stop  to  all  hosti-
lities :  which  is  easily  done  by  means  of  the  generals  who
direct  the  operations,  or  by  proclaiming  an  armistice  at  the
head  of  the  armies. The  peace  of  1735,  between  the  emperor
and  France,  was  not  proclaimed  till  long  after. The  procla-
im 441  ]  mation  was  postponed  till  the  treaty  was  digested  at  leisure, —
t^e  most  important  points  having  been  already  adjusted  in  the
preliminaries. The  publication  of  the  peace  replaces  the  two
nations  in  the  state  they  were  in  before  the  war. It  again
opens  a  free  intercourse  between  them,  and  reinstates  the  sub
jects  on  both  sides  in  the  enjoyment  of  those  mutual  privileges
which  the  state  of  war  had  suspended. On  the  publication,
the  treaty  becomes  a  law  to  the  subjects :  and  they  are  thence-
forward bound  to  conform  to  the  regulations  stipulated  therein.
If,  for  instance,  the  treaty  imports  that  one  of  the  two  nations
shall  abstain  from  a  particular  branch  of  commerce,  every
subject  of  that  nation,  from  the  time  of  the  treaty's  being
made  public,  is  obliged  to  renounce  that  commerce.
^  26. Time When  no  particular  time  has  been  assigned  for  the  execu-
of  the  exo-  ^j^^  ^f  ^jj^  treaty,  and  the  performance  of  the  several  articles,
common  sense  dictates  that  every  point  should  be  carried  into
efifect  as  soon  as  possible :  and  it  was,  no  doubt,  in  this  ligbt
that  the  contracting  parties  understood  the  matter. The
faith  of  treaties  equally  forbids  all  neglect,  tardiness,  and
studied  delays,  in  the  execution  of  them.
» ..i..- — _— —

— others,  andor  that  of the  oiyil  tri-  followed ; and  ihe 8tates>genera! r*  -

bunals, the parliaments, Ac — es-  quired  that  the treaty  concluded  tbe

cheatage,  for instance, which comes  same  year  should  be  recorded  In  all  the

under  the  cognisance  of  the  chambre  parliaments  of  the  kingdom. See  Uio

des comptes [excheqtier]. Thus, the  king's  reply  on  this  subject,  in  hi«  letiirr

treaty  must  be  recorded  in  all  those  to  the  Count  D'Estrades,  page 399. —

different places." This advice  was  Edit.  ^.d.  1797.
658


TREATY  OF  PEACE,  44J

But  in  this  affair,  as  in  every  other,  a  legitimate  excuse, *ook  rt.
founded  on  a  real  and  insurmountable  obstacle,  is  to  be  ad-  -SE^IlIS:.
mitted ;  for  nobody  is  bound  to  perforin  impossibilities. The  ^  ^7.  A  Uw..
obstacle,  when  it  does  not  arise  from  any  fault  on  the  side  of  be  i^iT**
the  promising  party,  vacates  a  promise  which  cannot  be  made  ted.
good  by  an  equivalent,  and  of  which  the  performance  cannot
be  deferred  to  another  time. If  the  promise  can  be  fulfilled
on  another  occasion,  a  suitable  prolongation  of  the  time  must
be  allowed. Suppose  one  of  the  contracting  nations  has,  by
the  treaty  of  peace,  promised  the  other  a  body  of  auxiliary
troops :  she  will  not  be  bound  to  furnish  them,  if  she  happen
to  stand  in  urgent  need  of  them  for  her  own  defence.  Suppose
she  has  promised  a  certain  yearly  quantity  of  corn :  it  cannot
be  demanded  at  a  time  when  she  herself  labours  under  a
scarcity  of  provisions ;  but,  on  the  return  of  plenty,  she  is
bound  to  make  good  the  quantity  in  arrear,  if  required.

It  is  further  held  as  a  maxim,  that  the  promisor  is  absolved  J  28. The
from  his  promise,  when,  after  he  has  made  his  preparations  P'??^  ^
for  performing  it  according  to  the  tenor  of  his  engagement,  he  ™^  par4°  o
is  prevented  from  fulfilling  it,  by  the  party  himself  to  whom  whom  it  wm
it  was  made. The  promisee  is  deemed  to  dispense  with  the  made  hu
frilfilment  of  a  promise  of  which  he  himself  obstructs  the  exe-***™*®'^  **"
cution. Let  us  therefore  add,  that  if  he  who  had  promised  p^rfop^^^ce
a  thing  by  a  treaty  of  peace  was  ready  to  perform  it  at  the  ©f  it.
time  agreed  on,  or  immediately  and  at  a  proper  time  if  there
was  no  fixed  term, — and  the  other  party  would  not  admit  of
it,  the  promiser  is  discharged  from  his  promise :  for  the  pro-
misee, not  having  reserved  to  himself  a  right  to  regulate  the
performance  of  it  at  his  own  pleasure,  is  accounted  to  re-
nounce it  by  not  accepting  of  it  in  proper  season  and  at  the
time  for  which  the  promise  was  made. Should  he  desire  that
the  performance  be  deferred  till  another  time,  the  promiser  [  442  ]
is  in  honour  bound  to  consent  to  the  prolongation,  unless  he
can  show  by  very  good  reasons  that  the  promise  would  then
become  more  inconvenient  to  him.

To  levy  contributions  is  an  act  of  hostility  which  ought  to  j  29. Cet-
cease  as  soon  as  peace  is  concluded  (§  24). Those  which  are  nation  of
already  promised,  but  not  yet  paid,  are  a  debt  actually  due ;  ^^°*"^'""
and,  as  such,  the  payment  may  be  insisted  on. But,  in
order  to  obviate  all  difficulty,  it  is  proper  that  the  contracting
parties  should  clearly  and  minutely  explain  their  intentions
respecting  matters  of  this  nature;  and  they  are  generally
careful  to  do  so.

' The  fruits  and  profits  of  those  things  which  are  restored  g  30! Prc^
by  a  treaty  of  peace  are  due  from  the  instant  appointed  for  ^^^^^  ^^  **•
carrying  it  into  execution :  and  if  no  particular  period  has  ^°^'^*"
been  assigned,  they  are  due  from  the  moment  when  the  re-  ceded,
ititution  of  the  things  themselves  was  agreed  to :  but  those
which  were  already  received  or  become  payable  before  the
conclusion  of  the  peace,  are  not  comprised  in  the  restitution ;

M9


44^  OF  EXECUTION  OF  THE

BOOK  IT. for  the  fniitB  and  profits  belong  to  the  owner  of  the  soil ;  and,
CHAP,  m.  ^  ^^Q  Q^Q  ^j^  question,  possession  is  accounted  a  lawful  title.
For  the  same  reason,  in  making  a  cession  of  the  soil,  we  do
not  include  in  that  cession  the  rents  and  profits  antecedently
due. This  Augustus  justly  maintained  against  Sextus  Pom-
pey,  who,  on  receiving  a  grant  of  the  Peloponnesus,  claimed
the  imposts  of  the  preceding  years.*
J  3L In Those  things,  of  which  the  restitution  is,  withcnit  further
what  oondi-  explanation,  simply  stipulated  in  the  treaty  of  peace,  are  tc*
tion  thingi  ^e  restored  in  the  same  state  in  which  they  were  when  taken :
are  to  be  w-fQj.  ^\^q  word  "restitution"  naturally  implies  that  every  thing
should  be  replaced  in  its  former  condition. Thus,  the  resti-
tution of  a  thing  is  to  be  accompanied  with  that  of  all  the
rights  which  were  annexed  to  it  when  taken. But  this  rule
must  not  be  extended  to  comprise  those  changes  which  naay
have  been  the  natufal  consequences  and  efiects  of  the  war
itself  and  of  its  operations. A  town  is  to  be  restored  in  the
condition  it  was  in  when  taken,  as  far  as  it  still  remains  in
that  condition  at  the  conclusion  of  the  peace. But  if  the
town  has  been  razed  or  dismantled  during  the  war,  that  da-
mage was  done  by  the  right  of  arms,  and  is  buried  in  oblivion
by  the  act  of  amnesty. We  are  under  no  obligation  to  repair
the  ravages  that  have  been  committed  in  a  country  which  wc
restore  at  the  peace ;  we  restore  it  in  its  existing  state. But,
as  it  would  be  a  flagrant  perfidy  to  ravage  that  country  after
the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  the  case  is  the  same  with  respect
to  a  town  whose  fortifications  have  escaped  the  devastation  of
war :  to  dismantle  it  previous  to  the  restoration  would  be  a  viola-
tion of  good  faith  and  honour. If  the  captor  has  repaired
the  breaches,  and  put  the  place  in  the  same  state  it  was  in
before  the  siege,  he  is  bound  to  restore  it  in  that  state. If  he
[  443  ]  has  added  any  new  works,  he  may  indeed  demolish  these :
but  if  he  has  razed  the  ancient  fortifications,  and  constructed
others  on  a  new  plan,  it  will  be  necessary  to  come  to  a  parti-
cular agreement  respecting  this  improvement,  or  accurately
to  define  in  ^what  condition  the  place  shall  be  restored. In-
deed this  last  precaution  should  in  every  case  be  adopted,  in
order  to  obviate  all  dispute  and  diflSculty. In  drawing  up  an
instrument  solely  intended  for  the  restoration  of  peace,  it
should  be  the  object  of  the  parties  to  .leave,  if  possible,  no
ambiguity  whatever, — nothing  which  may  have  a  tendency  to
rekindle  the  flames  of  war. I  am  well  aware,  however,  that
this  is  not  the  practice  of  those  who  value  themselves  now-a-
days  on  their  superior  abilities  in  negotiation :  on  the  coq-
trary,  they  study  to  introduce  obscure  or  ambiguous  clauses
into  a  treaty  of  peace,  in  order  to  furnish  their  sovereign  with
a  pretext  for  broaching  a  new  quarrel  and  taking  up  arms
again  on  the  first  favourable  opportunity. How  contrary


*  Appian.  de  BelL  Civ.  lib.  y,,  qaotod  by  GrotiUy  lib.  iL  cap.  20,  }  22.
6(C


TREATY  OP PEACE.  443

such  pitiful  finesse  is  to  the  faith  of  treaties,  we  have  already book  it.
observed  (Book  11.  §  231) :  it  is  a  disparagement  of  that  can- ^"^'''  '"•
dour  and  magnanimity  which  should  beam  forth  in  all  the
actions  of  a  great  prince.

But,  as  it  is  extremely  diflScult  wholly  to  avoid  ambiguity  ?  32. The
in  a  treaty,  though  worded  with  the  greatest  care  and  the  *"^'^r®**'
most honourable intentions, — and to obviate every  doubt  ^^.^^^^ ^
which  may  arise  in  the  application  of  its  several  clauses  to  peace  is  to
particular  cases, — ^recourse  must  often  be  had  to  the  rules  of  fe®  against
interpretation. We  have  already  devoted  an  entire  chapter  *^®^"^J^"^J
to  the  exposition  of  those  important  rules  :*  wherefore,  instead  ^^^  ^'
of  entering  at  present  into  tedious  repetitions,  we  shall  con-
fine ourselves  to  a  few  rules  more  particularly  adapted  to  the
special  case before  us, — the interpretation of  treaties of
peace. 1.  In  case  of  doubt,  the  interpretation  goes  against
him  who  prescribed  the  terms  of  the  treaty :  for  as  it  was
in  some  measure  dictated  by  him,  it  was  his  own  fault  if  he
neglected  to  express  himself  more  clearly :  and  by  extending
or  restricting  the  signification  of  the expressions to  that
meaning  which  is  least  favourable  to  him,  we  either  do  him  no
injury,  or  we  only  do  him  that  to  which  he  has  wilfully  ex-
posed himself;  whereas,  by  adopting  a  contrary  mode  of  in-
terpretation, we  would  incur  the  risk  of  converting  vague  or
ambiguous  terms  into  so  many  snares  to  entrap  the  weaker
party  in  the  contract,  who  has  been  obliged  to  subscribe  to
what  the  stronger  had  dictated.

2.  The  names  of  countries  ceded  by  treaty  are  to  be  under-  ?  '^s.  Xamef
stood  according  to  the  usage  prevailing  at  the  time  among  °^  ^®^?*^

•  •  ..^  1  coiLatries.

skilful  and  intelligent  men :  for  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that
weak  or  ignorant  persons  should  be  intrusted  with  so  import-
ant a  concern  as  that  of  concluding  a  treaty  of  peace ;  and
the  articles  of  a  contract  are  to  be  understood  of  what  the
contracting  parties  most  probably  had  in  contemplation,
since  the  object  in  contemplation  is  the  motive  and  ground
of  every  contract.  [  444  ]

3.  The  treaty  of  peace  naturally  and  of  itself  relates  only  ^  .34.  Rcato.
to  the  war  which  it  terminates. It  is,  therefore,  in  such  re-"'^**"'*^^***
lation only, that  its  vague  clauses are  to  be  understood.  ^^^^^^JT"
Thus, th^  simple  stipulation of  restoring things  to their  ^hose  who
former  condition  does  not  relate  to  changes  which  have  not  have  voiun-
been  occasioned  by  the  war  itself:  consequently,  this  general  warily  k>^«»*
clause  cannot  oblige  either  of  the  parties  to  set  at  liberty  a  *^«™»«^^®"
free  people  who  have  voluntarily  given  themselves  up  to  him

during  the  war.  And  as  a  people,  when  abandoned  by  their
sovereign,  become  free,  and  may  provide  for  their  own  safety
in  whatever manner  they  think  most advisable (Book  I.

(190)  As  to  the  construetion  of  treaties  in  general,  see  Book  II.  Chap.  XVIL
{  262,  ante,  244.— 0.
*  Book  U.  Chap.  XVn.  anU,  244—274.

71  Wl


444  OF  OBSERVANCE  AND  BREACH


CHAP. III.


BOOK  IT.  §  202) — if  such  people,  during  the  course  of  the  war,  hare
'-'  voluntarily,  and  without  military  compulsion,  submitted  anl
given  themselves  up  to  the  enemy  of  their  former  sovereigju
the  general  promise  of  restoring  conquests  shall  not  extend
to  them.  It  were  an  unavailing  plea,  to  allege  that  the  parnr
who  requires  all  things  to  be  replaced  on  their  former  fooiii.2
may  have  an  interest  in  the  independence  of  the  former  uf
those  people,  and  that  he  evidently  has  a  very  great  one  in
the  restoration  of  the  latter.  If  he  wished  to  obtain  thinjs
which  the  general  clause  does  not  of  itself  comprise,  he  shouii
have  clearly  and  specifically  expressed  his  intentions  reladve
to  them.  Stipulations  of  every  kind  may  be  inserted  in  a
treaty  of  peace ;  but  if  they  bear  no  relation  to  the  wtr
which  it  is  the  view  of  the  contracting  parties  to  bring  to  a
conclusion,  they  must  be  very  expressly  specified  ;  for  tie
treaty  is  naturally  understood  to  relate  only  to  its  ovrn  p&ni-
cular  object.


<^^^^'  ^'  CHAP.  IV.

OF  THE  OBSERVANCE  AND BREACH OF  THE  TREATY  OF  PEACX

J  35.  The  THE  treaty  of  peace  concluded  by  a  lawful  power  is  un-
treaty  of  doubtedly  a  public  treaty,  and  obligatory  on  the  whole  na-
UiTnado'f'  tion  (Book  II.  §  154).  It  is  likewise,  by  its  nature,  a  real
and  suooes-  treaty ;  for  if  its  duration  had  been  limited  to  the  life  of  tlie
Bors.  sovereign,  it  would  be  only  a  truce,  and  not  a  treaty  of  peace.

Besides,  every  treaty  which,  like  this,  is  made  with  a  view  !«•

the  public  good,  is  a  real  treaty  fBook  II.  §  198). It  i?

therefore  as  strongly  binding  on  tne  successors  as  on  thf

prince  himself  who  signed  it,  since  it  binds  the state  itstlf.

and  the  successors  can  never  have,  in  this  respect,  any  other

•  rights  than  those  of  the  state.
§  36. It  is After  all  we  have  said  on  the  faith  of  treaties  and  the  in-
to b©  faith-  dispensable  obligation  which  they  impose,  it  would  be  super-
iOTved. " fluous  to  use  many  words  in  showing  how  religiously  treaties

of  peace  in  particular  should  be  observed  both  by  sovereigns

and  people. These  treaties  concern  and  bind  whole  nations ;

they  are  of  the  highest  importance ;  the  breach  of  them  in-
[  445  ]  fallibly  rekindles  the  flames  of  war ; — all  which  considerations

give  additional  force  to  the  obligation  of  keeping  our  faith,

and  punctually  fulfilling  our  promises.

i  37. The We  cannot  claim  a  dispensation  from  the  observance  of  a

plea  of  fear  treaty  of  peace,  by  alleging  that  it  was  extorted  from  us  by

"  ^*^'*^® fear,  or  wrested  from  us  by  force. In  the  first  place,  were

**'  this  plea  admitted,  it  would  destroy,  from  the  very  founds-

562


OP  THE  TREATY  OF  PEACE.  445

tions,  all  the  security  of  treaties  of  peace ;  for  there  are book  it.  ,

few  treaties  of  that  kind,  which  might  not  be  made  to  afford -^^i^iili.
such  a  pretext,  as  a  cloak  for  the  faithless  violation  of  them,  p*^^®  ^^
To  authorize  such  an  evasion  would  be  a  direct  attack  on  the  tJ*  ^^^'
common  safety  and  welfare  of  nations : — the  maxim  would
b.e  detestable,  for  the  same  reasons  which  have  universally
established  the  sacredness  of  treaties  (Book  II.  §  220).  Be-
sides, it  would  generally  be  disgraceful  and  ridiculous  to  ad-
vance such  a  plea.  At  the  present  day,  it  seldom  happens
that  either  of  the  belligerent  parties  perseveres  to  the  last
extremity  before  he  will  consent  to  a  peace.  Though  &
nation  may  have  lost  several  battles,  she  can  still  defend
herself:  as  long  as  she  has  men  and  arms  remaining,  she  is
not  destitute  of  all  resource.  If  she  thinks  fit,  by  a  disad-
vantageous treaty,  to  procure  a  necessary  peace, — if  by  great
sacrifices  she  delivers  herself  from  imminent  danger  or  total
ruin, — the  residue  which  remains  in  her  possession  is  still  an
advantage  for  which  she  is  indebted  to  the  peace :  it  was  her
own  free  choice  to  prefer  a  certain  and  immediate  loss,  but  of
limited  extent,  to  an  evil  of  a  more  dreadful  nature,  which,
though  yet  at  some  distance,  she  had  but  too  great  reason
to  apprehend.

If  ever  the  plea  of  constraint  may  be  alleged,  it  is  against
an  act  which  does  not  deserve  the  name  of  a  treaty  of  peace, —
against  a  forced  submission  to  conditions  which  are  equally
offensive  to  justice  and  all  the  duties  of  humanity.  If  an  un-
just and  rapacious  conqueror  subdues  a  nation,  and  forces  her
to  accept  of  hard,  ignominious,  and  insupportable  conditions,
necessity  obliges  her  to  submit :  but  this  apparent  tranquillity
is  not  a  peace ;  it  is  an  oppression  which  she  endures  only  so
long  as  she  wants  the  means  of  shaking  it'  off,  and  against
which  men  of  spirit  rise  on  the  first  favourable  opportunity.
When  Ferdinand  Cortes  attacked  the  empire  of  Mexica without
any  shadow  of  reason,  without  even  a  plausible  pretext, — if
the  unfortunate  Montezuma  could  have  recovered  his  liberty
by  submitting  to  the  iniquitous  and  cruel  conditions  of  re-
ceiving Spanish  garrisons  into  his  towns  and  his  capital,  of
paying  an  immense  tribute,  and  obeying  the  commands  of  the
king  of  Spain, — ^will  any  man  pretend  to  assert  that  he  \f  ould
not  have  been  justifiable  in  seizing  a  convenient  opportunity
to  recover  his  rights,  to  emancipate  his  people,  and  to  expel
or  exterminate  the  Spanish  horde  of  greedy,  insolent,  and
cruel  usurpers  ?  No  !  such  a  monstrous  absurdity  can  never
be  seriously  maintained.  Although  the  law  of  nature  aims
at  protecting  the  safety  and  peace  of  nations  by  enjoying  the
faithful  observance  of  promises,  it  does  not  favour  oppressors.  [  446  ]
All  its  maxims  tend  to  promote  the  advantage  of  mankind :
that  is  the  end  of  all  laws  and  rights.  Shall  he,  who  with  his
own  hand  tears  asunder  all  the  bonds  of  human  society,  be
afterwards  allowed  to  claim  the benefit  of  them? Even

563


446


OF  OBSBBYANCB  AKB  BRSACH


BOOK  IT.

OHAP.  nr.


^  38. How
man  J  waya
a  treaty  of
peace  may
bo  broken.


{39. By
a  oondnot
contrary  to
the  natare
of  ©very
treaty  of
peaoe.


{40. To
take  np
armfl  for  a
froth  cause


though  it  were  to  happen  that  this  maxim  should  be  abnsed,
and  that  a  nation  should,  on  the  strength  of  it,  anjastlj  rise
in  arms  and  recommence  hostilities, — still  it  is  better  to  ri«k
that  inconvenience  than  to  furnish  usurpers  with  an  easy  mo-ie
of  perpetuating  their  injustice,  and  establishing  their  osarpt-
tion  on  a  permanent  basis.  Besides,  were  you  to  preach  up
the  contrary  doctrine  which  is  so  repugnant  to  all  the  feeling
and  suggestions  of  nature,  where  couid  you  expect  to  makn
proselytes  ?

Equitable  agreements,  therefore,  or  at  least  snch  as  are
supportable,  are  alone  entitled  to  the  appellation  of  treaties
of  peace :  these  are  the  treaties  which  bind  the  public  faitk
and  which  are  punctually  to  be  observed,  though  in  some  re-
spects harsh  and  burdensome.  Since  the  nation  consentei
to  them,  she  must  have  considered  them  as  in  some  measure
advantageous  under  the  then  existing  circumstances  ;  and  sh«
is  bound  to  respect  her  promise.  Were  men  allowed  to  rescind
at  a  subsequent  period  those  agreements  to  which  they  were
glad  to  subscribe  on  a  former  occasion,  there  would  be  an  end
to  all  stability  in  human  affairs.

The  breach  of  a  treaty  of  peace  consists  in  violating  the
engagements  annexed  to  it,  either  by  doing  what  it  prohibits,
or  by  not  doing  what  it  prescribes.  Now,  the  engagementi
contracted  by  treaty  may  be  violated  in  three  different  ways, —
either  by  a  conduct  that  is  repugnant  to  the  nature  and  es-
sence of  every  treaty  of  peace' in  general, — ^by  proceedings
which  are  incompatible  with  the  particular  nature  of  the  treaty
in  question,— or,  finally,  by  the  violation  of  any  article  ex-
pressly contained  in  it.

First,  a  nation  acts  in  a  manner  that  is  repugnant  to  the
nature  and  essence  of  every  treaty  of  peace,  and  to  peace
itself,  when  she  disturbs  it  without  cause,  either  by  taking  up
arms  and  recommencing  hostilities  without  so  much  as  a  plau-
sible pretext,  or  by  deliberately  and  wantonly  offending  the
party  with  whom  she  has  concluded  a  peace,  and  offering  such
treatment  to  him  or  his  subjects  as  is  incompatible  with  the
state  of  peace,  and  such  as  he  cannot  submit  to  without  being
deficient  in  the  duty  which  he  owes  to  himself.  It  is  likewise
acting  contrary  to  the  nature  of  all  treaties  of  peace  to  take
up  arms  a  second  time  for  the  same  subject  that  had  given
rise  to  the  war  which  has  been  brought  to  a  condasion.  or
through  resentment  of  any  transaction  that  had  taken  place
during  the  continuance  of  hostilities.  If  she  cannot  allege  at
least  some  plausible  pretext  borrowed  from  a  fresh  cause,
which  may  serve  to  palliate  her  conduct,  she  evidently  revives
the  old  war  that  was  extinct,  and  breaks  the  treaty  of  peace.

But  to  take  up  arms  for  a  fresh  cause  is  no  breach  of  the
treaty  of  peace :  for  though  a  nation  has  promised  to  live  in
peace,  she  has  not  therefore  promised  to  submit  to  injurioa
and  wrongs  of  every  kind,  rather  than  procure  justice  by  force


OF  THE  TBEATT  OF  PEACE.  446

of  arms. The  rupture  proceeds  from  him  who,  by  his  ob- book  rv.
Btinate  injustice,  renders  this  method  necessary.  ^"^^*  ^'


But  here  it  is  proper  to  recall  to  mind  what  we  have  more  is  no  breach
than  once  observed, — namely,  that  nations  acknowledge  no  *»^  *^®  *^***y
common  judge  on  earth, — ^that  they  cannot  mutually  con-**  ^^***^
demn  each  other  without  appeal, — and,  finally,  that  they  [  447  ]
are  bound  to  act  in  their  quarrels  as  if  each  was  equally  in
the  right. On  this  footing,  whether  the  new  cause  which
gives  birth  to  hostilities  be  just  or  not,  neither  he  who  makes
it  a  handle  for  taking  up  arms,  nor  he  who  refuses  satisfac-
tion, is  reputed  to  break  the  treaty  of  peace,  provided  the
cause  of  complaint  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  refusal  of  satis-
faction on  the  other,  have  at  least  some  colour  of  reason,  so
as  to  render  the  question  doubtful. When  nations  cannot
come  to  any  agreement  on  questions  of  this  kind,  their  only
remaining  resource  is  an  appeal  to  the  sword. In  such  case
the  war  is  absolutely  a  new  one,  and  does  not  involve  any  in-
fraction of  the  existing  treaty.

And  as  a  nation,  in  making  a  peace,  does  not  thereby  give  ?  *i.  A  eub-
up  her  right  of  contracting  alliances  and  assisting  her  friends,  *f ^i'*®"*  f^
it  is  likewise  no  breach  of  the  treaty  of  peace  to  form  a  sub-  j^o^nemy  ii
sequent  alliance  with  the  enemies  of  the  party  with  whom  she  iikewiso  no
has  concluded  such  treaty, — to  join  them,  to  espouse  their  breach  of
quarrel,  and  unite  her  arms  with  theirs, — ^unless  the  treaty  ^^  *^«**y»
expressly  prohibits  such  connections. At  most,  she  can  only
be  said  to  embark  in  a  fresh  war  in  defence  of  another
people's  cause.

But  I  here  suppose  these  new  allies  to  have  some  plausible
grounds  for  taking  up  arms,  and  that  the  nation  in  question
has  just  and  substantial  reasons  for  supporting  them  in  the
contest.  Otherwise,  to  unite  with  them  just  as  they  are  en-
tering on  the  war,  or  when  they  have  already  commenced
hostilities,  would  be  evidently  seeking  a  pretext  to  elude  the
treaty  of  peace,  and  no  better,  in  fact,  than  an  artful  and
perfidious  violation  of  it.

It  is  of  great  importance  to  draw  a  proper  distinction  he-i^-  Why*
tween  a  new  war  and  the  breach  of  an  existing  treaty  of  ^»*i"«^<>"*
peace,  because  the  rights  acquired  by  such  treaty  still  subsist,  J^^^  ^^
notwithstanding  the  new  war :  whereas  they  are  annulled  by  tween  a  new
the  rupture  of  the  treaty  on  which  they  were  founded. It  is  war  and  a
true,  indeed,  that  the  party  who  had  granted  those  rights  ^^^^  ^^
does  not  fail  to  obstruct  the  exercise  of  them  during  the  course * **  ^*
of  the  war,  as  far  as  lies  in  his  power, — and  even  may,  by
the  right  of  arms,  wholly  deprive  his  enemy  of  them,  as  well
as  he  may  wrest  from  him  his  other  possessions. But  in  that
case he  withholds  those rights  as  things  taken from  the
enemy,  who,  on  a  new  treaty  of  peace,  may  urge  the  restitu-
tion of  them. In  negotiations  of  that  kind,  there  is  a  ma-
terial difference  between  demanding  the  restitution  of  what
we  were  possessed  of  before  the  war,  and  requiring  new  con-

2  X  565


448  OF  OBSERVANCE AND BREACH


BOOK  IV.  cessions :  a  little  equality  in  our  successes  entitles  ns  to  is-
^oHAP.  IV.  gjg^  ^^  ^Yie  former,  whereas  nothing  less  than  a  decided  su[.e-
riority  can  give  us  a  claim  to  the  latter.  It  often  happens
when  nearly  equal  success  has  attended  the  arms  of  both  pr-
ties,  that  the  belligerent  powers  agree  mutually  to  re^tcrc
their  conquests,  and  to  replace  every  thing  in  its  former  stcv.
When  this  is  the  case,  if  the  war  in  which  they  were  er-
gaged  was  a  new  one,  the  former  treaties,  still  subsist;  but
if  those  treaties  were  broken  by  taking  up  arms  a  secrcd
time  for  the  same  subject,  and  an  old  war  was  revived,  iLej
remain  void ;  so  that,  if  the  parties  wish  they  should  a^rij.
take  effect,  they  must  expressly  specify  and  confirm  iheE
in  their  new  treaty.

The  question  before  us  is  highly  important  in  anotLer
view  also, — that  is,  in  its  relation  to  other  nations  who  mavb^
interested  in  the  treaty,  inasmuch  as  their  own  affairs  reqaire
them  to  maintain  and  enforce  the  observance  of  it  It  is  of
the  utmost  consequence  to  the  guarantees  of  the  treaty,  if
there  are  any, — ^and  also  to  the  allies,  who  have  tc  diseov?:
and  ascertain  the  cases  in  which  they  are  bound  to  fumL4
assistance.  Finally,  he  who  breaks  a  solemn  treaty  is  mtcL
more  odious  than  the  other,  who,  after  making  an  ill-grounlti
demand,  supports  it  by  arms.  The  former  adds  perfiij  u
injustice :  he  strikes  at  the  foundation  of  public  tranquilliij:
and  as  he  thereby  injures  all  nations,  he  affords  them  jV.
grounds  for  entering  into  a  confederacy  in  order  to  corb  ai.d
repress  him.  Wherefore,  as  we  ought  to  be  cautious  of  in-
puting  the  more  odious  charge,  Grotius  justly  obserires,  tha:,
in  a  case  of  doubt,  and  where  the  recurrence  to  arms  mav^e
vindicated  by  some  specious  pretext  resting  on  anew  groniii.
"  it  is  better  that  we  should,  in  the  conduct  of  him  who  take;
up  arms  anew,  presume  simple  injustice,  unaccompanied'.^
perfidy,  than  account  him  at  once  guilty  both  of  perfidy  stiii
injustice."*
J  43.  Justi-  Justifiable  self-defence  is  no  breach  of  the  treaty  of  pK!«.
fiabie  self-  It  is  a  natural  right  which  we  cannot  renounce :  and,  in  pn-
defence  is  mising  to  live  in  peace,  we  only  promise  not  to  attack  virriMi!
no  reac causc,  and  to  abstain  from  injuries  and  violence. Bai  tbtre

of  the  treiu  '  ^  n i n i-

ty.  are  two  modes  oi  defending  our  persons  or  our  property-

sometimes  the  violence  offered  to  us  will  admit  of  do  oik."
remedy  than  the  exertion  of  open  force ;  and  under  such  cir-
cumstances, we  may  lawfully  have  recourse  to  i^.  On  "'ii'
occasions,  w&  may  obtain  redress  for  the  damage  and  injurj
by  gentler  methods ;  and  to  these  we  ought  of  course  to  ir-ve
the  preference.  Such  is  the  rule  of  conduct  which  ought  lo
be  observed  by  two  nations  that  are  desirous  of  maintainicj^
peace,  whenever  the  subjects  of  either  have  happened  tobnas
out  into  any  act  of  violence. Present  force  is  checked  m


«  Lib.  uL  o&p.  20,  J  28.
600


OF  THE  TREATY  OP  PEACE.  448


repelled  by  force. But,  if  there  is  question  of  obtaining book  iv.
reparation  of  the  damage  done,  together  with  adequate  satis-  _£E^-  Hi
faction  for  the  oifence,  we  must  apply  to  the  sovereign  of  the
delinquents  :  we  must  not  pursue  them  into  his  dominions,  or
have  recourse  to  arms,  unless  he  has  refused  to  do  us  justice.
If  we  have  reason  to  fear  that  the  ofifenders  will  escape, — as,  r  449  1
for  instance,  if  a  bind  of  unknown  persons  from  a  neighbour-
ing country  have  made  an  irruption  into  our  territory, — we .
are  authorized  to  pursue  them  with  an  armed  force  into  their
own  country,  until  they  be  seized :  and  their  sovereign  can-
not consider  our  conduct  in  any  other  light  than  that  of  just
and  lawful  self-defence,  provided  we  commit  no  hostilities
against  innocent  persons.

When  the  principal  contracting  party  has  included  his  al-  ?  44.  Canada
lies  in  the  treaty,  their  cause  becomes  in  this  respect  insepa-  ®^  J^pt^re
rable  from  his ;  and  they  are  entitled,  equally  with  him,  to  ^^  ^^^^
enjoy  all  the  conditions  essential  to  a  treaty  of  peace ; so
that  any  act,  which,  if  committed  against  himself,  would  be  a
breach  of  the  treaty,  is  no  less  a  breach  of  it,  if  committed
against  the  allies  whom  he  has  caused  to  be  included  in  his
treaty. If  the  injury  be  done  to  a  new  ally,  or  to  one  who
is  not  included  in  the  treaty,  it  may,  indeed,  furnish  a  new
ground  for  war,  but  is  no  infringement  of  the  treaty  of  peace.

The  second  way  of  breaking  a  treaty  of  peace  is  by  doing  ?  45.  2.  Tb«
any  thing  contrary  to  what  the  particular  nature  of  the  treaty  ^^^^^  ^^
requires. Thus,  every  procedure that  is  inconsistent  with^^'j^^^^^g^^^^
the rules  of  friendship  is  a  violation  of  a  treaty  of  peace  trary  to  it*
which  has  been  concluded  under  the  express  condition  of  particular
thenceforward  living  in  amity  and  good  understanding. To  ^'^t'^'^o-
favour  a  nation's  enemies, — to  give  harsh  treatment  to  her  ^ ^
subjects, — to  lay  unnecessary  restrictions  on  her  commerce,
or  give  another  nation  a  preference  over  her  without  reason, —
to  refuse  assisting  her  with  provisions,  which  she  is  willing
to  pay  for,  and  we  ourselves  can  well  spare, — to  protect  her
factious  or  rebellious  subjects, — to  aiford  them  an  asylum, —
all  such  proceedings  are  evidently  inconsistent  with  the  laws
of  friendship. To  this  list,  may,  according  to  circumstances,
be  also  added — ^the  building  of  fortresses  on  the  frontiers  of
a  state,— expressing distrust against  her, — levying  troops,
and  refusing  to  acquaint  her  with  the  motives  of  such  step,
&c.  (191) But,  in affording a retreat to exiles, — in har-
bouring subjects  who  chose  to  quit  their  country,  without  an
intentioif  of  injuring  it  by  their  departure,  and  solely  for  the
advantage  .of  their  private  affairs, — ^in  charitably  receiving
emigrants  who  depart  from  their  country  with  a  view  to  en-
joy liberty  of  conscience  elsewhere, — there  is  nothing  incon-
sistent with  the  character  of  a  friend. The  private  laws  of
friendship  do  not,  according  to  the  caprice  of  our  friends,  dis-

(191)  And  see,  ante,  Book  HL  0.  3,  aa  to  what  are  Just  oaases  of  war. — C.

667 '


449  OF  0BS5RVANCB AND  BftEACH


BOOK  XV. pense  with  our  observance  of  the  common  duties  of  Immanitj
which  we  owe  to  the  rest  of  our  species.


CHAP. IV.


^  4t>.  3.  By Lastly,  the  peace  is  broken  by  the  violation  of  any  of  the
the  violation  express  articles  of  the  treaty. This  third  way  of  breaking  it
o^^an/  ar  -  j^  ^j^^  most  decisive,  the  least  susceptible  of  quibble  or  evasion.
Whoever  fails  in  his  engagements  annuls  the  contract  as  far
as  depends  on  him : — ^this  cannot  admit  of  a  doubt.
2  47. Tko But  it  is  asked  whether  the  violation  of  a  single  article  of
violation  of  the  treaty  can  operate  a  total  rupture  of  it  ? Some  writers,*
tide  breaks  ^^^^  drawing  a  distinction  between  the  articles  that  are  con-
the  whole ucctod  together  {connext)  and  those  that  stand  detached  and
treaty. separate  {diverst),  maintain,  that,  although  the  treaty  be  vit)-
lated  in  the  detached  articles,  the  peace  nevertheless  still
[  450  ]  subsists  with  respect  to  the  others. But,  to  me,  the  opinion  of
Grotius  appears  evidently  founded  on  the  nature  and  spirit
of  treaties  of  peace. That  great  man  says  that  all  the  Arti-
cles of  one  and  the  same  treaty  are  conditionally  included  in
each  other,  as  if  each  of  the  contracting  parties  had  formally
said,  "  I  will  do  such  or  such  thing,  provided  that,  on  your
•  part,  you  do  so  and  so  ;"t  and  he  justly  adds,  that,  when  it
is  designed  that  the  engagement  shall  not  be  thereby  rendered
ineifectual,  this  express  clause  is  inserted, — ^that, **  though
any  one  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty  may  happen  to  be  vio-
lated, the  others  shall  subsist  in  full  force." Such  an  agree-
ment  may  unquestionably  be made. It  may  likewise bo
agreed  that  the  violation  of  one  article. shall  only  annul  those
corresponding  to  it,  and  which,  as  it  were,  constitute  the
equivalent  to  it. But,  if  this  clause  be  not  expressly  inserted
in  the  treaty  of  peace,  the  violation  of  a  single  article  over-
throws the  whole  treaty,  as  we  have  proved  above,  in  speak-
ing of  treaties  in  general  (Book  II.  §  202).
I  48. Whe- It  19  equally  nugatory  to  attempt  making  a  distinction  in
theradig- this  instance  between  the  articles  of  greater  and  those  of
tinction  may  lesser  importance. According  to  strict  justice,  the  violation
^^id  ^b ^^  ^^^  most  trifling  article  dispenses  the  injured  party  from
tween  the the  observance  of  the  others,  since  they  are  all,  as  we  have
more  and secn  abovc,  conuectcd  with  each  other,  as  so  many  conditions.
the  less  iin-  Besidcs,  what  a  source  cf  dispute  will  such  a  distinction  lay
portant  ar- ^^^^  j -^j^^  ^^^^i  determine  the  importance  of  the  article
violated  ? We  may,  however,  assert  with  truth,  that,  to  be
.  ever  ready  to  annul  a  treaty  on  the  slightest  cause  of  com-
plaint, is  by  no  means  consonant  to  the  reciprocal  duties  of
nations,  to  that  mutual  charity,  that,  love  of  peace,  which
should  always  influence  their  conduct.  -•

f  49.  Pe-  In  order  to  prevent  so  serious  an  inconvenience,  it  is  pm-
iiaity  an-  dent  to  agree  on  a  penalty  to  be  suffered  by  the  party  who
xed  t-  the  violates  any  of  the  less  important  articles :  and  then,  on  h\i
submitting  to  the  penalty,  the  treaty  still  subsists  in  full  force.

*  See  WoU:  Jas  Gent.  {{  1022, 1023.  |-  Lili.  ilL  oap.  zix.  {  14.

56S  ^


lie


of  "FB  TRBATT  OF  FBACB.  450

In  like  aoanner,  there  may,  to  the  violation  of  each  individual »oo»  xv.

article,  be  annexed  a  penalty  proportionate  to  its  importance — '—

We  have  treated  of  this  subject  in  our  remarks  on  truces  vioUtion  of
(Book  III.  §  243),  to  which  we  refer  the  reader.  ^  '^''^^'

Studied  delays  are  equivalent  to  an  express  denial,  and  j  50.  sta-
differ  from  it  only  by  the  artifice  with  which  he  who  practises  died  delays,
them  seeks  to  palliate  his  want  of  faith :  he  adds  fraud  to  per-
fidy, and  actually  violates  the  article  which  he  should  fulfil. *

But,  if  a  real  impediment  stand  in  the  way,  time  must  be  j  61.  lnTO»-
allowed ;  for  no  one  is  bound  to  perform  impossibilities.  And  monntabie
for  the  same  reason,  if  any  insurmountable  obstacle  should  |^P®^ '
render  the  execution  of  an  article  not  only  impracticable  for
the  present,  but  for  ever  impossible,  no  blame  is  imputable
to  him  who  had  engaged  for  the  performance  of  it ;  nor  can  his
inability  furnish  the  other  party  with  a  handle  for  annulling  [  461  ]
the  treaty :  but  the  latter  should  accept  of  an  indemnification,
if  the  case  will  admit  of  it,  and  the  indemnification  be  prac-
ticable. However,  if  the  thing  which  was  to  have  been  per-
formed in  pursuance  of  the  article  in  question  be  of  such  a
nature  that  the  treaty  evidently  appears  to  have  been  con-
cluded with  a  sole  view  to  that  particular  thing,  and  not  to
any  equivalent, — the  intervening  impossibility  undoubtedly
cancels  the  treaty.  Thus,  a  treaty  of  protection  becomes  void
when  the  protector  is  unable  to  afford  the  promised  protection,
although  his  inability  does  not  arise  from  any  fault  on  his
part.  In  the  same  manner,  also,  whatever  promises  a  sove-
reign may  have  made  on  condition  that  the  other  party  should
procure  him  the  restoration  of  an  important  town,  he  is  re-
leased from  the  performance  of  every  thing  which  he  had  pro-
mised as  the  purchase  of  the  recovery,  if  he  cannot  be  put  in
possession.  Such  is  the  invariable  rule  of  justice.  But  rigid
justice  is  not  always  to  be  insisted  on : — peace  is  so  essential
to  the  welfare  of  mankind,  and  nations  are  so  strictly  bound
to  cultivate  it,  to  procure  it,  and  to  re-establish  it  when  inter-
rupted,— that,  whenever  any  such  obstacles  impede  the  exe-
cution of  a  treaty  of  peace,  we  ought  ingenuously  to  accede
to  every  reasonable  expedient,  and  accept  of  equivalents  or
indemnifications,  rather  than  cancel  a  treaty  of  peace  already
concluded,  and  again  have  recourse  to  arms.

We  have  already,  in  an  express  chapter  (Book  II.  Chap,  j  62.  Inine.
VI.),  examined  how  and  on  what  occasions  the  actions  of  ^^^^  ^^  *^*
subjects  may  be  imputed  to  the  sovereign  and  the  nation. I**7*ceb  th«
is  by  that*circumstance  we  must  be  guided  in  determining  hoWg„i,jecto;
far  the  proceedings  of  the  subjects  may  be  capable  of  annul-
ling a  treaty  of  peace. They  cannot  produce  such  effect  un-
less so  far  a«  they  are  imputable  to  the  sovereign. lie  who
is  injured  by  the  subjects  of  another  nation  takes  satisfaction
for  the  offence,  himself,  when  he  meets  with  the  delinquents
in  his  own  territories,  or  in  a. free  place,  as,  for  instance,  on
the  open  sea ;  or  if  it  be  more  agreeable  to  him,  he  demands

72  2x2  669


1


451  OP  OBSERVANCE  ANP BREAOH  OF  TREATY, ETC.


BOOK  rv. justice  of  their  sovereign. If  the  offenders  are  refractory
CHAP.  lY. gut)ject8,  no  demand  can  be  made  on  their  sovereign;  but
whoever  can  seize  them,  even  in  a  free  place,  executes  gnm-
mary  justice  on  them  himself. Such  is  the  mode  obserrtil
towards  pirates :  and,  in  order  to  obviate  all  misunderstand-
ings, it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  same  treatment  be  given
to  all  private  individuals  who  commit  acts  of  hostility  witliom
being  able  to  produce  a  commission  from  their  sovereign.
2  63.  Or  by The  actions  of  our  allies  are  still  less  imputable  to  us  than
allies.  those  of  our  subjects. The  infractions  of  a  treaty  of  peace

by  allies,  even  by  those  who  have  been  included  in  it,  or  who
joined  in  it  as  principals,  can  therefore  produce  no  rupture
of  it  except  with  regard  to  themselves,  and  do  not  affect  it  in
[  452  ]  what  concerns  their  ally,  who,  on  his  part,  religiously  ob-
serves his  engagements. With  respect  to.  him,  the  treaty  sub-
sists in  full  force,  provided  he  do  not  undertake  to  support
the  cause  of  those  perfidious  allies. If  he  furnishes  them  viik
such  assistance  as  he  cannot  be  bound  to  give  them  on  an  oc-
casion of  this  nature,  he  espouses  their  quarrel,  and  becomes
an  accomplice  in  their  breach  of  faith. But,  if  he  has  an  in-
terest in  preventing  their  ruin,  he  may  interpose,  and,  by
obliging  them  to  make  every  suitable  reparation,  save  them
from  an.  oppression  of  which  he  would  himself  collaterally  feel
the  effects. It  even  becomes  an  act  of  justice  to  undertake
their  defence  against  an  implacable  enemy,  who  will  not  be
contented  with  an  adequate  satisfaction.
2  54  Right When  the  treaty  of  peace  is  violated  by  one  of  the  con-
of  the tracting  parties,  the  other  has  the  option  of  either  declaring
offen  e ^j^^  treaty  null  and  void,  or  allowing  it  still  to  subsist :  for  a
against  him  Contract  which  contains  reciprocal  engagements,  cannot  be
who  ha«  Tio-  binding  on  him  with  respect  to  the  party  who  on  his  side
lated  the pays  no  regard  to  the  same  contract. But,  if  he  chooses  nut
*'®**^* to  come  to  a  rupture,- the  treaty  remains  valid  and  obligatory.
It  would  be  absurd  that  he  who  had  been  guilty  of  the  vio-
lation should  pretend  that  the  agreement  was  annulled  by  his
own  breach  of  faith :  this  would,  indeed,  be  an  easv  way  of
shaking  off  engagements,  and  would  reduce  all treaties  tu
empty  formalities. If  the  injured  party  be  willing  to  let
the  treaty  subsist,  he  may  either  pardon  the  infringement,—
insist  on an indemnification  or adequate satisfaction, — or
discharge  himself,  on  his  part,  from  those  engagements  cor-
responding with  the  violated  article, — ^those  promises  he  baa
made  in  consideration  of  a  thing  which  has  not  been  performt'^l.
But,  if  he  determines  on  demanding  a  just  indemnification,
and  the  party  in  fault  refuses  it,  then  the  treaty  is  necessa-
rily broken,  and  the  injured  party  has  a  very  just  cause  for
taking  up  arms  again. And  indeed  this  is  generally  the  case;
for  it  seldom  happens  that  the  infractor  will  submit  to  make
reparation,  and  thereby  acknowledge  himself  in  fault.

670


OS*  THE BIGHT  OF  EMBASSY.  452


BOOK  IT.
CHAP V.


CHAP.  V.

OJ THE  RIGHT OP  EMBASSY,  OR THE RIGHT  OF  SENDING  AND

RECEIVING  PUBLIC  MINISTERS.

IT  is  necessary  that  nations  should  treat  and  hold  ir^ter-  §  55. It  ii
course  together,  in  order  to  promote  their  interests, — to  avoid  necessary
iniuring  each  other, — and  to  adjust  and  terminate  their  dis-  J^*^  °  uV*T*
putes. And  as  they  all  lie  under  the  indispensable  obligation  ^  ^^^^  ^^
of  giving  their  consent  and  concurrence  to  whatever  conduces  communi-
to  the  general  advantage  and  welfare  (Prelim.  §  13) — of  «**«  *o«®-
procuring  the  means  of  accommodating  and  terminating  their  ^®''
differences  (Book  II.  §  323,  &c.) — and  as  each  has  a  right  to
every  thing  which  her  preservation  requires  (Book  I.  §  18) —  [  463  1
to  every  thing  which  can  promote  her  perfection  withoiit  in-
juring others  (lb.  §  23),  as  also  to  the  necessary  means  of  ful-
filling her  duties, — ^it  results  from  the  premises,  that  each  na-
tion is  at  once  possessed  of  the  right  to  treat  and  communicate
with  others,  and  bound  by  reciprocal  obligation  to  consent
to  such  communication  as  far  as  th^  situation  of  her  affairs
will  permit  her.

But  nations  or  sovereign  states  do  not  treat  together  im-  j  66. They
mediately :  and  their  rulers  or  sovereigns  cannot  well  come  ^^  this  by
to  a  personal  conference  in  order  to  treat  of  their  affairs.  ^®  »««fcy
Such  interviews  would  often  be  impracticable;  and,  cxclu- ^'j^^g^^
sive  of  delays,  trouble,  expense,  and  so  many  other  inconve-
niences, it  is  rarely,  according  to  the  observation  of  Philip
de  Commines,  that  any  good  effect  could  be  expected  from
them. The  only  expedient,  therefore,  which  remains  for  na-
tions and  sovereigns,  is  to  communicate  and  treat  with  each
other  by  the  agency  of  procurators  or  mandatories, — of  dele-
gates charged  with  their  commands,  and  vested  with  their
powers, — that  is  to  say,  public  ministers. This  term,  in  its .
more  extensive  and  general  sense,  denotes  any  person  intrust-
ed with  the  management  of  publie  affairs,  but  is  more  par-
ticularly understood  to  designate  one  who  acts  in  such  capa-
city at  a  foreign  court.

At  present  there  are  several  orders  of  public  ministers,
and  in  the  sequel  we  shall  speak  of  them ;  but  whatever  dif-
ference custom  has  introduced  between  them,  the  essential
character  is  common  to  them  all ;  I  mean  that  of  minister^
and,  in  some  sort,  representative  of  a  foreign  power, — a  per-
son charged  with  the  commands  of  that  power,  and  delegated
to  manage  his  affairs :  and  that  quality  is  su£Scient  for'  our
present  purpose.

Every  sovereign  state  then  has  a  right  to  send  and  to  re-  {  67.  Breiy
ceive  public  ministers;  for  they  are  necessary  instruments "o^er^^sn

671


453  OF  THE RIGHT  OF  EMBASST.

BOOK  IT. in  the  management  of  those  affairs  which  sovereigns  have  to
CHAP.  T. transact  with  each  other,  and  the  channels  of  that  correspond-


•uto  has  a  ence  which  they  have  a  right  to  carry  on.  In  the  first  chapter
right  to  send  ^f  ^j^jg  ^ork  may  be  seen  who  are  those  sovereigns,  and  what
public  mi-*  those  independent  states,  that  are  entitled  to  rank  in  the  great
nisters. society  of  nations. They  are  the  powers  to  whom  belongs  the

right  of  embassy.
J  58.  An  un- An  unequal  alliance,  or  even  a  treaty  of  protection,  not
equAi  alii- being  incompatible  with  sovereignty  (Book  I.  §§  5,  6), — such


ance,  or^a tj-^^ties  do  not  of  themselves  deprive  a  state  of  the  right  of
protection, Sending  and  receiving  public  ministers. If  the  inferior  ally
does  not or  the  party  protected  has  not  expressly  renounced  the  right
take  away of  entertaining  connections  and  treating  with  other  powers,
**!»•  right }jg  necessarily  retains  that  of  sending  ministers  to  them,  and
of  receiving  their  ministers  in  turn. The  same  rule  applies
to  such  vassals  and  tributaries  as  are  not  subjects  (Book  L
§§7^8).  _  .

i  59.  Right Nay  more,  this  right  may  even  belong  to  princes  or  commu-
of  the nities  not  possessed  of  sovereign  power :  for  the  rights  whose
Juto  ^o^th  ^s^^l^'^g^  constitutes  the  plenitude  of  sovereignty,  are  not
empire  in indivisible :  and  if,  by  the  constitution  of  the  state,  by  the
thiB  respect,  concession  of  the  sovereign,  or  by  reservations  which  the
subjects  have  made  with  him,  a  prince  or  community  remains
[  454  ]  possessed  of  any  one  of  those  rights  which  usually  belong  to
the  sovereign  alone,  such  prince  or  community  may  exercise
it,  and  avail  themselves  of  it  in  all  its  effects  and  all  its  natu-
ral or  necessary  consequences,  unless  they  have  been  for-
mally excepted. Though  the  princes  and  states  of  the  empire
are  dependent  on  the  emperor  and  the  empire,  yet  they  are
sovereign  in  many  respects ;  and  as  the  constitutions  of  the
empire  secure  to  them  the  right  of  treating  with  foreign
powers  and  contracting  alliances  with  them,  they  incontes^
ably  have  also  that  of  sending  and  receiving  public  ministers.
The  emperors,  indeed,  when  they  felt  themselves  able  to  carry
their  pretensions  very  high,  have  sometimes  disputed  that  right,
• or  at  least  attempted  to  render  the  exercise  of  it  subject  to
the  control  of  their  supreme  authority, — insisting  that  their
permission  was  necessary  to  give  it  a  sanction. But  since
the  peace  of  Westphalia,  and  by  means  of  the  imperial  capi-
tulations, the  princes  and  states  of  Germany  have  been  able
to  maintain  themselves  in  the  possession  of  that  right ;  and
they  have  secured  to  themselves  so  many  other  rights,  that
the  empire  is  now  considered  as  a  republic  of  sovereigns.
{ 60. Cities There  are  even  cities  which  are  and  which  acknowledge
that  have themselves  to  be  in  a  state  of  subjection,  that  have  never-
Uie  right  of  theless  a  right  to  receive  the  ministers  of  foreign  powers,  and
to  send  them  deputies,  since  they  have  a  right  to  treat  with
them. This  latter  circumstance  is  the  main  point  upon  which
the  whole  question  turns :  for  whosoever  has  a  right  to  the
end,  has  a  right  to  the  means. It  would  be  absurd  to  ao-


OF  THE  RIGHT  OF  EMBASSY.  454


CHAP. T.


XDOwIedge  the  right  of  negotiating  and  treating,  and  to  con-  book  it.
test  the  necessary  means  of  doing  it.  Those  cities  of  Swit-
zerland, such  as  Neufchatel  and  Bienne,  which  have  the  right
of  banner,  have,  by  natural  consequence,  a  right  to  treat  with
foreign  powers,  although  the  cities  in  question  be  subject  to
the  dominion  of  a  prince :  for  the  right  of  banner ^  or  of  arms,
comptehends  that  of  granting  succours  of  troops,*  provided
such  grants  be  not  inconsistent  with  the  service  of  the  prince.
Now,  if  those  cities  are  entitled  to  grant  troops,  they  must
necessarily  be  at  liberty  to  listen  to  the  applications  made  to
them  on  the  subject  by  a  foreign  power,  and  to  treat  respect-
ing the  conditions.  Hence  it  follows  that  they  may  also
depute  an  agent  to  him  for  that  purpose,  or  receive  his  mi-
nisters. And  as  they  are  at  the  same  time  vested  with  the
administration  of  their  own  internal  police,  they  have  it  in
their  power  to  insure  respect  to  such  foreign  ministers  as
come  to  them.  What  is  here  said  of  the  rights  of  those  cities
is  confirmed  by  ancient  and  constant  practice.  However  ex-
alted and  extraordinary  such  rights  may  appear,  they  will
not  be  thought  strange,  if  it  be  considered  that  those  very
cities  were  already  possessed  of  extensive  privileges  at  the
time  when  their  princes  were  themselves  dependent  on  the
emperors,  or  on  other  liege  lords  who  were  immediate  vassals  [  455  ]
of  the  empire.  When  the  princes  shook  off  the  yoke  of  vas-
salage, and  established  themselves  in  a  state  of  perfect  inde-
pendence, the  considerable  cities  in  their  territories  made
their  own  conditions ;  and  instead  of  rendering  their  situation
worse,  it  was  very  natural  that  they  should  take  hold  of  ex-
isting circumstances,  in  order  to  secure  to  themselves  a  greater
portion  of  freedom  and  happiness.  Their  sovereigns  cannot
now  advance  any  plea  in  objection  to  the  terms  on  which  those
cities  consented  to  follow  their  fortunes  and  to  acknowledge
them  as  their  only  superiors.

Viceroys  and  chief  governors  of  a  sovereignty  or  remote  j  61.  Minis,
province  have  frequently  the  right  of  sending  and  receiving  tera  of  yIco-
public  ministers; but,  in  that  particular,  they  act  in  the"*^.
name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  sovereign  whom  they  rd-
present,  and  whose  rights  they  exercise. That  entirely  depends
on  the  will  of  the  master  by  whom  they  are  delegated. The
viceroy  of  Naples,  the  governors  of  Milan,  and  the  governors-
general  of  the  Netherlands  for  Spain,  were  invested  with  such
power.

The  right  of  embassy,  like  all  the  other  rights  of  sove-  ?  «2.  Minii.
reign ty,  oriffinally  resides  in  the  nation  as  its  principal  and*®"®^*^®,

p J,'> o y  ^  r  r  .  -  nation  or  of

primitive  subject. During  an  interregnum,  the  exercise  of  ^j^^  regenti
that  right  reverts  to  the  nation,  or  devolves  on  those  whom  during  an
the  laws  have  invested  with  the  regendy  of  the  state. They  interreg-
may  send  ministers  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sovereign

*  Sa6  the  History  of  the  Helretio  Confederacy,  by  M.  de  WatteviUe.

573


nam.


455  OF  THE  EIGHT  OF  EMBASST.

BOOK  IT. used  to  do;  and  these  minrsters  possess  the  same  rights  as
CHAP.  V. ^,gj.g  enjoyed  by  those  of  the  sovereign. The  republic  of  Po-
land sends  ambassadors  while  her  throne  is  vacant :  noi  would
she  suiFer  that  they  should  be  treated  with  less  respect  and
consideration  than  those  who  are  sent  while  she  has  a  king.
Cromwell  effectually  maintained  the  ambassadors  of  England
in  the  same  rank  and  respectability  which  they  possessed
under  the  regal  authority.
{  63.  Of  him Such  being  the  rights  of  nations,  a  sovereign  who  attempts
who  molests  ^q  hinder  another  from  sending  and  receiving  public  ministers,
Xe  exerdse  ^^^^  ^™  ^^  ^^i^^i  and  offeuds  against  the  law  of  nations.  It
of  the  right  is  attacking  a  nation  in  one  of  her  most  valuable  rights,  and
of  embassy,  disputing  her  title  to  that  which  nature  herself  gives  to  every
independent  society:  it  is  offering  an  insult  to  nations  in
general,  and  tearing  asunder  the  ties  by  which  they  are
united.
2  64. What But  this  is  to  be  understood  only  of  a  time  of  peace :  war
18  allowable  introduces  other  rights. It  allows  us  to  cut  off  from  an
spect  in  time  ®^®™y  ^^^  ^is  resources,  and  to  hinder  him  from  sending  mi-
of  war. nisters  to  solicit  assistance. There  are  even  occasions  when
we  may  refuse  a  passage  to  the  ministers  of  neutral  nations,
who  are  going  to  our  enemy. We  are  under  no  obligation  to
allow  them  an  opportunity  of  perhaps  conveying  him  intelli-
gence of  a  momentous  nature,  and  concerting  with  him  the
means  of  giving  him  assistance,  &c.. This  admits  of  no  doubt,
for  instance,  in  the  case  of  a  besieged  town. No  right  can
[  456  ]  authorize the minister  of  a  neutral  power,  or  any  other
person  whatsoever,  to  enter  the  place  without  the  besieger's
consent. But,  in  order  to  avoid  giving  offence  to  sovereigns,
good  reasons  Tunst  be  alleged  for  refusing  to  let  their  minis*
ters  pass ;  and  with  such  reasons  they  must  rest  satisfied,  if
they  are  disposed  to  remain  neuter. Sometimes  even  a  pas-
sage is  refused  to  suspected  ministers  in  critical  and  dubious
junctures,  although  there  do  not  exist  any  open  war. But
this  is  a  delicate  proceeding,  which,  if  not  justified  by  reasons
that  are  perfectly  satisfactory,  produces  an  acrimony  that
easily  degenerates  into  an  open  rupture.
;  65. The As  nations  are  obliged  to  correspond  together,  to  attend  to
mmiaterof  ^j^^  proposals  and  demands  made  to  them,  to  keep  open  a
poweTis  to ^^^^  ^^^  ^*^®  channel  of  communication  for  the  purpose  of
bo  received,  mutually  understanding  each  other's  views  and  bringing  their
disputes  to  an  accommodation,  a  sovereign  cannot,  without
very  particular  reasons,  refuse  admitting  and  hearing  the
minister  of  a  friendly  power,  or  of  one  with  whom  he  is  at
peace. But  in  case  there  be  reasons  for  not  admitting  him
into  the  heart  of  the  pountry,  he  may  notify  to  him  that  hf»
will  send  proper  persons  to  meet  him  at  an  appointed  place
on  the  frontier,  there  to  hear  his  proposals. It  then  becomes
the  foreign  minister's  duty  to  stop  at  the  place  assigned :  it

674


OF  THE  RIGHT  OP  EMBASSY.  456

J8  sufficient  that  he  obtains  a  hearing;  that  being  the  utmost book  tv.
that  he  has  a  right  to  expect.  ^°^^'  ^*


The  obligation,  however,  does  not  extend  so  far  as  to  in-?  66.  Ofi*
elude  that  of  suflFering  at  all  times  the  residence  of  perpetual  ®^.**®'**  ™^"
ministers,  who  are  desirous  of  remaining  at  the  sovereign's
court,  although  they  have  no  business  to  transact  with  him.
It  is  natural,  indeed,  and  perfectly  conformable  to  the  senti-
ments which  nations  ought  mutually  to  entertain  for  each
other,  that  a  friendly  reception  should  be  given  to  those  resi-
dent ministers,  when  there  is  no  inconvenience  to  be  appre-
hended from  their  stay.  But  if  there  exist  any  substantial
reason  to  the  contrary,  the  advantage  of  the  state  undoubt-.
edly  claims  a  preference ;  and  the  foreign  sovereign  cannot
take  it  amiss  if  his  minister  be  requested  to  withdraw,  when
he  has  fulfilled  the  object  of  his  commission,  or  when  he  has
not  any  business  to  transact.  The  custom  of  keeping  every
where  ministers  constantly  resident  is  now  so  firmly  esta-
blished, that  whoever  should  refuse  to  conform  to  it,  must
allege  very  good  reasons  for  his  conduct,  if  he  wishes  to  avoid
giving  offence.  These  reasons  may  arise  from  particular  con-
junctures :  but  there  are  also  ordinary  reasons  ever  subsist-
ing", and  such  as  relate  to  the  constitution  of  a  government
and  the  state  of  a  nation.  Republics  would  often  have  very
good  reasons  of  the  latter  kind,  to  excuse  themselves  from
continually  suffering  the  residence  of  foreign  ministers,  who
corrupt  the  citizens, — gain  them  over  to  their  masters,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  republic, — and  excite  and  foment  par-
ties in  the  state,  &c.  And  even  though  no  other  evil  should
arise  from  their  presence  than  that  of  inspiring  a  nation,  ori-
ginally plain,  frugal,  and  virtuous,  with  a  taste  for  luxury,
the  thirst  of  gain,  and  the  manners  of  courts, — that  alone
would  be  more  than  suflScient  to  justify  the  conduct  of  wise
and  provident  rulers  in  dismissing  them.  The  Polish  govern-  [  457  1
ment  is  not  fond  of  resident  ministers ;  and  indeed  their  in-
trigues with  the  members  of  the  diet  have  furnished  but  too
many  reasons  for  keeping  them  at  a  distance.  In  the  war  of
1666,'  a  nuncio  publicly  complained,  in  the  open  diet,  of  the
French  ambassador's  unnecessarily  prolonging  his  stay  in
Poland,  and  declared  that  he  ought  to  be  considered  as  a
spy.  In  1668,  other  members  of  that  body  moved  for  a  law
to  regulate  the  length  of  time  that  an  ambassador  should  be
allowed  to  remain  in  the  kingdom.*

The  greater  the  calamities  of  war  are,  the  more  it  is  incum-  ?  67. How
bent  on  nations  to  preserve  means  for  putting  an  end  to  it.  -^®  minia-
Hence  it  becomes  necessary,  that,  even  in  the  midst  of  hosti-  '*"  ®^  *"
lities,  they  be  at  liberty  to  send  ministers  to  each  other,  for  ^^  ^j^  ^d-
the  purpose  of  making  overtures  of  peace,  or  proposals  tend-mitted.
ing  to  moderate  the  transports  of  hostile  rage. It  is  true.


*  ynokefoT^B  AmbsBsador,  b.  i.  {  1.

67»


457  OT  THE  RIGHT  OF  BMBadST.

BOOK  IT. indeed,  that  the  minister  of  an  enemy  cannot  come  withont
— '—  permission ;  accordingly,  a  passport,  or  safe-conduct,  is  asked


for  him, either  through  the  intervention  of  some  common
friend,  or  by  one  of  those  messengers  who  are  protected  by
the  laws  of  war,  and  of  whom  we  shall  speak  in  the  sequel —
I  mean  a  trumpeter  or  drummer. It  is  true,  also,  that,  for
substantial  reasons,  the  safe-conduct  may  be  refused,  and  ad-
mission denied  to  the  minister. But  this  liberty,  which  \a
authorized  by  the  care  that  every  nation  is  bound  to  bestow
on  her  own  safety,  is  no  bar  to  our  laying  it  down  as  a  gene-
ral maxim,  that  we  are  not  to  refuse  admitting  and  hearing
an  enemy's  minister;  that  is  to  say,  that  war  alone,  and  of
itself,  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  refusing  to  hear  any  pro-
xposal  coming  from  an  enemy ;  but  that;  to  warrant  such  re-
fusal, there  must  exist  some  reason  of  a  particular  nature,
and  which  rests  upon  very  good  grounds,  as,  for  instance,
when  an  artful  and  designing  enemy  has,  by  his  ow^n  conduct,
given  us  just  cause  to  apprehend  that  his  only  intention,  in
Bending  his  ministers  and  making  proposals,  is  to  disunite  the
members  of  a  confederacy,  to  lull  them  into  security  by  hold-
ing out  false  appearances  of  peace,  and  then  to  overpower
them  by  surprise.
{  «8. Whe- Before  we  conclude  this  chapter,  it  will  be  proper  to  dis-
thep  miDis-  ^^g  g^  celebrated  question,  which  has  been  often  debated.. It
MMived *  ^^  asked  whether  foreign  nations  may  receive  the  ambassa-
from  or  sent  dors  and  Other  ministers  of  an  usurper,  and  send  their  minis-
to  an  usurp-  tcrs  to  him  ? In  this  particular,  foreign  powers  take  for  their
•*'  rule  the  circumstance  of  actual  possession,  if  the  interest  of

their  affairs  so  require :  and,  indeed,  there  cannot  be  a  more
certain  rule,  or  one  that  is  more  agreeable  to  the  law  of  na-
tions and  the  independency  of  states.  As  foreigners  have
no  right  to  interfere  in  the  domestic  concerns  of  a  nation,
they  are  not  obliged  to  canvass  and  scrutinize  her  conduct  in
the  management  of  them,  in  order  to  determine  how  far  it  is
either  just  or  unjust.  They  may,  if  they  think  proper,  sup-
L  ^^"  J  pose  the  right  to  be  annexed  to  the  possession.  When  a  na-
tion has  expelled  her  sovereign,  other  powers,  who  do  not
choose  to  declare  against  her,  and  to  risk  the  consequences
of  her  enmity  or  open  hostility,  consider  her  thenceforward
as  a  free  and  sovereign  state,  without  taking  on  themselves  to
determine  whether  she  has  acted  justly  in  withdrawing  from
her  allegiance  to  the  prince  by  whom  she  was  governed.  Car-
dinal Mazarin  received  Lockhart,  whom  Cromwell  had  sent  as
ambassador  from  the  republic  of  England,  and  refused  to  see
either  King  Charles  the  Second,  or  his  ministers.  If  a  people,
after  having  expelled  their  prince,  submit  to  another — ^if  they
change  the  order  of  succession,  and  acknowledge  a  sovereign
to  the  prejudice  of  the  natural  and  appointed  heir — ^foreign
powers  may,  in  this  instance  also,  consider  what  has  been
done  as  lawful :  it  is  no  quarrel  or  business  of  theirs. At


OF  THE  SEVERAL  ORDERS  OF  PUBLIC  MINISTERS.  458

the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  Charles,  Duke  of  Suder-  boor  it,
mania,  having  obtained  the  crown  of  Sweden,  to  the  preju-  ^"^p-  ▼»,
dice  of  his  nephew  Sigisnium'd,  king  of  Poland,  was  soon
acknowledged  by  most  sovereigns.  Villeroy,  minister  of  the
French  monarch,  Henry  the  Fourth,  in  his  despatches  of  the
8th  of  April,  1608,  plainly  said  to  the  president,  Jeannin,
'*•  All  these  reasons  and  considerations  shall  not  prevent  the
king  from  treating  with  Charles,  if  he  finds  it  to  be  his  in-
terest, and  that  of  his  kingdom.''  This  remark  was  sensible
and  jiKlicious.  The  king  of  France  was  neither  the  judge  nor
the  guardian  of  the  Swedish  nation,  that  he  should,  contrary
to  the  interests  of  his  own  kingdom,  refuse  to  acknowledge
the  king  whom  Sweden  had  chosen,  under  pretence  that  a
competitor  had  termed  Charles  an  usurper.  Had  the  charge
been  even  founded  in  justice,  it  was  an  affair  which  did  not
fall  under  the  cognizance  of  foreigners.

Therefore,  when  foreign  powers  have  received  the  minis-
ters of  an  usurper,  and  sent  theirs  to  him,  the  lawful  prince,
on  recovering  the  throne,  cannot  complain  of  these  measures
as  an  injury,  nor  justly  make  them  the  ground  of  a  war,  pro-
vided those  powers  have  not  proceeded  to  greater  lengths,
nor  furnished  any  assistance  against  him.  But  to  acknow-
ledge the  dethroned  prince  or  his  heir,  after  the  state  has
solemnly  acknowledged  the  person  to  whom  the  sceptre  has
been  transferred,  is  an  injury  done  to  the  latter,  and  a  pro-
fession of  enmity  to  the  nation  that  has  chosen  him.  Such  a
step,  hazarded  in  favour  of  James  the  Second's  son,  was,  by
William  the  Third  and  the  British  nation,  alleged  as  one  of
the  principal  reasons  of  the  war  which  England  soon  after
declared  against  France.  Notwithstanding  all  the  caution,
and  all  the  protestations  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  his  acknow-
ledgment of  young  Stuart,  as  king  of  England,  Scotland,  and
Ireland,  under  the  title  of  James  the  Third,  was  considered
by  the  English  as  an  injury  done  both  to  the  king  and  to  the
nation.


CHAR  VL .  [  459  ]

OF  THE SEVERAL  ORDERS OF PUBLIC  MINISTERS — OF  THE  RE- ^"^^^  ^-
PRESENTATIVE  CHARACTER — ^AND OF  THU  HONOURS DUE  TO
MINISTERS.

IN  former  days,  people  were  scarcely  acquainted  with  more  ?  «9.  Origin
than  one  order  of  public  ministers,  in  Latin  termed  legati,  ©^  t^®  »•▼«-
which  appellation  has  been  rendered  by  that  of  ^^ ambasBa-^^^J^^^/^^
dors.** But,  when  courts  were  become  more  proud,  and,  at  J^JI^""
the  same  time,  more  punctilious  in  the  article  of  ceremony,
and  especially  when  they  had  introduced  the  idea  of  extend-

78  2  T  677


459  OP  THE  SEVERAL  ORDERS

BOOK  nr. ing  the  minister's  representation  even  to  that  of  his  master**

^^^^'  ^'' dignity,  it  was  thought  expedient  to  employ  commissioners

of  less  exalted  rank  on  certain  occasions,  in  order  to  avoid

trouble,  expense,  and  disputes.  Louis  the  Eleventh  of  France

was,  perhaps,  the  first  who  set  the  example. Thus,  several

orders  of  ministers  being  established,  more  or  less  dignity

was  annexed  to  their  character,  and  proportionate honours

were  required  for  them.

i  70.  Repre- Every  minister,  in  some  measure,  represents  his  master,  as

sentative every  agent  or  delegate  represents  his  constituent. But  this

0  arac  r. representation  relates  to  the  affairs  of  his  office :  the  minister

represents  the  subject  in  whom  reside  the  rights  which  he  is
to  exercise,  preserve,  and  assert — the  rights  respecting  which
he  is  to  treat  in  his  master's  stead.  Although  such  repre-
sentation is  admitted  in  a  general  view,  and  so  far  as  respects
the  essence  of  affairs,  it  is  with  an  abstraction  of  the  dignity
of  the  constituent.  In  process  of  time,  however,  princes
would  have  ministers  to  represent  them,  not  only  in  their
rights  and  in  the  transaction  of  their  affairs,  but  also  in  their
dignity,  their  greatness,  and  their  pre-eminence.  It  was,  no
doubt,  to  those  signal  occasions  of  state,  those  ceremonies  for
which  ambassadors  are  sent,  as,  for  instance,  marriages,  that
this  custom  owes  its  origin.  But  so  exalted  a  degree  of  dig-
nity in  the  minister  is  attended  with  considerable  inconve-
nience in  conducting  business,  and,  besides  occasioning
trouble  and  embarrassment,  is  often  productive  t)f  difficulties
and  disputes.  This  circumstance  has  given  birth  to  different
orders  of  public  ministers,  and  various  degrees  of  representa-
tion. Custom  has  established  three  principal  degrees.  What
is,  by  way  of  pre-eminence,  called  the  representative  character^
is  the  faculty  possessed  by  the  minister,  of  representing  his
master  even  in  his  very  person  and  dignity.
f  71.  Am-  The  representative  character,  so  termed  by  way  of  pre-
?w2t^°"  eminence,  or  in  contradistinction  to  other  kinds  of  represen-
^  tation,  constitutes  the  minister  of  the  first  rank  the  ambas-

sador. It  places  him  above  all  other  ministers  who  are  not
invested  with  the  same  character,  and  precludes  their  enter-
ing into  competition  with  the  ambassador.  At  present  there
are  ambassadors  ordinary  and  extraordinary :  but  this  is  no
more  than  an  accidental  distinction,  merely  relative  to  the
subject  of  their  mission.  Yet  almost  everywhere  some  dif-
ference is  made  in  the  treatment  of  these  different  ambas-
[  460  ]  sadors. That,  however,  is  purely  matter  of  custom.

1  72. En- Envoys  are  not  invested  with  the  representative  character,
»oys.  properly  so  called,  or  in  the  first  degree. They  are  ministers

of  the  second  rank,  on  whom  their  master  was  willing  to  con-


(192)  An  ambatmador  may  annul  a  the  event  of his nation rejecting  %

treaty, see aathoritiefl coUected in  person  sent  by  tfa«  friendly  iiation  m

1  Chitt/s  Commercial  Law,  46. In  eonsuli  he is  to  assign the reason^
578


OF  PUBLIC  MINISTERS.  460

per  a  degree  of  dignity  and  respectability,  which,  without  book  tv.
being  on  a  level  with  the  character  of  an  ambassador,  im-  ..c"-^^-  ^'i^
mediately  follows  it,  and  yields  the  pre-eminence  to  it  alone.
There  are  also  envoys  ordinary  and  extraordinqry ;  and  it
appears  to  be  the  intention  of  princes  that  the  latter  should
be  held  in  greater  consideration.  This  likewise  depends  on
custom.

The  word  resident  formerly  related  only  to  the  continu-  §  73.  ResU
ance  of  the  minister's  stay ;  and  it  is  frequent,  in  history,  dente.
for  ambassadors  in  ordinary  to  be  designated  by  the  simple
title  of  residents.  But,  since  the  praci;ice  of  employing  dif-
ferent orders  of  ministers  has  been  generally  established,  the
name  of  residents  has  been  confined  to  ministers  of  a  third
order,  to  whose  character  general  custom  has  annexed  a  lesser
degree  of  respectability.  The  resident  does  not  represent  the
prince's  person  in  his  dignity,  but  only  in  his  affairs.  His
representation  is  in  reality  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of  the
envoy :  wherefore  we  often  term  him,  as  well  as  the  envoy,  a
minister  of  the  second  order, — thus,  distinguishing  only  two
classes  of  public  ministers,  the  former  consisting  of  ambas-
sadors who  are  invested  with  the  representative  character  in
pre-eminence,  the  latter  comprising  all  other  ministers  who  do
not  possess  that  exalted  character.  This  is  the  most  neces-
sary distinction,  and,  indeed,  the  only  essential  one.

Lastly,  a  custom  of  still  more  recent  origin  has  introduced  1 74  Minb-
a  new  kind  of  ministers  without  any  particular  determination  *•".
of  character.  These  are  called  simply  ministers^  to  indicate
that  they  are  invested  with  the  general  quality  of  a  sove-
reign's mandatories,  without  any  particular  assignment  of
rank  and  character.  It  was  likewise  the  punctilio  of  cere-
mony which  gave  rise  to  this  innovation. Use  had  esta-


and  reqaest  the  appointment  of  ano-  tions. Id.  461-2 ;  Th»  Caroline,  6  Kob.

ther  con^oL  Id.  55. In  hU  absence  a  Bep.  461 ;  The  Madison,  1  Edw.  K.  224.

consul  of  his  nation  may  demand  an As  respects  an  ambassador or  mi-  Ambassa-

audience with the minister of the  nister in Great Britain, this is de-  dor's  privi*

friendlj  state, (Id. 63,) although a  clared  and  enforced  by  7  Anne,  c.  12 ;  lege  from

consul  has  not  the  same  priTileges  as  see  the  decisions  thereon,  Chitty's  Col.  arrest.

an  ambassador  in  other  respects, Id.  Stat.  13;  Novello  v.  Tog  wood,  1  Barn.

70. The  children of  an ambassador  A  Ores.  554,  2  Dowl.  A  ByL  833,  S.  C. ;

and  of  his  attendants,  though  bom  in  and 13 Price  Bep.  805. And  a  ser-

a  foreign  state,  are  considered  natural*  vant of a foreign minister,  though

Dom  subjects. Id.  110,  112. An am-  not  lodging  in  his  house,  is  protected

bassador from a foreign oourt^ for-  by  that  act In re Count Hatlang,

merly, could  not  come  into  England  Dick.  274. But  a  plaintiff  under  such

irithout a license and safe-conduct,  protection of a foreign ambassador

Id.  131. He  is  the  proper  person  to  has  been  oompeUed  to give security

grant a passport  Id.  492. The  am-  for  costs  before  he  will  be  allowed  to

bassador  of  an  enemy  at  a  neutral  court  proceed. Adderly  y.  Smith,  Dick,  355.

may  recoTcr  and  insist  on  haying  re-  But  that  act  does  not  extend  to  contuU,

stored despatches sent  by  a  neutral  who are, therefore,  liable to arrest

yessel,  and  captured  by  an  enemy;  and  VivearU  y.  Beleherf  3  Maule  A  Selwyn^

he  is  peculiarly  an  object  of  t&e  pro-  284. — C.

tection  and  fayonr  of  the  law  of  na-

679


460  OF  THE  SEVEBAL  OBDERS

BOOK  IV. blished  particular  modes  of  treatment  for  the  ambassador,  th«

CHAP.  ▼'.,enYQy^  and  the  resident. Disputes  between  ministers  of  the

several  princes  often  arose  on  this  head,  and  especially  aboat

rank. In  order  to  avoid  all  contest  on  certain  occasions


when  there  might  be  room  to  apprehend  it,  the  expedient
adopted  of  sending  ministers  not  invested  with  any  one  of  the
three  known  characters. Hence,  they  are  not  subjected  to
any  settled  ceremonial,  and  can  pretend  to  no  particular
,  treatment. The  minister  represents  his  master  in  a  vague
and  indeterminate  manner,  which  cannot  be  equal  to  the  fir&t
degree;  consequently  he  makes  no  demur  in  yielding  pre-
eminence to  the  ambassador. He  is  entitled  to  the  general
[  461  ]  regard  due  to  a  confidential  person  intrusted  by  a  sovereign
with  the  management  of  his  affairs ;  and  he  possesses  all  the
rights  essential  to  the  character  of  a  public  minister. This
indeterminate  quality  is  such  that  the  sovereign  may  confer  it
on  one  of  his  servants  whom  he  would  not  choose  to  inrest
with  the  character  of  ambassador ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it
may  be  accepted  by  men  of  rank,  who  would  be  unwilling  to
undertake  the  office  of  resident,  and  to  acquiesce  in  the  treat-
ment at  present  allotted  to  men  in  that  station. There  are
also  ministers  plenipotentiary^  and  of  much  greater  distinction
than  simple  ministers. These  also  are  without  any  particular
attribution  of  rank  and  character,  but,  by  custom,  are  now
placed  immediately  after  the  ambassador,  or  on  a  level  with
the  envoy  extraordinary.
2  75. Con- We have spoken of consuls in treating of commerce
d'f ^dfe''**'  (Book  II.  §  34). Formerly,  agents  were  a  kind  of  pubRc  mi-
oomn^B-' liisters :  but  in  the  present  increase  and*  profusion  of  titles,
sionera,  Ac.  this  is  given  to  persons  simply  appointed  by  princes  to  trans-
(193)  act  their  private  affairs,  and  who  not  unfrequently  are  sub-

jects of  the  country  where  they  reside. They  are  not  public
ministers,  and  consequently  not  under  the  protection  of  the
law  of  nations. But  a  more  particular  protection  is  due  to
them  than  to  other  foreigners  or  citizens,  and  likewise  some
attention  in  consideration  of  the  prince  whom  they  serve. If
that  prince  sends  an  agent  with  credentials  and  on  public  bu-
siness, the  agent  thenceforward  becomes  a  public  minister ;
his  title  making  no  difference  in  the  case. The  same  remark
is  also  applicable  to  deputies,  commissioners,  and  others  in-
trusted with  the  management  of  public  affairs.
{ 76. Ore- Among  the  several  characters  established  by  custom,  it
dentiali. rests  with  the  sovereign  to  determine  with  what  particular
one  he  chooses  to  invest  his  minister ;  and  he  makes  known
the  minister's  character  in  the  credentials  which  he  gives  him
for  the  sovereign  to  whom  he  sends  him. Credentials  are  the
instrument  which  authorizes  and  establishes  the  minister  in
his  character  with  the  prince  to  whom  they  are  addressed.

il93)  Ante,  147  and  459.
580


Oir PUBLIC  MINISTERS,  461


CHAP. VI.


If  tliat  prince  receives  the  minister,  he  can  receive  him  only book  it.
in  the  quality  attributed  to  him  in  his  credentials. They  are,
as  it  were,  his  general  letter  of  attorney,  his  mandate  patent^
mandatum  manifestum.

The  instructions  given  to  the  minister  contain  his  master's  j  77.  in-
secret  mandate,  the  orders  to  which  the  minister  must  carefully  struotioM.
conform,  and  which  limit  his  powers.  Here  we  might  apply
all  the  rules  of  the  law  of  nature  respecting  procurations  and
mandates,  whether  open  or  secret.  But  exclusive  of  their
being  more  particularly  applicable  to  the  subject  of  treaties,
we  may  with  the  less  impropriety  dispense  with  such  details
in  this  work,  as  the  custom  has  wisely  been  established,  that
no  engagements  into  which  a  minister  may  enter,  shall
have  any  validity  between  sovereigns,  unless  ratified  by  his
principal.

We  have  seen  above  that  every  sovereign,  every  commu-  ?  78.  Right
nity,  and  even  every  individual,  who  has  a  right  to  treat  with  ^^  fe^^ding
foreign  powers,  has  also  that  of  sending  ambassadors.  (See  JJ^f^**"
the  preceding  chapter.)  The  question  admits  of  no  difficulty,
BO  far  as  respects  simple  ministers  or  mandatories,  considered
in  general  as  persons  intrusted  with  the  afiairs,  and  vested  [  462  ]
with  the  powers,  of  those  who  have  a  right  to  treat.  Further,
the  ministers  of  every  sovereign  are,  without  hesitation,
allowed  to  enjoy  all  the  rights  and  prerogatives  belonging  to
ministers  of  tjhe  second  order.  Powerful  monarchs,  indeed,
deny  to  some  petty  states  the  right  of  sending  ambassadors ;
but  let  us  see  with  what  reason.  According  to  the  generally
established  custom,  the  ambassador  is  a  public  minister,  re-
presenting the  person  and  dignity  of  a  sovereign;  and,  as
this  representative  character  procures  him  particular  honours,
great  princes  are  therefore  unwilling  to  admit  the  ambas-
sador of  an  inconsiderable  state,  from  a  repugnance  to  pay-
ing him  honours  of  so  distinguished  a  kind.  But  it  is  mani-
fest that  every  sovereign  has  an  equal  right  of  causing  himself
to  be  represented  in  the  first  as  well  as  in  the  second  or  the
third  degree:  and  the  sovereign  dignity  is  entitled  to  dis-
tinguished respect  in  the  great  society  of  nations.  We  have
shown  (Book  II.  Ch.  III.)  that  the  dignity  of  independent  na-
tions is  essentially  the  same :  that  a  sovereign  prince,  how-
ever low  he  may  rank  in  the  scale  of  power,  is  as  completely
sovereign  and  independent  as  the  greatest  monarch,  in  the
same  manner  as  a  dwarf  is  a  man  equally  with  a  giant:
although,  indeed,  the  political  giant  makes  a  more  conspicu-
ous figure  in  the  general  society  than  the  dwarf,  and  has,  on
that  account,  a  greater  portion  of  respect  and  more  signal
honours  paid  to  him.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  every  prince,
every  state,  truly  possessed  of  sovereignty,  has  a  right  to
send  ambassadors,  and  that  to  contest  their  right  in  this  in-
stance is  doing  them  a  very  great  injury;  it  is,  in  fact,  con*

testing  their  sovereign  dignity. And  if  they  have  that  right,

2t2  681


462  OF  THE  SEVERAL  OKDBRfl

BOOK  TV. their  ambassadors  cannot  be  refused  those  regards  and  ho-
-^~  — nours  which  custom  particularly  assigns  to  the  representative


of  a  sovereign.  The  king  of  France  admits  no  ambassadors
from  the  princes  of  Germany,  as  refusing  to  their  ministers
the  honours  annexed  to  the  first  degree  of  representation ;
yet  he  receives  ambassadors  from  the  princes  of  Italy.  The
reason  alleged  for  this  conduct  is  that  he  considers  the  latter
to  be  more  perfectly  sovereign  princes  than  the  former,  be-
cause, though  equally  vassals  of  the  emperor  and  the  empire,
they  are  not  equally  dependent  on  the  imperial  authority.
The  emperors,  nevertheless,  claim  the  same  rights  over  the
princes  of  Italy,  as  over  those  of  Germany.  But  France,
seeing  that  the  former  do  not  actually  constitute  a  part  of
the  Germanic  body,  nor  assist  at  the  diets,  countenances
their  absolute  independence,  in  order  as  much  as  possible  to
detach  them  from  the  empire.

I  shall  not  here  enter  into  a  detail  of  the  honours  dae  and
actually  paid  to  ambassadors :  these  are  matters  which  alto-
gether depend  on  institution  and  custom:  I  shall  only
observe,  in  general,  that  they  are  entitled  to  those  civilities
and  distinctions  which  usage,  and  the  prevailing  manners  of
the  time,  have  pointed  out  as  proper  expressions  of  the  re-
spect due  to  the  representative  of  a  sovereign.  And  it  must
be  observed  here,  with  regard  to  things,  of  institution  and
[  463  ]  custom,  that,  when  a  practice  is  so  established,  as  to  impart,
according  to  the  usages  and  manners  of  the  age,  a  real  value
tind  a  settled  signification  to  things  which  are  in  their  own
nature  indifferent,  the  natural  and  necessary  law  of  nations
requires  that  we  should  pay  deference  to  such  institution,
and  act,  with  respect  to  such  things,  in  the  same  manner  as
if  they  really  possessed  all  that  value  which  the  opinion  of
mankind  has  annexed  to  them.  For  instance,  according  to
the  general  usage  of  all  Europe,  it  is  the  peculiar  prerogative
of  an  ambassador  to  wear  his  hat  in  presence  of  the  prince  to
whom  he  is  sent.  This  right  expresses  that  he  is  acknow-
ledged as  the  representative  of  a  sovereign :  to  refuse  it,
therefore,  to  the  ambassador  of  a  state  which  is  truly  inde-
pendent, would  be  doing  an  injury  to  that  state,  and,  in  some
measure,  degrading  it.  The  Switzers,  who  formerly  were
much  deeper  adepts  in  the  art  of  war  than  in  the  etiquette  of
courts,  and  far  from  being  punctilious  on  the  score  of  mere
ceremony,  have,  on  some  occasions,  submitted  to  be  treated
in  a  manner  unbecoming  the  dignity  of  their  nation.  In
1663,  their  ambassadors  sufiered  the  king  of  France,  and  the
nobles  of  his  court,  to  refuse  them  those  honours  which  cus-
tom has  rendered  essential  to  the  ambassadors  of  sovereigns,
and  particularly  that  of  being  covered  before  the  king  at  their
audience.* Some  of  their  number,  who  knew  better  what


•  In  Wicqaefort>  maj  be  seen  a  particular  aocoont  of  tiie  whob  tx«M>
682


OF  PUBLIC  MDOSTBRS.  463

they  owed  to  the  glory  of  their  republic,  strongly  insisted  on  book  nr.
that  essential  and  distinctive  honour ;  but  the  opinion  of  the  ^^^^'  ^*:-
majority  prevailed,  and  at  length  they  all  yielded,  on  being
assured  that  the  ambassadors  of  their  nation  had  not  worn
their  hats  in  presence  of  Henry  the  Fourth.  Allowing  the
fact  to  have  been  true,  the  argument  was  not  unanswerable.
The  Switzsers  might  have  replied,  that  in  Henry's  time  their
nation  was  not  yet  solemnly  acknowledged free  and  inde-

?endent  of  the  empire,  as  it  had  lately  been  by  the  treaty  of
?'estphalia  in  1648.  They  might  have  said,  that,  although
their  predecessors  had  not  been  duly  attentive  to  support  the
dignity  of  their  sovereigns,  that  gross  error  could  not  impose
on  their  successors  any  obligation  to  commit  a  similar  one.
At  present,  as  the  nation  is  more  enlightened,  and  more
attentive  to  points  of  that  nature,  she  will  not  fail  to  support
her  dignity  in  a  more  becoming  manner.  Whatever  extra-
ordinary honours  may,  in  other  respects,  be  paid  to  her
ambassadors,  she  will  not,  in  future,  suffer  herself  to  be  so  far
blinded  by  those  empty  marks  of  distinction,  as  to  overlook
that  peculiar  prerogative  which  custom  has  rendered  essential.
When  Louis  the  Fifteenth  visited  Alsace,  in  1744,  the  Helvetic
body  declined  sending  ambassadors  to  compliment  him  accord-
ing to  custom,  until  informed  whether  they  would  be  allowed
to  wear  their  hats:  and  on  the  refusal  of  that  just  demand,  [  464  ]
none  were  sent.  Switzerland  may  reasonably  hope  that  his
most  Christian  majesty  will  no  longer  insist  on  a  claim  which
does  not  enhance  the  lustre  of  his  crown,  and  can  only  serve
to  degrade  an  ancient  and  faithful  ally.


CHAP.  vn.

OP THE RIGHTS, PRIVILEQES, AND IMMUNITIES OP AMBAS- chap,  vii.
SADORa  AND OTHER PUBLIC MINISTERS.  (194)

\ .

THE  respect  which  is  due  to  sovereigns  should  redound  to  i  80. Re-
their  representatives,  and  especially  their  ambassadors, as^P?^*^"®.**
representing  their  master's  person  in  the  first  degree. Who-n^gters"*"
ever  offends  and  insults  a  public  minister  commits  a  crime  the  (i95)
more  deserving  of  severe  punishment,  as  he  might  thereby
involve  his  country  and  his  sovereign  in  very  serious  diffi-
culties and  trouble. It  is  just  that  he  should  be  punished  for
his  fault,  and  that  the  state  should,  at  the  expense  of  the  de-

action. That  writer is  justifiable  in  nation by coarsely asserting that

expressing a degree of indignation  "they prefer money to honour."

against  the  Swiss  ambassadors ;  but  he  Ambassador,  book  L  { 19. See  also

ought  not  to  hare  insulted  the  whole  18.

(194)  See  Wloqaeforf •  Ambassvloziy (lt6)  Ante,  p.  469,  n.
per  tot, — C.

683


BOOK  IT.
CHA.P.  VIl.


164  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, ANB

linqueDt,  give  full  satisfaction  to  the  sovereign  who  has  been
offended  in  the  person  of  his  minister.  If  the  foreign  minis-
ter is  himself  the  aggressor,  and  offends  a  citizen,  the  latter
may  oppose  him  without  departing  from  the  respect  due  to
the  character  which  the  offender  bears,  and  give  him  a  lesson
which  shall  both  efface  the  stain  of  the  outrage,  and  make  the
author  of  it  blush  for  his  misconduct.  The  person  offended
may  further  prefer  a  complaint  to  his  own  sovereign,  who  will
demand  for  him  an  adequate  satisfaction  for  the  minister's
master.  The  great  concerns  of  the  state  forbid  a  citizen,  on
such  occasions,  to  entertain  those  thoughts  of  revenge  which
the  point  of  honour  might  suggest,  although  they  should  in
other  respects  be  deemed  allowable.  Even  according  to  the
maxims  of  the  world,  a  gentleman  is  not  disgraced  by  an
affront  for  which  it  is  not  in  his  own  power  to  procure  satis-
faction.
^  81.  Their  The  necessity  and  right  of  embassies  being  established
poreons  Ba-  (see  Chap.  V.  of  this  Book),  the  perfect  security  and  in  viola-
erod  and  tilitv  of  ambassadors,  and  other  ministers,  is  a  certain  con-
(ivftf)  sequence  of  it :  for,  if  their  persons  be  not  protected  from

violence  of  every  kind,  the  right  of  embassy  becomes  preca-
rious, and  the  success  very  uncertain.  A  right  to  the  end
inseparably  involves  a  right  to  the  necessary  means.  Embas-
sies, then,  being  of  such  great  importance  in  the  universal
society  of  nations,  and  so  necessary  to  their  common  well-
being,  the  persons  of  ministers  charged  with  those  embassies
are  to  be  held  sacred  and  inviolable  among  all  nations.  (See
Book  II.  §  218.)  Whoever  offers  violence  to  an  ambassador,
or  to  any  other  public  minister,  not  only  injures  the  sovereign
whom  that  minister  represents,  but  also  attacks  the  common
[  465  ]  safety  and  well-being  of  nations :  he  becomes  guilty  of  an
atrocious  crime  against  mankind  in  general.


(196)  AnU,  p.  459,  n.— C.

*  An  enormons  infraction  of  the
law  of  nations  caused  the  ruin  of  the
powerful  empire  of  Ehoyarezm,  or
Kakesm,  and  opened  a  door  to  the
Tartars  for  the  subjugation  of  almost
aU  Asia.  The  famous  Gengis-khan,
wishing  to  establish  a  commercial  in-
tercourse between  his  states  and  those
of  Persia,  and  the  other  provinces  sub-
ject to  Mohammed  Cotheddin,  sultan
of  Khovarezm,  sent  to  that  prince  an
ambassador,  accompanied  by  a  caravan
of  merchants.  On  the  arrival  of  that
caravan  at  Otraw,  the  governor  caused
them  to  be  arrested,  together  with  the
ambanador,  and  wrote  word  to  the
Sultan  that  they  were  a  company  of
spies.  Mohammed  thereupon  ordered
him  to  have  the  prisoners  put  to  death.
Gongis-khan  demanded  satiflfkction  of
684


the  sultan  for  this  barbarous  maMaere;
and,  finding  him  backward  to  give  it»
he  took  up  arms.  The  conquer  of
the  whole  empire  of  Khovarezm  soon
followed;  and  Mohammed  himself,  re-
duced to  the  condition  of  a  wretched
fugitive,  died  of  a  broken  heart  in  a
desert  island  of  the  Caspian  Sea.

Canson,  the  last  sultan  of  the  Main-
melucs,  having  put  to  death  the  aa&-
bassadors  of  .the  Turkish  emperor^
Selim  the  First,  the  injured  monareh
took  a  signal  vengeance  for  the  atro-
cious deed.  He  conquered  aU  the  do-
minions of  Canson,  and,  having  de-
feated and  captured  that  prince  near
Cairo,  ho  caused  him  to  be  hanged
at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  eity.  Ma-
rigny,  History  of  the  Arabs,  to}.  iL  |
105,  427.


IMMUNITIES OF  AMBASSADORS, ETCf.  465

This  safety  is  particularly  due  to  the  minister,  from  the book  it.
sovereign  to  whom  he  is  sent. To  admit  a  minister,  to  ac-  chap,  xvn
knowledge  him  in  such  character,  is  engaging  to  grant  him  i  82.  Parti-
the  most  particular  protection,  and  that  he  shall  enjoy  all  ^^^"5  P*?'

Eossible  safety.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  sovereign  is  ^  ^^^^
ound  to  protect  every  person  within  his  dominions,  whether  (i97)
native  or  foreigner,  and  to  shelter  him  from  violence :  but
this  attention  is  in  a  higher  degree  due  to  a  foreign  minister.
An  act  of  violence  done  to  a  private  person  is  an  ordinary
transgression,  which,  'according  to  circumstances,  the  prince
may  pardon :  but  if  done  to  a  public  minister,  it  is  a  crime  of
state,  an  offence  against  the  law  of  nations ;  and  the  power
of  pardoning,  in  such  case,  does  not  rest  with  the  prince  in
whose  dominions  the  crime  has  been  committed,  but  with  him
who  has  been  offended  in  the  person  of  his  representative.
However,  if  the  minister  has  been  insulted  by  persons  who
were  ignorant  of  his  character,  the  offence  is  wholly  uncon-
nected with  the  law  of  nations,  and  falls  within  the  class  of
ordinary  transgressions.  A  company  of  young  rakes,  in  a
town  of  Switzerland,  having,  in  the  night-time,  insulted  the
British  minister's  house,  without  knowing  who  lived  in  it,  the
magistracy  sent  a  message  to  the  minister  to  know  what  satis-
faction he  required.  He  prudently  answered,  that  it  was  the
magistrates'  concern  to  provide  for  the  public  safety  by  such
means  as  they  thought  best ;  but  that,  as  to  his  own  part,  he
required  nothing,  not  thinking  himself  affronted  by  persons
,  who  could  have  had  no  design  against  him,  as  not  knowing
his  house.  Another  particular  circumstance,  in  the  protec-
tion due  to  foreign  ministers,  is  this : — according  to  the  de-
structive maxims  introduced  by  a  false  point  of  honour,  a  sove-
reign is  under  a  necessity  of  showing  indulgence  to  a  person
wearing  a  sword,  who  instantly  revenges  an  affront  done  to
him  by  a  private  individual :  but  violent  proceedings  against
a  public  minister  can  never  be  allowed  or  excused,  unless  [  466  ]
where  the  latter  has  himself  been  the  aggressor,  and,  by  using
violence  in  the  first  instance,  has  reduced  his  opponent  to  the
necessity  of  self-defence.

Though  the  minister's  character  is  not  displayed  in  its  full  j  83.  Wkwi
extent,  and  does  not  thus  insure  him  the  enjoyment  of  all  his  it  com-
rights,  till  he  is  acknowledged  and  admitted  by  the  sovereign,
to  whom  he  delivers  his  credentials, — ^yet,  on  his  entering  the
country  to  which  he  is  sent,  and  making  himself  known,  he  is
under  the  protection  of  the  law  of  nations;  otherwise,  it  would
not  be  safe  for  him  to  come.  Until  he  has  had  his  audience
of  the  prince,  he  is,  on  his  own  word,  to  be  considered  as  a
minister ;  and  besides,  exclusive,  of  the  notice  of  his  mis^on,

(197)  Sco  also  the  case  of  the  arrest 12. See  reoi1%l  in  act,  and  1  Bla.  Com.
of  the .  Russian  ambassador,  which  oo- 250,  and  ante^  459,  note. — C.
easioned  the  passing  of  the  7  Anne,  o.

U  686


mencea.


466  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEQES, AND

BOOK  IT. usually  given  by  letter,  the  minister  has,  in  case  of  doubt,  his
CHAP,  ^"-.passports  to  produce,  which  will  sufficiently  certify  his  cha-


racter,
f  84.  What  These  passports  sometimes  become  necessary  to  him  in  the
'is  due  to  countries  through  which  he  passes  on  his  way  to  the  place  of
countries  ^^®  destination ;  and,  in  case  of  need,  he  shows  them,  in  order
through  to  obtain  the  privileges  to  which  he  is  entitled.  It  is  true,
which  they  indeed,  that  the  prince  alone  to  whom  the  minister  is  sent,  13
I*""  under  any  obligation,  or  particular  engagement  to  insure  him

the  enjoyment  of  all  the  rights  annexed  to  his  character.  Tel
the  others  through  whose  dominions  he  passes  are  not  to  deny
him  those  regards  to  which  the  minister  of  a  sovereign  is  en-
titled, and  which  nations  reciprocally  owe  to  each  other.  In
particular  they  are  bound  to  aflford  him  perfect  security.  To
insult  him  would  be  injuring  his  master,  and  the  whole  nation
to  which  he  belongs :  to  arrest  him,  and  offer  him  violence,
would  be  infringing  the  right  of  embassy,  which  belongs  to
all  sovereigns  (§§  67 — 63).  The  French  monarch,  Francis
the  First,  had  therefore  very  good  reason  to  complain  of  the
murder  of  his  ambassadors,  Kincon  and  Fregose,  as  an  atro-
cious violation  of  public  fi^ith  and  the  law  of  nations.  Those
two  ministers,  the  one  destined  for  Constantinople,  the  other
for  Venice,  ha\ing  embarked  on  the  Po,  were  stopped  and
murdered ;  and,  according  to  all  appearances,  the  deed  had
been  perpetrated  by  order  of  the  governor  of  Milan.*  The
emperor  Charles  the  Fifth,  having  taken  no  pains  to  discover
the  persons  concerned  in  the  murder,  authorized  a  belief  that
he  had  himself  ordered  it,  or  at  least  that  he  tacitly  approved
of  the  act  after  its  commission.  And,  as  he  did  not  give  any
suitable  satisfaction  for  it,  Francis  had  a  very  just  cause  for
declaring  war  against  him,  and  even  calling  for  the  assistance
of  all  other  nations :  for  an  affair  of  this  natiu*e  is  not  a  pri-
vate dispute,  a  doubtful  question,  in  which  each  party  pre-
tends to  have  justice  on  his  side :  it  is  a  quarrel  which  in-
volves the  concern  of  all  nations,  since  they  are  all  equally
interested  in  maintaining  the  sacred  inviolability  of  that
right,  and  of  those  means  which  enable  them  to  hold  com-
[  467  ]  munication  with  each  other,  and  to  treat  of  their  affairs.  If
an  innocent  passage,  and  even  perfect  security  are  due  to  a
private  individual,  much  more  are  they  due  to  the  minister
of  a  sovereign,  who  is  going  to  execute  his  master's  orders,
.  and  who  travels  on  the  affiiirs  of  a  nation.  I  sav,  "  an  in-
nocent  passage;"  for  the  minister's  journey  is  justly  sus-
pected, if  a  sovereign  has  reason  to  apprehend  that  he  will
make  an  improper  use  of  the  liberty  granted  him  of  entering
his  territories,  by  plotting  against  his  interests  while  in  the
country,  or  that  he  is  going  to  convey  intelligence  to  his  ene-
mies,  or  to  stir  up  others  against  him. We  have  already

*  Memoires  de  Martin  da  Bellaj,  liv.  ix.
686


IMMUNITIES OF  AMBASSADOES, ETC.  461


said  (§  64)  that  he  may  in  such  case  refuse  him  a  passage :  book  iv.
but  he  is  not  to  maltreat  him,  nor  suffer  any  violence  to  be  J5^Ii-IBl
offered  to  his  person.  If  he  has  not  reason  sufficient  for  de-
nying him  a  passage,  he  may  take  precautions  against  the
abuse  which  the  minister  might  make  of  it.  These  maxims
the  Spaniards  found  established  in  Mexico  and  the  neigh-
bouring provinces.  In  those  countries,  ambassadors  were
respected  throughout  their  whole  journey:  but  they  could
not  deviate  from  the  high  road  without  forfeiting  their
rights:* — a  prudent  and  judicious  reservation,  introduced
as  a  guard  against  the  admission  of  spies  under  the  name
of  ambassadors.  Thus,  while  the  negotiations  for  peace
were  carried  on  at  the  famous  congress  of  Westphalia,  amid
the  dangers  of  war  and  the  din  of  arms,  the  several  couriers
sent  or  received  by  the  plenipotentiaries  had  each  his  particu-
lar route  designated;  and,  out  of  the  prescribed  tract,  his
passport  could  afford  him  no  protection,  f

What  we  have  here  observed  relates  to  nations  that  are  §85. Am-
at  peace  with  eatjh  other. On  the  breaking  out  of  a  war,  we  baasadon
cease  to  be  under  any  obligation  of  leaving  the  enemy  in  the s^iog*® "
free  enjoyment  of  his  rights :  on  the  contrary,  we  are  justi-  country,
fiable  in  depriving  him  of  them,  for  the  purpose  of  weakening
him,  and  reducing him  to  accept  of  equitable  conditions..
Uis  people  may-  also be  attacked  and  seized  wherever  we
have  a  right  to  commit  acts  of  hostility. Not  only,  there-
fore, may  we  justly  refuse  a  passage  to  the  ministers  whom
our  enemy  sends  to  other  sovereigns ;  we  may  even  arrest
them  if  they  attempt  to  pass  privately,  and  without  permis-
sion, through  places  belonging  to  our  jurisdiction. Of  such
proceeding the last  war furnishes a  signal instance. A
French  ambassador,  on  his  route  to  Berlin,  touched,  through
the  imprudence  of  his  guides,  at  a  village  within  the  electo-
rate of  Hanover,  whose  sovereign,  the  king  of  England,  was
at  war  with  France. The  minister  was  there  arrested  and
afterwards  sent over  to  England. As his  Britannic  ma-
jesty had  in  that  instance  only  exerted  the  rights  of  war,
neither  the  court  of  France  nor  that  of  Prussia  complained
of  his  conduct.

The  reasons  which  render  embassies  necessary,  and  am-  2  86. Em-
bassadors sacred  and  inviolable,  are  not  less  cogent  in  time  ^"^^®*  **®-
of  war,  than  in  profound  peace. On  the  contrary,  the  ne-j^i^g^
cessity  and  indispensable  duty  of  preserving  some  resource
by  which  the  minds  of  the  belligerent  parties  may  be  brought  [  468  ]
to  a  mutual  understanding,  and  peace  be  restored,  is  a  fresh
reason  why  the  persons  *of  ministers,  as  instruments  in  the
preliminary  conferences  and  final  reconciliation,  should  be
still  more  sacred  and  inviolable. Nomen  UgcUi^  says  Cicero,

*  Solifl'a  history  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico; 2  ^7*
f  Wicquefort's  Ambassador,  book  L  J 1.

687


468  OF RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND

BOOK  TV, ejusmodi  esse  debet,  quod,  non  modo,  inter  sociarum  jura,  $€d
^HAp.  VII.  ^iifjf^jy^  inter  hostium  tela,  ineolume  versetur,* Accordingly,
one  of  the  most  sacred  laws  of  war  is  that  which  insures  per-
fect security  to  persons  who  bring  messages  or  proposals
from  the  enemy. It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  ambassador  of
an  enemy  must not  approach  without  permission : and  as
there  does  not  always  exist  a  convenient  opportunity  of  ob-
taining such  permission  through  the  medium  of  neutral  per-
sons, the  defect  has  been  supplied  by  the  establishment  of
certain  privileged  messengers  for  carrying  proposals  from
enemy  to  enemy,  in  perfect  safety.
;  sr. He- The  privileged  messengers  I  allude  to  are  heralds,  trum-
raids,  trum-  petcrs,  and drummers,  who,  from the  moment  they  make
peters,  and  themselves  known,  and  as  long  as  they  confine  themselves
°^®"' within  the  terms  of  their  commission,  are,  by  the  laws  of  war
and  those  of  nations,  considered  as  sacred  and  inviolable.
This  regulation  is  absolutely  necessary ;  for,  exclusive  of  the
duty  incumbent  on  us  to  reserve  the  means  of  restoring  peace
(as  above  mentioned),  there  occur,  even  during  the  course  of
the  war,  a  thousand  occasions,  when  the  common  safety  and
advantage  of  both  parties  require  that  they  should  be  able
to  send  messages  and  proposals  to  each  other. The  insti-
.  tution  of  heralds  succeeded  that  of  the  Roman  feciales :  at
present,  however,  they  are  seldom employed :  drummers  or
trumpeters  are  sent,  and  after  them,  according  to  the  exi-
gence of  the  occasion,  ministers,  or  officers  furnished  with
powers. Those  drummers  and  trumpeters  are  held  sacred
and  inviolable; but  they  are to make themselves  known
by  the  marks  peculiar  to  them.  (198) Maurice,  prince  of
Orange,  highly  resented the conduct of  the garrison of
Ysendick,  who  had  fired  at  his  trumpeter  rf  on  which  occa-
sion the  prince observed that  no punishment  can  be  too
severe  for  those  who  violate  the  law  of  nations. Other  in-
stances may  be  seen  in  Wicquefort,  and  particularly  the  repa-
ration which  the  duke  of  Savoy,  as  general  of  Charles  the
Fifth's  army,  caused  to  be  made  to  a  French  trumpeter,  who
had been dismounted and despoiled by some Grerman
soldiers,  t
;  88. Mi- In  the  wars  of  the  Netherlands  the  duke  of  Alva  hanged
niaters, up  a  trumpeter  belonging  to  the  prince  of  Orange,  saying
trumpeters,  ^j^^t  he  was  not  obliged  to  allow  safety  to  a  trumpeter  sent
respe^eted ^™  ^7  *^®  chicf  of  the  rcbels.f On  this,  as  on  many  other
even  in  a' occasions,  that  Sanguinary  general  was  undoubtedly  guilty
eivU  war. of  a  flagrant  violation  of  the  laws  of  war,  which,  as  we  have
[  469  ]  proved  above  (Book  III.  Chap.  XVIII.),  ought  to  be  ob-
served even  in  civil  wars :  for,  unless  both  parties  can  with
perfect safety  interchange  messages,  and  reciprocally  send


*  In  Verrem,  orat  L  ( 198)  But  see  JSsop's  Fables. — C

f  Wioqaeforty  book  L  {  3.

588


IMMUNITIES  or  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  469

confidential  persons  to  each  other,  how  can  they,  on  those  book  it.
unfortunate  occasions,  ever  come  to  talk  of  peace?  What— ^^^^-^
channel  remains  open  for  negotiating  a  salutary  accommo-
dation? The  same  duke  of  Alva,  in  the  war  which  the
Spaniards  afterwards  made  on  the  Portuguese,  whom  they
also  termed  rebels,  caused  the  governor  of  Cascais  to  be
hanged  for  having  given  orders  to  fire  on  a  trumpeter  sent  to
demand  a  surrender  of  the  town.*  In  a  civil  war,  or  when
a  prince  takes  up  arms  for  the  purpose  of  subduing  a  body
of  people  who  think  themselves  absolved  from  their  allegiance
to  him,  an  attempt  to  compel  the  enemies  to  respect  the  laws
of  war,  while  he  himself  does  not  observe  them  on  his  own
part,  is  in  fact  equal  to  a  determined  resolution  of  carrying
those  wars  to  the  extreme  of  cruelty,  and  converting  them
into  a  scene  of  inordinate  and  endless  murder,  by  the  long
series  of  mutual  retaliations  which  will  naturally  ensue.

But,  as  a  prince,  when  influenced  by  substantial  reasons,  j  89.  Some*
may  refuse  to  admit  and  listen  to  ambassadors,  in  like  man-  timea  they
ner  the  general  of  an  army,  or  any  other  commander,  is  not  ?*^,^V*T
always  obliged  to  p'ermit  the  approach  of  a  trumpeter  or  ^^^  /^™^x
drummer,  and  to  give  him  a  hearing. If,  for  instance,  the
governor  of  a  besieged  town  is  apprehensive  that  a  summons
to  surrender  may  intimidate  the  garrison,  and  excite  prema-
ture ideas  of  capitulation,  he  undoubtedly  may,  on  seeing
the  trumpeter  advance,  send  him  orders  to  retire,  informing
him  that  if  he  comes  a  second  time  on  the  same  errand  and
without  permission,  he  shall  be  fired  upon. This  conduct  is
no  violation  of  the  laws  of  war :  but  such  a  mode  of  proceed-
ing ought  not  to  be  adopted  without  very  cogent  reasons,
because,  by  irritating  the  besiegers,  it  exposes  the  garrison
to  be  treated  by  them  with  the  extreme  of  rigour,  unte;n-
pered  with  mercy. or  moderation. To  refuse  to  hear  a  trum-
peter's message  without alleging  a  substantial  reason  for
the  refusal,  is  equivalent  to  a  declaration  that  the  party  is
determined  to  presevere  in  irreconcilable  hostility.

Whether  we  admit  or  refuse  to  hear  a  herald  or  a  trum-  ?  90.  Everj
peter,  we  ought  carefully  to  avoid  every  thing  which  might  ^^"'^  ^i»ici»
wear  the  appearance  of  an  insult  offered  to  him. Not  only  p^^^g^of
does  the  law  of  nations  claim  that  respect,  but  prudence  insult  to
moreover  recommends  such  caution  and  delicacy. In  1744,  them  mnat
the  Bailly  de  Givry  sent  a  trumpeter,  with  an  officer,  to  sum-  ^®  avoided,
mon  the  redoubt  of  Pierrelonge  in  Piedmont. The  Savoyard  [  470  ]
officer  who  commanded  in  the  redoubt,  a  brave  man,  but  of
a  blunt  and  fiery  disposition,  feeling  his  indignation  roused
by  a  summons  to  surrender  a  post  which  he  deemed  tenable
and  secure,  returned  an  insulting  answer  to  the  French  gene-
ral. The  officer  to  whom  the  answer  was  given,  judiciously


•  Wicquefort,  book  i.  21  b. ;  4  Inet  166;  2  Inst.  67;  1  Chit-

(199)  See  also  Calvin't  eate,  7  Coke, ty's  Com.  L.  131.— 0.

2Z  589


470  OF  RIGHTS, PRIYILEGES, AND


BOOK  IT. took  advantage  of  the  circumstance,  and  delivered  it  to  tbe
^^^^'  ^"'  Bailly  de  Givry  in  the  hearing  of  the  French  troops. It  set
them  in  a  flame ;  and  their  native  valour  heing  stimulated
by  the  eager  desire  of  avenging  an  affront,  their  impetuosity
was  irresistible :  though  the  attack  was  attended  with  con-
siderable carnage,  the  losses  they  sustained  only  added  fresh
fuel  to  their  courage,  till  at  length  they  carried  the  redoubt :
and  thus  the  imprudent  commandant  was  accessary  to  his  own
death,  the  slaughter  of  his  men,  and  the  loss  of  bis  post,
g  91.  By  and The prince,  the general  of  the army, and every  com-
to  whom mander-in-chief  within  his  department,  have  alone  the  right
helenL^ of  sending  a  trumpeter or drummer ; and,  on the other
hand,  it  is  only  to  the  commander-in-chief  that  they  can  send
such  messengers. Should  a  general,  besieging  a  town,  at-
tempt to  send  a  trumpeter  to  any  subaltern,  to  the  magis-
tracy, or  the  townsmen,-  the  governor  might  justly  treat  that
trumpeter as a  spy. The French monarch,  Francis the
First,  while  engaged  in  war  with  Charles  the  Fifth,  sent  a
trumpeter  to  the  diet  of  the  empire,  then  assembled  at  Spires,
The  trumpeter  was seized  by  order  of  the  emperor,  who
threatened  to  han^  him,  because  he  was  not  sent  to  him.*
But  he  did  not  oare  to  put  his  threat  in  execution;  for,
loudly  as  he  complained  on  the  subject,  he  was  nevertheless
convinced,  in  his  own  mind,  that  the  diet  had  a  right,  even
without  his  consent,  to  listen  to  the  proposals  brought  by  a
trumpeter. On  the  other  hand,  a  drummer  or  trumpeter
from  a  subaltern  is  seldom  received,  unless  for  some  partica-
lar  object  depending  on  the  present  authority  of  that  subal-
tern acting  in  his  function; At  the  siege  of  Rynberg  in
1598,  a  colonel  of  a  Spanish  regiment  having  taken  upon
him  to  summon  the  town,  the  governor  sent  the  drummer
orders  to  withdraw,  informing  him  at  the  same  time,  that,  if
any  other  drummer  or  trumpeter  had  the  audacity  to  come
on  the  same  errand  from  a  subaltern,  he  would  cause  the
messenger  to  be  hanged. f*
( 92. Inde- The  inviolability  of  a  public  minister,  or  the  protection  to
pcndeDce  of  ^hich  he  has  a  more  sacred  and  particular  claim  than  any
foreign  mi-  Qi^^er  person,  whether  native  or  foreigner,  is  not  the  only
(200)  * privilege  he  enjoys :  the  universal  practice  of  nations  allows
him,  moreover,  an  entire  independence  on  the  jurisdiction
and  authority  of  the  state  in  which  he  resides. Some  au-
thorsj  maintain  that  this  independence  is  merely  a  matter
of  institution  between  different  states,  and  will  have  it  refer
red  to  the  arbitrary  law  of  nations,  which  owes  its  origin  to
manners,  customs,  or  particular  conventions :  in  a  word,  they
deny  it  to  be  grounded  on  the  natural  law  of  nations. It  is
true,  indeed,  that  the  law  of  nature  gives  men  a  right  to

*  Wioqaefort»  abi  supra.  f  Idem,  ibid.

(200)  Se«  ante,  pp.  459,  44(4  %  See  VfoU,  Jos  Gent  }  1059.

590


IMMUNITIES OF  AMBASSABORS, ETC.  470

punish  those  who  injure  them :  consequently,  it  empowers book  it.
sovereigns  to  punish  any  foreigner  who  disturbs  the  public -H££lZ5l
tranquillity,  who  offends  them,  or  maltreats  their  subjects :
it  authorizes  them  to  compel  such  foreigner  to  conform  to
the  laws,  and  to  behave  properly  towards  the  citizens. But
it  is  no  less  true,  that  the  natural  law  at  the  same  time  im-  [  471  j
poses  on  all  sovereigns  the  obligation  of  consenting  to  those
things,  without  which  it  would  be  impossible  for  nations  to
cultivate  the  society  that  nature  has  established  among  them,
to  keep  up  a  mutual  correspondence,  to  treat  of  their  affairs,
or  to  adjust  their  differences. Now,  ambaasadorSy  and  other
public  ministers,  are  necessary  instruments  for the main-
tenance of  that  general  society ^  of  that  mutual  correspond-
ence between  nations. But  their  ministry  cannot  effect  the
intended  purpose,  unless  it  be  invested  with  all  the  preroga-
tives which  are  capable  of  insuring  its  legitimate  success,  and
of  enabling  the  minister  freely  and  faithfully  to  discharge
his  duty  in  perfect  security. The  law  of  nations,  therefore,
while  it  obliges  us  to  grant  admission  to  foreign  ministers,
does  also  evidently  oblige  us  to  receive  those  ministers  in
full  possession  of  all  the  rights  which  necessarily  attach  to
their  character — all  the  privileges  requisite  for  the  due  per-
formance of  their  functions. It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  in-
dependence must  be  one  of  those  privileges ;  since,  without
it,  that  security  which  is  so  necessary  to  a  public  minister,
would  be  enjoyed  on  a  very  precarious  footing. He  might
be  molested,  persecuted,  maltreated,  under  a  thousand  pre-
tences. A  minister  is  often  charged  with  commissions  that
are  disagreeable  to  the  prince  to  whom  he  is  sent. If  that
prince  has  any  power  over  him,  and  especially  a  sovereign
authority,  how  is  it  to  be  expected  that  the  minister  can  Q^e-
cute  his  master's  .orders  with  due  fidelity,  firmness,  and  free-
dom of  mind  ? It  is  a  matter  of  no  small  importance  that
he  have  no  snares  to  apprehend — that  he  be  not  liable  to  be
diverted  from  his  functions  by  any  chicanery — that  he  have
nothing  to  hope,  nothing  to  fear,  from  the  sovereign  to  whom
he  is  sent. In  order,  therefore,  to  the  success  of  his  minis- '
try,  he  must  be  independent  of  the  sovereign  authority  and
of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country,  both  in  civil  and  criminal
matters. To  this  may  be  added,  that  the  nobility  and  other
persons  of  eminence  would  be  averse  to  undertaking  an  em-
bassy, if  such  commission  were  to  subject  them  to  a  foreign
authority — not  unfrequently  in  countries  where they  have
little  friendship  to  expect  for  their  own  Ration,  and  where
they  must  support  disagreeable  claims,  and  enter  into  dis-
cussions naturally  productive  of  acrimony. In  a  word,  if  an
ambassador  may  be  indicted  for  ordinary  offences,  be  cri-
minally prosecuted,  taken  into  custody,  punished — if  he  may
be  sued  in  civil  cases — ^the  consequence  will  often  be,  that  be

will  neither  possess  the  power,  the  leisure,  nor  the  freedom

6ui


471  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND

BOOK  IT.  of  mind  which  his  master's  affairs  require.  And  how  shai*
■  ^^^^'  ^"*  he  be  able  to  support  the  dignity  of  representation  in  such  a
state  of  subjection  ?  On  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  impossible
to  conceive  that  the  prince  who  sends  an  ambassador,  or  any
other  minister,  can  have  any  intention  of  subjecting  him  to
the  authority  of  a  foreign  power :  and  this  consideration  fur-
nishes an  additional  argument  which  completely  establishes
[  472  ]  the  independency  of  a  public  minister.  If  it  cannot  be  rea-
sonably presumed  that  his  sovereign  means  to  subject  him  to
the  authority  of  the  prince  to  whom  he  is  sent,  the  latter,  in
receiving  the  minister,  consents  to  admit  him  on  the  footing
of  independency:  and  thus  there  exists  between  the  two
princes  a  tacit  convention,  which  gives  a  new  force  to  the
natural  obligation.

The  established  practice  is  perfectly  conformable  to  the
principles  here  laid  down.  All  sovereigns  claim  a  perfect  in-
dependency for  their  ambassadors  and  ministers.  If  it  be
true  that  there  was  a  king  of  Spain,  who  from  a  desire  of
arrogating  to  himself  a  jurisdiction  over  the  foreign  ministers
resident  at  his  court,  wrote  to  all  the  Christian  princes,  in-
forming them  that  if  his  ambassadors  should  commit  any
crime  in  the  places  of  their  respective  residence,  it  was  his
pleasure  that  they  should  forfeit  all  their  privileges,  and  be
tried  according  to  the  laws  of  the  country,*  one  solitary  in-
stance is  of  no  weight  in  an  affair  of  this  nature ;  nor  have
his  successors  on  the  Spanish  throne  adopted  a  similar  mode
of  thinking.
{  93.  How  This  independency  of  the  foreign  minister  is  not  to  be
the  foreign  converted  into  licentiousness:  it  does  not  excuse  him  from
io^ehaTo?  Conforming  to  the  customs  and  laws  of  the  country  in  all  his
external  actions,  so  far  as  they  are  unconnected  with  the
object  of  his  mission  and  character: — ^he  is  independent;
but  he  has  not  a  right  to  do  whatever  he  pleases.  Thus,
for  instance,  if  there  exist  a  general  prohibition  against  pass-
ing in  a  carriage  near  a  powder-magazine,  or  over  a  bridge —
against  walking  round,  and  examining  the  fortifications  of  a
town,  &c. — the  ambassador  is  bound  to  respect  such  prohibi-
tions, f Should  he  forget  his  duty — should  he  grow  insolent,

*  The  fact  is  advanced  by  Antony  retpeoUTe  claims  to  precedency,  msd«

de  Vera,  in  his  ''Idea  of  a  Perfect  a  general  request to all  the  for^igii

Ambassador:" but Wicquefort sus-  ministers not  to  send  their carriage!

peots  the  authenticity  of  the  anecdote,  to  attend  the  public  entry  of  the  Ve-

— ^not  having,  as  he  says,  met  with  it  netian  ambassador. The  count  dTs-

in  any  other  writer. Ambassad.  book  i.  trades,  at  that  time  minister  from  th«

J  29.  court  of  France,  having  compli;d  «i  h

f  The  king  of  England  having  re-  his  majesty's  desire, — Louis  XrV.  tei-

eoived information that the French  tified his dissatisfaction  at  the defe-

and Spanish ambassadors had seve-  renoe  paid  by  the  count  to  tlie  Bridrk

rally collected considerable  numbers  monarch's message, "which was no

of  armed  men,  lur  the  purpose  of  sup-  more than a  simple request not  to

porting,  on  a  solemn  occasion,  their  send  carriages; — ^whereas,  even  if  be
692


IMMUNITIES  OP  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  472

and  be  guilty  of  irregularities  and  crimes — there  are,  accord-  book  iv.
ing  to  the  nature  and  importance  of  his  offences,  various  ^^^^VL
modes  of  repressing  him :  and  these  we  shall  speak  of,  after
we  have  said  a  few  words  concerning  the  line  of  conduct  to
be  pursued  by  a  public  minister  in  the  place  of  his  residence.
He  must  not  avail  himself  of  his  independency  for  the  pur-  [  473  j
pose  of  violating  the  laws  and  customs;  he  should  rather
punctually  conform  to  them,  as  far  as  they  may  concern  him,
although  the  magistrate  has  no  compulsive  power  over  him ;
and  he  is  especially  bound  to  a  religious  observance  of  the
rules  of  justice  towards  all  who  have  any  dealings  with  him.
As  to  what  concerns  the  prince  to  whom  he  is  sent,  the  am-
bassador should  remember  that  his  ministry  is  a  ministry  of
peace,  and  that  it  is  on  that  footing  only  he  is  received.
This  reason  forbids  his  engaging  in  any  evil  machinations :
let  him  serve  his  master  without  injuring  the  prince  who  re-
ceives him.  It  is  a  base  treachery  to  take  advantage  of  the
inviolability  of  the  ambassadorial  character,  for  the  purpose
of  plotting  in  security  the  ruin  of  those  who  respect  that
character — of  laying  snares  for  them— of  clandestinely  in-
juring them— of  embroiling  and  ruining  their  affairs.  What
would  be  infamous  and  abominable  in  a  private  guest,  shall
that  be  allowable  and  becoming  in  the  representative  of  a
sovereign  ?

Here  arises  an  interesting  question.  It  is  but  too  common
for  ambassadors  to  tamper  with  the  fidelity  of  the  ministers
of  the  court  to  which  they  are  sent,  and  of  the  secretaries
and  ether  persons  employed  in  the  public  offices.  What
ideas  are  we  to  entertain  of  this  practice?  To  corrupt  a
person — ^to  seduce  him — ^to  engage  him  by  the  powerful  al-
lurement of  gold  to  betray  his  prince  and  violate  his  duty,
is,  according  to  all  the  established  principles  of  morality,
undoubtedly  a  wicked  action.  How  comes  it  then  that  so
little  scruple  is  made  of  it  in  public  affairs  ?  A  wise  and
\drtuous  politician*  sufficiently  gives  us  to  understand  that
he  absolutely  condemns  that  scandalous  resource:  but,  fear-
ful of  provoking  the  whole  triba  of  politicians  to  assail  him
at  once,  like  a  nest  of  hornets,  he  proceeds  no  further  than
barely  advising  them  not  to  practise  such  manoeuvres  except
when  every  other  resource  fails.  As  to  me,  whose  pen  is
employed  in  developing  the  sacred  and  immutable  principles

had  issued  an  express  order  (as  being  subject ;  since  every  soTcreign  must
at  liberty  to  give  what  orders  he  pleases  surely  have  a  right  to  prohibit  all  fo-
in  his  own  kingdom,)  you  should  have  reign  ministers  doing  any  thing  in  his
replied  that  you  receive  no  commands  dominions  which  may  tend  to  produce
but  from  me:  and  if,  after  that,  he  disorder,  and  which,  moreover,  is  not
had  attempted  to  use  violence,  the  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  their  mi-
part  which  remained  for  you  to  act,  nisterial  functions,
was  that  of  withdrawing  from  hii  *  Mons.  Pequet,  Discours  sur  I'Art
sourt." — I  think  the  French  monarch  de  Negocier,  p.  91.
entertained erroneoua ideaa on the

76  2i2  593


473  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND

BOOK  rv.  of  justice,  I  must,  in  duty  to  the  moral  world,  openly  arer
S^^FlJIL  that  the  mode  of  corruption  is  directly  repugnant  to  all  the
rules  of  virtue  and  probity,  and  a  flagrant  violation  of  the
law  of  nature.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  an  act  of  a  more
flagitious  nature,  or  more  glaringly  militant  against  the  re-
ciprocal duties  of  men.  than  that  of  inducing  any  one  to  do
evil.  The  corruptor  is  undoubtedly  guilty  of  a  crime  against
the  wretch  whom  he  seduces ;  and  as  to  the  sovereign  whos«
secrets  are  thus  treacherously  explored,  is  it  not  both  an
ofience  and  an  injury  committed  against  him,  to  abuse  the
friendly  reception  given  at  his  court,  and  to  take  advantage
of  it  for  the  purpose  of  corrupting  the  fidelity  of  his  servants  *
He  has  a  right  to  banish  the  corruptor  from  his  dominions,
and  to  demand  justice  of  his  employer.

If  ever  bribery  be  excusable,  it  is  when  it  happens  to  he
the  only  possible  mode  by  which  we  can  completely  discover
[  474  ]  and  defeat  a  heinous  plot,  capable  of  ruining,  or  materially
endangering  the  state  in  whose  service  we  are  employed.
In  the  conduct  of  him  who  betrays  such  a  secret,  there  may,
according  to  circumstances,  be  no  criminality.  The  great
and  lawful  advantage  accruing  from  the  action  which  we
induce  him  to  perform,  together  with  the  urgent  necessity  of
having  recourse  to  it,  may  dispense  with  our  paying  too  scru-
pulous an  attention  to  the  questionable  complexion  of  the
deed  on  his  part.  To  gain  him  over  is  no  more  than  an  act
of  simple  and  justifiable  self-defence.  It  every  day  happen:?,
that,  in  order  to  foil  the  machinations  of  wicked  men,  we
find  ourselves  under  a  necessity  of  turning  to  our  account
the  vicious  dispositions  of  men  of  similar  stamp.  On  this
footing  it  was  that  Henry  the  Fourth  said  to  the  Spanish
minister,  that  ^'  it  is  justifiable  conduct  in  an  ambassador  to
have  recourse  to  bribery  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  the
intrigues  that  are  carried  on  against  his  sovereign's  interest  ;"*
adding,  that  the  afiair  of  Marseilles,  that  of  Metz,  and  seve-
ral others,  sufficiently  showed  that  he  had  good  reason  for
endeavouring  to  penetrate  the  schemes  which  his  enemies  were
plotting  at  Brussels  against  the  tranquillity  of  his  kingdom.
That  great  prince,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  did  not  consider
bribery  and  seduction  as  on  all  occasions  excusable  in  a  foreign
minister,  since  he  himself  gave  orders  for  the  arrest  of  Bru-
neau,  the  Spanish  ambassador's  secretary,  who  had  tampered
with  Mairargues  for  the  clandestine  surrender  of  Marseilles
to  the  Spaniards.

In  barely  taking  advantage  of  the  offers  made  to  us  by  a
traitor,  whom  we  have  not  seduced,  our  conduct  is  less  in-
consistent with  justice  and  honour.  But  the  examples  of  the
Romans,  which  we  have  already  quoted  (Book  III.  §§  loo,
181),  and  in  which  there  was  question  of  declared  enemies^

*  See  Sullf'B  Memcin,  and  the  Frenoh  historians.
694


IMMUNITIES OP  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  474

—those  examples,  I  say,  sufficiently  show  that  true  greatness  book  it.
of  soul  disdains  even  that  resource,  lest  the  adoption  of  it  chap.  wi.
should  hold  out  an  encouragement  to  infamous  treachery.  A
prince  or  a  minister,  whose  ideas  of  honour  are  not  inferior
to  those  of  the  ancient  Romans  above  noticed,  will  never
stoop  to  embrace  the  proposals  of  a  traitor,  except  when  com-
pelled by  some  dire,  uncontrollable  necessity :  and  even  then
he  will  regret  the  degrading  circumstance  of  owing  his  pre-
servation to  so  unworthy  an  expedient.

But  I  do  not  here  mean  to  condemn  an  ambassador  for
employing  civilities  and  polite  attentions,  and  even  presents
and  promises,  with  a  view  to  gain  friends  for  his  sovereign.
To  conciliate  men's  affections  and  good-will  is  not  seducing
them,  or  impelling  them  to  the  perpetration  of  criminal
deeds :  and,  as  to  those  new  friends,  it  is  their  business  to
keep  a  strict  watch  over  their  own  hearts,  lest  their  attach-
ment to  a  foreign  prince  should  ever  warp  them  from  the
fidelity  which  they  owe  to  their  lawful  sovereign.  [  475  ]

Should  an  ambassador  forget  the  duties  of  his  station —  §  91-  How
should  he  render  himself  disagreeable  and  dangerous — ^should  ^^'f^y?*
he  form  cabals  and  schemes  prejudicial  to  the  peace  of  the^"°"
citizens,  or  to  the  state  or  prince  to  whom  he  is  sent — there
are  various modes  of  punishing  him,  proportionate  to  the
nature  and  degree  of  his  offence. If  he  maltreats  the  sub- 1.  for  ordi-
jects  of  the  state — if  he  commits  any  acts  of  injustice  or^*^.*™°'-
violence  against  them — ^the  injured  subjects  are  not  to  seek^®*^*°°*'
redress  from  the  ordinary  magistrates,  since  the  ambassador
is  wholly  independent  of  their  jurisdiction :  and,  for  the  same
reason,  those  magistrates cannot proceed  directly  against
him. On  such  occasions,  therefore,  the  plaintiffs  are  to  make
application  to  their  sovereign,  who  demands  justice  from  the
ambassador's  master,  and,  in  case  of  a  refusal,  may  order  the
insolent  minister  to  quit  his  dominions.

Should a  foreign minister offend  the prince himself — ?95.  2.  for
should  he  fail  in  the  respect  which  he  owes  him,  or,  by  his  ^^^^^  ^^•'
intrigues, embroil the state and the court — ^the oflfe^^^^^d  "^^^^^  ^
prince,  from  a  wish  to  keep  measures  with  the  offender's  prince,
sovereign,  sometimes  contents  himself  with  simply  requiring
that  the  minister  be  recalled ;  or  if  the  transgression  be  of  a
more  serious  nature,  he  forbids  his  appearance  at  court  in  the
interval  while  his  master's  answer  is  expected ;  and,  in  cases
of  a  heinous  complexion,  he  even  proceeds  so  far  as  to  expel
him  from  his  territories.

Every  sovereign  has  an  unquestionable  right  to  proceed  in  j  qc  Right
this  manner ;  for,  being  master  in  his  own  dominions,  no  of  orderinf
foreigner  can  stay  at  his  court,  or  in  his  territories,  without  *^*y  *"
his permission. And though sovereigns are generally  *^^**"^*|J_
obliged  to  listen  to  the  overtures  of  foreign  powers,  and  to  ty,  or  justly
admit  their  ministers,  this  obligation  entirely  ceases  with  re-  mwpected.
gard  to  a  minister,  who,  being  himself  deficient  in  the  duties

595


475  OF BIQHTS, PBIYILEGESy AKI)

BOOK  TV.  attached  to  this  station,  becomes  dangerous  to,  or  justly  oU*-
CHAP.  vn>  p^gted  by  the  sovereign,  to  whom  he  can  come  in  no  tth^
character  than  that  of  a  minister  of  peace.  Can  a  prince  be
obliged  to  suffer  that  a  secret  enemy,  who  is  raising  dis-
turbances in  the  state  and  plotting  its  ruin,  shall  remain  in
his  dominions  and  appear  at  his  court  ?  Ridiculous  was  the
answer  of  Philip  the  Second  to  queen  Elizabeth,  on  her  re-
quest that  he  would  recall  his  ambassador,  who  was  carrying
on  dangerous  plots  against  her.  The  Spanish  monarch  re-
fused to  recall  him,  saying,  that  "the  condition  of  princes
would  be  very  wretched  indeed,  if  they  were  obliged  to  recall
a  minister  whenever  his  conduct  did  not  suit  the  humour  or
the  interest  of  those  with  whom  he  was  negotiating.*'*  Much
more  wretched  would  be  the  condition  of  princes,  if  they
were  bound  to  suffer  in  their  states,  and  at  their  court,  a  mi-
nister who  was  disagreeable  or  justly  suspected,  an  incendiary,
an  enemy  disguised  under  the  character  of  an  ambassador,
who  shoidd  avail  himself  of  his  inviolability  for  the  purpose
of  boldly  plotting  schemes  of  a  pernicious  tendency.  The
queen,  justly  offended  at  Philip's  refusal,  put  a  guard  on  the
[  476  .]  ambassador,  t

;  9r.  Right  But  is  a  prince  on  every  occasion  bound  to  confine  his  re-
ef repreasing  sentment  to  the  simple  expulsion  of  an  ambassador,  however
f  ™  ^  T  h  8^®*^  ^^®  enormities  of  which  the  latter  may  have  been  guilty  ?
behaves  as  Such  is  the  doctrine  maintained  by  some  authors,  who  ground
Ml  enemy,  their  opinion  on  the  absolute  independency  of  a  public  minis-
ter. I  own  he  is  independent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  coun-
try :  and  I  have  already  said,  that,  on  this  account,  the  com-
mon magistrate  cannot  proceed  against  him.  I  further  admit,
that,  in  all  cases  of  ordinary  transgression,  all  instances  of
offensive  or  disorderly  behaviour,  which,  though  injurious  to
individuals,  or  to  society,  do  not  endanger  the  safety  of  the
state  or  of  the  sovereign,  there  is  that  degree  of  respect  due
to  the  ambassadorial  character  which  is  so  necessary  for  the
oorrespondence  of  nations,  and  to  the  dignity  of  the  prince
represented,  that  a  complaint  be  first  made  to  him  of  the
conduct  of  his  minister,  together  with  a  demand  of  repara-
tion; and  that,  if  no  satisfaction  is  obtained,  the  offended
sovereign  be  then  content  with  simply  ordering  the  ambassa-
dor to  quit  his  dominions,  in  case  the  serious  nature  of  the
offences  absolutely  require  that  a  stop  be  put  to  them.  But
shall  an  ambassador  be  suffered  with  impunity  to  cabal  against
the  state  where  he  resides,  to  plot  its  ruin,  to  stir  up  the  sub
jects  to  revolt,  and  boldly  to  foment  the  most  dangerous  con
spiracies,  under  the  assurance  of  being  supported  by  his  master  ?
If  he  behaves  as  an  enemy,  shall  it  not  be  allowable  to  treat
him  as  such  ?  The  question  admits  not  of  a  doubt  with  re-
gard to  an  ambassador  who  proceeds  to  overt  acts,  who  takes

*  Wioqaeforty  book  L  {  2y.  f  Idem,  ibid.

696


IMKUKITIEB  OF  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  470

np  arms,  and  uses  violence.  In  such  case,  those  whom  he  book  it.
attacks  may  repel  him  :  self-defence  being  authorized  by  the  ^°^^'  ^°'
law  of  nature.  Those  Roman  ambassadors,  who,  being  sent
to  the  Gauls,  fought  against  them  with  the  people  of  Clusium,
divested  themselves  of  the  ambassadorial  character.*  Can
any  one  therefore  imagine  that  the  Gauls  were  bound  to  spare
them  in  the  hour  of  battle  ?

The  question  is  more  difficult  with  respect  to  an  ambassa-  j  98. An^
dor  who,  without  proceeding  to  overt  acts,  broaches  plots  of  baasador
a  dangerous  tendency, — who,  by  his  occult  machinations,  ex-  ^°"'**'^«
cites  the  subjects  to  revolt,  and  who  forms  and  encourages  pj^^g  ^^i
conspiracies  against  the  sovereign  or  the  state. Shall  it  be  conspxra-
deemed  unlawful  to  repress  and  inflict  exemplary  punishment  ciee.
on  a  traitor  who  abuses  the  sacred  character  with  which  he
is  invested,  and  ^ho  is  himself  the  first  to  set  the  example  of
violating  the  law  of  nations  ? That  sacred  law  provides  no  less
for  the  safety  of  the  prince  who  receives  an  ambassador,  than
for  that  of  the  ambassador  himself. But,  on  the  other  hand,
if  we  allow  the  offended  prince  a  right  to  punish  a  foreign
minister  in  such  cases,  the  subjects  of  contest  and  rupture  L  ^*  * J
between  sovereigns  will become  very frequent; and  it  is
much  to  be  feared  that  the  ambassadorial  character  will  cease
to  enjoy  that  protection  and  inviolability  which  are  so  essen-
tial to  it. There  are  certain  practices  connived  at  in  foreign
ministers,  though  not  always  strictly  consistent  with  the  rules
of  rectitude:  there  are  others,  again,  which  are  not  to  be
corrected  by  actual  punishment,  but  simply  by  ordering  the
minister  to  depart.  ,  How  shall  we,  in  every  case,  be  able  to
ascertain  the  precise  boundaries  of  those  different  degrees  of
transgression  ? When  there  exists  a  premeditated  design  of
persecuting  a  minister,  an  odious  colouring  will  be  given  to
his  intrigues :  his  intentions  and  proceedings  will  be  calum-
niated by  sinister  constructions ;  even  false  accusations  will
be  raised  against  him. Finally,  such  plots  as  we  here  allude
to  are  generally  conducted  with  caution :  they  are  carried  on
so  secretly,  that,  to  obtain  full  proof  of  them,  is  a  matter  of
extreme  difficulty,  and  indeed  hardly  possible,  without  the
formalities  of  justice, — formalities  to  which  we  cannot  sub-
ject a  minister  who  is  independent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
country.

In  laying  down  the  grounds  of  the  voluntary  law  of  na-
tions (Prelim.  §  21),  we  have  seen  that,  in  particular  con-
junctures, nations  must,  with  a  view  to  the  general  advan-
tage, necessarily  recede  from  certain  rights,  which,  taken  in
themselves  and  abstracted  from  every  other  consideration,
should  naturally  belong  to  them. Thus,  although  the  sove-

*  Livy^  book  r.  ohap.  26,  where  the "  Legati,  contra  jus  gentinxD,  annm  oapi*
hifltorian  peremptorily  decides  that  those nnt."
ambassadora  violated  the  law  of  nations :

597


477  Olr  KIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND

BOOK  ir.  reign  who  has  justice  on  his  side  be  alone  really  entitled  to
cHAF.jriu  ^11  ^Yie  rights  of  war  (Book  III.  §  188),  he  is  neverthelesi
obliged  to  look  upon  his  enemy  as  enjoying  equal  rights  with
himself,  and  to  treat  him  accordingly  (Ibid.  §§  190,  191).
The  same  principles  must  be  our  rule  in  the  present  case.
We  may  therefore  venture  to  affirm,  that,  in  consideration
of  the  extensive  utility,  nay,  the  absolute  necessity  of  em-
bassies, sovereigns  are  bound  to  respect  the  inviolability  of
an  ambassador  as  long  as  it  is  not  incompatible  with  their
own  safety  and  the  welfare  of  their  state.  Consequently,
when  the  intrigues  of  the  ambassador  have  transpired,  and
his  plots  are  discovered, — when  the  danger  is  passed,  so  that
there  no  longer  exists  a  necessity  of  laying  hands  on  him  in
order  to  guard  against  it, — ^the  offended  sovereign  ought,  in
consideration  of  the  ambassadorial  character,  to  renounce
his  general  right  of  punishing  a  traitor  and  a  secret  enemy
who  conspires  against  the  safety  of  the  state, — and  to  con-
tent himself  with  dismissing  the  guilty  minister,  and  ^equi^
ing  that  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  him  by  the  sovereign
to  whose  authority  he  is  subject.

Such,  in  fact,  is  the  mode  of  proceeding  established  by
common  consent  among  the  generality  of  nations,  especially
those  of  Europe.  Wicquefort*  gives  us  several  instances  of
some  of  the  principal  European  sovereigns,  who,  on  discover-
[  478  ]  ing  ambassadors  to  be  guilty  of  odious  machinations,  have
limited  their  resentment  to  the  expulsion  of  the  offenders,
without  even  making  application  to  have  them  punished  by
their  masters,  of  whom  they  did  not  expect  to  obtain  a  com
pliance  with  such  a  demand.  To  these  instances  let  us  add
that  of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  regent  of  France.  That  prince,
having  detected  a  dangerous  conspiracy  which  had  been
formed  against  him  by  the  prince  de  Cellamare,  ambassador
from  Spain,  behaved  with  great  moderation  on  the  occasion,
— not  adopting  any  severer  measures  than  those  of  setting  a
guard  over  the  guilty  minister,  seizing  his  papers,  and  caus-
ing him  to  be  conducted  out  of  the  kingdom.  Another  re-
markable instance,  of  very  ancient  date;  stands  recorded  by
the  Roman  historians, — ^that  in  which  Tarquin*s  ambassadors
were  concerned.  Having  repaired  to  Rome  under  pretence
of  claiming  the  private  property  belonging  to  their  master,
who  had  been  expelled  from  his  kingdom,  they  tampered  with
the  profligate  young  nobility,  and  engaged  them  in  a  black
and  infamous  conspiracy  against  the  liberties  of  their  coun-
try. Although  such  conduct  would  have  authorized  the
rulers  of  the  Roman  state  to  treat  them  as  enemies,  the  con-
suls and  senate  nevertheless  respected  the  law  of  nations  in
the  persons  of  those  ambassadors,  f The  offenders  were  sent

*  AmbassacL  book  L  Jg  27,  28,  29.  tamen  gentium  valait. Tit  Lir.  liK  u.

t  Bt quamquam yisi sunt {legaH) cap.  4
eommisisse  ut  hosdum  looo  essen^  jua
698


IMMUNITIES OF  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  478

«

back  to  their  employer,  without  having  received  any  personal book  iv.
injury ;  but,  from  Livy's  account  of  the  transaction,  it  ap-  ^^^^'  ^"'
pears  that  the  letters  which  they  had  from  the  conspirators
to  Tarquin  were  taken  from  them.

This  example  leads  us  to  the  true  rule  of  the  law  of  na-  ?  99.  What
tions,  in  the  cases  now  in  question.  An  ambassador  cannot  ™*y  ^®
be  punished  because  he  is  independent:  and,  for  the  reasons ^^°^^.^*™
we  have  alleged,  it  is  not  proper  to  treat  him  as  an  enemy,  the  exigen-
till  he  himself  proceeds  to  overt  acts  of  violence :  but  we  are  ey  of  th©
justifiable  in  adopting  against  him  every  measure  which  the  *^®-
circumstances  of  the  case  may  reasonably  require  for  the
purpose  of  defeating  his  machinations  and  averting  the  evil
which  he  has  plotted.  If,  in  order  to  disconcert  and  prevent
a  conspiracy,  it  were  necessary  to  arrest  or  even  put  to  death
an  ambassador  who  animates  and  conducts  it,  I  do  not  see
ivhy  we  should  for  a  moment  hesitate  to  take  either  of  those  '
9teps, — not  only  because  the  safety  of  the  state  is  the  su-
preme law,  but  also  because,  independent  of  that  maxim,  the
ambassador's  own  deeds  give  us  a  perfect  and  particular
right  to  proceed  to  such  extremities.  A  public  minister,  I
grant,  is  independent,  and  his  person  is  sacred :  but  it  is  un-
questionably lawful  to  repel  his  attacks,  whether  of  a  secret
or  of  an  open  nature,  and  to  defend  ourselves  against  him,
whenever  he  acts  either  as  an  enemy  or  a  traitor.  And  if
we  cannot  accomplish  our  own  preservation  without  harm
thence  resulting  to  him,  it  is  he  himself  who  has  laid  us  un-
der a  necessity  of  not  sparing  him.  On  such  an  occasion,
it  may  with  great  truth  be  asserted,  that  the  minister  has,
by  his  own  act,  excluded  himself  from  the  protection  of  the
law  of  nations.  Suppose  the  Venetian  senate, — though  ap-
prised of  the  marquis  of  Bedamar's  conspiracy,  and  impressed
with  a  thorough  conviction  of  that  minister's  being  the  prime  [  479  ]
mover  and  director  of  the  whole  business, — had  nevertheless
been,  in  other  particulars,  destitute  of  suflScient  information
to  enable  them  to  crush  the  detestable  plot, — suppose  they
had  been  uncertain  with  respect  to  the  number  and  rank  of
the  conspirators,  the  designs  they  had  in  agitation,  and  the
particular  quarter  where  the  meditated  mischief  was  to  burst
forth, — whether  an  intention  was  entertained  of  exciting  a
revolt  among  the  marine  or  the  land  forces,  or  effecting  the
clandestine  capture  of  some  important  fortress, — would  they,
under  such  circumstances,  have  been  bound  to  suffer  the
ambassador  to  depart  unmolested,  and  thus  afford  him  an
opportunity  of  joining  and  heading  his  accomplices,  and  of
bringing  his  designs  to  a  successful  issue ! — No  man  will
serioiisly  answer  in  the  aflSrmative : — the  senate,  therefore,
would  have  had  a  right  to  arrest  the  marquis  and  all  his
household,  and  even  to  extort  from  them  their  detestable
secret.  But  those  prudent  republicans,  seeing  the  danger
was  removed^  and  the  conspiracy  totally  suppressed,  chose

599


479


OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, ANX


BOOK  IT.

CHAP.  vn.


^  100. Am-
baasador  at-
tempting
Against  the
tiovereign's
life.


to  keep  measures  with  Spain :  wherefore  they  prohibited  all
accusation  of  the  Spaniards  as  concerned  in  the  plot,  and
contented  themselves  with  simply  requesting  the  ambassador
to  withdraw,,  in  order  to  screen  himself  from  the  rage  of  the
populace.

In  this  case  the  same  rule  is  to  he  followed  which  we  have
already  laid  down  (Book  III.  §  136,)  in  treating  of  what  may
lawfully  be  done  to  an  enemy.  Whenever  an  ambasj^ador
acts  as  an  enemy,  we  are  justifiable  in  adopting  against  him
every  measure  that  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  defeating
his  evil  designs  and  insuring  our  own  safety.  It  is  on  the
same  principle,  and  under  the  idea  which  represents  the  am-
bassador as  a  public  enemy  when  he  behaves  as  such,  that  we
proceed  to  determine  the  treatment  he  ought  to  receive  in
case  he  pursues  his  criminal  career  to  the  last  stage  of  enor-
mity. If  an  ambassador  commit  any  of  those  atrocious
crimes  which  sap  the  very  foundations  of  the  general  safety
of  mankind, — if  he  attempt  to  assassinate  or  poison  the
prince  who  has  received  him  at  his  court, — he  unquestionably
deserves  to  be  punished  as  a  treacherous  enemy  guilty  of
poisoning  or  assassination  (See  Book  III.  §  155).  The  am-
bassadorial character,  which  he  has  so  basely  prostituted,
cannot  shield  him  from  the  sword  of  justice.  Is  the  law  of
nations  to  protect  such  a  criminal,  when  the  personal  secu-
rity of  all  sovereigns  and  the  general  safety  of  mankind
loudly  demand  that  his  crime  should  be  expiated  by  the  sacri-
fice of  his  forfeit  life  ?  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  we  have  Uttle
room  to  apprehend  that  a  public  minister  will  proceed  to  such
dreadful  enormities :  for  it  is  generally  men  of  honour  who
are  invested  with  the  character  of  ambassadors ;  and  even
if  there  should,  among  the  number,  be  some  whose  con-
sciences are  callous  to  every  scruple,  the  difiiculties,  never-
theless, and  the  magnitude  of  the  danger,  are  suflicieut  to
deter  them  from  the  attempt.  Yet  such  crimes  are  not
[  480  ]  wholly  unexampled  in  history.  Monsieur  Barbeyrac*  in-
stances the  assassination  of  the  lord  of  Sirmium  by  an  am-
bassador of  Constantinus  Diogenes,  governor  of  the  neigh-
bouring province  for  Basilius  II.,  emperor  of  Constantinople;
and  for  his  authority  he  quotes  the  historian  Cedrenus.  The
following  fact  is  likewise  to  the  purpose.  In  the  year  1382,
Charles  III.,  king  of  Naples,  having  sent  to  his  competitor,
Louis  duke  of  Anjou,  a  knight  named  Matthew  Sauvage,  in
the  character  of  a  herald,  to  challenge  him  to  single  combat, —
the  herald  was  suspected  of  carrying  a  demi-lance  whose
point  was  tinged  with  a  poison  of  so  subtle  a  nature,  that  who-
ever should  look  steadfastly  on  it,  or  even  sufier  it  to  touch
his clothes,  would  instantly  drop  down  dead. The  duke,


*  In  bis  notes  on  Bynkenhoek's  treatiM  on  the  Competent  Jadge  of  Aaw
basBadoray  ch.  zxiv.  {  b,  note  2.
•00


IMMXTNirrBS OF  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  480

being  apprized  of  the  danger,  refused  to  admit  the  herald  book  it.
into  his  presence,  and  ordered  him  to  be  taken  into  custody.  ^^^^'  ^'^
The  culprit  was  interrogated,  and,  upon  his  own  confession,
suffered  the  punishment  of  decapitation.  Charles  complained
of  the  execution  of  his  herald,  as  an  infraction  of  the  laws
and  usages  of  war :  but  Louis,  in  his  reply,  maintained  that
he  had  not  violated  those  laws  in  his  treatment  of  Sauvage,
who  had  been  convicted  by  his  own  confession.*  Had  the
crime  imputed  to  the  herald  been  clearly  substantiated,  he
was  an  assassin,  whom  no  law  could  protect.  But  the  very
nature  of  the  accusation  sufBciently  proves  that  it  was  a
false  and  groundless  charge.

The  question  of  which  we  have  been  treating  has  been  j  loi. Two
debated  in  England  and  France  on  two  famous  occasions.  f«™<»kabi«
In  the  former  of  those  countries,  the  question  arose  in  the  *"***°^®''
case  of  John  Leslie,  bishop  of  Ross,  ambassador  from  Mary,  ^^^  immune
queen  of  Scots. That  minister  was  continually  intriguing  Uea  of  public
against  queen  Elizabeth,  plotting  against  the  tranquillity  of  miniateri.
the  state,  forming  conspiracies,  and  exciting  the  subjects  to
rebellion. Five  of  the  most  able  civilians,  being  consulted
by  the  privy  council,  gave  it  as  their  opinion,  that  "  an  am-
bassador raising  a  rebellion  against  the  prince  at  whose  court
he  resides,  forfeits  the  privileges  annexed  to  his  character,
and  is  subject  to  the  punishment  of  the  law." They  should
rather  have  said,  that  he  may  be  treated  as  an  enemy. But
the  council  contented  themselves  with  causing  the  bishop  to
be  arrested,  and  after  having  detained  him  a  prisoner  in  the
Tower  for  two  years,  set  him  at  liberty  when  there  was  no
longer  any  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  his  intrigues,  and
obliged  him  to  depart  from  the  kingdom. f This  instance
may  serve  to  confirm  the  principles  which  we  have  laid  down ;
and  the  like  may  be  said  of  the  following. Bruneau,  secre-
tary to  the  Spanish  ambassador  in  France,  was  detected  in
the  very  act  of  treating  with  Mairargues,  in  a  time  of  pro-
found peace,  for  the  surrender  of  Marseilles  to  the  Spaniards.
The  secretary  was  thereupon  committed  to  prison,  and  was  [  481  ]
Subjected  to  a  judicial  examination  by  the  parliament  before
whom  Mairargues  was  tried. That  body,  however,  did  not
pronounce  sentence  of  condemnation  on  Bruneau,  but  referred
his  case  to  the  king,  who  restored  him  to  his  master,  on  con-
dition that  the  latter  should  order  him  to  depart  immediately
from  the  kingdom. The  ambassador  warmly  complained  of
the  imprisonment  of  his  secretary :  but  Henry  IV.  very  judi-
ciously answered,  that  "the  law  of  nations  does  not  forbid
putting  a  public  minister  under  an  arrest,  in  order  to  hinder
him  from  doing  mischief." The  king  might  have  added,  that
a  nation  has  even  a  right  to  adopt,  against  a  public  minister,

«  History  of  the  Kings  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  by  Monsieop  D'Egly.
f  Cambdon's  AddaL  AngL  ad  aim.  1571,  1573.

76  3  A  «01


481  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEaKS, AND

BOOK  TV. every  measure  which  may  be  necessary  for  the  purpose  of
CHAP.  VII.  ^a|. Jing  Qff  i]^Q  mischief  he  meditates  against  her,  — of  defeat-
ing his  projects,  and  preventing  their  evil  consequences. It
was  on  this  principle  that  the  parliament  were  authorised  to
interrogate  Bruneau,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  all  the
parties  concerned  in  so  dangerous  a  conspiracy. The  ques-
tion, whether  foreign  ministers  who  violate  the  law  of  nations
do  thereby  forfeit  their  privileges,  was  warmly  debated  at
Paris,  but,  without  waiting  to  have  the  point  decided,  the
king  restored  Bruneau  to  his  master.*
2 102.  Who- It  is  not  lawful  to  maltreat  an  ambassador  by  way  of  ret^i-
therrepri- Nation:  for  the  prince  who  uses  violence  against  a  public
saamay  e  uji^jg^^j.  jg  cruilty  of  a  Crime ;  and  we  are  not  to  take  veir
^bL^tr.  geance  for  his misconduct  by  copying  his  example. We
never  can,  under  pretence  of  retaliation,  be  authorized  to
commit  actions  which  are  in  their  own  nature  unjustifiable:
and  such  undoubtedly  would  be  any  instance  of  ill  treatment
inflicted  on  an  unoffending  minister  as  a  punishment  for  his
master's  faults. If  it  be  an  indispensable  duty  to  pay  a
general  regard  to  this  rule  in  cases  of  retaliation,  it  is  more
particularly  obligatory  with regard  to  an  ambassador,  on
account  of  the  respect  due  to  his  character. The  Cartha-
ginians having  violated  the  law  of  nations  in  the  persons  of
the  Roman  ambassadors,  the  ambassadors  of  that  perfidious
nation  were  brought  to  Scipio,  who,  being  asked  how  he
would  have  them  to  be  treated,  replied,  "  Not  in  the  manner
that  the  Carthaginians  have  treated  ours.'* Accordingly  he
[  482  ]  dismissed  them  in  safety  if  but  at  the  same  time  he  made
preparations  for  chastising,  by  force  of  arms,  the  state  which
had  violated  the  law  of  nations.  J There  cannot  be  a  better


*  See  the  diBcussion  of  the  question,  with common decency." La  Croix,

and  the  discourse  which  Henry  lY.  held  Hist  of  Timur-Bec,  book  ii.  chap.  2&

on  this  subject  to  the  Spanrsh  ambassa-  The  same historian,  in  his  account  (f

dor,  in  the  Memoires  de  Nevers,  vol.  ii.  Barcouo, sultan of Egypt, vhu pu:

p.  858,  et  seq.,  in  Matthieu,  vol.  iL  book  Timur's  ambassador  to  death,  ob!=i'nr.>

iii.  and  other  historians.  — ''that  it  was  an  infamous  sctioD:—

Joseph  Sofi,  king  of  Carezem,  having  that  to  insult  an  ambassador  is  a  via*

imprisoned  an ambassador of Timur-  lation of  the law of nations,  aod  a

Bee, Timur's secretary  of  state  wrote  deed  at  which  nature  herself  s^hudtifrs."

him  a  letter  couched  in  strong  terms  Ibid, book v. chap.  17. Edit  i.i>.

of  expostulation  on  the  subject  of  that  1797.

infraction of  the  law  of  nations, — in- f  Appian,  quoted  by  Grotlus,  lib.  ii.

forming  him  that  "  it  is  a  maxim  with  cap.  28,  J  7. According to Diodoru

kings  to  consider  the  person  of  an  am-  Siculus, Scipio said to the R<,>manN

bassador  as sacred: for  which  reason  "Do not imitate that conduct  with

he  is  always held  exempt from  the  which you reproach the Carthftp-

punishment  of  death  or  imprisonment^  nians." "Ekivuov  ovk  ei^ri  Uw  ufamty  •

if  the sovereign to  whom  he  is  sent  rots Kapooiioiwif  jrcyaXo  tri. Diod.  Sir.

has  even  the  slightest  knowledge  of  Excerpt  Peiroso.  p.  290.
the  law  of  nations,  or  the  ambassador ^  Livy,  book xxx. chap.  2S,  }  '•

himself  does  but  possess  sufficient  pru-  That historian makes Scipio a},

dence  to  refrain  from  the  commission  ''Though the Carthaginians hav«

of  any  heinous  offence,  and  to  behave  violated  the  faith  of  the  truce,  and  the

eo2


IMMUNITIES  OF  AMBASSADOBS, ETC.  482

pattern  for  sovereigns  to  follow  on  such  an  occasion.  If  the  book  it.
injury  for  which  we  would  make  retaliation  does  not  concern  ^^^^'  ^"'
a  public  minister,  there  exists  a  still  stronger  certainty  that
we  must  not  retaliate  on  the  ambassador  of  the  sovereign
against  whom  our  complaint  lies.  The  safety  of  public
ministers  would  be  very  precarious,  if  it  were  liable  to  be
afiected  by  every  casual  difierence  that  might  arise.  But
there  is  one  particular  case  in  which  it  appears  perfectly
justifiable  to  arrest  an  ambassador,  provided  no  ill  treatment
be  given  to  him  in  other  respects.  When,  for  instance,  a
prince  has,  in  open  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,  caused
our  ambassador  to  be  arrested,  we  may  arrest  and  detain
his,  as  a  pledge  for  the  life  and  liberty  of  ours.  But  should
this  expedient  prove  unsuccessful,  it  would  become  our  duty
to  liberate  the  unoffending  minister,  and  to  seek  redress  by
more  efficacious  measures.  Charles  the  Fifth  caused  the
French  ambassador,  who  had  made  him  a  declaration  of  war,
to  be  put  under  an  arrest;  whereupon  Francis  the  First
caused  Granvelle,  the  emperor's  ambassador,  to  be  arrested
in  like  manner.  At  length,  however,  it  was  agreed  that  both
those  ministers  should  be  conducted  to  the  frontier,  and  re-
leased at  the  same  time.*  4

We  have  derived  the  independence  and  inviolability  of  the  ?  103.
ambassadorial  character  from  the  natural  and  necessary  prin- '^«"®™®^
ciples  of  the  law  of  nations. These  prerogatives  are  further  con'oerain*
confirmed  by  the  uniform  practice  and  general  consent  of  the  pnvi-
mankind. We  have  seen  above  (§  84),  that  the  Spaniards  leges  of
found  the  right  of  embassies  established  and  respected  in*™^"*^
Mexico. The  same  principle  also  prevails  even  among  the  ^"'
savage  tribes  of  North  America :  and  if  we  thence  turn  our
eye  to  the  other  extremity  of  the  globe,  we  find  that  ambas-
sadors are  highly  respected  in  China.  In  India  also  the  same
rule  is  observed,  though  with  less  scrupulous  punctuality  :f
the  king  of  Ceylon,  for  instance,  has  sometimes  imprisoned
^  the  ambassadors  of  the  Dutch  East-India  company. Being
master  of  the  places  which  produce  cinnamon,  he  knows  that
the  Dutch,  in  consideration  of  a  profitable  commerce,  will
overlook  many  irregularities  in  his  conduct ;  and,  with  the
true  disposition  of  a  barbarian,  he  takes  an  undue  advantage
of  that  circumstance. The  Koran  enjoins  the  moslems  to  re-
spect public  ministers :  and  if  the  Turks  have  not  in  all  in-
stances uniformly  observed  that  precept,  their  violations  of  [  483  ]
it  are  rather  imputable  to  the  ferocity  of  particular  princes
than  to  the  principles  of  the  nation  at  large. The  rights
of  ambassadors  were  formerly  very  well  known  among  the

law  of  nations,  in  the  person  of  our *  Mesersy's  Hist  of  France,  toL  iL

ambassadors,  I  wiU  do  nothing  against p.  470.

theirs  that  is  nnworthy  of  the  maxims f  General Histi of  Voyages, art

of  the  Roman  people,  and  of  my  own Chinay  and  Indies.

'xinciples."

60S


48?  OF  RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND

B03K  TV. Arabs. A  writer  of  that  nation*  relates  the  following  inci-

OHAP. Til. -  -


dent:  Khaled,  an  Arabian  chief,  having  come,  in  the  cha-
racter of  ambassador,  to  the  army  of  the  emperor  Heracliu?,
used  insolent  language  to  the  general :  whereupon  the  latter
observed  to  him,  that  "ambassadors  were  protected  from
all  kind  of  violence  by  the  law  which  universally  prevail!
among  nations :  and  it  was  probably  that  consideration  vhicli
had  emboldened  the  Arab  to  speak  to  him  in  so  indecent  a
manner. "f  It  would  be  quite  unnecessary,  in  this  place,  to
accumulate  the  various  examples  with  which  the  history  of
the  European  nations  presents  us :  the  enumeration  would
be  endless;  and  the  established  customs  of  Europe  on  this
subject  are  suflSciently  known.  Saint  Louis,  when  at  Acra
in  Palestine,  gave  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  protectif*
due  to  public  ministers  : — an  ambassador  from  the  Old  Man
of  the  Mountain,  or  prince  of  the  Assassins,  speaking  in?>
lently  to  the  French  monarch,  the  grand-masters  of  tie
orders  of  the  Temple  and  the  Hospital  informed  that  minis-
ter, that,  "  were  it  not  for  the  respect  paid  to  the  character
with  which  he  was  invested,  they  would  cause  him  to  be
thrown  into  the  8ea."J  The  king,  however,  dismissed  him
without  suffering  the  slightest  injury  to  be  done  him.  Xever-
theless,  as  the  prince  of  the  Assassins  was  on  his  own  pan
guilty  of  grossly  violating  the  most  sacred  rights  of  nations,
it  would  have  been  reasonable  to  suppose  that  his  auibas?.!-
dor  had  no  claim  to  protection,  except  indeed  on  this  single
consideration,  that,  as  the  privilege  of  inviolability  is  fouiiU'd
on  the  necessity  of  keeping  open  a  safe  channel  of  commu-
nication, through  which  sovereigns  may  reciprocally  make
proposals  to  each  other,  and  carry  on  negotiations  both  in
peace  and  in  war,  the  protection  should  therefore  extoii'l
even  to  the  envoys  of  those  princes,  who,  guilty  them>elTt?
of  violating  the  law  of  nations,  would  otherwise  nave  no  title
to  our  respect.
}  104.  Free  There  are  rights  of  another  nature,  which,  though  not
exerciae  of  necessarily  annexed  to  the  character  of  a  public  minister,
rei'gion.  ^^e  nevertheless  allowed  to  him  by  established  custom  ii
almost  every  country.  One  of  the  principal  of  these  is  the
free  exercise  of  his  religion.  It  is,  indeed,  highly  pn'l^'r
that  a  minister,  and  especially  a  resident  minister,  shouH
enjoy  the  free  exercise  of  his  religion  within  his  own  bou^e,
for  himself  and  his  retinue.  But  it  cannot  be  said  that  this
right,  like  those  of  independence  and  inviolability,  is  ai^o-
lutely  necessary  to  the  success  of  his  commission,  pariictt-
larly  in  the  case  of  a  non-resident  minister,  the  only  one
whom  nations  are  bound  to  admit  (§  66). The  minister  maj,

*  Alvakedi's  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Syri*.
f  Ookley's  History  of  the  Sanoens,  ToL  L
j  Choisy's  History  of  St  Louis,

90i


IMMUNITIES OF  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  481

in  this  respect,  do  what  he  pleases  in  his  own  house,  into  »o>k  it.
which  nobody  has  a  right  to  pry  or  to  enter.  But,  if  the  —^^^—  '^
sovereign  of  the  country  where  he  resides  should,  for  sub-
stantial reasons,  refuse  him  permission  to  practise  his  reli-
gion in  any  manner  which  might  render  it  an  object  of  pub-
lic notice,  we  must  not  presume  to  condemn  the  conduct  of
that  sovereign,  much  less  to  accuse  him  of  violating  the  law
of  nations.  At  present,  ambassadors  are  not  debarred  the
free  exercise  of  their  religion  in  any  civiliased  country :  for  a
privilege  which  is  founded  on  reason  cannot  be  refused  when
it  is  attended  with  no  ill  consequence.

Among  those  rights  that  are  not  necessary  to  the  success  i  105.  Whe
of  embassies,  there  are,  on  the  other  hand,  some  which  ^^^J.^®'^*^
not  founded  on  a  general  consent  of  nations,  but  which  are  ^"^pted
nevertheless,  by  the  custom  of  several  countries,  annexed  to  from  aU  im-
the  ambassadorial  character. Of  this  number  is  the  exemp-poata.
tion  of  things  brought  into  or  sent  out  of  the  country  by  a
foreign  minister  from  the  customary  duties  on  importation
and  exportation. There  is  no  necessity  that  he  should  be
favoured  with  any  distinction  in  that  respect,  since  his  pay-
ment of  those  duties  will  not  render  him  the  less  capable  of
discharging  his  functions. If  the  sovereign  is  pleased  to
exempt  him  from  them,  it  is  an  instance  of  civility  which  the
minister  could  not  claim  as  matter  of  right,  any  more  than
that  his  baggage,  or  any  chests  or  packages  which  he  imports
from  abroad,  shall  not be searched at the  custom-house.
Thomas  Chaloner,  the  English  ambassador  in  Spain,  sent
home  a  bitter  complaint  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  his  mistress,  that
the  custom-house  officers  had opened his trunks in  order
to  search  them. But  the  queen  returned  him  for  answer,
that  it  was  "the  duty  of  an  ambassador  to  wink  at  every
thing  which  did  not  directly  offend  the  dignity  of  his  sove-
reign."*

The  independency  of  the  ambassador  exempts  him  indeed
from  every  personal  imposition,  capitation,  or  other  duty  of
that  nature,  and  in  general  from  every  tax  relating  to  the
character  of  a  subject  of  the  state.  But  as  for  duties  laid
on  any  kind  of  goods  or  provisions,  the  most  absolute  inde-
pendency does  not  exempt  him  from  the  payment  of  them :
even  sovereigns  themselves  are  subject  to  them.  In  Holland,
the  following  rule  is  observed: — ambassadors  are  exempt
from  the  taxes  on  consumption, — doubtless,  because  those
taxes  are  more  directly  of  a  personal  nature :  but  they  pay
the  duties  on  importation  and  exportation.

However  extensive  their  exemption  may  be,  it  is  manifest
that  it  solely  relates  to  things  intended  for  their  own  use.
Should  they  abuse  and  make  a  shameful  traffic  of  it  by  lend-
ing their  name  to  merchants,  the  sovereign  has  unquestionably


*  Wicqueforfe  Ambass.  book  i.  J  28,  towards  the  end.

8a2  606


485


OF RiaHTS, PRIVILEGES, AKB


BOOK  IT.
OHAP. VII.


3  10«. ObU-
gation
founded  on
080  and
custom.


a  right  to  put  a  stop  to  the  fraud,  even  by  suppressin;:  'j<*
privilege.  Such  things  have  been  known  in  several  plat^;
and  the  sordid  avarice  of  some  ministers,  who  made  a  ink
of  their  exemption,  has  obliged  the  sovereign  to  deprive
them  of  it.  At  present,  the  foreign  ministers  at  Peterii.
burgh  are  subject  to  the  duties  on  importation ;  but  i  -
empress  has  the  generosity  to  indemnify  them  for  the  !■  -•
of  a  privilege  which  they  had  no  right  to  claim,  and  wbi:  u
from  the  frequency  of  its  abuse,  she  had  been  obliged  i<.
abolish.

But,  here  it  is  asked,  whether  a  nation  may  abolish  vhi:
general  custom  has  established  with  respect  to  foreign  inir.>
ters  ? Let us then consider what obligation  custom  a^  I
received  usage  can  impose  on  nations,  not  only  in  what  c-'t-
cerns  ministers,  but  also  in  any  other  instance,  in  genemL
The  usages  and  customs  of  other  nations  are  no  further  ui  le-
gatory on  an  independent  state,  than  as  she  has  expressly  or
tacitly  given  her  consent  to  them. But  when  once  a  cit^t-tm,
indifferent  in  itself,  has  been  generally  established  and  re-
ceived, it  carries  the  force  of  an  obligation  on  the  st&wi
which  have  tacitly  or  expressly  adopted  it. Nevertheless,  if,
in  process  of  time,  any  nation  perceives  that  such  custom  i^
attended  with  incpnveniences,  she  is  at  liberty  to  declare  tha:
she  no  longer  chooses  to  conform  to  it :  and  when  once  ^'^e
has  made  this  explicit  declaration,  no  cause  of  complaint  liti
against  her  for  refusing  thenceforward  to  observe  the  costum
in  question. But  such  a  declaration  should  be  made  befl)^^
hand,  and  at  the  time  when  it  does  not  affect  any  particular
nation :  it  is  too  late  to  make  it  when  the  case  actually  exkM
for  it  is  a  maxim  universally  received,  that  a  law  must  never
be  changed  at  the  moment  of  the  actual  existence  of  the
particular  case  to  which  we  would  apply  it. Thus,  on  the
subject  before  us,  a  sovereign  who  has  previously  notified  Lis
intentions,  and  received  an  ambassador  only  on  that  footir  •:,
is  not  obliged  to  allow  him  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  privi-
leges, or  to  pay  him  all  the  honours,  which  custom  had  before
annexed  to  the  ambassadorial  character, — provided  that  tlie
privileges  and  honours  which  are  withheld  be  not  essential  to
the  nature  of  the  embassy,  and  necessary  to  insure  its  legiti-
mate success. To  refuse  privileges  of  this  latter  kind,  W'>u]J
be  the  same  thing  in  effect  as  refusing  the  embassy  itself.--*
conduct  which  a  state  is  not  at  liberty  to  pursue  generallr
and  on  every  occasion  ("§  65),  but  in  those  instances  onlr
where  the  refusal  is  founaed  on  some  very  substantial  reason
To  withhold  honours  which  are  ccmsecrated  by  custom  and
become  in  a  manner  essential,  is  an  expression  of  contempt,
and  an  actual  injury.

Here  it  must  be  further  observed,  that,  when  a  sovereign
intends  to  break  through  an  established  custom,  the  rule
should  be  general. To  refuse  certain  customary  honours  or

606


IMMUNITIES OP  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  485

privileges  to  the  ambassador  of  one  nation,  and  to  continue book  it.
the  enjoyment  of  them  to  others,  is  an  aflfront  to  that  nation,  ^^^^'  ^^
a  mark  of  contempt,  or  at  least  of  ill-will.

Sometimes  princes  send  to  each  other  secret  ministers,  ?  lor. A
whose  character  is  not  public. If  a  minister  of  this  kind  be  ™f°^^'j^
insulted  by  a  person  unacquainted  with  his  character,  such  ^^^  ^  ^^j,
insult  is  no  violation  of  the  law  of  nations :  but  the  prince  public,
who  receives  this  ambassador  and  knows  him  to  be  a  public
minister,  is  bound  by  the  same  ties  of  ^J^ty  towards  him  as  [  486  ]
towards a publicly  acknowledged ambassador, and under
equal  obligation  to  protect  him,  and  as  far  as  in  his  power,
to  insure  him  the  full  enjoyment  of  that  inviolability  and
independence  which  the  law  of  nations  annexes  to  the  am-
bassadorial character. No  excuse,  therefore,  can  be  offered
for  the  conduct  of  Francis  Sforza,  duke  of  Milan,  in  putting
to  death  Maraviglia,  secret  minister  of  Francis  the  First.
Sforza  had  often  treated  with  that  secret  agent,  and  had
acknowledged  him  as  the  French  monarch's  minister.*

We  cannot  introduce  in  any  more  proper  place  an  im-  J  i»8.  a
portant  question  of  the  law  of  nations,  which  is  nearly  allied  sovereign  im
to  the  right  of  embassies.  It  is  asked,  what  are  the  rights  '^^^^^
of  a  sovereign,  who  happens  to  be  in  a  foreign  country,  and
how  the  master  of  the  country  is  to  treat  him  :  If  that  prince
be  come  to  negotiate,  or  to  treat  about  some  public  affair,  he
is  doubtless  entitled  in  a  more  eminent  degree  to  enjoy  all
the  rights  of  ambassadors.  If  he  be  come  as  a  traveller,  his
dignity  alone,  and  the  regard  due  to  the  nation  which  he  re-
presents and  governs,  shelters  him  from  all  insult,  gives  him
a  claim  to  respect  and  attention  of  every  kind,  and  exepipts
him  from  all  jurisdiction.  On  his  making  himself  known,  he
cannot  be  treated  as  subject  to  the  common  laws ;  for  it  is
not  to  be  presumed  that  he  has  consented  to  such  a  subjec-
tion :  and  if  a  prince  will  not  suffer  him  in  his  dominions  on
that  footing,  he  should  give  him  notice  of  his  intentions.
But,  if  the  foreign  prince  forms  any  plot  against  the  safety
and  welfare  of  the  state, — in  a  word,  if  he  acts  as  an  enemy,
— he  may  very  justly  be  treated  as  such.  In  every  other
case  he  is  entitled  to  full  security,  since  even  a  private  indi-
vidual of  a  foreign  nation  has  a  right  to  expect  it.

A  ridiculous  notion  has  possessed  the  minds  even  of  per-
sons who  deem  themselves  superior  in  understanding  to  the
common  herd  of  mankind.  They  think  that  a  sovereign  who
enters  a  foreign  country  without  permission,  may  be  arrested
there.f But  on  what  reason  can  such  an  act  of  violence  be

*  See  the Memoirs  of Martin  Da  Gramond's Hist. GaU.  lib.  zii. The

Bellay,  book  iy.,  and  Father  Daniel's  Cardinal De Richelieu also alleged

History of France, vol. y. p. 300,  this trifling reason,  when he gave

&o.  orders for arresting Charles Lewis,

f  It  is surprising to see a  grave  the  elector  Palatine,  who  had  attompt-

historjoi  give  into  this  opinioD* Hee  ed  to  pass  through  France  incognito*

607


186  OF  BIGHTS, PRIYILEaSSy ASD

BOOK  IV. grounded? The  absurdity  of  the  doctrine  carries  ita  own
CHAP,  vn.  refQtation  on  the  face  of  it. A  foreign  sovereign,  it  is  true,


ought  to  give  notice  of  his  coming,  if  he  wishes  to  receive
such  treatment  as  he  is  entitled  to  expect.  It  would,  more-
over, be  prudent  in  him  to  make  application  for  passports,  in
order  that  designing  malevolence  may  not  have  any  pretext,
any  hope  of  finding  specious  reasons  to  palliate  an  act  of
[  487  ]  injustice  and  violence.  I  further  allow,  that, — as  the  pre-
sence of  a  foreign  sovereign  may  on  certain  occasions  be  pro-
ductive of  serious  consequences, — if  the  times  are  in  anywise
critical,  and  the  motives  of  his  journey  liable  to  suspicion,
he  ought  not  to  undertake  it  without  the  consent  and  appro-
bation of  the  prince  whose  territories  he  means  to  enter.
When  Peter  the  Great  determined  personally  to  visit  foreign
countries  in  quest  of  the  arts  and  sciences  to  enrich  his  empire,
he  travelled  in  the  retinue  of  his  own  ambassadors.

A  foreign  prince  unquestionably  retains  all  his  rights  over
his  own  state  and  subjects,  and  may  exercise  them  in  every
instance  that  does  not  affect  the  sovereignty  of  the  country
in  which  he  is  a  sojourner.  The  king  of  France,  therefore,
appears  to  have  been  too  punctilious  in  refusing  to  permit
the  emperor  Sigismund,  when  at  Lyons,  to  confer  the  dig-
nity of  duke  on  the  count  of  Savoy,  who  waa  a  vassal  of  the
empire  (see  Book  II.  §  40).  Less  diflBiculty  would  have  been
made  with  any  other  prince:  but  the  court  was  scrupulously
careful  to  guard  against  the  old  claims  of  the  emperors.  On
the  other  hand,  it  was  with  very  good  reason  that  the  same
court  expressed  considerable  displeasure  at  the  conduct  of
Queen  Christina,  who,  whilst  residing  in  France,  caused  one
of  her  domestics  to  be  executed  in  her  own  house:  for  an
execution  of  that  kind  is  an  act  of  territorial  jmnsdictiou :
and  besides,  Christina  had  abdicated  the  crown.  Her  re-
servations, her  birth,  her  dignity,  might  indeed  entitle  her  to
great  honours,  or,  at  most,  to  an  entire  independence, — but
not  to  all  the  rights  of  an  actual  sovereign.  The  famous
instance  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  so  often  quoted  on  ques-
tions on  this  subject,  is  not  a  very  apposite  example:  for
that  princess  was  no  longer  in  possession  of  the  crown  at  the
time  when  she  came  to  England,  and  was  arrested,  tried,  and
condemned  to  death.
f  106.  De-  The  deputies  sent  to  the  assembly  of  the  states  of  a  king-
putiec  to  the  Jom,  or  a  republic,  are  not  public  ministers  like  those  of
***  ^ whom  we  have  spoken  above,  as  they  are  not  sent  to  foreign

he  said,  that  **  no foreign  prince  was  pretended  to  have  a  greater  right  than

permitted  to  pass  through  the  kingdom  any  other power,  hecause those con

without .  a  passport'' But  he  added  quests  had  been  made  with  the  inctnej

better  reasons,  drawn  from  the  prince  furnished  by  that kingdom. Sec the

Palatine's  designs  against  Brissac  and  History  of  the  Treaty  of We^stphalia,

the  other  places  left  by  Bernard,  duke  by  Father  Bougant,  vol.  u.  in 12mo

of  Saxe-Weymar,  and  to  which  France  p.  88.
608


IMMUNITIES  OP  AMBASSADORS, ETC.  487

powers:  but  they  are  public  persons,  and  in  that  character  book  it.
are  possessed  of  privileges  which  it  is  our  duty  to  establish  ^'^^'  ^^
before  we  take  leave  of  this  subject.  The  states  which  have
a  right  to  meet  by  deputies  for  the  purpose  of  deliberating
on  public  affairs,  are,  from  that  very  circumstance,  entitled
to  demand  perfect  security  for  their  representatives,  together
with  every  exemption  and  immunity  that  is  neoessary  to  the
free  discharge  of  their  functions.  If  the  persons  of  the  de-
puties be  not  inviolable,  their  constituents  c^not  be  assured
of  their  fidelity  in  asserting  the  rights  of  the  nation  and
courageously  defending  the  public  interests.  And  how  could
those  representatives  duly  acquit  themselves  of  their  func-
tions, if  people  were  allowed  to  molest  them  by  arrests,  either
for  debt  or  for  ordinary  offences?  Between  the  nation  and
the  sovereign,  in  this  casej  the  same  reasons  bold  good,  on
which,  between  state  and  state,  the  immunities  of  ambassa-
dors are  founded.  We  may  therefore  safely  venture  to  as-
sert, that  the  rights  of  the  nation,  and  the  public  faith,  secure
those  deputies  from  violence  of  every  kind,  and  even  from
any  judicial  prosecution,  during  the  term  of  their  ministry.
Such  indeed  is  the  rule  observed  in  all  countries,  and  par-  [  488  "|
ticularly  at  the  diets  of  the  empire,  the  parliaments  of  Eng-
land, and  the  cortes  of  Spain.  Henry  the  Third,  of  France,
caused  the  duke  and  the  Cardinal  de  Guise  to  be  killed  at
the  meeting  of  the  states  at  Blois.  Unquestionably  the  se-
curity of  the  assembly  was  violated  by  that  action :  but  those
two  princes  were  factious  rebels,  whose  audacious  views  aimed  ,

at  nothing  less  than  depriving  their  sovereign  of  his  crown.
And  if  it  was  equally  certain  that  Henry  wafl  no  longer  pos^
sessed  of  sujficient  power  to  bring  them  to  a  formal  trial,  and
punish  them  according  to  the  laws,  the  necessity  of  justifiable
self-defence  gave  the  king  a  right  to  adopt  the  mode  which
he  pursued,  and  furnishes  a  sufficient  apology  for  his  conduct.
It  is  the  misfortune  of  weak  and  imskilful  princes,  that  they
suffer  themselves  to  be  reduced  to  extremities,  from  which
they  cannot  extricate  themselves  without  a  violation  of  every
established  rule.  It  is  said  that  Pope  Sextus  the  Fifth,  on
hearing  of  the  catastrophe  of  the  Duke  de  Guise,  commended
that  resolute  act  as  a  necessary  stroke  of  policy ;  but  when
he  was  told  that  the  cardinal  had  likewise  been  killed,  he
burst  into  a  violent  paroxysm  of  rage.*  This,  indeed,  was
carrying  his  haughty  pretensions  to  an  excessive  height.
The  pontiff  readily  allowed  that  urgent  necessity  had  au-
thorized Henry  to  violate  the  security  of  the  states,  and  to
break  through  all  the  forms  of  justice :  and  could  he  pretend
that  this  prince,  rather  than  be  deficient  in  respect  for  the
Roman  purple,  should  risk  both  his  crown  and  his  life  ?


*  See  the  Freneh  huloiiaaf.

77  eo9


488  OF  THE  JUDGE  OF AHBASSADOBfl


BOOK  IT.
CHAP.  YHL


CHAP.  vm.

OF  THE  JUDGE  OF  AMBASSADORS  IN  CIVIL  CASES.

}  110. Ths SOME  authors  will  have  an  ambassador  to  be  subject,  is
ambafltador  civil  cascs,  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country  where  he  rfr
"  ®^®™P' sides, — at  least*  in  such  cases  as  have  arisen  during  the  tiict
civUjuriB- of  his  embassy;  and,  in  support  of  their  opinion,  they  afo
diction  of that  this  subjection  is  by  no  means  derogatory  to  the  aa-
the country  bassadorial  character:  "for,"  say  they,  "however  sacreti^i
where  he pgrgon  may  be,  his  inviolability  is  not  affected  by  suing  hiia
in  a  civil  action." But  it  is  not  on  account  of  the  samd-
ness  of  their  person  that  ambassadors  cannot  be  sued :  it  a
because  they  are  independent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  coun-
try to  which  they  are  sent ;  and  the  substantial  reasons  n
which  that  independency  is  grounded  may  be  seen  in  a  p^^
ceding  part  of  this  work  (§  92).^ Let  us  here  add,  that  it  i<
in  every  respect  highly  proper,  and  even  necessary,  that  aL
ambassador  should  be  exempt  from  judicial  prosecution  eve:.
in  civil  causes,  in  order  that  he  may  be  free  from  molestati  -^i
in  the  exercise  of  his  functions. For  a  similar  reason,  it  ¥,.«
not  allowed,  among  the  Romans,  to  summon  a  priest  vlii-'
[  489  ]  he  was  employed  in  his  sacred  oflBces:*  but  at  other  tiiiit>
he  was  open  to  the  law. The  reason  which  we  have  here
'  alleged  for  the  exemption  is  also  assigned  in  the  Roman  lav:

"  Ideo  entm  non  datur  actio  (adversus  legatum)  ne  ah  ^jn-"
suscepto  legationis  avoceturyf  ne  impediatur  legatio.X'  Bar
there  was  an  exception  as  to  those  transactions  vhich  h\
taken  place  during  the  embassy.  This  was  reasonable  fiV.
regard  to  those  legatty  or  ministers,  of  whom  the  Roman  law
here  speaks,  who,  being  sent  only  by  nations  subject  to  i  le
empire,  could  not  lay  claim  to  the  independency  enjoveil  1»t
a  foreign  minister.  As  they  were  subjects  of  the  state,  the
legislature  was  at  liberty  to  establish  whatever  regulations  it
thought  most  proper  respecting  them:  but  a  sovereign  hx«
not  the  like  power  of  obliging  the  minister  of  another  sovt^
reign  to  submit  to  his  jurisdiction :  and  even  if  such  power
wa&  vested  in  him  by  convention,  or  otherwise,  the  exem?<
of  it  would  be  highly  improper :  because,  under  that  preter.
the  ambassador  might  be  often  molested  in  his  ministry,  anl
the  state  involved  in  very  disagreeable  quarrels,  for  the  tri-
fling concerns  of  some  private  individuals,  who  might  and
ought  to  have  taken  better  precautions  for  their  own  securitj.
It is,  therefore,  only  in conformity  to the mutual  dutirf

*  Nee pontifioem (in jns Tocari f  Digest  lib.  ▼.  tit I,  de  Uik^t,
oportet)  dnm  sacra  facit. Digest  Ub. Ae.  leg.  24,  J  2.
it  tit  4. De  in  Jas  yooando,  leg.  2.  ^  Ibid.  leg.  xxvL

eio


IN  CIVIL  CASES.  489


which  states  owe  to  each  other,  and  in  accordance  with  the  book  it.
grand  principles  of  the  law  of  nations,  that  an  ambassador  ^^^^'  ^'"•-
or  public  minister  is  at  present,  by  the  universal  custom  and
consent  of  nations,  independent  of  all  jurisdiction  in  the
country  where  he  resides,  either  in  civil  or  criminal  cases.
I  know  there  have  occurred  some  instances  to  the  contrary ;
but  a  few  facts  do  not  establish  a  custom :  on  thei  contrary,
those  to  which  I  allude,  only  contribute,  by  the  censure
passed  on  them,  to  prove  the  custom  such  a»  I  have  asserted
it  to  be.  In  the  year  1668,  the  Portuguese  resident  at  the
Hague  was,  by  an  order  of  the  court  of  justice,  arrested  and
imprisoned  for  debt.  But  an  illustrious  member  of  the  same
court*  very  justly  thinks  that  the  procedure  was  unjustifiable,
and  contrary  to  the  law  of  nations.  In  the  year  1667,  a
resident  of  the  elector  of  Brandenburg  was  also  arrested  for
debt  in  England.  But  he  was  set  at  liberty,  as  having  been
illegally  arrested ;  and  even  the  creditors  and  oflScers  of  jus-
tice who  had  offered  him  that  insult  were  punished,  f

But  if  an  ambassador  cl\ooses  to  renounce  a  part  of  his  ?  m. How
independency,  and  to  subject  himself  in  civil  affairs  to  the  J*®  ™*y  ^^'
jurisdiction  of  the  country,  he is  undoubtedly  at  liberty  ^^".^^^.^^
to  do  so,  provided  it  be  done  with  his  master's  consent,  self  to  it.
Without  such  consent,  the  ambassador  has  no  right  to  re-
nounce privileges  in  which  the  dignity  and  service  of  his
sovereign  are  concerned, — ^which  are  founded  on  the  master's
rights,  and  instituted  for  his  advantage,  not  for  that  of  the  [  490  ]
minister. It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  ambassador,  without
waiting  for his sovereign's permission, acknowledges the
jurisdiction  of  the  country  when  he  commences  a  suit  as
plaintiflF  in  a  court  of  justice. But  the  consequence,  in  that
case,  is  inevitable;  and  besides,  in  a  civil  cause,  on  a 'point
of  private  interest,  no  inconvenience  attends  it;  sincfe  the
ambassador  has  it  at  all  times  in  his  power  to  avoid  com-
mencing a  suit,  or  may,  if  such  a  step  be  necessary,  intrust
the  prosecution  of  his  cause  to  an  attorney  or  lawyer.

Let  us  here  add,  by  the  way,  that  an  ambassador  ought
never  to  institute  a  prosecution  on  a  criminal  charge.  If
he  has  been  insulted,  he  should  make  his  complaint  to  the
sovereign ;  and  the  delinquent  is  to  be  prosecuted  by  the
public.

It  may  happen  that  the  minister  of.  a  foreign  power  is  at  J  U2. A
the  same  time  a  subject  of  the  state  where  he  is  employed ;  ^^oister
and  in  this  case,  as  a  subject,  he  is  unquestionably  under  ^tject*of
the  jurisdiction  of  the  country  in  every  thing  which  does  not  the  state
directly  relate  to  his  ministry. But  the  question  is,  to  de-  ^bere  he  »

employed.

*  M. de Bjnkershoek's Competent his  croditon,  and  refused  a  passport  hy
Judge  of  Ambassadors,  chap.  ziii.  ^  1. the  French court. See  Journal  PolU

f  Ibid. — It  is  not  long  since  the  world tique  de  Bouillon,  Feb.  1,  17tl,  p.  54,
witnessed  the  circumstance  of  a  foreign and  Jan.  15,  p.  57.
niniBter  in  Fra;ice  being  pursued  by

611


490  OF  THE  JUPGE  OF  AHBA6SAD0BS

BOOK  rr.  termine  in  what  cases  those  two  characters,  of  subjert  uid
CHAP,  vm.  foreign  minister,  are  united  in  the  same  person.  To  produce
such  union,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  minister  was  born  a
subject  of  the  state  to  which  he  is  sent ;  for  unless  the  laws
expressly  prohibit  every  citizen  to  leave  his  country,  he  dm?
legally  have  renounced  his  country,  and  placed  himself  ii
subjection  to  a  new  master.  He  may,  likewise,  without  ^^
nouncing  his  country  for  ever,  become  independent  of  it
during  the  whcde  time  that  he  spends  in  the  service  of »
foreign  prince;  and  the  presumption  is  certainly  in  favour
of  such  independency :  for  the  state  and  functions  of  a  pub-
lic minister  naturally  require  that  he  should  depend  only  on
his  master  (§  92),  on  the  prince  who  has  intrusted  him  witk
the  management  of  his  affairs.  Whenever,  therefore,  there
does  not  exist  any  circumstance  which  furnishes  a  proof  or
indication  to  the  contrary,  a  foreign  minister,  though  allt^
cedently  a  subject  of  the  state,  is  reputed  to  be  absolutelt
independent  of  it  during  the  whole  time  of  his  commission.
If  his  former  sovereign  does  not  choose  to  allow  him  soch
independency  in  his  dominions,  he  may  refuse  to  admit  him
in  the  character  of  a  foreign  minister,  as  is  the  practice  in
France,  where,  according  to  Monsieur  De  Callieres,  "the  king
no  longer  receives  any  of  his  own  subjects  as  ministers  of
foreign  princes."*

But  a  subject  of  the  state  may  still  continue  its  subject,
notwithstanding  his  acceptance  of  a  commission  frcMu  a  fo-
reign prince. His  subjection  is  expressly  established  when
^  the  sovereign  acknowledges  him  as  minister  only,  with  i

reserve  that  he  shall  remain  a  subject  of  the  state.  The
states-general  of  the  United  Provinces,  in  a  decree  of  the
[  491  ]  19th*  of  June,  1681,  declare,  "  That  no  subject  of  the  state
shall  be  received  as  ambassador  or  minister  of  another  power,
but  on  condition  that  he  shall  not  divest  himself  of  his  cha-
racter of  subject,  even  with  regard  to  jurisdiction  both  in
^  civil  and  criminal  affairs, — and  that  whoever,  in  making
himself  known  as  ambassador  or  minister,  has  not  mentione'l
his  quality  of  subject  of  the  state,  shall  not  enjoy  thwe
rights  or  privileges  which  peculiarly  belong  to  the  ministers
of  foreign  powers.**t

Such  a  minister  may  likewise  retain  his  former  subjection
.  tacitly ;  and  then,  by  a  natural  consequence,  drawn  from  his
actions,  state,  and  whole  behaviour,  it  is  known  that  he  con-
tinues a  subject.  Thus,  independent  of  the  declaration  abore
mentioned,  those  Dutch  merchants  who  obtain  the  title  of
residents  of  certain  foreign  princes,  and  nevertheless  continue
to  carry  on  their  commerce,  thereby  sufficiently  denote  that
they  remain  subjects. Whatever  inconveniences  may  attend

*  Manner  of  Negotiating  wiUi  SoreroignB,  chap.  yL
t  Bynkenhoek,  nbi  supra,  chap,  z*
613


IK  CIVIL  OASES.  491

the  subjection  of  a  minister  to  the  sovereign  with  whom  he book  it.
resides,  if  the  foreign  prince  chooses  to  acquiesce  in  such  a  ^°^»vy'"
state  of  things,  and  is  content  to  have  a  minister  on  that
footing,  it  is  his  own  concern ;  and  should  his  minister,  on
any  ignominious  occasion,  be  treated  as  a  subject,  he  has  no
cause  of  complaint.

It  may  likewise  happen  that  a  foreign  minister  shall  become
a  subject  of  the  sovereign  to  whom  he  is  sent,  by  accepting
of  a  post  under  him :  and  in  this  case  he  cannot  lay  claim
to  independence,  except  in  such  things  alone  as  directly  re-
late to  his  ministry.  The  prince  by  whom  he  is  delegated,
in  allowing  of  this  voluntary  subjection,  agrees  to  risk  the
inconveniences  that  attend  it.  Thus,  in  the  last  century,  the
baron  De  Gharnac^  and  the  count  D'Estrades  were  ambas-
sadors from  France  to  the  States  General,  and  at  the  same
time  officers  in  their  high  mightinesses'  army.

The  independency  of  a  public  minister  is  the  true  reason  f  113. im-
of  his exemption  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country  inm^»»i*yof
which  he  resides. No  legal  process  can  be  directly  issued  *^®  »"»"*«
against  him,  because  he  is  not  subject  to  the  authority  of  the  i^jg  p,^.
prince  or  the  magistrates. But  it  is  asked  whether  thatperty.
exemption  of  his  person  extends  indiscriminately  to  all  his
property  ? In  order  to  solve  this  question,  we  must  consider
by  what  circumstances  property  may  be  subjected  to,  and  by
what  others  it  may  be  exempted  from,  the  jurisdiction  of  a
country. In  general,  whatever  lies  within  the  extent  of  a
country,  is  subject  to  the  authority  and  jurisdiction  of  the
sovereign  (Book  I.  §  206,  and  Book  II.  §§  83,  84). If  any
dispute  arises  concerning  effects  or  goods  within  or  passing  *

through  the  country,  it  is  to  be  decided  by  the  judge  of  the
place.  In  virtue  of  this  dependence,  the  mode  of  stoppage
or  seizure  has  been  established  in  many  countries,  for  the
purpose  of  compelling  a  foreigner  to  repair  to  the  spot  where
the  seizure  has  been  made,  and  there  to  answer  questions  that
are  to  be  put  to  him,  though  not  directly  relating  to  the  [  492  ]
effects  seized.  But  a  foreign  minister,  as  we  have  already
shown,  is  independent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country;
and  his  personal  independence  in  civil  cases  would  be  of  |

little  avail,  unless  it  extended  te  every  thing  which  he  finds  '

necessary  in  order  to  enable  him  to  live  with  dignity,  and
quietly  to  attend  to  the  discharge  of  his  functions.  Besides,
whatever  he  has  brought  with  him,  or  purchased  for  his  own
use  as  minister,  is  so  connected  with  his  person  as  to  partake
of  the  same  fate  with  it.  Since  the  minister  entered  the
territory  on  the  footing  of  independence,  he  could  not  have
it  in  contemplation  to  subject  his  retinue,  his  baggage,  or
his  necessaries,  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country.  Every
thing,  therefore,  which  (firectly  belongs  to  his  person  in  the
character  of  a  public  minister, — every  thing  which  is  intend-
ed for  his  use,  or  which  serves  for  his  own  maintenance  and

3B  618


492  OF  THE  JUDGE  OF  AMBASSADORS.


BOOK  IV. that  of  his  household,— every  thing  of  that  kind,  I  saj,
CHAP.  V"'-.  partakes  of  the  minister's  independency,  and  is  absoktelj
exempt  from  all  jurisdiction  in  the  country. Those  things,
together  with  the  person  to  whom  they  belong,  are  cods-
dered  as  being  out  of  the  country.
i  114. The But this  exemption cannot extend  to such  property  &3
oxamption evidently  belongs  to  the  ambassador  under  any  other  reU-
tend  to  ef- *^^^  ^^^^  ^^^*  ^^  minister. What  has  no  aflSnity  with  hk
fects  bo- functions  and character cannot  partake  of  the privileges
longing  to which  are  solely  derived  from  his  functions  and  character,
th ^  *^^*te  ^^^^^^  ^  tninister,  therefore,  (as  it  has  often  been  the  caise,-
maycaiTy  '  ©^ihark  in  any  branch  of  commerce,  all  the  effects,  goodi,
oa;  money,  and  debts,  active  and  passive,  which  are  connected

with  his  mercantile  concerns, — and  likewise  all  contests  aic
lawsuits  to  which  they  may  give  rise, — fall  under  the  juris-
diction of  the  country.  And  although,  in  consequence  of
the  minister's  independency,  no  legal  process  can,  in  thc$e
lawsuits,  be  directly  issued  against  his  person,  he  is,  never-
theless, by  the  seizure  of  the  effects  belonging  to  his  com-
merce, indirectly  compelled  to  plead  in  his  own  defence.
The  abuses  which  would  arise  from  a  contrary  practice  are
evident.  What  could  be  expected  from  a  merchant  vested
with  a  privilege  to  commit  every  kind  of  injustice  in  a  foreijni
country  ?  There  exists  not  a  shadow  of  reason  for  extend-
ing the  ministerial  immunity  to  things  of  that  nature.  If
the  sovereign  who  sends  a  minister  is  apprehensive  of  anj
inconvenience  from  the  indirect  dependency  in  which  li:i
servant  thus  becomes  involved,  he  has  only  to  lay  on  him  his
injunctions  against  engaging  in  commerce, — an  occupation,
indeed,  which  ill  accords  with  the  dignity  of  the  ministerial
character.

To  what  we  have  said,  let  us  add  two  illustrations:—
1.  In  doubtful  cases,  the  respect  due  to  the  ministerial  cha-
racter requires  that  things  should  always  be  explained  to  ibe
advantage  of  that  character.  I  mean  that,  when  there  ia
.  room  for  doubt  whether  a  thing  be  really  intended  for  the
use  of  the  minister  and  his  household,  or  whether  it  belongs
to  his  commerce,  the  decision  must  be  given  in  favour  of
the  minister :  otherwise  there  would  be  a  risk  of  violating
his  privileges.  2.  When  I  say  that  we  may  seize  such  of  the
[  493  ]  minister's  effects  as  have  no  relation  to  his  public  character,
particularly  those  that  belong  to  his  commercial  concernis
this  is  to  be  understood  only  on  the  supposition  that  the
seizure  be  not  made  for  any  cause  arising  from  his  transac-
tions in  quality  of  minister,  as,  for  instance,  articles  supplied
for  the  use  of  his  family,  house-rent,  etc.,  because  any  claims
which  may  lie  against  him  in  that  relation  cannot  be  decided
in  the  country,  and  consequently  cannot  be  subjected  to  ita
jurisdiction  by  the  indirect  mode  of  seizure.

6U


m  CIVIL  CASEB-  498

All  landed  estates,  all  immovable  property,  by  whomsoever book  iv.
possessed,  iire subject  to the  jurisdiction  of  the country -HE^^iZHh
(Book  I.  §  205,  and  Book  II.  §§  83,  84). Are  they  to  be  i  lis.  nor
exempted  from  it  on  the  single  ground  that  their  owner  has  ^  immov-
been  appointed  ambassador  by  a  foreign  power  ? There  can  *  *  hiohTe
exist  no  reason  for  the  exemption  in  such  case. It  is  not  in  possesses  in
his  public  character  that  the  ambassador  possesses  that  pro-  the  country,
perty ;  nor  is  it  attached  to  his  person,  so  as,  like  himself,  to  C^^^)
be  reputed  out  of  the  territory. If  the  foreign  prince  appre-
hends any  ill  consequences  from  that  state  of  dependency  in
which  his  minister  may  stand  on  account  of  some  of  his  pos-
sessions, he  may  make  choice  of  another  person  to  fill  the
office. Let  us  conclude,  therefore,  that  immovable  property
possessed  by  a  foreign  minister  does  not  change  its  nature  in
consequence  of  the  character  conferred  on  the  owner,  but  con-
tinues subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  in  which  it  lies.
All  contests  and  lawsuits  concerning  that  property  are  to  be
carried  before  the  tribunals  of  the  country ;  and  those  same
tribunals  may  decree  its  seizure  in  order  to  satisfy  any  legal
claim. It  is,  however,  easily  conceived,  that,  if  the  ambas-
sador lives  in  a  house  of  his  own^  that  house  is  excepted  from
the  rule,  as  actually  serving  for  his  immediate  use ; — it  is
excepted,  I  mean,  in  whatever may  affect  the  present  use
which  the  ambassador  makes  of  it.  (201)  ■

It  may  be  seen,  in  Monsieur  de  Bynkershoek's  treatise,*
that  custom  coincides  with  the  principles  laid  down  in  this
and  the  preceding  sections.  In  suing  an  ambassador  in
either  of  the  two  cases  just  mentioned, — that  is  to  say,  on
the  subject  of  any  immovable  property  lying  in  the  country,
or  of  movable  effects  which  have  no  connection  with  the
embassy, — the  ambassador  is  to  be  summoned  in  the  same
manner  as  an  absent  person,  since  he  is  reputed  to  be  out  of
the  country,  and  his  independency  does  not  permit  any  im-
mediate address  to  his  person  in  an  authoritative  manner,
such  as  sending  an  officer  of  a  court  of  justice  to  him.

By  what  mode,  then,  may  satisfaction  be  obtained  of  an  |  lie.  Hon
ambassador  who  refuses  to  do  justice  to  those  who  have  deal-  justice  may
ings  with  him  ? It  is  asserted  by  many  that  he  must  be  ^®  "^^^^^
sued  before  the  tribunal  to  whose  jurisdiction  he  was  subject  J^^,^^^^
antecedently  to his appointment  as  ambassador. In  this
there  appears  to  me  an  impropriety. If  the  necessity  and
importance  of  his  functions  selr  him  above  all  prosecution  in
the  foreign country  where  he resides,  shall any  man  be
allowed  to  molest  him  in  the  performance  of  his  ministerial  [  494  ]
duties  by  summoning  him  to  appear  before  the  tribunals  of
his  own  country  ? The  interest  of  the  public  service  forbids

(201)  As  to  this  pointy  and  the  exemption  from  a  distress,  see  NoveUo  y,  Toogood,
i  Barn.  &  Cress.  554-2 ;  Dowl.  k  Ry.  833,  S.  C— C.
•  On  the  competent  Jadge  of  Ambassadors,  chap.  ztL  {  0.


194  OF  THB  AHBASSABOB'S  HOUSE.

BOOK  IT.  such  a  procedure.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  mims'
OHAP.  Yin.  |.^j.  giiQ^id  solely  depend  on  his  sovereign,  to  whom  he  be
longs  in  a  peculiar  manner.  He  is  an  instrument  in  tht
hand  of  the  conductor  of  the  nation ;  and  no  circumstanoe
whatever  ought  to  be  permitted  to  divert  or  obstruct  his  ser-
vices. Neither  would  it  be  just  that  the  absence  of  a  person
who  is  intrusted  with  the  interests  of  the  sovereign  and  the
nation  should  prove  detrimental  to  him  in  his  private  con-
cerns. In  all  countries,  those  who  are  absent  on  the  serriee
of  the  state  enjoy  privileges  which  secure  them  from  the  in-
coniheniences  attendant  on  the  state  of  absentees.  But  these
privileges  of  the  ministers  of  the  state  should,  as  far  as  pos-
sible, be  so  modelled  and  tempered  as  not  to  be  unreasonably
burdensome  or  injurious  to  private  persons  who  have  dealings
with  them.  How  then  aro  those  different  injterests — ^the  ser-
vice of  the  state  and  the  administration  of  justice — ^to  be  re-
conciled ?  All  private  persons,  whether  citizens  or  foreign-
ers, who  have  any  demands  against  a  minister — if  they  can-
not obtain  satisfaction  from  himself-r-should  apply  to  his
master,  who  is  obliged  to  do  them  justice  in  such  manner  as
may  be  most  consistent  with  the  public  service.  It  rests  with
the  prince  to  determine  whether  it  be  most  proper  to  recall
his  minister,  to  appoint  a  tribunal  before  which  he  may  be
sued,  or  to  order  an  adjournment  of  the  cause,  &c.  In  a
word,  the  good  of  the  state  does  not  allow  that  any  person
whatever  should  have  it  in  his  power  to  disturb  the  minister
in  his  functions,  or  to  divert  his  attention  from  them  without
the  sovereign's  permission ;  and  the  sovereign,  whose  duty
it  is  to  distribute  impartial  and  universal  justice,  ought  not  to
countenance  his  minister  in  refusing  it  or  wearying  out  his
adversaries  by  unjust  delays.


CHAP.  IX.  CHAP.  IX

OF  THE  ambassador's  HOUSE  AND  DOMESTICS.

^  117. The THE  independency  of  the  ambassador  would  be  very,  im

Rmbassa. perfect,  and  his  security  very  precarious,  if  the  house  in

?202)^^^**  which  he  lives  were  not  to  enjoy  a  perfect  immunity,  and  to

be  inaccessible  to  the  ordinary  officers  of  justice. The  am

bassador  might  be  molested  under  a  thousand  pretexts ;  his

secrets  might  be  discovered  by  searching  his  papers,  and  his


(202)  How  far  exempt  fW>m  a  dis< lord  of  a  bonse  tenanted  by  an
tress,  see  Nbvello  r.  Toogood,  1  Bam. bassador  to  the  payment  of  poar-nuef
Jb  Cres.  654,  2  Dowl.  A  R.  833,  8.  C. and  taxes.— 0.
Modern  acts  usually  subject  the  land-
lift


AND DOMEBTICS.  494

person  exposed  to  insults.  Thns,  all  the  reasons  which  es-  book  it.
tablish  his  independence  and  inviolability,  concur  likewise  in  ^^''  "'  ■
securing  the  freedom  of  his  house.  In  all  civilized  nations,
this  right  is  acknowledged  as  annexed  to  the  ambassadorial
character;  and  an  ambassador's  house,  at  least  in  all  the
ordinary  affairs  of  life,  is,  equally  with  his  person,  considered
as  being  out  of  the  country.  Of  this,  a  remarkable  instance
occurred,  not  many  years  ago,  at  Petersburgh.  On  the  3d
of  April,  1752,  thirty  soldiers,  with  an  officer  at  their  head,
entered  the  house  of  baron  Greiffenheim,  the  Swedish  minis-  [  495  ]
ter,  and  carried  off  two  of  his  domestics,  whom  they  con-
ducted to  prison,  under  a  pretence  that  those  two  men  had
clandestinely  sold  liquors,  which  the  imperial  farm  alone  has
the  privilege  of  selling.  The  court,  incensed  at  such  a  pro-
ceeding, caused  .the  authors  of  this  act  of  violence  t'o  be  im-
mediately taken  into  custody,  and  the  empress  ordered  satis-
faction to  be  made  to  the  offended  minister;  she  likewise
sent  to  him  and  to  all  the  other  foreign  ministers,  a  declara-  '
tion,  in  which  she  expressed  her  concern  and  resentipent  at
what  had  happened,  and  communicated  the  orders  which  she
had  given  to  the  senate  to  institute  a  prosecution  against
the  commissioner  of  the  office  established  for  the  prevention
of  the  clandestine  sale  of  liquors,  he  being  the  chief  delin-
quent.

The  house  of  an  ambassador  ought  to  be  safe  from  all  out-
rage, being  under  the  particular  protection  of  the  law  of
nations,  and  that  of  the  country ;  to  insult  it,  is  a  crime  both
against  the  state  and  against  all  other  nations.

Sut  the  immunity  and  freedom  of  the  ambassador's  house  J  lis.  Righi
is  established  only  in  favour  of  the  minister  and  his  house*  ^^^•■yi'™-
hold ;  as  is  evident  from  the  very  reasons  upon  which  it  ia
grounded.  Can  he  take  advantage  of  the  privilege,  in  order
to  convert  his  house  into  an  asylum,  to  afford  shelter  and
protection  to  the  enemies  of  the  prince,  and  to  malefactors
of  every  kind,  and  thus  screen  them  from  the  punishments
which  they  have  deserved  ?  Such  proceedings  would  be  con-
trary to  all  the  duties  of  an  ambassador,  to  the  spirit  by
which  he  ought  to  be  animated,  and  to  the  lawful  purposes
for  which  he  has  been  admitted  into  the  country.  This  is
what  nobody  will  presume  to  deny.  But  I  proceed  further,
and'  lay  it  down  as  a  certain  truth,  that  (^  sovereign  is  not
obliged  to  tolerate  an  abuse  so  pernicious  to  his  state,  and  so
detrimental  to  society.  I  grant,  indeed,  that  when  there  is
question  only  of  certain  ordinary  transgressions,  and  these
committed  by  persons  who  often  prove  to  be  rather  unfortu-
nate than  criminal,  or  whose  punishment  is  of  no  great  im-
portance to  the  peace  of  society,  the  house  of  an  ambassador
may  well  serve  as  an  asylum  for  such  offenders ;  and  it  is
better  that  the  sovereign  should  suffer  them  to  escape,  than
expose  the  ambassador  to  frequent  molestation  under  pre-

78  8b2  617


495  OF  THE  ambassadors'  house.

BOOK  IV. tence  of  a  search  after  them,  and  thus  involve  the  Bt*te  m
CHAP.  IX.  g^jj^y difficulty which  might arise from such proceedings.
And  as  the  house  of  an  ambassador  is  independent  of  the
ordinary  jurisdiction,  no  magistrate,  justice  of  the  peace,  or
other  subordinate  officer,  is  in  any  case  entitled  to  enter  it
by  his  own  authority,  or  to  send  any  of  his  people  to  enter
it,  unless  on  occasions  of  urgent  necessity,  when  the  public
welfare  is  threatened  with  imminent  danger  which  admits  of
no  delay. Whatever  concerns  a  point  of  such  weight  and
delicacy, — whatever  affects  the  rights  and  the  dignity  of  a
foreign  power, — whatever  may  embroil  the  state  with  that
power, — is  to  be  laid  immediately  before  the  sovereign,  and
to  be  determined  either  by  himself  in  person,  or,  under  his
[  496] direction,  by  the  privy  council. Thus,  it  belongs  to  the  sove-
reign to  decide,  on  occasion,  how  far  the  right  of  asylum,
which  an  ambassador  claims  as  belonging  to  his  house,  is  to
be  respected :  and  if  the  question  relates  to  an  offender  whose
•  arrest  or  punishment  is  of  great  importance  to  the  state,  the
prince  is  not  to  be  withheld  by  the  consideration  of  a  privi-
lege which  was  never  granted  for  the  detriment  and  ruin  of
states. In  the  year  1726,  the  famous  duke de Ripperda
having  sheltered  himself  in  the  house  of  lord  Harrington,  am-
bassador from  England,  the  council  of  Castile  decided  "that
he  might  be  taken  out  of  it,  even  by  force ;  since,  otherwise,
those  regulations  which  had  been  made  for  the  purpose  of
maintaining  a  more  regular  and  intimate  correspondence  be-
tween sovereigns  would,  on  the  contrary,  operate  to  the  sub-
version and  utter  ruin  of  their  authority ; — ^and  that,  if  per-
sons who  had  been  intrusted  with  the  finances,  the  power,
aod  the  secrets  of  the  state,  were,  when  guilty  of  violating
the  duties  of  their  office,  allowed  to  take  shelter  under  a  pri-
vilege which  had  been  granted  to  the  houses  of  ambassadors
in  favour  only  of  ordinary  offenders, — such  an  extension  of
the  right  of  asylum  would  be  productive  of  consequences  the
most  pernicious  and  detrimental  to  all  the  powers  on  earth,
who,  if  the  practice  once  became  established,  would  be  re-
duced to  the  necessity,  not  only  of  enduring  the  presence  of
every  man  who  was  plotting  their  destruction,  but  even  of
seeing  him  supported  in  their  own  court."* — ^Nothing  could
be  said  on  this  head  with  greater  truth  and  judgment.

The  abuse  of  the  privilege  has  nowhere  been  carried  to
a  greater  extent  than  at  Rome,  where  the  ambassadors  of
crowned  heads  claim  it  for  the  whole  ward  in  which  their
house  is  situated.  The  popes,  once  so  formidable  to  sove-
reigns, have  for  above  two  centuries  been  in  their  turn  under
a  necessity  of  observing  the  most  delicate  and  cautious  cir-
cumspection in  their  conduct  towards  them.  It  -is  in  vain
that  they  have  endeavoured  to  suppress,  or  at  least  to  reduce

•  Memoirs  of  the  Abb6  De  Montfon,  vol  2.
018


AND  DOMESTICS.  *  496


within  proper  bounds,  an  abusive  privilege,  for  which,  pre- book  it.
scription, however great its antiquity, ought not to be ^^^^'  '^
allowed as  a  sufficient plea  in opposition to  justice and
reason.

An  ambassador's  carriages  and  equipages  are  equally  pri- ;  119.  Ex-
rileged  with  his  house,  and  for  the  same  reasons :  to  insult  emption  of
them  is  an  attack  on  the  ambassador  himself,  and  on  ^^i®  Jor^g"^^**"
sovereign  whom  he  represents.  They  are  independent  of  allriageg.
subordinate  authority— of  guards,  custom-house  officers,  ma-
gistrates and  their  agents, — ^and  must  not  be  stopped  or
searched  without  a  superior  order.  But  in  this  instance,  as
in  that  of  the  ambassador's  house,  the  abuse  is  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  right.  It  would  be  absurd  that  a  foreign
minister  should  have  the  power  of  conveying  off  in  his  coach
a  criminal  of  consequence, — a  man,  in  the  seizure  of  whose
person  the  state  were  highly  interested ;  and  that  he  should
do  this  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  sovereign,  who  thus  would
see  himself  defied  in  his  own  kingdom  and  court.  Where  is
the  sovereign  who  would  suffer  this  ?  The  marquis  de  Fon-
tenay,  the  French  ambassador  at  Rome,  sheltered  the  Neapo-
litan exiles  and  rebels,  and  at  last  undertook  to  convey  them
out  of  Rome  in  his  own  carriages :  but  the  carriages  were
stopped  at  the  city  gates  by  some  Corsicans  of  the  pope's  [  497  ]
guard,  and  the  Neapolitans  committed  to  prison.  The  am-
bassador warmly  complained  of  the  procedure :  but  the  pope
answered  ^'that  his  motive  had  only  been  that  of  arresting
men  whom  the  ambassador  had  assisted  in  escaping  from  con-
finement ;  and  that,  since  the  ambassador  took  the  liberty  of
harbouring  villains,  and  affording  protection  to  every  criminal
in  the  papal  territory, — at  least  he,  who  was  sovereign  of  the  •
state,  ought  to  be  allowed  to  have  them  retaken  wherever
they  could  be  found ;  as  the  rights  and  privileges  of  ambas-
sadors were  not  to  be  carried  to  such  lengths.*'  The  ambas-
sador replied,  "that  it  would  not  appear,  on  examination,  that
he  had  granted  an  asylum  to  any  subjects  of  the  pope,  but
solely  to  some  Neapolitans,  whom  he  might  very  lawfully
shelter  from  the  persecutions  of  the  Spaniards."*  By  this
answer,  the  minister*  tacitly  conceded  that  he  would  not  have
.  been  authorized  to  complain  of  the  stoppage  of  his  carriages,
if  he  had  employed  them  for  the  purpose  of  favouring  the
escape  of  any  of  the  pope's  subjects,  and  aiding  criminals  to
elude  the  pursuit  of  justice.

The  persons  in  an  ambassador's  retinue  partake  of  his  J 120.  of
inviolability ;  his  independency  extends  to  every  individual  ^^*  retmw
of  his  household:  so  intimate  a  connection  exists  between ^^^^^'
him  and  all  those  persons,  that  they  share  the  same  fate  with


*  See  Wicqueforf  B  Ambassador,  book Anne,  0. 12 ;  and  see  cas<>s,  Chitty's  OoL
i.  {  28,  towards  the  end.  Stat  13;  13  Price  Rep.  805.— C.

(203)  Privileged  from  an arrest^  7


I  497  *  OF THE ASfBASSADOB'S  HOUSE

BOOK  IT. him ;  they  immediately  depend  on  him  alone,  and  are  exempt
^  oHAP.  IX.  ^^^  ^YiQ  jurisdiction  of  the  country,  into  which  they  would

I  not  have  come  without  such  reservation  in  their  favour. The

ambassador  is  bound  to  protect  them ;  and  no  insult  can  he
offered  to  them,  which  is  not  at  the  same  time  an  insult  to
himself.  If  the  domestics  and  household  of  a  foreign  nunifl-
ter  were  not  solely  dependent  on  him,  it  is  evident  at  first
sight,  how  easily  he  might  be  harassed,  molested,  and  dis-
turbed in  the  exercise  of  his  functions.  These  maxima  are
I  at  present  everywhere  adopted  and  confirmed  by  custom.

J 121.  ofhia The  ambassador's  wife  is  intimately  united  with  him,  and
^ji*°.^ more  particularly  belongs  to  him  than  any  other  person  of
^' his  household. Accordingly,  she participates in  his inde-
pendence  and  inviolability;  she  even  receives  distinguished
honours,  which,  in  a  certain  degree,  cannot  be  refused  to  her
without affronting the ambassador; and for  which there
exists,  in  the  generality  of  courts,  an  established  ceremonial.
The  respect  due  to  the  ambassador  extends  likewise  to  his
children,  who  also  partake  of  his  immunities.
2122.  of  the The  ambassador's  secretary  is  one  of  his  domestics:  hut
secretary  of  the  Secretary  of  the  embassy  holds  his'  commission  from  the
r®  ®™" sovereign  himself;  which  makes  him  a  kind  of  public  minis-
' ter,  enjoying  in  his  own  right  the  protection  of  "the  law  of
[  498  ]  nations,  and  the  immunities  annexed  to  his  office,  independ-
ently of  the  ambassador,  to  whose  orders  he  is  indeed  but
imperfectly  subjected,— rsometimes  not  at  all,  and  always  in
such  degree  only  as  their  common  master  has  been  pleased
to  ordain.
2  123.  of Couriers  sent  or  received  by  an  ambassador,  his  papers,
the  ambas*  letters,  and  despatches,  all  essentially  belong  to  the  embassy,
■iidor'B  cou-  g^jj^j  g^j.^  consequently  to  be  held  sacred ;  since,  if  they  were
dMpatohes.  ^^*  respected,  the  legitimate  objects  of  the  embassy  could
not  be  attained,  nor  would  the  ambassador  be  able  to  dis-
charge his  functions  with  the  necessary  degree  of  security.
The  states-general  of  the  United  Provinces  decided,  while
the  president  Jeannin  resided  with  them  as  ambassador  from
France,  that,  to  open  the  letters  of  a  public  minister  is  a
breach  of  the  law  of  nations.* Other  instances  may  be  ae^
in  Wicquefort. That  privilege,  however,  does  not — on  cer-
tain momentous  occasions,  when  the  ambassador  himself  has
violated  the  law  of  nations,  by  forming  or  countenancing  plots
or  conspiracies  against  the  state— deprive  us  of  the*  liberty
to  seize  his  papers  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  the  whole
secret,  and detecting his accomplices; since,  in such an
emergency,  the  ambassador  himself  may  lawfully  be  arrested
and  interrogated  (§  99). An  example  is  furnished  us  in  the
conduct  of  the  Roman  government,  who  seized  the  lettert


•  Wicquefort,  book  L  }  27.


AKD DOMESTICS.  498


which  a  treasonable  junto  had  committed  to  the  hands  of book  it.
Tarquin's  ambassadors  (§  98).


CHAP. IX.


The  persons  in  a  foreign  minister's  retinue,  being  inde- }  124. Tho
pendent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  country,  cannot  be  taken  J™^"^
into  custody  or  punished  without his consent. It  ''"^ould,  y.^"^*"^
nevertheless,  be  highly  improper  that  they  should  enjoy  an  hia  retmue.
absolute  independence,  and  be  at  liberty  to  indulge  in  every
kind  of  licentious  disorder,  without  control  or  apprehension.
The ambassador must necessarily  be supposed  to  possess
whatever  degree  of  authority  is  requisite  for  keeping  them  in
order  :*  and  some  writers  will  have  that  authority  to  include
even  a  power  over  life  and  death. When  the  marquis  de
R&ny,  afterwards  duke  De  Sully,  was  in  England  as  ambas-
sador extraordinary  from  France,  a  gentleman  of  his  retinue
committed  a  murder,  which 'caused  a  great  noise  among  the
people  of  London. The  ambassador  assembled  some  French
noblemen  who  had  accompanied  him  on  his  mission,  tried  the
murderer,  and  sentenced  .him  to  lose  his  head. He  then  ac-
quainted the  lord  mayor  of  London  that  he  had  pronounced
sentence  on  the  criminal,  desiring  that  magistrate  to  furnish
him  with  an  executioner  and  proper  attendants  to  have  the

f)unishment  inflicted.  But  he  afterwards  consented  to  de-
iver  up  the  criminal  to  the  English,  in  order  that  they  might  [  499  j
execute  justice  on  him  as  they  thought  proper :  and  Monsieur
De  Seaumont,  the  French  ambassador  in  ordinary,  prevailed
on  the  British  monarch  to  pardon  the  young  man,  who  was
related  to  that  minister  by  the  ties  of  consanguinity.f  It
rests  entirely  at  the  option  of  the  sovereign  to  invest  his  am-
bassador with  such  an  extensive  power  over  the  persons  of  his
suite :  and  the  marquis  de  Rdny  was  confidently  certain  of
having  his  Qpnduct  approved  by  his  master,  who  did,  in  fact,  \
express  his  approbation  of  the  whole  transaction.  In  gene-
ral, however,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  ambassador  is
possessed  only  of  a  coercive  power  sufficient  to  restrain  his
dependants,  by  other  punishments  which  are  not  of  a  capital
or  infamous  nature.  He  may  punish  the  faults  committed
against  himself  and  against  his  master's  service,  or  send  the
delinquents  to  their  sovereign,  in  order  to  their  being  pun-
ished. But  should  any  of  his  people  commit  crimes  against
society,  which  deserve  a  severe  punishment,  the  ambassador

*  It  is  Mb  datj  to  watoh  over  iheir  mediate an accommodation between

eondact,  and  to  exert  hU  aathority  in  Charles  L  and  his  parliament^  seyera]

order  to  prevent  them  from  transgress-  gentlemen  of  that  minister's  suite  re-

ing  the  bounds  of  their  station,  and  paired  to  the  royal  army,  and  fought

committing actions which may  give  against  the  parliamentarians ;  on  which

Jnst  offence  to  the  sovereign  at  whose  account the parliament immediately

court  he  resides, — ^an  event  which  may  declined  all further  negotiation  with

sometimes  be  productive  of  very se-  the  count  Be  Harcourt Duport's  Hist

vtoud and disagreeable  consequences,  of  Conspir.  vol.  iv.  p.  261. Edit  A.n.

The French court having sent the  1729.

•onnt De Harcourt to England to  f  Sully's  Memoirs,  voL  vL  chap.  i. ,

621


i99  OP  THE  ambassadob's  house

BOOK  rr. ought  to  make  a  distinction  between  Bnch  of  his  domeiitics  as
CHAP,  jx,  ]3^iQng  tQ  iiig  Q^^  nation,  and  others  who  are  flubjects  of  the
country  where  he  resides. The  shortest  and  most  natural
way  with  the  latter,  is  to  dismiss  them  from  his  service,  and
deliver  them  up  to  justice. As  to  those  of  his  own  nation,  if
they  have  oflfended  the  sovereign  of  the  country,  or  committed
any  of  those  atrocious  crimes  in  whose  punishment  all  nations
are  interested,  and  whose  perpetrators  are,  for  that  reason,
usually  surrendered  by  one state  when demanded  by  an-
other,— why  should  he  not  give  them  up  to  the  nation  which
calls  for  their  punishment  ? If  the  transgression  be  of  a  dif-
ferent kind,  he  is  to  send  them  to  his  sovereign. Finally,  if
the  case  be  of  a  doubtful  nature,  it  is  the  ambassador's  duty
to  keep  the  oifender  in  irons  till  he  receives  orders  from  hia
court. But  if  he  passes  a  capital  sentence  on  the  criminal,  I
do  not  think  he  can  have  it  executed  in  his  own  house;  an
execution  of  that  nature  being  an  act  of  territorial  superiority
which  belongs  only  to  the  sovereign  of  the  country. And
although  the  ambassador,  together  with  his  house  and  house-
hold, be  reputed  out  of  the  country,  that  is  nothing  more
than  a  figurative  mode  of  speech  intended  to  express  his  in-
dependency, and  all  the  rights  necessary  to  the  lawful  suc-
cess of  the  embassy :  nor  can  that  fiction  involve  privileges
which  are  reserved  to  the  sovereign  alone, — ^which  are  of  too
delicate  and  important  a  nature  to  be  communicated  to  a  fo-
reigner, and,  moreover,  not  necessary  to  the  ambassador  for
the  due  discharge  of  his  functions. If  the  offence  has  been
committed  against  the  ambassador  or  against  the  service  of
his  master,  the  ambassador  may  send  the  delinquent  to  his
sovereign. If  the  crime  concerns  the  state  where  the  minis-
ter resides,  he  may  try  the  criminal,  and,  if  he  finds  him
[  500  ]  worthy  of  death,  deliver  him  up  to  the  justice  of  the  country,

as  did  the  marquis  de  Rdny.

;  125.  When When  the  commission  of  an  ambassador  is  at  an  end,—

the  rights '^hen  he  has  concluded  the  business  for  which  he  came  into

bassado™" *^^  Country, — ^when  he  is  i:ecalled  or  dismissed, — ^in  a  word.

•xpire. when  he  is  obliged  to  depart  on  any  account  whatever,  his

functions  cease :  but  his  privileges  and  rights  do  not  imme

diately  expire :  he  retains  them  till  his  return  to  his  soT^

reign,  to  whom  he  is  to  make  a  report  of  his  embassy.* His

safety,  his  independence,  and  his  inviolability  are  not  less

necessary  to  the  success  of  the  embassy  in  his  return,  than

at  his  coming. Accordingly,  when  an  ambassador  departs

on  account  of  a  war  arising  between  his  master  and  the  so^'^

reign  at  whose  court  he  was  employed,  he  is  allowed  a  sufB-

.^__^__^_^^^^__M. I. I  M^M II  I  ^ '^

*  "  It  was  at  that  time,"  says  Join-  them  happened  to  die,  the  ambaE$ad<»i

Tille,  "  an  established  custom,  as  veil  in  vhom  they  had  matoaUy  sent  to  c«eh

pagan  as  in Christian  countries,  that,  other  remained  prisoners  and  alax^"

when  two  princes  were  at  war«  if  one  of  p 72,  edit  a.  d.  1797.

* 822


AND  DOMESTICS.  600

cient  time to  qxdt  the  country  in  perfect  security: and, book  it.
moreover,  if  he  was  returning  home  by  sea,  and  happened  to  -EE^^l^l.
be  taken  en  his  passage,  he  would  be  released  without  a  mo-
ment's hesitation,  as  not  being  subject  to  lawful  capture.

For the same  reasons,'  the  ambassador's privileges  still  j  120.  Cssm
exist  at  those  times  when  the  activity  of  his  ministry  happens  ^^©J*  "^f^
to  be  suspended,  and  he  stands  in  need  of  fresh  powers.  ®"  *°**
Sueh  a  case  occurs  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  prince  ^^^^
whom  the  minister  represents,  or  of  the  sovereign  at  whose
court  he  resides. On  either  occasion  it  becomes  necessary
that  the  minister  should  be  furnished  with  new  credentials.
The  necessity,  however,-  is  less  cogent  in  the  latter  than  in
the  former  case,  especially  if  the  successor  of  the  deceased
prince be  the natural and necessary  successor; because,
while  the  authority  whende  the  minister's  power  emanated
still  subsists,  it  is  fairly  presumable  that  he  retains  his  for-
mer character  at  the  court  of  the  new  sovereign. But  if  his
own  master  is  no  more,  the  minister's  powers  are  at  an  end ;
and  he  must  necessarily  receive  fresh  credentials  from  the
new  prince,  before  he  can  be  authorized  to  speak  and  act  in
his  name. In  the  iiiterim,  however,  he  still  continues  to  be
the  minister  of  his  nation,  and,  as  such,  is  entitled  to  enjoy
all  the  rights  and  honours  annexed  to  that  character.

At  length,  I  have  reached  the  end  of  my  proposed  career.  §127.  Con-
I  do  not  flatter  myself  with  the  idea  of  having  given  a  per-  ciuaion.
feet,  full,  and  complete  treatise  of  the  law  of  nations ;  nor
was  that,  indeed,  my  design ;  for  it  would  have  been  too
great  a  degree  of  confidence  in  my  own  abilities  to  have
made  such  an  attempt  on  a  subject  so  extensive  and  so  co-
pious. I  shall  think  I  have  done  a  great  deal,  if  my  princi-
ples are  approved  as  solid,  luminous,  and  sufficient  to  enable
intelligent  persons  to  give  a  proper  solution  on  any  minute
questions  that  may  arise  in  particular  cases ;  and  shall  be
happy  if  the  result  of  my  labours  proves  in  anywise  service-
able to  those  men  in  power  who  love  mankind  and  respect
justice, — and  furnishes  them  with  weapons  for  the  purpose
of  defending  the  cause  of  .right,  and  compelling  the  unjust
to  observe  at  least  some  measures,  and  to  keep  within  the
bounds  of  decency.


INDEX.


ABSKNCB. See  Gouimir.

of  the  right  of  indiTidnali  to  quit  their
oountry,  103,  Ao.

AGREEMENT. See Tuatt, CoHm-

TIOXS.

ALIEN  ENEMT,  323. See  EnxT.
ALIENAGE,  178. See  Forucudul

ALIENATION,

of public property, 110. See Pbo-

PXRTT.

ALLEGIANCE,

obtigations  of,  6,  in  note,
of  sabjeot  to  a  loyereign,  21.

ALLIANCE.  See  Trbatt.
tareatj  of,  192,  323,  324.
■abject  of,  oonsidered,  %h

ALLUVION. See  Riyebs.
of  the  right  to,  121.
distinction  between,  and  avnlsion,  ib,

ALLY. Sie  Ensict,  Was.

AMBASSADOR,

who,  459.

are  ordinary  or  extraordinary,  %b»

repreaentative  character  of,  ih,

rights,  privileges,  and  immunities  o^  404.
See  MiHiSTBR.

may  annul  a  treaty,  459,  n.  (192).

duty  of,  when  consul  of  friendly  state  re-
jected, t6.

ehildren  of  and  attendants,  though  bom
in  foreign  state,  considered  as  natu-
ral-bom subjects,  ih.

'right  of,  to  grant  passports,  ih.

right  of,  to  restoration  of  despatches  when
captured  by  an  enemy,  ib.

protected  and  favoured  by  the  law  of
nations,  ih.

79


AMBASSADOR  (eonHnved).

privileges  of,  and  servants  firom  anef^

459,  n.  (192).
when  compelled  to  give  security  for  ootti^

ih.
right  of,  in  eivH  eases,  488.
is  exempt  from  civil  jurisdiction  whert

resident,  488,  489.
eause  of  this  exemption,  ib.
may  voluntarily  subject  himself  to  it^  489^

490.
may  commence  a  civil  sni^  490.
but  should  not  institute  a  criminal  one,  ih.
when  a  subject  of  state  where  employed,'

ih.
when  or  not  subject  t its  jurisdiction,

490,  491.
property  of,  also  exempt,  491,  492.
when  otherwise,  492.
not  liable  to  claims  arising  from  dutiei

of  office,  ih.
immovable  property  of,  not  exempt,  493,

and  fi.  (201).
when  exempt  from  distress,  493,  and  a.

(201),  495,  and  n.  (202).
proceedings  against  property  not  exempt

493,  494.
house  and  domestics  of,  494
to  ei^oy  a  perfect  immunity,  494^  495.
how  far  exempt  from  distress,  495,  a.

(202),  493,  n.  (201).
how  far  subject  to  poor-rates  and  taxeib

495,  n.  (202).
his  right  of  asylum,  495,  496.
limitation  thereof,  ih.
exemption of ambassadors' carriages

496.

of  their  retinue,  497,  n.  (203).

of  wife  and  family  of,  497.

of  secretary  of  ambassador,  ih.

of  their couriers and despatches
498.
SO  626


626


INDEX.


AMBASSADOR  (eontinued),

authority  of,  orer  retinae,  498,  and  n.  f

499.
dnty  of,  vitb  respect  to,  498,  499.
when  rights  of,  expire,  500.
new  credentials,  when  necessary,  %b»

AMKESTT. See  Peacb.
what)  439.

an  obliYion  of  the  pasty  ib.
implied  in  every  treaty  of  peace,  ih,
to  rebels,  423,  426.

ANTICIPATION, •
what,  114.

right  of,  in  the  use  of  common  property,
ib. See  PROPSBTT.

ARBITRATION,
what,  20,  277.

between  sovereign  and  sii|»jeots,  20.
between  nations,  277.
general  obligations  of  arbitrators'  deci-
sion, ib.
when  not  binding,  277,  278.
conferences  and  congresses,  278.
congress,  what,  ib.

ARISTOCRATIC REPUBLIC. See Go-

TBRITMBNT.

what,  2.

empire  intrusted  by  nation  to  a  certain
number  of  citizens,  ib,

ARMY. See  Wab.

right  of  levying  troops,  294.
enlistment  of  troops,  294,  298.
soldiers'  pay  and  quarters,  296.
standing  armies^  296,  314.
mercenary  soldiers,  297.
obligation  of  soldiers,  299.
punishment  of  deserters,  «6.
military  laws,  ib.
military  discipline,  ih.
officers  of,  299,  300,  301.

ARREST,

ambassador  privileged  firom,  459,  and  n.

See  Ambasbadob.
consul  not  exempt  from,  147,  and  n.  (101),

459,  and  n.  (192).
on  foreign contract  here,  though  -airest

not  permitted  where  contract  made,

173,  and  n.  (111).

ASSASSINATION,
what,  359.
of  prisoners, 858,  860,  361. See Pri-

BOITBRS.

ASSEVERATION,

use  of,  in  treaties,  233. See  Trbatt.

ASSOCIATE,

of  the  enemy,  828. See  EmEirr.

AUXILIARIES,

what,  324 See  Ehbitt.


AVULSION,

what,  121. See  RnrxBS,  Stbbaki,  sm

Lakbs.
distinction  between,  and  allnvion,  HI.

BANISHMENT. i%e  Exilx.

distinction  between,  and  exile,  107*

banishment,  what,  ib.

for  what  time,  ib.

when  party  said  to  b«  banished,  ih,

inflicted  as  a  punishment^  ib.

is  a  mark  of  infamy,  ib.

how  far  right  of,  extends,  ib.

right  of  banished  party  to  live  somewhere

108.
though  right  only  an  imperfect  one,  tb.
nations  may  refuse  him  admittance,  ib.
but  not  without  good  reasons,  t'^.
duty  of  nations  towards  him,  ib.
cannot  punisK  him  for  oflencea  eommiUcd

out  of  their  territories,  109.
except  for  safe^  of  mankind,  ib,

BAT,  129, 130. See  Sba.

BILL  OF  EXCHANGE.

construction  of,  in  this  eountry,  173, «.

(HI),
effect  of  English  Statute  of  Limitalionf,  ih

BLOCKADE,

what,  339,  and  n.  (159).

of  the  violation  of,  ib,

distinction  between  military  and  conuaer-

cial  blockade,  ib,
three  things  necessary  to  eonstitate  t
violation  of,  xb.
L  The  existence  of  an  aetnal  block-
ade, ib.
3.  The  knowledge  of  the  party  rap-
posed  to  have  violated  ity  ib.
8.  Some  act  of  violation,  »5.

BOOTY,

what^  365.

distinction  between,  and  conqneety  Aw
See  ExEMT.

CAPITULATION. SeeWAVL
what»  412,  413.
how  concluded,  ib.
necessity  for  observing  terms  of,  414.
instances,  415.

duty  of  sovereigns  to  see  them  fUfilkd,
414.

CAPTURE. See  War.

CASUS  F<EDERIS,
what,  326.
only  takes  place  where  war  nigost,  33A,

330.
how  it  exists  in  a  defensive  war,  326.
in  a  treaty  of  guaranty,  ih.


INDBX.


627


CELIBACT. See  Popbrt.

of  priests  considered,  69,  70.
its  effects,  ib,

CHILBREN,

of  citisens  bom  in  a  foreign  oonntzy,  102,

n.  (59). See  Citueh.
bom  at  sea,  102. See  SxA.
bom  in  armies  of  state,  103.
in  the  honse  of  minister  at  foreign  conrty

459,  and  n.  (192). See  Couittrt.
of  vagrants,  103. See  Vagrant.

CHBISTIANITY. See  Bbuoioh.

law  of  nations  constraed  by,  n.  (1).

CHURCH. See Ecclksiastiob, Bbu-

QIOH.

ihe  sovereign's  anthority  over,  62.
necessity  of  acknowledging  him  to  be

head  of,  66.
of  taxing  chnroh  possessions,  72,  73.
should  be  the  first  appropriated  to  the

use  of  the  state,  73.
why  should  bo  so,  ib,
misappropriation  of  revenues  of,  ih,

CITIZEN. See  Couhtrt,  NAnoM.
who  are  eitixens,  101.
are  members  of  tho  civil  society,  ih,
children  of,  bom  abroad,  are  citizens,  102,

t and  n.  (59).
right  of,  to  quit  their  country,  103-105.
duty  of,  in  advancing  glory  of  their  coun-
try, 92.
right  of,  to  protection,  6,  6,  n.  (15).  95.

See  NAnoir.
right  of,  when  the  nation  submits  to  a

foreign  power,  94.
interest  of  a  nation  in  the  conduct  of  her

citizens,  161.
duty  of  sovereign  to  revenge  injuries  of,

161, 162.
his  duty  to  protect,  162.
to  prevent  them offending  citizens of

other  nations,  i6.
acts  of  individuals  not  to  be  imputed  to

the  nation,  ib,
otherwise,  if  ratified,  ib,
conduct  of  iigured  party,  ib.
may  punish  aggressor,  ib.
duty of  aggressor's sovereign herein,

163.
should  enforce  reparation,  ib,
when  should  deliver  up  offender,  ib,
sovereign  refusing  Justice  becomes  a  party

to  the  wrong,  ib.
nation may  be guilty of  her  citizens'

crimes,  when,  164,  and  n.  (106).
duty  of  citizens  in  supporting  glory  of

their  nation,  91. .

CIVIL  WAft.

what,  422,  424.

distinction  between,  and  rebellion,  424.


CIVIL  WAR  (eoAfftttuMO.

sovereign's  right  against  rebels,  422.
public  commotion,  insurrection,  and  sedi*
tion,  ib.
meaning  thereof,  ib.
sovereign,  how  to  suppress  them,  ib,
of  amnesty  to  offenders,  423,  426.
sovereign's  obligation  to  perform  his  pro-
mises to  rebels,  423.
effects  of  civil  war,  425,  426.
produces  two  independent  parties,  425.
each  bound  to  observe  the  laws  of  war,  ib
consequences  of  not  observing  them,  425

to  427.
exception  from  amnesty  in  case  of  sub-
jection, 426.
interference  of  foreign  nations,  427.
may  interfere  to  restore  peace,  ib.
when  may  assist  either  party,  ib.

CLERGY. See  EccLBSZAsncs,  Religioit.

CODE.

no  general  international  code,  Iv.  In  note,
ancient  codes  on  parts  of  the  law  of  na-
tions, ib.
'  as  to  the  maritime  law,  ib,
but  these  imperfect  ib.

COLONIES. See  CourrRT.
establishment  of,  101.
relation  of,  to  mother  country,  ib.
commerce  with,  42,  and  note.

COMMERCE,

what,  37,  43.

home  and  foreign  trade,  37.

utility  of  the  home  trade,  ib.
of  the  foreign  trade,  t&.

obligation  to  cultivate,  37, 143,  144.

foundation  of  the  laws  of,  37,  143.

right  of  buying  and  selling,  38,  144.

distinction  between  these  rights,  38.

right  of  buying  imperfect,  39,  145.

moral  obligation  herein,  38,  and  n.  36.

prohibition  of  foreign  merchandise,  39.

each  state  may  prohibit  entrance  of,  39,
and  n.  (37),  144.

or  choose  how  far  it  will  engage  in  com-
merce, 39,  144.
0/ freedom  of  trade,  144,  and  n.  (97).

commerce  with  colonies  of  parent  state,
40.

right  to  foreign  trade,  how  acquired,  41,
145.

necessity  of  commercial  treaties,  40,  145.
See  Commercial  Treaties.

laws  relating  to  commerce  not  subject  Ut
prescription,  40.

so  of  rights  founded  on  treaty,  41.

exceptions  thereto,  42.
0/  monopolieef  ib,

generally  unlawful,  ib,

right  of  sovereign  to  grant,  when,  %b,

suppression  of,  when,  116.


628


IHBBX.


OOHMERCE  {moncpoUet  mmiCmmmcI).

of  eommereial  companiM  how  fi»  bene-
ficial, 142.

of  foreign  monopolies,  42,  and  note.
Of  the  hvUanw  of  trade,  43.

forenunent  ehonld  enoonnge  adTan-
tageons  trade,  ih,

ahould  lay  restraints  where  disadyan-
tageoas,  43,  and  n.  (42).

what  an  advantageoas  trade,  43.

what  a  rainons  trade,  ih.

of  import  duties,  ih,

COMMERCIAL TREATIBS.  . See Com-

XERCB.

necessity  of,  40.

role  respecting  commercial  treaties,  145.

duty  of  nations  in  making  them,  147.

duration  of,  145.

revocation  of,  146.

distinctions  as  to,  i6.

of  granting  right  to  third  party  contrary
to  treaty,  146.

of  abridging  commerce  in  favour  ^f  an-
other nation,  ih.

or  of  appropriating  a  particular  branch
of  trade,  147.

COMPROMISE. iS^NATXOjr.
what»  276.

CONDEMNATIOir. 8m  Puzi  Covrt.
sentence  of,  166.
requisites  of,  ih»

necessity  of,  to  complete  title  to  capture,
166,  385,  and  notes.

CONGRESS,
what,  278.

CONQUEST,
whaty  865.
distinction  between,  and  booty,  ih.

CONSCIENCE.

law  of,  the  law  of  nations,  IviiL  to  Ix.

8f  Law  of  NAnoRS.
liberty  of,  in  religion,  56,  61. S—  Rr-

IJGION.

CONSTITUTION. See  Stair.
what)  8.  '

right  of  nation  to  change,  10.
legislature  cannot»  ih.

CONSULS,
who,  147.
appointment  of,  ih.
right  to  appoint  should  be  stipulated  for,

ih,
must  not  be  subjects  of  state  where  they

reside,  148.
are  accountable  to  their  sovereign,  ih.
when  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  law

of  nations,  ih,
azemption from criminal  Justice  when,

«5.


CONTRABAND  GOODS»
what»  337.
seisure  and  confiscation  ^  337,  33B»

CONTRACT,

oonstractlon  of  foreign  eoncraetii  17S«  R.

enforcement  of,  ih,

arrest  here  on  oontraety  though  Boi  per-
mitted in  country  where  made^  A.

Invalidity  ot,  when  in  &voor  of  aliea
enemy,  414.

CONTRIBUTIONS. iS^BaRxr.
what,  866.
of  the  right  to  levy,  %h,

CONTENTION. See  Trratt.
what,  218.

of  those  made  by  sovereigns!,  ih.
by  subordinate  powers,  ih,
who  are  subordinate  powers,  {ft.
when  made  in  the  name  of  the  aovenig^

ih.
or  by  virtue  of  their  oflBce,  ih,
power  to  make,  how  acquired,  «&.
by public persons without sufieieiil

powers,  210.
when  or  not  valid,  ih,
of  tacit  or  express  ratifioatioB  UMveef,  A.
of  an  agreement  called  sponsio,  ih.
foundation  of,  210,  220.
state  not  bound  by,  220.
to  what  promisor  is  bound,  whoA  it  is

disavowed,  220  to  223.
to  what  the  sovereign  is  bound,  223  tt

226.
private  contracts  of  sovereign,  226.
subject  to  same  rules  as  those  of  private

persons,  ih,
contracts  made  by  sovereign  with  private

persons  in  name  of  state,  ih,
are  binding  on  a  nation  and  his  soeees-
sors,  227.  .
debts  of  the  sovereign  and  state,  ih.
donations  of  the  sovereign,  228.
restriction  and  revocation  of,  ih.
of  conventions during war,  40^ JSm

War.
of  conventions  relating  to  raaaoB  of

prisoners,  410. See  Rarsom.

CONVENTIONAL  LAW. See  Trraxt.
what,  Ixiv.

binds  only  the  contracting  parties^  Ixv
and  n.

CONVENTS. See  Poprrt.

CORPORATION,
property  of,  113.

See  PROPRRTT.
right  of,  to  alienate  same,  113, 114.
sovereign's  power  over,  113.
members  of,  114.  ,

right  of,  to  make  regulations,  A.


UIDJBX.


629


CORPORATION  {coniinMl),

obligation  of,  to  preserro  corponte  pro-

'  porty,  115«
expenses  of,  and  how  bomOf  ti.
COUNTRY,

what,  63, 101, 103.

how  nnderstood  in  the  law  of  nations,  64.
love  of  conn  try,  62,  103.
in  individuals,  63.
'in  the  nation  And  sorereign,  ib*
injury  to,  64.

possession  of  by  a  nation,  98.
ezclnsive  right  thereto,  id.
comprehends  two  things,  ib,
right  of  domain  and  emjn'r«,  98,  99.
acquisition  of  sovereignty  in  a  yacant

country,  99.
empire  over,  acquired  with  domain,  ib.

another  mode  of  acquiring  it»  ib,
how  a  nation  may  appropriate  to  itself

a  desert  country,  ib,
must  be  by  possession,  ib,
of  possesion  where  occupied  by  a  few
wandering  tribes,  99, 100,  101.
of  colonies,  101.
become  a  part  of  the  mother  oounixy,
ib.
Of  <&e  teveral  ihingi  relating  to  country,  ib.
citizens,  who  are,  ib.
natives,  who  are,  ib.
children  bom  of  oitliens,  their  rights,

ib.
of  foreigners,  ib.
inhabitants,  who  are,  102.
distinguished  from  citisens,  ib.
of  foreigners  permitted  to  settle  iher»,

ib.
their  duty  to  defend  the  state,  ib.
eigoy  only  the  advantages given  by

the  law,  Ac,  ib.
perpetHcU  inhabitants,  who,  i&.
their  rights,  ib, '

rights  of,  pass  to  their  posterity,  ib.
NaturcUitation,  whatp  102,  and  n.  68.
by  whom  granted,  102.
)f  imperfect  naturalisation,  ib.
of  naturalization  by  birth,  ib.
in  England  and  Poland,  ib.
Children  of  eitizeni  bom  in  a  /ortign  country,

ib.
Children  bom  at  tea,  ib.

when  in  parts  belonging  to  the  nation,

ib.
on  the  open  sea,  ib.
vessels  of  a  nation  a  part  of  its  teiritoiy,

ib.
children  bom  therein,  bom  within  its

territory,  ib.
otherwise, if  bom  in  foreign  vessel,

Ac.,  ib.
uless  in  a  port  belonging  to  their  own


COUKTRT  {children  continued).

CKHdren  bom  in  the  armiee  of  the  etate,  103.

are  bom  in  tiie  country,  ib.

so  if  bom  in  the  house  of  its  minister
at  a  foreign  court,  103.
Settlement,  ib.

what,  ib.

is  a  fixed  residence  in  any  place,  with
intent  of  always  staying  there,  ib.

how  established,  ib.

may  transfer  his  settiement,  ib.

how  distinguished  from  habitation,  ib,

of  natural  or  original  settiemenl^  ib,

of  acquired  settiement,  ib.
Vagrante,  ib.

who  are,  ib.

are  people  who  have  no  settiement,  ib,

children  of,  have  no  country,  ib,

when  country  of,  that  of  parent,  ib.
When  a  party  may  ^it  hie  country,  108,
104.

in  general  has  a  right  to  do  so,  104.

as  on  arriving  at  years  of  discretion,  ib,

must  not  endanger  its  welfare,  ib.

distinction  between  internal  and  ex-
ternal obligation,  i6.

should  not  qui^  except  from  necessity,
ib.

of  abandoning  country  at  a  time  ot
danger,  ib.

right  of  country  to  punish,  ib.  and  n.
0/ temporary  abeence/rom,  106.

right  thereto  in  time  of  peace,  ib.

return  when  public  interest  requires  it^
ib,

variation  in  political  laws  herein,  ib.

these  laws  must  be  observed,  ib.

when  passports  requisite,  ib.
Caeee  where  a  dtiuen  hae  a  right  to  quit  hie
country,  H^

when  he  cannot  procure  subsistence
there,  ib.

where  body  of  society  fall  to  dis-
charge their  obligations  toward^
him,  ib.

or  attempt  to  enact  laws  he  is  not
bound  to  submit  to,  106.

instances  herein,  ib,

where  only  one  religion  allowed^  100^
67.

where  popular  state  wish  to  have  a
sovereign,  106,  11.

or  to  submit  to  a  foreign  power,  106,
94.
Emigrante,  106.

who  are^  ib.

sources  of  right  to  emigrate,  ib.

is  a  natural  right,  ib,

or  arising  from  a  fundamental  law  of
the  state,  ib.

or  from  a  voluntary  grant  to  the  sove-
reign, ib,

5o2


680


INDEX.


OOUNTRT  (emigranU  continued).

hj  treaty  from  foreign  power,  106.

on  account  of  religion,  ih.

or  -where  one  state  refuges  to  receiye
thone  of  another,  106,  107.

right  to  emigrate,  how  infringed,  107.
SupplieanUf  ib*

who  are,  td.
Exile  and  Baniehment  fram^  ib,

who  an  exile,  iL

one  driven  from  plaoe  of  settlement,
hut  without  a  mark  of  infamy,  ib.

banishment  what,  ib.

a  like  expulsion  with  mark  of  infamy,
107,  and  note.

time  of,  107.

distinction  between  exile  and  banish-
ment, ib.

exile  sometimes  a  punishment^  ib,

banishment  always  one,  ib.

exile  is  either  voluntary  or  involuntary,
107, 108.

voluntary  when  to  escape  punishment,
107.

involuntary  when  the  effect  of  a  supe-
rior order,  108.

limit  of,  as  to  place,  ib,

exiled  and  banished  man  has  a  right  to
live  somewhere,  ib.

nature  of  this  right,  f6.
is  of  an  imperfect  kind,  ih.

right  of  nations  to  refuse  him  admit-
tance, ib.

duty  of  nations  towards  him,  ib,

cannot  deprive  him  of  necessaries,  ib.

or  punish  for  faults  committed  out  of
their  territories,  109.

unless  they  affect  the  safety  of  man-
kind, ib,

of  the  delivery  up  of  offenders,  109,  and
note.

COURT  OF  HONOUR,

establishment  of,  proposed,  86,  86.

COURTS  OP  JUSTICE. See  Jubtiob.
establishment  of,  78,  79.

CREDENTIALS. See  MnfiBTBB.
what,  461.
when  new  oredentiab  necessary,  500.

CULTIVATION,

utility  of  tillage,  34.

advantages  of,  as  a  source  of  wealth,  ib,

regulations  necessary  in  respect  of,  ib,

distribution  of  land,  ib,

protection  of  husbandmen/  85.

should  be  placed  in  an  honourable  light,

ib.
cultivation  of  the  soil  a  natural  obligation,

ib.
of  pnblie  granaries,  36.
propriety  of  establishment  of,  i&.
management  of,  ib.


CURRENT  OF  RIVERS,

works  tending  to  obstruct,  unlawful,  122.
of  preventing  alteration  in,  122,  Dot«.
right  to  soil  on  change  of,  121,  122.

CUSTOMARY  LA^,
what,  Pre£  Ixv.
how  far  binding,  ib,
foundation  and  extent  of,  tb,
general  obligation  of,  ib,
consent  to,  when  presumed,  IxtL

DEGRADATION,

suggestions  as  to,  to  prevent  daeDing,  96,

DFiMOCRACY. See  Govxrhiobxt.
what,  2.
empire  kept  by  body  of  nation  in  its  owi

hands,  ib,
also  called  a  popular  government^  ih,

DESERTERS,

punishment  of,  299.

DOMAIN. See  Countrt,  pBomtTV.

of  the  right  of,  183. Se*  OBUAAnon

AND  Rl&HTS.

DONATION,

of  the  sovereign,  wha^  228.
distinction  between,  and  debts  of,  %b.
should  be  with  a  view  to  public  welfare,

ib,
revocation  of,  ib,
immunities  and  privileges  in  natme  vt,

ih.
revocation  of,  ib,

DUELLING,

condemned,  84

means  of  putting  a  stop  to  this  disorder,

84  to  86.
suggestions  respecting,  84,  86.
of  establishing  a  Court  of  Honoiir,  85,

86.

ECCLESIASTICS. See Rxueioir. Po-

PBRT.

of  the  sovereign's  authority  over,  63,  61.

nature  of  this  authority,  64.

rule  to  be  observed  with  respect  to,  ih.

should  be  subject  to  the  public  power,  ih,

the  sovereign's  duty  towards  them,  ib.

their  duty  to  the  state,  ib,

reasons establishing sovereign's right

over,  64,  65.
authorities  and  examples,  65.
pernicious  consequences of  a  eontnzy

opinion,  i6.
abuses  therefrom  particularised,  65,  66.

ELECTIVE  STATE,
what,  23.

the  right  of  choosing  successor  <hi  death
of  sovereign,  ib,  «

elective  kings,  real  sovereigas^  24.


INDEX.


68J


BMBASST,

right  of,  what,  463.

of  sending  and  reeeiying  public  miniB-

terSf  lb
of  the  necessity  thereof,  ib»
done  by  the  agency  of  pnblio  ministerSy  ib,
explanation  of  term  minister,  453.
of  the  right  of  sovereigns  to  send  and

reoeire  public  ministers,  ib.
right  not  taken  away  by  unequal  allianoe,

ib,
or  by  a  treaty  of  protection,  ib,
right  of  princes  and  states  herein,  ib»
cities  that  have  the  right  of  banner,  454.
of  ministers  of  viceroys,  455.
right  of  regents  daring  an  inteiregnam,

ib.
molestation  in  exercise  of  rights  an  ii^aiy)

ib.
what  allowable  in  this  respect  in  time  of

war,  455,  456.
minister  of  friendly  power  to  be  received,

456.
of  resident  ministers,  ib.
how  ministers  of  an  enemy  to  be  admit-
ted, 457.
from  a  usurper,  when,  457,  458.
instances  herein,  ib.
£MIQRANT. See  GouifTBT.
who  are  emigrants,  106.
right  to  emigrate,  106,  33.
sources  of  their  right,  106.

from  law  of  nature,  ib.

or  fundamental  law  of  the  state,  ib.

from  voluntary  grant  of  sovereign,
ib,

or  from  treaty  with  foreign  power,
ib.
infringement  of  their  right,  107.

remedy  for  that  infringement^  ib,
ENEMT,

Who  it  an  enemy f  321,  and  note,
distinction  between  public  and  private

enemy,  821.
all  subjects  of  two  states  at  war  are  ene-
mies, ib.
and  continue  so  in  all  places,  ib,
except  in  a  neutral  state,  ib.
women  and  children  are  enemies,  321,

351.
how  to  be  treated,  321,  362.
in  ease  of  sovereigns,  363.
0/  thinge  belonging  to  the  enemy,  322.
belong  to  the  nation  at  large,  ib,
continue  such  everywhere,  ib.
when  otherwise,  ib.
neutral  things  found  with  enemy  not  o,

ib.
lands  possessed  by  foreigners  in  enemy's

country,  ib.
things due  to  the  enemy  by  a  third

party,  322,  328.


ENEMY  {continued).

Of  the  enemy* t  alliee,  823.
treaties  of  alliance  in  war,  323,  324.
defensive  and  offensive  treaties,  324.
several  kinds  of,  323,  324.
difference  between  warlike assooiations

and  auxiliary  treaties,  324.
auxiliary  troops,  what,  ib,
subsidies,  what^  ib.
treaties  respecting,  ib.
when  a  nation  allowed  to  assist  anothot*

ib.
general  principle  herein,  ib,
when  to  make  alliances  for  war,  324-5.
of  alliances  made  with nation  actually

engaged  in  war,  325,  333.
alliances  in  time  of  peace,  325,  333.
tacit  clause  in  every  alliance,  325.
refusing  succours  when no breach of

alliance,  326.
casus  foederis,  what,  ib.
never  titkes  place  in  an  nqjust  war,  326,

330.
how  it  exists  in  a  defensive  one,  326.
or  in  a  treaty  of  guarantee,  ib.
of  granting or  refusing snccours,  3^6,

327.
of  two  parties  in  alliance  coming  to  a

rupture,  327.
duty  of  third  party  herein,  ib.
of  the  enemy's  associates,  328.
who  deemed  such,  328  to  331.
those  who  make  common  cause  with  him,

are,  328.
or  assist  him,  without  being  obliged  to  it

by  treaties,  ib,
or  are  in  an  offensive  alliance  with  him,

329.
how  a  defensive  alliance  associates  with

the  enemy,  ib,
in  what  case  it  does  not  produce  the  same

effect,  329,  330.
whether  necessary  to  declare  war  against
^  enemy's  associates,  331.

0/  the  right  over  thinge  belonging  to  the  ene-

ffiy,  364^ See  War.
0/  levying  eantribiOione  on  enemy**  eountrgf

366. See  War.
0/ faith  between  enemiet,  371. See  War.

ENLISTMENT,
of  troops,  294.
in  foreign  countries,  298.

ENVOY,

who,  460.
rank  of,  ib.

are  ordinary  and  extraordinary,  ib,
the  latter  held  in  greater  consideration,
ib.

EQUITY,  COURT  OF,

bill  in,  to  enforce  treaty,  not  sustainabte^
T.  insote.


682

B8CHEATAGE,

whaty  176,  and  note,
doctrine  of,  ib,

BXCHANGE. Sw  Mojnr  axd  E^craxqm,
of  money,  what,  47.
a costom of  merohantB for remitting

money,  ib,
should  be  eapported  by  good  laws,  •(.
duty  of  nations  herein,  ib,

EXCOMMUNICATION. See  Popebt.
abuae  of  the  Pope's  power  herein,  78,
of  men  in  office,  ib,
of  soyereigns,  ib.
instances  of  abuse,  74.
abuses  not  confined  to  Popes,  ib,
instances  hereof,  74,  75,  in  note.

EXEMPTION,

from  carrying  arms,  295.

EXILE. Se^BAxnmnan,
who  an  exile,  107.

distinction  between,  and  banishment,  ib.
one  driven  from  place  of  settlement^  %b.
but  without  mark  of  infamy,  ib,
time  of  exile  unlimited,  ib.
when  a  punishment  ib,
is  voluntary  or  involuntary,  tb,,  108.
voluntary,  if  to  avoid  punishment^  108.
involuntary, where effect of superior's

order,  ib.
when  limited  to  plaoe,  ib.
right  of,  to  live  somewhere,  ib.
though  right  only  an  imperfect  one,  ib,
nations  may  refuse  him  admittance,  ib,
but  not  without  good  reasons,  ib.
cannot  punish  for  offences  committed  out

of  their  territories,  109.
except  for  safety  of  mankind,  ib,
of  deUvery  up  of  offenders,  109,  and  note.

EXTERNAL  LAW,
what,  Ixii.

distinction  between,  and  internal,  IxiL
external  law  relates  to  men,  ib,
**ttemal  to  the  oonscienoe,  ib,

FALSEHOOD,
what,  872,  873.

distinction  between,  and  a  He,  872.
when  bound  'to  speak  the  truth  to  an
enemy,  378. See  Enext.

FEDERAL  REPUBLIC,
what  3.

a  union  of  independent  states  by  a  per-
petual  confederal,  8.

FEUDATORY  STATES,
what,  8.

one  doing  homage  to  a  foreign  power,  8.
though  still  a  eowreign  state,  ib.


IKDBZ.


FOREIGNERS,
described,  171.
rules  with  respect  to,  171.
conduct  state  should  observe  towani%  A
right  of,  to  enter  territory,  172.
subject  to  the  laws,  172, 173.
and  punishable  according  thereto,  172.
disputes  of,  how  Judged,  172,  and  note.
proteetion  due  to,  173.
their  duties  towards  the  state,  tb,
to  what  burthens  subject,  174.
continue  members  of  their  own  eooatn

state  has  no  right  over  persons  o^  Au
nor  over  personal  property  of,  ih.
who  are  the  heirs  of  a  foreigner,  175l
right  of,  to  make  a  will,  ib.
will,  how  affected  by  law  of  ooontiy,  A.
of  eeekeatage,  or  doctrine  of  alienage^  17f
and  note.

of  the  right  of,  fratte /ortEMe,  177.

of  immovable  property  possessed  by,  ITT

and  notes,
eannot  inherit  real  property,  177,  ncvta.
exceptions  thereto  by  treaty,  177,  nota:
marriagea  of,  177.
validity,  and  proof  of,  177,  Boie.

FOREIGN  JUDGMENT,

effect  of,  and  proof  thereof,  188,  note.
English law on  this subjecl^ 188^  fa
note.

FOREIGN  LAW,

how  proved,  178  and  note,  177,  note

GLORT,

of  a  nation,  wha^  91.

advantages  of,  ib.

duty  of  nation  to  establish,  %b,

bow  acquired,  %b,

duty  of  the  prince  herein,  ib,

of  the  citizens,  92.

example  of  the  Swiss,  ib,

attacking  the  glory  of  a  nation,  88.

GOVERNMENT,

0/  tike  eeveral  hinde  of,  2.

1.  Popular  or  Democratie,  %b,
what,  ib.

empire  kept  by  body  of  natton  ia  te
own  hands,  ib,

2.  Arietoeratie,  ib.
what,  ib,

where  intrusted  to  a  number  of  nHiMML
ib,
8.  Monardiieal,  %b*
what,  ib.

where  power  in  a  single  persoo,  tb.
Primeipal  obfeete  of,  83,

1.  To  provide  for  neeeeeitiee  of

ib.
duty  of  sovereign  herein,  ib,
should  proeore  plenty,  ib.


IKBSX*


688


OOYBRNMENT  (eontit  ued).

and  titke  care  there  be  siii&oient  work-

meiiy  33.
•hould  preyent  emigration  of  those  lue-

fal,  ib.
and  punish  emiuaries  enticing  them

away,  34^
should  enoonrage  labour  and  industiyi

ib.
S.  To  procure  kappinett  of  fuUion,  47.
nation  should  labour  after  its  own  hap-

pinessy  ib.
should  instruct  people,  4ft,  48.
educate  youth,  48.

examples  of  ancient  states  herein,  ib,
should  foster  and  encourage  the  arts

and  sciences,  ib.
allow  freedom  of  philosophical  discus-
sion, 49.
inspire  a  lore  of  rirtue,  61.
a  hatred  of  vice,  ib,
hereby  intention  of  rulers  disooTered,

ib.
state,  Ac.  should  perfect  its  understand-
•  ing  and  will,  52.

and  direct  knowledge  of  dtiseni  to  its

welfare,  ib,
should  inspire  them  with  the  lore  of

country,  62,  63.
BO  in  each  individual,  63.
the  like  between  the  nation  and  its

sovereign,  ib.
definition  of  term  country,  63,  6^  101,

103.
man's  duty  towards  it,  64.
criminal  to  injure  one's  country,  ib.
the  glory  of  good  citixens,  ib,
examples,  ib.
t.  To  fortify  iUttfoigainH  external  attcieht,

87.
of  national  strength,  ih.
how  constituted,  ib,
by  number  of  citiiens,  ih,
their  military  virtues,  ib,
and  their  riches,  ib.

increase  of  population, and  how  ef-
fected, ib.
of  national  valour,  88,  80.
other  military  virtues,  89.
in  what  consists  the  wealUi  of  a  nation^

i'6.,90.
not  in  revenues  of  sovereign,  89.
but  in  that  of  individuals,  89,  90.
strength of  state increased thereby,

90.
when  may  be  employed  in  defence  of

the  state,  ib.
state  should  have  income  proportionate

to  its  expenditure,  ib.
of  the  public  revenue  and  taxes,  ib,.
should  not  increase  its  power  by  illegal

means,  ib,

80


0OVERKMEin?  {etmtinue^

power  of  nation  relative,  90.

should be measured by  that  of  itf

neighbours,  ib,
or  those  from  whom  it  has  any  thing

to  fear,  ib.
is sufficiently  powerful  when  it  eaa

resist  attacks,  ib.
of  the  prudence  requisite  herein,  «&•

GRANAKIES,

propriety  of  establishing  of,  36.

GUARANTT. Se4  Trbjltiss.
for  observance  of  treaties,  236.
what^  t6.
gives  the  guarantee  no  right  to  interfere^

ib.
nature  of  the  obligation  it  imposes,  236.
cannot  impair  the  rights  of  a  third  partj^

ib.
duration  of  the  guaranty,  ih,

HARBOURS,

of  seashore,  to  whom  belonging,  129,
130.

HBREDITART STATE. See  Succkbsiys

Stati.
what,  24.
origin  of,  ib.

when  may  be  changed,  ib,
of  renunciations,  26.
how  fkr  binding,  ih,
of  regents,  27.
who  to  decide  disputes  respecting  sneoM*

sion,  ib.
foreign  powers  ought  not,  29.

HOSPITALS. ^«Wa]u

erection  of,  for  invalids,  296.

HOSTAGES. See  Treaty.

who  are  such,  238,  239.

given  for  observance  of  treaties,  ift.

of  the  right  over  them,  239.

their  liberty  alone  pledged,  ib,

when  they  are  to  be  sent  back,  ib,

whether  they  may  be  detained  on  any
other  account  ib.  ^

OMj  be  detained  for  their  own  actionf^
240.

of  their  support,  ib,

to  be  provided  by  party  giving,  ih,

subject  cannot  revise  tcr  be,  241.

but  a  vassal  may,  ib.

who  may  give  and  receive  hostages,  ^

rank  of  hostages,  ib,

ought  not  to  escape,  ib.

on  escape,  should  be  sent  back,  242.

death  o^  whether  to  be  replaced,  ib,

of  him  who  takes  the  place  of,  ib,

of  a  hostage  succeeding  to  the  crown,  tlw

to  be  released  on  deliveiy  of  another  suf-
ficient hostage,  ib,

liability  of,  ends  with  treaty,  ib.


1


t>84


INDEX.


HOSTAGES  {continued),

violation  of  treaty  an  iigory  to  the  host-
ages, 243.

abandonment  of,  bj  sovereign,  ib,

oompeKsation  due  to  them  thereon,  •(.

fate  of,  when  he  who  has  given  them  fails
in  his  engagement^  ib,

maj  transfer  his  allegiance,  %b,

life  of,  cannot  he  taken,  ib.

IMMUNITIES. See  Popert.

abase  of  popish  clergy  in  respect  of,  71.
attempt  of,  to  escape  from  political  an-

ihority,  ib.
of  their  church  possessions,  72,  78.

IMPERFECT  NATURALIZATION,
what»  102.

INHABITANT. See  Gouhtbt.
who  deemed  such,  102.
the  foreigners  settled  in  a  conntry,  ib.
their  rights  and  duties,  »6.
are  liable  to  Uie  laws,  ib.
are  bound  to  defend  the  state,  ib.
of  perpetual  inhabitants,  ib,
who  are  such,  ib.  "

children  of,  their  rights,  f(.

INHERITANCE. iS^  Property.

right  of  parties  to  bequeath  property,

116.
limitation  of  right,  ib.
law  of,  in  England,  116,  note.

INSTRUCTIONS. iS'ee Ministbb, Pub-
uo.
to  public  ministers,  what,  46L

INTERNAL  LAW  OF  NATIONS,
whai^  IvilL
why  so  called,  ib,

INTERNAL  POLICE,
what,  83.

essential  to  preserve  order,  ib,
regulations  to  enforce,  ib,
Holland  instanced,  ib.

INTERNATIONAL  COURT,
difficult  to  establish,  liiL
observations  hereon,  ib.

JURISDICTION,
of  a  nation,  166.
nature  and  extent  of,  ib.
nations  should  respect  right  of,  ib,
effect  of,  in  foreign  countries,  »6.,  and  n.
(107).

JUS  POSTLIMINIUM,
right  of,  defined,  392.
foundation  of  righl^  ib.
duty  of  sovereign  herein,  ib,
how  right  takes  effect,  39$.
n  bother  among  allien  ib .  I


JUS  POSTLIMINIUM  ((conHnued).

of  no  validity  in  neutral  nations,  393.
what  things  recoverable  by  this  ri^^

394.
light  when  presumed  to  be  relinqnished,

ib.
of  persons  who  cannot  return  to  lig^t  ^

ib.
but  enjoy  it  when  retaken,  ib.
whether  right  extends  to  property  alies-

ated  by  enemy,  395.
distinction  between  movable  and  immor-

able  property,  ib.
whether  a  subdued  nation  can  eijoy  tbii

right,  396.
distinction  herein,  ib.
right  for  what  is  restored  at  the  pesect

397.
for  things  ceded  to  the  enemy,  ih.
does  not  exist  on  conclusion  of  peace,  A.
why  always  in  force  for  prisoners,  ib.
how  rights  of  prisoners  subsist,  398.
will  of  prisoner  at  war,  ib.
marriage  not  dissolved  by  captirilyof  ois

of  the  parties,  ib.
regulations  respecting  right  of,  estaUiiW

by  treaty  or  custom,  ib.

JUSTICE  AND  POLITY,

necessity  for  observance  of,  77, 160.

a  nation  ought  to  make  justice  reign,  77

methods  of  doing  so,  ib.

by  establishing  good  laws,  ib,

by  enforcing  execution  of  them,  77, 78b

duty  of  prince  in  this  respect,  78.

how  he  is  to  dispense  justice,  ib.

should  appoint  enlightened  and  upright
judges,  ib.

ordinary  courts  should  determine  reTouM
causes,  79.

should  establish  supreme  courts,  ih.

of  the  right  of  appeal,  ib.

prince  should  preserve  forms  of  justice,  80l

should  support  authority  of  judges,  ib.

of  dietributive  justice,  ib.

meaning  of  term,  ib.

should  regulate  distribution  of  employ-
ments and  rewards,  ib.

of  the  puniehment  of  tran^grepson,  8L

foundation  of  right  to  punish,  ib.

who  to  punish,  ib.

of  the  criminal  laws,  ib.

necessity  of,  to  prevent  crime,  ib.

of  the  degree  of  punishment,  82.

should  be  limited  to  safety  of  state,  Uk

should  be  proportioned  to  guilt  of  partji
ib.

should  not  be  sanguinary,  ib.

consequences  thereof,  ib,

execution  of  the  lairs,  82,  83.

to  whom  belongs,  82.

dutj  in  this  respect,  82,  83.


INDEX*


686


JITSTICB  AKD  POLITY  (eontinued),
should  not  aggravate  the  aentenoe,  83.
of  pardoning,  ih.
an  attribute  of  the  soyereigo,  ib,
how  to  be  exercised,  ib,
of  the  internal  police,  i&.
in  what  it  consists,  ib,
essential  to  preserre  order,  ib.
regulations  to  enforce,  ib.
Holland  instanced,  ib.
of  duelling  or  single  combat^  84.
custom  of,  oondenmed,  ib.
means  of  putting  a  stop  to  this  disorder,

84-87.
of  the  observance  of  justioe  between  na>

tions,  160.
necessity  for  observance  of,  ib,
obligations of  natiooB to cultivate it»

ib.
right  of  refusing  to  submit  to  injustice,

161.
right  a  perfect  one,  and  produces,  ib.

the  right  of  defence,  ib.

and  right  of  doing  ourselves  justice,
*  ib.

right  to  punish  ii^ustice,  ib,

right  of  nations  against  one  that  openly

despises  justioe,  ib.

KING. See  Sovebeioh,  Soveuion  6tatb.

IjAKE. See  Rivers,  Streams,  and  Lakes.
proprietors  of,  who,  123.
of  the  increase  of  lakes,  ib.
of  the  land  formed  on  banks  of,  125.
to  whom  belonging,  ib.
where  bed  of,  dried  up,  ib.
jurisdiction  over  lakes  and  rivers,  i6.

LAW  OF  NATIONS,
defined,  Iv.

idea  and  general  principles  of  the  law  of
nations,  Iv.,  Iviii.

what  meant  by  a  nation  or  state,  Iv.

it  is  a  moral  person,  ib.

definition  of  the  law  of  nations,  ib.
general  view  of,  and  how  ascertained,  ib.,

n.(l).
present  sources  of  information  thereon,

Iv.
violation  of,  when  a  ground  of  war,  ib.
no  permanent  or  general  court  of,  ib.
teaches  rights  and  obligations  of  nations,

Iv.  in  note,
knowledge  of,  essential,  ib,
how  knowledge  of,  ascertained,  i6.
Christianity  the  unfailing  role  in  oon-

struotion  of,  ib.
in  Great  Britain  held  to  be  part  of  law

of  the  land,  ib.
sources  of  information  respecting,  enume-

rated,  ib.
In  what  light  fuUion  coMicUnd,  Ivi.


LAW  OF  NATIONS  (continued).

In  tphat  latM  it  originally  eonnntec^  .vL DB
originally  the  law  of  nature,  ib.
though  .limited,  Ac,  by  circumstances,  t6b
definition  of  the  necessary  law  of,  Iviii.
application  of,  to  nations,  ib.
internal  law  of  nations,  what,  i6.
ftaturcd  law  of,  what,  ib.
it  is  immutable,  ib.
nations  cannot  make  change  in,  ib.
nor  dispense  with  obligations  arising  firom

it,  ib.
treaty,  Ac,  contravening,  unlawful,  liz.
when  otherwise,  ib.
Society  established by  nature between  oil
mankind,  ib.
as  between  men,  ib.
as  between  nations,  Iz.
object  of  this  society  of  nations,  Izi.
general  obligations  herein,  ib.

1.  to  benefit other nations  without

prejudice  to  itself,  IxiL

2.  the  peaceable  enjoyment  of  liberty

and  independence,  ib.
effect  of  that  liberty,  Ixii.,  367.
nation  may  judge  for  itself,  ib.
of  making  war  for  injuries  to,  Ixiv.
extent  of  that  right,  ib.
Distinetions  betioeen  internal and  extemalp

perfect  and  imperfect  obligations  and

rights,  Ixii
internal  obligation  binds  the  eonscienoey

i6.
external  relates  to  men,  ib.
intemai  obligation  is  of  the  same  nature,

ib.
though  varying  in  degree,  ib.
eeetemal  is  divided  into  perfect  and  imper-
fect, ib.
perfect,  what,  ib.
imperfect,  what,  ib.
EquaUtg  of  nations,  IxiiL
all  naturally  equal,  ib.
and  inherit the same obligations  anl

rights,  ib.
without  regard  to  power  or  weakness,  ib,
effect  of  that  equality,  ib.
each  nation  mistress  of  her  own  actions,

ib,
when  rights  of  others  not  affected  thereby,

ib.
Voluntary  law  of  nations,  ib.  and  note,
what  meant  thereby,  ib.
right  of  nations  against  infractors  of,  Ixir*
right  of  declaring  war,  ib.
measure  of  that  right,  ib.
Conventional  law  of  nations,  IzT.  and  lb

(Ixiv).
what,  and  who  bound  by,  Ixv.
Customary  law  of,  ib.
founded  on.a  tacit  consent,  ib,
how  distinguished^  ib*


\


836


Dn>]sx«


LAW  OF  NATIONS  (eonHnmed).
general  rales  respeeting,  Ixr.
how  far  obligatory,  IztL
when  may  be  reUnqoished^  A.
Positive  law  of,  ib,
IB  of  three  kinds,  ib,
Tolnntary,  ib.
customary,  ib.
oonTdntional,  ib,
from  whence  proceeding,  ib,
deduced  from  the  will  of  nations,  iftb
distinguished  from  natural  or  neeenary
law  of  nations,  ib,
Qtneral  maxim  respecting  um  of  necetearif
and  volHMary  law  of  ncUioiM,  ib,

tBGISLATIVE  POWER,
what,  11.
to  whom  intrusted,  ib.

may  be  to  the  sovereign,  ib,

or  to  an  assembly,  ib.

or  to  both  jointly,  ib.
right  of,  to  change  the  constitution,  ib.
only  extends  to  civil  and  political  laws,

ib.
and  not  to  fiindamental  laws,  ib,

LETTER  OF  MARQUE. See  Rbpbibai..
wha^  285.

LIB,

distinction  between,  and  mere  fiilsehood,

872,  373.
when bound to  speak  the  truth  to  an

enemy,  373. See  Ekext.

BfANIFESTOES,
what»  319.

MARITIME  LAW,

ancient  codes  relating  to,  It.  in  note,
is  imperfect^  ib.

MARRIAGE,

of  aliens,  177,  and  note.

▼alidity  and  constraction  of,  in  England,

166,  note,  177,  note,
ho  IT  proved,  177,  note,
not  dissolved  by  captivity  of  one  of  the
parties,  398.

MEDIATION,
what,  276.
in  time  of  peace,  ib.
in  time  of  war,  437.

MERCENARY  SOLDIERS,
who,  297.

MILITARY  DISCIPLINE,

importance  of,  considered,  290.

MILITARY  LAWS,

necessity  of,  considered,  29Q^

MINISTERS,  PUBLIC,
who  are,  463.

of  the  several  orden  of,  469.
their  origin,  ib,
their  representative  oharaoter,  ib.


MINISTERS,  PUBLIC  {eonHnuedy.

Of  ambaseacUtn,  469. See  AmASSAMK.
are  ordinary  or  extraordinary,  ih,
distinotion  herein,  ib,
privileges  of,  and  rights,  i6.,  and  n.  (414^
Of  envoys,  460.
are  ordinary  or  extraordinary,  ift.
importance  of  the  latter,  ib.
Of  residents,  ib.
of  ministers  simply  so  called,  ib,
representative  eharaoter  of,  ib,
distinction  between  and

ordinary,  460,  461.
of  consuls,  agents,  deputies,

ere,  Ac,  461.
credentials,  what,  ib.
character  of  minister  known  by,  ib.
Instructions  of,  defined,  ib,

what  they  contain,  ib.
Bight  of  sending  ambtissadors,  461,  462.
Of  the  rights,  privileges,  and  imsmtmities  c/,
464.
of  the  respect  due  to  them,  tlw
persons  of,  sacred  and  inviolaUe,  ib,
privilege  of,  from  arrest,  469,  note,
particular  protection  due  to  him,  466l
ii^uries  to,  how  redressed,  ib.
when  protection  to,  commences,  466.
what  due  to  them  in  countries  throng
-which  they  pass,  ib.
Of  ambassadors  going  to  mm  miem^s  mmntrj,
467.
when  may  be  arrested,  ib,
instance  of  arrest,  ib.
of  embassies  between  enemies,  ib,
necessity  for,  ib.
Of  heralds,  trumpeters,  and  drummsn,  463.
are  privileged  messengers,  ib,
persons  of,  to  be  respected,  i6.
even  in  civil  war,  468,  469.
may  be  refused  admittance,  when,  469.
appearance  of  insult  to,  diould  be  avoided,

ib,
by  and  to  whom  they  may  be  sen^  470,
Independence  of  foreign  ministers,  ib.
how  they  ahould  behave,  472.
independence  of,  not  to  be>  oonverted  iate

licentiousness,  ib,
must  conform  to  the  cvstoms  and  bin  of

the  country,  472,  473.
so  flu-  as  consistent  with  hie  mlasioi^  472.
Tampering  tpith  fidelity  of,  473.
Bribery  of,  and  when  excusable,  478,  474

of  making  presents,  Ac,  by,  ib.
How  punishabU,  476,  478.

1.  for  ordinary  transgressions,  476.

2.  for  offences  against  the  prince,  «1l
right  of  ordering  away,  ib,

or  of  repressing  him  by  foroe^  If  be  be-
haves as  an  enemy,  476.

or  where  he  forms  dangeioos  ploti  and
eonspiraeies,  ift.


ZNDBX.


687


MIKISTERSi  PUBLIC  (conUmted),
instanoes  of  dismiSMl,  477.
what  may  be  done  to  him,  aoeording  to

the  exigenoiei  of  the  oaae,  478.
of  ambauador  attempting  the  life  of  the

sovereign,  479.
iofltaneee  respeoting  immunitiei  of  public

ministen,  480,  481.
what  repriBals  may  be  made  on,  481.
why  not  in  genend  permitted,  481,  482.
Agr^ementa  of  naiiont  rttpecting  priviUget

o/,  482.
allowed  the  free  exercise  of  his  religion,

483.
exemption  of,  from  imposts,  48^
to  what  extent^  t6.

this  obligation  founded  on  use  and  cus-
tom, 485.
0/  «0orel  tnin%$ter9,  tb.
rights  and  duties  of,  485,  486.
of  a  sovereign  in  a  foreign  oountry,  486.
eonduct  to  be  pursued  towards,  ib,
bis  rights,  privileges,  and  security,  486,

487.
0/  deptaiet  to  ttatet,  487.
rights  and  immunities  of,  i&.
safety  to  persons  of,  ib,

MmiSTBRS OF BELIOION. Set Rx-

LIOIOH.

MISSIONARIES,

of  their  employment  in  religions  matters,

158.
of  refusal  of  admittance  to  them,  id.

MONARCHY. See  GoTEKincxKT.
defined,  2.

a  government  confided  to  one  person,  2.
form  of,  considered,  2,  in  note.
MONEY  AND  EXCHANGE,

0/  the  eetabliehment  of  money,  45.
utility  and  convenience  of,  ib,
oommeroe  facilitated  by,  ib.
duty  of  nation  with  respect  to  coin,  ib.
imjo'ession  on  the  seal  of  its  standard

value,  ib.
should  be  coined  in  sovereign's  name,  i6.
amount  of  coinage,  ib.
of  increasing  value  of,  when  inexpedient^

ib.
rights  in  respect  of,  46.
state  alone  has  the  right  of  coining,  ih,
of  counterfeiting  coin,  i6.
an  o£fence  against  the  sovereign,  t5.
though  made  of  standard  value,  ib.
coining  a  prerogative  of  mi^esty,  ib.
how  one  nation  may  ii^ure  another  in  the

article  of  coin,  47.
as  by  counterfeiting,  ib.
or  protecting,  Ac.  those  who  do,  t(.
all  princes  equally  interested  in  extermin-
ating them,  ib.t  and  note.
Of  exehange  a\d  the  latM  of  oomm«ree,  47.


MONEY  AND  EXCHANGE  (etwIuiiietO*
a eustom of  merehants for remitting

money,  47.
should  be  supported  by  good  laws,  i£i.
duty  of  nations  herein,  ib*

MONOPOLY. Set  Oohmkbcx.

duty  of  sovereign  to  hinder,  1x6.

MUNICIPAL  COURT. Set  Jubudiotioh.
jurisdiction  of,  Iv.  in  note,
cannot  enforce  treaty,  ib.
when  otherwise,  i(.

NATION. See  State.

law  of. See  Law  or  Nations.

meaning  of  term  nation,  Iv.,  1.

is  a  moral  person,  ib.

susceptible  of  obligations  and  rights,  It.,

4.
of  the  state  and  sovereignty  of,  1.
of  the  several  kinds  of  government  of,  2.
General  principle  of  the  dutitt  of  a  natiom
toward*  iteelf,  4.
should  act  agreeably  to  its  nature,  ib.
should  preserve  and  perfect  itself,  ib,
in  what  consists  its  preservation,  ib,
what  its  perfection,  ib.
what  is  the  end  of  civil  society,  5.
of  the  nation's  obligation  to  preserva

itself,  i6.  •

also  to  preserve  its  members,  ib.
has  a  right  to  everything  neoessaxy  for

its  preservatioui  6.
or  which  may  promote  that  end,  ib.
diould  avoid  every  thing  that  might

occasion  its  destruction,  6,  7.
should  be  perfect  in  itself  and  state,  6.
should avoid every thing contrary

thereto,  7.
of  the  right  derived  from  these  obli»

gations,  ib,
examples,  ib.

a  nation  ought  to  know  itself,  8.
Common  dutiea  of  towarde  othere,  133.
foundation  of  those  duties,  133,  134.
offices  of  humanity,  134,  135.
difference  of  religion  should  not  pre-
clude  the performance of  them,
139.
instances,  139,  140,  and  notes,
general  principle  of  the  mutual  duiieg

of  nations,  135.
duties  of  a  nation  for  the  preservatioii

of  others,  ib
should assist  a  nation affected  with
famine or other calamity, 136^
and  note,
installs,  136*
should  contribute  to  the  perfection  of

others,  136,  137.
of  the  right  to  require  the  oiBcet  of

humanity,  138.
of  the  right  to  refuse  them,  ib*
3D


688


nmix.


NATION  (eontifwed).

performance  of,  oannot  be  enforced,  138.

mutual  love  of  nations,  ih,

each  nation  ehonld  cultivate  the  friend-
ship of  others,  138, 139.

and  perfect  itself  for  the  advantage  of
others,  139.

to  take  care  of  their  glory,  ih,

rule  and  measure  of  the  offices  of  hu-
manity, 140.

partioular  limitation  with  regard  to  the
prince,  141.

no  nation  ought  to  injure  others,  141,
142.

meaning  of  the  word  injure,  141,  note.

how  far  one  nation  may  injure  the  com-
merce of  another,  142,  note.

case  of  revolted  colony,  ib,

should  avoid  giving  offence  to  others,
142,  143.

of  the  publication  of  libels,  143,  note..
0/  the  protection  eought  hy  a  nation,  93.

of  simple  protection,  93,  94.

how  obtained,  and  terms,  f(.

reservation  of  right  of  government^  %b.

voluntary  submission  of  one  nation  to
another,  94.

when  may  lawfully  do  so,  f6.

on  what  terms,  ih»

of  the  different  kinds  of  submission,  i(.

may  leave  inferior  nation  a  part  of  the
sovereignty,  ib.

may  totally  abolish  it,  ih,

may  incorporate  the  two  in  one,  ih,

right  of  citizens  when  nation  submits  to  a
foreign  power,  ih,

when  not  bound  to  submit^  ih,

may  sell  effects  and  retire  elsewl^ere,  04,
106.

these  compacts  how  annulled,  95.

by  failure  of  protection,  95,  96,  and
note.

through  want  of  good  faith,  95.

by  infidelity  of  party  protected,  ib,

by  encroachments  of,  protected,  ib,

by  silence  of  party  protected,  95,  96.

' Of  the  eeparation  of  a  nation  from  a  tttzie  of

tihich  it  it  a  member,  96,  97.

difference  between  incorporated  nations
and  those  merely  in  a  state  of  sub-
jection, ib,

ikOure  of  protection  alone  no  ground  of
separation,  ib,

their  duty  when  in  danger;^  97.

to  use  endeavours  to  maintain  themselves
in  their  present  state,  i&.

if  overcome  by  force,  may  treat  with  the
conqueror,  ib.

their  right  when  abandoned,  97,  98.

may  provide  for  their  own  safety,  97.

instances,  97,  98.
ly  the  eetabliehment  of,  in  a  eonntry,  08,


NATION  (continued),

possession  of,  and  how  acquired,  M.
exclusive  right  thereto,  ib.
comprehends  two  things,  ib.
right  of  domain  and  empire,  ih,
acquisition  of,  in  a  vacant  country,  99.
empire  over,  acquired  with  domain,  «k
another  mode  of  acquiring  it^  ib,
of  appropriation  of  a  desert  country  by  i

nation,  t6.
must  take  entire  possession,  ib,
where  possession in a few  waadering

tribes,  99,  100,  101.
by  treaties,  153.
our  duty  to  conform  to  general  outoiu,

153,  and  note,
of  mutual  respect  sovereigns  owe  esdi

other,  153.

how sovereign ought to maJntain hit

dignity,  154.
Of  the  right  of  nation  to  eeeurity,  tJ.
nature  of  this  right,  ib.
gives  the  right  of  resistance,  154, 16L
and  of  obtaining  reparation,  155, 16L
gives  the  right  of  punishing,  ib.
right  of,  against  a  mischievons  people,  ti.
oannot  interfere in  the  government  of

another  state,  155,  and  note,
one  sovereign  cannot  make  himself  jodfi

of  conduct  of  another,  155.
how  far  may  interfere  in  a  quarrel  be-
tween a sovereign and  his  people,

157.
right  of  opposing  such  inteifeience,  U7,

158.
.  no  nation  to  be  restrained  as  to  religioo,

158.
offices of  humanity  in these  mattery

ib.
Of  mienonariee,  ib
may order them to leave dontioioDe,

ib,
their  duty  to  obey,  ib,
of  the  circumspection  to  be  used  hereia,

159.
what  sovereign  may  do  in  farov  of

those  who  profess  his  religion  in

another  state,  159,  160.
Of  eoloniet,  101.
when  they  become  a  part  of  the  motber

country,  ib.
Of  the  thing*  relating  tp  that  evtahlighmfntjA

jSce  Country.
Of  the  mutual  commerce  beHoeen  naticntf  14J<

See  COMVF.RCE.

Of  the  dignity  and  equality  of  nationif  1^
dignity  of  nations  or  sovereigns,  ib.
their obligation to maintain it, Ui

154.
their  equality,  149.
their  precedence,  ib,
'  none  can  claim  it  as  a  rights  tk


INDEX,


689


KATION  (eonttnued),

how  far  power  and  antiquitj  of  state  give

it  precedence,  149.
form  of  goremment  immaterial,  160.
state  to  keep  its rank,  though  goyem-

ment  changed,  ib.
keaties  and  established  cnstoms  to  be

observed,  ib.
instances  herein,  160, 161.
of  the  name  and  honoors  given  by  the

i^ation  to  its  conductor,  161.
rule  of  conduct  in  this  respect^  ib,
right  of  sovereign  to  assume  honours  and

titles,  152.
right  of  other  nations  in  this  respect,

152.
their  duty,  ib,
how  titles  and  honours  may  be  secured,

163.
0/  the  ob9ervanee  of  juttiee  betutetn  naUona,

160. See  JnsTiCB  Aim  Polity.
necessity  for  observance  of,  160..  m

obligation  of  nations  to  cultivate  it,  ibl
right  of  refusing  to  submit  to  injustice,

161.
this  right  a  perfect  one,  ti.,  and  pro-
duces,
the  right  of  defence,  ib,
the right  of  doing  onrselvei  Justioe,

ih.
and  right  to  punish  iijustice,  i6.
right  of  nations  against  one  that  openly

despises  justice,  ih,
Of  terminating diepuUe behoeen  notum*,

274.
general  observations  herein,  ih.
VYerj  nation  bound  to  give  satisfaction,

275.
how  nations  may  abandon  their  rights

and  complaints,  ib.
duty  of  sovereign to  insist  on  compen-
sation for  wrongs  to  his  subjects,

276.
means  suggested  by  the  law  of  nature

for  terminating  their  disputes,  ib,

1.  by  amicable  accommodation,  ib.

2.  by  compromise,  ib.

3.  by  mediation,  ib.

4.  by  arbitration,  277,  278.

these several modes described, 276,

278.
of  conferences  and  congresses,  278.
distinctions  to  be  made  between  evident

and  doubtful  cases,  278.
between  e—enHal  rights  and  inferior  ones,

279.
of  resorting  to  force  in  doubtftU  cases,

280.
when  conciliatory  measuree  may  be  dia-

pensed  with,  «^.
•fleet  of  vciuntary  law  of  nations,  280,

281.


KATIOK  (e^fo'ntMMf).

equitable  conditions  to  be  offered,  281,
282.

rights  of  party  in  possession  in  doubtftil
cases,  ib.

how  reparation  of  injury  to  be  sought^
ib.

of  retaliation,  282,  283.

when,  and  how  far  justifiable,  ib.

of  the  various  modes  of  punishment  with-
out resortlDg  to  arms,  283.

of  retortton,  what,  ib.

of  reprieale,  what,  283, 284. See  Rb-

PRIBAL.
Of  the  glory  of  a  nation,  91. See  Globt.
Of  the  concern  a  nation  may  luive  in  the

actione of  her eittMcne,  161. See

CiTlZEir.
Of  the  effecte  of  domain  between  natione,  164^

See  GovNTBT.
Of  the  righte  common  to  all  natione,  1T8«

See  Obligations  Ain>  Riohts.
Of  war  between  ncUione,  290. See  Wab.
Of  peace  between  nationSf  and  obligation  la

cultivate  it,  428. See  Peacb.

NATIVES. See  Couhtbt.
who  are^  101.
those  bom  of  parents  whe  are  citisenf,

ib.
succeed  to  rights  of  parents,  101,  San.
bom  of  foreigners,  101.
become  citiicBS  by  tacit  consent^  ibm

NATURALIZATION,
what,  102,  and  n.
by  whom  granted,  102.
of  imperfect  naturalization,  ib.
of  naturalization  by  birth,  ib,
instances,  ib.  in  note.

NATURAL  LAW,
what,  Iviii.  in  note,
defined  t&  be  the  science  of  the  law  of

nature,  Ixvii.  in  note.  ^
of  God  and  our  conscience,  ib,
the  basis of  the  law  of  nations,  Iv.  !b

note,
nations  subject  to,  and  bound  by,  IvL

NECESSARY  LAW,
what,  Iviii.

application  of,  to  nations,  ib.
why  so  called,  ib,
is  immutable,  ib,
nations  cannot  vary,  il

or  dispense  with  its  obligations,  ih,
maxim  concerning  use  of,  Ixvi.

NEUTRALITY,
what,  332.

of  neutral  nations,  ib,
conduct  to  be  observed  by,  ib,
impartiality  of,  ib.


640


JSDE3L


KEUTRALITT  (eonftntMcO.

in  -whftt  it  coDButa,  832.

relates  solely  to  war,  %b.

what  a  breach  of  neatralitj,  332,  833.

an  ally  maj  ftimish  saoooor  due  from
him,  333.

and  yet  remain  neuter,  i6.

of  the  right  of  remaining  neuter,  ib.

all  nations  may  remain  so,  ib,

uless  otherwise  bound  by  treaties,  ib.

when  they  should  Join  in  the  oontesty  ib,

treaties  of  neutrality,  ib.

when  lawful  to  enter  into,  ib*

when  from  necessity,  ib,

when  with  both  parties,  833,  334.

foundation  of  rules  of  neutrality,  834.

how  levies  may  be  allowed,  Ac.,  without
breach  of,  ib,

of-  breach  of,  generally,  834,  885.

trade  of  neutral  nations  with  those  at  war,
835,  and  note.

of  seizing  the  property  thereof,  336.

passage  of  troops  through  neutral  coun-
try, 340.

of  the  right  thereof,  ib,

when  may  be  refrised,  840,  343,  845.

permission  must  be  applied  for,  340.

may  be  refused  for  good  reasons,  341.

as  where  war  ui^u8t>  345.

in  what  case  may  be  forced,  841.

fear  of  danger  authorises  a  reftisal,  342,
343.

or  a  demand  of  eveiy  reasonable  seenrity,
842.

whether  necessary  to  gire  security  re-
quired, t6.

equality  to  be  observed  towards  both  par-
ties as  to  the  passagv 343.

no  complaint  lies  against  neutral  state  for
granting  passage,  ib,

state  may  refuse  from  fear  of  resentment
of  opposite  party,  ib.

or  lest  her  country  should  become  the
theatre  of  war,  ib,

what  included  in  grant  of  pusage,  844.

to  indnde  all  connected  with  passage  of
troops,  ib.

saf«ty  of  passage,  ib,

hostilities  not  to  be  committed  in  neutrals'
country,  ib.

seay  when  considered  part  of  territory,
344,  in  note.

of  contraband  goods,  337.

what  deemed  such,  ib.

distinctions  as  to,  t5.

when  may  be  confiscated,  ib,

of  tearehinff  neutral  ships,  338,  339,  and
note.

foundation  of  right  to  do  so,  839.

neutral  ship  refusing  to  be  searched,  and
consequences,  ib,

may  be  oondemned  as  a  priio,  ib.


NEUTRALITY  (conHnutdy.

manner  of  search  generally  aettled  la

treaties,  339.
credit  usually  given  to  eertifleate%  wai

bill  of  lading,  ib,
unless  fraud  apparent,  839,  and  notes,
of  enemy's  property  on board nentnl

ship,  339.
liability  thereof  to  seimre,  839,  and  note,
of  neutral's  proper^  on  board  eaeraVs

ship,  339.
restoration  thereof  to  neutral,  ib,
latter  to  bear  any  loss  resulting  fica

capture,  ib.
of  trading  with  a  besieged  town,  33v,

and  note,
commerce with,  absolutely prohibited,

889.
of  blockade,  and  violation  thereof  339^

and  note. See  Blockadb.
of  impartial  offices  of  neutrals,  849.
duty  of,  towards  belligerents,  ib,
may  render  impartial  assistance,  ib,
other  assistance  by  treaty,  Ac,  t6w
enemy  pursuing  ship  into  nenind  port

must  refrain  from  hostilities  then,

344,  note,
nor  can  ship  be  condemned  in,  84^  note.
neutral  country  not  to  aiford  a  retreat  t^

troops,  345.
oonduot  of  Ifcroops  passing  throogh  neo-

tral  country,  ib.
stipulations for  indenmifioalion sgsiiul

loss,  ib,

OATH. See  Trbatiss.

of  the  use  of,  in  treaties,  232.

does  not  constitute  the  obligation,  ib,

or  change  the  nature  thereof,  ib,

or  give  pre-eminence  of  one  treaty  shove

another,  233.
does  not  give  force  to  an  invalid  trea^,

ib.
of  aeaeveratione,  ib,

OBLIGATIONS  AND  RIGHTS.
JDietineiione  reepeeting,  IziL
are  internal  and  external,  ib,
or  perfect  and  imperfect,  ib,
IfUenuU  obUgatioHf  what,  ib.
binding  on  the  conscience,  t&.
always  of  the  same  nature,  ib.
External,  what,  ib.
relates  to  men.  Sac,  ib.
is  either  perfect  or  imperfect  ib,
perfect  where  performance  may  be  eon-

pelled,  ib.
Imperfect  when  only  a  right  to  ath,  ib.
0/  riffhte  retait%ed  by  all  nation$,  I7&
of  what  rights  men  cannot  be  deprived,

ib.
right  still  remaining  from  primitive  sIMi
of  communion,  ib.


ZNBBZ.


641


intarodnetion  and  taeii  reftrietioii  fhere-

on,  178.
light  retained  by  each  nation  oyer  the

property  of  others,  %b,
right  of  necessity,  «6.
right  of  procuring  proviiionB  by  force,

179.
when  this  right  may  be  resorted  to,  %h,
right  of  making  use  of  things  belong-
ing to  others,  ib.
compensation  for  the  same,  ib,
. of  pressing  vessels  in  eases  of  neces-
sity, {&•
compensation  to  be  made  for  services,

ih,
right  of  carrying  off  women,  «&.
instance  of  'the  rape  of  Sabine  women,

ih.
right  of  passage,  180.
none  can  be  depriTcd  of,  A.
though  right  limited,  ift.
right  of,  from  neoesrity,  ikm
when  may  be  enforced,  ib,
when  to  escape  from  danger,  ih*
of  right  of  yessel  to  force  entxy  in  a

foreign  port,  ti.
right  of  procuring  neoesiBaries,  ib,
right  of  dwelling  in  a  foreign  ooontxy,

ib.
right  herein  defined,  180, 18L
right of  use of  things iaezhaiisUble,

181.
instances  of  rights,  ib.
right  of  innocent  use,  and  what  meant

thereby,  181,  182.
nature  of  this  right  in  general,  182.
who  to  decide  thereon,  ib,
where  right  doubtful,  ib,
in  cases  not  doubtful,  ib.
exercise  of  this  right  between  nations,

182, 183.
Of  the  right  of  domain,  183.
exercise  of  that  right  by  nations,  ib,
general  duty  of  the  proprietor,  ib.
bound  to  grant  a  lawful  passage,  ib,
bat  sureties  may  be  required,  184.
passage  of  merchandise,  ib,
right  of  residence,  184, 171.
should  in.  general  be  granted,  18^
unless  required  for  unlawM  purposes,

ib,
what, no ground for expulsion^ 184,

185.
how  to  act  towards  foreigners  desiring  a

perpetual  residence,  186.
oi  the  right  accruing  from  a  general

permission,  ib,
of  right  granted  as  a  farour,  186.
the  nation  ought  to  be  courteous,  ibm

PAOnON. iSm 'rsBATT,  OovmnoH.

81


PAEDON,

right  of,  in  whom,  83.
an  attribute  of  sovereignty,  ib,
of  the  exercise  thereof,  ibm
should  be  without  iigury  to  any  one,  ift.
or  where  welfare  of  state  requires  aa

exception,  ib,
exercise of,  should  be  for  advantage
of  society,  ib,

PASSPORT,
what,  410.

distinction  as  to,  and  safe  conduct,  ib,
by  whom  granted,  450,  in  note,  105.

PATRIMONIAL  STATE,
what^  30.

doctrine  of,  refuted,  25,  30,  435.
true  sovereignty  inalienable,  25,  31,  32^

and  notes,
duty  of  sovereign  empowered  to  appoint

successor,  32,  435.
must  have  at  least  a  tacit  ratifleationt

32,  33.

PBACE,

what  peace  is,  429,  430.
obligation  to  cultivate  it^  430.
sovereign's  obligation  herein,  ib,
extent  of  this  duty,  ib,
of  the  disturbers  of,  431.
how  far  war  may  be  continued,  431,  803.
peace  the  end  of  war,  432.
general  effects  of  peace,  ib.
TreaHM  of,  432  to  440.
defined,  432.
by  whom  concluded,  ib.
sovereign's  authority  herein,  432,  433.
when  limited,  433.

of  alienations  made  by  a  treaty  of  peace,  ift.
to  what  extent  mliy  be  made,  433,  434.
when sovereign may  dispose  of  what

eoncems  individuals,  435.
state  bound  to  indemnify  sufferers,  ib.
whether  sovereign,  prisoner  of  war,  can

conclude  treaty  of  peace,  ib,
when  he  may  negotiate  it,  Ac,  ib,
who  then  to  conclude  it,  ib.
dnty  of  state  to  procure  release  of  sove*

reign,  436.
when  may  be  made  with  an  usurper,  ib.
allies  included  in,  ib,
when  not  binding  on  allies,  436,  437.
associates,  to  treat  each  by  himself,  437.
of  mediation,  ib.
on  What  footing  peace  may  be  conoludedf

ib.
general  effect  thereof  438.
engage  .to  preserve  perpetual  peace,  ib.
of  special  compromises,  ib,
amnesty,  what,  439.
a  perpetual  oblivion  of  the  past^  ih,
aseessnrily  implied  in  evei^  treaty  cf

peaoe^'ift.

8dS


642


Dn>EZ«


PS\CB  (continued).

of  things  not  mentioDed  in  the  treaty,
439.

«f  things  not  ineluded  therein,  ih.

6fie8  not  extend  to  things  having  no  re-
lation to  the  war,  ib,

• as  debts  contracted  with  indiyidaal^  ifr.
or  to  moTables,  Ac,  ib.

former  treaties,  mentioned  and  confirmed
in  the  new,  are  part  of  it»  440.
0/  the  execution  of  those  treaties,  440  to  443.

<rhen  the  obligation  of  the  treaty  com-
mences, 440.

publication  of  peace,  %h,

should  be  without  delay,  ib.

when  may  be  postponed,  440,  441.

time  of  the  execution  thereof,  441.

lawful  excuse  for  delay,  ib.

promise  void  when  party  hai  hindered
the  performance  of  it»  ib.

cessation  of  contributions,  442.

products  of  the  things  ceded  or  restored,
id.

in  what  condition  to  be  restored,  ib,

import  of  word  restitutionf  ib.

Instances,  442,  443.
Interpretation  of  treaty  of  peace,  443.

1.  who^e doubtful,  against the pre-

scriber  thereof,  ib.

2.  names  of  ceded  countries,  i'(.

how  to  be  understood,  ib.
8.  restoration  not  to  bo  understood  of
those  who  have  rolnntarily  given
themselves  up,  444.
Of  the  observance  and  breach  thereof,  ib,
binds  the  nation  and  successors,  ib.
to  be  faithfully  observed,  ib.
plea  of  fear  or  force  does  not  dispense

with  its  observance,  ib,
breach  of  what,  446.
ways  in  which  it  may  be  broken,  ib.
may  be  violated  in  three  ways,  446  to  450.

1.  by  conduct  contrary  to  the  nature

thereof,  446.
to  take  up  arms  for  a  fresh  cause,

no  breach,  ib.
nor  is  a  fubsequent  alliance  with  an

enemy  a  >>reach,  447.
distinction  to  be  made  between  a  new

war  and  a  breach  of  treaty,  i6.
Justifiable defence no breach of

treaty,  448.
causes of  rupture on account  of

allies,  449.

2.  by conduct  contrary  to its par^

ticnlar  nature,  ib.
instances  herein,  ib.
8.  by  violation  of  any  arUde,  ib.
violation  of  a  single  article  breaks
the  whole  treaty,  460.
no  distinction between more  and  less
important  articles,  449.


PEACE  (continued),

of  penalty  annexed  to  the  violation  of  ii

article,  450.
■tudied  delays,  their  effect,  ib.
of  insurmountable  difficulties,  i&.
when  time  must  be  allowed,  450, 45L
or  indemnity  given,  451.
preferable  to  recourse  to  arms,  ib.
instruction  of  treaty  by  subjects,  ik.
distinction,  if  not  imputable  to  sorerogi,

ib.
the  treaty  not  broken  by,  ib,
of  infraction  by  allies,  ib.
right  of  offended  party  against  riolaur

of  treaty,  452.
optional  to  declare  treaty  nuQ,  or  iBav

it  to  subsist,  ib,

PIETY. See  BEUGiOJfr.
meaning  of,  65.

its  influence  on  happiness  of  nt^en,  ik
nation  ought  therefore  to  be  pious,  %h.
should  be  attended  with  knowled^,  0.
consequences  of  want  of,  55,  56.

POISON,

use  of,  in  warfare  condemned  as  odiou,

360.
not  to  be  adopted  by  way  of  reprisal,  tl
of  poisoning  prisoners,  358,  360,  361.
use  of  poisoned  weapons  condemned,  Sdl
so,  of  poisoning  springs,  ib.

POLICE. See  Jubticb  ijn>  Poutt.

POLITICAL  EQUILIBKIUM. iS^WiB.
what,  312.

POPE. See  PoPEBT.

POPERY,

Abuses  of,  particularized,  66.
L  power  of  the  popes,  ib,
extent  thereof,  66,  67.
whence  it  arises,  67.
effect  of,  in  a  foreign  court,  %b.
instances,  65  to  67.
2.  important employments eonfene^
by  a  foreign  power,  68.
disposal  of  ecclesiastical  diguitiei,  ti
practice  hereof  a  violation  of  xajaia't

right,  ib.
nations submitting  to,  oondemiied,
ib.
8.  powerful  subjects  dependirg  qb  »
foreign  court,  68,  69.
abuse  in  this  respect,  69.
4.  the  celibacy  of  the  priests,  ia.
for  what  cause  invented,  ib,
practice  of,  condemned,  69,  70.
of  conventa,  ib.
marriage  advocated,  70.
6.  enormous  pretensions  of  the  dergj,
ib.
their  pre-eminency,  ib.
Its  prejudice  on  good  order,  ib.


INDEX.


648


POPERY  (eoniimitd).

6.  independence  'of|  71.
imraunitiefl,  ib*

their  attempt  to  escape  from  political

authority,  t6.
daim  their  immunities  from  God,  ib.

7.  immunities  of  church  possessions,

72,  73.

same  immunity  claimed  for  pos-
sessions of  the  church,  72.

when  state  may  exempt  them,  ib,

■hould  be  first  taken  for  the  use  and
safety  of  the  state,  73.

limit  of  exemption,  72.

8.  excommunication  of  men  in  office,

73.

9.  and  of  sovereign  themselves,  74.
instances  of  abuse,  ib.

but  abuses  not  confined  to  popes,

ib.
instance,  74,  75,  in  note*
10.  the  clergy  drawing  every  thing  to
themselves,  and  disturbing  the
order  of  justice,  75,  76.
11*  money  drawn  to  Rome,  76.

their  rapacity  herein, ruinous  to
the  court  of  Rome,  ib,
12.  laws  and  customs  contrary  to  the
welfare  of  states,  t6.
consequence  of  trusting  same  to  the

clergy,  ib,
its  pernicious  effect  on  the  state,  ib,

POPULAR GOVERNMENT. See  Go-

TSBNMSNT.

what,  2.

empire  kept  by  state  in  its  own  hands,  2.

also  called  a  democracy,  ib,

PORTS. See  Sea.

to  whom  belonging,  129.
enemy  pursuing  ship  into  neutral  port
must  refrain  from  hostilities  there,
344,  n.

POSITIVE  LAW,

what,  Ixiv.,  Ixvi.,  Ixvii.,  and  notes,
proceeds  from  the  will  of  nations,  66.
IS  of  three  kinds,  Ixvi.

1.  voluntary,  what,  ib.

2.  customary,  what,  ib,

3.  conventional,  what,  ib,

the  two  latter  called  the  arbitrary  law  of
nations,  IxvL

POSTLIMINIUM. See  Jus  Postliminium.

PREROGATIVES  OF  THE  CROWN,
what,  15.

with  respect  to  coin,  46. See  Coin.
in  matters  of  religion,  62. See  Religion.
with  regard  to  public  property,  112. See

PUOPEETT.

as to pardoning offenders, 83. 8m
Pabdoh


PRESCRIPTION,

of  usucaption  and  prescription,  187,  and

note,
definition  of,  187,  &,c
is  derived  from  the  law  of  nature,  187.
what  foundation  required  for  ordinaiy

prescription,  189.
of  immemorial  prescription,  ib,
claimant  alleging  reasons  for  his  silence,

190.
proprietor  showing  he  does  not  intend  to

abandon  his, right,  ib,
prescription  founded  on  the  actions  of

the  proprietor,  ib,
usucaption  and  prescription  take  place

between  natiorfli,  ib.
more  difficult  between  nations  to  found

them  on  a  presumptive  desertion,

190,  191.
other  principles  that  enforce  prescription,

191.
effects  of  voluntary  law  of  nations  on

this  subject,  191,  192.
law  of  treaties  or  custom^  herein,  192.
natiohs  should  adopt  rules  on  this  sub-
ject, ib,
exclusive  right  to,  not  acquired  by  pr^

scription,  127.
right  may  be  acquired  by  treaty,  126.

PRETEXTS,
"  what,  304,  306. &e  Was.

PRISONERS  OF  WAR. &e  Was.
right  of  making,  353.
are  not  to  be  put  to  death,  348,  354.
how  to  be  treated,  354.
may  be  confined  and  fettered,  ib,

but  not  to  be  treated  harshly,  ib.

unless  guilty  of  crime,  ib.
are  seldom  ill-treated  by  European  nik

tions,  ib.
of  releasing  them  on  parole,  355.
whether  prisoners  who  cannot  be  fed,
&&,  may  be  put  to  death,  ib.

should  be  dismissed  on  parole,  ib,
whether  may  be  made  slaves,  356.

in  what  cases  lawful,  ib.
exchange  and  ransom  of,  357.
object  of  detention  of,  ib.
time  of  exchange  or  ransom,  ib,

when  proper^  ib.
state  bound  to  procure  release  of,  ib,

its  duty  to  provide  for  support,  ib,
formerly  obliged  to  redeem  themselves,  ib»
of  assassination  and  poisoning  of^  358,

360,  361.
practice  of,  condemned,  ib.
of  the  jus  postliminium  with  respect  to,

398.
in  force  for  prisoners,  397.
how  rights  of,  subsist,  398.
may  dispose  of  and  will  property,  t^


1


AAA


INDXX.


PRIZE  COURT,

how  constituted,  364,  892,  in  notes,
questions  of  capture  or  prize  determined

in,  364,  392,  in  notes.
ni>es  respecting,  166,  note.

1.  must  belong  to  belligerent  country,

t6.,  344,  note.

2.  must  have  actually  sat  in  country

to  which  it  belonged,  t6.

3.  properly condemned  must  be,  at

time  of  condemnation,  in  country
where  sentence  pronounced,  t6.

PRIVATEER. &eWAE.

PROPERTY,

Differefd  kinds  oft  109.

is  public,  common,  or  prirate,  tft.
Of  public  proptrty,  109,  113.

what,  109.

called  by  Romans  ret  communOf  ib.

of  what  it  consists,  ib,

how  acquired,  110.

of  the  revenues  of  the  public  pro-
perty, ib.

naturally  at  the  sovereign's  disposal,
ib.

nation  may  grant  him  the  use  and
property  of  its  common  posses-
sions, ib.

may  allow  him  the  domain,  ib.

and  reserve  to  itself  the  use  of  them,
ib.

of  taxes.  111. Set  Taxes.

nation  may  reserve  to  itself  the  right
of  imposing,  ib.

of  the  sovereign  who  has  this  power,  ib.

his  duties  with  respect  to,  112.

of  eminent  domain  annexed  to  sove-
reignty, ib.

his  right  thereto,  ib..

may  dispose  thereof,  ib,

government  of  private  property,  113.
Of  common  property,  113,  115.

what,  109,  110.

sovereign  may  make  laws  respecting,
113.

but  not  abuse  such  power,  ib.

of  aUenation  of  property  of  a  corpo-
ration, ib.

corporation  has  a  right  to  do  so,  ib.

how  that  right  should  be  exercised,  ib.

whose  consent  requisite  therein,  ib.

of  the  several  kinds  of  corporate  pro-
perty, 114.

use  of  common  property,  ib.

how  each  member  is  to  enjoy  it,  t6.

must  not  injure  the  common  use,  ib.

right  of  anticipation  in  the  use  of  it,  ib.

instances  of  the  exercise  of  this  right,
ib.

in  drawing  water  from  a  well,  ib,

or  felling  tree  in  a  forest,  114^


PROPERTY  (cofitiHuedS

preservation  and  leptdrs  of  cooByi

possessions,  115.
expenses  hereof  and  how  raised,  iL
duty  and  right  of  sovereign  hefei&,i6
Of  prvmU  property,  115,  J 16.
lights  of  proprietors  o^  116.
when  sovereign  may  interfere  there-
with, ib.
may  subject  it  to  regulations  of  police,

ib.
may  compel  sale  oC,  in  caseeofnecei-

sity,  115,  116.
power  over,  in  other  instances,  ib.
should  hinder  monopolies,  116.
of  inheritances  thereto,  ib.
right  of  persons  to  bequeath  it,  d.
when  limited,  ib.
Of  the  alienation  ofpubUc  pnperty,  ib,
right  of  nation  herein,  ib.
duties  of  nation  in  this  respect,  t&.
in  cases  of  necessity,  ib.
duties  of  the  prince  as  to,  117.
cannot  alienate  it,  ib.
though  nation  may  give  him  t  li^

to  it,  ib.
but  right  not  to  be  presumed,  ib,
rules  respecting  alienation  between

nations,  ib.
of  treaties  thereon,  ib.
of  alienation  of  a  part  of  the  state,  116.
should  only  be  in  cases  of  extrone

necessity,  ib.
rights  of  dismembered  party,  1 18, 1 19.
not  obliged  to  receive  new  master,  119>
whether  prince  has  power  to  dinnen*

bar  the  state,  ib.

PROTECTION. See  Natioit.

of  protection  sought  by  a  nation,  93.
simple  treaty  of,  what,  93,  94.
how  annulled,  95.

PUBLIC  GRANARIES,

propriety  of  establishing,  36.

PUBLIC  WAYS,

utility  of  highways,  canak,  Ac,  43,  tad

note,
duty  of  government  in  respect  of,  43.
should  render  them  safe  and  commo-
dious, t^
its  rights  in  this  respect,  ib.
nation  should  contribute  to  expeneee  U,
lb.
may  compel  people  to  lalxtur  at,  44
or  contribute  to  the  expense,  44,  icd
see  note,
foundation  of  the  rights  of  toll,  Uh
abuses  of,  ib.,  and  notes,
how  far  tolerated  bj  arbitrary  Isw  ti

nations,  ib.
now  generally  settled  by  treaties,  ib>


6«5


PUNISHMENT. See  JvBTlOtL
Of  tratugreteorn,  81.
foundation  of  right  of  pttniBhing,  %b.
founded  on  right  of  personal  aafety,  ib.
to  whom  it  belongs,  16.
of  the  laws,  and  their  execation,  ib,
of  the  criminal  laws,  ib.
necessity  of  these  laws,  16.
tlieir  choice,  and  establishment,  81, 82.
Of  the  degree  of  punishment^  82.
not  to  be  beyond  what  safe^  of  state

requires,  ib.
what  to  be considered  in  proportion-
ing of  it,  ib,
as  nature  of  crime  itself,  ib,
opportunities  of  committing  it,  ib,
degree  of  injury  done  to  the  public,  ib,
consequences  of  unnecessary  severity,  ib.
importance  of  enforcing  the  laws^  ib»

BANSOM,

of  prisoners,  357.

right  to  detain  till  ransomed,  ib.

tune  of  ransom,  ib.

generally  settled  by  treaty,  ib.

right  of  soTereign  to  enforce  payment  of
ransom,  414.

conventions  relating  to  the  ransom,  419.

right  to  demand,  may  be  transferred,  ib,

should  not  be  in  an  unlimited  manner,  ib.

what  may  annul  the  convention  made
for  the  rate  of  the  ransom,  ib.

ransom  proportionate  to  rank  of  officer,
ib,

concealment  of  rank,  compact  may  he
.  annulled,  ib,

prisoner  dying  before  payment  of  ran-
som, ib.

ransom  when,  or  not  due,  419,  420.

instances,  t6.

prisoner  released  on  condition  of  pro-
curing the  release  of  another,  420.

when  bound  ^  return,  ib,

where  prisoner  is  retaken  before  pay-
ment of  ransom,  ib.

his  liability  to  pay  second  ransom,  ib,

otherwise,  if  rescued  before  he  has  ob-
tained his  liberty,  421.

of  ships,  dec.,  414,  notes.

prohibited  by  English  laws,  414,  note.

^NSOM  BILLS,

doctrine  of,  recognised  as  a  part  of  the
law  of  nations,  414,  note.

REBEL. See  Civil  Law.
who  are  rebels,  422,  424.
sovereign's  right  against,  422.
obligatory  on  him  to  perform  promises
to,  423.

RK6EN1 ,

when  to  be  appi  inted,  28.
bis  authority,  27


RELIGION. See  Pibtt.

Of  religion  exiemal  and  intemal,  56.
defined,  ib.

as  an  afiair  of  conscience,  ib.
or  an  afiair  of  state,  ib.
Mights  of  individuals  as  to,  ib.
should  acquire  knowledge  of  Grod  and

his  laws,  i6.
love  and  respect  due  to  God,  ib.
liberty  of  conscience,  ib.
right  to  exercise  choice  in  matten  of^M-

ligion,  66,  60.
importance  of  this  right,  56,  61.
is  natural  and  inviolable,  t6.
should  be  limited  within  just  bound%
56.
Public  esiablishmenl  of  religion,  ib.
is  a  matter  of  state,  57.
and  under  jurisdiction  of  political  ao*

thority,  ib.
of  a  nation  how  established,  16.
When  as  yet  no  established  religion,  ib*
choice  oi^  how  made,  ib.
duty  of  nation  herein,  ib.
majority  to  have  choice  of,  ib,
but  minority  to  have  ^berty  to  foDow

their  own  religion,  ib.
or  separate  from  society  of  majority,  ib,
when  may  sell  their  jproperty,  and  r^
tire,  ib.,  106.
When  there  is  an  established  rtligiony  58.
nation  bound  to  protect  and  support,  ifa.
when  may  make  changes  therein,  ib.
of  the  danger  of  innovations,  ib.
who  to  determine  on  changes,  ib,
in  case  of  a  new  religion  spreading,  ib.
Duties  and  rights  of  sovereign  with  respect  lo
religion,  ib.
When  no  religion  established,  ib,
should establish  one by mild and

suitable  means,  ib,
should  not  use  authority  or  restraint,

ib.
should  prevent  introduction  of  onu
pernicious  to  morality,  dec,  ib.
When  there  is  an  established  religion,  59.
'  duty  of  sovereign  to  watch  over  it,  i&.
should  restrain  attempts  to  disturb  it,

ib.
his  right  to  interfere  in  such  case,  ib.
how  right  to  be  exercised,  ib.
objects  of  his  care,  and  the  means  he

ought  to  employ,  bO.
interior  as  well  aa  external  religion
should  be,  ib.
Of  toleration,  ib.
of  all  tenets  advisable,  10.
unless  dangerous  to  morality,  t6.
Of  primes  duly,  when  nation  resolved  fi
change  its  religion,  ib.
cannot  constrain  them  therein,  61.
but  may  exercise  his  own  religion,  iit


646


INDSZ.


RELIGION  {cmliniud).

difTerence  of,  does  not  deprive  him  of

his  crown,  61.
duties  and  rights  of  the  sovereign  recon-
ciled with  those of  the  subjects,
i6.
Right  of  tovereign  to  havj  inspection  ooer
matters  of  religion^  62.
should  have inspection  of  all  relating

thereto,  ib.
also  over  those  who  teach  it,  ib,
its  exercise  advantageous  to  the  state,

ib.
a  prerogative  of  majesty,  ib.
right  of  nation  to  delegate  this  power,

ib.
sovereign's  duty to  prevent abuse  of

received  religion,  63.
his  authority  over  ministers  of  religion,
ib.
this  authority  described,  63,  64.
cannot  compel  ecclesiastic  to  preach

against  his  conscience,  64.
duty  of  ecclesiastic  herein,  ib.
rule  to  be  observed  with  respect  to  eccle-
siastics, ib.
should  enjoy  a  large  portion  of  es-
teem, ib.
should  have  no  authority,  ib.
or  claim  independence,  t6.
should  be  subject  to  the  public  powers,

ib.
and  amenable  to  sovereign  for  their

conduct,  ib.
duty  of  sovereign  towards,  ib.
should  cause  them  to  be  respected,

ib.
and  invest  them  with  authority  suffi-
cient to  discharge  their  functions,
ib.
but  should  prevent  abuse  of  that  au-
thority, ib.
clergy  when  formidable  as  a  separate
body,  ib,
RecapitulcUion  of  reasoru  establuking  sove-
reign's rights  in  matters  of  religion,
64,66.
authorities  and  examples,  65.
Perwieioua  contequences  of  denying  sovereiffn
to  be  head  of  the  church,  ib.
abuses  particularized,  ib,

1.  Power of  the popeS) 66. See  Pope-

RT.

extent  thereof,  66,  6T.

pernioious  effect  of,  in  a  foreign  court>

67.
instances,  ib,

2.  Of  Important  employments  conferred  by

a  foreign  power,  68.
disposal  of  dignities,  ib,
a  riolation  of  a  nation's  right,  ib.
•abmission  thereto  condemned,  ib.


RELIGION  (continued)

3.  Powerful  subjects  depending  oo  fv

reign  court,  68,  69.
abuse  in  this  respect,  69.

4.  The  celibacy  of  their  priests,  ii
for  what  cause  invented,  ib.
practice  of,  condemned,  70.

of  convents,  69,  70.
marriage  advocated,  70.

5.  Enormous  pretensions  of  the  6a^,

ib.
of  their  assumed  pre-eminence,  ih.
its  prejudice  on  good  order,  ib.

6.  Independence  of,  71.
immunities  o£,  ib.

attempt  o^  to  escape  from  politiai

authority,  ib.
claim  their  immunities  from  God,  it.

7.  Immunities of  church poBsesdoDi

72,  73.
when  state  may  exempt  them,  7S.
limit  of  exemption,  ib.

8.  Excommunication  of  men  in  offiee,

73.

9.  And  of  sovereigns  themselves,  74.
instances  of  this  abuse,  74, 75,  in  w^

10.  The  clergy  drawing  every  thing  to

themselves, and disturbing  thi
order  of  justice,  75,  76

11.  Money  drawn  to  Rome,  76

12.  Laws  and  customs  contrsiy  to  Ibi

welfare  ot  states,  ib.
consequences  of  crusting  same  to  tbi

clergy,  ib.
pernicious  efiects  thereof  on  the  mte,
ib.
Right  of  nations  to  interfere  mtk  nUgm
of  each  other,  167,  158.
no  nation  can  be restrained  with  re-
spect to,  158.
with  respect  to  missionaries,  ib.
what  a  sovereign  may  do  in  fiivonr  of
those  professing  his  religion  in  U'
other  country,  159.

RENUNCIATION,
what,  25.
validity  and  efiect  o(  26,  26.

REPRISALS,
what,  283.

their  nature,  283,  284.
accomplishment  of,  284.
what  required  to  render them  IswfU,

ib,
must  be  on  just  grounds  before  tllove^

ib.
upon  what effects reprisali  nad^  (^

and  note,
general  reprisals,  what,  285,  note,
state  should  compensate  those  who  fffa

by,  285.
fovereign  alone  can  order  reprisali,  t^


INDEX.


Mt


REPRISALS  (emUmtud).

termed  by  the  Frendi — ^letters  of  maique,

285.
aguinst  a  nation  for  the  actions  of  its

subjects,  ib,
hut  not  in  favour  of  foreigners,  ib,
those  who  have  given  cause  ioT^  ought

to  indemnify  the  sufferers,  286.
what  deemed  a  refusal  to  do  justice,  286,

287.
arrest  of  subjects  by  way  of,  287,  481.
instances  of,  ib,

our  right  against  those  who  oppose  re-
prisals, 287.
just  reprisals  do  not  afford  a  just  cause

of  war,  288.
how  we  ought  to  confine  ourselves  to

reprisals,  or  proceed  to  extremities,

288,  289.
wnen  latter  course  preferable,  289.
uf  reprisals  during  war,  348.
whether  may  be  made  on  ambassadors,

Jbc,  481,  482.
use  of  poison  not  to  be  adopted  by  way

of  reprisal,  360.

REPUBLIC. Sk  Gotebnment.
what,  2.

empire  intrusted  by  nation  to  a  certain
number  of  citizens,  2.

RESIDENTS,
who,  460.

RETALIATION  OF  INJURIES,  282, 283,
317.

RETORTION,  283.

REVENUE. See  Propehtt.
of  the  public  revenues,  110.
at  whose  disposal,  ib,
application  of,  ib,

RIGHTS. See  Obltoatioks  and  Rights.

RIVERS,  STREAMS,  AND  LAKES,
right  of  nation  thereto,  120.
of  river  separating  two  territories,  ib,
rules  respecting,  ib,

1.  where*  nation takes possession of

country  bounded  by,  ib.
priority  of  possession  gives  right,  f6.

2.  and appropriates  to itself  the use

thereof  t6.
8.  where  possession  doubtful,  ib.
4.  where possession long and  undis-
puted, 120,  and  note.
6.  where  settled  by  treaty,  120.
of  the  bed  of  a  river  dried  up,  or  taking

another  course,  121.  '^

the  bed  of,  belongs  to  owner  of  river,  ib,
of  the  right  of  alluvion,  t6.
distinction  between,  and  avulsion,  ib.
whether  it  produces  any  change  in  the

right  to  the  river,  ib.
where  bed  of  changed^  122.


RIVERS,  &c  (cmHnued).

right  of  soil  of  abandoned  ooarM,  m

whom,  122.
of  works  tending  to  turn  the  coirent  of

ib.
when,  or  not  lawful,  ib.
or  in  prejudice  of  right  of  others,  ib,
rules  in  relation  to  interfering  rights,  t&.
where  right  of  fishery  exists,  t6.
in  cases  of  navigation,  ib.
of  lakes,  123,  124. See  Lakbs.
proprietors  of,  who,  123.
of  the  increase  of  lakes,  ib,
of  land  formed  on  banks  of  lakes,  12ft.
where  bed  of  lake  dried  up,  ib.
jurisdiction  over  lakes  and  rivers,  ib.

SAFE  CONDUCT,
what,  416.

distinction  between,  and  passport,  ib,
right  of  sovereign  to  grant,  ib.
when  may  delegate  right,  ib.
is  not  transferable,  ib,
of  safe conduct granted for certain

effects,  ib.  "

when  those  effects  may  be  removed  by

others,  ib.
extent  of  the  promised  securi^,  ib.
duty  of  party  granting  it,  417.
of  the  right  derived  thereby,  ib,
whether  includes  baggage  and  domestics,

ib,
practice  to  specify  particulars,  ib.
granted  to  father  does  not  include  his

family,  ib.
when  to  party  and  his  retinue,  ib,
term  of  safe  conduct,  418.
of  person  forcibly  detained  beyond  the

term,  ib.
of  respite  in  case  of  forcible  detainer  or

sickness,  ib,
does  not  expire  at  death  of  him  who

gave  it,  ib,
how  may  be  revoked,  ib,
time  allowed  in  case  of  revocation,  ib.

SAFE-GUARD. See  Enemy.
what,  and  when  granted,  869.

SEA,

its  use,  125.

dominion  over,  125,  in  note.

whether  it  can  be  possessed,  125.

no  one  can  appropriate  to  himself  the

use  of,  ib,
attempt  to  exclude  another  does  it  an

injury,  126.
attempt  an  injury  to  all  nations,  ih.
exclusive right may be acquired by

treaties,  ib,
but  not  by  prescription,  or  long  usage,  127.
unless  by  virtue  of  a  tacit  agreement,  ib.
but  sea  near  the  coasts  may  become  a

property,  ib.


S48


IHDB3L


?RA  (ebntitwed).

leason  fi>r  appropriating  the  sea  near  the
coast,  128.

how  far  this  poflseuion  may  extend,
128,  129.

of  shores  and  ports,  129.

of  bays  and  straits,  129,  130.

of  straits  in  particular,  130.

of  tax  in  right  of  passage,  ib.

of  the  right  to  wrecks,  ib,

when  allowed,  ib.

to  whom  belonging,  ib.

of  a  sea  included  within  the  territories
of  a  nation,  ISO,  131.

of  the  jurisdiction  over  the  sea,  131.

empire  and  domain  over,  not  insepara-
ble, ib,

of  children  bom  at,  102. See  Couktkt.

SEARCH. See  Nxutbalitt.

right  of,  in  neutral  ships,  338,  339.
consequences  of  refusal,  ib.
usually  settled  by  treaty,  ib,

BBPARATION,

of  a  nation  from  the  state  of  which  it  is

a  member,  96.
when  allowed,  96,  97.
when  conquered  or  abandoned,  97.
mere  failure  of  protection  not  sufficient,

96,  97.

BETTLEMEJVT. See  Goumtbt.
what,  103.

when  may  be  changed,  ib,
distinction  between,  and  habitation,  ib.
of  natural  or  original  settlement,  ib,
acquired  setUement,  what,  ib.

8H0RE,  129. See  8ba.

SLAVERY,

of  the  right  to  condemn  prisoners  to,
366,  357. See  P&isgneb.

SOCIETY. See  Law  of  Nations.

of  the  establishment  of  natural  societj,

lix.
its  necessity,  ib.

its  duties  and  obligations,  Ix.  IxL
its  object,  Ixi.
general  laws  deduced  therefrom,  Ix.  IxL

Ixii.
benefit  of  others,  without  prejudice  to

ourselves,  Ixi.  Ixil.
the  Uberty  of  nations,  IxiL
effect  of  this  liber^,  ib.  ^
the  right  of  judging  for  her^lf,  Ixii.  346.
importance  of  this  law,  Ixiv.
violation  of,  a  ground  of  war,  ib,
extent  of  right,  ib.
must  not  af^^-ct  the  liberty  of  nations,  ib.

80LDIERS. See  War.
right  of  raising,  293.
of  enlistment  of,  294.


SOLDIERS  (cofi/MitfiO

their  pay  and  quarters,  296^
of  mercenaiy  soldiers,  297.

SOVEREIGN,

obligations  and  rights  of,  12.

who  is  a  sovereign,  1,  12.

established  for  the  advantage  of  sodety,
13.

representative  character  bf,  14.

origin  of,  ib.

is  intrusted  with  the  obligations  of  the
nation,  ib.

and  invested  with  its  rights,  14.

rights  of  in  this  respect,  14,  ]&.

ought  to  know  the  nation,  16.

extent  of  his  power,  ib.

his  prerogatives,  ib.

to  respect  and  support  the  laws  liind*-
mental,  i6.

may  change  those  not  fundamental,  ib.

ought  to  maintain  the  existing  laws,  I6i

in  what  sense  subject  to  the  laws,  ib,

person  of^  sacred  and  inviolable,  17.

nation  may  curb  a  tyrant,  17,  18.

may  withdraw  itself  from  his  obedience,
ib.

arbitration  between,  and  his  sabjedi,  20,

obedienee  which  subjects  owe  to,  31.

when  may  resist  him,  t^.

appointment  of  ministers  by,  23.

duty  o^  in  establishing  glory  of  the  na-
tion, 91.

of  pardoning  ofibnders. See  Pai.doii.

right  of,  to  grant  privilege  of  safe  con-
duct, 416.

duty  of  state  to  procure  release  oi|  wliaB
a  prisoner,  436.

right  of,  over  property  of  subject.  &i
Propebtt.

SOVEREIGN  STATE,

what^  2.

is  such,  though  bound  by  an  unequal
alliance,  ib.

or  by  treaty  of  protection,  tb.

or  to  pay  tribute,  ib.

or  to  do  homage,  ib. -
two  states  subject  to  the  same  prine«^

may  be,  8.
80  of  states  forming  a  federal  sepubUo^  A.
when  it  ceases  to  be  such,  4.
when  under  dominion  of  another,  ih,

SOVEREIGNTY. Se» aUo Soybbbioi

Stats.
what,  3.

indivisibill^  of,  27.
is  inalienable,  81.

SPY,

of  the  employment  of,  875,  376y  858.

STATE. Se0  Kation,  Law  ov  KATion»
SoysBuanT*


niDiiz.


649


■ .. -^


STATE  (amttnued),
Jt»  amttituliont  8.

duties  and  righto  of  the  nation  in  re-
spect to,  ib.

of  the  public  authority  o(  ib.

nation  should  choose  the  best  constitu-
tion, 9.

of  the  political,  fundamental,  and  dvil
laws  of,  ib,

of  the  support  of  the  constitution,  and
obedience  to  the  laws,  9,  10.

rights  of  nation  with  respect  to  ito  con-
stitution and  government,  10.

may  reform  ito  government,  ib,

and  change  ito  constitution,  ib*

of  the  legislative  power  of,  11.

right  of,  to  change  the  constitution,  ib.

of  the  caution  necessary  herein,  12.

is  the  judge  of  all  disputes  relating  to
the  government,  ib,

no  foreign  power  has  a  right  to  interfere,
ib,

several  kinds  o{  stotes,  23.

BTRAIT. See  Ska.

of  refusing  passage  through,  130.
of  levying  tax  on  vessels  passing  through,
ib,

STREAM,  120,  121. See  Riysb,  Stkeaus,
AND  Lakes.

SUBMISSION. See  Nation.
of  one  nation  to  another,  94»
different  kinds  o^  ib,
right  of  citizens  on,  ib,
how  treaty  o^  annulled,  95.
distinction between,  and  incorpora-
tion, 96.

SUBSIDY. See  Enemt.
whati  324.

SUCCESSIVE OR HEREDITARY

STATE,
what,  24.
origin  o£^ib,

when  may  be  changed,  26.
ought  to  be  kept,  26.
of  renunciation,  25.
when,  or  not  binding,  ib.
of  regents,  27.

indivisibility  of  sovereigns,  ib,
who  to  decide  disputes  respecting  suo-

eession,  %b,
ought  not  to  depend  on  judgment  of  •

foreign  power,  29.

SUPPLICANT. See  Countbt.
wl^oare,  107.

sao^  as  implore  protection  of  a  eove-
reign  against  nation  tfaey  have
quitted,  ib.


BUBBTT. ,"^e  GUABANTT.

for observance of  treaties^  287.
Tbeatt.

83


See


TAXES,

imposition  and  regulation  of.  111.
each  citizen  to  contribute  according  to

his  ability,  ib.
nature  of  the  obligation,  ib.
nation  may  reserve  to  itself  the  right  of

imposing  them,  ib.
of  money  bills,  111,  in  nofe.
of  the  sovereign  who  has  this  power,  iU
duties  of  sovereign  with  respect  to,  ib.
application  o^  112.

TERRITORY. See  Countbt.

TESTAMENTS,

validity  of^  how  decided,  167.

how  construed  in  England,  167,  note.

prisoner  of  war  may  make,  398.

TOLERATION. <S^  Relioion  and  Pibtt.
when  universal  toleration  advisable,  60.
is  so,  unless  tenets  dangerous  to  m»-
rality^  ib.

TOLL. See  Public  Wats.

foundation  of  right  to,  44,  115.
nature  and  object  of  imposition  o(  44«
on  whom  imposed,  44,  and  note.

TRADE,  37  to  43. See  Commbbci.

TREATIES,

Of  alUance  and  (Aher  public  treaties^  192.
nature  of  treaties,  192,  and  note,
of  pactions,  agreements,  and  oonvei^

tions,  192.
by  whom  treaties  are  to  be  made,  ib,
state  under  protection  may  make,  193.
limitation  of  right,  ib,
of  treaties concluded  by  proxies  and

plenipotentiaries,  ib*
by  whom  ratified,  ib.
validity  of  treaties,  194.
injury  does  not  render  them  void,  ib,
duty  of  nations  herein,  ib.
if  injurious  to  state,  a  nullity,  ib,
80,  if  made  for  unjust  or  dishonest  pur^

poses,  196.
contraction  of,  with  those  who  do  not

profess  the  true  religion,  ib.
obligation  of  observing  treaties,  196.
necessity  of,  acknowledged  by  all  no*

tions,  ib»
glory  to  nation  resulting  therefix>m,  ib,
instances,  196.

violation  of,  an  act  of  injustice,  ib.
cannot  be  made  contrary  to  those  pre-
viously existing,  ib.
how  concluded  with  several  nations  with

same  view,  197.
the  more  ancient  ally  entitled  to  pn^

forence,  ib,
ao  assistance  in  an  unjust  war,  ib.
General  dwinon  of  the  subject,  198.
1.  those  relating  to  things  aboody  duo

by  the  law  of  nature^  t&.


650


INDEX.


TREATIES  (continwd).

2.  those  relating  to  furtl  er  engagementB,
189.

the  former  described,  ib.

collision  of  these  treaties  with  duty
we  owe  ourselves,  t6.

treaties  by  which  we  barely  fnromise
to  do  no  injury,  ib,

utility  thereof,  ib,

treaties concerning thingi  not  na-
turally due,  ib.

these  treaties  described,  ib,

are  equal  or  unequaly  198,  199.

oi  equal  treaties,  199.

obligation  of  preserving  equality  in
treaties,  199.
\  difierence  between  equal  and  unequal
treaties,  200.

of  unequal  treaties  and  sllianoes,  ih,

are  divided  into  two  classes,  ib,

1.  where inequality on side of

stronger  power,  ib,

2.  where  on  side  of  inferior,  ib,
of  unequal  alliances,  201.

either  impair  the  sovereignty,  or  they

do  not,  ib,
how  alliance  with  diminution  of  sove-
reignty may annul preceding

treaties,  202,  203.
should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible,

203.
mutual  duty  of  nations  with  respect

to  unequal  alliances,  ib,
of  those  where  inequality  on  the  side

of  the  more  powerful  party,  203,

204.
how  inequality  may  be  conformable

to  the  law  of  nature,  204.
when  imposed  by  way  of  punishment,

205.
of  personal  and  real  treaties,  ib.
personal  alliance,  what,  ib,
expires  with  him  who  makes  it,  ib,
real  alliance,  what,  ib,
always  attaches  to  the  state,  ib,
unless  limited,  ib,
distinctions  between,  to  be  observed,

ib.
general  rules  respecting,  ib,
naming  contracting  parties  in,  does

not  make  it  personal,  ib,
alliance  by  a  republic  is  real,  ib.
subsists,  though  form  of  government

changed,  206.
of  treaties  concluded  by  kings  or  other

monarchs,  ib.
of  perpetual  treaties,  ib,
of  those  for  a  certain  time,  ib,
of  treaties  for  king  and  his  successors,

16.
treaties  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,

807.


TREATIES  (continued).

presumption,  how  to  be  founded  &

doubtful  cases,  207.
instances' in  illustration,  207,  208
*  obligations  and  rights  resulting  iioia
a  real  treaty  pasb  to  the  aar-
ceseor,  208.
but  general  custom  fiir  succeawr  to

renew  them,  t6. .
of  treaties  accomplished  once  ibr  all

and  perfected,  208,  209.
of  thoae  accomplished  in  part,  209,2I0«
personal alliance  expires if  one  of

parties  ceases  to  reign,  21 1.
of  those  in  their  own  nature  personal,

211.
where  concluded  for  defence  of  king

and  royal  family,  ib.
when  binding  where  king  deprived  of

his  crown,  ib.
distinction  when  dethroned  by  rebels^

16.
and  lawfully  dethroned,  t6.
instances of  Louis 4th and king

WUliam,  212.
obligation  of  a  real  alliance  where  tho
king  is  dethroned,  ib.
Of  the  disaolulion  and  renewal  of  tnatie$,  Uu
expiration  of  alliances  made  for  a  limited
time,  213.
, of  the  renewal  of  treaties,  ib.
of  the  tacit  renewal  of,  213,  214.
how  dissolved  when  violated  by  one  t^

contracting  parties,  214.
violation  of  one  treaty  does  not  cancel

another,  ib.
when  violation  of  part  cancels  the  whole

215.
is  void  by  the  destruction  of  one  of  the

contracting  parties,  216.
but  not  by  state  placing  itself  under  pro-
tection of  another,  ib,
of  treaties  dissolved  by  mutual  consent,
217.
Of  public  conventions  in  nature  of,  218. Sm
Convention.
when  made  by  sovereigns,  t6.
of  those  by  subordinate  powers,  d>.
of  treaties  concluded  by  public  ponm

not  having  sufficient  power,  219.
of  the  agreement  called  Sponsio,  t6.
state  not  bound  thereby,  220.
effect  of,  on  pEomi&er,  ih,
sovereign,  how  far  bound  by,  223.
Cf  the  faith  of  treaties,  229.
what  is  sacred  among  nations,  i^.
treaties  are  held  sacred  between  nations^

t6.
fisuth  of  treaties  is  sacred,  t6.

and  he  who  violates  them  violates  tlw
law  of  nations,  t6.
right  of  nations  against  violator,  230L


cn>EX.


651


TREATIES  (continued).

violation  of,  by  the  popes,  230.

this  abuse  authorized  bj  princes,  281.

use  of  an  oath  in  treaties,  232.

does  not  constitute  the  obligation,  t6.

or  produce  new  obligations,  i6.

or  change  the  nature  of  them,  ib,

it  gives  no  pre-eminence  to  one  treaty

above  another,  ib.
cannot  give  force  to  a  treaty  Invalid,

233.
of  asteverations,  232.
violation  of,  disgraceful,  ib.
fidth  of  treaties  does  not  depend  on  the

difference  of  religion,  233.
precautions  to  be  observed  in  wording

of,  233.
of  subterfuges  in  treaties,  234.
an  evidently  false  interpretation  incon-
sistent with  faith  of  treaties,  ib.
fiiith  tacitly  pledged,  ib.
Ofsecuritiei  given  for  observance  off  235.
guaranty,  wha^  ib.
gives  the  guarantee  no  right  to  interfere,

ib.
nature of  the obligation it  imposes,

236.
cannot  impair  the  rights  of  a  third  party,

ib.
duration  of  the  guaranty,  ib.
of  treaties  with  surety,  237.
of  pawns, securities,  and mortgages,

ib.
right  of  nation  over  what  she  holds  as  a

pledge,  237,  238.
how  obliged  to  restore  it,  238.
how  she  may  appropriate  it,  ib.
of  hostages, 238, 239. See Host-
age.
Of  the  interpretation  of  treaiieSf  244.
necessity  of  establishing  rules  of,  t6.
general observations herein,  244,  and

notes,
maxims  respecting,  ib.

1st,  not  allowable  to  interpret  what
has  no  need  of  interpretation,
ib.
2d,  if  he  who  could  and  ought  to
have  explained  himself,  and  has
not done  it,  it  is  to his  own
detriment,  245.
8d,  neither  of  contracting  parties  to
interpret  according  to  his  own
fancy,  ib, *
4th,  what is sufficiently declared
is  to be taken  for true, 245,
246.
5th,  inti  rpretation  ought  to  be  made
according  to  certain  rules,  246.
ftith  of  trv^aties  lays  an  obligation  to

follow  these  rules,  247.
general  rule  of  in'  erpretation,  ib.


TREATIES  {continued).

should  be  conformaible  to  common  usage,

248.
how  ancient  treaties  to  be  interpreted,

ib.
of  quibbles  on  words,  249.
rule  for  avoiding  of,  ib.
mental  reservations  not  allowed,  ib.
technical  terms,  how  interpreted,  250.
of  terms  whose  signification  admits  of

degrees,  ib.
of  figurative  expressions,  ib.
of  equivocal expressions,  251.
rule  for  latter  cases,  ib.
not  necessary  to  give  a  term  the  same

sense  everywhere  in  the  same  deed,

252.
absurd interpretations should be re-
jected, ib.
absurdity  described,  and  instances,  ib.
interpretation  rendering  treaty  void  not

to  be  admitted,  253.
obscure expressions,  how intOTpreted,

254.
interpretation  founded  on  the  connection

of  the  discourse,  ib.
or  drawn  from  the  connection,  dec  of

the  things  themselves,  255.
to  be  founded  on  the  reason  of  the  dee^

256.
how,  where  many  reasons have  con*

curred  to  determine  the  will,  257.
what  constitutes  a  sufficient  reason  for

an  act  of  the  will,  ib.
extensive  interpretation  founded  on  the

reason  of  the  act,  ib.
of  firauds  tending  to  elude  laws  and

promises,  258.
of  restrictive  interpretations,  259.
use  of,  to  avoid  falling  into  absurdities,

ib.
or  into  what  is  unlawful,  ib. '
or  into  what  is  too  severe  and  burthen-
some,  260.
how  it  ought  to  restrict  the  signification

agreeably  to  the  subject,  ib.
wlien  change  happening  in  the  state  of

things  forms  an  exception,  261.
interpretation  o^  in  unforeseen  cases,

262.
reasons  arising  fi^m  the  possibility  an<f

not  the  existence  of  the  thing,  t6.
where expressions capable  of  an ex-
tensive and  a  limited  sense,  263.
of  things  &vourabIe  and  things  odious,

ib.
&vourabIe,  when  tending  to  the  common

advantage,  264.
odious,  when  to  the  contrary,  ib.
BO,  of  things  useful  to  human  society,

265.
whatever  contains  a  nenalty  is  odious,  t6.


052


IITDBX*


TREATIES  (etmlintud).

BO,  whatever renders  a  deed  ymd  u

odious,  265.
all  tending  to  change  the  present  state

of  things  is  favourable,  ib,
the  contrary  is  octious,  ib,
of  things  of  a  mixed  nature,  266.
interpretation  of  favourable  things,  ib.
rules  respecting,  ib.

1.  utmost  latitude  to  be  given  to  terms

used  according  to  common  usage,
ib.

2.  terms  of  art  to  receive  the  fullest

interpretation,  267.
8.  but  not  in  an  improper  signification,
unless  from  necessity,  267.

4.  signification  to  be  restricted,  where

leading  to  absurdity,  ib.

5.  to  be  restricted  where  equity  or  a

great  common  advantage  requires
it,  ib.
interpretation  of  things  odioia,  t6.
should  be  limited,  267,  268.
examples,  268,  269.

how  deeds  of  liberality  should  be  inter-
preted, 270.
where  a  collision  of  laws  and  treaties,
ih.
€rtnaral  rule$ respecting  inierpretation  off
ib.

1.  where  bare  permission incompatible

with  prescription — flatter  preferred,
, 271.

2.  treaty  permilling,  to  give  way  to  that

forbidding,  ib.

3.  so,  that  which  ordains,  to  give  way  to

that  which  forbids,  ib.

4.  where  collisiim  between  two  afiirma-

tive  treaties,  latter  to  be  preferred.
ib.
when  otherwise,  ib.

5.  of  two  laws  or  conventions,  the  less

general  preferred,  272.
0.  treaty  not  admitting  of  delay,  to  be
preferred to that  to  be  done  at
another  time,  273.

7.  of  two  competing  duties,  the*  most

important,  Ac,  preferred,  i&.

8.  of  two  promises,  die  party  promised

to  elect,  274.
but  in case of  doubt,  promiser  to
perform  that  in  which  most  strongly
hound,  ib.

9.  treaty confirmed on oath to be

preferred  to  one  not  sworn  to,
ib.
10.  treaty  enjoined  under  a  penalty,  to  be
preferred  to  that  not  enforced  by
one,  ib.
M),  of  that  enjoined  under  a  greater
penalty  to  that  enforced  by  a  lesser,
tb.


TREATIES  OF  PEACE,  432. fibePneft

TRIBUTARY  STATE. &e  Stat*.
what,  3.
is  a  sovereign  state,  3.

TROOPS,

right  of  levying,  294.
enlistment  of;  294,  298

TRUCE. See  W AM.
what,  404.

does  not  terminate  the  wai,  iU
is  partial  or  general,  ib.
general  tmce  for  many  yean^  ik
how  concluded,  ib,
sovereign's  £uth  engaged  in,  406.
when  truce  begins  to  be  obligatoiy,  ib.
publication  o^  ib.

subjects  contravening  the  trace,  i&
violation  of,  407.
stipulation  of  penalty  against  infirador

of;i6.
time  of  the  tmce,  ib*
effects  of  a  truce,  408.
what  or  not  allowed  during  oontiBiiaiioe

o^  ib,
rules  respecting,  408,  409.

1.  each  party  may  do  at  home  what

they  have  a  right  to  do  in  time
of  peace,  409.

2.  not  to  take  advantage  of  the  truce

in  doing  what  hostilities  would

have  prevented,  ib.
as  continuing  the  works  of  a  siegf,

ib.
or  repairing  breaches,  &&,  ib.
or  introducing  succours,  410.
distinctions  herein,  ib.
as  army  retreating  during  a  so**

pension  of  hostilities,  ib.

3.  nothing  to  be attempted  in  eon-

tested  places,  but  every  thing  to
be  left  as  it  was,  41 1.
but  places  quitted,  dec,  by  enemj

may  be  possessed,  ib.
subjects  inclined  to  revolt  not  to  be

received  during  the  truce,  tb.
much  less  to  be  solicited  to  treason,

ib,
persons  or  effects  of  enemy  not  to
be  seized  during  truce,  ib.
right  of  postliminium  during  a  trace,  t&.
intercourse  allowed  during,  t6.
of  persons detained by insurmoant*'
ble  difficulties  after  expiratioD  of,
412.
of  adding  particular  conditions  to  tnioei.

ib.
at  expiration  of,  war  renewed  witboa
fresh  declaration,  t6.

TRUTH,

when  bound  to  speak  it  to  an  eneniy,
373.


ISTDSSu


CSS


^!'


\,  V.


tti


oli


L'-


U8UCAPTI0N. See  PEBSOBiirnoH.
what,  187,  and  note.

V  \GRANT. See  Countbt.
who  are  vagrants,  103.
those  who  have  no  aettlementa,  ib.
children  of^  have  therefore  no  country,

ib.
when  country  of  vagrant  that  of  child,  ib,
as  where  vagrant  has  not  renounced  hia

natural  settlement,  ib.

VOLUNTARY  LAW,
what,  Ixiv.,  and  note,
founded  on  a  presumed  consent,  Ixiv.
maxim  concerning  use  of,  Ixvi.

VOLUNTEERS,  40L Sm  Wab.

WAR,

Deflmtion  of,  291.

is  public  or  private,  ih.

defensive  or  offensive,  293.

right  of  making,  291.

belongs  only  to  the  sovereign  power,

292,  293.

though  sometimes  otherwise,  292.
right  of  kings  of  England  to  make,  292,

293,  and  note.
Ofihi  inalruments  oftoar,  293.

what  deemed  such,  t6.

troops,  officers,  dec,  ib.

arms,  artillery,  dec.,  ib,

right  of  levying  troops,  294.

belongs  to  the  sovereign  power,  t5.

18  one  of  the  prerogatives  of  majesty,
ib.

though  right  sometimes  limited,  ib.

obligations  of  citizens  to  serve  and  de-
fend the  state,  ib.

of  the  enlistment  or  raising  of  troops,
ib.

of  the  exemptions  from  canying  arms,
296.

who  exempt,  as  mag^trates,  clergy,  dec.;
295,  296.

of  soklieis'  pay  and  quarters,  296.

of  hospitals  for  invalids,  ib.

of  mercenary  soldiers,  297.

who  are  such,  ib,

possession  of,  how  far  lawful,  ib.

what  observed  in  their  enlistment,  298.

service  of,  voluntary,  ib.

must  not  be  by  stratagem  or  ft>  oe,  ib.

(tf  enlistment  in  foreign  countries,  ib.

permission  of  sovereign  requisite,  298.

none  but  volunteers  to  be  enlisted,  ib.

of  enticing  away  subjects,  ib.

nature  of  crime  and  punishment,  ib.

when  a  cause  for  declaring  war,  ib.

of  the  obligation  of  soldiers,  299.

to  tike  oath  of  fidelity,  ib.

are  not  to  desert  the  service,  ib»

ponishment  of  deserters,  ib.


WAR,  (continued),

of  solicitations  to  deaat,  873L

of  military  laws,  t6.

necessity  of,  in  army,  ift.

military  code  oC,  what,  tft.

of  military  discipline,  ib,

importance  of,  considered,  ib,

of  subordinate  powers  in  war,  ib*

their  authority,  ib,

extent  and  limit  thereof  ib,

promises  oj^  how  &r  binding  on  iot«*

reign,  300.
when  binding  only  on  themselves,  ib,
of  the  assumption  of  power  by,  ib,
their  responsibility,  t^.
how  they  bind  their  inferiors,  801.
Ofthtjuat  cautet  of  war,  ib,
should  not  be  undertaken  without  veiy

cogent  reasons,  ib,
justificatory  reasons and motivea for

making,  302.
explanation  hereof,  ib,
what  in  general  a  just  cause  of  war,  ib.
what  unjust,  t^.
of  the  object  of  war,  ib,
what  motives  requisite  in  undertaking

war,  303.
proper  motives,  what,  ib,
vicious  motives,  what,  ib,
of  war  undertaken  upon  just  gToandi^

though  motives  vicious,  ib,
pretexts,  what,  304.
of  war  undertaken  merely  for  advantage,

ib.
of  nations  making  war  without  reason

or  apparent  motives,  306.
are  considered  enemies  to  mankind,  ib,
right  of  nations  to  punish  them,  ib.
how  defensive  war  is  just  or  unjust,  tb,
nation  has  no  right  to  defend  an  unjust

war,  306,  307.
her  duty  under  such  circumstances^

305,  313.
how  defence  may  become  just,  306, 313,

316.
offensive  war,  how  fiir  just  in  an  evident

cause,  306.
requisites  to  be  considered,  306.

1.  a  right  to  demand  something  of

another  nation,  366,  315.

2.  the  inability  to  obtain  it  otherwise

than  by  force  of  arms,  306,  316,
820.
in  a  doubtful  cause,  306.
when  to  be  resorted  to,  ib,  \

war  cannot  be  just  on  both  sides,  ib,
though  sometimes  reputed  lawful,  806,

820.
of  war  undertaken  to  punish  a  nation,  307.
should  be  founded  on  right  and  necessity,

ib.
duty  of  nation  at  fimk,  ib,
8iS


854


HtDEZ.


WAR  (eontinwd).

ag^andizement  of  a  neighboniing  power,
308.

when  no  right  to  make  war,  £6.

when  appearance  of  danger  gives  the
right,  309.

when  other  nations  may  check  aggrand-
izement of  a  state,  310,  311.  ,

other  allowable  means  of  defence  against
a  formidable  power,  311.

political  equilibrium,  what,  311,  312.

ways  of  maintaining  it,  312.

how  he  who  destroys  it  may  be  re-
strained, 312,  313.

behaviour  allowable  towards  a  neighbour
preparing  for  war,  313.
Of  the  declaration  of  war,  315.

of  the  necessity  thereof,  ib.

what  it  should  contain,  ib.

is  simple  or  conditional,  316.

right  to  make,  ceases  on  offer  of  equi-
table conditions,  ib,

formalities  of,  ib.

publication' of,  ib.

necessity  hereof,  ib.

defensive  war  requires  no  declaration,  t6.

when  may  be  omitted  in  an  offensive
war,  ib.

or  against  enemies'  associates,  831.

not  to  be  omitted  by  way  of  retaliation,
317.

unnecessary  at  expiration  of  a  truce,
412.

should  be  made  where  truce  of  long
duration,  ib.
Time  of  declaration  of  war,  817.

need  not  be  till  army  has  reached  the
frontiers,  t6.

or  has  entered  the  enemy's  territories,
ib.

must  precede  acts  of  hostility,  ib.
Duty  of  inhabitantt  on  entry  of  foreign  army
before  declaration,  ib.

commencement  of  hostilities,  ib,

conduct  to  be  pursued  towards  subjects
of  enemy  in  country  at  time  of
declaration,  318.

freedom  of  persons  and  property,  ib.

time  allowed  for  departure,  ib.

extension  of  that  time,  when,  ib.

when  to  be  treated  as  enemies,  ib.
Publication  of  the  war  and  manifestoes,  ib.

necessity  for,  among  neutrals,  ib.

how  published,  319.

manifebtoes,  what,  ib.

what  they  should  contain,  ib.

decorum  and  moderation  to  be  observed
in,  1*6.
Of  lawful  war  in  due  form,  ib.

r«^quisites  of,  ib.

by  whom  to  be  made,  ib.

aLw  termed  a  regular  war,  920,


WAH  (eoniiwued).

how  far  noticed  in  courts  of  justice,  320.

in  note,
distinctions between lawful and  tu^

lawful  war,  320.
between  unlawfiil  and  informal,  ib.
grounds  of  distinction,  320,  321.
Of  the  enemy,  and  things  belonging  to  km,

ib. See  Eneht.
Of  neutrality,  332. See  NsnTKALmr.
Of  the  rights  of  nations  in  war,  346,  ind

note,
general  principles  of,  346.
difference  between  what  may  be  doce

of  right,  and  what  merely  allowed,

346.
the right to weaken an enemv  bj

every  justifiable  method,  347, 363,

364.
the right over the enemy's penoa

347.
origin  and  limitation  of  this  right,  ih,
of  giving  quarter,  and  the  offer  to  car

pitulate,  348.
enemy  not  to  be  killed  after  ceasing  to

resist,  348,  3.50,  354.
case  when  quarter  may  be  refused,  348,

361.
enemy  violating  the  laws  of  war,  348,

350,  354,  361.
of  the  governor  of  a  town  making  an

obstinate  defence,  349,  350.
Reprisals,  what,  348. See  Rkp&isal.
a  system  of  retaliation,  348.
examples  of,  349,  and  note,
what  prisoners  not  to  be  the  subject  oC

349,  350.
Fugitives  and  deserters,  351.
when  may  be  put  to  death,  ib.
of  the  clemency  to  be  shown  to  them,

ib.
capitulation  with  respect  to,  ib.
Women,  children,  aged,  and  the  tick,  ib.
not  to  be  put  to  death,  ib.

unless  guilty  of  acts  of  hostility,  35S
Clergymen,  men  of  letters,  Sfc^  ib.
also  exempted  fix>m  death,  ib,
when  not,  ib,
peasants  and  those  not  carrying,  aimit

352,  353.
likewise  exempt,  ib,
their  freedom  in  general,  ib.
when  may  have  restraints  imposed  oi

them,  353.
Of  prisoners  of  war,  ib. See  Pr."»OHB».
right  of  making,  ib.
its  object,  ib.
not to be put to death, 348, 35«,

345.
treatment  of,  354,  and  note,
of  prisoners  who  cannot  be  fed.  355.
of  condemning  them  to  slavery,  36^


i


IKOBZ.


655


v_


, V


WAR  (c(mttnued),

txchangt  ana  rcmtom  or.  357. Set  Ran-
som.
object  of,  357.
vfhen.  it  takes  place,  «6.
how  regulated  in  general,  t6.
when  exchange  may  be  refused,  ib,
of  providing  liberty  of,  in  treaty,  ib.
right  of  nation  to  prohibit  ransom  of,
357,  358.
of  assassinating  and  poisoning  of,  358  to
360.
meaning  of  assassination,  359.
is  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,  360,

361.
guilt  of  sovereign  resorting  thereto,

361.
how  punished,  ib.

use  of  poison  not  to  be  adopted  by
way  of  reprisal,  360.
Of  the  right  of  war  with  regard  to  thinjgs
belonging  to  the  enemy^  364, See
Enemy.
Of  the  sovereign  who  wages  an  unjust  toar,
378.
an  unjust  war  gives  no  right,  ib,
guilt  of  hun  who  undertakes  it,  378, 379.
his  obligations,  379.
Of  the  effects  of  a  regular  woTj  381.
is  bound  to  make  reparation,  ib.
nations  not  rigidly  to  enforce  the  law  of

nature  against  each  other,  ib,
should observe the  voluntary  law  of,

382.
reason  for  this,  ib.
regular  war,  its  effects,  ib.
whatever  permitted  to  one  party,  is  so

to  the  other,  382,  383.
effect  of  the  voluntary  law  in  an  unjust
war,  383.
Of  acquisitions  by  war,  384.
war,  when  a  lawful  mode  of  acquisition,  t6.
'conditions  necessary  to  render  it  just,

384,  385.
every  acquisition  in  regular,  valid,  385.

and  this  though  war  unjus*  ib, ,
exception  in  case  of  war  destitute  of  any

plausible  pretext,  385.
acquisition  of  movable  property,  385,  in

note.  '

of  maritime  captures,  ib.
title  to,  when  complete,  ib.
law  as  to,  in  England,  ib,
acquisition  of  immovables  on  conquest,

386.
to  whom  they  belong,  t6.
when  title  thereto  complete,  ib.
how  to  transfer  them  validly,  387,  395.
conditions  on  which  a  conquered  town

is  acquired,  387.
Kch  rights  only  acquired  as  belonged
to  the  conquerfci  sovereign,  ib.


WAR  {continued)^,

lands  of  private  perKons,  388.

formerly  subject  to  the  right  of  conqueft^

ib.
such  right  now  confined  to  public  pro-
perty, ib.
conquest  of  the  whole  state,  ib.
treatment  of  the  conquered  state,  388,

&C.,  and  note,
to  whom  the  conquest  belongs,  391,

365,  and  note,
the  nation  entitled  thereto,  391.
nature  of  the  sovereign's  right  thereto,

391,  365,  and  note,
of  liberating  a  people  whom  the  enemy

have  unjustly  conquered,  391.
when  under  an  obligation  to  do  so,  339,

and  note.
Of  the  right  of  postUmimum,  392. See  Jus

Postliminium.
Of  the  rights  ofprivaie  persons  in  tear,  399.
subjects  cannot  commit  hostilities  with*
^  out  the  sovereign's  order,  ib,

nature  of  that  order,  ib.
necessity  for, and  why  adopted,  399,

400.
precise meaning of  order,  400, and

no^
how  interpreted,  400.
what  private  persons  may  undertake,

presuming  on  the  sovereign's  will

ib.
of  privateers,  ib.

nature  of  their  rights,  400,  401.
of  volunteers,  401.
their  treatment,  ib.
what  soldiers  and  subalterns  may  do,

401,  402.
obligation  of  state  to  indemnify  subjects

for  damages  sustained  in  war,  402,

403,  and  note,
distinction  herein,  ib.
duty  of  state  in  this  respect,  403,  and

note.
Of  conventions  made  during  war,  404. Se*

Tbuce.
of  truce  and*  suspension  of  arms,  ib.
distinction  between,  ib,
does  not  terminate  the  war,  ib,
a  truce  is  either  partial  or  general,  t6.
of  a  general  truce  for  many  years,  ib»
how  concluded,  ib.
sovereign's  faith  engaged  yi,  406.
when truce begins  to  be  obligatory,

ib.
publication  of,  ib,
subjects  contravening  of,  ib.
truce  not  thereby  broken,  ii.
punishment  of  delinquents,  406,  iOV.
violation  of,  407.
its  dissolution  by  breach  of  one  of

tracting  parties,  ib.


fiS6


INDEX.


WAR  (continued).

Btlpulatioii  of  penalty  agaiim  infractor
of;  407.

time  of  the  truce,  ib.

necesBity  of  Bpecifyinp,  407,  408*

how  oonstnieid  in  the  absence  of  sach
specification,  408.

general  e£fect8  of  a  trace,  ib.

what,  or  not  allowed  daring  oontinu-
•noe  of  it,  ib.

rules  respecting,  409. See  Tbuob.
Of  capitulaliontf  412.

by  whom  to  be  concluded,  412, 418.

clauses  thereof  419.

necessi^^  for  their  obserrance,  414.

promises  made  to  the  enemy  by  in-
dividuals are  iHnding,  414,  371,
372.

instances,  415.

duty  of  sovereign  to  see  them  fulfilled,
414.

as  to  contracts  in  &your  of  alitfn  ene-
mies, 414,  note.

as  to  promises  of  ransom,  414* See

RiUISOM.


WAR  (contimud).

of  conventions  relating  to  ransom,  419,
420. See  Ransom.
WAYS,  43. Su  Public  Watb.

WHALE  FISHERY.

customary  law  respecting,  Ixir.  note.

wn.Ls,

validity  o^  how  decided,  167.

how  construed  in  England,  167,  note.

prisoner  of  war  may  make,  39dt

WORSHIP. Su  Relioiok.
what,  46.

is  either  public  or  private,  61.
of  the  establishment  of;  66,  69,  60.
how  destroyed,  61.
of  attendance  at  public  worship,  ib*
how  far  enjoined  by  religion,  ib.

WRECKS,

of  the  right  thereto,  130,  and  note

in  what  cases  allowed,  ib,

only  where  owner  cannot  be  fban^
