Absentee Ownership and Business Enterprise in Recent Times (Thorstein Veblen, 1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/absenteeownershi0000thor). Veblen's last book: absentee ownership and the case of America against the vested interests.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee
ee


nprsreriee


Albion College
Library


FRO ae LIRRARY


STOCKWELL-MUDD LIBRARIES


ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP


AND BUSINESS ENTERPRISE |
IN RECENT TIMES


OTHER BOOKS BY THORSTEIN VEBLEN


THE HIGHER LEARNING IN AMERICA, $2.50
THE NATURE OF PEACE, $2.50

THE THEORY OF THE LEISURE CLASS, $2.50
THE INSTINCT OF WORKMANSHIP, $2.50


IMPERIAL GERMANY AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVO-
LUTION, $2.50


THE PLACE OF SCIENCE IN MODERN CIVILISATION
AND OTHER ESSAYS, $3.00


oa VESTED INTERESTS AND THE COMMON MAN,
1.50


‘THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM, $1.50
PusiisHED By B. W. HUEBSCH, Inc., NEw Yorx


ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP


AND BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
IN RECENT TIMES


The Case of America


by
THORSTEIN VEBLEN


New York
B. W. HUEBSCH, INc.


Memxxti0t


COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY
B. W. HUEBSCH, INC.


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERIOA


PREFACE


The following essay is an inquiry into the economic
situation as it has taken shape during this (twentieth)
century, particularly as exemplified in the case of
America. Its aim is an objective, theoretical analysis
and formulation of the main drift, as determined by the
material circumstances of the case, including the indus-
trial arts, and by the dominant institution of absentee
ownership, including the use of credit. This analysis
and formulation occupies Part II of the essay. It makes
little use of the received theories of Political Economy ;
not as departing from the received theories or discredit-
ing them, but because the inquiry is concerned chiefly
with economic forces and phenomena which are of later
date than the received doctrines.

Part I of the essay is occupied with a summary de-
scription of that range of economic circumstances and that
sequence of economic growth and change which have led
up through the nineteenth century and have come to a
head in the situation of the past two decades ; regard being
had chiefly to the case of England for the earlier decades
of the century and chiefly to the case of America for the
later years. It makes no use of recondite information
and makes no attempt to penetrate beyond the workday
facts which are already familiar to students of these
matters.

March 1923


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


https://archive.org/details/absenteeownershi0000thor


CONTENTS


PAKS


CHAPTER PAGH
Sel MPO 3 au GL oe =e. kee ee ae aS


IJ THE GRowTH AND VALUE OF NATIONAL INTEGRITY II


II] LAw anp Custom In Recent TIMES:


i. HANDICRAFT AND NatTurAL RIGHTS. . . 4a

ii. THe NaturAL RicHT oF INVESTMENT . 50-68

IV THe ERA or FREE COMPETITION . . . . . 6
V Tue RISE OF THE CORPORATION . .. . . &@

Wi Tee Caprain of INpuUstkRy .. . » « < I0¥F


VII TuHeE CAsE or AMERICA:


i Pee Stipmape Man. « « 5. «6 + igi
ii. THe INDEPENDENT FARMER. . .:. . 129
hii plete Osanna INen arp eeas Ae eM co Ge Se
iv. THe New Gorp = «. . 165


vy. THe TIMBER LANDS AND THE O1L FIELDS . 186


PART II
VIII THe New Order oF BUSINESS . . .. . . 205
IX Tue InpustrRiAL SYSTEM OF THE NEW ORDER . 229


X THE TECHNOLOGY OF PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY 251
XI MaANnuFACTURES AND SALESMANSHIP . . . 284
mie lee Lancer Use of Crepit.. .-. . -« «= 325

Pat) foe SECULAR LHEND . «5-5 « « « 93085448


ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP AND BUSINESS
ENTERPRISE IN RECENT TIMES


FART 1


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY


In recent times absentee ownership has come to be the
main and immediate controlling interest in the life of
civilised men. It is the paramount issue between the
civilised nations, and guides the conduct of their affairs
at home and abroad. The Great War arose out of a con-
flict of absentee interests and the Peace was negotiated
with a view to stabilise them.

This state of things is not precisely new, nor has it
come on suddenly. It is a growth out of the past, but it
has reached something like a culmination during these
opening decades of the century; and it is an outcome of
cumulative changes which have been directed to no such
end. The years of the Great War and the Armistice
have brought many things to a head, and among other
things they have also thrown this factor into the fore-
ground of the situation. And the experience of the War
and after has stirred men to a crude and uneasy realisation
of this state of things. Under one form of words or
another, issues which arise out of the sovereign rights of
absentee ownership are stirring the popular sentiment and
engaging the attention of the officials with an ever in-
creasing urgency. These issues are the substance of all
those desperate perplexities that beset the constituted
authorities and they underlie all those dissensions that
continually trouble the nation’s industry and business.
With the result that popular attention and sentiment are

3


4 Absentee Ownership


gathering about the issues of absentee ownership more
and more directly and consciously with each further
move,—questions of its aims and uses, its necessary limita-
tions, its continued security, its rightful claims, and its
possible eventual abridgment or disallowance.

It is true, this particular form of words—‘‘Absentee
Ownership”—has not been commonly employed to de-
scribe this peculiar institution which now engrosses pub-
lic policy and about which controversy is beginning to
gather. But that only marks a deficiency of speech. It
is only within the last few decades, and only by degrees,
that the facts in the case have been changing in such a
way as to call for the habitual use of such a
phrase as “absentee ownership.” It is only within the
last few decades, and only by degrees, that absentee own-
ership has visibly come to be the main controlling factor
in the established order of things. Yet it is no less true
that this peculiar institution which this form of words is
fit to describe has now plainly come to be the prime in-
stitutional factor that underlies and governs the established
order of society. At the same time and in the same degree
it has, as a matter of course, become the chief concern of
the constituted authorities in all the civilised nations to
safeguard the security and gainfulness of absentee own-
ership. This state of things is now plain to be seen, and
it is therefore beginning to cloud the sentiments of the
underlying population at whose cost this security and
gainfulness are maintained.

So, by degrees the drift of changing conditions has
been heading up in a new alignment of economic forces
and of economic classes. So that the dominant consid-
erations which now govern the material fortunes of the
community are no longer the same as they have been
in the recent past; nor indeed such as they are alleged to


Introductory 5


be in the present. These matters are still spoken of in
terms handed down from the past, and law and custom
still run in terms that are fit to describe a past situation
and conform to the logic of a bygone alignment of forces.
As always, the language employed and the principles
acted on lag behind the facts. But when, as now, the
facts have been changing at an unexampled rate the
language and the principles will lag behind the facts by
an unexampled interval. Yet under the urgent pressure
of new material conditions some degree of adjustment or
derangement of these ancient principles is due to follow.
Continued “lag, leak and friction” is bound to count for
something in the outcome. Continued irritation and de-
feat begot of a system of law and custom that no longer
fits the material conditions of life will necessarily be
an agency of unrest, particularly as touches the frame
of mind of that fraction of the community on whom the
irritation and defeat continue chiefly to fall.

Therefore these time-worn principles of ownership and
control, which are now coming to a head in a system
of absentee ownership and control, are beginning to come
in for an uneasy and reluctant reconsideration; partic-
ularly at the hands of that underlying population who
have no absentee ownership to safeguard. Their question-
ing of these matters habitually takes the shape of per-
sonal recrimination and special pleading, but the drift of
it all is no less evident. Those traditions that underlie
the established order and that guide legal and administra-
tive policy, proceed on an assumed community of class
interests, a national solidarity of interests, and an inter-
national conflict of interests; none of which is borne out
by material facts. Therefore these traditional policies
that still govern the conduct of affairs, civil and political,
legal and administrative, are also falling under suspicion


6 Absentee Ownership


of being incompetent, irrelevant and impertinent, if not
downright mischievous. The losers under these rules of
the game are beginning to see that law and politics, too,
serve the needs of the absentee owners at the cost of
the underlying population.

So, popular interest and sentiment no longer cluster
about these respectable heirlooms of civil liberty and na-
tional rivalry with the same enthusiastic bigotry as in
the recent past. Among these unblest classes who have
to pay its cost, patriotic animosity is no longer so unre-
flectingly self-sufficient as it once was, and as perhaps it
always should be. Among these classes of the underly-
ing population the new alignment of material interests is
beginning to threaten the continued life of the patriotic
spirit. The effectual division of interest and sentiment is
beginning visibly to run on class lines, between the absentee
owners and the underlying population. In material ef-
fect, the national frontiers no longer divide anything but
national groups of special interests, and these special
interests are quite uniformly interests of absentee owners.
National rivalries are useful to these special interests ;
hence the feverish urgency with which the constituted
authorities and the substantial citizens are concerned to
foment national animosity and to penalise backsliders.

Of course these matters are not currently spoken of in
these terms. The new alignment of interest and senti-
ment is not formally recognised, not yet. A decent re-
spect for the obsolete amenities of Natural Liberty for-
bids it, and there is always the human propensity to hold
fast that which once was good. And more particularly,
the bygone issues of national ambition still continue to
hold the affections of the substantial citizens, and the
spirit of national rivalry still continues to serve the needs
of the special interests. Therefore national ambitions


Introductory 7


must and shall be preserved and all conflict of class in-
terests must and shall be ignored.

But all the while the drift of circumstances goes for-
ward and cuts the lines of the new cleavage of interest
and sentiment no less deep and with no less intractable
ill-will on both sides, for all their being decently covered
over with patriotic invective and authentic verbiage about
the common good. And all the while, under one form of
words or another, men’s everyday interest and attention
gathers more and more consciously about this ill-defined
and shifty issue of absentee ownership, and about its
place and value in the country’s industry, to the slowly
increasing neglect of obsolete political ambitions. And
all the while it is increasingly evident that patriotic senti-
ment and national ambitions are no longer of any material
consequence, except as ways and means by which the
statesmen are enabled to further the material interests
of the substantial citizens. A “substantial citizen” is an
absentee owner of much property.


This summary description of things as they are may
seem overdrawn. But it is intended to describe the pres-
ent drift of things, rather than the accomplished facts
hitherto. It is drawn from current observation rather
than from the historical records; so that it aims to de-
scribe the current facts rather than the current talk about
these facts. Of course there is no intention to intimate
that the ancient and honorable habits of national conceit
and patriotic intolerance have been forgotten or even that
they are by way of becoming inoperative ; nor is it that the
rightful claims of absentee ownership are being neglected
or being formally questioned and required to show cause
why. Those cardinal realities of the established order
have not gone out of date or out of mind, neither the one


8 Absentee Ownership


nor the other. Nor is there an effectual resolution any-
where being taken to put either of them away; not yet.
But these ancient and honorable pillars of the old order
are by way of becoming holdovers, both the one and the
other; and the spokesmen of both are beginning to find
themselves on the defensive. As witness the Treaty
of Peace, which foots up to little if anything else than a
plan of defense for the vested interests, concerted be-
tween the several custodians of the old order, at any cost
to the world’s peace or to the underlying population.
As witness also the later conferences of the Powers at
Genoa, at The Hague, and at Lausanne, which have turned
on little else than measures designed to stabilise the right-
ful claims of absentee owners as against the defection
of the Russians and other recusants, together with the
equitable distribution of absentee perquisites among the
several groups of vested interests represented by the sev-
eral governments concerned.

In effect, and notoriously, it has been the chief and
engrossing business of all the statesmen of the Armistice
and the Treaty, on the winning and the losing side alike,
to safeguard these two essential holdovers that go to make
up the status quo ante. National rivalry is a necessary
means of making things safe and profitable for the ab-
sentee owners, as will appear more in detail in the further
argument. All this is a traditional matter of course and
has consequently aroused no particular discussion. In-
deed, it is so much a matter of course as to be taken for
granted. But the defensive measures concerted by these
statesmen, and their continued manceuvres for the stabil-
isation of absentee interests, go to show which way the
cleavage of interests runs. Statesmen do not resort to
counsels of desperation, such as underlie the Treaty and
the later negotiations concerning partition of colonies and


Introductory 9


military establishments, except to save a precarious situa-
tion. And the same defensive purpose, it must be ad-
mitted, runs through that desperate recourse to the strong
arm of repression which today engages the energies of
the civilised governments, all and several, with the
clamorous approval of their substantial citizens whose
pecuniary interests are sought to be safeguarded by these
measures.

Now, this red line of cleavage, in material interest and
in "sentiment, tuns not between those who own something
and those who own nothing, as has habitually been set
out in the formulas of the doctrinaires, but between those
who own more than they personally can use and those who
have > urgent use for more than they own. The issue now
is turning not on a “question of « ownership, as such, but
on absentee ownership. The standard formalities of “So-
cialism” and “‘Anti-socialism” are obsolete in face of the
new alignment of economic forces. It is now not so much
a question of equity in the distribution of incomes, but
rather a question of expediency as regards the absentee
management of productive industry, at large and in de-
tail. It is not a matter of moral revulsion. It may be
said, of course, and perhaps truthfully, that the absentee
owners of the country’s industrial equipment come in for
a disproportionate share of the “national dividend,” and
that they and their folks habitually consume their share
in superfluities ; but no urgent moral indignation appears
“to be aroused by all that. All that has long been a fa-
miliar matter of course, and no substantial question as to
the merits of that arrangement has yet been seriously en-
tertained. Efforts to capitalise such a sentiment for pur-
poses of disturbance have uniformly failed.

What the material circumstances are bringing to men’s
attention is a question of how to get the work done rather


Vy


Io Absentee Ownership


than_of what to. do with the output. It is a question of
the effectual use of the country’s industrial resources,
man-power, and equipment.t Investment and corpora-
tion finance have taken such a turn and reached such a
growth that, between them, the absentee owners large and
small have come to control the ways and means of pro-
duction and distribution, at large and in detail, in what
is to be done and what is to be left undone. And the
business interests of these absentee owners no longer co-
incide in any passable degree with the material interests
of the underlying population, whose livelihood is bound up
with the due working of this industrial system, at large
and in detail. The material interest of the underlying
population is best served by a maximum output at a low
cost, while the business interests of the industry’s owners
may best be served by a moderate output at an enhanced
price.


1Cf., eg., Walther Rathenau, “Die neue Wirtschaft,” Schrif-
ten, vol. V.


CHAPTER. II


THE GROWTH AND VALUE OF NATIONAL INTEGRITY


THERE is no question of the legality of absentee owner-}
ship, nor of its moral right. It is a settled institution |


of civilised life, embedded in law and morals, and its roots) &


run through the foundations of European civilisation. |
Legality and morality are a matter of statute, precedent, ,
and usage; and absentee ownership is quite securely
grounded in the Common Law and deeply ingrained in
the moral sense of civilised men. In the American com-
monweaith such ownership is also covered by the con-
stitutional provision which declares that men must not be
deprived of their property except by due process of law.
And the legal precedents, interpretations and refinements
which have been set up and worked out by jurists under
this constitutional provision have in the main been con-
cerned with fortifying and extending the security and im-
plied rights of absentee ownership in one bearing and an-
other; with the result that these rights are, legally and
morally, more secure and more extensive today than
ever before. Indirectly too, the provision for “due proc-
ess of law” has greatly reénforced the dominant posi-
tion of absentee ownership as against any claims of an-
other kind or against claimants of any other class. Liti-
gation as conducted according to the rules and precedents
which govern the “due process” has in recent times be-
come too costly to be carried to a conclusion by any liti-
gant who is not an absentee owner of large means. This
II


f
f


I2 Absentee Ownership


will hold true in America perhaps in a more conclusive
fashion than in any other civilised nation.t In effect,
due process of law as it concerns property has become
an appliance for the regulation of relations between ab-
sentee owners.

Legally, the dominant position of absentee ownership
is not to be questioned or shaken. And as regards its
moral foundations in current common sense, in the habits
of thought of this people, the institution is in a similarly
strong position. It remains true that absentee ownership
is still the idol of every true American heart. Indeed,
chief among the civic virtues of this people is that stead-
fast cupidity that drives its citizens, each and several,
under pain of moral turpitude, to acquire a “competence,”
and then unremittingly to augment any competence al-
ready acquired. The high ideal which of moral right
animates these good citizens in this pursuit of a ‘“compe-
tence” is to get something for nothing, to get legal pos-
session of some source of income at a less cost than its
capitalisable value. Invariably a “competence” signifies
the ownership of means in excess of what the owner can
make use of, personally and without help; which is also
a convenient definition of “absentee ownership.” By so
coming into the possession of an unearned increase of
wealth a man becomes a “substantial citizen.” And ac-
cording to the sturdy common sense of a population
trained to this pursuit of something for nothing, failure

1 American law and procedure have taken shape under the
hand of legislatures and courts which have habitually and as a
matter of course been made up of investors and lawyers, with
no control from outside these classes; and the upshot of it has
been an arrangement such as to serve the convenience and profit
of these two classes of persons,—such as to increase the cost,


volume, uncertainty and intricacy of litigation.—Cf., e. g., Charles


A. Beard, Contemporary American History, especially ch. III
and IX,


National Integrity 13


to acquire such a competence is visited with unsparing
moral reprobation. Any person who falls short in this
pursuit of something for nothing, and so fails to avoid
work in some useful occupation, is a shiftless ne’er-do-
well; he loses self-respect as well as the respect of his
neighbors and is in a fair way to be rated as an undesir-
able citizen. By and large, the line of moral demarka-
tion runs between the substantial citizen and the un-
desirable citizen. These ideals of propriety and morality
are not peculiarly American, of course; although the
Americans may perhaps be able to claim some slight
peculiar degree of certitude and moral sufficiency on this
head.


The established order of law and custom which safe-
guards absentee ownership in recent times and among
civilised nations is, in the main, a modern creation; being,
in effect, an outgrowth of usages and principles (habits
of thought) which were induced by the conditions of life
during early-modern times. The type-form of organised
control by which this modern law and custom is upheld
and enabled to function is that of the Nation—a politically
self-determining body of people, legally and morally com-
petent to make war.’


2There appears to be no other or further attribute or ca-
pacity that can be specified as a universally essential characteristic
of the modern nation except this moral and legal license to re-
sort to violence at will. A nation is a (de jure) self-determin-
ing body in respect of its hostilities. Other attributes and ca-
pacities may be taken away without thereby terminating any
given nation’s existence as such, but if this formally authentic
competency for self-determining hostility be surrendered the
nation, qua nation, is functa officio. It will accordingly be re-
marked, of course, that in respect of its authentic legal and
moral type-form the modern nation is essentially of a predatory
nature. And such is necessarily the case in view of its deri-


14 Absentee Ownership


Not that this modern system of law and order embodies
nothing that is of older date than early-modern times.
Indeed, embedded in this early-modern system are large
remnants which have stood over from antiquity and from
the Middle Ages; as how should it not, since it is in all
its constituents a creature of habit and tradition? The
experience of life in early-modern times and since has
not broken at all points—nor indeed in the main—with
what had gone before. At the same time there have been
substantial though minor changes brought into the system
in the course of later experience and habituation. But
apart from interpretations and refinements instituted ad
hoc, and in so far as it bears directly on the security,
rights and powers of absentee ownership, this current
system of law and custom is grounded in the principles of
law and morals that were worked up and stabilised in
the course of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth
centuries.

The system as it now stands comprises elements of
older date, but the scheme was rounded out and stabil-
ised in that time and in response to the impact of the
conditions which prevailed then, and the resulting struc-
ture of law and moralities has not been seriously dis-
turbed since then. By and large, the system is a hold-
over out of the early-modern centuries, and its period
of growth was formally closed during the later half of
the eighteenth century. Later experience has fluttered
against the stable framework of Natural Rights set up in
the eighteenth century and has, on the whole, brought no
substantial change of principles; assuredly nothing that
amounts to a break with the eighteenth-century point of


vation. The same state of the case will also be evident on first-
hand reflection, to any person who may be passably informed
as to the run of events during the past few years.


National Integrity 15


departure. Meanwhile an industrial revolution has passed
over the European peoples and has brought on an un-
exampled change in the material conditions of life.

It has consistently been the pride and boast of civilised
men that the laws and customs which govern their con-
duct and regulate their behavior in all their civic and in-
dustrial relations are grounded in a system of time-
worn principles—immutable principles of immemorial
antiquity which are fundamentally and eternally right and
good. That is to say, in this particular instance, these
principles of law and morals have been “immemorially
ancient” and “eternally right and good” ever since they
became ingrained by habit and presently reduced to docu-
mentary statement in modern times. As regards those
principles of right conduct which specifically cover the
just rights and powers of absentee ownership, their im-
memorial antiquity and immutable validity came on by
degrees during the transition from feudalism and canon
law to the handicraft era and the common law; when the
petty trade of that time expanded to such dimensions as
enabled it to change from peddling for a livelihood to
investment for a profit. In America specifically, the im-
mutable validity which so invests the law and morals of
absentee ownership dates from A.D. 1776 or 1787, ac-
cording as one may prefer to see it.

Meantime, while these immutable principles of law and
morals have continued to embody the habits of thought
of a bygone age, the industrial system within which and
in control of which absentee ownership exercises these its
ancient and immutable. rights and powers is of the twen-
tieth century and is in no respect and in no degree im-
mutable ; quite the contrary, in fact. While modern men
continue to boast and laud the changeless antiquity and
stability of the rules which govern their industrial rela-


16 Absentee Ownership


tions, it is at the same time their pride and boast that the
industrial arts which condition their behavior under these
rules are forever changing, progressively and at an ever-
accelerating rate. In time, immutable rules of conduct
enforced under progressively changing conditions should
logically result in a muddle.


There is, of course, nothing particularly new or pe-
culiarly civilised about this obstinate assumption that the
main specifications of the legal and moral code are an-
cient and immutable. Indeed, it is quite the usual thing
among the common run of barbarians and savages, an-
cient and contemporary. But all the while, in point of
fact and as a matter of course, any system of law and
custom, being a product of habituation, is necessarily
subject to continued change, even in respect of its under-
lying principles. An underlying principle is, after all,
little else than a personalised and stabilised blend of the
overlying details that go to make up everyday behavior.
The chain of responses to the impact of changing circum-
stances runs on as a course of progressive habituation, and
the resulting average run of blended habits will neces-
sarily shift and bend its course to follow the progressive
displacement of its constituent elements. It follows that
the upshot of this progressive habituation, which goes to
create the standards of conduct, will change cumulatively
from day to day by fluctuating variations.* But always
and everywhere men like to believe that their own par-
ticular standards of conduct are fixed in the nature of
things, so that to each people their own established scheme
of usages, in law and morals, is immutably right and
good, in principle.

But habituation follows after experience and works


8 Cf. Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct.


National Integrity 17


against the side-draft of previous habituation. With the
result that any deliberate change which is sought to be
worked into the accepted scheme of use and wont will
take effect only tardily, reluctantly, and sparingly. And
it is a trait of human nature that any unavoidable mini-
mum of change which so is perforce infused into the
scheme of conduct will be covered in with an apologetic
appeal to even more ancient and immutable principles
erected out of painstaking subtleties and evasions, such
as go to make up the consistency of the jurists and the-
ologians. The new effectual factors in the case, those
altered material circumstances that enforce a change in
the established scheme of usage and law, are not allowed
to come in openly as being in themselves conclusive
grounds for the changes of principle which they enforce.
Such is human nature. Any unavoidable move of this
nature must be vouched for by make-believe. Authenti-
city must be found in underlying principles and immemo-
rial usage, to be discovered by sophistical dialectics.

In the long run, of course, the pressure of changing
material circumstances will have to shape the lines of
human conduct, on pain of extinction. And this “long
run” will necessarily have to be a shorter run when, as
in the present, these relentless material circumstances are
changing swiftly and at an ever accelerated rate. But al-
ways this running adaptation of the legal and moral con-
ventions, if it is allowed at all, will be allowed to take ef-
fect only in the long run and sparingly, with an apparatus
of make-believe and under cover of metaphysically im-
mutable principles discovered ad hoc. But it does not
follow that the pressure of material necessity, visibly en-
forced by the death penalty, will ensure such a change
in the legal and moral punctilios as will save the nation
trom the death penalty. Witness the case of the civilised


18 Absentee Ownership


nations during the past few years and the immediate
present (1923).

Whether any given people is to come through any given
period of such enforced change alive and fit to live, ap-
pears to be a matter of chance in which human insight
plays a minor part and human foresight no part at all.
As has already been spoken of above and as is well known
to students of these things, any established scheme of
law and morals is an outgrowth of custom, of past hab-
ituation, and is bound to change incontinently in the course
of further habituation. It is an empirical creation, a sys-
tem of habits of thought induced by past habits of life,
which have been induced by the drive of those material
circumstances under which these human generations have
been living in the past. And this system of habits of
thought (law and custom) is, at the best, in a state of
moving equilibrium, forever subject to readjustment and
derangement by further habituation induced by further
changes in those material circumstances that condition the
community’s habits of life.

In the nature of things the growth of custom follows
after the facts of experience which give rise to it, and
any systematic change in the substance or direction of this
growth of custom follows after the material changes which
entail it. In this sense, therefore, any established order
of law and custom is always out of date, in some degree.
The code of right and honest living is always in arrears,
by more or less; more so in the case of any people for
whom the material conditions of life are in rapid process
of change, as in America and the civilised countries of
Europe.

Any large and persistent change in the material condi-
tions—such, e. g., as has been taking effect in the scale
and methods of industry during the past one hundred


National Iniegrity 19


years—will necessarily be followed in due course by more
or less pronounced changes in the established order of
human relations and principles of conduct; but it need
not follow that the resulting changes in law and morals
will be of such a nature as to enhance the facility of
life under the new order of material conditions which
has induced these changes. Habituation affects the apti-
tudes of the individual as such, and comprises no collec-
tive bent. It is in the nature of a wis a tergo, which
may drive many persons in the same general direction,
but which looks to no end. In effect, any resulting re-
vision of the principles of conduct will come in as a drift
of habituation rather than a dispassionately reasoned
adaptation of conduct to the circumstances of the case.
It appears always to be a matter of “forced movements”
rather than an outcome of shrewd initiative and logical
design—even though much argument may be spent in the
course of it all. As witness the helplessly evil case of
the civilised nations since the War and the Armistice,
and the solicitous fluttering of all the shrewd statesmen
and the responsible men of affairs. When seen in a

4 By ingrained habit stabilised with precept and example the
statesmen and men of affairs, together with the substantial
part of their underlying constituencies, conceive the situation
in terms of national intrigue and absentee ownership, and they
endeavor to deal with it all along those lines. National rapaci-
ties are to be balanced and absentee property-claims are to be
made secure; and there is at least a make-believe of hope that
all that will help some, at least for the time being. Whereas
the hardships of the situation effectually run in terms of popu-
lation, foot-loose man-power, idle equipment, under-production.
These are material facts that can be handled only by recourse
to material science, technical organisation, industrial allocation
of resources, quantity production of useful goods. But in effect,
in so far as touches any action on their part in these premises,
they know nothing and take no cognisance of the material


sciences, the mechanical technology, or the growth of population.
In the present disarray of these material ways and means, na-


20 Absentee Ownership


longer historical perspective and with a consequent
greater detachment of observation any deliberate revi-
sion of the received scheme of law and morals will ap-
pear all the more patently to be a work of casual drift
and an outcome of fortuitous habituation—Forced Move-
ments, Tropisms, and Animal Conduct.® Such in effect
has been the growth of nationalism in recent times, as
well as of the progressively expanded rights of absentee
ownership during the same period.®

So in the passage from medieval to modern times
certain profound and enduring changes took effect in the
civil and political institutions of Europe. But all that
had gone before was not lost, of course. Many things
were carried over. As a matter of course very much
of the institutional furniture of the Middle Ages has
stood over and has continued to govern men’s conduct


tional interests and absentee claims can serve only to obstruct
the work that is to be done. National interests after all are
essentially predatory interests and the rightful claims of ab-
sentee ownership are essentially claims to unearned income;
and the singleminded concern of the statesmen and men of
affairs with these endeavours to get something for nothing has in
effect resulted in unremitting sabotage on the work that is wait-
ing to be done. So they have hitherto achieved nothing more
to the point than a passably complete stultification.

5It is evident now that such has been the nature of those
revolutionary constitutional transactions that have marked the
history of modern Europe and given its special character to the
present established order of law and politics; as, e.g., the
English revolution of 1688 or the French and the American
transactions in the late eighteenth century.—Cf., e.g., Robinson
and Beard, Outlines of European History, Part II.

The form of words made use of above will be recognised as
taken from the title of a volume published by Jacques Loeb un-
der that caption.

6In all this it remains true, of course, that interested parties
have shrewdly turned these forced movements of popular senti-
ment to account, and so have exercised something of a selec-
tive guidance over the growth of institutions.


National Integrity 21


and convictions very nicely in one bearing and another
through the modern era,—as, e.g., the Church and the
Gentry. Articles of institutional furniture of this spirit-
ual order, being somewhat out of touch with those
material changes that make for change, stand a better
chance of survival, with less derangement. The mechani-
cally enforced behavior of workday life does not im-
pinge so directly and intimately on those habits of thought
that make up the verities and proprieties of religion and
gentility. However intrinsic to the due balance of hu-
man affairs, these things of the spirit are after all, in
their material bearing, of less immediate and less con-
crete effect, and they are therefore less rudely touched
by innovations in the industrial arts. Regard being had
to the very respectable body of such institutional hold-
overs, it will be seen that the established order of law
and custom is, after all, modern only in the sense that
it has been modernised out of the past, and that its
modernisation has necessarily been incomplete, in the na-
ture of things.

It is this modernisation of European institutions that
is in question here, and only in so far as it bears directly
on ownership and industry; and therefore on the material
fortunes of the civilised peoples, including America.
The rest of the institutional furniture that goes to make
up Western civilisation, those other articles of usage
and belief that are comprised in the spiritual heritage,
may be no less interesting and no less admirable in their
own right, but a discussion of these other things does
not belong here.

In so far as bears on latterday questions of ownership
and industry, there are two main articles of modern law
and custom that call for consideration,—the system of
Natural Rights, and the growth of National Integrity.


22 Absentee Ownership


The two are closely in touch with one another, indeed
they are bound up together, inasmuch as it is the na-
tional establishment that gives effect to the code of natu-
ral rights in this modern scheme of things. The two
together make the framework of democratic institutions.
Of these two pillars of the house of democracy, the na-
tional establishment may conveniently be spoken of first.


The growth of national integrity has run a fairly un-
broken course since the close of the Middle Ages. It
has all the while gathered vigor and momentum, on the
whole, and has grown gradually more definite in its aims
and motives; and this course of growth and ripening ap- rf
pears by no means to be concluded yet. As it bears on
the questions involved in the present inquiry the spirit
(or habit) of national integrity may be said to have taken
its rise and assumed much of its distinctive character in
those princely adventures in “state-making” that fill the
political history of early modern times.

State-making was a competitive enterprise of war and
politics, in which the rival princely or dynastic establish-
ments, all and several, each sought its own advantage at
the cost of any whom it might concern. Being essentially
a predatory enterprise, its ways and means were fraud
and force. The several princely and dynastic establish-
ments took on a corporate existence, with a corporate
interest, policy, and organisation; and each of them
worked consistently at cross purposes with all other simi-
lar corporations engaged in the same line of adventure.
Among them were also principalities of the Faith, includ-
ing the Holy See. The aim of it all centered in princely

NV dominion and prestige, and in unearned incomes for the
civil, military, and ecclesiastical personnel by whose con-
certed efforts the traffic in state-making was carried on.


National Integrity 23


Any one of these dynastic corporations could gain further
dominion and prestige only at the expense of others of
their kind, and only at the cost of their underlying popu-»
lation. It is a matter of course that the loss, damage,
decay or discomfort of any one counted as gain for the
rest; all gains being differential gains. The traffic was
carried on then as now by warfare and warlike diplo-
macy ;* which always resolves itself into an expenditure
of life and substance on the part of the underlying popu-
lation of all contending parties. It was always, as it has
always continued to be, an enterprise of intimidation
which counted on an eventual recourse to arms—ultima
ratio principum—and the business was always, then as
now, worked out in terms of mutual damage and dis-
comfort, the outcome being decided by the balance of
damage and loss; the cost in life and substance falling,
then as now, on the underlying population, and the gains
in dominion, prestige and goods going to the princely es-
tablishment and the kept classes.

This whole traffic in state-making is of a singularly
unambiguous character and makes a sufficiently notorious
chapter of history. And the States which it made were
such as it might be expected to make. It was an enter-
prise in mutual defeat, quite unashamed. To the end
that these adventures in damage, debauch and discomfort
might be carried to a fitting conclusion, as they com-
monly have been, the several dynastic corporations
claimed, and enforced, an undivided usufruct of their
underlying populations and all their ways and works.
So this unqualified usufruct of the underlying popula-
tion became a perpetual and unalienable asset of the


7 The part of wise statecraft then as now was to “speak softly
and carry a big stick,’ as the principle has been formulated
by one of the greater democratic statesmen of a later time.


24 Absentee Ownership


dynastic establishment, by Grace of God. In time, and
indeed in a relatively short time, by force of strict and
unremitting discipline and indoctrination the underlying
population learned to believe that this princely usufruct
of their persons and property by Grace of God was in-
dispensably right and good, in the nature of things.
By law and custom the underlying population came to
owe, and to own, an unbounded and unquestioning alle-
giance of service to the princely establishment in whose
usufruct they are held. Therefore servile allegiance has
become not only a point of law but also a point of morals
and honor. Such is the force of use and wont.

In the nature of things, these competitive princely cor-
porations were always working at cross purposes and
were imbued with an all-pervading spirit of enmity and
distrust, suitable to that enterprise in mutual damage and
discomfort for which they were organised and equipped;
and in all this diligent pursuit of disaster it was rec~-
ognised as a plain matter of course that there was no
place for scruples of any kind. All is fair in war and
politics. It is a game of force and fraud. There is
said to be honor among thieves, but one does not look
for such a thing among statesmen. And so this spirit
of dynastic statecraft spread down and outward by diffu-
sion, by precept and example, throughout the underlying
population until presently they were, all and several,
bound together in the service of their predacious masters
by an inveterate and unreflecting solidarity of national
conceit, fear, hate, contempt, and an enthusiastically slav-
ish obedience to the constituted authorities. Such has
been the force of use and wont, and such is its institu-
tional residue.®


8 Cf. e.g. Max Silvius Handman, “The Sentiment of Na-
tionalism.” Political Science Quarterly, March, 1921.—No peo-


National Integrity 25


By habituation through these bleak centuries of state-
making this national integrity of hate, mischief and dis-
trust has been ground into the texture of civilised life
and thought, until it has become one of the sovereign
facts in the established order of law and morals in all
the civilised nations. So that when presently, under the
pressure of altered material circumstances and conse-
quent altered habits of life, a growth of democratic in-
stitutions set in, the ancient habitual solidarity of na-
tional conceit, fear, hate, contempt, and servility was
carried over intact and unabated into the ideals of the
democratic commonwealth, where it is still treasured as
the essential substance of citizenship. It still remains
the chief engine of dissension and distress at the hands
of the national statesmen, whose chief end of endeavour
still continues to be mutual defeat. It is only that the
divine right of the prince has passed over into the divine
right of the Nation. The democratic corporations of
national statesmen continue to carry on the traffic in
war and politics on the same lines and by use of the same
means and methods as the dynastic statesmen of the era of
state-making in their time. And the ways and means of
it all is still the same dutiful usufruct of the underlying
population, dedicated to this use by their corporate spirit
of national vanity, fear, hate, contempt, and servility.

In the course of this era of state-making the prince
became a “sovereign” by Grace of God, with tenure in
perpetuity. His divine right to the usufruct of the under-
lying population was worked out and established by help
of the interested connivance of the Church; and this ap-
pears to have been the only substantial contribution which
the Church has made to the modern scheme of civil and


ple can be a bona-fide Nation so long as it falls short in re-
spect of this overhead of futilities and turpitudes.


26 Absentee Ownership


political institutions. The prince became a sovereign;
that is to say, all men became subject and abjectly in-
ferior to him, in the nature of things; and to him, for
no reasoned cause, all men thereupon owed unquestioning
and unqualified obedience and service, in the divine na-
ture of things. This notion of “sovereignty” is essenti-
ally a proposition in theological metaphysics, according
to which some sort of immaterial superiority is infused
in the person of the sovereign by divine fiat; which in-
vests him with an axiomatically authentic personal do-
minion over the underlying population and all their ways
and works. The Freudians would presumably call it an
inferiority complex with benefit of clergy.

When and in so far as the democratic commonwealth
has displaced the monarchical State, this theologico-met-
aphysical attribute of sovereignty is conceived by the
experts in political law and speculation to have passed
over intact to the Nation; so that the Grace of God in
this bearing now invests the national establishment, con-
ceived as a corporate personality, instead of the person
of the prince. The retention of this princely sovereignty
in behalf of the “sovereign people’ marks the Nation
as a successor of the dynastic State, chartered to do busi-
ness on the same lines and with the same powers; very
much as a modern oil corporation will take over all the
powers and liabilities of any individual promoters whom
it has bought out. The democratic Nation, therefore, is
a sovereign by Grace of God, whatever other blessings
it may enjoy. But the democratic Nation has no per-
sonal existence except in the several persons of its citi-
zens. So the experts in political speculation have drawn
the logical consequence, to the effect that these demo-
cratic citizens are vested with this princely sovereignty,
each and several, unalienably and in perpetuity. That


National Integrity 27


is to say, these democratic citizens, each and several, by
Grace of God hold sovereign dominion over the under-
lying population of which they each and several are ab-
jectly servile components.® So also it should apparently
follow by force of the same metaphysics that each of these
sovereign citizens, being at the same time a loyal member
of the underlying population, by Grace of God owes un-
qualified and unalienable allegiance to his own person in
perpetuity.

All this seems foolish, of course. But it has the merit
of consistency. And it was for a democracy of this
complexion that the world once was to have been made
safe. So also of course it is at least extremely doubtful
if any stretch of human fantasy could have designed
and embroidered such an extraordinary conception of
citizen-sovereignty, if it had not been that the maggoty
conceit of princely divine right was ready to hand,—
an institutional heirloom handed down to the democratic
commonwealth from the days of the Grace of God;
the days of dynastic state-making and princely bishops;
when the Lord’s ancinted “tore each other in the slime”
of political intrigue, while they visited upon the underly-


9 “Men jeg er denne Kong Apis,
Det ser jeg saa soleklart;

Og dersom du ikke forstaar det
Saa skal du forstaa det snart.


“Kong Apis var nemlig paa jagten,
Og steg af sin hest en stund,” o.s.v.


“But I am that same King Apis,
I see it as clear as noon;

And if you don’t understand it
You shall understand it soon.


“King Apis once rode out a-hunting,
And he went aside by himself,” etc.
Peer Gynt, Act IV


28 Absentee Ownership


ing population “the high justice, the middle, and the low.”

When divested of this metaphysical figment of sover-
eignty and divine right, any national pretensions on the
part of any democratic commonwealth become footless
nonsense. The commonwealth in such a case would no
longer be a political engine to be turned to account for
political traffic by the politicians. It would be nothing to
bluster and give off fumes about; nothing better, in
fact, than an unsanctified workday arrangement for the
common use of industrial ways and means. In fact the
democratic commonwealths would in such event be in a
fair way to become what they profess to be,—neighborly
fellowships of ungraded masterless men given over to
“life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness” under the
ancient and altogether human rule of Live and Let Live.
In that event loyal subjection to the national establish-
ment of politicians would have no sacramental value, and
patriotic fervor would be no more meritorious than
any other display of intolerance. Treason and sedition
would accordingly fall from their high estate as the
chief of crimes, and would take rank as nothing bet-
ter than scandalous dissension about matters of taste and
opinion. However, that is not the way things have been
arranged by the blind drift of habituation out of that
sorry past. And as things now stand, thanks to that
parlous legacy of despotism and predation by Grace of
God, patriotic inflation is the chief of the civic virtues,
and failure to abet the government’s political intrigues is
“high crimes and misdemeanors.”

By grace of this ingrained bias of predacious enmity
toward the outside and voluntary servitude within the
Nation the constituted authorities of these democratic
commonwealths have fallen neatly into the place once oc-
cupied by the dynastic statesmen, and so they have, quite


National Integrity 29


as a matter of course, also fallen into the same lines of
dreary traffic in competitive foree and fraud, without ma-
terial abatement. Therefore civilised mankind is still
divided against itself in a predatory scramble to get some-
thing for nothing at the cost of any whom it may concern;
which always foots up to mutual defeat at the cost of the
underlying population.

This is the domain of External Politics; a domain cre-
ated out of national animosities, by statecraft, for the pur-
suit of national prestige and unearned gain.

In internal affairs, on the other hand, it is loosely pre-
sumed that the statesmen will be actuated by principles
of equity and fair dealing and will be occupied with a
humane pursuit of the common good. But the more
fully the commonwealth has come to realise its status as
a Nation, the more does its external politics (war and
diplomacy) take precedence of its domestic concerns.
The exigencies of external politics are paramount, and
the conduct of internal affairs therefore are, in effect, re-
quired to conform to the needs of the nation’s external
policies. And the administration of external politics, be-
ing in the nature of an enterprise in chicane and coercion,
is necessarily furtive, runs forever on sharp practice, care-
fully withholds “information that might be useful to the
enemy,” and habitually gives out information with intent
to deceive. In effect, external politics is a blend of war
and business and combines the peculiar traits of both.
So the shadow of external politics covers also the manage-
ment of domestic affairs, with the result that the author-
ities of the democratic commonwealths habitually go
about their work under a cover of reticence tempered with
prevarication.

Now, this may seem a fault; but the strategy enforced
by the paramount exigencies of national politics is a


$0 Absentee Ownership


furtive business, in the nature of things, and will have
to be accepted with the defects of its qualities, if the
Republic is to fulfil its destiny as a dignified and self-
respecting Nation. The needful screen of strategic
feticence serves also as a useful cover for many inter-
ested transactions that would not bear the light of un-
tempered publicity; and the reasonable officers who
thrive under the shade of the screen will presumably be
such as the circumstances call for. By selective elimina-
tion of artless persons the personnel of official life comes
to be made up, in the main, of such persons as will feel
at home in the resulting spiritual twilight of official life,
by native gift or by sedulous training.1® So it has also
come about, under the stress of national strategy and
political business enterprise, that any effectual distinc-
tion between honest politics and corrupt politics is an
elusive difference of degree, not a difference in kind.
Due to the same causes it also follows that patriotic devo-
tion to the national establishment will, in effect, come to
much the same thing as partisan devotion to the fortunes
of some particular gang or clique of political hucksters
whose concern it is to make use of the national establish-
ment for the profit of some particular group of special
business interests ; which is called “party government” by
those who theorise in Political Science.
~.} The practical outcome has been a comprehensive defeat
of democratic institutions in civilised Europe, at home
and over-seas. It seems not likely that national vanity
10 This will ordinarily imply a degree of arrested development,
particularly of the moral faculty, such as goes to create what
is called a “moron.” Still, sedulous training will also do much.
11 As seen, e.g., in the late election of a United States Senator


from Michigan, where this question has been decided on a tech-
nicality.


National Integrity 31


and dissension alone and working at random could have
brought the affairs of the democratic nations to this pass,
but they have also not been left to work out their own
qualities unguided and unblended. Since and so far as
the anointed princes have ceased to provide an interested
motive for fomenting and mobilising international jeal-
ousies, statesmen have found a substitute in the pursuit of
business interests. So the propagation of special interests
under the shelter of national policy has come into the case,
and this intoxicating blend has brought the civilised na-
tions to the place where they now stand, after the War
that was fought for commercial dominion. When na-
tional inflation is compounded with business enterprise
bent on getting something for nothing at any cost, the
product is that democratic “Imperialism” that is now car-
rying on the ancient traffic of statecraft. As once at the
call of the anointed princes, so now at the call of a
businesslike imperialist policy, the nation’s citizen has
no rights which the nation’s politicians are bound to re-
spect, except such property rights as are identified with
business transactions on a reasonably large scale. So,
the democratic commonwealths have fallen back on the
ancient footing of intolerance, coercion, and furtive job-
bery, that belongs of right to the statecraft of despotism
and predation by Grace of God.

But it is, after all, a relapse with a difference, at least
by profession. So far as the dynastic State has formally
passed out of use among the civilised nations, and wher-
ever democratic forms have by degrees taken its place,
it is formally assumed and professed that the material
needs of the country at large have displaced the ambi-
tions of the Crown in the counsels of the statesmen who
manage the nation’s affairs. All this has brought on a


ny Absentee Ownership


change in the sentiments and aims which it is now in-
cumbent on the statesmen to profess in their public ut-
terances.

The resulting change has affected their professions
more profoundly than their policies. During the era of
state-making, war-like enterprise was always the chief and
abiding concern of the dynastic statesmen. But as a
means to this end the politicians of the Crown were also
bent on increasing the material resources of their State
at the cost of their neighbors. In this endeavor, which
included a “mercantile” policy, so called, they were guided
by the axiomatic general principle that one nation’s gain
is another’s loss, and conversely ; which assumes that in-
ternational hostility is a matter of course, in the nature
of things ; and which appears to be a sound axiom of na-
tional statecraft, in the nature of things national.

The main and abiding pursuit of mutual defeat was
never lost sight of in the economic policy of the dynastic
state-makers ; and, indeed the same familiar principle still
continues to govern the motions of the national statesmen
and the sentiments of their democratic constituencies.
This economic policy of dynastic and imperial statecraft
is called Mercantilism. In practice it is always in the
nature of sabotage. The ways and means of its strategy
are obstruction of trade and interference with industry; as,
e.g., by a protective tariff, a colonial policy, a subsidy
to shipping or munitions, an injunction of trade-unions,
etc.

With the rise of the democratic nations the divine right
of international obstruction and chicane passed from the
dead hand of the anointed princes into the hands of the
constituted authorities in these commonwealths, and these
have since then continued with singular consistency to
pursue the same tactics of mutual hindrance and defeat;


Natwonal Integrity 33


well approved all the while by their patriotic constitu-
encies. The only sensible departure from this course of
policy occurred during the early half of the nineteenth
century, before the special interests of business had con-
clusively displaced the material interest of the community
at large in the counsels of the statesmen and in the af-
fections of the underlying population.

America particularly, which is by all accounts the most
democratic nation in Christendom, has reverted to the
princely policy of mercantilism with the least abatement ;
or perhaps it should rather be said that America, the
most democratic, has pushed the inherited kingly policy
of economic obstruction and defeat to greater lengths
than the others. America’s unexampled resources have
enabled this nation to carry a heavier handicap of arti-
ficial disabilities than the others. Presumably it is not
that the Americans are endowed with a larger capacity
for clannishness and self-deception.


Certain considerations bearing on the case of mer-
cantilism in America may be called to mind to explain
and exculpate the peculiarly shameless abandon with
which that ancient policy of damage and defeat continues
to be pursued by this nation. America has by nature
been endowed with unexampled resources, which have
hitherto enabled this people to find an easy livelihood in
spite of their costly and vexatious tariffs and their equally
thriftless land policy. At the same time this people has
been subject to a somewhat special course of habitua-
tion, due to the peculiar position in which their resources
have placed them. They have from the outset been en-
gaged among themselves on a competitive pursuit of un-
earned gain to be got from taking over these resources
and holding them out or trading in them. So that, by


34 Absentee Ownership


steady habituation, cupidity and sharp practice have been
embedded in the common sense of this people as civic
virtues of the first order, under the decent camouflage
of thrift and self-help. A people whose workday ideal
of self-help is unearned gain by legalised seizure at the
cost of the community, who have been schooled in the
practice of salesmanship until they believe that wealth
is to be created by sharp practice, and that the perfect
work of productive enterprise and initiative consists in
“cornering the market” and “sitting tight,’—a body of
men whose sense of the realities is palsied with this man-
ner of hip-shotten logic is also fit to believe that “the
foreigner pays the tax” imposed by a protective tariff
or that a ship subsidy is of some benefit to someone else
than the absentee owners of the ships. An illustrious
politician has said that “you can not fool all the people
all the time,” but in a case where the people in question
are sedulousy fooling themselves all the time the politi-
clans can come near achieving that ideal result.

And all the while, being a new nation and of humble
antecedents, this American people has ever been quite
irritably beset with a felt need of national prestige; which
has engendered a bitterly patriotic sentiment and a head-
long protestation of national solidarity; such a spirit as
will lend itself to all manner of dubious uses in the hands
of astute politicians. And finally it is also to be noted
that the more maturely vicious development of this policy
of commercial sabotage in America coincides in point of
time and degree with the rise and dominance of absentee
ownership in this country, and that any gains to be derived
from such restraint of trade always accrue to one and
another of the vested interests of the absentee owners,
at the cost of the underlying population.


National Integrity 35


This protectionist sabotage on trade is a piece of the
nationalist politics called Imperialism. Imperialism is
dynastic politics under a new name, carried on for the
benefit of absentee owners instead of absentee princes;
but so far as regards its bearing on the material fortunes
of the underlying community it all comes to the same
thing. All the civilised nations are beset with imperi-
alistic ambitions, and so far as their limitations will per-
mit them they are all occupied with imperialistic schemes ;
that is to say schemes for the benefit of their vested busi-
ness interests, masked as schemes for the aggrandise-
ment of the nation.

There is a growing need of such national aids to busi-
ness. A business corporation as such is restricted by
certain large formalities of common honesty, the ob-
servance of which is not contemplated when business is
done in the name of the Nation. The Nation, being in
effect a licenced predatory concern, is not bound by the
decencies of that code of law and morals that governs
private conduct. So the national pretensions make a con-
venient cover for such adventures in pursuit of gain as run
beyond the pale. These adventures in business, as well
as the national pretensions, unavoidably run at cross pur-
poses with one another; the abiding purpose of all com-
petitors being to get whatever may be got at the cost of
their neighbors or at the cost of those industrially back-
ward peoples who have something to lose. It is the
foremost aim of the imperialistic statesmen to extend
and enlarge the advantages of such of the nation’s busi-
ness men as are interested in gainful traffic in foreign
parts; that is to say, it is designed to extend and enlarge
the dominion of the nation’s absentee owners beyond the
national frontiers.


36 Absentee Ownership


And by a curious twist of patriotic emotion the loyal
citizens are enabled to believe that these extra-territorial
gains of the country’s business men will somehow benefit
the community at large. The gains which the business
men come in for in this way are their private gains, of
course; but the illusions of national solidarity enable the
loyal ones to believe that the gains which so come to these
absentee owners at the cost of the taxpayers will benefit
the taxpayers in some occult way,—in some obscure way
which no loyal citizen should inquire into too closely.

So the loyal citizens loyally place their persons and
their substance at the service of those absentee owners
who aim to get something for nothing by lucrative traffic
in foreign parts and among the helpless outlying peoples;
the constituted authorities dutifully cover the traffic with
the national honor, the national prestige, the national con-
sular service, and the national armament; and the tax-
payers faithfully pay the public cost of the armaments
and the diplomatic and consular service by use of which
their absentee owners are enabled to increase their private
gains. Indeed, on occasion the same loyal taxpayers have
been known gladly and proudly to risk life and limb in
defense of this absentee trade that “follows the flag.”
Should any undistinguished citizen, not an absentee owner
of large means, hesitate to throw in his life and sub-
stance at the call of the politicians in control, for the
greater glory of the flag and the greater profit of absentee
business in foreign parts, he becomes a “slacker.”

By stress of this all-pervading patriotic bias and that
fantastic bigotry which enables civilised men to believe in
a national solidarity of material interests, it has come
now to pass that the chief—virtually sole—concern of the
constituted authorities in any democratic nation is a con-


National Integrity 37


cern about the profitable business of the nation’s sub-
stantial citizens.

But business enterprise here and now, and particularly
business done on so large a scale as to bring it under
the favorable notice of the federal authorities, is quite in-
variably an enterprise in absentee ownership. Any “Busi-
ness Administration” will be a “Big-Business Administra-
tion.” So the constituted authorities of this democratic
commonwealth come, in effect, to constitute a Soviet of
Business Men’s Delegates, whose dutiful privilege it is to
safeguard and enlarge the special advantages of the coun-
try’s absentee owners. And all the while the gains of
the absentee owners are got at the cost of the underlying
population,** whether with or without special countenance
from the side of the democratic authorities.


It is perhaps needless to say that all this is said with-
out malice. A description by simple enumeration will
sometimes look like fault-finding. But in all that has
been said there is no presumptuous aspiration to reprove,


12 This is not a matter of reproach, of course; quite the cons
trary, in fact. Indeed it is the boast of the present, latest
and presumably best, Federal Administration in this country that
this is altogether a Business Administration; and this is no idle
boast. Its legai findings as well as its legislative and adminis-
trative measures have run admirably true to the form so set up.
Always, night and day, the peculiar care of the Administration
is now and ever shall be the profitable activity of the nation’s
business concerns, more particularly the larger concerns with a
large capitalisation and a substantial rate of earnings.

13 “The essence of business success is not to make good goods.
It is not to have a host of employees. It is to have something
left. The biggest word in the language of Business is not gross
but net. To increase the net profits—that is the one aim of
Efficiency—Decreasing net profit is to a company what pain
is to a human body. It is a symptom of injury or disease,”—
Herbert Casson, in the Sabean, April, 1921.


38 Absentee Ownership


amend, hinder, improve, or otherwise interfere with this
appointed task of the constituted authorities at any point,
or in any manner or degree to take exception to the very
singular net residue in which democratic institutions have
culminated at this point. Evidently with no such inten-
tion but simply as a matter of objective results, driven by
the exigencies of national jealousies and absentee owner-
ship, democratic institutions have worked out to such an
outcome as is sketched above. By force of the unguarded
drift of habituation democratic institutions, which once
were designed to serve the ends of liberty, equality, and
the brotherhood of man, have under these latterday con-
ditions come to converge upon the security and free in-
come of the absentee owners, at the cost of the underly-
ing population.

That such a state of things has resulted is plainly due
to the continued prevalence—and ever-increasing intol-
erance—of that unreasoning habit of national conceit,
fear, hate, contempt, and servility, which the democratic
peoples have inherited from the statecraft of dynastic
politics, as it ran in the era of state-making ; when the pre-
lates and princes competitively bled their underlying popu-
lations in the royal sport of realpolitik. Diligent habitu-
ation makes all things right. Except for this mob-mind
of national integrity it is conceivable that democratic in-
stitutions might have come to serve the common good;
but because of this the rule of Live and Let Live has in
effect gone in the moral discard.


Born in iniquity and conceived in sin, the spirit of na-
tionalism has never ceased to bend human institutions to
the service of dissension and distress. In its material ef-
fects it is altogether the most sinister as well as the most
inibecile of all those institutional incumbrances that have


National Integrity 39


come down out of the old order. The national mob-mind
of vanity, fear, hate, contempt, and servility still con-
tinues to make the loyal citizen a convenient tool in the
hands of the Adversary, whether these sentiments cluster
about the anointed person of a sovereign or about the
magic name of the Republic. Within a fraction of one
per cent., the divine right of the Nation has the same size,
shape, color, and density as the divine right of the Stuart
kings once had, or as the divine right of Bourbons, Haps-
burgers and Hohenzollern have continued to have at a
later date; and it has also the same significance for “life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” 14


14 There is, of course, no intention to find fault with these
facts of history, or in any way to question the moral value
of this untoward frame of mind which by ancient habit besets
civilised mankind. It is only that this habitual mob-mind is
untoward in the material respect. Moral values are another
matter, and many untoward usages are highly moral. Moral
values are a matter of settled habit; and assuredly national ani-
mosity is a sufficiently settled habit. When all is said, it re-
mains an unshaken axiom in the popular mind that these mob
sentiments of national conceit, fear, hate, contempt, and servil-
ity are high qualities of manhood, and that they do greatly adorn
the character of any person whose moral tissues they may in-
fest. All of which remains a sacramental matter of course, about
which there is no disputing.

See also The Nature of Peace, ch. II, “On the Nature and
Uses of Patriotism”; Bertrand Russell, Why Men Fight; H. H.
Powers, What Men Fight For.


CHAPTER Til


Law AND CustToM IN RECENT TIMES:
J. HANDICRAFT AND NATURAL RIGHT


As in what has just been said in the last few paragraphs,
on the nature and growth of Nationalism, so also as re-
gards the argument which here follows, on the grounds
of Ownership, the discussion is designed to cover noth-
ing more than the modern case,—Nationalism and Owner-
ship as these two institutions have taken shape in later
times, in the habits of life of the modern civilised peoples,
and only in those respects in which these institutions are
characteristically modern.

Of course, neither ownership nor nationalism are sub-
stantially new and peculiar to recent times and to the
modern peoples. Both are ancient institutions, at least in
their elements, and something of their kind, more or less
effectual, is to be found among barbarians and civilised
peoples generally ; though both institutions are wanting or
slightly developed among those peoples that are reason-
ably to be classed as savages. Ownership which has de-
veloped so far as to take the form of absentee ownership

Vhas also been freely practiced here and there in other
times and other places, outside of the European circle
of industrial peoples and under material circumstances
of a character notably different from those which have
prevailed in recent times within the sweep of that indus-
trial civilisation which now dominates Europe and its col-


onies. So also an onset of nationalism has come up re-
40


Handicraft and Natural Right 41


peatedly in past times and among other peoples, and has in
fact served much the same purpose as that sentiment of
national integrity which now is at work to abridge and de-
flect the material fortunes of these civilised peoples. To
all appearance, human nature is, by native bent, eminently
prone to settle into some such habits of thought as are
embodied in these two dominant institutions, and Euro-
pean human nature is no less prone to some such frame
of mind than any other. Yet the case of these civilised
peoples as it shows up in the immediate present is marked
by certain special traits which it seems worth while to
inquire into.

In this connection it is as well to recall that in point
of native bent and capacities European mankind is still
the same as the neolithic European population once was,
some ten or twelve thousand years ago. The hybrid mix-
ture of races that occupies the countries of Europe and
its colonies is still the same as the European population
was in prehistoric (post-glacial) times, so far as regards
all hereditary traits, spiritual, mental, and physical. So
that the native aptitudes and disposition of these European
peoples, and therefore also the limits imposed on their
institutional development by their native aptitudes and
capacities, are still the same as they were in neolithic an-
tiquity. It follows that the scheme of law and custom
which now governs civilised life under modern industrial
conditions is still made up out of the same human men-
tality and still leans on the same spiritual forces that have
made the outcome in the past, early and late. It is only
that the material circumstances which condition th
growth and working of this established scheme of la
and custom in recent times are different in certain notable
respects from anything that has gone before. By force of
habit these altered material circumstances have made some


42 Absentee Ownership


difference in the existing scheme of institutions; but the
existing situation is, after all, a variation on an ancient
theme, through which runs always the same human strain.


The national integrity of these civilised European peo-
ples has come down from feudal antecedents, and it took
on its modern shape during the era of state-making in
early modern times, having come into its characteristic
modern form through strict habituation under the ex-
acting discipline to which the political traffic of that time
subjected all these European populations. Minor agen-
cies, excursions and refinements of the patriotic fancy,
have contributed something in the way of elaboration of
the theme in later times; but, by and large, the nationalism
of later times is still such as it once took shape under the
stern discipline of the era of state-making.

No doubt, in the last analysis it will be found that the
political traffic of that time was brought on and condi-

¥ tioned by a profound change in the material circumstances
which conditioned the life of the European peoples in that
time. The like is true for the modern system of owner-
ship, which also took shape about the same time and
driven by the same material forces. These driving
forces, it is held, were such things as the growth of the
handicraft industry, the growth of population, and the
growth of trade and the consequent resort to credit.?
The prime mover in the making of the new era, and there-
fore also in making over the principles of ownership,
is evidently the change which was then going forward in
the industrial arts, as embodied in the handicraft system
of industry.®


1Cf. Edward Jenks, Law and Politics in the Middle Ages.
2Cf. Sombart, Moderne Kapitalismus, bk. i.
3Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, ch. vi—The literature


Handicraft and Natural Right 43


Modern ownership and nationalism have both come oute~
of that period of profound change in the industrial arts
that gave rise to the handicraft system and to the petty
trade that ran along with the growth of handicraft; but
all the while this growth of new ideas was conditioned by
institutions and ideals that were standing over from an
earlier state of things. Law and custom are a product
of use and wont, but use and wont will enforce a closer
degree of conformity to material circumstances in that
range and manner of conduct that has most immediately
and intimately to do with the material circumstances. In
point of psychological incidence, law and custom in mat-
ters of political and civil usage were a degree farther re-
moved from the touch of that disturbance that was set
up by the growth of handicraft and the petty trade. So
that the political establishment and the national spirit on
which the State and its interests are borne up have re-
mained farther in arrears; as contrasted with the new
growth of ownership and its rights, powers, and im-
munities, which have been more intimately touched by the
everyday facts of productive industry. Doubtless, as has
already been spoken of above, law and custom in matters
of ownership will also always be found somewhat in ar-
rears, as compared with those driving forces of indus-
trial change that bring on changes in law and custom. In
the nature of things, the scheme of law and custom is al-
ways archaic, at all points, in some degree; always out of
date more or less. But the law and custom that rules
political relations and political ideals is, by the same
token, always more archaic, out of date in a more pro-
nounced degree, than the principles of such human con-
duct as is of more immediate consequence.*
dealing with this topic is excellent and very extensive, in all


the modern languages. :
4Qn the other hand, as a further term of comparison, the


44 Absentee Ownership


Fons et origo of the era of handicraft and its new order
was the Masterless Man. The handicraft industry took
its rise in the interstices of the feudal (manorial) system,
which was a settled order of mastery and service, orderly,
standardised, and stabilised as fully as might be, rest-
ing on a population engaged in mixed farming and bound
to the soil. The law and custom of the feudal régime
was a balanced scheme of coercion and submission, de-
pendence and fealty, in which all human values—rights
and obligations, security of life and limb, equity and jus-
tice, neighborly respect and affection, religious profit and
loss—were of right to be rated and apportioned accord-
ing to a settled schedule of graded privilege, standardised
superiority and inferiority. It was always and by settled
principle a question of gradation in respect of mastery
and service. In this scheme of human things there was
no place and no room for the masterless man. In its
terms he had no ratable human value and no rights which
honest folks were bound to respect. In effect, the Mas-
erless Man was not to be distinguished from the Sturdy


scheme of religious observances, e.g., is necessarily even more
archaic, more widely out of date; since religious observances,
after all, have little or no immediate industrial value and are
not in any pronounced degree exposed to the direct and intimate
impact of that habituation that is enforced by the state of the
industrial arts. So that while the political institutions and
ideals in vogue today may be said to date back a few hundred
years for their main substance; the religious observances and
ideals of the present still draw on dates and experience lying a
few thousand years in the past, being in great part erected out
of elements of habit supplied by the pastoral civilisations of re-
mote antiquity. Yet even the divine and immutable verities
of the Faith have not altogether escaped the corrosive touch of
this later state of the industrial arts. But for all the impact of
new habits to which it is exposed, there still hangs about the
Faith and its reactionary adepts an air of hoary antiquity, com-
pared with which the medieval ideals of the statesmen are a
recent growth.


Handicraft and Natural Right 45


Beggar. In terms of the nearest modern analogy he
would be a tramp, a drifter, a hobo, a species of Indus-
trial Worker of the World at large, taking that term in
its simpler and more sinister meaning.

What lends a measure of interest to this masterless man
when seen in the perspective of history is the fact that
he was the appointed beginning of a new order of industry
and the underlying factor of an eventual new dispensation
in law and custom. But in his own time and in that
institutional setting he was a graceless intruder and a good
deal of a nuisance, as still is likely to be the case with
any human material that does not fit into the framework
of current use and wont. He was an institutional misfit.
He owed no allegiance to any master according to the
standard methods of allegiance current in that time, and
therefore he was a social, industrial, civil, and political
encumbrance; very much as is now the case with any
I. W. W. who is endowed with no absentee ownership
and who disclaims that standardised allegiance to the na-
tional establishment that is stipulated by the forms of law
and custom in such cases made and provided. And, then
as now, the whole duty of loyal citizens in dealing with
these homebred aliens was that which is embodied in the
watchword of the Legion—“Treat ’em rough!”

In much the same measure as the feudal régime ma-
tured into perfection and settled down to its work, it
also grew progressively more irksome to the underlying
population; as would naturally happen in the case of any
system of absentee rights and powers, and as has hap-
pened more than once since then. Such a system of per-
sonal control runs on organised and standardised hard-
ship, and the more efficiently it is organised for its work
the greater will be the resulting hardship to the underly-
ing population. Long and steady habituation will go far


46 Absentee Ownership


to make it all right and proper; but there is also always
a limit of tolerance, beyond which an increasing net resi-
due of popular hardship begins to work mischief to the
system. So, when Knighthood was in Flower the mills
of the gods ground out an ever increasing number of rest-
less and graceless ones who turned away from the under-
paid virtues of feudal allegiance and went out to seek
a livelihood on their own. Feudal allegiance no longer
brought any net material advantage to the common man,
so soon as the feudal régime had come into full bearing ;
very much as national allegiance has ceased to offer any
net material advantage to the common man in our own
time ; and so, an increasing number of the harder-headed,
or hctter-headed, common men drifted loose from those
ties of loyalty that so had come to signify nothing but ma-
terial hardship overlaid with spiritual pomp and circum-

_ stance.

\ So, by drift of circumstance, these masterless men drew
together to seek a livelihood by the work of their hands
and without formal dependence on the absentee rights
and powers of those who owned the material world in that
time. Out of the resulting scattered parcels of indus-
trial drifters there grew up in course of time and experi-
ence the industrial towns and the arts, principles and
mysteries of the handicraft industry. By degrees a new
order of life arose and gave rise presently to a new line
of habits of thought, and so gave something of a new bent
to the subsequent growth of institutions among the Euro-
pean peoples. The modernisation of medieval Europe
set in.

The denizens of the incipient towns were ungraded
masterless men who worked for a living. That is the
ground and beginning of the handicraft scheme of things;
and the principles and ideals under shelter of which the


Handicraft and Natural Right 47


handicraft system presently grew great and displaced the
spiritual furniture of feudalism were such as emerged by
habituation out of these facts of everyday life.

The denizens of these new towns drew together for a
concerted defense against the constituted authorities of
that time; and out of this experience in illicit manceu-
vring along the margin of tolerance, there presently
emerged a commonwealth of ungraded masterless men
bound together for the common defense and governed by
self-imposed rules designed for the common good; with a
jealous eye to the common material interests at home and
a stiff defense toward the outside. The insistent need of
a common defense kept alive, stabilised, and carried over
that trained sense of partisan solidarity which the fac-
tional struggles of feudalism and the devout intolerance
of the Church had already ground into the moral tissues
of Christendom. So that when presently the militant
princely State of the era of state-making began to give
place to the democratic commonwealth of modern times, a
jealous national sentiment of collective ill-will was ready
to shift into the place once held by the habit of personal
allegiance to a feudal overlord. That habit of bellicose
loyalty to a personal superior, which was the most meri-
torious virtue of chivalry, blended with the popular de-
votion to the common defence, and so gave rise to that
spirit of militant nationalism that pervades Christendom
today. In time, under the fostering care of the states-
men who guard the vested interests, this national spirit has
headed up in the profligate imperialism of more recent
date ; which makes a virtue of getting something for noth-
ing by force and fraud at the cost of any whom it may
concern.

But the craftsmen were, after all, masterless men work-
ing for a living; men on whose productive industry no


48 Absentee Ownership


absentee claimant had any claim which they felt bound
to respect. Out of this workday experience appears to

. have arisen the common-sense notion that ownership is

“a “natural right” ; in the sense that what a man has made,
whatsoever “he hath mixed his labor with,” that has
thereby become his own, to do with it as he will. He has
extended over and infused into the material of his work
something of that discretionary force and control which,
in the nature of things, the masterless man of right ex-
ercises in the movements of his own person. So the
thing is his by virtue of his having made it. “Natural”
ownership is workmanship wrought out and stabilised in
a material object.° By this “natural” right of creative
workmanship the masterless man is vested with full dis-
cretionary control and disposal over the work of his hands,
and so he comes in for a natural right of free bargain
and contract in all that concerns his labor and its prod-
uct.

Trade—in this connection spoken of as the “Petty
Trade”—is of the essence of the handicraft system of in-
dustry. The trade runs on this “natural right” of free
bargain, and comes in on an equal footing with workman-
ship as an inalienable right of the masterless man. At
the same time it is a necessary factor in the handicraft
system, being the expedient without which the division of
labor that makes the craftsman could not take effect.
By force of this natural right of free bargain, ownership
passes unimpaired to the party of the second part, who
so comes in for the same secure tenure and disposal of the
goods. Whatever so passes into the buyer’s possession
is his by warrant of the same natural right of free con-

5 Cf. Locke, Of Civil Government, ch. v; See also The
Theory of Business Enterprise, ch. iv., for a more extended


discussion; also, Edward Jenks, Law and Politics in the Mid-
dle Ages.


Handicraft and Natural Right 49


tract, whether the goods in question continue to be held
under his hand and eye or are held in absentia. And so
absentee ownership comes into the case again, as a natural
right tracing back to the workmanship of the owner or
vendor.

Craftsmanship and the petty trade, the two creative ~
factors in the handicraft system, call for free contract
and secure tenure as a necessary condition of their carry-
ing-on; which by force of circumstances entails owner-
ship in absentia, more particularly when the petty trade
presently develops beyond the scale of peddling, huckster-
ing, or “itinerant merchandising,” so called. At the same
time ancient precedent is ready to hand, according to
which ownership is a prescriptive right grounded in the
feudalistic principle of Vested Interest. A vested inter-
est is a prescriptive right to get something for nothing.
‘Absentee ownership as it comes up in recent times, there- ~~
fore, has all the legitimation given it by those principles
of Natural Right that were induced by the workday ex-
perience of self-help during the era of handicraft, together
with the reinforcement given it by immemorial usage.
But the ground to which modern men—jurists, moralists,
economists—have preferred to trace its derivation and on
which they have preferred to rest its equitable claims has
on the whole continued to be the natural right of work-
manship, rather than the prescriptive right of vested in-
terest,—that “whatsoever a man hath mixed his labor
with,” that is his by virtue of his having made it. Ac-
cording to the moral bias created by age-long experience
during the era of handicraft, men are still inclined to,
justify property rights on the ground of productive indus-/ »
try, serviceable work, rather than prescriptive tenure.


50 Absentee Ownership


II. Tue NaturaAL RIGHT oF INVESTMENT


The “natural” right of property is grounded in the work-
manship of the man who “hath mixed his labor with”
the materials out of which a valuable article has been
created. By this right of ownership the owner is vested
with power to dispose of his property by bargain and sale.
He may sell for cash or for deferred payment, and he
may also lend. In so lending, the use of the valuable
article passes to the borrower (debtor) while the usu-
fruct remains with the owner (creditor) in the way of
a stated or customary payment for the use of the property.


.{ This is the simplest form of absentee ownership that


arises out of the “natural” right of property under the
principles of the handicraft system. But the masterless
men of the crafts had also the natural right to turn their
workmanship to account for a valuable consideration in
working up materials owned by another, without becom-
ing owners of the resulting product; which gives rise
to the wage relation and so brings on a second variant of
absentee ownership, still securely guaranteed by the handi-
craft principle which derives ownership from work-
manship and free contract. It was along these two lines


| —credit and hired labor-_that absentee ownership chiefly
_ found its way into the industrial system of recent times,


' until by degrees it has come to dominate the organisation


of industry and has taken over the usufruct of the com-
munity’s workmanship.

But included in the scheme of ownership as it stands
in recent times there is also an alien strain, not war-
ranted by the principles of Natural Right and not trace-
able to workmanship. Ownership of natural resources
—lands, forests, mineral deposits, water-power, harbor


The Natural Right of Investment 51


rights, franchises, etc——rests not on a natural right of
workmanship but on the ancient feudalistic ground of
privilege and prescriptive tenure, vested interest, which
runs back to the right of seizure by force and collusion.
The owners of these natural resources own them not by
virtue of their having produced or earned them, nor on the
workmanlike ground that they are making use of these
useful things in productive work. These owners own
these things because they own them. That is to say, title
of ownership in these natural resources is traceable to an
act of seizure, legalised by statute or confirmed by long
undisturbed possession. All this is wholly foreign to the
system of Natural Rights, altogether at cross purposes
with the handicraft principle of workmanship, but quite
securely incorporated in the established order of law and
custom. It is, in effect, a remnant of feudalism; that is
to say, absentee ownership without apology or after-
thought.

Not that all ownership of natural resources is absentee
ownership. Nor is it to be said that such ownership may
not be grounded in the owner’s workmanship. The small
farmer, e.g., is not usually an absentee owner. The
land owned and worked by the small farmer without hired
help is raw material with which he mixes his labor in the
work of producing crops, and so is to be counted in as
a typical case of ownership based on workmanship. The
like is true for other natural resources that are made use
of in a similar way in other productive work. These
things are not to be classed under the head of absentee
ownership so long as these useful things are fully em-
ployed as ways and means of work by their owners alone.
It is only when and in so far as such useful things are


\


worked by the help of others than their owners, or so far} /


as they are held out of productive use by their owners,|


52 Absentee Ownership


, that they are rightly to be classed under absentee owner-
_ship; only in so far as their productive use is disjoined
from their usufruct, so that workmanship and ownership
part company.

It follows that the small farmer’s land-holding falls
into the scheme of Natural Rights on an equal footing
with the craftsmen’s right to work for a living and to dis-
pose of their product or their labor under the rule of
free contract. It is not unusual to defend private prop-
erty in land and other natural resources on the plea that
the cultivator must have unhampered use of the land
which is the raw material of his work. In the main, as
things have turned in recent times, this plea is pettifoggery
and subterfuge. It is not the small farmer’s holding
that needs apology or defense; and in the main the small
farmer and his husbandry by self-help are already out of
date in those communities where the machine system of
industry has thoroughly taken effect. It is also to be
noted that in the practical working-out of law and cus-
tom in all the civilised countries, absenteeism throws no
cloud on the title to lands or other material resources. In
this connection workmanship and the needs of productive
work give no title, not even title to “improvements.”
Except by way of sophistication and obiter dictum, the
tenure of lands and similar resources is not brought in
under the “natural” principle of creative workmanship,
but remains a tenure by prescription,—that is to say by
legalized seizure. It might perhaps be argued that
“squatter’s rights” are a case of tenure arising out of
workmanship, but closer attention to the question will
show that the squatter’s right, whatever it may amount
to, rests on priority of seizure and possession.

Indeed, in the practical working-out of law and custom


The Natural Right of Investment 53


during the era of Natural Rights, the cultivator’s “na-
tural” claim to the soil on grounds of workmanship has
gone by default, even where a claim might have been sus-
tained on that ground; for the reason, apparently, that
there has been no sufficiently massive body of masterless
men engaged in husbandry, such as would bend custom to
its own habitual way of thinking about these things. On
the other hand, the Landed Interest was vested with title
by prescription and was a formidable spokesman for ab-
sentee ownership, tenacious of its prescriptive rights and
full of an habitual conviction of the justice of its cause.
So the feudalistic principle of absentee ownership by
prescriptive right of seizure and possession still stands
over as the accepted rule covering land and other natural
resources.


As is well known, from the outset the handicraft system
of industry included the petty trade, as a necessary factor
in the work to be done. Therefore, that workday routine
out of which the principles of Natural Right arose in-
cluded also daily contact with the market and familiarity
with the conduct of trade; so that all those preconceptions
and usages of free contract and of bargain and sale which
were involved in the conduct of the petty trade came to
be worked into the texture of Natural Rights, by un-
broken habit, and became a constituent part of the system.
In the balanced order of the handicraft system, the trader,
too, was counted in as a workman engaged in serviceable
work and therefore entitled to a livelihood on the ground
of work done. At the outset the petty trade runs along
with handicraft as a traffic of give and take, a method of
keeping the balance of work among the specialised work-
men and between the body of these workmen and the


54 Absentee Ownership


world outside. It was a traffic in the nature of market-
ing, huckstering, or peddling, and much of it was not far
removed from barter.

But the traffic presently grew greater in range, scale,
and volume, and took on more of the character of “busi-
ness,”’ in that the necessary management of contracts, bar-
gaining, and accounts became an occupation distinct from
the handling and care of the merchandise in transit and

in the market-place. The exigencies of the larger volume

of traffic over longer distances and larger intervals of time
necessarily removed the responsible merchant from per-
sonal contact with his merchantable goods; so that ever
more and more he shifted from the footing of an itin-
erant huckster who handled his own wares in transit and
in the market-place to that of an enterprising absentee in-
vestor who took care of the business ; while agents, super-
cargoes, factors took over the handling, carriage, and
even the buying and selling of the goods, which so passed
under the merchant’s ownership without passing under his
hand. By degrees, instead of an itinerant merchant he
grew to be a “merchant prince,” and instead of being an
industrial occupation the trade became a business enter-
prise.* But even the “merchant adventurer” of that time
continued in close touch with the merchandising traffic
from which his profits were drawn, as well as with the
productive industry which supplied the merchantable
goods.”


6 Cf. Ehrenberg, Das Zeitalter der Fugger, where this transi-
tion is shown in syncopated form in the history of the House of
Fugger, from the time when Jakob Fugger I came into Augs-
burg with a peddler’s pack, to the great days of the third genera-
tion. A recent parallel may be found in the fortunes of the
House of Guggenheim, which also shows the larger dimensions
and swifter pace of the current facts in a felicitous way.

7Cf. Thomas Mun, England’s Treasure by Forraign Trade,


The Natural Right of Investment 55


The growth of absentee ownership out of the crafts-
man’s natural right grounded in his workmanship comes
on first and most visibly in the merchandising trade. In-
vestment, that is to say absentee ownership in the way of
business enterprise, was commercial investment. It was
in the shape of commercial enterprise that the modern
world got used to the practice of investment for a profit
and so learned to appreciate business principles and to
value the investor and his work. But investment pres-
ently made its appearance also in industry proper, in the
shape of ownership of industrial equipment and materials
and the empleyment of hired labor.

By the time when the era of handicraft was drawing
to a close and the transition to the machine industry and
the factory system had set in, investment in industry was
already a customary fact, particularly in certain of the
leading industries, as, e.g., in textiles. It was absentee
ownership, and would be recognised as such by anyone
looking back to the facts of that time from the stand-
point of the present; but it does not appear to have seemed
so, at least not obtrusively so, to the men of that time,
who had to do with the industrial situation as it then lay
before them. Absenteeism was not the main and obvious
feature of the case. It was still the tradition, and in
great part the practical rule, that the owner of the works
was on the ground in person and acted as overseer and
director of the work in hand; although the work done
was not the work of his own hands.*

But with the transition to the machine industry and the
factory system the business organisation of industry
which shows the qualifications and daily occupation of a mer-
chant of the larger sort at the middle of the sixteenth Century.

8 Cf. Biicher, Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft, No. V, “Nie-
dergang des Handwerks”’; Ashley, Economic History and
Theory, Part II.


56 Absentee Ownership


gradually underwent such a change as to bring investment
and absenteeism very practically into the foreground; so
that since then, during the period which can properly
be called “recent times” in the industrial respect, absentee
ownership has been the rule in industry and investment
has been the type-form of ownership and control. By a
slight stretch it can be said that in the days of handicraft
absentee ownership was an incidental or adventitious
feature of the case, while since that time it will hold
true that it is the ordinary and typical practice; it now
is that which is expected, and anything else is regarded
as exceptional and sporadic.


Very much as was the case in the petty trade of the
Middle Ages, so also in the handicraft industry; by de-
grees but unavoidably, absentee ownership came in so
soon and so far as the scale of operation advanced to such
a point that trade or industry became a matter of team-
work. With the advance of specialisation and division of
labor the equipment required for carrying on any given
line of work presently became larger than what a work-
man could ordinarily provide out of his own work as he
went along, at the same time that the equipment took on
more and more of the character of a “plant” designed for
the joint use of a number of workmen. Such a plant
would ordinarily be the property of a master workman
or of a partnership of such masters, who thereby and in
that degree became absentee owners of the plant. The
like is true for the ownership of the materials employed
and of the finished product.

Yet it was still the tradition in Adam Smith’s time,
at the close of the handicraft era in England, that the
wealth so invested in trade and industry was, in the
natural and normal run of things, an accumulation of use-


The Natural Right of Investment 57


ful goods saved out of the productive work of its owner,
and it was likewise the tradition that the owner whose
Savings were so employed in production should “natu-
rally” direct and oversee the work in which his savings
were employed. What was “natural” in the Eighteenth
Century was that which had the sanction of unbroken
tradition; and so far as touches the economic life in that
time, that was “natural” which was attested by unbroken
habituation under the régime of handicraft.

Adam Smith spoke the language of what was to him
the historical present, that is to say the recent past of his
time, and he has left a luminous record of the state of
things economic in his time as formulated in terms of the
habits of thought with which the recent past had invested
that generation of men. But in the historical sequence
of things he stood at the critical point of transition to a
new order in industry and in ownership, and what was
“natural” in his view of things, therefore, ceased to be
the common run of things from and after the date at
which his luminous formulation of economic laws was
drawn up. What had gone before was the era of handi-
craft and the petty trade, the habitual outlook of which
had become (second) nature to the thoughtful men of
that time; what has followed after is the era of the
machine industry and business enterprise, in which the
“natural” laws and rights handed on from the era of
handicraft are playing the role of a “dead hand.”

From and after Adam Smith’s date (last quarter of
the eighteenth century) a new era sets in in industry and
business. As an incident of the new era there sets in also
a visible and widening division between industrial work
and business enterprise. The era of the machine in-
dustry opens in England in that time, and it opens pres-
ently after for the other civilised peoples also; at the same


58 Absentee Ownership


time that the businesslike management of industrial con-
cerns begins to shift from a footing of workday partici-
pation in the work done, to that of absentee ownership
and control. Instead of continuing to act as foreman of
the shop, according to the ancient tradition, the owner
began to withdraw more and more from personal con-
tact and direction of the work in hand and to give his
attention to the financial end of the enterprise and to
control the work by taking care of the running balance
of bargains involved in procuring labor and materials and
J disposing of the product. Instead of a master workman,
he became a business man engaged in a quest of profits,
very much after the pattern of business men engaged in
commercial enterprise. The result was that investment
and absentee ownership presently became the rule in the
v mechanical industries, as it already was the rule in com-
/merce and as it had long been the rule in husbandry.

This rearrangement of economic factors, and division
of economic activities, was brought on by the increasing
scale of the industrial plant and operations, wherever and
so far as the new technology of the machine process took
effect. And the characterisation just offered is intended
to apply only so far and so fast as the new mechanistic
technology gradually took over the industries of the coun-
try. There came on a progressive, but none the less
revolutionary, change in the standard type of industrial
business, as well as in the ways and means of industrial
work; and the same line of change has gone forward un-
remittingly from that time to the present, as it is also
visibly running on into the future.

If the word be defined to suit the case, “capitalism” in
industry may be said to have arisen in that time and out
of the circumstances described. Until the machine proc-
ess had made serious inroads in the standard industries,


The Natural Right of Investment 59


and until things had consequently begun to shift to the
new scale, the business man in industry continued, in the
typical case, to be personally concerned with the work in
hand; and until this change took effect, therefore, the
employer-owner answered quite reasonably to the char-
acter which Adam Smith assigned him, as a master work-
man who owned certain industrial appliances which he
made use of with the help of hired workmen. But from
this time on he became, in the typical case, an absentee
manager with a funded interest in the works as a going
business concern. The visible relation between the owner
and the works shifted from a personal footing of work-
manship to an impersonal footing of absentee ownership
resting on an investment of funds. Under the new dis-
pensation the owner’s guiding interest centered on the
earnings of the concern rather than on the workmen and
their work. The works—mill, factory, or whatever word
may be preferred—became a business concern, a “going
concern” which was valued and capitalised on its earning-
capacity; and the businesslike management of industry,
accordingly, centered upon the net earnings to be derived
in a competitive market,—earnings derived from the mar-
gin of the sale price of the product over the purchase
price of the labor, materials, and equipment employed in
its production. Industrial business became a commercial
enterprise, and the industrial plant became a going cofi-
cern capitalised on its earning-capacity.®

9 The economists and others who discuss business and industry
as carried on in that time—late eighteenth and early nineteenth
century—do not speak of “capitalisation of earning-capacity” ;
but business practice at the time gives evidence of the fact.
Then as always the theoretical discussions endeavored to for-
mulate the new facts in terms derived from an earlier state of
things. Indeed, it has taken something like a hundred years


for the formulas of the economists to adapt themselves to the
new run of facts in business and industry which set in in the


/


60 Absentee Ownership


It is not that nothing of the kind is to be found in the
practice of earlier times. Indeed it is quite easy so to
analyse the facts of property-holding in any age as to
show that the value of absentee ownership always and
everywhere is necessarily a matter of the capitalisation of
the earning-capacity of the property so held. It is more
difficult, perhaps it would prove impracticable, to apply the
same line of reasoning to the same end in the case of
other than absentee ownership. At any rate the matter
is fairly obvious in the case of absentee ownership, early
or late, to anyone who has occasion to see it from that
point of view. But with the advance into the new era,
into what is properly to be called recent times in business
and industry, the capitalisation of earning-capacity comes
to be the standard practice in the conduct of business
finance, and calls attention to itself as a dominant fact
in the situation that has arisen. The value of any in-
vestment is measured by its capitalised earning-capacity,
and the endeavors of any businesslike management there-
fore unavoidably center on net earnings.?°


It should be worth while to take stock of this earning-
capacity that underlies modern business enterprise, and
see what it comes of and what it comes to. The earning-
capacity of any given going concern is measured by the
habitual excess of its income over its outlay. The net
aggregate income, and therefore the net aggregate earn-


days of Adam Smith. Right lately the economists have begun
to recognise that “capital” means “capitalisation of earning-
capacity”; but when seen in the long perspective of history it is
evident that the business men who had to do with these things
were learning to do business on that footing something over
a hundred years ago.

10Cf. The Theory of Business Enterprise, ch. vi; W. H.
Lyon, Capitalisation, chs. ii and iii.


The Natural Right of Investment 61


ings, of the business community taken as a whole is de-
rived from the margin of product by which the output of
the industrial system exceeds its cost—counting cost and


te


;


output in physical terms. This may conveniently bev


called the net product of industry. So far as the coun-
try’s industries have been placed on a business footing;
that is to say, so far as the control of the industries has
been taken over by business men on a basis of investment
for a profit; so far the aggregate earnings of the business
community will tend to coincide with the net product of
the industrial system. This coincidence, or identity, be-
tween the net aggregate product of industry and the net
aggregate earnings of business is by no means exact; but
then, the whole system of absentee ownership and busi-
nesslike control is also not yet complete or altogether
supreme, either in range or scope. Indeed, it is safe
to affirm that the earnings of business come as near tak-
ing up the total net product of industry as one has a right
te expect, regard being had to the present imperfect state
of things.

It is this net product, counted in terms of its price, that
makes up the earnings of business and so makes the basis
of capitalisation; for earnings and capital, both, are
counted in terms of price, and not otherwise. It is the
ownership of materials and equipment that enables the
capitalisation to be made; but ownership does not of itself
create a net product, and so it does not give rise to earn-
ings, but only to the legal claim by force of which the
earnings go to the owners of the capitalised wealth. Pro-
duction is a matter of workmanship, whereas’ earnings
are a matter of business. And so the question returns:
What are the circumstances by force of which industry
yields a net product, which can be turned to account as


earnings ?


Ue


62 Absentee Ownership


It will appear on analysis that there are two main cir-
cumstances which enable human industry to turn out a
net product, and which govern its rate and volume: (a)
the state of the industrial arts, and (b) the growth of
population. Transiently, production will also be limited
by the available stock of industrial appliances, materials,
and means of subsistence; as well as by a variety of hin-
drances of a conventional or institutional nature, chief
among them being a businesslike curtailment of produc-
tion with a view to private gain. But always the state
of the industrial arts and the state of man-power pro-
vided by the population will determine what will be the
productive capacity of the industrial system; and in the
absence of disturbing causes of an extraneous kind the
effectual rate and volume of production will approach the
limit so set by these two abiding factors of workmanship.

At the same time, by and large, the growth of popula-
tion is governed by the state of the industrial arts, in such
a way that the numbers of the population cannot exceed
the carrying capacity of the industrial arts as known and
practiced at the time, although the population may, and
habitually does, fall somewhat short of that limit. It ap-

ypears, therefore, that the prime creative factor in human
industry is the state of the industrial arts; that is to say,
the determining fact which enables human work to turn
out a useful product is the accumulated knowledge, skill,
and judgment that goes into the work,—also called tech-
nology or workmanship.

The dominant creative force of this accumulated in-
dustrial wisdom, within the sweep of which human work-
manship lives and moves, has become evident more and
more obtrusively since the era of the mechanical in-
dustry set in. The increasingly impersonal sweep of
mechanical processes in industry during the past century


The Natural Right of Investment 63


has brought a realisation of the indispensably creative
function of technology. But in the light of what the
machine industry has made plain it is readily to be seen
that the state of the industrial arts, the accumulated knowl-
edge of ways and means, must in the nature of things
always be the prime factor in human industry. So that
in this respect the technology of this mechanistic era dif-
fers from what has gone before only in that the creative
primacy of the state of the industrial arts is a more pal-
pable fact today than ever before.

The state of the industrial arts determines what natural
materials will be useful as well as how they will be made
use of.** For the greater part the state of the industrial
arts is a heritage out of the past, a knowledge of ways and
means hit upon and tried out by past generations and from
them handed on to their posterity; and for the greater
part also any addition, extension, advance, or improve-


11F.g., in prehistoric times men (or more probably women)
invented the domestication of certain crop-plants, and presently
also of certain animals. By virtue of these technological dis-
coveries in ancient times these products of nature came to be
ways and means of human industry. And they have continued
to hold their place in the industrial system since then; so that
the life of the civilised peoples still depends on the continued
use of these industrial appliances, and those lands and soils
which lend themselves to use in the resulting system of hus-
bandry are valuable natural resources in the precise measure in
which the domestication of plants and animals has made them
so. So, again, in later times, within the era of the machine in-
dustry, petroleum and rubber, e.g., which were of no account
a hundred years ago, have come to be indispensable factors in
the industrial situation today, because technology has made them
so. There is no end to the number of instances that might be
adduced in illustration of this thesis, because the same proposi-
tion applies to all natural materials or processes that are or
have been turned to human use. It holds true throughout that
“Tnvention is the mother of necessity’ and that workmanship
turns brute matter into natural resources, ways and means of


productive industry.


yA


64 Absentee Ownership


ment in technology is a rearrangement of and a refine-
ment upon the elements of such knowledge so handed
down from the past. Industrial inventions and improve-
ments invariably consist, in the main, of elements of
aoe drawn from common notoriety but turned to
new and technologically unexpected uses. The novelties
of today are a technologically later generation of the
commonplaces of the day before yesterday.”

Evidently the state of the industrial arts is of the na-
ture of a joint stock, worked out, held, carried forward,
and made use of by those who live within the sweep of
the industrial community. In this bearing the industrial
community is a joint going-concern. And the “indus-
trial community” does not mean the Nation; since no
nation is or can be self-sufficient in this matter of tech-
nology. Of course, the patriotic spirit of nationalism
drives men to imagine vain things of that kind; but all
that is in the nature of a pathological make-believe, which
has only a paranoiac relation to the facts of the case.
And of course, the statesmen endeavor to hedge the na-
tion about with restrictions designed to set up some sort
of technological self-sufficiency and isolation; but all that
is done in the service of technological sterilisation and
decay, with a paranoiac view to the defeat of outsiders.
It is only that the statesmen are running true to form.
The industrial community as a technologically going con-
cern is so much of mankind as is living in and by the
industrial arts that go to make up the effectual system of
technological knowledge and practice. And in this re-
Jation, as in most others, the national frontiers are the
frontiers of the national futilities.


12Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, chapter iii, especially
Pp. 103-112.


The Natural Right of Investment 65


The state of the industrial arts is a joint stock of tech-
nological knowledge and practice worked out, accumu-
lated, and carried forward by the industrial population
which lives and moves within the sweep of this industrial
system. As regards the modern mechanical industry this
immaterial equipment of knowledge and training is held
jointly by the peoples of Christendom. And the broad
center of its diffusion still is that community of peoples
that cluster about the North Sea, together with their col-
onial extensions into newer lands. It is this joint stock
of industrial knowledge and practice that makes the na-
tions of Christendom formidable, and it is this same
joint stock of technology that gives to the modern world’s
tangible assets whatever use and value they have. Tangi-
ble assets, considered simply as material objects, are in-
ert, transient and trivial, compared with the abiding eff-
ciency of that living structure of technology that has
created them and continues to turn them to account.

But for the transient time being the material appli-
ances of industry, the natural resources and the material
equipment in hand, are indispensable to the conduct of
industry; since the current state of the industrial arts
does its creative work only by use of suitable mechanical
apparatus. Modern industry is a system of mechanical
processes devised and directed by expert knowledge and
carried out by means of mechanical apparatus and raw
materials. For the transient time being, therefore, any
person who has a legal right to withhold any part of the
necessary industrial apparatus or materials from current
use will be in a position to impose terms and exact obedi-
ence, on pain of rendering the community’s joint stock
of technology inoperative to that extent. Ownership of
industrial equipment and natural resources confers such


66 Absentee Ownership


a right legally to enforce unemployment, and so to make
the community’s workmanship useless to that extent.
This is the Natural Right of Investment.

Ownership confers a legal right of sabotage, and ab-
sentee ownership vests the owner with the power of sa-
botage at a distance, by help of the constituted authorities
whose duty it is to enforce the legal rights of citizens.
This legal right of sabotage is commonly exercised only
to the extent of a partial and fluctuating unemployment
of the material equipment and therefore of the available
workmanship; only to such an extent as seems wise for
the enforcement of terms satisfactory to the owners,—
only so far “as the traffic will bear.” It is to the owner’s
interest to derive an income from these his legal rights ;
and in the long run there will be no income derivable
from equipment or natural resources that are wholly un-
employed,** or from man-power which is not allowed to
work.

So the common practice has come to be partial employ-
ment of equipment and man-power on terms satisfactory
to the owners; often rising to something near full em-
ployment for a limited time, but always with the reserva-
tion that the owner retains his legal right to withhold his
property from productive use in whole or in part.
Plainly, ownership would be nothing better than an idle
gesture without this legal right of sabotage. Without the
power of discretionary idleness, without the right to keep
the work out of the hands of the workmen and the product
out of the market, investment and business enterprise

18 This does not overlook the case of speculative real estate
which is held quite idle for the time being with a view to a


lump gain in the future, in which case sabotage is carried to per-
fection for the time being.


The Natural Right of Investment 67


would cease. This is the larger meaning of the Security
of Property.

By virtue of this legal right of sabotage which inheres
as a natural right in the ownership of industrially useful
things, the owners are able to dictate satisfactory terms;
so that they come in for the usufruct of the community’s
industrial knowledge and practice, with such deductions as
are necessary to enforce their terms and such concessions
as will induce the underlying population to go on with
the work. This making of terms is called “Charging
what the traffic will bear.” It consists, on the one hand,
in stopping down production to such a volume as will
bring the largest net returns in terms of price, and in al-
lowing so much of a livelihood to the working force of
technicians and workmen, on the other hand, as will in-
duce them to turn out this limited output. It evidently
calls for a shrewd balancing of production against price,
such as is best served by a hard head and a cool heart.
In the ideal case, in so far as the “Law of Balanced Re-
turn” works out to a nicety, the output of production
should be held to such a volume that the resulting price
of the limited output will take up the entire purchasing
power of the underlying population, at the same time that
the livelihood which the owners allow their working force
of technicians and workmen is held down to the “sub-
sistence minimum.” But such a precise balance is not
commonly maintained in the practical management of
affairs. The difficulties arising out of a very complex
and fluctuating situation are very perplexing; so that in
practice it is necessary to allow for a certain margin of
error, which a businesslike (safe and sane) management
will bring in on the conservative side, to the effect that
the volume of production and the allowance of livelihood


68 Absentee Ownership


will commonly fall short of what the traffic would bear
rather than exceed that amount.

It appears, therefore (a) that industrial appliances
and materials (tangible assets), as well as the industrial
man-power, are productive agencies because and so far as
the accumulated industrial knowledge and practice make
them so; (b) that investment in industrial plant and
natural resources is worth while to the investor because
and so far as his ownership of these useful things enables
him to control and limit the operation of the industrial
arts which make these things useful,—that is to say, be-
cause and so far as his ownership of these things confers
on him the usufruct of the community’s workmanship;
(c) the earning-capacity of these assets, which gives them
their value as property, is measured by the net returns—
in terms of price—which come to their owner as usu-
fructuary or pensioner on the community’s workmanship ;
(d) these valuable assets are assets to the amount of
their capitalised value, that is to say to the amount of
their funded earning-capacity ; (e) their earning-capacity
is determined by what the traffic will bear, that is to
say by curtailing production to such an amount that the
output multiplied by the price per unit will yield the larg-
est net aggregate return; so that (f) the natural right
of investment becomes, in effect, a vested right of use
and abuse over the current industrial knowledge and
practice.**


14Cf. Two .papers “On the Nature of Capital,” in the Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, August and November, 1908; re-
printed’ in The Place of Science in Modern Civilisation and
Other Essays, pp. 224-386.


CHAPTER IV


THE ERA OF FREE COMPETITION


By a concourse of historical accidents, both the origins
of the Machine Industry and the principles of Natural
Right were first worked out in England* Between
them, these two factors of modern civilisation gave rise
to that Competitive System that governed the conduct of
industry through much of the nineteenth century and
that has continued to dominate the speculations of the
economists and the make-believe of the statesmen since
that time.

In England, and in the other countries into which the
mechanistic technology was then finding its way, the half
or three-quarters century which saw the introduction of
the machine industry was a period of extraordinary ac-
tivity coupled with profound changes in the economic


1 This does not overlook or question that tortuous documentary
pedigree which legal learning has been at pains to find for the
system of Natural Rights. It is not intended to cloud the
priorities of the jus naturale or the jus gentium or Time Im-
memorial. It applies only de facto, not de jure. It is intended
to speak only of the effectual emergence and diffusion of those
habits of thought that have made the principles of Natural Lib-
erty an effectual factor in the shaping of law and custom in
recent times. And in this matter it was the fortune of the
English-speaking people to take the lead; not by virtue of any
peculiar gifts of character or insight, but only because of the
accidental fact that the Industrial Revolution first took effect
in that country; which, in its turn, was due to the partial isola-
tion of the Island from the rest of Europe.

69


70 Absentee Ownership


order.1*, It comprised the interval during which competi-
tion, as near as may be, has run free in recent times; and
it is also the period during which investment for a profit
established itself in civilised law and custom as the staple
manner of ownership and control in industry. So also
the latterday forms and uses of credit took settled shape
and entered on their dominion in industrial business dur-
ing the same period. Before that time indebtedness had
been an ominous incumbrance, to be “lifted” as soon as
might be. During this period indebtedness came into
its own, as a staple means of gain for the debtor and an
indispensable recourse in the ordinary conduct of busi-
ness.

In effect, the Captain of Industry, too, emerged and
grew into an institution in that time. In the course of
these half-a-dozen decades or so the Captain of Industry
—that is to say the absentee owner and controller of in-
dustrial equipment and resources—comes gradually into
the foreground in the world of affairs and presently
becomes the center of attention and deference as well as
of policy and intrigue in all that concerns the ordinary
conduct of affairs, political, civil, social, ecclesiastical. It
is the era of personal business enterprise carried on un-
der the immunities of impersonal investment. ,The course
of things in that time inducted the Captain of Industry,
the Substantial Business Man, into the Seats of the
Mighty, where he presently took precedence of the Ab-
sentee Landlord and the Merchant, Prince, who had re-
cently been his betters.

It is not that Commercial Enterprise or the Landed In-
terest lost ground in any positive sense during that era of
new growth; but only that investment in the mechanical


Vv JaCf., e.g. L. C. A. Knowles, The Industrial and Commercial
Revolutions in Great Britain during the Nineteenth Century.


Free Competition ot


industries and in the trade which served the needs of
those industries then became profitable and consequential
beyond the rest; so that the industrial investments, and
the captains of industry who were the personal upshot of
such investments, presently outgrew those others who
had ruled the road and set the pace of law and custom,
usage and morals, before that time. During that era of
new growth the civilised nations swiftly shifted to the
ground of business interest and businesslike incentives
in all that was to be done or to be left undone. Those
nations that first felt the driving force of the new indus-
try led the others in this new move; but those other na-
tions that made the transition to the mechanical technol-
ogy at a later date also took to the same business-man’s
policy and came in for the same range of businesslike
ideals in the conduct of their civil and political affairs
at a correspondingly later date. The case of Germany
or of Japan shows this concomitance in a particularly sug-
gestive way.

Enhanced income from investments became the para-
mount incentive of civilised life; and the Captain of In-
dustry—the substantial citizen who controlled much of
the nation’s workmanship and so came in for a largely en-
hanced income—became the paramount exponent of the
community’s aims and ideals as well as the standard con-
tainer of all the civic virtues. Chief among these civic
virtues was a steadfast cupidity—as has already been
noted in an earlier passage,—the steadfast spirit of busi-
ness enterprise, of getting a safe margin of something for
nothing at the cost of any whom it may concern. Nas-
sau Senior about the middle of the nineteenth century ex-
plained that this is “The Natural State of Man,” ? as be-
ing that state of commercial felicity for which by a happy


2Senior, Political Economy, 5th ed. p. 85.


72 Absentee Ownership


destiny mankind have been brought out upon the surface
of this planet and placed under the governance of cer-
tain beneficent natural laws leading to this eventual con-
summation.


The coming of the new industry brought also certain
secondary but very substantial consequences. As con-
trasted with what had gone before, the new industrial
system dominated by the mechanistic technology, was
highly productive; increasingly so as the mechanistic
technology advanced and extended its range. Yet dur-
ing all that period which can properly be called the era of
free competition the industrial system never reached such
a pitch of efficiency that it could properly be called in-
ordinately productive; that is to say, production was not
at that time continually in danger of outrunning the ca-
pacity of the market. In the ordinary lines of industry
it was not at that time necessary constantly to restrict
the output in order to maintain prices at a reasonably
profitable level. Therefore that period—say, loosely,
down to the middle of the nineteenth century—was, by
and large, a period of free competitive production and
increasing output, in England and in the English-speak-
ing countries.

An immediate consequence of the increased rate of
production was an increasing growth of the underlying
population. At the same time the overseas trade was
greatly stimulated; partly by the large output of mar-
ketable goods; partly by the direct effect which the new
technology had on ship-building and navigation ; and partly
also by the fact that the new industrial arts made use of
a constantly increasing amount and variety of new ma-
terials, many of which were brought from overseas. In
the nature of things the new industrial system was bound


Free Competition 73


to disregard national frontiers, both for the resources on
which it drew and for the markets which it was fit to
supply. So that free trade both in industrial materials
and in marketable goods became an obvious foregone con-
clusion so soon as the new industry had got well under
way. It is true, then as ever, national jealousies favored
restrictions on trade, and business considerations—that
is to say considerations of private gain for special inter-
ests—then and since then have decided against free trade,
here and there from time to time. But it has been ob-
viously and increasingly true that productive industry
of the new order is always best served by an unrestricted
exchange of goods and resources. Business considera-
tions may call for obstruction of trade; technological con-
siderations do not.

The growth cf population and the growing extension of
trade into foreign parts afforded an outlet for an ever
increasing production of goods, at reasonably profitable
prices, that is to say at increasingly profitable prices. So
that business considerations during that time called for no
vigilant restriction of output, on the whole; and the sa-
gacity of the captains of industry was therefore habitu-
ally directed to a cheap and large output of goods rather
than to a vigilant sabotage on production with a view to
enhanced prices in a restricted market. The dominant
note of ordinary industrial business was not then a care-
fully balanced sabotage on production, as has since then
gradually come to be the case, but rather a rapaciously
thrifty cost of production of an increased volume of out-
put to be sold in a virtually unlimited market, at com-
petitive prices, that were made profitable by low cost.
It is true that, increasingly toward the close of that pe-
riod, businesslike sabotage on production also comes to
be habitual, so that industrial business enterprise takes on


74 Absentee Ownership


more of its later and maturer character of watchful wait-
ing; but during the era of free competition it is, after
all, the habitual drift of sound business practice to find
a margin of gain in an increased output at a reduced cost,
at the cost of the underlying population, by the help of
improved processes and by work on a larger scale.

If the era of free competition be considered to have
closed somewhere toward the middle of the nineteenth
century, it may be said that during that period of some
six or eight decades there was no very substantial addi-
tion to the range of materials commonly made use of in
industry, and no very appreciable innovations were made
in the nature of the processes commonly employed. The
advance of the industrial arts in that time, although very
substantial, consisted mainly in the further elaboration
and refinement of the mechanical processes which were al-
ready in use, and the more extensive and diversified use
of materials already in familiar use. Electricity, pe-
troleum, and rubber had no share in industry then, and
even that extensive use of structural iron and steel that
has characterised the later age was still in its beginnings.
Industrial chemistry was but a slight and inconspicuous
matter, and the industrial uses of the rarer metals were
still unknown. It is during the third quarter of the
century that these things begin practically to edge their
way into the everyday scheme of organised workmanship
and become incorporated into the industrial system. The
industrial system, the state of the industrial arts, as it
stood before that date was complete without these things;
since that time, since their invention has made them nec-
essary, industry can not do without these things; and in
that degree a new order has come into effect in industry.

But while little was added to the kind and variety of
raw materials employed, the consumption of the staple


Free Competition 75


raw materials already in use increased greatly and con-
tinually. This fact, coupled with a continually increasing
consumption of goods, led to an enhanced market value of
all those natural resources which were commonly drawn
on in that time. So that many a fortune, great or small,
was amassed during that period by the simple expedient
of “sitting tight’ while the market values of agricultural
and urban lands, timber lands, and lands underlaid with
mineral deposits, were gradually being bidden up by the
increasing volume of industrial uses and the increasingly
urgent needs of an ever larger underlying population.
The new values which so were added to the country’s
riches were created by the advancing state of the indus-
trial arts, but the new wealth which so came into being
was added to the possessions of those absentee owners
who were seized and possessed of these tangible prop-
erties.

The same process of creating tangible wealth by an
extension of industrial uses has, of course, gone on un-
remittingly since then, and indeed it has gone forward
all the while at an accelerated rate; and all the while the
increase has by settled law and custom continued to be
added to the possessions of absentee owners who have had
no part in that advance of the industrial arts by which
the new wealth has been created. The case of the min-
eral lands in America and the other Colonies will come to
mind; and the case of urban lands is well shown, e.g.,
by real-estate values on the island of Manhattan.®

England, and the other civilised nations in a lesser de-
gree, came through this initial phase of the existing indus-
trial situation with a greatly heightened industrial effi-


3 The holdings of Trinity Church may serve as an instance of
unobstructed and unabashed absentee ownership at the cost


of the community.


76 Absentee Ownership


ciency, a great and steadily growing number of gentlemen-
investors, a steadily increasing population, and a large in-
crease of material wealth. On the political side, this era
of free competition laid the foundations of the British
Empire. National wealth increased greatly, the kept
classes made a notable growth in numbers and in the con-
spicuous consumption of superfluities, while the under-
lying population steadily fell into arrears, underfed and
underbred in an ever more pronounced fashion as this
era of free competition ran its course and brought the
community nearer to Senior’s “Natural State of Man.”


Opinions will differ as regards the date at which the
era of free competition closed, and there also are those
who will say that it has not closed yet, that competitive
production still dominates the market and still gives its
character to the industrial system as it runs today. There
is, in fact, much to be said for this latter view, and indeed
much is said for it by those who wish to believe. Free
competition still stands over as the popular ideal to which
trade and production ought to conform; and in the na-
ture of things it is distasteful to believe that the ideal
state of things is already an irretrievably past phase of
the state of things. And there is much to be said by
those who believe that the competitive system still stands
over in the main, and that it can be reinstated in full
and intact by taking reasonable measures to that end.

But the question here is not what evidence and argu-
ments might without violence to the facts in the case be
written into a brief in advocacy of the competitive sys-
tem, as being the only good and natural plan. The ques-
tion here is wholly as to the run of the facts, for better
or worse; and this reduces itself to a question as to the
approximate date beyond which it seems reasonable to


Free Competition pd


say that, on the whole, the rule of free competition ceased
to govern productive industry and the market for the
product of such industry. And this is in some degree a
matter of opinion; although it seems reasonable, on the
whole, to say that such a change in the industrial situa-
tion becomes effective sometime around the middle of
the nineteenth century.

It is not that competition ceased abruptly at that date,
whether in trade or in industry, or even that it ceased
at all. It is only that in so far as touches the industrial
situation as a whole the incidence of this competition has
changed in such a way that the resulting situation can no
longer be spoken of as a competitive system in anything
like the sense in which that term has commonly been
employed. But even so, there still are large and highly
important divisions of productive industry within which
competitive production still runs on according to the an-
cient plan. Such are, e.g., agriculture, as well as many
of the minor lines of production which have not been
made over on the pattern of the machine industry.

The competitive system has been dying at the top.
Free competitive production has ceased to be the rule
in what are sometimes called the “key industries’; those
lines of production on whose output of goods or services
the continued working of the industrial system as a whole
depends from day to day. These are at the same time the
lines of work in which the machine technology has been
chiefly brought into effectual use, as well as the lines of
production on which all the industrial arts chiefly draw
for power, materials and equipment; as, e. g., coal, steel,
oil, transportation, and structural work.

The competitive system has been dying at the top, and
the decay has been spreading outwards and downwards as
fast and as far as the other and lower branches of the


78 Absentee Ownership


industry have been sufficiently brought into line with the
mechanical technology and so have become fit material for
absentee ownership and control; that is to say, fit to be
profitably managed on business principles. In great part
this decay of the old-fashioned competitive system has
consisted in a substitution of competitive selling in the
place of that competitive production of goods that is al-
ways presumed to be the chief and most serviceable fea-
ture of the competitive system. That is to say, it has
been a substitution of salesmanship in the place of work-
manship; as would be due to happen so soon as business
came to take precedence of industry, salesmanship being
a matter of business, not of industry; and business being
a matter of salesmanship, not of workmanship. That is
to say in other words, competition as it runs under the
rule of this decayed competitive system is chiefly competi-
tion between the business concerns that control produc-
tion, on the one side, and the consuming public on the other
side; the chief expedients in this businesslike competi-
tion being salesmanship and sabotage. Salesmanship in
this connection means little else than prevarication, and
sabotage means a businesslike curtailment of output.

Of course, neither salesmanlike prevarication nor busi-
nesslike curtailment of output are new inventions of the
Victorian age. Both are as old as commercial enterprise.
But during Victorian times things took such a turn as to
throw these expedients of commercial business into the
foremost place among the principles which ‘have guided
business men in their control of industry. What has
been taking place is after all only a change in degree,
but it is a change in degree of such magnitude as to create
a change in kind.

As has already been indicated in earlier passages, this
turn of things that so brought on a new order of competi-


Free Competition 79


tion and put the old-fashioned competitive system in abey-
ance, turns in the main on three peculiar features of the
situation as it developed during the early half of the
nineteenth century: (a) by a fuller development of the
mechanistic technology industry was becoming excessively
productive—beyond the current needs of business; (b)
because of this fact and because the territorial expansion of
the available market had then virtually reached its limits,
the supply of industrial products had overtaken the de-
mand; (c) there was a large and increasing use of credit,
which in great part took the form of investment in cor-
poration securities. Each of these causes worked toward
the same outcome, and it would be difficult to say which
of them is to be credited with the greater share in the
outcome. They have all persisted in later times, and
they still go to make up the situation in which the in-
dustrial system is placed. It might readily be made to
appear that the use of credit has proved the more con-
sequential of these causes that have converged to create
the existing situation in industry, but it would likewise
appear that this use of credit would presumably have had
no such effect in the absence of an inordinately productive
state of the industrial arts. Before this turn in human
affairs thoughtful men were asking if business is good
for industry, since then the engrossing question is whether
industry is good for business.*


Seen in the historical perspective of today the era of
free competition that so drew to a lingering close in
early or middle Victorian times has the appearance of a
period of transition, or in some respects even a period of


4The answer to both questions appears to be that business
may be good for industry and industry may be good for busi-
ness if not used to excess and not allowed to form a habit.


80 Absentee Ownership


beginnings and pioneering, especially as regards the con-
duct of business and the businesslike control of industry;
although, of course, it had no such appearance in the eyes
of those who saw it all at the time.’ As has already been
remarked in an earlier passage, during the earlier decades
that followed the Industrial Revolution the new mechanical
industries were habitually conducted on a relatively small
scale on a basis of self-ownership, with credit relations
playing a subsidiary and essentially transient part, and
by owners who exercised a personal supervision of the
works from day to day and dealt with their hired work-
men on something of a personal footing. In the typical
case, the organisation and management had, on the whole,
a good deal of an air of personal contact and personal
understandings, both in its business transactions and in
its direction of the work in hand. The business concern,
which in the typical case was the same as the industrial
manager, would commonly consist of a single man, with
more or less workmanlike knowledge and experience, such
as would make him a reasonably competent foreman of
the works; or it was a private firm, in the nature of a
partnership which included such a person. From this
type-form there were many departures in practice, tran-
siently or permanently. But through it all ran a visible
presumption of self-help, personal initiative, and avoid-
ance of debt. Aside from book accounts, the credit rela-
tions of this typical industrial concern would be slight
and presumptively ephemeral.

In the course of the period in question, and as a major
factor in bringing it to a close, business practice so far
departed from this early footing of individual self-help

5So, e.g., to Nassau Senior that phase of commercialised in-
dustrial enterprise was the terminus ad quem, the “Natural


State of Man’; and Senior is an eminently competent spokes-
man of his time.


Free Competition 81


that the prevalent form of industrial business concern
presently came to be a more or less unwieldy partnership,
commonly including silent or “sleeping” partners, rather
than an individual employer-owner. And while the part-
nerships increased in size and number an increasing pro-
portion of them also took on the corporate form of joint-
stock companies or were replaced by chartered companies,
impersonal corporations with limited liability.®


6 This rapidly growing resort to incorporation presently led,
in the English case, to the Companies Acts, in the fifties; and
this may be taken as a convenient date to mark the transition
from the earlier to a later phase of modern business organisa-
tion. By chance, perhaps, this coming of new things in business
methods coincides somewhat closely in point of dates with the
beginnings of certain new things in technology which have had
far-reaching consequences for the later industrial system, very
much as these new things in business which came on during the
middle half of the nineteenth century have proved to be the
beginnings of greater things in business.


CHAPTER SY
THE RISE OF THE CORPORATION ?


THROUGH the latter half of the 19th century corporations
multiplied and increasingly displaced other forms of busi-
ness concerns, and took over more and more of the con-
trol of the industrial system. By this move the conduct
and control of industrial production has more and more
become a matter of corporation finance. Writers on In-
dustrial History who deal with that period will commonly
arrange their narrative and descriptions in the form of
life-histories of the greater corporations and corporation
financiers of the time, backed with supplementary matter
on the movement of population and the state of the in-
dustrial arts.2, Which makes it a history of business en-
terprise rather than of industry, and with which it is not
usual to find fault on that account.

The corporation (or “company,” in English usage) is a
business concern, not an industrial unit. It is a business
concern which has been created by a capitalisation of
funds, and which accordingly rests on credit; in which it
differs, at least in a marked degree, from the private
firms and partnerships which it has superseded as the
ordinary type-form of concern doing business in in-
dustry and commerce. It is an incorporation of absentee
ownership, wholly and obviously. Hence it is necessarily
impersonal in all its contacts and dealings, whether with

1 Joint-stock Company, Societé anonyme, Aktiengesellschaft.


2Cf., e.g., Burton J. Hendrick, The Age of Big Business.
82


The Corporation 83


other business concerns or with the workmen employed
in the industry. It is a business concern only, and in the
nature of the case its activities as a corporation are lim-
ited to business transactions of the nature of bargain and
sale, and its aims are confined to results which can be
brought into a balance-sheet in terms of net gain. The
corporation’s control and direction of industry is a finan-
cial control and direction; which always and necessarily
takes effect in industry at the second remove only, by
means of a business transaction which is of the nature of
a bargain; in pursuit of a businesslike outcome which is
statable in terms of outlay and income.

A corporation which does business in industry will em-
ploy technica! experts to manage the work and oversee the
processes into which its outiay goes and out of which its
income is (indirectly) drawn ; but such a corporation is not
itself an organisation of technical personnel, nor can its
corporate activities be stated in terms which have a tech-
nological meaning. Its end and aim is not productive
work, but profitable business; and its corporate activities
are not in the nature of workmanship, but of salesman-
ship. If it is an “industrial” corporation, so called, it
will make use of technical ways and means, processes and
products ; but it makes use of them as ways and means of
doing a profitable business. It has only an absentee
beneficiary’s interest in the work to be done. It is a
pecuniary institution, not an industrial appliance. It is
an incorporation of ownership to do business for private
gain at the cost of any whom it may concern.

This is not said by way of finding fault or raising an
issue. The rise of the corporation toward the middle of
the century, and its subsequent growth, was not due to
any access of iniquity; nor on the other hand does it ap-
pear to have resulted in increased hardship. It came


84 Absentee Ownership


on by force of circumstances, because the conditions and
methods of business were maturing into such shape as to
head up in this outcome. The incentives which drove on
to this outcome were the sound and laudable incentives
of greater expedition and larger net gains to be got by a
more exhaustive use of credit. Corporation business is
quite like any other form of business enterprise in being
a quest of net profits at the cost of any whom it may con-
cern. It is only that at this juncture in the advance of
technology and population, and consequently of trade and
industry, business conditions were falling into such shape
that larger net gains could be got by use of the corporate
form of business organisation than by the methods and
forms of procedure previously in use.

It has been usual, indeed it has long been an inveterate
habit, among economists and public writers, to assume
and say that the corporation came into use as a means
of increasing the scale on which industry was carried on,
by providing larger assemblages of material appliances
and drawing them together into larger working units.
Doubtless there is much truth in that opinion, or at least
the facts will bear that construction. It is, e. g., strongly
borne out by the visible results in such an industry as
railroading, and evidence to the same effect is not want-
ing in other lines of production and service. But the
use of a larger scale of production is a technological
device, whereas the corporation is a business arrangement.
The incentives which gave rise to the corporation and
which have made it the dominant form of business or-
ganisation must accordingly be incentives of business;
that is to say incentives of pecuniary gain, of increased
net gain per cent. on the investment.

Safe and sane business men would go in for incorpora-
tion only on a good prospect of getting a little something


The Corporation 85


more for nothing by following that lead, or on the prom-
ise of incurring a margin of net loss by failing to follow
the lead. To employ a larger scale of production is a
sound business proposition only so long as this larger scale
will bring an increased net gain in the aggregate price of
the output; which will be the outcome within limits and
within certain lines of industry, and which doubtless held
true and had its effect in some appreciable degree at the
time when the corporation was coming into its dominant
position in modern industrial business.’

But the corporation is always a business concern, not
an industrial appliance. It is a means of making money,
not of making goods. The production of goods or serv-
ices, wherever that sort of thing is included among the
corporation’s affairs, is incidental to the making of money
and is carried only so far as will yield the largest net gain
in terms of money,—all according to the principle of
“what the traffic will bear,’ or of “balanced return,”
which underlies all sound business, and more particularly
all corporation business.

This principle has come to be formally recognised and
accepted as good and final ever since the corporation came
into general use as the standard form of business concern.
Doubtless, and obviously, the spirit of it has always been
present and decisive wherever men have done business,
from time immemorial, but in concession to ancient prej-
udice it used to be decently covered over with profes-
sions of something else. It is only since the dominant
interest of the civilised nations has shifted from produc-
tion for a livelihood to investment for a profit, that this
principle of net gain has come to stand out naked and


3 Mr. Dewing discusses this point in a very competent fashion
under “The Law of Balanced Return.”—see A. S. Dewing, The
Financial Policy of Corporations, vol. iv, ch. ii.


86 Absentee Ownership


unashamed, as the sound and honest rule that should gov-
ern and limit the production of goods for human use.
And the corporation incorporates this underlying principle
of business enterprise more singly and adequately than
any form of organisation that had gone before. Business
enterprise may be said to have reached its majority when
the corporation came to take first place and became the
master institution of civilised life.


It is also a part of the folklore of Political Economy
that the corporation—jointstock company—has exerted,
and continues to exert, a creative force in productive in-
dustry, in that it draws out of retirement many small ac-
cumulated hoards of savings, and so combines them and
puts them to work when they would otherwise remain
idle. By this means the active capital is augmented by
so much; which is believed to augment the materials and
appliances of industry by so much, and thereby to in-
crease the volume of work and output in a corresponding
degree. This faith in the creative efficiency of capital
funds and capitalised savings is one of the axioms of the
business community. It is a safe presumption that no
sound business man would question it. Savings will
produce goods so soon as they are invested and cap-
italised. A more attentive scrutiny of this proposition
should throw some light on the nature and uses of cor-
poration finance.

The savings which are to be drawn out and mobilised,
turned to use by corporation finance, are held and brought
out in the shape of funds—money, coin, banknotes, sav-
ings-banks deposits, money borrowed on collateral, and
the like. They are not material goods that can be em-
ployed in production. In practical fact, the savings in
question have existed and continue to exist only in the


The Corporation 87


form of records of ownership, commonly evidences of
debt. What is transferred in the transactions by which
the savings are taken over into corporate capital is com-
monly some form of credit instrument; and the transac-
tions result in an augmentation of the volume of out-
standing credit instruments. Whether there are any
physically useful goods anywhere held in store back of
these funded savings—physical goods which are in any
special sense “represented” by these funds—is an open
question, with the presumption running strongly to the
contrary. Apart from warehouse receipts and the like,
which play a negligible part in these premises, the saved
up funds foot up to an absentee claimant’s undifferen-
tiated claim on a share in the outstanding stock of mer-
chantable goods at large. Any multiplication of such
claims, or any mobilisation of an added number of them,
adds nothing to the stock of goods on hand; it only re-
duces the share per unit of effectual claims, to answer to
the increased number of units. An immediate conse-
quence of the mobilisation of savings by corporation
finance, therefore, will be an inflation of general prices, a
depreciation of the currency.

In any case it is not the underlying goods, if any, that
are mobilised in such a financial transaction, but the
funds. It is the funds that go to swell the capitalisation.
Capitalisation is a transaction in funds, not a physical
operation. The transaction is concluded in a transfer
of funds and the creation of a corresponding credit obli-
gation, not in any corporeal transfer and delivery of
productive goods. It is a transaction in credit, in the
nature of a loan, by which the corporation financier comes
in for the use of additional funds and is enabled to in-
crease the capitalisation and the purchasing-power of the
business concern for which he acts. These funds may be


88 Absentee Ownership


invested in industry—materials, equipment, wages; in
which case they constitute an addition to the purchasing-
power which is thrown into the market for these things,
without making any corresponding addition to the store
of purchasable goods in hand which this increased power
is to buy. If all goes well there follows a transfer of
goods bought, but at a higher price than the same goods
would have brought in the absence of the new purchas-
ing-power which has been brought into the market by
this transaction in corporation finance. And that is all
that can be counted on for a certainty.

The total of useful goods in hand is the same as be-
fore, as counted by weight and tale; but the total wealth
in hand has been increased by a rise of prices, by some
multiple of the added purchasing power, as counted in
money-values. Measured by physical units or physical
usefulness the total effect is nil, at the best; but measured
in money-values there has been an appreciable addition
to the total wealth, represented immediately by the cor-
porate capital in which the funds in question have been
invested and indirectly by the enhanced level of prices.
There has been a creation of funded wealth without an
increase of material goods.

So far the result would appear to be quite unsub-
stantial. Money-values have been inflated by an inflation
of credit, which has been capitalised. But men do not
see it in that light; use and wont prevents them. In all
these civilised countries where the price system has gone
into effect men count their wealth in money-values. So
much so that by settled habit, induced by long and close
application to the pursuit of net gain in terms of price,
men have come to the conviction that money-values are
more real and substantial than any of the material facts
in this transitory world. So much so that the final pur-


The Corporation 89


pose of any businesslike undertaking is always a sale,
by which the seller comes in for the price of his goods;
and when a person has sold his goods, and so becomes in
effect a creditor by that much, he is said to have “re-
alised” his wealth, or to have “realised” on his holdings.
In the business world the price of things is a more sub-
stantial fact than the things themselves. Therefore in
all these civilised nations, where net gain in price is the
master passion and where the corporation has come to be
the master institution. the endless * use of credit has en-
abled the wealth in hand to multiply far and away out of
proportion to the increased production of goods due to
the advance of the industrial arts.


But corporation finance, even in that simple and obvi-
ous form in which it first went into action during the
middle half of the nineteenth century, is not a small and
easy matter, to be disposed of in a passing paragraph.
It has, in fact, occupied many able writers through many
well-considered volumes. Yet there is a little something
to be said here in the way of additional comment on the
work of the corporation considered as the master institu-
tion of the business world during the period when the


4Endless in the sense that in the ordinary course of business
no transaction of any consequence terminates in anything else
than a new credit arrangement. And when one sells out and
“realises” on his holdings the “reality” which he comes in for
is invariably some form of fiduciary paper, some evidence of
debt. Indeed, even if it were practicable to close out and “real-
ise” in cash—say, in coin—it would not be sound business; it.
would be a losing game, except conceivably in the case of a
banking concern which might have use for a store of specie
on the basis of which to extend its credit transactions.

5 Cf, e.g, E. S. Meade, Corporation Finance; H. W. Lyon,
Corporation Finance; A. S. Dewing, The Financial Policy of Cor-
porations.


go Absentee Ownership


business situation was maturing into the shape which it
has taken on in more recent times.

If the nature and uses of the corporation be considered
in terms of that earlier and simpler business practice out
of which the corporate form of organisation arose, the
case will stand somewhat as follows. The corporation
arises out of a collective credit transaction whereby funds
supplied by the stockholders (shareholders) are entrusted
to the corporation as a going concern, to be administered
for their benefit under certain specified limitations. The
company so organised is, therefore, an impersonal in-
corporation of liabilities to the stockholders, and by em-
ploying these liabilities as collateral (formally or infor-
mally) it will then procure further capital by an issue of
securities (debentures, typically bonds) bearing a stated
rate of income and constituting a lien on the assets of
the corporation. The securities outstanding make up the
capitalisation, and the stated income rates borne by these
securities are fixed charges on the corporate earnings.
Such is the simplest case of corporation finance, neglect-
ing certain minor facts that do not materially affect the
typical working-out of the corporation’s control of in-
dustry ; which is the point of interest here.

Two main and consequential facts are obvious on the
face of things: (a) an inflation of credit; and (b) a cap-
italisation of funds, essentially liabilities, with fixed
charges. The inflation of credit has been spoken of
above, as well as its immediate consequence in the infla-
tion of prices. It may be worth while to note here in
the same connection that the continued advance of the
industrial arts during the same period has constantly
been at work to offset or minimise that advance of prices
which the credit operations of corporation finance have
constantly been at work to produce. So that any sta-


The Corporation gI


tistical presentation of the actual course of prices during
the period will not show in any adequate fashion how
greatly the inflation of credit has acted to inflate prices.
At the same time the inflation of credit has broken down
from time to time in the way of crises and depressions,
whereupon the process of inflation has had to begin over
again. All of which confuses the case.

A further effect of the inflation should also be noted
briefly. Inasmuch as in any community that is given to
business enterprise men habitually rate their wealth and
their gains in money-values, any inflation of money-values
will bring on what is called “buoyancy” throughout the
business community and lead to a heightened business
activity and a spirit of confident adventure. Such a
situation presents a promise of an uncommonly wide mar-
gin of something for nothing, and by the simple money-
value logic of business it results in an increased volume
of transactions and a consequent release of the industrial
forces controlled by the business community. There
results a period of prosperity, during which productive
industry is speeded up to meet the larger demands of the
market; so that for a time the industrial equipment and
man-power may be allowed to run at something approach-
ing full capacity. The eventual consequence of such a
period of prosperity in that past era which is here in ques-
tion was, as a matter of course, “overproduction,” glut,
depression, and commonly crisis with disastrous liquida-
tion; but the prosperity would be no less actual for the
time being, and it is to be set down to the credit of the
credit-inflation out of which such a run of industrial
activity has arisen. In later times the more perfect and
comprehensive control of credit on a unified plan, and
by collusion of the greater credit institutions, has virtually
done away with these unadvised fluctuations of prosperity


Q2 Absentee Ownership


and depression; although even yet a general liquidation
may be, and a general depression already has been,
brought on by a credit-inflation of such unexampled
sweep as to exceed the capacity of that apparatus of con-
trol that has been made and provided for the stabilisa-
tion of this business.

Throughout the period dominated by corporation fi-
nance the use of credit, therefore, has had much, if not
all, to do with periodically speeding up business, and so
speeding up production for the market; and the corpora-
tion, which has been the chief embodiment and vehicle of
credit in the nineteenth century, has had its share in that
work. It is true, there was always bound up with this
periodical business prosperity a corresponding periodical
liquidation and depression, which always brought curtail-
ment and retardation in industry. And it is at least
doubtful if the one could have been had without the other.
The history of that period is a history of rythmically re-
curring fluctuations between prosperity and depression,
recurring so constantly and typically as to argue that the
two are inseparable phases of the same movement; which
in turn would argue that any prosperity so brought on by
credit inflation—also called “returning confidence”—can
not have furthered the growth of industry or increased
the volume of production in the long run, since each re-
curring wave of prosperity was always and unavoidably
followed and offset by an equivalent wave of depression
and retardation due to the same set of causes, leaving no
net gain traceable to this cause. All of which leaves the
point in doubt.®

But while the long-term use and value of credit in-
flation as a creator of prosperity is left in doubt, there is


6 Cf. W. C. Mitchell, Business Cycles.


The Corporation 93


at least one other point, of a similar bearing, at which
the long-term effect of corporation finance on industry
is not similarly doubtful. The corporation is an incor-
poration of credit, capitalised on the basis of the funds
invested and to the amount of its prospective earning-
capacity. It carries fixed charges to an amount corre-
sponding to its capitalisation—charges formally enforce-
able in the case of bonds and preferred stock (preference
shares) and insisted on with tenacity in the case of the
common stock. There is no provision for a shrinkage of
assets, and but a slight and doubtful provision for a
shrinkage of earnings. In other words, the corporation
is organised for prosperity, not for adversity, and it is
somewhat helpless in the face of adversity. It is not de-
signed to carry on in a falling market. Fixed charges
must be met, on pain of insolvency, and earnings can ac-
cordingly not be allowed to fall off materially. More
particularly since it is the practice in sound corporation
finance to capitalise any increase of earnings that looks
at all promising, and cover them with an issue of secu-
rities bearing fixed charges. The principle involved in
this practice has been called “Trading on the Equity.” ”

The reason for “trading on the equity” and so increas-
ing the issue of securities with fixed charges as far as
the corporation’s earnings will bear, is the urgent need
of more capital. The need of more capital in business
is insatiable, or “indefinitely extensible,” because funds
are a means of competition and business is competitive.
This abiding need of more capital has commonly beset
the common run of corporations’ in brisk or ordinary
times, and it may rise to the point of desperation in times
of depression. All of which holds true in a particular
degree for that earlier date which here is in question, be-


7Cf. Lyon, Capitalisation, ch. i1.


94 Absentee Ownership


fore the present, twentieth-century, phase of corporation
finance had come into action. There is always a disposi-
tion to trade on a thinner equity, to cover more nearly all
assets with an issue of securities with fixed charges;
which constitute a lien on the corporation’s assets, and
which will bring the concern to insolvency so soon as the
earnings fall off materially, as they are likely to do in
dull times. And the reason for this abiding need of more
capital is the competitive use of funds in a rising market;
the rise of the market being itself in the main caused by
this competitive use of funds.

The competitive use of funds may, though it need not,
involve.a competitive increase of the production of goods.
In brisk times there is likely to be something in the way
of a competitive increase of the volume of output, but
in ordinary times such an effect is not commonly to be
observed. It remains true, of course, that the corpora-
tions are business concerns, and the competition between
them is a business competition; that is to say, it is a
competitive endeavour to realise the largest net gain in
terms of price. So that the competitive endeavour always
centers finally on salesmanship; and the stress of compe-
tition may accordingly fall on increased production in
case and so far as an increased output can be counted on
to bring an increased net return in terms of price, and not
otherwise,—according to the well-known business prin-
ciple of what the traffic will bear.

Witness the present situation (1923) as it has stood
since the Armistice in 1918; the generality of business
concerns are and have all this time been seeking addi-
tional funds, but evidently not to increase the output of
goods, since neither the equipment controlled by these
concerns nor the available man-power are or have been
employed to much more than one-half their capacity.


The Corporation 95


Indeed, increased production of goods regardless of mar-
ket conditions—i.e., regardless of what the traffic will
bear—could have gone into action on very few hours
notice and on an unexampled scale at any time during
these years of unemployment and Watchful Waiting
since the Armistice; but while such increased production
has been quite feasible, technically, and quite urgently de-
sirable as a matter of the consumptive need of goods, it
would be suicidal as a matter of business. During all
this time the traffic would not bear an increased produc-
tion of goods. The result would, it is believed, be a
calamitous liquidation, in which a greatly inflated credit
situation would collapse, and would involve a cancella-
tion of, perhaps, one-half of the money-values now car-
ried on the books of the business community,—which is
not to be contemplated, not to say with equanimity. It
is true, the community, apart’ from the business concerns,
would be that much better off in respect of useful goods
and the other material amenities of life; but in any civ-
ilised nation the needs of business are paramount, and ac-
cording to business principles (net gain in terms of price)
it still is good and right that the popular need of work
and goods should wait on the business need of net gain
computed on outstanding credits.

This situation that has prevailed since the Armistice
and has stood over as a product of that season of spectac-
ular waste and profiteering covered by the War, is the
same in kind as the situation which prevailed at any pe-
riod after corporation finance first came into control
of the leading industries in the nineteenth century. It
is only an exaggerated case of that with which all civ-
ilised men are most familiar, in much the same measure
in which they are civilised, and for the maintenance of
which they have undergone unexampled sacrifices and are


96 Absentee Ownership


ready to undergo as much more. In short, it is business as
usual, only more of it. It is business as usual under the
régime of corporation finance. And such has been the na-
ture of business-as-usual ever since and so far as corpora-
tion finance has taken over the control of industry ; in the
nineteenth century in such measure as the petty circum-
stances of the nineteenth century permitted, amd in the
twentieth century on that magnificent scale of unemploy-
ment, privation, and underfeeding that is now to be seen
all over the place, rising here and there to the pitch of
famine and pestilence. It is not possible, on sound busi-
ness grounds, to let the industrial forces of the country
go to work and produce what, in the physical sense, the
country needs ; because a free run of production would, it
is believed, be ruinous for business; because it would
lower prices and so reduce the net business gain below
the danger point—the point below which the fixed charges
on outstanding obligations would not be covered by the
net returns. Hence what is conveniently called capital-
istic sabotage or businesslike sabotage on industry.

Corporation finance has always proceeded on a capital-
isation of credit, with fixed charges, carried as far as cir-
cumstances would permit. And circumstances have per-
mitted this capitalisation of credit to go farther the more
widely inclusive the scheme of corporation finance has
become and the more capable the apparatus for stabilis-
ing credit has become. Which comes to saying that the
need of a businesslike sabotage on industry, occasional
or habitual, has grown measure for measure as the scope
and volume of corporation finance has grown, and as the
equilibrium of make-believe carried forward in the out-
standing securities has grown more inclusive and more
delicately balanced.

And all the while the industrial arts have grown more


The Corporation 97


efficient in detail, at the same time that the range of in-
dustries and products which have come under the rule
of the mechanical industry has grown greater; new de-
tails and new ramifications have been added to the me-
chanical technology; new materials and new natural re-
sources have continually been added to what was already
in hand, and the whole has all the while been falling into
a more close-knit system of interlocking industrial proc-
esses. All of which has gone, together, progressively to
heighten the productive capacity per capita of an ever in-
creasing and increasingly workmanlike population.

So the continued progress of the industrial arts has be-
come a continued menace to the equilibrium of business,
has forever threatened to lower the cost per unit and to
increase the volume of output beyond the danger point,—
the point written into the corporation securities in the
shape of fixed charges on funds borrowed for operation
under industrial conditions that have progressively grown
obsolete. For the ceaseless advance of the mechanical
technology has also the effect of lowering the production
cost of the necessary equipment, as also the (physical)
cost at which raw materials may be had. And the remedy
by which this inordinate productivity of the industrial
arts is to be defeated or minimised is always a business-
like sabotage, a prudent measure of unemployment and
a curtailment of output, such as will keep prices running
above that salutary minimum that is required to pay fixed
charges on the funded make-believe and allow a “rea-
sonable profit” on investments.

Something can always be done toward this end by a
campaign of salesmanship, and quite as much has been
done in that way as one would like to admit. But the
greater work and the greater expenditure on salesmanship
has come at a later date, later than that early phase of


98 Absentee Ownership


corporation finance with which the argument is im-
mediately occupied here; so that any fuller discussion
of salesmanship and its place in the economy of busi-
ness will come more fittingly at a later passage. But the
rise of salesmanship into the first rank among the mat-
ters with which business is concerned dates back to the
same gencral period that saw the early rise of corpora-
tion finance. And salesmanship and sabotage have grown
up together and have always been bound together in the
strategy of business during all this time, so that the two
may fairly be spoken of as the twin pillars of the edifice
of business-as-usual in recent times. Salesmanship be-
ing the end and animating purpose of all business that
is done for a price, that is to say business-as-usual,
sabotage on production may even properly be counted as
one of the expedients of salesmanship, although it is so
greatly the first among these expedients as to put it in
a class by itself among the duties of business enterprise.
To increase sales and curtail the output is the appointed
way of maintaining prices and increasing the net gain,
which is the whole end and duty of business enterprise.


That period which has here been called the “era of free
competition” was marked by a reasonably free competitive
production of goods for the market, the profits of the
business to be derived from competitive underselling. It
is for such a “competitive system” that the economists
have consistently spoken, through the nineteenth century
and after, and the rehabilitation of it is still the abiding
concern of many thoughtful persons. In practical effect
it tapered off to an uncertain close in England about the
middle of the century, in America something like a quar-
ter-century later. So that it is a past phase. It meant a


The Corporation 99


competition between producing-sellers, and so far as the
plan was operative it inured to the benefit of the con-
sumers.

Doubtless, such freely competitive production and sell-
ing prevailed only within reasonable bounds even in the
time when it may be said to have been the rule in in-
dustrial business, and with the passage of time and the
approaching saturation of the market the reasonable
bounds gradually grew narrower and stricter. The man-
ner of conducting the business passed by insensible de-
grees into a new order, and it became an increasingly
patent matter-of-course for business enterprise in this
field consistently to pursue the net gain by maintaining
prices and curtailing the output.

It is not that competition ceased when this “compet-
itive system” fell into decay, but only that the incidence of
it has shifted. The competition which then used to run
mutually between the producing-sellers has since then in-
creasingly come to run between the business community
on the one side and the consumers on the other. Sales-
manship, with sabotage, has grown gradually greater and
keener, at an increasing cost. And the end of this sales-
manship is to get a margin of something for nothing at
the cost of the consumer in a closed market. Whereas
on the earlier plan the net gain was sought by undersell-
ing an increased output of serviceable goods in an open
market. The old-fashioned plan, so far as it was ef-
fective, might be called a competition in workmanship;
the later plan, so far as it has gone into effect, is a com-
petition in publicity and scarcity.

In the workday actualities of the business the contrast
between the ancient plan, that ruled the days before the
coming of corporation finance, and the practice of later


100 Absentee Ownership


times is neither so broad nor so sheer as this characterisa-
tion would make it; but the difference is after all suffi-
ciently visible, and it runs to the effect implied in this
characterisation.


CHAPTER VI
THE CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY


Tue Captain of Industry is one of the major institutions
of the nineteenth century. He has been an institution
of civilised life—a self-sufficient element in the scheme
of law and custom—in much the same sense as the Crown,
or the Country Gentleman, or the Priesthood, have been
institutions, or as they still are in those places where
the habits of thought which they embody still have an
institutional force. For a hundred years or so he was,
cumulatively, the dominant figure in civilised life, about
whose deeds and interests law and custom have turned,
the central and paramount personal agency in Occidental
civilisation. Indeed, his great vogue and compelling
eminence are not past yet, so far as regards his place in
popular superstition and in the make-believe of political
strategy, but it is essentially a glory standing over out of
the past, essentially a superstition.2 As regards the ma-
terial actualities of life, the captain of industry is no
longer the central and directive force in that business
traffic that governs the material fortunes of mankind; not
much more so than the Crown, ‘the Country Gentleman,
or the Priesthood.

1 An institution is of the nature of a usage which has become
axiomatic and indispensable by habituation and general accept-
ance. Its physiological counterpart would presumably be any


one of those habitual addictions that are now attracting the at-


tention of the experts in sobriety.
2 He is also still a dominant figure in the folklore of Political


Economy.
IOI


102 Absentee Ownership


Considered as an institution, then, the captain of in-
dustry is the personal upshot of that mobilisation of busi-
ness enterprise that arose out of the industrial use of the
machine process. And the period of his ascendency is,
accordingly, that era of (temperately) free competition
that lies between the Industrial Revolution of the eigh-
teenth century and the rise of corporation finance in the
nineteenth, and so tapering off into the competitive twi-
light-zone of the later time when competition was shift-
ing from industry to finance. But in the time of his
ascendency the old-fashioned competitive system came
up, flourished, and eventually fell into decay, all under the
ministering hand of the Captain.


As is likely to be true of any institution that even-
tually counts for much in human life and culture, so
also the captain of industry arose out of small beginnings
which held no clear promise of a larger destiny. The
prototype rather than the origin of the captain of in-
dustry is to be seen in the Merchant Adventurer of an
earlier age, or as he would be called after he had grown
to larger dimensions and become altogether sessile,
the Merchant Prince. In the beginning the captain was
an adventurer in industrial enterprise—hence the name
given him; very much as the itinerant merchant of the
days of the petty trade had once been an adventurer in
commerce. He was a person of insight—perhaps chiefly
industrial insight—and of initiative and energy, who was
able to see something of the industrial reach and drive of
that new mechanical technology that was finding its way
into the industries, and who went about to contrive ways
and means of turning these technological resources to new
uses and a larger efficiency; always with a view to his
own gain from turning out a more serviceable product


The Captain of Industry 103


with greater expedition. He was a captain of workman-
ship at the same time that he was a business man; but he
was a good deal of a pioneer in both respects, inasmuch
as he was on new ground in both respects. In many of
the industrial ventures into which his initiative led him,
both the mechanical working and the financial sanity of
the new ways and means were yet to be tried out, so that
in both respects he was working out an adventurous ex-
periment rather than watchfully waiting for the turn of
events. In the typical case, he was business manager of
the venture as well as foreman of the works, and not in-
frequently he was the designer and master-builder of the
equipment, of which he was also the responsible owner.*
Typical of the work and spirit of these Captains of the
early time are the careers of the great tool-builders of
the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.*

Such, it is believed, were many of those to whom the
mechanical industries owed their rapid growth and sweep-
ing success in the early time, both in production and in
earning-capacity ; and something of this sort is the typical
Captain of Industry as he has lived, and still lives, in the
affections of his countrymen. Such also is the type-form
in terms of which those substantial citizens like to think
of themselves, who aspire to the title. If this charac-
terisation may appear large and fanciful to an unbelieving
generation, at least the continued vogue of it both as a
popular superstition and as a business man’s day-dream
will go to show that the instinct of workmanship is not
dead yet even in those civilised countries where it has
become eternally right and good that workmanship should
wait on business.. The disposition to think kindly of


3Cf. The Engineers and the Price System, ch. iit. “The In-
dustrial System and the Captains of Industry.”
4Cf. Roe, British and American Tool-Builders.


104 Absentee Ownership


workmanlike service is still extant in these civilised na-
tions, at least in their day-dreams; although business
principles have put it in abeyance so far as regards any
practical effect.

In fact, it seems to be true that many, perhaps most,
of those persons who amassed fortunes out of the pro-
ceeds of industry during this early period (say, 1760-
1860), and who thereby acquired merit, were not of this
workmanlike or pioneering type, but rather came in for
large gains by shrewd investment and conservative un-
dertakings, such as would now be called safe and sane
business. Yet there will at the same time also have been
so much of this spirit of initiative and adventure abroad
in the conduct of industry, and it will have been so vis-
ible an element of industrial business-as-usual at that
time, as to have enabled this type-form of the captain of
industry to find lodgment in the popular belief; a man
of workmanlike force and creative insight into the com-
munity’s needs, who stood out on a footing of self-help,
took large chances for large ideals, and came in for his
gains as a due reward for work well done in the service
of the common good, in designing and working out a
more effective organisation of industrial forces and in
creating and testing out new and better processes of
production. It is by no means easy at this distance to
make out how much of popular myth-making went to set
up this genial conception of the Captain in the popular
mind, or how much more of the same engaging conceit
was contributed toward the same preconception by the
many-sided self-esteem of many substantial business men
who had grown great by “buying in” and “sitting tight,”
and who would like to believe that they had done some-
thing to merit their gains. But however the balance may
lie, between workmanship and salesmanship, in the make-


The Captain of Industry 105


up of the common run of those early leaders of industrial
enterprise, it seems that there will have been enough of
the master-workman in a sufficient number of them, and
enough of adventure and initiative in a sufficient number
of the undertakings, to enable the popular fancy to set
up and hold fast this genial belief in the typical captain
of industry as a creative factor in the advance of the
industrial arts; at the same time that the economists were
able presently to set him up, under the name of “Entre-
preneur,” as a fourth factor of production, along with
Land, Labor, and Capital. Indeed, it is on some such
ground that men have come to be called “Captains of
Industry” rather than captains of business. Experience
and observation at any later period could scarcely have
engendered such a conception of those absentee owners
who control the country’s industrial plant and trade on
a restricted output.

By insensible degrees, as the volume of industry grew
larger, employing a larger equipment and larger numbers
of workmen, the business concerns necessarily also in-
creased in size and in the volume of transactions, per-
sonal supervision of the work by the owners was no
longer practicable, and personal contact and personal ar-
rangements between the employer-owner and his work-
men tapered off into impersonal wage contracts gov-
erned by custom and adjusted to the minimum which
the traffic would bear. The employer-owner, an ever in-
creasingly impersonal business concern, shifted more and
more to a footing of accountancy in its relations with
the industrial plant and its personnel, and the oversight
of the works passed by insensible degrees into the hands
of technical experts who stood in a business relation to
the concern, as its employees responsible to the concern
for working the plant to such a fraction of its productive


106 Absentee Ownership


capacity as the condition of the market warranted for the
time being.

So the function of the entrepreneur, the captain of
industry, gradually fell apart in a two-fold division of
labor, between the business manager and the office work
on the one side and the technician and industrial work
on the other side. Gradually more and more, by this
shift and division, the captain of industry developed into
a captain of business, and that part of his occupation
which had given him title to his name and rank as captain
of “industry” passed into alien hands. Expert practical
men, practical in the way of tangible performance, men
who had, or need have, no share in the prospective net
gain and no responsibility for the concern’s financial
transactions, unbusinesslike technicians, began to be
drawn into the management of the industry on the tangi-
ble side. It was a division of labor and responsibility, be-
tween the employer-owners who still were presumed to
carry on the business of the concern and who were
responsible to themselves for its financial fortunes, and
on the other hand the expert industrial men who took
over the tangible performance of production and were
responsible to their own sense of workmanship.

Industry and business gradually split apart, in so far as
concerned the personnel and the day’s work. The em-
ployer-owners shifted farther over on their own ground as
absentee owners, but continued to govern the volume of
production and the conditions of life for the working
personnel on the businesslike principle of the net gain in
terms of price. While the tangible performance of so
much work as the absentee owners considered to be wise,
fell increasingly under the management of that line of
technicians out of which there grew in time the engineer-
ing profession, with its many duties, grades, and divisions


The Captain of Industry 107


and its ever increasingly numerous and increasingly speci-
alised personnel. It was a gradual shift and division, of
course. So gradual, indeed, that while it had set in in a
small way before the close of the eighteenth century, it
had not yet been carried out completely and obviously by
the close of the nineteenth, even in the greater mechanical
industries. In fact, it has not yet been carried through
to so rigorous a finish as to have warranted its recognition
in the standard economic theories. In the manuals the
captain of industry still figures as the enterprising in-
vestor-technician of the days of the beginning, and as
such he still is a certified article of economic doctrine
under the caption of the “Entrepreneur.”


The industrial arts are a matter of tangible perform-
ance directed to work that is designed to be of material
use to man, and all the while they are calling for an in-
creasingly exhaustive knowledge of material fact and an
increasingly close application to the work in hand. The
realities of the technician’s world are mechanistic real-
ities, matters of material fact. And the responsibilities of
the technician, as such, are responsibilities of workman-
ship only; in the last resort responsibility to his own
sense of workmanlike performance, which might well be
called the engineer’s conscience. On the other hand the
arts of business are arts of bargaining, effrontery, sales-
manship, make-believe, and are directed to the gain of
the business man at the cost of the community, at large
and in detail. Neither tangible performance nor the
common good is a business proposition. Any ma-
terial use which his traffic may serve is quite beside the
business man’s purpose, except indirectly, in so far as it
may serve to influence his clientele to his advantage.

But the arts of business, too, call all the while for


108 Absentee Ownership


closer application to the work in hand. Throughout re-
cent times salesmanship has come in for a steadily in-
creasing volume and intensity of attention, and great
things have been achieved along that line. But the work
in hand in business traffic is not tangible performance.
The realities of the business world are money-values ;
that is to say matters of make-believe which have the sanc-
tion of law and custom and are upheld by the police in
case of need. The business man’s care is to create needs
to be satisfied at a price paid to himself. The engineer’s
care is to provide for these needs, so far as the business
men in the background find their advantage in allowing
it. But law and custom have little to say to the engineer,
except to keep his hands off the work when the inter-
ests of business call for a temperate scarcity.

So, by force of circumstances the captain of industry
came in the course of time and growth to be occupied
wholly with the financial end of those industrial ventures
of which he still continued to be the captain. The spirit
of enterprise in him took a turn of sobriety. He became
patient and attentive to details, with an eye single to his
own greater net gain in terms of price. His conduct
came to be framed more and more on lines of an alert
patience, moderation, assurance, and conservatism; that
is to say, his conduct would have to fall into these lines
if he was to continue as a Captain under the changing

circumstances of the time. Changing circumstances
called for a new line of strategy in those who would sur-
vive as Captains and come into the commanding posi-
tions in the business community, and so into control of
the industrial system. It should perhaps rather be said
that the force of changing circumstances worked a change
in the character of the Captains by eliminating the Cap-
tains of the earlier type from the more responsible posi-


The Captain of Industry 10g


tion and favoring the substitution of persons endowed
with other gifts and trained to other ideals and other
standards of conduct; in short, men more nearly on the
order of safe and sane business, such as have continued
to be well at home in responsible affairs since then.

Under the changing circumstances the captains of in-
dustry of the earlier type fell to second rank, became
lieutenants, who presently more and more lost standing,
as being irresponsible, fanciful project-makers, footless
adventurers, fit only to work out innovations that were of
doubtful expediency in a business way, creators of tech-
nological disturbances that led to obsolescence of equip-
ment and therefore to shrinkage of assets. Such men are
persons whom it is not for the safe and sane Captains of
the newer type to countenance ; but who should be handled
with circumspection and made the most of, as project-
makers whose restless initiative and immature versatility
is counted on to bring about all sorts of unsettling and ir-
ritating changes in the conditions of industry; but who
may also, now and again, bring in something that will
give some patiently alert business man a new advantage
over his rivals in business, if he has the luck or the
shrewdness to grasp it firmly and betimes. Under the
changed circumstances the spirit of venturesome enter-
prise is more than likely to foot up as a hunting of trou-
ble, and wisdom in business enterprise has more and
more settled down to the wisdom of “Watchful wait-
ine


5 Doubtless this form of words, “watchful waiting,’ will have
been employed in the first instance to describe the frame of
mind of a toad who has reached years of discretion and has
found his appointed place along some frequented run where many
flies and spiders pass and repass on their way to complete that
destiny to which it has pleased an all-seeing and merciful
Providence to call them; but by an easy turn of speech it has


110 Absentee Ownership


The changing circumstances by force of which the con-
duct of industrial business so gradually came under the
hands of a saner generation of Captains, actuated more
singly by a conservative estimate of the net gain for them-
selves,—these circumstances have already been recited in
an earlier passage, in sketching the rise and derivation of
the business corporation and the conditions which brought
corporation finance into action as the ordinary means of
controlling the output of industry and turning it to the
advantage of absentee owners. So far as these deter-
mining circumstances admit of being enumerated in an
itemised way they were such as follows: (a) the indus-
trial arts, in the mechanical industries, grew gradually
into a complex and extensive technology which called for
a continually more exhaustive and more exact knowledge
of material facts, such as to give rise to engineers, tech-
nicians, industrial experts; (b) the scale on. which in-
dustrial processes were carried out grew greater in the
leading industries, so as to require the men in charge to
give their undivided attention to the technical conduct,
the tangible performance of the work in hand; (c) the


also been found suitable to describe the safe and sane strategy of
that mature order of captains of industry who are governed by
sound business principles. There is a certain bland sufficiency.
spread across the face of such a toad so circumstanced, while
his comely personal bulk gives assurance of a pyramidal sta-
bility of principles.


“And the sons of Mary smile and are blessed—
they know the angels are on their side,

They know in them is the Grace confessed,
and for them are the Mercies multiplied.

They sit at the Feet, and they hear the Word—
they know how truly the Promise runs.

They have cast their burden upon the Lord,
and—the Lord, He lays it on Martha’s sons.

—RupyarD KIPLING


The Captain of Industry TUE


business concerns in which was vested the ownership and
control of the industrial equipment and its working also
grew larger, carried a larger volume of transactions, took
on more of an impersonally financial character, and eventu-
ally passed over into the wholly impersonal form of the
corporation or joint-stock company, with limited liabil-
ity; (d) the continued advance of the industrial arts, in
range, scope, and efficiency, increased the ordinary pro-
ductive capacity of the leading industries to such a de-
gree that there was continually less and less question of
their being able to supply the market and continually more
and more danger that the output would exceed what the
market could carry off at prices that would yield a rea-
sonable profit—that is to say the largest obtainable profit;
(e) loosely speaking, production had overtaken the mar-
ket; (f) eventually corporation finance came into action
and shifted the point of businesslike initiative and dis-
cretion from the works and their management, and even
from the running volume of transactions carried by the
business office of the concern, to the negotiation and
maintenance of a running volume of credit; (g) the cap-
italisation of credit with fixed charges, as involved in
the corporate organisation, precluded shrinkage, reces-
sion, or retrenchment of assets or earnings, and so ordi-
narily precluded a lowering of prices or an undue increase
of output,—undue for purposes of the net gain. Busi-
ness enterprise, therefore, ceased progressively to be com-
patible with free-swung industrial enterprise, and a new
order of businesslike management went progressively into
action, and shuffled a new type of persons into the posi-
tions of responsibility; men with an eye more single to
the main chance at the cost of any whom it may concern.

Among these circumstances that so made for a new
order in industrial business the one which is, presumably,


112 Absentee Ownership


the decisive one beyond the rest is the growing productive
capacity of industry wherever and so far as the later ad-
vances in industrial process are allowed to go into effect.
By about the middle of the nineteenth century it can be
said without affectation that the leading industries were
beginning to be inordinately productive, as rated in terms
of what the traffic would bear; that is to say as counted
in terms of net gain. Free-swung production, approach-
ing the full productive capacity of the equipment and
available man-power, was no longer to be tolerated in
ordinary times. It became ever more imperative to ob-
serve a duly graduated moderation, and to govern the
volume of output, not by the productive capacity of the
plant or the working capacity of the workmen, nor by
the consumptive needs of the consumers, but by what the
traffic would bear; which was then habitually and in-
creasingly coming to mean a modicum of unemployment
both of the plant and the available man-power. It was
coming to be true, increasingly, that the ordinary equip-
ment of industry and the available complement of work-
men were not wanted for daily use, but only for special
occasions and during seasons of exceptionally brisk trade.
Unemployment, in other words sabotage, to use a word
of later date, was becoming an everyday care of the busi-
ness management in the mechanical industries, and was
already on the way to become, what it is today, the most
engrossing care that habitually engages the vigilance of the
business executive. And sabotage can best be taken care
of in the large; so that the corporations, and particularly
the larger corporations, would be in a particularly for-
tunate position to administer the routine of salutary sa-
botage. And when the Captain of Industry then made the
passage from industrial adventurer to corporation finan-
cier it became the ordinary care of his office as Captain


The Captain of Industry Lig


to keep a restraining hand on employment and output,
and so administer a salutary running margin of sabotage
on production, at the cost of the underlying population.®


But the account is not complete with a description of
what the Captain of Industry has done toward the stand-
ardisation of business methods and the stabilisation of
industrial enterprise, and of what the new order of busi-
ness-as-usual has done toward the standardisation of the
Captain and eventually towards his neutralisation and
abeyance. As has already been remarked, he was one of
the major institutions of the nineteenth century, and as
such he has left his mark on the culture of that time and
after, in other bearings as well as in the standards of busi-
ness enterprise. As has also been remarked above, the
Captain of Industry and his work and interests presently
became the focus of attention and deference. The Landed
Interest, the political buccaneers, and the priesthood,
yielded him the first place in affairs and in the councils of
the nation, civil and political. With the forward move-
ment from that state of things in which business was con-
ceived to be the servant of industry to that more mature
order of things under which industry became the servant
of business, and then presently industrial business of the
simpler sort became the servant of the big business which
lives and moves on the higher level of finance at large,—
as this progression took effect and reshaped the Captain to
its uses, the growth of popular sentiment kept pace with
the march of facts, so that the popular ideal came to be
the prehensile business man rather than the creative
driver of industry; the sedentary man of means, the Cap-


6 As someone with a taste for slang and aphorism has said
it, “In the beginning the Captain of Industry set out to do some-
thing, and in the end he sat down to do somebody.”


114 Absentee Ownership


tain of Solvency. And all the while the illusions of na-
tionalism allowed the underlying population to believe
that the common good was bound up with the business
advantage of these captains of solvency, into whose serv-
ice the national establishment was gradually drawn, more
and more unreservedly, until it has become an axiomatic
rule that all the powers of government and diplomacy
must work together for the benefit of the business in-
terests of the larger sort. Not that the constituted au-
thorities have no other cares, but these other cares are,
after all, in all the civilised nations, in the nature of
secondary considerations, matters to be taken care of
when and so far as the paramount exigencies of business
will allow.

In all this there is, of course, nothing radically new, in
principle. In principle it all comes to much the same
thing as the older plan which this era of business, big and
little, has displaced. So long as nationalism has held
sway, the care and affectionate pride of the underlying
population has, in effect, ever centered on the due keep of
the nation’s kept classes. It is only that by force of cir-
cumstances the captain of industry, or in more accurate
words the captain of solvency, has in recent times come to
be the effectual spokesman and type-form of the kept
classes as well as the keeper and dispenser of their keep;
very much as the War Lord of the barbarian raids, or the
Baron of the Middle Ages, or the Prince of the era
of state-making, or the Priesthood early and late in
Christendom, have all and several, each in their time,
place and degree, stood out as the spokesman and ex-
emplar of the kept classes, and served as the legitimate
channel by which the community’s surplus product has
been drained off and consumed, to the greater spiritual
comfort of all parties concerned.


The Captain of Industry 115


It is only that the superstitions of absentee ownership
and business principles have come into the first place
among those “Superstitions of the Herd” which go to
make up the spirit of national integrity. The moral ex-
cellence and public utility of the kept classes that now
march under the banners of absentee ownership and busi-
ness enterprise are no more to be doubted by the loyal
citizens of the Christian nations today than the similar
excellence and utility of the princely establishment and
the priestly ministrations which have drained the resources
of the underlying population in an earlier and ruder age.
And the princes of solvency and free income no more
doubt their own excellence and utility than the princes of
the divine grace or the prelates of the divine visitations
thhave done in their time. It is only a shifting of the pri-
macy among the civilised institutions, with the effect
that the princes and the priests of the Grace and the
Mercy now habitually creep in under the now impervious
cloak of the prince and priest of business; very much as
the business adventurer of an earlier day crept in under
the sheltering cloak of the prince and the priest of the
Grace and the Mercy, on whom the superstitions that were
dominant in that time then bestowed the usufruct of the
underlying population. For in the nineteenth century the
captain of business became, in the popular apprehension, a
prince after the order of Melchizedech, holding the pri-
macy in secular and spiritual concerns.


Men are moved by many impulses and driven by many
instinctive dispositions. Among these abiding disposi-
tions are a strong bent to admire and defer to persons of
achievement and distinction, as well as a workmanlike
disposition to find merit in any work that serves the com-
mon good. The distinction which is admired and de-


116 Absentee Ownership


ferred to may often be nothing more to the point than a
conventional investiture of rank attained by the routine
of descent, as, e. g., a king, or by the routine of seniority,
as, e. g., a prelate.

There is commonly no personal quality which a by-
stander can distinguish in these personages. The case
of the Mikado in the times of the Shogunate is perhaps
extreme, but it can by no means be said to be untrue or
unfair as an illustrative instance of how the predilection
for deference will find merit even in a personage who, for
all that is known of him, has no personal attributes, good,
bad, or indifferent. The kings and prelates of Christen-
dom are only less perfect instances of the same. It is
in these cases a matter of distinction, of course, with
no hint of achievement, except such achievement as a
loyal deference is bound to impute.” It is usual, indeed
it seems inevitable, in all such instances of the conven-
tional exaltation of nothing-in-particular, that there is
also imputed to the person who so becomes a person-
age something in the way of service to the common good.
Men like to believe that the personages whom they so
admire by force of conventional routine are also of some
use, as well as of great distinction,—that they even some-
how contribute, or at least conduce, to the material well-
being at large. Which is presumably to be set down as
one of the wonders wrought by the instinct of workman-
ship, which will not let men be content without some

7 As a blameless instance of this human avidity for deference
and exaltation of personages, a certain Square on Manhattan
Island has lately been renamed in honor of a certain military
personage who was once, in an emergency, appointed to high
rank and responsibility because there was nothing better avail-
able under the routine of seniority, and of whose deeds and at-
tainments the most laudatory encomium has found nothing sub-


stantially better to say than that it might have been worse.
And it is by no means an isolated case.


The Captain of Industry Lily


colorable serviceability in the personages which they so
create out of nothing-in-particular,

But where there is also achievement, great deeds ac-
cording to that fashion of exploits that has the vogue for
the time being, this will of itself create distinction and
erect a personage. Such is the derivation of the captain
of industry in the nineteenth century. Men had learned,
at some cost, that their exalted personages created ad hoc
by incantation were of something less than no use to the
common good, that at the best and cheapest they were
something in the nature of a blameless bill of expense.
The civilised nations had turned democratic, so much of
them as had a fairly colorable claim to be called civilised ;
and so they had been left without their indispensable
complement of personages to whom to defer and to whom
to impute merit. In so far as the ground had been cleared
of institutional holdovers from pre-democratic times,
there remained but one workable ground of distinction
on which a practicable line of personages at large could
be erected, such as would meet the ever-insistent need of
some intoxicating make-believe of the kind. Demo-
cratically speaking, distinction at large could be achieved
only in the matter of ownership, but when ownership was
carried well out along the way of absentee ownership it
was found to do very nicely as a base on which to erect
a colorable personage, sufficient to carry a decently full
charge of imputed merit.* It results that under the aegis


8 Exception may be taken to all this, to the effect that the req-
uisite personages can always be found in the shape of gen-
tlemen at large—“country gentlemen” or “Southern Gentlemen,”
of what not—and “Best Families’ who sit secure on a pre-
scriptive gentility of birth and breeding. But in this bearing and
seen in impersonal perspective, Gentlemen and Best Families are
best to be defined as “absentee ownership in the consumptive
phase,” just as the captain of industry may likewise be spoken of


118 Absentee Ownership


of democracy one’s betters must be better in point of
property qualifications, from which the civic virtues flow
by ready force of imputation.

So the captain of industry came into the place of first
consequence and took up the responsibilities of exemplar,
philosopher and friend at large to civilised mankind; and
no man shall say that he has not done as well as might be
expected. Neither has he fallen short in respect of a
becoming gravity through it all. The larger the pro-
portion of the community’s wealth and income which he
has taken over, the larger the deference and imputation of
merit imputed to him, and the larger and graver that af-
fable condescension and stately benevolence that habitu-
ally adorn the character of the large captains of solvency.
There is no branch or department of the humanities in
which the substantial absentee owner is not competent to
act as guide, philosopher and friend, whether in his own
conceit or in the estimation of his underlying popula-
tion,—in art and literature, in church and state, in sci-
ence and education, in law and morals,—and the under-
lying population is well content. And nowhere does
the pecuniary personage stand higher or more secure as
the standard container of the civic virtues than in demo-
cratic America; as should be the case, of course, since
America is the most democratic of them all. And no-
where else does the captain of big business rule the af-
fairs of the nation, civil and political, and control the
conditions of life so unreservedly as in democratic Amer-
ica ; as should also be the case, inasmuch as the acquisition
of absentee ownership is, after all, in the popular appre-
hension, the most meritorious and the most necessary
work to be done in this country.


impersonally as absentee ownership in the acquisitive phase;
which brings the case back to the point of departure.


CHAPTER VII


THE CASE OF AMERICA:
I. THe SeLtF-MAapE Man


In this matter of absentee ownership the case of America
is peculiar in some respects, although the special features
of the case are not such that it departs from the main
line of the development in any material degree. In-
deed, it might rather be said that America shows this
development in the freest and fullest shape which it has
anywhere attained hitherto. The special circumstances
which have conditioned its growth in this country have
brought the institution more swiftly to a more stable and
mature state here than elsewhere. So that absentee
ownership has become the master institution in Ameri-
can civilisation, speedily and summarily, with slighter
reservations than in the older civilised nations. In this
particular, at least, America may be said to stand at the
apex of cultural growth among the peoples of Christen-
dom. And America is followed closely by the other,
newer peoples that have come up out of European coloni-
sation; although it is doubtful if any of them will have
the fortune to overtake America. There is some ground
for thinking that these others may have made too late
a start, so that an undue proportion of other ideals and
principles, alien to the perfect dominance of absentee
ownership, may be included in the effectual drift of popu-
lar sentiment in these other cases. But so far these
others are coming along very nicely, and there is perhaps
no ground for serious apprehension.
119


120 Absentee Ownership


America is the oldest and maturest of the colonies
founded by the English-speaking peoples, or by any of
those Continental peoples which fall into the same class
with the English in this connection, as, e. g., the Dutch
or the Scandinavians. And the foundation and impetus
dates back to that period of West-European culture when
the principles of self-help, free contract, and net gain,
achieved their ascendency, and before these principles
had been pruned back by legal definition to fit a more
conservative manner of thinking. It is, indeed, a point
of distinction for the American case that here the pruning
back of these popular principles of conduct was carried
out to fit the working-out of these principles themselves,
under such conditions of singleminded conviction that
other institutional holdovers of the older order have not
seriously troubled the outcome. It was the fortune of
the American people to have taken their point of de-
parture from the European situation during a period when
the system of Natural Liberty was still “obvious and
simple,” fresh and crude, and consequently amenable to
growth and adaptation on its own premises under the
direct impact of the new material circumstances offered
by the New World. Whereas later enterprises in coloni-
sation have had their institutional point of departure
blurred with a scattering of the holdovers that were
brought in again by the return wave of reaction in Europe,
as well as by those later-come stirrings of radical dis-
content that have questioned the eternal fitness of the
system of Natural Liberty itself. The difference is not
wide, and the American advantage is not a great one; nor
need it make or mar the outcome in the end, since the
colonists and the later-come inhabitants of these other
new countries are, after all, the same thing over again
in respect of their permanent traits of character. They


The Self-Made Man 12I


are all made up of substantially the same hybrid mixture
of races, so that by heredity they are all substantially the
same people.*

In this matter those other, South-European or “Latin,”
peoples who have had a share in the colonisation of the
new continents fall somewhat to one side. In this mat-
ter of absentee ownership after the pattern set by the
system of Natural Rights, these others carry a serious
handicap. It is their fortune, not their fault. At that
period, when they were taking the lead in the winning of
the New World, these South-Europeans were still living
very busily in a more archaic and barbarian phase of the
European culture, which belongs at a point in the se-
quence antedating the natural rights that make democracy.
Their ideals and motives were, on the whole, of a visibly
different order and have worked out in time to a differ-
ent effect. Their enterprise in colonisation, as, e. g., the
Spanish and in a degree the Portuguese, was an enter-
prise in pillage, inflamed and inflated by religious fanati-
cism and martial vanity ; and it has worked out in the erec-
tion of a class of colonial nations which have hitherto
scarcely proved fit to survive under this newer order of
things that has been imposed by the mechanical industry
and the business enterprise which makes use of the me-
chanical industry.

In effect, the English-speaking peoples, on the other
hand, colonised with a view to the orderly exploitation
of the natural resources ; driven, on the whole, by motives
and ideals of self-help, equal opportunity, and net gain.
The difference may not be wide or substantial, nor is
there by any means a sharp contrast between the Eng-
lish-speaking colonial pioneers and the South-Europeans


1 Of course, in point of nationality they are, each and several,
eternally distinct for the time being.


122 Absentee Ownership


on these heads; not nearly so wide and sharp as this
blunt phrasing of it will imply. But, in effect, a differ-
ence of this character is visible, and in its working-out
this initial difference has told cumulatively in the out-
come. And in the outcome the English-speaking colonial
nations turn out to be addicted to democratic institutions,
the mechanical industries, and business enterprise. It
will not do to say that the English-speaking colonisation
to which America owes its beginnings and its character
was untouched by the spirit of plunder or unfamiliar with
religious atrocities and warlike vanity; but while the dif-
ference may be one of degree rather than of kind, such
measure of initial difference as there was appears to have
made the outcome. And the difference in the outcome is
too obvious to be overlooked by any but statesmen and
lawyers.

America is the most mature of these English-speaking
colonies. And in all of these colonial nations the main-
spring of the enterprise and the enduring preoccupation
of the people has been the exploitation of natural re-
sources for private gain. In all of them the natural
resources have progressively been taken over into pri-
vate ownership on a reasoned plan of legalized seizure.
It has been a sober and orderly-advancing seizure of these
resources, conducted under rules designed to safeguard
a democratically equal opportunity of seizure, and ad-
vancing as fast as the available resources have succes-
sively become, or have promised to become, valuable.
The rules governing this progressive subreption have been
‘drawn on lines that constantly call to mind the rules gov-
erning games of skill, where a formally even chance is
prescribed for all players who “sit in.’ And these rules
of equitable “grab” have also, on the whole, been lived up
to with about the same degree of scruple that is commonly


The Self-Made Man 123


to be had in games of luck and skill. In either case,
whether in the standard games of chance and dexterity
or in the business of taking over natural resources and
turning them to account, it is understood that any for~
mally blameless evasion of the rules will rightly inure
to the benefit of any competitor who so has been able to
“beat the game.” It is a principle of self-help. But
in either case, too, there is a formal limit on profitable
evasion, beyond which tact and salesmanship cease to be
sportsmanlike finesse or businesslike ambiguity and be-
come sharp practice or swindle.”

So there has been incorporated in American common
sense and has grown into American practice the pre-
sumption that all the natural resources of the country
must of right be held in private ownership, by those per-
sons who have been lucky enough or shrewd enough to.
take them over according to the rules in such cases made
and provided, or by those who have acquired title from
these original impropriators.

With the (partial) exception of the agricultural lands,
the ownership of these natural resources is always absentee
ownership, and it has always been absentee ownership
that has been aimed at in the efforts made to come into
possession of them. And they are always acquired and
held with a view to getting a larger benefit from them
than their cost; that is to say, with a view to getting a
margin of something for nothing at the cost of the rest
of the community. These are commonplaces, of course,


2It is not easy in any given case—indeed it is at times im-
possible until the courts have spoken—to say whether it is an
instance of praise-worthy salesmanship or a penitentiary offense.
All that may turn on a point of legal verbiage, and it may also
depend somewhat on the magnitude of the transaction and the
business rating of the parties in interest; a large transaction is,
on the whole, less likely to be found reprehensible.


124 Absentee Ownership


which it should scarcely be necessary to call to mind.

The natural resources of America are, or have been,
unexampled in abundance and availability, and they have
always been the main factor on which the life and com-
fort of the inhabitants have depended. They are the in-
dispensable means of life of the population at large, so
that the livelihood of all the inhabitants from day to day is
unavoidably bound up in their daily use. So long and
so far as these resources can be turned to use without
hindrance the American population will always be as-
sured an abundant and easy livelihood. So much so
that with free and full use of its unexampled natural re-
sources and an unhindered employment of its workman-
ship this people may, or rather might, come in for an
unexampled material abundance on unexampled easy
terms. What stands in the way of this climax of material
good fortune, immediately and directly, is the absentee
ownership of these natural resources. And what stands
in the way of discontinuing this absentee ownership of
the country’s resources is the moral sense of the Ameri-
can body of citizens; and in this they are in close accord
with the working bias of their constituted authorities,
whose chief care it is to safeguard and augment all rights
of absentee ownership at all points.

Doubtless the discontinuance of absentee ownership in
the country’s resources would not of itself set the indus-
trial system free to run at full capacity and so make the
most of the country’s workmanship; business considera-
tions could not permit that, so long as business considera-
tions continue to control the industrial system,—and there
is other business to be taken care of than that which is
occupied with the control of natural resources. But it
remains true that absentee ownership of the country’s
resources stands first and obviously in the way of a con-


The Self-Made Man 125


tinued full run of the country’s productive industry.

Should it occur to anyone to take exception to this
broad statement. it should suffice to call attention to the
fact that the raw materials drawn from these natural re-
sources command a price beyond the cost of the workman-
ship that goes to bring out the supply. Should this,
again, be questioned, there is the fact that the absentee
owners of the country’s coal, ore, oil, water-power, timber,
quarries, water frontage, building sites, and the like, con-
tinue to hold these properties as a valued possession from
which they derive a revenue. This is free income payable
to the absentee owners of these things and constitutes an
overhead charge on the country’s productive industry; it
goes into the cost of the goods produced, and is that much
of a burden and restriction on the output. This should
also be sufficiently obvious; but the moral sense of the
body of citizens will tolerate no disallowance of this
right of the absentee owners to get this legalised margin
of something for nothing.

Natural resources are valuable to their owners not be-
cause the owners have produced these things nor because
they have invested their “savings” in them, but because
the community has use for them and is willing to pay
something for their use,—because they are an indispens-
able means of living. Failing either the industrial use-
fulness which these things now have, or failing the con-
tinued willingness to allow the absentee owners a usu-
fruct in these resources as a source of free income, they
will no longer have value as assets, whatever they may
have cost.2 Natural resources are acquired, owned, and


3A classic illustration of the first point are the flint deposits
of Denmark, which were of first-rate consequence as natural
resources in the Stone Age; while the second point is covered
by the case of the Negro man-power of the Southern States,


126 Absentee Ownership


valued, as a source of free income; income for which
no equivalent in useful work is given, whatever the cost
at which these assets may have been acquired. At the
same time they will be of no use, and so will have no value
as assets, except as they are turned to use by the work-
manship of the population. It is the state of the indus-
trial arts that makes them natural resources, not the
funds invested in their ownership. In the language of
mathematics, the value of these things as a source of free
income to their owners is a “function” of the workman-
ship of the population at large. And for the complete-
ness of statement it should be added that the workman-
ship of the population is a “function” of the state of the
industrial arts; which is a joint stock of technical knowl-
edge and workmanlike habits ingrained in the population
and carried on jointly by the country’s man-power, which
in this respect carries on as an indivisible going con-
cern,

The absentee owner of natural resources is enabled to
make them a source of free income, that is to say make
them assets, by the power legally conferred on him to
withhold them from use until his charge for their use
is allowed him. What this charge will be is always a
question of what the traffic will bear; which is the same
as what will yield him the largest net return. But what
the traffic will bear will vary indefinitely according to the
circumstances of the case, and the value of given re-
sources as assets will vary accordingly.* Aside from


‘which ceased to be assets as soon as the consent to its usufruct
by absentee ownership was withdrawn.

*E.g., certain copper properties have varied greatly in their
value as assets, with the continued discovery of further copper
deposits, on the one hand, and with the increased requirements
of electrical material, on the other hand. So also have nickel
properties responded to changing circumstances of the same


The Self-Made Man 127


changes in the industrial arts, the most considerable and
most widely effective of these varying circumstances is
the varying degree in which competition prevails among
the owners of such assets.®

In the usual course, in the case of such staple resources
as coal, oil, or the ores, the business of exploitation has
at the outset commonly been competitive in a pro-
nounced degree; that is, the owners have competed in the
market by speeding up the output and underbidding on
the price. The result has been low prices for the time
being, and a rapid exhaustion, with waste, of the natural
supply. Presently, as the holdings have been drawn to-
gether into the ownership of a smaller and more man-
ageable number of absentee owners, these owners have
more and more consistently acted in collusion, and in
time have drawn together into combinations which have
taken on a corporate character, at least in effect, and
so have ceased to compete among themselves.®


order. And both, but particularly nickel, considered as a means
of free income for absentee owners, have been greatly helped
out from time to time by a protective tariff designed to safe~
guard and augment the free income of vested interests of this
class. It is the whole wisdom of a protective tariff that when
the charges so imposed by the absentee owners are so protected
by a protective duty the traffic can be made to bear a heavier
charge. In further illustration of the general statement above,
it may be recalled that the discovery of the Minnesota iron ores
and the gradual perfecting of the steel smelting processes, in-
continently cut down the value as assets of those Cuban ore
bodies whose American absentee owners were to have been
safeguarded in their free income by the Spanish-American War,
But there are no end of illustrative instances, since the whole
use and value of these natural resources, as well as variations in
their value as assets, turn on the state of technological knowl-
edge, with which the owners of them have nothing to do.

5 Compare, e.g., the case of the Texas oil fields with that
of the anthracite coal field.

6 The salt business, e.g., shows a very fair instance of this


128 Absentee Ownership


The result is not that competition ceases or declines
when the business of a given line of natural supply so
outgrows what is called the competitive stage and passes
under the control of a collusive or corporate combina-
tion of absentee owners, but only that it takes a new
turn, commonly with an increased vigor and persistence.
Instead of competing against one another, to their own
mutual defeat, the absentee owners now turn their un-
divided competitive efforts against the consumers. It
becomes a competition not within the business but be-
tween this business as a whole and the rest of the com-
munity. This stage of business maturity, which may
be called the stage of vested interest, has progressively
been reached in a very passable fashion by the generality
of that absentee ownership that controls the necessary
‘supply of raw materials used in the leading industries,—
in what are sometimes called the “key industries.”

There is, of course, the large exception of agricultural
food products, and the partial exception of such a nat-
ural staple as crude oil, where the continued opening of
new deposits and the continued growth of an under-
supplied market continues still to trouble the business
and its vested interests with a weedy crop of upstart
competitors for the market. The agricultural soil, the
natural resource from which the food-products are drawn,
is not amenable to absentee ownership except in a par-
tial measure, at least not yet; and agricultural food prod-
ucts have accordingly not yet been successfully handled
on the non-competitive or collusive plan, so far as concerns
their production; although there are typical cases of
collusion and absentee control to be found among the
concerns that own the business of milling, packing, and


‘gradual shifting from a competitive to a monopolistic foot-
ing.


The Independent Farmer 129


marketing many of these food-products. And while
crude oil is still troubled with irresponsible competitive
production for an open market, of the kind sometimes
called “wild-catting,”’ the efforts toward a collusive stabil-
ity of the business have, after all, been as successful as
might reasonably be looked for. So that, on the whole,
the owners and distributors are already engaged on a
fairly secure and consistent collusive competition against
the rest of the community.

The farmers who have to do with the great staples
have, for some time past and repeatedly, endeavored to
establish a collusive control of their market, with a view
to narrowing and stabilising the margin between the
prices they get and the prices which the consumers pay;
but so far with no substantial results. It has quite uni-
formly worked out in nothing better than gestures of
desperation. Their markets are controlled, but not by
the farmers. Absentee ownership in farming has yet
reached neither the extent nor the scale which would en-
able a collusive combination of farm-owners to determine
what the traffic will bear and arrange the volume of out-
put accordingly. All that matter is now taken care of
by those massive vested interests that move obscurely in
the background of the market and decide for themselves
what the traffic will bear for their benefit at the cost of
the farmers on the one side and the consumers of farm
products on the other.


II. Tue INDEPENDENT FARMER


The case of the American farmer is conspicuous ;
though it can scarcely be called singular, since in great
part it is rather typical of the fortune which has over-


130 Absentee Ownership


taken the underlying populations throughout Christen-
dom under the dominion of absentee ownership in its
later developed phase. Much the same general run of
conditions recurs elsewhere in those respects which en-
gage the fearsome attention of these farmers. By and
large, the farmer is so placed in the economic system that
both as producer and as consumer he deals with busi-
ness concerns which are in a position to make the terms
of the traffic, which it is for him to take or leave. There-
fore the margin of benefit that comes to him from his
work is commonly at a minimum. He is commonly
driven by circumstances over which he has no control,
the circumstances being made by the system of absentee
ownership and its business enterprise. Yet he is, on the
whole, an obstinately loyal supporter of the system of law
and custom which so makes the conditions of life for
him.

His unwavering loyalty to the system is in part a
holdover from that obsolete past when he was the In-
dependent Farmer of the poets; but in part it is also due
to the still surviving persuasion that he is on the way,
by hard work and shrewd management, to acquire a
“competence”; such as will enable him some day to take
his due place among the absentee owners of the land and
so come in for an easy livelihood at the cost of the rest
of the community; and in part it is also due to the per-
sistent though fantastic opinion that his own present in-
terest is bound up with the system of absentee owner-
ship, in that he is himself an absentee owner by so much
as he owns land and equipment which he works with
hired help,—always presuming that he is such an owner,
in effect or in prospect.

It is true, the farmer-owners commonly are absentee


The Independent Farmer | 131


owners to this extent. Farming is team-work. As it is
necessarily carried on by current methods in the great
farming sections, farm work runs on such a scale that no
individual owner can carry on by use of his own per-
sonal work alone, or by use of the man-power of his own
household alone,—which makes him an absentee owner
by so much. But it does not, in the common run, make
him an absentee owner of such dimensions as are re-
quired in order to create an effectual collusive control of
the market, or such as will enable him, singly or collect-
ively, to determine what charges the traffic shall bear. It
leaves him still effectually in a position to take or leave
what is offered at the discretion of those massive ab-
sentee interests that move in the background of the mar-
ket.®?

Always, of course, the farmer has with him the abid-
ing comfort of his illusions, to the effect that he is in
some occult sense the “Independent Farmer,” and that he
is somehow by way of achieving a competence of absentee
ownership by hard work and sharp practice, some day;
but in practical effect, as things habitually work out, he is
rather to be called a quasi-absentee owner, or perhaps a
pseudo-absentee owner, being too small a parcel of ab-
sentee ownership to count as such in the outcome. But
it is presumably all for the best, or at least it is expedi-
ent for business-as-usual, that the farmer should con-
tinue to nurse his illusions and go about his work; that
he should go on his way to complete that destiny to which
it has pleased an all-seeing and merciful Providence to
call him.

From colonial times and through the greater part of its
history as a republic America has been in the main an


6a Cf. Wallace, Farm Prices.


132 Absentee Ownership


agricultural country. Farming has been the staple oc-
cupation and has employed the greater part of the popu-
lation. And the soil has always been the chief of those
natural resources which the American people have taken
over and made into property. Through the greater part
of its history the visible growth of the country has con-
sisted in the extension of the cultivated area and the
increasing farm output, farm equipment, and farm pop-
ulation. This progressive taking-over and settlement of
the farming lands is the most impressive material achieve-
ment of the American people, as it is also the most serv-
iceable work which they have accomplished hitherto. It
still is, as it ever has been, the people’s livelihood; and
the rest of the industrial system has in the main, grown
up, hitherto, as a subsidiary or auxiliarly, adopted to and
limited by the needs and the achievements of the coun-
try’s husbandry. The incentives and methods’ engaged
in this taking-over of the soil, as well as the industrial
and institutional consequences that have followed, are
accordingly matters of prime consideration in any en-
deavour to understand or explain the national character
and the temperamental bent which underlies it.

The farm population—that farm population which has
counted substantially toward this national achievement
-—have been a ready, capable and resourceful body of
workmen. And they have been driven by the incentives
already spoken of in an earlier passage as being char-
acteristic of the English-speaking colonial enterprise,—
individual self-help and cupidity. Except transiently and
provisionally, and with doubtful effect, this farm popula-
tion has nowhere and at no time been actuated by a spirit
of community interest in dealing with any of their ma-
terial concerns. Their community spirit, in material con-


The Independent Farmer 133


cerns, has been quite notably scant and precarious, in
spite of the fact that they have long been exposed to ma-
terial circumstances of a wide-sweeping uniformity, such
as should have engendered a spirit of community inter-
est and made for collective enterprise, and such as could
have made any effectual collective enterprise greatly re-
munerative to all concerned. But they still stand sturdily
by the timeworn make-believe that they still are individu-
ally self-sufficient masterless men, and through good re-
port and evil report they have remained Independent
Farmers, as between themselves, which is all that is
left of their independence,—Each for himself, etc.

Of its kind, this is an admirable spirit, of course; and
it has achieved many admirable results, even though the
results have not all been to the gain of the farmers. Their
self-help and cupidity have left them at the mercy of any
organisation that is capable of mass action and a steady
purpose. So they have, in the economic respect—and
incidentally in the civil and political respect—fallen under
the dominion of those massive business interests that
move obscurely in the background of the market and
buy and sell and dispose of the farm products and the
farmers’ votes and opinions very much on their own terms
and at their ease.

But all the while it remains true that they have brought
an unexampled large and fertile body of soil to a very
passable state of service, and their work continues to
yield a comfortably large food supply to an increasing
population, at the same time that it yields a comfortable
run of free income to the country’s kept classes. It is
true, in the end the farm population find themselves at
work for the benefit of business-as-usual, on a very mod-
est livelihood. For farming is, perhaps necessarily, car-


134 Absentee Ownership


ried on in severalty and on a relatively small scale, even
though the required scale exceeds what is possible on a
footing of strict self-ownership of land and equipment by
the cultivators; and there is always the pervading spirit
of self-help and cupidity, which unavoidably defeats even
that degree of collusive mass action that might other-
wise be possible. Whereas the system of business in-
terests in whose web the farmers are caught is drawn
on a large scale, its units are massive, impersonal, im-
perturbable and, in effect, irresponsible, under the estab-
lished order of law and custom, and they are interlocked
in an unbreakable framework of common interests.


By and large, the case of America is as the case of the
American farm population, and for the like reasons. For
the incentives and ideals, the law and custom and the
knowledge and belief, on which the farm population has
gone about its work and has come to this pass, are the
same as have ruled the growth and shaped the outcome
for the community at large. Nor does the situation in
America differ materially from the state of things else-
where in the civilised countries, in so far as these others
share in the same material civilisation of Christendom.

In the American tradition, and in point of historical
fact out of which the tradition has arisen, the farmer has
been something of a pioneer. Loosely it can be said that
the pioneering era is now closing, at least provisionally
and as regards farming. But while the pioneer-farmer is
dropping out of the work of husbandry, his pioneer soul
goes marching on. And it has been an essential trait of
this American pioneering spirit to seize upon so much of
the country’s natural resources as the enterprising pioneer
could lay hands on,—in the case of the pioneer-farmer,


The Independent Farmer 135


so much of the land as he could get and hold possession
of. The land had, as it still has, a prospective use and
therefore a prospective value, a “speculative” value as
it is called; and the farmer-pioneer was concerned with
seizing upon this prospective value and turning it into
net gain by way of absentee ownership, as much as the
pioneer-farmer was concerned with turning the fertile
soil to present use in the creation of a livelihood for him-
self and his household from day to day.

Habitually and with singular uniformity the American
farmers have aimed to acquire real estate at the same time
that they have worked at their trade as husbandmen.
And real estate is a matter of absentee ownership, an
asset whose value is based on the community’s need of
this given parcel of land for use as a means of livelihood,
and the value of which is measured by the capitalised free
income which the owner may expect to come in for by
holding it for as high a rental as the traffic in this need
will bear. So that the pioneering aim, in American farm-
ing, has been for the pioneer-farmers, each and several,
to come in for as much of a free income at the cost of the
rest of the community as the law would allow; which has
habitually worked out in their occupying, each and several,
something more than they could well take care of. They
have habitually “carried’* valuable real estate at the same
time that they have worked the soil of so much of their
land as they could take care of, in as effectual a manner
as they could under these circumstances. They have been
cultivators of the main chance as well as of the fertile
soil; with the result that, by consequence of this intense
and unbroken habituation, the farm population is today
imbued with that penny-wise spirit of self-help and cu-
pidity that now leaves them and their work and holdings


136 Absentee Ownership


at the disposal of those massive vested interests that
know the uses of collusive mass action, as already spoken
of above.

But aside from this spiritual effect which this pro-
tracted habituation to a somewhat picayune calculation of
the main chance has had on the farmers’ frame of mind,
and aside from their consequent unfitness to meet the busi-
nesslike manceuvres of the greater vested interests, this
manner of pioneering enterprise which the farmers have
habitually mixed into their farming has also had a more
immediate bearing on the country’s husbandry, and, in-
deed, on the industrial system as a whole. The common
practice has been to “take up” more land than the farmer
could cultivate, with his available means, and to hold it
at some cost. Which has increased the equipment re-
quired for the cultivation of the acres cultivated, and has
also increased the urgency of the farmer’s need of credit
by help of which to find the needed equipment and meet
the expenses incident to his holding his idle and semi-idle
acres intact. And farm credit has been notoriously usuri-
ous. All this has had the effect of raising the cost of
production of farm products; partly by making the in-
dividual farm that much more unwieldy as an instru-
ment of production, partly by further enforcing the in-
sufficiency and the make-shift character for which Ameri-
can farm equipment is justly famed, and partly also by
increasing the distances over which the farm supplies and
the farm products have had to be moved.

This last point marks one of the more serious handi-
caps of American farming, at the same time that it has
contributed materially to enforce that “extensive,” “su-
perficial,” and exhausting character of American farm-
ing which has arrested the attention of all foreign ob-
servers. In American practice the “farm area” has al-


The Independent Farmer 137


ways greatly exceeded the “acreage under cultivation,”
even after all due allowance is made for any unavoidable
inclusion of waste and hali-waste acreage within the farm
boundaries. Even yet, at the provisional close of the
career of the American pioneer-farmer, the actual pro-
portion of unused and half-used land included within
and among the farms will materially exceed what the
records show, and it greatly exceeds what any inexperi-
enced observer will be able to credit. The period is not
long past—if it is past—when, taking one locality with
another within the great farming sections of the country,
the idle and half-idle lands included in and among the
farms equalled the acreage that was fully employed, even
in that “extensive” fashion in which American farming
has habitually been carried on.

But there is no need of insisting on this high proportion
of idle acreage, which none will credit who has not a wide
and intimate knowledge of the facts in the case. For
more or less—for as much as all intelligent observers will
be ready to credit—this American practice has counted to-
ward an excessively wide distribution of the cultivated
areas, excessively long distances of transport, over roads
which have by consequence been excessively bad—neces-
sarily and notoriously so—and which have hindered com-
munication to such a degree as in many instances to con-
fine the cultivation to such crops as can be handled with a
minimum of farm buildings and will bear the crudest kind
of carriage over long distances and with incalculable de-
lays. This applies not only to the farm-country’s high-
ways, but to its railway facilities as well. The Ameri-
can practice has doubled the difficulty of transportation
and retarded the introduction of the more practicable and
more remunerative methods of farming; until make-
shift and haphazard have in many places become so in-


138 Absentee Ownership


grained in the habits of the farm population that noth-
ing but abounding distress and the slow passing of gen-
erations can correct it all At the same time, as an in-
cident by the way, this same excessive dispersion of the
farming communities over long distances, helped out by
bad roads, has beeen perhaps the chief factor in giving
the retail business communities of the country towns their
strangle-hold on the underlying farm population.

And it should surprise no one if a population which has
been exposed to unremitting habituation of this kind has
presently come to feel at home in it all; so that the boot-
less chicanery of their self-help is rated as a masterly
fabric of axiomatic realities, and sharp practice has be-
come a matter of conscience. In such a community it
should hold true that “An honest man will bear watch-
ing,” that the common good is a by-word, that “Every-
body’s business is nobody’s business,” that public office
is a private job, where the peak of aphoristic wisdom is
reached in that red-letter formula of democratic politics,
“Subtraction, division, and silence.” So it has become
a democratic principle that public office should go by
rotation, under the rule of equal opportunity,—equal
opportunity to get something for nothing—but should go
only to those who value the opportunity highly enough to
make a desperate run for it. Here men “run” for office,
not “stand” for it. Subtraction is the aim of this pioneer
cupidity, not production; and salesmanship is its line of


1As a side issue to this arrangement of magnificent distances
in the fertile farm country, it may be called to mind that the
éducation of the farm children has on this account continually
suffered from enforced neglect, with untoward results. And
there are those who believe that the noticeably high rate of in-
sanity among farmers’ wives in certain sections of the prairie
country is traceable in good part to the dreary isolation enforced
upon them by this American plan of “country life.”


The Independent Farmer 139


approach, not workmanship; and so, being in no way re-
lated quantitatively to a person’s workmanlike powers or
to his tangible performance, it has no “saturation point.” ?

The spirit of the American farmers, typically, has been
that of the pioneer rather than the workman. They have
been efficient workmen, but that is not the trait which
marks them for its own and sets them off in contrast with
the common run. Their passion for acquisition has driven
them to work, hard and painfully, but they have never
been slavishly attached to their work; their slavery has
been not to an imperative bent of workmanship and hu-
man service, but to an indefinitely extensible cupidity
which drives to work when other expedients fail; at
least so they say. So they have been somewhat footloose
in their attachment to the soil as well as somewhat hasty
and shiftless in its cultivation. They have always, in the
typical case, wanted something more than their propor-
tionate share of the soil; not because they were driven


2 This civilised-man’s cupidity is one of those “higher wants
of man” which the economists have found to be “indefinitely
extensible,’ and like other spiritual needs it is self-authenticat-
ing, its own voucher.

The Latin phrase is auri sacra fames, which goes to show
the point along the road to civilisation reached by that people.
They had reached a realisation of the essentially sacramental
virtue of this indefinitely extensible need of more; but the
aurum in terms of which they visualised the object of their
passion is after all a tangible object, with physical limitations of
weight and space, such as to impose a mechanical “saturation
point” on the appetite for its accumulation. But the civilised
peoples of Christendom at large, and more particularly America,
the most civilised and most Christian of them all, have in recent
times removed this limitation. The object of this “higher want
of man” is no longer specie, but some form of credit instrument
which conveys title to a run of free income; and it can accord-
ingly have no “saturation point,” even in fancy, inasmuch as
credit is also indefinitely extensible and stands in no quantitative
relation to tangible fact.


140 Absentee Ownership


by a felt need of doing more than their fair share of
work or because they aimed to give the community more
service than would be a fair equivalent of their own live-
lihood, but with a view to cornering something more than
their proportion of the community’s indispensable means
of life and so getting a little something for nothing in
allowing their holdings to be turned to account, for a good
and valuable consideration.


The American farmers have been footloose, on the
whole, more particularly that peculiarly American ele-
ment among them who derive their traditions from a
colonial pedigree. There has always been an easy shift-
ing from country to town, and this steady drift into the
towns of the great farming sections has in the main been
a drift from work into business. And it has been the
business of these country towns—what may be called
their business-as-usual—to make the most of the neces-
sities and the ignorance of their underlying farm popula-
tion. The farmers have on the whole been ready to make
such a shift whenever there has been an “opening”; that
is to say, they have habitually been ready to turn their
talents to more remunerative use in some other pursuit
whenever the chance has offered, and indeed they have
habitually been ready to make the shift out of husbandry
into the traffic of the towns even at some risk whenever
the prospect of a wider margin of net gain has opened
before their eager eyes.

In all this pursuit of the net gain the farm population
and their country-town cousins have carried on with the
utmost good nature. The business communities of the
country towns have uniformly got the upper hand. But
the farmers have shown themselves good losers ; they have
in the main gracefully accepted the turn of things and


The Independent Farmer I4I


have continued to count on meeting with better luck or
making a shrewder play next time. But the upshot of it
so far has habitually been that the farm population find
themselves working for a very modest livelihood and the
country towns come in for an inordinately wide margin
of net gains; that is to say, net gain over necessary out-
lay and over the value of the services which they render
their underlying farm populations.

To many persons who have some superficial acquain-
tance with the run of the facts it may seem, on scant re-
flection, that what is said above of the inordinate gains
that go to the country towns is a rash overstatement, per-
haps even a malicious overstatement. It is not intended
to say that the gains per capita of the persons currently
engaged in business in the country towns, or the gains
per cent. on the funds invested, are extraordinarily high;
but only that as counted on the necessary rather than the
actual cost of the useful work done, and as counted on the
necessary rather than the actual number of persons en-
gaged, the gains which go to the business traffic of the
country towns are inordinately large.*


3Jt may be added, though it should scarcely be necessary,
that a good part of the gains which are taken by the country-
town business community passes through their hands into the
hands of those massive vested interests that move obscurely in
the background of the market, and to whom the country towns
stand in a relation of feeders, analogous to that in which
the farm population stands to the towns. In good part the busi-
ness traffic of the country towns serves as ways and means of net
gain to these business interests in the background. But when
all due allowance is made on this and other accounts, and even
if this element which may be called net gains in transit be de-
ducted, the statement as made above remains standing without
material abatement: the business gains which come to the
country towns in their traffic with their underlying farm popu-
lations are inordinately large, as counted on the necessary cost
and -use-value of the service rendered, or on the necessary


142 Absentee Ownership :


Ill. Ture Country Town


The country town of the great American farming re-
gion is the perfect flower of self-help and cupidity stand-
ardised on the American plan. Its name may be Spoon
River or Gopher Prairie, or it may be Emporia or Cen-
tralia or Columbia. The pattern is substantially the same,
and is repeated several thousand times with a faithful per-
fection which argues that there is no help for it, that it
is worked out by uniform circumstances over which there
is no control, and that it wholly falls in with the spirit
of things and answers to the enduring aspirations of the
community. The country town is one of the great
American institutions; perhaps the greatest, in the sense
that it has had and continues to have a greater part than
any other in shaping public sentiment and giving char-
acter to American culture.

The location of any given town has commonly been
determined by collusion between “interested parties” with
a view to speculation in real estate, and it continues
through its life-history (hitherto) to be managed as a real
estate “proposition.” Its municipal affairs, its civic pride,
its community interest, converge upon its real-estate
values, which are invariably of a speculative character,
and which all its loyal citizens are intent on “booming”
and “boosting,’—that is to say, lifting still farther off the


work done. But whether these net gains, in so far as they are
“jnordinate’—that is in so far as they go in under the caption
of Something for Nothing—are retained by the business men of
the town or are by them passed on to the larger business
interests which dominate them, that is an idle difference for all
that concerns the fortunes of the underlying farm population or
the community at large. In either case it is idle waste, so far
as concerns the material well-being of any part of the farm
population.


The Country Town 143


level of actual ground-values as measured by the uses to
which the ground is turned. Seldom do the current
(speculative) values of the town’s real estate exceed the
use-value of it by less than 100 per cent.; and never do
they exceed the actual values by less than 200 per cent., as
shown by the estimates of the tax assessor; nor do the
loyal citizens ever cease their endeavours to lift the
speculative values to something still farther out of touch
with the material facts. A country town which does not
answer to these specifications is ‘‘a dead one,” one that has
failed to “make good,” and need not be counted with, ex-
cept as a warning to the unwary “boomer.” Real estate
is the one community interest that binds the townsmen
with a common bond; and it is highly significant—perhaps
it is pathetic, perhaps admirable—that those inhabitants
of the town who have no holdings of real estate and who
never hope to have any will commonly also do their little
best to inflate the speculative values by adding the clamour
of their unpaid chorus to the paid clamour of the profes-
sional publicity-agents, at the cost of so adding a little
something to their own cost of living in the enhanced ren-
tals and prices out of which the expenses of publicity are
to be met.

Real estate is an enterprise in “futures,” designed to get
something for nothing from the unwary, of whom it is
believed by experienced persons that “there is one born
every minute.” So, farmers and townsmen together


1“The great American game,” they say, is Poker. Just why
Real Estate should not come in for honorable mention in that
way is not to be explained off hand. And an extended exposition
of the reasons why would be tedious and perhaps distasteful,
besides calling for such expert discrimination as quite exceeds
the powers of a layman in these premises. But even persons
who are laymen on both heads will recognise the same family
traits in both.


144 Absentee Ownership


throughout the great farming region are pilgrims of hope
looking forward to the time when the community’s
advancing needs will enable them to realise on the inflated
values of their real estate, or looking more immediately
to the chance that one or another of those who are “born
every minute” may be so ill advised as to take them at
their word and become their debtors in the amount which
they say their real estate is worth. The purpose of
country-town real estate, as of farm real estate in a less
extreme degree, is to realise on it. This is the common
bond of community interest which binds and animates the
business community of the country town. In this enter-
prise there is concerted action and a spirit of solidarity, as
well as a running business of mutual manceuvring to get
the better of one another. For eternal vigilance is the
price of country-town real estate, being an enterprise in
salesmanship. .

Aside from this common interest in the town’s inflated
real estate, the townsmen are engaged in a vigilant rivalry,
being competitors in the traffic carried on with the farm
population. The town is a retail trading-station, where
farm produce is bought and farm supplies are sold, and
there are always more traders than are necessary to take
care of this retail trade. So that they are each and several
looking to increase their own share in this trade at the
expense of their neighbors in the same line. There is
always more or less active competition, often underhand.
But this does not hinder collusion between the com-
petitors with a view to maintain and augment their collec-
tive hold on the trade with their farm population.

From an early point in the life-history of such a town
collusion habitually becomes the rule, and there is com-
monly a well recognised ethical code of collusion govern-
ing the style and limits of competitive manceuvres which


The Country Town 145


any reputable trader may allow himself. In effect, the
competition among business concerns engaged in any given
line of traffic is kept well in hand by a common under-
standing, and the traders as a body direct their collective
efforts to getting what can be got out of the underlying
farm population. It is on this farm trade also, and on the
volume and increase of it, past and prospective, that the
real-estate values of the town rest. As one consequence,
the volume and profit of the farm trade is commonly
over-stated, with a view to enhancing the town’s real-
estate values.

Quite as a matter of course the business of the town
arranges itself under such regulations and usages that it
foots up to a competition, not between the business con-
cerns, but between town and country, between traders
and customers. And quite as a matter of course, too, the
number of concerns doing business in any one town greatly
exceeds what is necessary to carry on the traffic; with
the result that while the total profits of the business in
any given town are inordinately large for the work done,
the profits of any given concern are likely to be modest
enough. The more successful ones among them com-
monly do very well and come in for large returns on their
outlay, but the average returns per concern or per man
are quite modest, and the less successful ones are habit-
ually doing business within speaking-distance of bank-
ruptcy. The number of failures is large, but they are
habitually replaced by others who still have something to
lose. The conscientiously habitual overstatements of the
real-estate interests continually draw new trader’s into the
town, for the retail trade of the town also gets its quota
“of such persons as are born every minute, who then tran-
siently become supernumerary retail traders. Many for-
tunes are made in the country towns, often fortunes of


146 Absentee Ownership


very respectable proportions, but many smaller fortunes
are also lost.


Neither the causes nor the effects of this state of things
have been expounded by the economists, nor has it found
a place in the many formulations of theory that have to
do with the retail trade ; presumably because it is all, under
the circumstances, so altogether “natural” and unavoid-
able. Exposition of the obvious is a tedious employment,
and a recital of commonplaces does not hold the interest
of readers or audience. Yet, for completeness of the
argument, it seems necessary here to go a little farther
into the details and add something on the reasons for
this arrangement. However obvious and natural it may
be it is after all serious enough to merit the attention of
anyone who is interested in the economic situation as it
stands, or in finding a way out of this situation; which
is just now (1923) quite perplexing, as the futile endeay-
ours of the statesmen will abundantly demonstrate.

However natural and legitimate it all undoubtedly may
be, the arrangement as it runs today imposes on the coun-
try’s farm industry an annual overhead charge which runs
into ten or twelve figures, and all to the benefit of no one.
This overhead charge of billions, due to duplication of
work, personnel, equipment, and traffic, in the country
towns is, after all, simple and obvious waste. Which is
perhaps to be deprecated, although one may well hesitate
to find fault with it all, inasmuch as it is all a simple and
obvious outcome of those democratic principles of self-
help and cupidity on which the commonwealth is founded.
These principles are fundamentally and eternally right and
good—so long as popular sentiment runs to that effect—
and they are to be accepted gratefully, with the defects of
their qualities. The whole arrangement is doubtless all


The Country Town 147


right and worth its cost; indeed it is avowed to be the
chief care and most righteous solicitude of the constituted
authorities to maintain and cherish it all.

To an understanding of the country town and its place
in the economy of American farming it should be noted
that in the great farming regions any given town has a
virtual monopoly of the trade within the territory tribu-
tary to it. This monopoly is neither complete nor indis-
putable; it does not cover all lines of traffic equally nor
is outside competition completely excluded in any line.
But the broad statement is quite sound, that within its
domain any given country town in the farming country
has a virtual monopoly of trade in those main lines of
business in which the townsmen are chiefly engaged.
And the townsmen are vigilant in taking due precautions
that this virtual monopoly shall not be broken in upon.
It may be remarked by the way that this characterisation
applies to the country towns of the great farming country,
and only in a less degree to the towns of the industrial
and outlying sections.

Under such a (virtual) monopoly the charge collected
on the traffic adjusts itself, quite as a matter of course, to
what the traffic will bear. It has no other relation to the
costs or the use-value of the service rendered. But what
the traffic will bear is something to be determined by
experience and is subject to continued readjustment and
revision, with the effect of unremittingly keeping the
charge close up to the practicable maximum. Indeed,
there is reason to believe that the townsmen are habitually
driven by a conscientious cupidity and a sense of equity
to push the level of charges somewhat over the maximum ;
that is to say, over the rate which would yield them the
largest net return. Since there are too many of them
they are so placed as habitually to feel that they come in


148 Absentee Ownership


for something short of their just deserts, and their
endeavour to remedy this state of things is likely to lead to
overcharging rather than the reverse.

What the traffic will bear in this retail trade is what
the farm population will put up with, without breaking
away and finding their necessary supplies and disposing
of their marketable products elsewhere, in some other
town, through itinerant dealers, by recourse to brokers
at a distance, through the mail-order concerns, and the
like. The two dangerous outside channels of trade appear
to be the rival country towns and the mail-order houses,
and of these the mail-order houses are apparently the more
real menace as well as the more dreaded. Indeed they
are quite cordially detested by right-minded country-town
dealers. The rival country towns are no really grave
menace to the usurious charges of any community of
country-town business men, since they are all and several
in the same position, and none of them fails to charge all
comers all that the traffic will bear.

There is also another limiting condition to be con-
sidered in determining what the traffic will bear in this
retail trade, though it is less, or at least less visibly,
operative ; namely, the point beyond which the charges can
not enduringly be advanced without discouraging the farm
population unduly; that is to say, the point beyond which
the livelihood of the farm population will be cut into so
severely by the overcharging of the retail trade that they
begin to decide that they have nothing more to lose, and
so give up and move out. This critical point appears not
commonly to be reached in the ordinary retail trade—as,
e.g., groceries, clothing, hardware—possibly because there
still remains, practicable in an extremity, the recourse to
outside dealers of one sort or another. In the business of
country-town banking, however, and similar money-lend-


The Country Town 149


ing by other persons than the banks, the critical point
is not infrequently reached and passed. Here the local
monopoly is fairly complete and rigorous, which brings
On an insistent provocation to over-reach.

And then, too, the banker deals in money-values, and
money-values are forever liable to fluctuate; at the same
time that the fortunes of the banker’s farm clients are
subject to the vicissitudes of the seasons and of the mar-
kets; and competition drives both banker and client to
base their habitual rates, not on a conservative anticipation
of what is likely to happen, but on the lucky chance of
what may come to pass barring accidents and the acts of
God. And the banker is under the necessity—“inner
necessity,” as the Hegelians would say—of getting all he
can and securing himself against all risk, at the cost of any
whom it may concern, by such charges and stipulations as
will insure his net gain in any event.

It is the business of the country-town business com-
munity, one with another, to charge what the traffic will
bear; and the traffic will bear charges that are inor-
dinately high as counted on the necessary cost or the
use-value of the work to be done. It follows, under the
common-sense logic of self-help, cupidity, and business-
as-usual, that men eager to do business on a good margin
will continue to drift in and cut into the traffic until the
number of concerns among whom the gains are to be di-
vided is so large that each one’s share is no more than will
cover costs and leave a “reasonable” margin of net gain.
So that while the underlying farm population continues to
yield inordinately high rates on the traffic, the business
concerns engaged, one with another, come in for no
more than what will induce them to go on; the reason
being that in the retail trade as conducted on this plan of
self-help and equal opportunity the stocks, equipment and


150 Absentee Ownership


man-power employed will unavoidably exceed what is re-
quired for the work, by some 200 to 1000 per cent.,—those
lines of the trade being the more densely over-populated
which enjoy the nearest approach to a local monoply, as
e.g., groceries, or banking.”

It is perhaps not impertinent to call to mind that the re-
tail trade throughout, always and everywhere, runs on
very much the same plan of inordinately high charges and
consequently extravagant multiplication of stocks, equip-
ment, work, personnel, publicity, credits, and costs. Itruns
to the same effect in city, town and country. Andi in city,
town or country town it is in all of these several respects
the country’s largest business enterprise in the aggregate ;
and always something like three-fourths to nine-tenths of
it is idle waste, to be cancelled out of the community’s
working efficiency as lag, leak and friction. When the
statesmen and the newspapers—and other publicity-agen-
cies—speak for the security and the meritorious work of
the country’s business men, it is something of this sort


2The round numbers named above are safe and conservative,
particularly so long as the question concerns the staple country
towns of the great farming regions. As has already been re-
marked, they are only less securely applicable in the case of
similar towns in the industrial and outlying parts of the coun-
try. To some they may seem large and loose. They are based
on a fairly exhaustive study of statistical materials gathered
by special inquiry in the spring of 1918 for the Statistical Di-
vision of the Food Administration, but not published hitherto.

There has been little detailed or concrete discussion of the
topic. See, however, a very brief paper by Isador Lubin on
“The Economic Costs of Retail Distribution,” published in the
Twenty-second Report of the Michigan Academy of Science,
which runs in great part on the same material.

It is, or should be, unnecessary to add that the retail trade of
the country towns is neither a unique nor an extravagant develop-
ment of business-as-usual. It is in fact very much the sort of
thing that is to be met with in the retail trade everywhere, in
America and elsewhere.


The Country Town I51


they are talking about. The bulk of the country’s busi-
ness is the retail trade, and in an eminent sense the retail
trade is business-as-usual.

The retail trade, and therefore in its degree the country
town, have been the home ground of American. culture
and the actuating center of public affairs and public senti-
ment throughout the nineteenth century, ever more se-
curely and unequivocally as the century advanced and drew
toward its close. In American parlance “The Public,” so
far as it can be defined, has meant those persons who are
engaged in and about the business of the retail trade,
together with such of the kept classes as draw their keep
from this traffic. The road to success has run into and
through the country town, or its retail-trade equivalent
in the cities, and the habits of thought engendered by the
preoccupations of the retail trade have shaped popular
sentiment and popular morals and have dominated public
policy in what was to be done and what was to be left
undone, locally and at large, in political, civil, social,
ecclesiastical, and educational concerns. The country’s
public men and official spokesmen have come up through
and out of the country-town community, on passing the
test of fitness according to retail-trade standards, and have
carried with them into official responsibility the habits of
thought induced by these interests and these habits of life.

This is also what is meant by democracy in American
parlance, and it was for this country-town pattern of
democracy that the Defender of the American Faith once
aspired to make the world safe. Meantime democracy,
at least in America, has moved forward and upward to a
higher business level, where larger vested interests dom-
inate and bulkier margins of net gain are in the hazard.
It has come to be recognised that the country-town sit-
uation of the nineteenth century is now by way of being


Ee Absentee Ownership


left behind; and so it is now recognised, or at least acted
on, that the salvation of twentieth-century democracy is
best to be worked out by making the world safe for Big
Business and than let Big Business take care of the inter-
ests of the retail trade and the country town, together with
much else. But it should not be overlooked that in and
through all this it is the soul of the country town that goes
marching on.


Toward the close of the century, and increasingly since
the turn of the century, the trading community of the
country towns has been losing its initiative as a maker of
charges and has by degrees become tributary to the great
vested interests that move in the background of the mar-
ket. In a way the country towns have in an appreciable
degree fallen into the position of toll-gate keepers for the
distribution of goods and collection of customs. for the
large absentee owners of the business. Grocers, hard-
ware dealers, meat-markets, druggists, shoe-shops, are
more and more extensively falling into the position of local
distributors for jobbing houses and manufacturers. They
increasingly handle “package goods” bearing the brand
of some (ostensible) maker, whose chief connection with
the goods is that of advertiser of the copyright brand
which appears on the label. Prices, and margins, are
made for the retailers, which they can take or leave. But
leaving, in this connection, will commonly mean leaving
the business—which is not included in the premises. The
bankers work by affiliation with and under surveillance
of their correspondents in the sub-centers of credit, who
are similarly tied in under the credit routine of the asso-
ciated banking houses in the great centers. And the
clothiers duly sell garments under the brand of “Cost-
Plus,” or some such apochryphal token of merit.


The Country Town 153


All this reduction of the retailers to simpler terms has
by no means lowered the overhead charges of the retail
trade as they bear upon the underlying farm population ;
rather the reverse. Nor has it hitherto lessened the du-
plication of stocks, equipment, personnel and work, that
goes into the retail trade ; rather the reverse, indeed, what-
ever may yet happen in that connection. Nor has it
abated the ancient spirit of self-help and cupidity that
has always animated the retail trade and the country
town; rather the reverse; inasmuch as their principals
back in the jungle of Big Business cut into the initiative
and the margins of the retailers with “package goods,”
brands, advertising, and agency contracts; which irritates
the retailers and provokes them to retaliate and recoup
where they see an opening, that is at the cost of the under-
lying farm population. It is true, the added overcharge
which so can effectually be brought to rest on the farm
population may be a negligible quantity; there never
was much slack to be taken up on that side.

The best days of the retail trade and the country town
are past. The retail trader is passing under the hand of
Big Business and so is ceasing to be a masterless man
ready to follow the line of his own initiative and help to
rule his corner of the land in collusion with his fellow
townsmen. Circumstances are prescribing for him. The
decisive circumstances that hedge him about have been
changing in such a way as to leave him no longer fit to
do business on his own, even in collusion with his fellow
townsmen. The retail trade and the country town are an
enterprise in salesmanship, of course, and salesmanship is
a matter of buying cheap and selling dear; all of which
is simple and obvious to any retailer, and holds true all
around the circle from grocer to banker and back again.
During the period while the country town has flourished


154 Absentee Ownership


and grown into the texture of the economic situation, the
salesmanship which made the outcome was a matter of
personal qualities, knack and skill that gave the dealer
an advantage in meeting his customers man to man, largely
a matter of tact, patience and effrontery; those qual-
ities, in short, which have qualified the rustic horse-trader
and have cast a glamour of adventurous enterprise over
American country life. In this connection it is worth
recalling that the personnel engaged in the retail trade of
the country towns has in the main been drawn by self-
selection from the farm population, prevailingly from the
older-settled sections where this traditional animus of the
horse-trader is of older growth and more untroubled.

All this was well enough, at least, during the period of
what may be called the masterless country town, before
Big Business began to come into its own in these premises.
But this situation has been changing, becoming obsolete,
slowly, by insensible degrees. The factors of change have
been such as: increased facilities of transport and com-
munication; increasing use of advertising, largely made
possible by facilities of transport and communication ;
increased size and combination of the business concerns
engaged in the wholesale trade, as packers, jobbers, ware-
house-concerns handling farm products; increased resort
to package-goods, brands, and trade-marks, advertised on
a liberal plan which runs over the heads of the retailers;
increased employment of chain-store methods and agen-
cies ; increased dependence of local bankers on the greater
credit establishments of the financial centers. It will be
seen, of course, that this new growth finally runs back to
and rests upon changes of a material sort, in the indus-
trial arts, and more immediately on changes in the means
of transport and communication.

In effect, salesmanship, too, has been shifting to the


The Country Town 155


wholesale scale and plane, and the country-town retailer
is not in a position to make use of the resulting wholesale
methods of publicity and control. The conditioning cir-
cumstances have outgrown him. Should he make the
shift to the wholesale plan of salesmanship he will cease
to be a country-town retailer and take on the character
of a chain-store concern, a line-yard lumber syndicate, a
mail-order house, a Chicago packer instead of a meat mar-
ket, a Reserve Bank instead of a county-seat banker, and
the like; all of which is not contained in the premises of
the country-town retail trade.

The country town, of course, still has its uses, and its
use so far as bears on the daily life of the underlying farm
population is much the same as ever; but for the
retail trade and for those accessory persons and classes
who draw their keep from its net gains the country town
is no longer what it once was. It has been falling into
the position of a way-station in the distributive system,
instead of a local habitation where a man of initiative and
principle might reasonably hope to come in for a “com-
petence’”—that is a capitalised free livelihood—and bear
his share in the control of affairs without being account-
able to any master-concern “higher-up” in the hierarchy
of business. The country town and the townsmen are
by way of becoming ways and means in the hands of Big
Business. Barring accidents, Bolshevism, and the acts of
God or of the United States Congress, such would appear
to be the drift of things in the calculable future; that is
to say, in the absence of disturbing causes.

This does not mean that the country town is on the
decline in point of population or the volume of its traffic ;
but only that the once masterless retailer is coming in for
a master, that the retail trade is being standardised and
reparcelled by and in behalf of those massive vested inter-


156 Absentee Ownership


ests that move obscurely in the background, and that these
vested interests in the background now have the first call
on the “income stream” that flows from the farms
through the country town. Nor does it imply that that
spirit of self-help and collusive cupidity that made and
animated the country town at its best has faded out of
the mentality of this people. It has only moved upward
and onward to higher duties and wider horizons. Even
if it should appear that the self-acting collusive store-
keeper and banker of the nineteenth-century country town
“lies a-moldering in his grave,” yet “his soul goes march-
ing on.” It is only that the same stock of men with
the same traditions and ideals are doing Big Business on
the same general plan on which the country town was
built. And these men who know the country town “from
the ground up” now find it ready to their hand, ready
to be turned to account according to the methods and
principles bred in their own bone. And the habit of
mind induced by and conducive to business-as-usual is
much the same whether the balance sheet runs in four
figures or in eight.


It is an unhappy circumstance that all this plain speak-
ing about the country town, its traffic, its animating spirit,
and its standards of merit, unavoidably has an air of
finding fault. But even slight reflection will show that
this appearance is unavoidable even where there is no in-
clination to disparage. It lies in the nature of the case,
unfortunately. No unprejudiced inquiry into the facts
can content itself with anything short of plain speech,
and in this connection plain speech has an air of
disparagement because it has been the unbroken usage
to avoid plain speech touching these things, these
motives, aims, principles, ways and means and achieve-


The Country Town 157


ments, of these substantial citizens and their busi-
ness and fortunes. But for all that, all these sub-
stantial citizens and their folks, fortunes, works, and
Opinions are no less substantial and meritorious, in fact.
Indeed one can scarcely appreciate the full measure of
their stature, substance and achievements, and more par-
ticularly the moral costs of their great work in developing
the country and taking over its resources, without putting
it all in plain terms, instead of the salesmanlike parables
that have to be employed in the make-believe of trade
and politics.

The country town and the business of its substantial
citizens are and have ever been an enterprise in sales-
manship; and the beginning of wisdom in salesmanship
is equivocation. There is a decent measure of equivoca-
tion which runs its course on the hither side of prevarica-
tion or duplicity, and an honest salesman—such ‘‘an hon-
’ est man as will bear watching’”—will endeavor to confine
his best efforts to this highly moral zone where stands the
upright man who is not under oath to tell the whole truth.
But “self-preservation knows no moral law”; and it is
not to be overlooked that there habitually enter into the
retail trade of the country towns many competitors who
do not falter at prevarication and who even do not hes-
itate at outright duplicity; and it will not do for an
honest man to let the rogues get away with the best—or
any—of the trade, at the risk of too narrow a margin
of profit on his own business—that is to say a narrower
margin than might be had in the absence of scruple.
And then there is always the base-line of what the law
allows; and what the law allows can not be far wrong.
Indeed, the sane presumption will be that whoever lives
within the law has no need to quarrel with his conscience.
And a sound principle will be to improve the hour today


158 Absentee Ownership


and, if worse comes to worst, let the courts determine
tomorrow, under protest, just what the law allows, and
therefore what the moral code exacts. And then, too, it
is believed and credible that the courts will be wise enough
to see that the law is not allowed to apply with such
effect as to impede the volume or narrow the margins
of business-as-usual.

“He either fears his fate too much, Or his deserts are
small, Who dare not put it to the touch” and take a
chance with the legalities and the moralities for once in a
way, when there is easy money in sight and no one is
looking, particularly in case his own solvency—that is
his life as a business concern—should be in the balance.
Solvency is always a meritorious work, however it may
be achieved or maintained; and so long as one is quite
sound on this main count one is sound on the whole, and
can afford to forget peccadillos, within reason. The
country-town code of morality at large as well as its code
of business ethics, is quite sharp, meticulous ; but solvency
always has a sedative value in these premises, at large
_and in personal detail. And then, too, solvency not only
puts a man in the way of acquiring merit, but it makes
him over into a substantial citizen whose opinions and
preferences have weight and who is therefore enabled to
do much good for his fellow citizens—that is to say,
shape them somewhat to his own pattern. To create man-
kind in one’s own image is a work that partakes of the
divine, and it is a high privilege which the substantial
citizen commonly makes the most of. Evidently this
salesmanlike pursuit of the net gain has a high cultural
value at the same time that it is invaluable as a means toa
competence.

The country-town pattern of moral agent and the code
of morals and proprieties, manners and customs, which


The Country Town 159


come up out of this life of salesmanship is such as this
unremitting habituation is fit to produce. The scheme of
conduct for the business man and for “his sisters and
his cousins and his aunts” is a scheme of salesmanship,
seven days in the week. And the rule of life of coun-
try-town salesmanship is summed up in what the older
logicians have called suppressio veri and suggestio falsi.
The dominant note of this life is circumspection.? One
must avoid offense, cultivate good-will, at any reasonable
cost, and continue unfailing in taking advantage of it; and,
as a corollary to this axiom, one should be ready to recog-
nise and recount the possible short-comings of one’s neigh-
bors, for neighbors are (or may be) rivals in the trade,
and in trade one man’s loss is another’s gain, and a rival’s
disabilities count in among one’s assets and should not be
allowed to go to waste.

One must be circumspect, acquire merit, and avoid
offense. So one must eschew opinions, or information,
which are not acceptable to the common run of those
whose good-will has or may conceivably come to have
any commercial value. The country-town system of
knowledge and belief can admit nothing that would annoy
the prejudices of any appreciable number of the respect-
able townsfolk. So it becomes a system of intellectual,
institutional, and religious holdovers. The country town
is conservative ; aggressively and truculently so, since any
assertion or denial that runs counter to any appreciable
set of respectable prejudices would come in for some de-
gree of disfavor, and any degree of disfavor is intolerable
to men whose business would presumably suffer from it.
Whereas there is no (business) harm done in assenting to,
and so in time coming to believe in, any or all of the
commonplaces of the day before yesterday. In this sense


3It might also be called salesmanlike pusillanimity.


160 Absentee Ownership


the country town is conservative, in that it is by force of
business expediency intolerant of anything but holdovers.
Intellectually, institutionally, and religiously, the coun-
try towns of the great farming country are “standing pat”
on the ground taken somewhere about the period of the
Civil War; or according to the wider chronology, some-
where about Mid-Victorian times. And the men of af-
fairs and responsibility in public life, who have passed
the test of country-town fitness, as they must, are men
who have come through and made good according to the
canons of faith and conduct imposed by this system of
holdovers.

Again it seems necessary to enter the caution that in
so speaking of this system of country-town holdovers
and circumspection there need be no hint of disparage-
ment. The colloquial speech of our time, outside of the
country-town hives of expedient respectability, carries
a note of disallowance and disclaimer in all that it has to
say of holdovers; which is an unfortunate but inherent
defect of the language, and which it is necessary to dis-
count and make one’s peace with. It is only that outside
of the country towns, where human intelligence has not
yet gone into abeyance and where human speech accord-
ingly is in continued process of remaking, sentiment and
opinion run to the unhappy effect which this implicit dis-
paragement of these holdovers discloses.

Indeed, there is much, or at least something, to be said
to the credit of this country-town system of holdovers,
with its canons of salesmanship and circumspection. It
has to its credit many deeds of Christian charity and
Christian faith. It may be—as how should it not ?—that
many of these deeds of faith and charity are done in the
business-like hope that they will have some salutary ef-
fect on the doer’s balance sheet; but the opaque fact re-


The Country Town 161


mains that these business men do these things, and it is
to be presumed that they would rather not discuss the
ulterior motives.

It is a notorious commonplace among those who get
their living by promoting enterprises of charity and good
deeds in general that no large enterprise of this descrip-
tion can be carried through to a successful and lucrative
issue without due appeal to the country towns and due
support by the businesslike townsmen and their asso-
ciates and accessory folks. And it is likewise notorious
that the country-town community of business men and
substantial households will endorse and contribute to vir-
tually any enterprise of the sort, and ask few questions.
The effectual interest which prompts to endorsement of
and visible contribution to these enterprises is a salesman-
like interest in the “prestige value” that comes to those
persons who endorse and visibly contribute; and perhaps
even more insistently there is the loss of “prestige value”
that would come to anyone who should dare to omit due
endorsement and contribution to any ostensibly public-
spirited enterprise of this kind that has caught the vogue
and does not violate the system of prescriptive holdovers.

Other interest there may well be, as, e. g., human char-
ity or Christian charity—that is to say solicitude for the
salvation of one’s soul—but without due appeal to sales-
manlike respectability the clamour of any certified solicitor
of these good deeds will be but as sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal. One need only try to picture what would
be the fate, e.g., of the campaigns and campaigners for
Red Cross, famine relief, Liberty Bonds, foreign mis-
sions, Inter-Church fund, and the like, in the absence of
such appeal and of the due response. It may well be,
of course, that the salesmanlike townsman endorses with
the majority and pays his contribution as a mulct, under


162 Absentee Ownership


compunction of expediency, as a choice between evils, for
fear of losing good-will. But the main fact remains. It
may perhaps all foot up to this with the common run, that
no man who values his salesmanlike well-being will dare
follow his own untoward propensity in dealing with these
certified enterprises in good deeds, and speak his profane
mind to the certified campaigners. But it all comes to
the same in the upshot. The substantial townsman is
shrewd perhaps, or at least he aims to be, and it may well
be that with a shrewd man’s logic he argues that two
birds in the bush are worth more than one in the hand; and
so pays his due peace-offering to the certified solicitor of
good deeds somewhat in the spirit of those addicts of the
faith who once upon a time bought Papal indulgences.
But when all is said, it works; and that it does so, and
that these many adventures and adventurers in certified
mercy and humanity are so enabled to subsist in any de-
gree of prosperity and comfort is to be credited, for the
major part, to the salesmanlike tact of the substantial
citizens of the country towns.

One hesitates to imagine what would be the fate of the
foreign missions, e. g., in the absence of this salesmanlike
solicitude for the main chance in the country towns. And
there is perhaps less comfort in reflecting on what would
be the terms of liquidation for those many churches and
churchmen that now adorn the land, if they were driven
to rest their fortunes on unconstrained gifts from de
facto worshippers moved by the first-hand fear of God,
in the absence of that more bounteous subvention that so
comes in from the quasi-consecrated respectable towns-
men who are so constrained by their salesmanlike fear
of a possible decline in their prestige.

Any person who is seriously addicted to devout ob-
servances and who takes his ecclesiastical verities at their


The Country Town 163


face might be moved to deprecate this dependence of the
good cause on these mixed motives. But there is no need
of entertaining doubts here as to the ulterior goodness
of these businesslike incentives. Seen in perspective from
the outside—as any economist must view these matters—it
should seem to be the part of wisdom, for the faithful and
for their businesslike benefactors alike, to look steadfastly
to the good end and leave ulterior questions of motive on
one side. There is also some reason to believe that such
a view of the whole matter is not infrequently acted upon.
And when all is said and allowed for, the main fact
remains, that in the absence of this spirit of what may
without offense be called salesmanlike pusillanimity in the
country towns, both the glory of God and the good of
man would be less bountifully served, on all these issues
that engage the certified solicitors of good deeds.


This system of innocuous holdovers, then, makes up
what may be called the country-town profession of faith,
spiritual and secular. And so it comes to pass that the
same general system of holdovers imposes its bias on the
reputable organs of expression throughout the commun-
ity—pulpit, public press, courts, schools—and dominates
the conduct of public affairs; inasmuch as the constitu-
ency of the country town, in the main and in the everyday
run, shapes the course of reputable sentiment and convic-
tion for the American community at large. Not because
of any widely prevalent aggressive preference for that
sort of thing, perhaps, but rather because it would scarcely
be a “sound business proposition” to run counter to the
known interests of the ruling class; that is to say, the
substantial citizens and their folks. But the effect is
much the same and will scarcely be denied.

It will be seen that in substantial effect this country-


164 Absentee Ownership


town system of holdovers is of what would be called a
“salutary” character; that is to say, it is somewhat in-
tolerantly conservative. It is a system of professions
and avowals, which may perhaps run to no deeper ground
than a salesmanlike pusillanimity, but the effect is much
the same. In the country-town community and its out-
lying ramifications, as in any community of men, the
professions made and insisted on will unavoidably shape
the effectual scheme of knowledge and belief. Such is
the known force of inveterate habit. To the young gen-
eration the prescriptive holdovers are handed down as
self-evident and immutable principles of reality, and the
(reputable) schools can allow themselves no latitude and
no question. And what is more to the point, men and
women come to believe in the truths which they profess,
on whatever ground, provided only that they continue
stubbornly to profess them. Their professions may have
come out of expedient make-believe, but, all the same,
they serve as premises in all the projects, reflections, and
reveries of these folks who profess them. And it will
be only on provocation of harsh and protracted exposure
to material facts running unbroken to the contrary that
the current of their sentiments and convictions can be
brought to range outside of the lines drawn for them by
these professed articles of truth.

The case is illustrated, e. g., by the various and widely-
varying systems of religious verities current among the
outlying peoples, the peoples of the lower cultures, each
and several of which are indubitable and immutably truth-
ful to their respective believers, throughout all the bizarre
web of their incredible conceits and grotesqueries, none
of which will bear the light of alien scrutiny. Having


* There is, of course, no call in this Christian land to throw
up a doubt or question touching any of the highly remarkable


The New Gold 165


come in for these professions of archaic make-believe,
and continuing stubbornly to profess implicit faith in
these things as a hopeful sedative of the wrath to come,
these things come to hedge about the scheme of knowledge
and belief as well as the scheme of what is to be done or
left undone. In much the same way the country-town
system of prescriptive holdovers has gone into action as
the safe and sane body of American common sense; until
it is now self-evident to American public sentiment that
any derangement of these holdovers would bring the af-
fairs of the human race to a disastrous collapse. And all
the while the material conditions are progressively draw-
ing together into such shape that this plain country-town
common sense will no longer work.


IV. Tue New Gop


America has been a land of unexampled natural re-
sources. Some day China and the Russian dominions
will presumably outbid America in that way, both as to
the abundance and the availability of their natural re-


verities of the Christian confession at large. While it will be
freely admitted on all hands that many of the observances and
beliefs current among the “non-Christian tribes” are grotesque
and palpable errors of mortal mind; it must at the same time,
and indeed by the same token, be equally plain to any person of
cultivated tastes in religious superstition, and with a sound bias,
that the corresponding convolutions of unreason in the Chris-
tian faith are in the nature of a divine coagulum of the true,
the beautiful, and the good, as it was in the beginning, is now,
and ever shall be: World without end. But all the while
it is evident that all these “beastly devices of the heathen,” just
referred to, are true, beautiful and good to their benighted ap-
prehension only because their apprehension has been benighted
by their stubborn profession of these articles of misguided make-
believe, through the generations; which is the point of the
argument.


166 Absentee Ownership


sources, and Brazil and Argentine come into the same class
in this respect, as also other less well known regions in
the low latitudes. But the material resources of these
countries are to be counted with in the future rather
than in the past; and, for the present at least, a good part
of them are to be counted in as a source of supple-
mentary and subsidiary materials required for use in the
industries of the countries lying in the temperate lati-
tudes, not as countries that are abundantly endowed with
a balanced allowance of those raw materials that go to
make the basis of that system of industry which runs on
the existing state of the industrial arts. Something to
the same general effect may be said for all the greater
fertile lands in the low latitudes. As the case stands
just now these regions are outlying tributaries to the
industrial system that centers in the north-temperate lati-
tudes, and they come into the industrial scheme as a
necessary compliment to the ways and means of this in-
dustrial system rather than a basis for self-balanced in-
dustrial commonwealths at home. All of that may be
due to change presently. The state of the industrial arts
is unstable, now as always, and it would be idle to specu-
late on what is due to come of it all in the remoter course
of time and change. But for the present and the cal-
culable future the seats of the mighty in this industrial
system lie in the north-temperate latitudes, and for the
immediate present and that recent past that goes to make
the current situation, America comes easily first in this
matter of abundant and available natural resources.
That such is the case may be called an historical acci-
dent. The state of the industrial arts as it has taken
shape in this recent past has brought productive industry
to depend, in the main and perforce, on that range of nat-
ural resources with which America is peculiarly well


The New Gold 167


endowed. It is no serious stretch of language to say
that this current state of the industrial arts has made
America a land of abundant resources, inasmuch as these
industrial arts have made these material facts of the
American continent serviceable for industrial use. In the
absence of that mechanical industry that arose in Europe
in the eighteenth century and that system of mixed farm-
ing which runs along with the mechanical industry, the
natural resources of America would count for little. So
that the current state of the industrial arts might even
quite warrantably be said to have created this natural
wealth of the country,—converted otherwise meaningless
elements of physiography and mineralogy into industrial
wealth. It all was of little use or value, counted for little
as wealth or as means of production, until the coming
of this state of the industrial arts. And it is of course
also conceivable that in the further course of time and
change men may learn to do well enough without the use
of this range of materials; whereupon these resources
would cease to be resources, by that much. But all that
lies beyond the calculable future.

In the same connection it may, at the risk of tedious
iteration, be worth while to recall that this state of the in-
dustrial arts that now makes the outcome is, like any
other, of the nature of a joint stock of technical knowl-
edge and proficiency, held, worked, augmented, and car-
ried forward in common by the population at large; in-
deed, by the population of the civilised world at large,
not by any one class or country unaided or in isolation.
It is a joint stock of technical knowledge and workmanlike
habits, without the use of which the existing material
wealth of the civilised nations would not be wealth. Also,
in the same connection it should also be recalled that the
American plan is and has been, consistently from the be-


168 Absentee Ownership


ginning, to convert all these unexampled natural resources
to absentee ownership, with all haste and expedition, so
soon as they have become valuable enough to be worth
owning,—all the while that it is the community’s work-
manship that gives them whatever value they have.


This American plan began at the beginning, and has
continued. It is not peculiarly American, except in the
sense that it has been worked out more consistently and
more extensively here than elsewhere, and that it has been
worked into the texture of American life and culture
more faithfully. In the last analysis, the difference in
this respect between the Americans and the other civil-
ised nations will probably resolve itself into a difference
of opportunity, and there is no wide difference at that.
This American plan or policy is very simply a settled
practice of converting all public wealth to private gain on
a plan of legalised seizure.

First among these natural resources to fall under the
American plan were the fur-bearing animals. The fur
trade, of course, was not a matter of the first magni-
tude, and it is now a scarce-remembered episode of pion-
eering enterprise ; nor does it now count in any appreciable
degree among the useful means of livelihood, in great
part because business enterprise has run through that
range of natural resources with exemplary thoroughness
and expedition and has left the place of it bare. It is
worth while to speak of it here only because it shows a
finished instance of business-as-usual converting com-
munity goods to private gain without afterthought. It
is a neat, compact, and concluded chapter of American
business enterprise.

Bound up with the enterprise there is also an unwrit-
ten chapter on the debauchery and manslaughter entailed


The New Gold 169


on the Indian population of the country by the same
businesslike fur trade; one of the least engaging chapters
of colonial history, lapping over far into the nineteenth
century, and leaving more than one distasteful sequel to
run into the future. Indirectly and unintentionally, but
speedily and conclusively, the traffic of the furtraders con-
verted a reasonably peaceable and temperate native popu-
lation to a state of fanatical hostility among themselves
and an unmanageable complication of outlaws in their
contact with the white population. The traffic has, of
course, also had its effect on the latter, chiefly by way of
what may be called sclerosis of the American soul.

But the Americans have forgiven themselves for the
fur trade and its hideous accessories and have nearly for-
gotten it all; nor is the fur trade in any case to be counted
in as a factor in the economic situation as its runs in re-
cent times. The Great Adventure of the Americans has,
after all, been the seizure of the fertile soil and its conver-
sion to private gain. Their dealing with the soil has
been the largest of these enterprises in absentee owner-
ship, both in respect of its extent in time and space and in
its social and civil consequences ; and this has already been
spoken of, in its main bearings and at some length. Yet
there is at least one further, and very consequential, feat-
ure of the case that should come in for mention, if not for
extended discussion, as a grave and instructive incident in
the working-out of this American plan.

In the North this enterprise in land-values has run off
in the manner and with accessory consequences some-
what as described in the last two preceding sections
But the case of the South, and the institutional value
of the soil in that section, has been different. In the
South the private usufruct of the soil injected into Ameri-
can life the “peculiar institution” of Negro slavery. The


170 Absentee Ownership


soil, crops, topography and climate of the North were, on
the whole, not suited to agricultural exploitation on a large
scale by use of forced labor; whereas the soil and crops
of the South lent themselves very passably to that man-
ner of absentee ownership in agriculture. So the more
fertile tracts in the South fell into the shape of “plan-
tations” rather than farms; and the large scale, with
forced labor and absentee coercion, became the type-form
of Southern husbandry. The consequence has been that
while Negro slavery tapered off and faded out in the
North before it had time to give its character to the in-
dustrial system and to mold the scheme of social values
and usages into its own image, in the South Negro slavery
became the “peculiar institution” about which “the scheme
of things entire” circled and gravitated, and which gave its
color and bias to all the local conventions and principles of
honor and honesty; until, in the end, Negro slavery has
left its mark on the culture of that section so deeply
etched into the moral tissues of its people that the bias of
it will presumably not be outgrown within the calculable
future. In the South that bias is still right and good
which the exacting discipline enforced by this “peculiar
institution” once made right and good to them and so
ingrained it in their common sense; very much as the
equally peculiar institution of the Country Town has
made the moral bias and the spiritual outcome in the
North.

This is not saying that the Country Town has counted
for nothing in the South,—the county-seat politics and
social amenities of that section are not to be overlooked ;
nor did Negro slavery leave the North untouched. Negro
slavery presumes a Negro slave-trade. And the slave-
trade was a Northern enterprise in the main, centering
chiefly in New England, it is said; and it has doubtless


The New Gold Lr


had its effect in giving a certain implacable effrontery to
the commercial spirit of that section, while it also had
something substantial to do with the early accumula-
tion of commercial fortunes in New England.?


Aside from agriculture and real estate, the progressive
seizure of natural resources and their conversion to pri-
vate gain falls under several main heads, somewhat as
follows :—gold and other precious metals, timber, coal,
iron and other useful metals, petroleum, natural gas, water-
power, irrigation, transportation (as water-front, right-
of-way, and terminal facilities).

For the time being the great ones among these are:
coal, iron, transportation, and perhaps oil. As the case
stands just now, coal, iron, and transportation together
can make and remake the industrial balance, and the con-
trol of either one of the three can mar it, as is shown by
current events. These are public interests of course, pub-
lic utilities, if that term is to be applied at all in a com-
munity where the custom is to turn every public need to
account as a means of private gain, and to capitalise it as


1The slave-trade never was a “nice” occupation or an al-
together unexceptionable investment—‘“balanced on the edge of
the permissible.” But even though it may have been distaste-
ful to one and another of its New-England men of affairs, and
though there always was a suspicion of moral obliquity attached
to the slave-trade, yet it had the fortune to be drawn into the
service of the greater good. In conjunction with its running-
mate, the rum-trade, it laid the foundations of some very reput-
able fortunes at that focus of commercial enterprise that pres-
ently became the center of American culture, and so gave rise to
some of the country’s Best People. At least so they say.

Perhaps also it was, in some part, in this early pursuit of gain
in this moral penumbra that American business enterprise learned
how not to let its right hand know what its left hand is doing;
and there is always something to be done that is best done with
the left hand.


172 Absentee Ownership


such. One must quite naturally hesitate about speak-
ing of a “public interest” or a “public utility” which is
carried on the books of a private corporation as a cap-
italised source of income. It seems incongruous.

While gold and the chase after it is not to be reckoned
among the country’s greater enterprises in point of per-
manent importance for industry, yet it ranks in the popu-
lar esteem as the greatest and most glorious of them all,
the most picturesque and the most affectionately familiar
in men’s mind. It stands out as the type-form of that
manly enterprise which aims to get something for noth-
ing at all costs. So that, one thing with another, for its
bald honesty and its picturesque qualities as well as by the
concrete and tangible nature of the reward which it offers
for spent manhood, the quest of gold has always a place
in the rosy foreground of all pioneering.

It is not that the bountiful earth gives up its gold, or
its other precious minerals, without cost to the finder,
but it always remains his aim and his actuating hope that
he may come in for much of it at next to no proportionate
cost; in which, it is true, he is commonly disappointed.
But “Hope springs eternal in the human breast.” The
actuating hope of the prospector is something for noth-
ing, although his work will more commonly bring noth-
ing for something. But there is also another sense in
which it can be said even more truly that the gold which
is found and brought out is a clear case of something for
nothing. The gold is added to the outstanding pur-
chasing power, while nothing is thereby added to the pur-
chasable goods in hand. So that its finder or producer,
at whatever cost, comes in for a share of the useful goods
already on hand, without anything having been added to
the community’s material wealth.

Wherever gold has been found or procured in recent


The New Gold 73


times the tale of it runs always to the same effect, whether
in California, Australia, South Africa, or Alaska. And
it runs to this effect:—Many ablebodied men, at a very
appreciable cost for equipment and subsistence, engage in
this adventure for a considerable length of time, hard at
work under conditions of some hardship, and subject to
a death-rate which invariably exceeds that of equally ro-
bust men in the common run of employments. The
greater number of these men come through the ad-
venture alive, most of them without seriously impaired
health,—unless the period covered by the enterprise
should run longer than has commonly been the case.
Some of them, relatively few, come in for large for-
tunes. Many of them, an appreciable fraction of those
who come through alive, come out of it with modest
gains, or at least without pecuniary loss. The greater
number, perhaps ninety per cent. or so, of those who come
out alive, come through with nothing to show for the time,
work, and equipment which they have staked on the
lucky chance, nothing but a harsh experience and an in-
creased age. Meantime, as the period of free adventure
draws to a close, the gold-bearing properties will have been
taken over by absentee corporations, after having served
their turn as stakes in what is reputed to be the most
doubtful game of hazard known to men.’


2 Although it is not greatly to the point, yet it may be noted
by way of parenthesis, that many funds are also invested in
worthless, “wild-cat,’ and spurious mining stocks in the course
of that speculative investment that gathers about any one of
the greater gold discoveries, and that the funds so invested in
profitless make-believe will doubtless in all cases greatly ex-
ceed the total value of the gold produced up to the date at
which the gold-bearing properties have finally passed into the
possession of absentee corporations and are being worked on
the basis of corporate business-as-usual. Of course, all this
traffic in speculative mining shares has no great or material


174 Absentee Ownership


The total value of the gold produced, one year with
another, is also doubtless appreciably less than the total
of the work and equipment expended on its discovery
and production during the same period. And the same
relation between cost and output holds true for any given
gold field also, through its earlier years, while individual
initiative is still running free; but in the adventurous
years of the beginning the difference between total costs
and the total value produced will be still wider than it
is after the work has been standardised and stabilised
under corporate control. There is always a net loss in
the production of gold, but the net loss is larger during
the earlier years of novelty and adventure. Even if the
time, expenses, and wear and tear of the unsuccessful
seekers are left out of the account—as being perhaps no
more than a fair equivalent of the “pleasures of the
chase”—it still will hold true that the total cost of pro-
ducing the supply of gold habitually exceeds the total value
of the product by several hundred per cent. And the
significance for anyone else than the buyers and sellers. The
speculative losses of over-sanguine investors and the specu-
lative gains of the over-facile salesmen who create and dispose
of mining stocks have only a speculative interest to anyone but
themselves. Like other games of chance and skill it is a closed
circuit of profit and loss. It foots up to a transfer of purchas-
ing power from the buyers, who get nothing, for a price, to the
sellers, who dispose of the same commodity, for the same price.
It is of interest as being a typical case of salesmanship; an ex-
ploit of salesmanship in puris naturalibus, as one might say; that
is to say, it runs off wholly on the plane of make-believe, without
ulterior consequences or sequelae. It has something of that de-
tachment from material fact which distinguishes the publicity
enterprise of Holy Church.

3Cf. W. S. Jevons, Investigations im Currency and Finance
(London, 1884) pp. 70-73. “But in itself gold-digging has ever
seemed to me almost a dead loss of labour as regards the world
in general—a wrong against the human race, just such as is that


of a Government against its people, in over-issuing and depre-
ciating its own currency.”


The New Gold 175


same will hold true in a less degree for the other pre-
cious and semi-precious metals and minerals.

And all the while it holds true that, loosely speaking,
the production of gold is of no industrial use and no
material service to the community at large. What may
have to be admitted in qualification of this broad state-
ment is so slight and doubtful that it may be neglected
without serious oversight. The gold supply is a supply
of specie, on which money and money-values are based.
The productive use of the metal in industry is altogether
of secondary consequence, particularly such use as can
claim to serve any material need. What goes into the in-
dustrial arts goes in chiefly as a means of conspicuously
wasteful consumption; a need which is doubtless real
enough, but which could also doubtless be met as ade-
quately in the absence of a gold supply, or by use of
any smaller gold supply, without apparent lower limit.*


Men who are intimately acquainted with the gold deposits of
Alaska and their working, and who have had the benefit of a
full acquaintance with the work of the U. S. Geological Survey
in that region, have been at pains to estimate and compute on the
basis of the statistical information which so can be drawn on,
and have come to the result that the total expenditures which
have gone into the production of gold in the Alaskan field, up
to the year 1919, have exceeded the total value of the output
of gold by some 500 per cent., rather over than under. So that
the gold output of Alaska has cost something like six dollars per
dollar. Which may be taken as a fair index of the value of the
Alaskan gold fields to the American people at large; except that
when the matter is appraised from the point of view of the
community at large the time and work of the unsuccessful
seekers, as well as the lost lives, would have to be counted in
among the total costs. Which would raise the cost of the gold
appreciably over 1000 per cent. of its purchasing value. Cf. also
“The World’s Gold Supply,” by William A. Berridge, in The
Review of Economic Statistics (Harvard University Press), Pre-
liminary Volume II. pp. 181-199.

4What has happened to platinum during the past quarter-
century may be taken as a passably conclusive object-lesson


176 Absentee Ownership


The gold supply is useful as specie. This has to
do with business, not with industry, except as industry is
controlled by business. And here, again, one meets with
the paradox that, while gold is extremely valuable and
does good service as specie, a smaller supply of bullion
would doubtless serve the same purpose quite as well.
Indeed, a greatly increased supply would be inconvenient,
and if carried very far an increasing supply would seri-
ously impair or conceivably destroy the usefulness of gold
as specie. The immediate and substantial effect of an
increased supply of specie is to decrease the purchasing-
value of the money unit; that is to say, a depreciation of
the dollar and a consequent advance of the general price
level.

Otherwise it leaves things very much as before, ex-
cept for certain indirect consequences which may be more
or less serious. So, e. g., other things equal, an increased


on this head. In the early nineties platinum still had virtually
no use as a decorative precious metal. Then its price began
to rise, strongly and steadily, chiefly because of its increasing
employment in the electrical industry, and in some degree by a
slighter but increased use in photography and dyeing. Then
progressively, as the price advanced and so made the decorative
use of platinum increasingly and conspicuously wasteful, the
decorative use as well as the conventional beauty of platinum
steadily gained ground and assurance; until the metal is today
imperatively required as an indispensable ingredient in all the
more exacting and honorable confections of the jeweler’s art,—at
a price ranging some ten or twenty fold higher than the point of
departure. No slight is to be put upon platinum, as touches
either its beauty or its serviceability, in taking note of the fact
that at a sufficiently lower price it would be no more sought
after as a personal adornment than some of the several alloys
which rival it in visual effect. Indeed, except for the declining
value of gold, brought on by the increased supply, and the ris-
ing value of platinum, due to scarcity, it is extremely doubtful
if the latter metal could have found any special favor as an ob-
ject of beauty, or could in any degree have displaced gold as an
article of personal ornament.


The New Gold 177


supply of specie will depress the purchasing-value of
annuities, insurance payments, fixed salaries and fees,
and similar incomes, and it will also lighten the effectual
burden of fixed charges payable on long-term loans and
the like, and so will depress the purchasing-value of out-
standing securities which carry a stated rate of income.
Its direct and proximate effect is, therefore, to undo the
stability of the money-unit, depreciate it, and so derange
prices, in the direction of an advance; to alter the ef-
fectual terms of loans outstanding, to the advantage of
the debtor; to bring on an effectual redistribution of
property as counted in goods, to the disadvantage of
creditors, annuitants, and holders of securities drawn in
terms of money; and, perhaps the most consequential out-
come, effectually to lighten the burden of outstanding
corporation securities, and thereby enable the corpora-
tions to increase the volume of their obligations and their
capitalisation. So also, by further indirect effect there
will commonly follow an increased activity in business
—and therefore in industry—due to the inflation of prices.
The whole matter is summed up in saying that an in-
creased supply of specie brings depreciation of the money
unit. And it should be added that business men com-
monly welcome such depreciation, so long as it is not
known by that name. Such depreciation (or inflation),
within reasonable limits, is “good for trade.”

In point of material usefulness, then, it seems fair to
say that the production of gold is pure waste—more es-
pecially the production of more than is currently taken up
in the arts—and that this waste commonly exceeds the
total value of the product. But in point of expediency
for business it appears to be very much the other way.
The effect on business appears to be altogether “salutary,”
as it would be called. That is to say, continued produc-


178 Absentee Ownership


tion of gold in excess of what is consumed in the arts
will bring business prosperity—the only prosperity known
to civilised men—by raising prices. The surplus of gold
depreciates the money unit; which inflates prices; which
provokes to increased activity in business by holding out
a prospect of larger gains in money; which involves
larger sales; which calls for a larger industrial output ;
which speeds up industry and increases the percentage
of employment both of the plant and of the industrial
man-power. So also, this inflation of prices and in-
creased activity of business will increase the rate and vol-
ume of the business turnover and of the business earn-
ings—as counted in terms of the depreciated money unit
—and will thereby inflate capital values, and so make credit
easier by inflating the values of the collateral. Doubt-
less, no other single circumstance will affect the business
situation in so invariably acceptable a manner as a sur-
plus output of specie, such, e.g., as was had during the
closing years of the nineteenth century and the opening
years of the twentieth.®


5 The statement is put in this form because it applies without
reservation only under the conditions which prevailed in the
late nineteenth century and for a few years after its close, gradu-
ally changing into a new order of things as the twentieth cen-
tury has advanced. Since then it will apply only with lessened
force. Indeed, until the War brought on the present interna-
tional complication of insolvent credits, the American system of
money and credit seemed in a fair way to become independent
of any surplus productions of gold or of any store of specie, if
need be.

In short, the statement applies to the older situation; when the
banks and other credit establishments were still doing business
in severalty, at least in the main; and it will apply with gradually
lessening force since and in so far as these concerns that
do business in credit have effectually been drawing together
for concerted action on a collusive plan; and more particularly
will it not hold true in the earlier fashion since the establish-
ment of the Federal Reserve has enabled this collusive plan of


The New Gold 179


The surplus output of gold takes effect on the conduct
of business along two main lines. Directly and immedi-
ately it acts to inflate prices—in so far as it is not offset by
the Federal Reserve’s remedial control of credit and cur-
rency—and so it inflates the business men’s expectations
of gain, and thereby speeds up business and industry ; for
among the securely known facts of psychology, as touches
the conduct of business, is the ingrained persuasion that
the money unit is stable;*® the value of the money unit
being the base-line of business transactions. Therefore
an inflation of prices is rated as an accession of wealth.
Therefore such an inflation will impart confidence and
buoyancy and raise great expectations, by a tropismatic
stimulation of the business men’s sensibilities if not by
logical inference ; and logic is after all a feeble defense in
the face of a tropismatic stimulation, as is abundantly
shown by the history of business cycles.7 And when so


team-work in credit to be enforced with a reasonable measure
ef ceniralised control. The stability (at least de jure) of the
money unit and of the country’s credit arrangements is no
longer conditioned on the supply of specie in any such intract-
able fashion. Yet a surplus production of the money metal, at
any cost, continues always to be a fortunate circumstance for
the conduct of- business.

6 This persuasion or presumption prevails wherever the price-
system has fully gone into effect. It may fairly be called the
spiritual precipitate of the price-system. It affects not only the
business men, properly speaking, but the underlying population
as well. It is known not to accord with fact, but still it re-
mains a principle of conduct. It has something like an instinc-
tive force; or perhaps rather, it is something like a tropis-
matic reaction, in that the presumption is acted on even when
it is known to be misleading. And it is a necessary assumption
in business, since business is necessarily done in terms of price;
so that money values unavoidably. constitute the base-line to
which transactions are finally referred, and by measurements
upon which they are tltimately checked, controlled, adjusted,
and accounted for.

7Cf. W. C. Mitchell, Business Cycles, perhaps especially chap-
ter xiii.


180 Absentce Ownership


borne up on the resulting “wave of confidence” the busi-
ness men are in a frame of mind for new commitments ;
which turns the wave of confidence into a wave of pros-
perity.

Money-values are the underlying realities of the busi-
ness man’s world, the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen. Therefore an inflation of
prices is a business gain, and a decline of prices is a
business loss. And one must not do business at a loss.
Therefore the staple remedy for declining prices is to do
no business until “things look up again.” Therefore such
business as is concerned with productive industry will
aim to correct low or declining prices by slowing down,
curtailing output, holding back,—in short, sabotage. So
long as the case is not desperate—that is to say so long
as the failure of the price situation can be covered over
with plausible make-believe—so long the business-like
remedy will be a steadfast application of sabotage, while
waiting watchfully for things to take a turn. But so
soon as the case grows desperate—that is to say when the
unreality of the money-values involved can no longer be
overlooked, even with the best endeavours of make-believe
—then there is no remedy within the range of assumptions
on which business is conducted. Therefore, in this last
extremity there comes a break-down, a slaughter of the
innocents, called a period of liquidation; which violates
the premises of business-as-usual.®

8In the present spectacular conjuncture which had followed
upon the War and the Armistice, e.g., it is a matter of common
notoriety that the scale of prices went out of touch with the
material realities of production and consumption some years
ago atid has so continued since then; that the present scale of
money-values, in tangible property and in securities, is quite
unsound; that the outstanding volume of credit obligations has


turned into a fantastic tissue of footless make-believe; and that
the only way out of a desperate situation is to go to work.


The New Gold 181


In ordinary times as well as in hard times, such as the
present, it is of necessity the constant care of the business
men who control industry to guard against an over-supply
of their industrial output,—a running balance of sabotage
on production with a view to maintain prices. It is the
immediate effect of a surplus output of gold to inflate
prices by depreciating the money unit. Therefore it re-
lieves the need of this businesslike sabotage on the output
of industry by that much. Therefore it brings a run of


It is equally notorious that there is a desperate need of goods
for consumption; and that the needed raw materials, industrial
plant, and manpower are ready to hand—urgently ready to be
turned to productive use.

All this is well known to all concerned and has been quite
evident all through these years while this situation has run on
and grown steadily worse. The established rights of ownership
(absentee ownership) vest all discretion in this matter in the
country’s business men—and in the Business Administration
which has been installed to serve their needs; so that it is for
them, and their Business Administration, to say what is to be
done about it. And it is also plain enough what need be done.
They_are all agreed that the thing to do is to go to work; to
make use of the country’s raw materials, equipment and man-
power for the production of useful goods. But to take these
known facts by their only handle, to acknowledge the known
facts and act upon them, would not be “a sound business proposi-
tion.” Indeed, it can not be done without violating the premises
on which sound business is conducted,—the premises of un-
shrinkable values and net gain. Therefore the best that the col-
lective wisdom of the business community and the Business
Administration knows how to propose after some three or four
years of deliberation is “Nothing doing.”

There is wide-spread and steadily increasing privation among
the underlying population, increasing unemployment of plant
and man-power, increasing discontent, increasing indebtedness,
steady shrinkage of use-values, due to consumption, wear and
tear, and neglect. And all the while the business men, who
alone have the power to act, are bound by their unshrinkable
money-values; and so they hold back and wait watchfully for
the eventual breakdown, under a smoke-screen of optimistic
talk; watchfully and with a manly attempt at self-delusion.


182 Absentee Ownership


prosperity in business, a reduction of unemployment in
industry, and a run of increased production. Its great
merit is that it offsets, in its degree, this habitual need of
curtailing the output of industry. It is a psychological
factor, and it owes its efficacy to this inveterate habit of
rating wealth in terms of money-values instead of use-
values; and this habit rules the case wherever and in so
far as the price-system has taken effect.

But in recent times the mastery of the price-system
has taken a peculiar turn, in that corporation finance has,
in effect, supplanted private initiative, and so has taken
over the direction of business enterprise and the control
of the material fortunes of the community. And the
surplus output of gold stands in a somewhat special re-
lation to corporation finance. A corporation is an in-
corporation of credit, an organisation of funds, a cap-
italisation of obligations. Loosely its capital value is
measured by its outstanding obligations, and the whole
is rated and administered on the basis of the current
money-values of these obligations. This is the measure
of its rating and the basis of its commitments. Its every-
day business transactions, too, large and small, are in
the nature of transactions in credit. At the same time
—if it is an industrial concern in any sense—the corpora-
tion is possessed of tangible assets (natural resources,
taw materials, industrial plant, right of way, etc.) as
well as intangibles (of the nature of credit instruments,
monopolies and custom). All these are valuable, and all
will serve as collateral at the same time that they are means
of earning. Any increase in the money-value of these
assets, tangible or intangible, is an increase of the cor-
poration’s assets and therefore an accession of wealth,
in the only sense in which wealth can be taken account
of in corporation finance.


The New Gold 183


Any inflation of money-values due to an increased
supply of specie will enhance the corporation’s assets,
while it leaves the outstanding obligations at the old
figure. Inflation, therefore, signifies net gain to the cor-
poration in all its book-values; and its assets will serve
as collateral to float that much more debt, with a fixed
charge.

In the last analysis, of course, all this gain that comes
to the corporation from this inflation of prices comes at
the cost of its senior creditors, the holders of its out-
standing securities with a fixed rate, the purchasing power
(or use-value) of whose claims shrinks by as much as
the money unit has depreciated. But except in an ex-
treme case, and very tardily then, the creditors will not
see it that way. Nor have they any remedy if
they should come to see it that way. On the
contrary, they are elated with the improved  sol-
vency of the corporation whose securities they are
holding. For these creditors, too, like other men
who live by and under the price-system, go on the
assumption that money-values are the final reality of
things, and that they can lose nothing so long as the face
value of their paper is undiminished and the solvency of
their debtor remains unimpaired. It is true, these
creditors may know better, as a matter of deliberate in-
formation, but they do not know it with such effect as
to shake their faith in the realities of the price-system
or to influence their conduct in any degree.

Among other things, then, this depreciation of the
currency affects the corporation’s assets and enhances
their carrying-capacity as collateral; which enables the
corporation to contract new credit-obligations, add some-
thing to its capitalisation, and so to take on an additional
overhead of fixed charges. The income-rate on the new


184 Absentee Ownership


capitalisation is fixed formally by the terms of the in-
strument which covers it (e.g. in the case of bonds and
similar debentures) or informally and more flexibly by
usage, presumption, and financial expediency (e.g. in the
case of stocks). When the inflated assets have so been
capitalised and hypothecated they are, in effect, stand-
ardised at a stated value and become unshrinkable, ex-
cept by way of enforced liquidation. So they come to
stand at these inflated values as staple assets, on which it
is then imperative to “earn” a net gain answering to the
fixed or customary income-charge ordinarily borne by se-
curities of the class which covers them.’ So the traffic
must be made to bear such charges in perpetuity as will
yield that rate of net gains which is called for by this ex-
panded recapitalisation. And the staple procedure dic-
tated by sound business principles in such a case is to
increase the schedule of charges and curtail the output.
It is perhaps unfortunate that there is no other way out


9 The guaranteed earnings of the American railways, as now
provided by law, is instructive on this head; both as regards
capitalised inflation and as regards the unshrinkable values of
assets that have once been covered with securities of the approved
forms. The railroad properties have, in great part, ceased to
yield earnings. Logically this state of things should call for
their recapitalisation at such a lower figure as would answer
to their shrunken earning-capacity. But business principles,
vested interests, and corporation finance do not admit deflation
of assets in the ordinary course of business,

It may be mentioned as something outside the ken of Ameri-
can statesmen and financiers and abhorrent to American princi-
ples of sound business that certain European industrial cor-
porate concerns lately (1921-1922) have, under severe pressure,
been writing off a very appreciable proportion of capital on
which no earnings can be had. But then, there were no Ameri-
can statesmen at hand to succor these Europeans in distress.
The parallel case of the American railways and their (actually)
valueless assets will point the difference. The American plan
is to let the taxpayers make up the shrinkage. America is,
after all, the land of unshrinkable absentee ownership.


The New Gold 185


according to the canons of business-as-usual, since there is
after all a limit to this method of making the traffic bring
a reasonable net gain on inflated capitalisation.’


It apears, then, that so far as concerns the output of
gold—and other precious metals—there is much to be said
for this American plan of exhausting the country’s nat-
ural resources by seizure and conversion to absentee
ownership, regardless of cost and as expeditiously as may
be. This particular range of natural resources has, in
effect, no use-value; so that their loss or exhaustion en-
tails no material loss on the community directly,—apart
from the excessively high cost of their exhaustion by this
method. Indirectly but immediately, it is true, by opera-
tion of the added purchasing-power which the new specie
gratuitously brings into the market, the community at
large loses so much in useful goods as this added pur-
chasing power will account for; which will, by use of
fiduciary currency, bank checks, and other forms of
credit-extension, foot up to some multiple of the initial
value of the new specie that is brought to market,—say
some ten times the value of the new specie, or some
such figure. But this loss the community bears gladly,
and in fact counts it as so much gain measured by the
purchasing-value of the new specie. The country is so
much richer per capita, counted in terms of the depre-
ciated money unit. So great is the magic of the price
system and its frame of mind. Beyond this there is to

10The case of the American railways, again, illustrates the
point; in that the schedule of charges in this case has been ad-~
vanced to such a point that the total net earnings have ap-~
parently been falling off. In the absence of a guarantee it
should not seem likely that the railways would charge more than
the trafic will bear; but with standard earnings guaranteed


there may even be a certain economy in making the charges
high enough to discourage traffic in a moderate degree.


186 Absentee Ownership


be set down to the credit of the new specie the creation
of a wave of prosperity by inflation, and the creation also
of enlarged opportunities for corporation finance.


V. Tue Timper Lanps AND THE OIL FIELDS


The American Plan of seizure and conversion as it
has worked out in the case of the land and the precious
metals has been greatly complicated with ulterior con-
sequences and secondary effects, not aimed at and not con-
templated in the original design. The like is not true
in the same degree in respect of those other natural re-
sources which are more usually spoken of as such; as
timber, coal, iron, oil, gas, waterpower, irrigation waters.
Harbor facilities and transportation lines should also be
included among these. The history of the large and
many enterprises that have had to do with taking over
these articles of national wealth can, of course, not be
recited here, nor need it be. The records are full and
accessible, for all such facts relating to these public utili-
ties as the public has a right to inquire into under this
American plan.

Publicity touching these matters is no part of the Amer-
ican plan. Yet, to recall what the ordinary course of
events has been like, and what has been the commonplace
outcome of absentee ownership and business enterprise in
this field, it is necessary to show some of the character-
istic practices and incidents that have marked this pio-
neering enterprise. And this can be shown as well, and
perhaps more simply and concisely, in lumber than in any
other one line of natural resources.

There have been many picturesque incidents and not a
few spectacular episodes in the course of this pioneering


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 187


enterprise ; but all such it will be necessary to avoid, since
that which is of interest here as bearing on the present
argument is not the colorful atmosphere of this thing but
only its workday nature, causes, and outcome—the in-
dustrial significance of its ordinary working-out. The
case as a whole, of course, as an object-lesson showing the
merits and qualities of the American Plan, runs not on
picturesque episodes but on standard practice and work-
day outcome.

What has been done with the country’s timber supply
is a well defined and characteristic case, showing how
absentee ownership functions in taking over the country’s
natural resources and using them up. As a character-
istic feature of the case it may be called to mind at the
outset that much of what has happened to the stand of
hardwood timber has happened as an episode by the way,
a side-issue of pioneer farming. The greater proportion
of the original stand of hardwood, together with an ap-
preciable fraction of the pine and hemlock, was got rid
of in all haste in clearing the land to get at the soil. It
would be hard to say how much of this hurried work of
destroying the stand of timber is to be set down to the
account of absentee ownership. There can be no ques-
tion as to the broad fact that the practice of competitively
taking over land more rapidly and in larger parcels than
the requirements of cultivation called for will have in-
creased the rate and volume of this waste. For more or
less, so much is to be set down to the account of ab-
sentee ownership. It would perhaps be an overstate-
ment to say that this practice has doubled the waste of
timber incident to bringing the soil under cultivation,
though it is not an extravagant overstatement. The en-
terprise in “land-grabbing,” as it has been called, has in-
volved a great deal of hasty work by men who have com-


188 Absentee Ownership


monly been short of equipment and “working capital”
and who have been driven to many shifts by present need
and so have gone on a plan of hurried exploitation instead
of economical use.*

The pine and other evergreens have been taken care of
by enterprising lumbermen driven by a businesslike pur-
suit of immediate net gain without afterthought. The
like is also true for much of the hardwood timber; for
such of it as has not been included in the “farm areas.”
The greater and better part of the stand of pine timber
east of the plains—and much of the hemlock, spruce,
and cedar—was run through and virtually exhausted dur-
ing the latter half of the nineteenth century.

In pursuance of this American plan of lumbering as
shown in the pine-timber country the usual procedure
of the business men who conducted the enterprise was to
acquire title to tracts of timber-land by one means and
another. There was a shady side to some—quite a large


1So, e.g., in much of the country where the ground was cov-
ered with hardwood timber it was in its time not unusual for the
impecunious settlers to raise some slight funds for urgent use
by hastily felling the stand of timber, burning it, and selling the
ash, which was used for making potash. So also, in the same
sections as well as in many places where the land was timbered
with pine and hemlock, it has not been unusual to construct
fences by felling the timber along the fence-line in such a
‘way as to make a barrier of it to serve the purpose of a fence by
cumbering the ground. These Independent Farmers were com-
monly very nearly penniless, and so were driven to many in-
genious devices to find ready money, at the same time that their
competitive enterprise in land-grabbing scattered them and their
work out over wide spaces of half-wild country with long dis-
tances and atrocious roads, leaving them far out of reach of
reasonable transportation. They were (commonly) unable to
buy or to bring in anything like the equipment and materials
required in their work. So they took this way out of present
difficulties at the cost of the future; and the future, which has
now become the present, is paying the cost in a scarcity of tim-
ber.


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 189


proportion, they say—of the transactions involved in so
acquiring title to these timber-lands or to the stand of
timber on them; but this somewhat prevalent shady com-
plexion of the enterprise at this point is not of.particular
interest here. Title was acquired under the broad prin-
ciple that all is fair in competitive business ; particularly
so long as any dubious practices are carried through at
the cost of the community at large.

According to the standard routine of the time, as seen,
e.g., in the pineries of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Min-
nesota, these tracts of timber-land would then be “lum-
bered” as expeditiously as might be;? that is to say, as
the practice ran through the larger and busier part of
that half-century, the high-grade and accessible pine tim-
ber was taken out, turned into lumber, and marketed.
The inferior grades of pine timber—the smaller sticks
(say, under eighteen inches in the butt), the crooked and
short sticks (say, under sixteen feet length), and other
kinds than White pine (as, e.g., “Norway,” “pitch,”
“Jack,” or “bull” pine)—were left standing or fallen,
together with the greater part, sometimes all, of the hem-
lock, spruce, fir, cedar, tamarack, and any scattered bodies
of hardwood. So also the slashings (approximately one-
half of the total mass of material in each tree) were left
on the ground. So soon as these loppings were suffici-


2The time allowed for stripping any such given tract and
“getting out” its first-class timber would commonly be limited to
the number of years which the laws of the state allowed delin-
quent taxes to run before title to the land reverted to the
state. Hence the need of despatch. This period was commonly
long enough for the purpose if no time were wasted; and as
a matter of economy it was accordingly not usual to pay taxes
on the timber-lands during this interval while the desirable
timber was removed. So that much of the timber-lands reverted
to the state for delinquent taxes after the stand of timber had
been cut or burned.


190 Absentee Ownership


ently dry—say, in two or three years—they would pres-
ently be fired, by accident or design, and the tract would
then be burned over, destroying whatever timber had not
been taken out.

When account is taken of the frequent spread of these
fires into uncut tracts of standing timber, it is probably
within the mark to say that something more than one-
half of the original stand of timber was lost in these un-
avoidable fires. This standard routine of American lum-
bering, including the destruction by fire, did not vary
greatly from place to place, and it has held true with
little abatement throughout the period. It is doubtless
within the mark to say that this enterprise of the lumber-
men during the period since the middle of the nineteenth
century has destroyed very appreciably more timber than
it has utilised,* although some practice of economy has
come into the business toward the close of the period,
and more particularly since the beginning of the present
century.*


3 Cf. e.g. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service-
circular 171. “The Forests of the U.S. and their Uses,” pp. 9-11.

4There has been an increasing endeavour to turn by-products
and waste products to account, and more economical methods and
appliances have come into use. The latter point is illustrated,
e.g., by the gradual introduction of the gang-saw, and presently
the band-saw, in place of the circular saw in the sawmills which
turn the saw-logs into lumber. The circular saw is an Ameri-
can invention, at least in respect of its larger use and as a stand-
ard appliance for reducing saw-logs to lumber. In this larger
use, in the use of these circular saws of large diameter, the
unavoidable waste of material is larger than the corresponding
waste involved in the use of the gang-saw, larger by something
more than 100 per cent. But the circular saw is expeditious, and
it does not require so extensive or so massive an equipment, at
the same time that it and its equipment are more readily port-
able. And so long as waste of material has little or no com-
mercial value the circular saw is preferred. But it makes saw-
dust of something like one-fourth to one-third of the lumber-


Timber Lands and Oil Fields IgI


None of this passionate endeavour of the lumbermen to
get rich quick has been wilfully destructive. It is only
that as it has been conducted, and as it could not but be
conducted according to sound business principles, a de-
structive waste of the timber supply has been involved
in it and a greater waste and destruction has unfailingly
followed it up. It is always sound business practice to
take any obtainable net gain, at any cost and at any risk
to the rest of the community. The Captains of Industry,
who have been engaged in this enterprise of disembowel-
ing the country’s timber resources and who have profited
by it have been quite within their rights and within the
ethics of business. Not only so; commonly if not in-
variably their conduct is heartily approved and admired
by their fellow citizens, and they have come through the
adventure with a greatly augmented self-respect and a
very notable conviction of well-doing.

They, the successful ones, have become substantial citi-
zens, bearing all the stigmata of civic substance and
merit. And after the pattern of substantial American
citizens they have, not unusually, gone on and acquired
further merit by devoting some part of their takings to
conspicuously humane works. There are towns, not a
few, that have been named in reverent memory of these
enterprising men, and there are many parks, hospitals,
museums, libraries, fountains, school and town edifices,
and other municipal works, in many towns and cities in
these states, which bear their name and carry forward the
memory of their munificence. Indeed, so highly do their
fellow citizens esteem their meritorious work in so hav-
ing disembowelled the country’s timber resources, that


content of a saw-log, whereas the gang-saw’s or the band-saw’s al-
lowance for sawdust will be perhaps one-tenth to one-fourth
of the lumber-content.


192 Absentee Ownership


they have not uncommonly been called by popular vote to
take over the business of governing the country whose
resources they have disembowelled, in legislative and ad-
ministrative office, in the states and in the Federal Gov-
ernment. There is, broadly speaking, no fault to be
found with them or their works, or at least no fault is
found, by themselves or by their fellow citizens. Their
rating, in the popular esteem and in their own, is re-
flected by the fact that a very appreciable and honorable
number of these men have proved to be substantial and
public-spirited enough to find their way into the federal
senate, sometimes even at a cash outlay which it might be
inconvenient to specify; and here they have honorably
“stood pat,” embattled in defense of the principles of
business-as-usual, and have honorably kept faith with all
the vested interests. In short, they run meritoriously true
to the American ideal of the self-made man who knows
that his work is well done.

In the end, that is to say since the end of the timber
resources has very crudely come in sight, a more economi-
cal plan of seizure and conversion has gone into effect,
more economical and also more conclusive in the matter
of seizure and conversion. It became evident some time
ago that the timber-lands were by way of becoming valu-
able holdings for eventual profit. Therefore title to the
major part of what was left was presently acquired by
interested individuals and corporations, to be held for
an eventual rise in the prices of lumber. And the rise
in lumber was looked for as due to come so soon as the
increasing scarcity of timber and the collusive strategy of
these large absentee owners could be effectually brought
to bear on the market. And, indeed, the anticipated ad-
vance came on with reasonable promptitude, so soon as
the major part of the remaining stand of timber had


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 193


passed securely under the control of these larger absentee
owners. And the outcome has been such a schedule of
prices as the traffic could be made to bear on this basis of
organised collusion. In the end this remnant of the
original stand of timber promises to cost the community
as much at the hands of these collusive absentee owners
as the original stand of timber would have been worth
in case it had been managed on a plan of deliberate econ-
omy and conservation from the outset. And its value to
its absentee owners is measured by its cost to the com-
munity, which in turn is measured by what the traffic can
be made to bear in the case of a tariff-protected neces-
sity under competent monopoly management.®

The Lumber Interest shows the American plan as it
has worked out in a moderately large and well defined
field. In principle, what has been done with other, larger
natural resources does not differ essentially from the
case of the timber lands. The details are different, of


5 There is, of course, no monopoly control of the timber sup-
ply, de jure; no more than there is such a control de jure in
anthracite or bituminous coal. The law does not tolerate such
control, de jure. But the present argument is concerned only
with the state of the case de facto. And de facto it will not be
questioned that in the case of the timber supply, as is uniformly
to be expected under this American plan of expeditious seizure
and conversion to private ownership, the spectacularly waste-
ful competition among enterprising pioneers has now run its
course and has worked out in a system of collusive management
in behalf of these larger absentee owners who have acquired title
to (virtually) all that is left. Whereby it has come about, as
happens uniformly where an effectual monopoly control has
taken over the output of one of the necessaries of life, that
the competition which once used to run between the lumbermen
producing for an open market now runs between this group
of absentee owners and the underlying population. So the
group of absentee owners of the remaining stand of timber make
the terms under due cover of law, which the underlying popula-
tion will have to take, de facto, but which they can leave, de


jure.


194 Absentee Ownership


course, inasmuch as these others come into the industrial
system each in ways of its own. So far as the peculiar
circumstances of each case will permit, these others, too,
show the characteristic traits of the American plan,—
initial waste and eventual absentee ownership on a large
scale and on a quasi-monopolistic footing. And wher-
ever and so far as the course of enterprise has had a
chance to work out, the outcome is monotonously the
same,—collusive management under absentee control at
the cost of the underlying population.

But these larger items of the country’s natural re-
sources—as coal, iron, water-power, or transportation
lines—are the material of the country’s “key industries.”
They are, therefore, the substance of the country’s indus-
trial system, and it would be a bootless undertaking to
go into a discussion of them except as organic factors
in that balanced system of industrial processes in which
they are the major forces engaged. They can only be
taken conjointly, and their joint life-history is the life-
history of American industry as it has run on since the
mechanical technology began to dominate American in-
dustry during the latter half of the nineteenth century.

Coal and iron have already reached a passably settled
state of collusive management under corporation control
on a basis of unqualified absentee ownership. Water-
power is still in process of being taken over and converted
to absentee gain, helped along covertly and overtly by
official and legislative furtherance; no doubt conscien-
tiously so, in the main, since the legislators as well as the
administrative and judiciary officials are commonly men
with a sound business-man’s bias; men whose best knowl-
edge and belief runs to the effect that such gainful ab-
sentee enterprise at any cost to the underlying population
is “good for business”; that the common good turns on


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 195


the unremitting acceleration of absentee business traffic;
which is conditioned on increasing net gains for the in-
terested parties. And the costless transfer of these neces-
saries of life to these absentee owners is an obvious means
of increasing their net gains ; thereby provoking them to do
business with the underlying population; which is the
good end to which in the nature of things a businesslike
administration should bend its energies.

So the country’s water-power is unobtrusively passing
into the hands of duly constituted vested interests, to be
turned to account for the benefit of duly accredited ab-
sentee owners, all in due accord with the American Plan.
So also the transportation system is still in process, but
in an advanced stage of the process, of approach to that
settled state of vested interest which confers an inalien-
able right to a flow of free income computed on an im-
mutably inflated capitalisation. The railways, e. g., should
not have much farther to go along that road. What
chiefly remains to be done would seem to be that which
the authorities already have in hand,—to make the tax-
payers chargeable for suitable earnings on the railway
corporations’ capitalisation, as a fixed overhead charge on
the cost of living, without apology or afterthought. So
that matter will have been arranged.®

6 Such a course falls in with the temper of a Business Admin-
istration, at the same time that it is wholly consonant with that
popular sentiment that is animated with business principles. Any
sound business concern is capitalised on that rate of net gain
which it has been found that the traffic will bear; and in effect
it is held, in law and custom, that any reputably large business
concern duly capitalised on this basis, and of some years’
standing, is duly entitled, has a vested right, to a net income
in perpetuity answering to this capitalisation so arrived at.
Therefore, when earnings fall off—due, perhaps, to businesslike
incapacity—it should be the part of economy and clean manage-


ment to cut out meaningless intermediate steps in the process
of getting these legitimate gains out of the underlying popula-


196 Absentee Ownership


In coal, iron, and transportation the conversion of pub-
lic necessities into private assets has already reached a
passably settled and conclusive state, so that these means
of production are now securely held in absentee owner-
ship and managed on the sound business principle of
charging what the traffic will bear. Their use is regulated
on the steady presumption of rendering no greater serv-
ice than that minimum which will yield a satisfactory
net gain to their absentee owners. That is to say, as
regards these natural resources their employment has been
brought to a basis of “sound business,” so that the abid-
ing care of the businesslike management is to avoid an
excessive output. An excessive output in this connec-
tion means such a full and sustained employment of plant
and man-power as would overstock the market and lower
profits. Hence a watchful curtailment of output, unem-
ployment, and sabotage.’ ;


ion, by making the suitable rate of net gains for this business
a fixed overhead charge upon the underlying population in the
shape of a tax. There is no use of having taxpayers if they
are not to be made use of in such an emergency.

7 This is by no means intended to say that this running sabot-
age on production and output constitutes the whole duty of the
corporate management which takes care of the interests of the
absentee owners of these natural resources. There are also al-
ways the many and various cares of corporation finance, and
there is the running administrative routine of “hiring and firing”
the working personnel with a view to lower costs, and this
duty is forever complicated with “labor troubles” that arise out
of refractory human nature. But sabotage, in that inoffensive
sense in which the word is used here, remains after all the
first and unremitting duty incumbent on these executives, in so
far as their business is conducted on the sound principles of
net gain in terms of price, as is commonly the case. And this
sabotage, graduated un-employment, and parsimonious hiring
and firing, entails “labor troubles,” in the nature of things. On
this head the situation in coal since the Armistice is typical
rather than exceptional. So also in steel. So persistent, or
rather chronic, have been the labor troubles in these industries


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 197


On the other hand Oil, that is to say the business in
crude oil, is still in an immature phase of its development,
resembling the earlier lumbering enterprise, and marked
by a headlong competitive rush to disembowel the avail-
able resources expeditiously and at any cost. In the course
of nature the older oil-fields have passed this stage *of
development and have duly come to rest secure and
orderly under the absentee ownership and absentee man-
agement of economically regular corporations, of the large
and stable type which is known colloquially as Big Busi-
ness. So also is very much of the business of refining,
transporting and marketing the output. These things
have already come in under the head of business-as-usual
and are managed discretely by collusion and coercion on
the principle of what the traffic will bear; that is to say,
these lines of business run on a settled plan of com-
petition between the absentee owners and the underlying
population, according to which the absentee management
makes the terms for the underlying population on the
principle of what the traffic will bear. As business con-
cerns these corporate interests have already become enter-
prises in salesmanship simply, and conduct their affairs
quite in conformity with the later approved canons of
salesmanship, as touches both their outstanding securities
and their marketable products and services.®

There still is much pioneering enterprise in the
during these years while the necessary sabotage on production
has run high, that the management have found it necessary to
cali in the help of many “under-cover-men” and armed guards
as well as the armed forces at the disposal of the local and state
authorities. The authorities so called in have even found it
necessary transiently to resort to “martial law.” The salutary
modicum of sabotage on production is no light care—Cf., e.g,
Public Opinion and the Steel Strike, ch. i; also Report on the


Steel Strike of 1919, especially ch. vii.
8 Cf. Joseph E. Pogue, Economics of Petrolewm, ch. i.


198 Absentee Ownership


production of the crude oil, designed to get rich
quick on a moderate outlay. Many “independent” con-
cerns are engaged in this enterprise, a number of
which—perhaps the greater number—are unrecognised
subsidiaries of the large absentee corporations which
handle the refined. The affiliations of these “inde-
pendent” oil concerns are surrounded with much
painstaking obscurity. For such of them as are in
any degree independent in fact, the manceuvres of the
greater corporations are conditioning circumstances to be
guessed at and taken account of. The great corporations
stand as massive impersonal vested interests which move
obscurely in the background of the market and make the
terms on which business may be transacted; and it is for
the “independents” to make their peace with them on such
terms as may be had. Having come to terms with the
master corporations, the enterprising knights of trover and
conversion who are “developing” the newer fields go about
their business of disemboweling the country’s oil
resources in all haste and without afterthought.®

The greater number of these “independent” concerns
are scantily equipped for the work; although the total
expenditure on equipment and work in the field greatly
exceeds what would be required to produce the crude oil
on any reasonably economical plan. They are also com-
monly under-manned, in the sense that the working per-
sonnel in the field includes too small a proportion of
suitably skilled and experienced workmen and too scant
a staff of technical experts; too scant, that is, for eco-
nomical working. Also they are commonly ill prepared
for contingencies, whether of a financial or a mechanical


9Cf. Pogue, Economics of Petroleum, chapters i, ii, iv and
XV.


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 199


nature; partly because they commonly do not have the
benefit of competent technical advice and experience;
partly because much of this enterprise still carries the
mark of “wild-cat” and still does business in a hurry
on a chance and a “shoe-string”; and partly also because
unfavorable contingencies are not infrequently arranged
for them as a matter of business strategy in behalf of the
vested interests that move in the background. And quite
as a matter of routine there is a notorious initial waste of
the output (both oil and gas) when a well is brought in.
This waste commonly goes on for some time at a high
percentage, and the waste of gas will often run on nearly
unchecked through the life of the well, for want of stor-
age capacity, pipe-line connections, etc.

Much of this enterprise is of the nature of a com-
petitive duplication of work and equipment. The inde-
pendent producers, many of whom are corporations of
some standing, are competitive leaseholders of plots of
ground bounded by survey lines, lines of ownership, not
by the natural boundaries of the “pools” which they are
engaged in exhausting. These leased plots of ground
touch one another along the geometrical lines of the sur-
vey. So, under the spur of businesslike initiative the
leaseholders each and several bend their efforts to get
the better of one another by cutting in on one another’s
oil-contents underground along these dividing lines. All
and several sink many wells rapidly on these competing
plots of ground, taking care to crowd many new wells
up against the dividing lines and into the corners of their
leaseholds, to draw off underground what it would be lar-
ceny to take over after it reaches the surface; until the
resulting number of wells (and “dry holes”) sunk in any
given neighbourhood is several times as many, at several


200 Absentee Ownership


times the cost that would be needed to get out the under-
lying oil on any reasonable plan.*°

This clamorous waste and manhandling of the oil
resources runs on quite as a matter of business routine,
and the recital of any part of the story here may well
seem a piece of aimless tedium. It runs on in this fashion
from the outset, but it is plain that the enterprise is in
all cases due to head up eventually in a collective control
of the output by large absentee owners. The older fields
show what is to be expected in that respect and how it is
likely to be done. The waste which this pioneering enter-
prise in oil involves, and the excessive cost of it, will not
run to so high a percentage of the output’as in the case of
the gold production (some 500 per cent. for the Alaskan
gold), but counted in absolute figures the total of wasteful
costs and wasted output entailed by private initiative in
the production of oil is doubtless larger than the corre-
sponding total for gold.

The whole of this routine of waste and inefficiency is
a matter of course under the American plan of seizure
and conversion; and it is at least a blameless exercise of
private initiative, commonly regarded as a meritorious


10 Any detail map of such an oil-field will show this duplica-
tion of wells as one of its striking features. Wherever four
leaseholds meet, e.g., one expects to find four (or more) com-
peting wells, sunk in all haste, crowded into the four corners
as near as the dimensions of the machinery or of the law will
permit, in a race to encroach on one another’s oil-contents and
draw off the oil which one well would handle with less waste.
Such duplication of wells is also enforceable at law, as certain
recent court-decisions have established. A leaseholder who fails
to crowd in quickly into a competing corner of his leasehold is
liable to damages at the suit of the lessor.

Cf., e. g., C. G. Gilbert and J. E. Pogue, Petroleum—A Re-
source Interpretation (Bulletin 102, part 6, U. S. National
Museum, 1918,); see also J. E. Pogue, Economics of Petroleum
(New York, I921), pp. 31-46, and map on p. 33.


Timber Lands and Oil Fields 201


work. It is, in effect, no more than an exemplary work-
ing-out of the American citizen’s dearest constitutional
rights, and there is no fault to be found with it all on
any score of irregularity. In its time and under the given
conditions of law and custom it is sound business enter-
prise; just as the Big Business and monopoly control in
which it invariably heads up is also sound business. It is
all in the day’s work. It has seemed necessary here to
recall these workday incidents of business-as-usual in oil,
just because they show a concrete and exemplary work-
ing-out of absentee ownership as it affects the country’s
natural resources.


sere)


Lar |


PART I


CHAPTER VIII
THE New Orver Or BUSINESS


Wuat has just been described, or sketched, hastily in
these brief chapters on the progress of industrial America
in the nineteenth century has evidently been a process of
continued growth, a cumulative sequence of complex
changes. And the new order of things which now faces
the Americans is an outgrowth of a period of unexampled
changes. So there has arisen a situation which foots up
to a new order of things; although the new order carries
over much of the old order out of which it has arisen.
The changes that have been going forward have taken
effect primarily and most profoundly in the material cir-
cumstances which condition the life and work of this peo-
ple. The material conditions, the ways and means of liv-
ing and of procuring a livelihood, have been altered in
a very substantial degree. At the same time these
material and technical changes have also put a strain on
the received canons of knowledge and belief and on the
established order of law and custom; although the strain
to which they have been subjected has not yet brought on
any substantial measure of change in these principles of
use and merit that govern belief and conduct.

The changes that have been going forward have not
affected all parts of the scheme of life in anything like
the same measure. The drive of change has not been the
same, and the rate of change has therefore not been the


same throughout. The driving forces of change have
205


206 Absentee Ownership


taken direct effect in the industrial arts, and have touched
matters of law and custom only at the second remove.
Habits of thought have therefore not been displaced and
shifted forward to a new footing in law and morals in
anything like the same measure in which men have learned
to use new ways and means in industry. The principles
(habits of thought) which govern knowledge and belief,
law and morals, have accordingly lagged behind, as con-
trasted with the forward drive in industry and in the
resulting workday conditions of living.

As is always the case, in the nature of things, so in this
case, too, the changes that have taken effect in the material
circumstances are the creative factors which have gone
into action, as a driving force and a controlling agency,
and have set afoot a new line of habituation. And as is
always the case, in the nature of things, the new pattern
of knowledge and the new elements of belief and convic-
tion which these new habits of workday living are pushing
forward are finding acceptance and endorsement only tar-
dily and by way of reluctant concession to the force
majeure of continued and rigorous habituation. In point
of time, these adaptations of knowledge and belief come
after the fact. And any departure from ancient precedent
in law and morals will come into effect still more tardily,
still farther in arrears. So much so that opinionated per-
sons are quite able to believe that no substantial change
need take place or can take place in that range of habitual
“action patterns” in which law and morals are grounded,
at least not in America. Indeed, it is something of a boast
among Americans of the stricter observance that Amer-
ican law and custom have suffered no change, in principle,
since the date of the Federal Constitution. In principle,
that is to say in respect of its underlying habits of thought,
the working system of American law and custom is held


The New Order 207


to be the finished product of a process of growth which
came to a ripe conclusion some 150 years ago. This
rigorously retrospective position is formally binding on
the judiciary and the legal profession. It overlooks the
service rendered by legal fiction and constructive pre-
cedents, of course; but there is after all a modicum of
truth in the contention,—so much as will enable the
judiciary and the legal profession to rest their arguments
on it, pro forma.

It results that in so far as the new order of things departs
from the old it has not the countenance of law and cus-
tom, except by way of legal fiction. Or to turn the prop-
osition about, in so far as the new order of things departs
from the old, the American system of law and order as
embodied in the Federal constitution is out-of-date, except
by way of legal fiction. The Federal constitution was
framed by the elder statesmen of the eighteenth century ;
whereas the new industrial order of things is created by
the technicians of the twentieth century. There is accord-
ingly a discrepancy between the run of material facts in
the present and the canons of law and order as stabilised
in the eighteenth century. In the same fashion, though in
a less formal conflict, the traditional system of knowledge
and belief also is holding out against the pressure brought
by the revolution in industry. Such is necessarily the case
with any stable system of usages and beliefs and with any
established order of law and custom; and it holds true
with particular cogency in this American case, where the
rate and volume of change in the material conditions of
life during this interval have been large and swift beyond
example.

The established system of knowledge and belief, law and
order, came out of the remoter past that lies back of the
period of its own stabilisation, and it embodies the habits


208 Absentee Ownership


of thought and the frame of mind that were engendered
in still earlier generations by habituation and precedent in
the course of that past experience. In this sense, then,
it is necessarily out-of-date by so much as the material
circumstances which condition the present have departed
from those past conditions to which it owes its rise and
fixation; and, indeed, by so much more as the working
scheme of knowledge and belief, law and order, in that
past time carried forward and perpetuated habits of
thought, preconceptions, principles, that are of still older
date.

The new order of things has arisen out of the past by
a change in degree carried so far as to result in an
effectual change in kind. In the American case this
change in the material conditions of life has gone so far
as to amount to a break with the past; while the
system of legal and customary rights, powers, immun-
ities, and privileges stands over on the base given it
by the elder statesmen of the past, except for legal
fiction.

The changes which have made this break with the past
and have set up this discrepancy between the current con-
ditions of life and the received rules which govern the
conduct of life,—these changes have been, primarily and
immediately, changes in the material circumstances of the
case, due to a progressive change in the state of the indus-
trial arts and to a continued growth of population. And
in both of these respects the rate and volume of change
have been large, beyond example. And this altered state
of their material circumstances has not yet had time to
affect the spiritual animus, the frame of mind, of the
American community, at all seriously or substantially ; nor
has it all at all seriously affected their outlook on things
even in those matters of knowledge and belief that have


The New Order 209


to do directly with the industrial arts and the material
welfare of the community.?

It is true, business enterprise and business methods
have undergone some measure of reorganization, designed
to get the benefit of the new opportunities offered by the
new scale of work that has been brought into action by
the continued advance of the industrial arts. So that
business has been conducted on a larger scale and at a
swifter pace, and with a wider sweep of credit relations—
all due in great part to improved mechanical facilities;
but the spirit in which American business is conducted,
as well as the law and custom which formally govern its
powers and procedure, are still the same spirit and the
same principles of law and morals that have long been
familiar to the horse-trading farmer and the collusive
retailers of the country towns.?

The material circumstances which underlie and enable
the new order, which supply its working forces and limit
its powers, are the state of the industrial arts and the man-
power of the underlying population ; and these forces have
come up into their present state by an irrepressible


1 The country town has apparently been the chief agency by
which this stable and peevish quietism of American knowledge
and belief has been kept in repair, as indicated in an earlier
passage.

2 Of course, what so is said of a new order of things will apply
only de facto, not de jure. Indeed, that is the point in argu-
ment. De jure, of course, the current state of things in
the American industrial world differs in no degree from the situ-
ation of a hundred years ago. And the difficulties and per-
plexities, and animosities, that have lately been coming to a head
under this new industrial order have arisen out of the growing
divergence between the state of things de jure and the state of
things de facto. It is, perhaps, necessary to add that “de facto”
is here used not in the sense of a convenient prevarication, as
in latterday diplomatic usage, but rather as designating the
material circumstances of the case.


210 Absentee Ownership


growth, and they are still engaged in a sweeping advance
which is pushing them farther and farther from their
point of departure. But the control of these industrial
powers, and the decision as to what, when, and how much
work shall be done by them, is vested in the absentee
owners of the country’s resources. And these owners
and their business agents go into this work of directing
and restraining the work in hand with such powers and
preconceptions as have been conferred on them according
to a scheme of law and custom that was worked out
and stabilised in an alien past for purposes that are alien
to this latterday state of the industrial arts and out of
touch with the latterday state of population. The New
Order, therefore, is by way of being a misfit. It is an
organisation of new ways and means in the way of indus-
trial processes and man-power, subject to irresponsible
control at the hands of a superannuated general staff of
business men moving along lines of an old-fashioned
strategy toward obsolete ends.?


This new order of things in American business and
industry may be said to have arisen so soon as a working
majority of the country’s industrial resources, including
the transportation system, had been brought securely
under absentee ownership on a sufficiently large scale, in


3It is not intended to cast aspersions on this general staff of
business men who so administer the country’s industrial affairs
for the benefit of its absentee owners. They are superannuated,
not in point of physical senility but only in point of their aims
and methods, bias and preconceptions. By interest, training, and
perhaps by native gift, they are holdovers out of a past order of
conceptions, which cannot be defined in terms of the later in-
dustrial processes or in terms of the man-power engaged. They
are responsible men, of course, but their responsibility runs
in such terms and to such effect that it has no meaning within
the system of the latter-day technology.


The New Order 211


sufficiently large holdings, to make these national resources
and the industries which make use of them amenable to
concerted surveillance and control by the vested inter-
ests that represent these larger absentee owners. Of
course, there is no sharply drawn date-line to mark the
beginning of this new dispensation; de jure it does not
exist. But the de facto rise of the new order may be
conveniently dated from about the turn of the century.
Loosely speaking, that large-scale control of the indus-
trial forces which has made the outcome, dates back to the
ten or twelve years overlapping the end of the century.
The “era of trust-making,’ sometimes so called, that ran
for some years from, say, 1897 onward, was concerned
in this transition to a new footing in American business.

This appears to make the New Order a new order of
business. And so it is, in the sense that the New Order
is an order of things in which business considerations are
paramount. Its distinctive characteristic on this head
being that it is an order of things in which Big Business
is paramount. But Big Business still is business of the
old familiar kind, with the old familiar aims to be worked
out in the old familiar spirit.

Big Business is paramount in the New Order. But all
the while the conditioning circumstances which underlie
this new order of business enterprise are circumstances
of a material, tangible, mechanical, technical nature, ways
and means of doing tangible work, not merely new and
improved ways and means of doing business. Business
has to do with the intangibles of ownership, and only
indirectly with the tangible facts of workmanship. Under
the new dispensation as under any other, the whole duty
of business enterprise is to come in for as large and secure
a net gain as may be, to acquire title, to “make money,”
and therefore to turn all tangible means and performances


2i2 Absentee Ownership


to account for this intangible but paramount purpose of
acquiring title. The new expedients that have been
brought into action in the conduct of business are con-
trivances and expedients designed to serve this intangible
end; new ways and means of responding to the call of
those new opportunities for gain that arise out of tangible
changes in the industrial system,—for it is out of the
tangible performance of this industrial system that the
gains of ownership are drawn and it is to these tangibles
of industrial work and products that title is to be acquired.
And the tangible changes affecting the industrial system
have been going forward as an unremitting proliferation,
a continuous advance in the scale and articulation of
the industrial process at large.

No new order of business and industry has sprung up
suddenly and complete at any given date, even though a
visible change has taken effect within a reasonably short
time. It is only that somewhere about the turn of the
century a critical point was reached and passed, without
much visible change of circumstances at the time. The
new system, in business and in industry, has in fact been
maturing into its present working shape through some
twenty years past. And it is still feasible for legally-
minded persons to believe that no substantial change has
taken effect for a longer period than that. Nor will it
do to say that this new growth has now run its course
to a finality; although it should perhaps not come as a
surprise if the present phase of it turns out to mark some-
thing like a station in the course of events, possibly even
something of a new point of departure. Certain indica-
tions that the present situation may constitute such a crit-
ical phase, and may mark a new departure, will be brought
into the argument in a later passage and in another con-
nection.


The New Order 213


The critical pass, the point at which the New Order may
be said to have set in, was reached and passed so soon
as a working majority of the country’s industrial resources
had been brought under absentee ownership on a suffici-
ently large scale for collusive management. But this is
not intended to say that at that period anything like a
statistical majority of the natural resources had been
taken over into large holdings ; but only that, loosely about
that period, an effectual working majority of those
natural resources and industrial plants which are immedi-
ately engaged in the so-called “key industries” had already
passed into absentee ownership on so large a scale as to
enable an effectual collusive control of these things by
the vested interests concerned, such a degree of control
as to make a reasonably concerted check on production
in these key industries a manageable undertaking.*

In effect, whether by intention or not, the country’s
industrial system as a working whole, as an industrial
going concern, was thereby brought under control and
became subject to a varying degree of sabotage at the
hands of the vested interests in these key industries.


4Effectual concert of action in this bearing does not involve
anything like a formal collusive arrangement, such as would
constitute a “conspiracy in restraint of trade’ in the opinion of
the courts. E.g., even now slightly more than one-half of the
steel production of the country is in the hands of “independent”
concerns which have no corporate connection with the Steel Cor-
poration; at least no such relation is visible to the courts or
avowed by the corporation executives. Yet it is a fact accepted
as a matter of course and of common notoriety that the policy
pursued by the Steel Corporation, e.g., in its “labor manage-
ment” and its campaign for the “open shop,” will in the nature
of things govern the conduct of the Independents in the same
connection.—Cf. Report on the Steel Strike of 1919, by the
Commission of the Interchurch World Movement (New York,
1920), where this state of the case is very much in evidence
throughout the findings of the Commission.


214 Absentee Ownership


That is what is meant by calling them “key industries.”
The business concerns that have to do with other branches
of production and trade necessarily wait on the movement
of things in these key industries. That is also a matter
of course and of common notoriety. Not that the busi-
nesslike management of one and another of these key
industries will aim to administer sabotage to any or all
of the underlying and outlying members of the industrial
system. That is not the intention; it is only the effect.
Indeed, in so curtailing employment and output in the
underlying and outlying industries by curtailing the output
in the key industries the business management of these
latter unintentionally curtail the fund of wealth from
which the owners of the key industries are to draw their
run of free income. So that it is, in effect, at a sacrifice
of the long run of gain that the management of the key
industries “grabs off” an enhanced rate of earnings for
the time being, by curtailing its output and advancing its
price schedule. But then, business enterprise, particularly
American business enterprise, habitually looks to the short
run. And there are reasons why Big Business in par-
ticular should conduct its operations with a view to the
short-time returns.®

The working schedule throughout the rest of the indus-
trial system is conditioned from day to day on the rate,
volume, and balance of work and output in these key
industries ; inasmuch as the secondary, underlying and
outlying branches of the system are, in effect, engaged on
what may be called continuation work, which draws un-
remittingly on the output of the key industries for power,
raw materials, transportation, and mechanical equipment,


5 Cf., “On the Nature of Capital,” second paper, reprinted in
The Place of Science, pp. 352-386, especially pp. 373-386.


The New Order 215


and which presently will unavoidably halt when the flow
of these indispensable ways and means of production is
clogged by obstructive manceuvres and curtailment in the
key industries. So also, the habitual and deliberate fail-
ure of the key industries, for business reasons, to run at
their full productive capacity acts, in effect, to set the
pace, to adjust the rate and volume of employment and out-
put throughout the rest of the industrial system at a lower
average than would otherwise be the rule. Any degree
of concerted control over these natural resources, as it
takes effect in the curtailment or speeding-up of these
main industries that so lie at the tactical center of the
system, will effectually govern the movements of the coun-
try’s industrial system at large, as a comprehensive going
concern.

And this control, and the running balance of sabotage
which is its chief method of control and its chief material
consequence, all takes effect in an impersonal and dispas-
sionate way, as a matter of business routine. Absentee
ownership and absentee management on this grand scale
is immune from neighborly personalities and from sen-
timental considerations and scruples.®

It takes effect through the colorless and impersonal
channels of corporation management, at the hands of busi-
nesslike officials whose discretion and responsibility extend
no farther than the procuring of a reasonably large—
that is to say the largest obtainable—net gain in terms of
price. The absentee owners are removed out of all touch
with the working personnel or with the industrial work

6 Cf., e.g., Testimony of E. H. Gary before the Senate Com-
mission to investigate the Steel Strike of 1919-1920, vol. I; and
Feport on the Steel Strike of 1919 by The Interchurch World


Movement (New York, 1920), througuout, and especially sec-
tions II (“Ignorance”) and V (“Grievances and Control”).


216 Absentee Ownership


in hand, except such remote, neutral and dispassionate
contact by proxy as may be implied in the continued
receipt of a free income; and very much the same is true
for the business agents of the absentee owners, the invest-
ment-bankers and the staff of responsible corporation offi-
cials. Their relation to what is going on, and to the man-
power by use of which it is going on, is a fiscal relation.
As industry, as a process of workmanship and a produc-
tion of the means of life, the work in hand has no mean-
ing for the absentee owners sitting in the fiscal background
of these vested interests. Personalities and tangible con-
sequences are eliminated and the business of governing the
rate and volume of the output goes forward in terms of
funds, prices, and percentages.

But all the while the work in hand goes forward in
terms of mechanical power, fuel, raw materials, mechan-
ical equipment, chemical processes, man-power, and tech-
nical design and surveillance,—matters hidden, perhaps
mercifully, from the absentee owners who come in for that
free income on which the strategy of these vested interests
converges. Thereby the absentee owners as well as their
absentee business managers are spared many distasteful
experiences, saved from reflecting on many dreary trivial-
ities of life and death,—trivialities on the balance sheet of
assets and liabilities, although their material counterfoil
in terms of life and death among the underlying popula-
tion may be grave enough to those on whom their impact
falls. But the absentee owners and their business agents
are also by the same screen of absentee immunity barred
out from knowing what to do, or from doing anything
at all to the purpose in case of need, in case these trivial-
ities of life and death head up in a tangle of discord and
mutiny such as to jeopardise the orderly run of their free


The New Order 207


income, after the fashion which is now becoming familiar
to all men.?

The strategy of business—the strategy of getting a
larger net gain in dollars—dictates what is to be done or
left undone; and having so dictated, it moves on to the
next thing in the same line. There is no place in Big
Business for considerations of a more material sort or of
a more sentimental sort than net gain within the law. It
moves on that particular plane of make-believe on which
the net gain in money-values is a more convincing reality
than productive work or human livelihood. Neither the
tenuous things of the human spirit nor the gross material
needs of human life can come in contact with this business
enterprise in such a way as to deflect its course from the
line of least resistance, which is the line of greatest present
gain within the law.

This line of least resistance and greatest present gain
runs in the main by way of a vigilant sabotage on produc-
tion. So true is this and so impassively binding is this
duty of businesslike sabotage, that even in a crisis of
unexampled privation, such as these years since the War,
the captains of Big Business have been unable to break
away and let the forces of production take their course ;
and this in spite of their being notably humane persons,
imbued with the most benevolent sentiments. With an
eye single to the net gain, business strategy still continues


7“The conditions described have caused me deep concern. The
first intimation months ago that such a situation existed ... led
me to institute prompt inquiry, with the hope that any just
grounds for criticism might be removed forthwith. That these
efforts, long since under way and still in progress, have not been
more quickly effective has been and is a disappointment.”—Cf.
also The Epistles of Saint John of the Standard to the Holy
Brotherhood of the Long Bow. Passim.


218 Absentee Ownership


impartially to dictate a conscientious withdrawal of effi-
ciency.®

The state of things brought on by the War and per-
petuated by the businesslike Peace which has followed
after, is complicated enough in detail; but the outline of
things so far as regards the main circumstances which
govern business and industry is not especially obscure.
When relieved of those personalities and moralities that
commonly cloud the argument, the case will stand some-
what as follows. There is a very large inflation of cred-
its, both in the set form of loan credits and in fiduciary
currency, in all the civilised nations. The inflation in
America, taking one thing with another, may perhaps be
rated at something like 100 per cent., rather over than
under.® Hence money-values have advanced, resulting


8 Here as in other passages of this argument “Sabotage” is
taken to mean “A Conscientious Withdrawal of Efficiency,” with
whatever tactics of artifice and effrontery may be required to give
it effect. The phrase is said to have originated among the
I. W. W.; but it is no less convenient for use in the present con-
nection. Like aims call for like procedure.

It will be said, of course, as it has been said, that this com-
fortless and perplexing situation of the immediate present
has been precipitated by the War, and that the difficulties and
distress involved in this present state of things are the difficulties
of recovery from the devastation and disorganization incident to
the War. But it is by no means certain that very much the
same state of things would not have come on anyway, before
long, as the rightful outgrowth of that run of forces that have
been at work in business and industry during these past two
decades, while the New Order has been coming into its own, and
that the fatalities of the War have only brought it all to a head
more sharply and perhaps more speedily than might otherwise
have happened. The situation is a complicated one, and further
analysis may reach a different result.

9 This is at present (1923) over the official figure, so far as
official figures have been given out. Indeed, inflation has been
denied for America, apparently in good faith. The dollar is
still claimed to be at par and redeemable. It is needless to ques


The New Order 219


in an effectual recapitalisation of American business con-
cerns, their assets and their presumptive earnings.1° At
the same time the aggregate wealth of the country, as
counted by weight and tale and use-value, has fallen off
greatly, as has also the man-power available for produc-
tive work. Hence there has arisen a discrepancy between
the country’s material wealth and the business commu-
nity’s capitalised wealth, which may in a manner of speak-


tion the fact here. The dollar may be redeemable in some sense
de jure; de facto the depreciation is effective. Official statistics
of prices make it something like 60 or 70 per cent. over the level
of 1914; the effectual inflation still seems to run appreciably over
the official figures.

Under the exacting surveillance of the Federal Reserve, the
banking community have hitherto exercised a very salutary col-
lusive control of credits, which has upheld the effectual inflation
and so prevented any precipitate liquidation. They have indeed
effected a slow and temperate retrenchment of credits, which
may conceivably have gone far enough to offset the continued
shrinkage of assets that has run along at the same time, due to
idleness, consumption and wear and tear. Nor, conceivably, need
America experience a period of acute liquidation so long as the
effectual bankruptcy of virtually all civilised Europe does not
pass from de facto to de jure; provided always that the Federal
Reserve continues to administer the American credit situation
with a firm hand, and provided also that the nation’s Business
Administration does not live up to its election promises in the
way of businesslike legislation. It may yet be within the power
of the American banking community and the Federal Reserve to
postpone the formal bankruptcy of Europe indefinitely, if Euro-
pean statecraft can be brought to substitute common sense for
politics in any sensible degree. All this appears to be known to
those who control the American credit situation and to be acted
on by them.

10 The capital value of a business concern at any given time,
its purchase value as a going concern, is measured by the cap-
italised value of its presumptive earnings; which is a question
of its presumptive net earning-capacity and of the rate or co-
efficient of capitalisation currently accepted at the time; and the
second of these two factors is intimately related to the rate
of discount ruling at the time.


220 Absentee Ownership


ing be called a divergence between the country’s wealth
de facto and its wealth de jure; between the country’s
wealth in hand considered as a business proposition
(which has increased) and its material wealth considered
as a proposition in livelihood (which has decreased). The
country is richer in money-values and poorer in use-
values.

But capitalisation and earnings are a business prop-
osition; livelihood is not. And in any civilised country,
like America, business controls industry; which means
that production must wait on earnings. Under these cir-
cumstances it is, as a matter of common honesty, incum-
bent on the business men in charge to keep this—in a
sense fictitious—capitalisation intact, and to make it good
by bringing current earnings up to the mark. And they
have been endeavoring to do this by curtailing employ-
ment and output to such a point that the resulting smaller
volume of output at the resulting increased price per unit
will yield the requisite increased total price-return.
Among the expedients by which it is sought to save the
capitalisation intact is a concerted effort to reduce
wages.7*


111t will be noted that all this businesslike strategy falls
properly under the head of sabotage. It is, in effect, a traffic
in privation, of course. It is also business-as-usual. No fault
need be found with it, since theré is no help for it. It is not a
matter of personal preference or moral obliquity. It is not
that these captains of Big Business whose duty it is to administer
this salutary modicum of sabotage on production are naughty.
It is not that they aim to shorten human life or augment human
discomfort by contriving an increase of privation among their
fellow men. Indeed, it is to be presumed that they are as humane
as they profess. But only by shortening the supply of things
needed and so increasing privation to a critical point can they
sufficiently increase their (nominal) earnings, and so come off
with a clear conscience and justify the trust which their absentee
owners have reposed in thern. They are caught in the net of


The New Order 221


It is evident that in its main lines this precarious situa-
tion that has been precipitated by the War, and the Peace,
does not differ notably, unless in degree, from the orderly
run of business and industry during the times of peace
immediately preceding the War. The drift of things in
that time set visibly in the direction of such an outcome
as the War has brought to a head. Then as since then
over-capitalisation was the rule; }* as a standard practice


business-as-usual, under circumstances which dictate a con-
scientious withdrawal of efficiency. The question is not whether
this traffic in privation is humane, but whether it is sound busi-
ness management; which reduces itself to a question of whether
the underlying population will put up with a sufficient degree
of privation for a sufficiently long time. And the underlying
population of this country is notoriously tolerant as regards all
those things that are done in the name of business.

12 “Over-capitalisation” is here used for brevity only, and in a
particular technical sense, applicable in this connection and not
necessarily serviceable for general use. It is intended to cover
the well-known fact that in current practice business capital,
the capital value of any successful business concern, has habitually
and increasingly exceeded the value of the material wealth which
underlies it. The fact is perhaps most obvious in the case of
corporate capitalisation, but it is scarcely less true for going con-
cerns which are not incorporated. In other words, the total
capitalised assets of the country’s business concerns have habitu-
ally, and increasingly, exceeded their total tangible assets.

Of course there is nothing reprehensible in this business prac-
tice. It is a matter of sound business routine. Such “over-
capitalisation” is one of the ordinary consequences, as it is
also an evidence, of good management; being in great part a
capitalisation of “good-will,” so called. But it involves two
consequences that are worth noting in this connection:—it re-
sults that (a) the total wealth of the country counted as assets,
funded capital values, is very appreciably larger than the same
total when counted as itemised material wealth in hand; and
(b) these assets on which the earnings of business are to be com-
puted are notably larger than the holdings of materially produc-
tive goods employed. Which brings up the paradox that the
ordinary net earnings of business must exceed the ordinary net
product of industry from which alone these net earnings are to


222 Absentee Ownership


there has been more or less of a running sabotage on
production, that is to say more or less unemployment of
equipment and man-power; there has been intermittent
and, on the whole, increasing discord and distrust between
the workmen in the larger industries and their corporate
employers, rising with increasing frequency into hostil-
ities in the way of strikes and lockouts, while there has
also been a rapidly increasing use of strike-breakers, labor
spies (“under-cover men”), armed guards, hired “depu-
ties,” state police and other armed forces, to keep the
peace, uphold the rights of property and make good the
absentee owners’ claim to a reasonable net gain. By and
large, the system of civilised business and industry
appears to have been moving forward as a whole and in
an orderly fashion toward some such state of balanced
inaction and suspended hostilities as that which has been
precipitated by the War.

At first sight this view seems to be sound, but a closer
scrutiny may leave it in doubt. On the face of things,
it looks as if the business community which controls the
country’s industrial forces had for some time past been
engaged in a concerted movement of cumulative over-
capitalisation and sabotage; while the industrial man-
power has been increasingly and systematically falling


be drawn. Which gives added precision to the statement that
business management is businesslike and capable only in so
far as it gets something for nothing.

The case of the American farm population, too, comes in for
sharper definition in the light of this paradox. The assets
of the going concerns in business yield earnings in excess, as a
reward of sound business management. On the other hand, as
is known to statisticians, the assets of the farmers yield, on an
average, next {o no earnings, perhaps none. The ordinary in-
come of the average farm where the equipment is owned by the
cultivator will foot up to scant wages for the labor expended
by the farmer and his household.


The New Order 223


into an attitude of cross-purposes and ill-will. There is
scarcely a question about the intractable attitude of the
industrial man-power, and the steadily rising pitch and
sweep of it. Nor is there a tenable doubt as regards the
increasing resort to over-capitalisation and sabotage on
the part of the business community. But there is at least
a reasonable doubt as to how far the business managers
have been moving in concert in this matter. Their duti-
ful denials have, of course, no significance except as a
ground of suspicion. But the circumstantial evidence in
the case is not convincing.

The War, and the businesslike Peace, have brought
the economic system as a whole to a state of balanced
inaction by a general and uniform check, which gives the
resulting situation of sabotage on employment and output
the appearance of concerted action on a deliberate and
comprehensive plan. But there is no good evidence of
widely concerted inaction in that businesslike sabotage
that prevailed in the pre-war period. And there is at
least a reasonable doubt whether the present apparently
concerted inaction, after the War, is the outcome of
deliberate choice arrived at in concert by the business
community at large acting in collusion. Superficially it
has the appearance of conspiracy, of course; and the
evidence is perhaps reasonably conclusive that the large
employers have been working together the past two years
on a common understanding to break down the labor
unions, in the well-known campaign for what is called
the “open shop.” But there is no good evidence of any
similarly wide concert of action on their part in earlier
years. They have showed no capacity for concerted
action on such a scale in the past. Except for the bank-
ing community, who are held under passable control of a
coercive kind by the great credit establishments at the


224 Absentee Ownership


financial center, acting under the coercive surveillance of
the Federal Reserve, the American business community
have showed no great aptitude for such intelligent and
sustained concert of action as this would imply.

There has in the past, from time to time, been an effec-
tual concert of action within certain groups, among the
business concerns which take care of certain industries ;
as, e.g., in steel, coal, lumber, oil, copper, electrical and
building supplies, and in a degree in transportation. But
the resulting inaction and curtailment, so far as it has
affected the industrial system at large, has been somewhat
haphazard. It has had the appearance of being governed
by uncoordinated yielding to the pressure of circum-
stances, tracing back to curtailment of supplies from one
or another of the key industries or to measures taken in
the centralised credit business. The industrial business
concerns at large have commonly appeared to act in sev-
eralty, yielding to a common pressure, rather than moving
by a common impulse and looking to a shrewdly balanced
sabotage on employment and output as a whole. Of
course, in ordinary times there is a routine of sabotage, a
restriction of output to meet the market, which goes into
the day’s work of all sizable concerns that do business in
productive industry; but all that has been a matter of
routine business within each concern; which is something
quite different from such a nation-wide campaign of inac-
tion and hostilities as has held up the country’s industry
since the War.

The question may be put in this way:—Is this post-
bellum state of resolute inaction in business and of unem-
ployment and hostilities in industry the rightful outgrowth
of the ordinary agencies that have been at work during the
past two decades? or is it all a transient derangement of
things, due to transient causes extraneous to that system


The New Order 225


of absentee ownership and finance that makes the New
Order of things? And if the latter appears to be the
case, 1f this post-bellum complication of hardships and
inaction does not belong in the orderly course of things
under the New Order, what should then reasonably be
looked for in the calculable future as an outcome of con-
tinued growth along the line of the past two decades?
What is reasonably to be looked for as the outcome of
absentee ownership and control on this large scale as it is
working out on the ground of an increasingly large and
close-knit industrial-system, and an increasingly large
and compact underlying population ?

It is a question of human behavior under pressure of
changing circumstances with a minimum of change in the
formal rules which govern this behavior. Apparently it
should involve a question of the degree and direction of
change to be looked for in the law and the administrative
procedure that touches the conduct of industry and busi-
ness. Which becomes, in effect, a question of what the
courts, the legislatures, and the administrative officials are
likely to decide in these premises. There should appar-
ently be small ground for doubt on that head, in the light
of what has been taking place. So that the answer to this
part of the question may be taken for granted, with a fair
degree of confidence.

As has been customary in recent times, so also during
the past two decades the courts and legislatures have, on
the whole, acted to safeguard and fortify the rights,
powers and immunities of absentee ownership whenever
there has been occasion, and the administrative officials
have acted in the same sense with celerity and effect, to
the best of their knowledge and belief; in all of which
the constituted authorities have doubtless acted in good
faith and have followed out the logic of law and custom


226 Absentee Ownership


that has been bred in them by precept, example and
tradition. There need be no apprehension of interfer-
ence with the course of things from that side, so far as
the course of things is dictated by the needs of absentee
ownership. It may accordingly be assumed that the case
of America as it runs into the calculable future will con-
tinue to be ordered on the lines of absentee ownership
without much afterthought, governed by business enter-
prise carried on with an eye single to the largest net gain
in terms of price. The law allows it and the court awards
it. The changes to be looked for are such changes as are
initiated from outside the jurisdiction of law and custom.

There are three somewhat divergent main lines, at least,
along which the resulting new growth may move; accord-
ing as one or another of the country’s main business inter-
ests comes to dominate the situation, alone or in a combin-
ation. (a) The funded power, the control of credit, in
the hands of the associated banking-houses and the Fed-
eral Reserve, may be able to govern the course of business
to such effect as to safeguard the interests of absentee
ownership at large, maintain a steadily rising overcapital-
isation of absentee assets, and assure an indefinitely con-
tinued increase of net gains on investments and credit com-
mitments. The drift just now appears to set in that direc-
tion. These agencies may be able to maintain such a
balanced and stable progressive expansion of assets and
earnings. In any case, the dominant position of this
community of “investment-bankers,” moving in concert
under the steady surveillance of the Federal Reserve, will
exercise an influence of this kind and will greatly affect
the outcome. (b) At the same time it is conceivable
that the vested interests which own and control the main
natural resources and the key industries may take the lead,
with the support of the banking community. Ownership


The New Order 227


of these tangible assets that underlie the country’s indus-
trial system, the underlying material resources and equip-
ment, will enable these corporate interests to draw
together on a concerted plan of common action and set the
pace for the country’s industry as a whole by limiting
output and service to such a rate and volume as will
best serve their own collective net gain. In so doing they
will be in a position progressively to draw the industrial
system as a whole in under their own absentee owner-
ship, without material reservation, at least to the extent
of coming in for the effectual usufruct of the whole,—
somewhat after the fashion in which the packers, millers,
and railways, now enjoy the usufruct of the farming com-
munity in the Middle West, but with a stricter authority.
in this connection it is to be recalled that there is already
a far-reaching identity both of personnel and of corporate
interests between the group of corporations who control
the key industries on the one side and the banking com-
munity on the other, and this coalescence or consolidation
of the masters of tangible assets with the masters of credit
and solvency is visibly on the increase. So that what
should be looked for is quite as likely to be an effectual
coalescence and concert of these two powers, the bankers
and the key industries, rather than the dominance of
either one as against the other. (c) There is also the
possibility that the business concerns which control the
natural resources and the great industries will continue
to act by groups as in the recent past, each group taking
measures for itself in what may be called group sev-
eralty, and each group of Interests * seeking its own im-
mediate advantage by charging what the traffic will bear, at
the cost of any other vested interests and of the under-


13 As, e. g., railways, steel, oil, anthracite coal, bituminous coal,
packers, millers.


228 Absentee Ownership


lying population. In so doing these collusive groups of
industrial concerns will necessarily be working more or
less at cross purposes, and will thereby carry on a hap-
hazard and fluctuating sabotage on employment and out-
put, after the pattern that had become familiar during
the years before the War. Such is the tradition of busi-
ness enterprise in industry and of that “competitive sys-
tem” that still lives in American tradition, and there is
always the chance that the conservative spirit of the Amer-
ican business may preclude any effectual departure
from this familiar plan of mutual distrust and sharp
practice. In the background of any such pattern of semi-
detached group action there is, of course, always the collu-
sive banking community to be counted with; and there
remains therefore the question of how far the banking
community will tolerate cross purposes between groups
of industrial business concerns.

There is also the more obscure question of what the in-
dustrial man-power and the underlying population will say
to it all, if anything. In strict consistency, of course, un-
der the dispassionate logic of established law and custom,
neither the industrial man-power nor the underlying
population come into the case except as counters in the
computation of what the traffic will bear. Anything like
reasoned conduct or articulate behavior on their part will
scarcely be looked for in this connection. Yet there
remains an uneasy doubt as touches the de facto limits
of tolerance.


CHAPTER IX


THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM OF THE NEW ORDER


THatT new order of things which has been coming to a
head since the close of the century is especially plain to
be seen in the conduct of business. Business runs on
something of a new footing. But it is a new order of
material conditions that has enabled this new dispensa-
tion in business to come on and go into action. It runs
on an altered state of the industrial arts, coupled with a
continual growth of population. And the new dispensa-
tion in business has arisen out of the endeavours of the
business men to profit by the enlarged opportunities which
these altered material conditions have offered them. It
has been their work to turn the new industrial situation
to account for their own gain while working under rules
of the game of business that have come down from the
old order.

This has involved a progressive change. It has taken
time and experiment as well as the help of legal counsel
to discover and work out suitable expedients of business
procedure and to get into the habit of them. At the
same time the underlying industrial situation has been
subject to a continued, cumulative, alteration ; an advance
in mass and extension, in the scale and range of opera-
tions, as well as in the complexity, balance, and precision
of details. Therefore the new order of business proce-
dure has gone into action in a progressive and tentative


fashion. And for the same reason it has never reached
229


230 Absentee Ownership


the end of its development; nor, indeed, is there any
promise of its reaching anything like a final state of stabil-
ity and finished growth in the calculable future; for the
reason that the state of the industrial arts which under-
lies it is forever unstable. And just now the industrial
arts are in a state of unexampled instability. And the
business men who aim to benefit by the use and control of
these industrial arts will have to take them as they come,
and it is the habitual procedure of these business men that
determines what the methods and organization of business
will be.


There is little that can be said in the way of confident
forecast as touches the future of the industrial arts or as
regards any final outcome of this continued advance in
technology and in the consequent sweep and scale and
articulation of the industrial system; and the business
community will have to face these new exigencies as they
arise. Yet in one respect, at least, the course of things
in the recent past may be taken to indicate the nature
of the situation which the business management will have
to deal with as time goes on. As it stands now the indus-
trial system is inordinarily productive. Its productive
capacity per unit of the factors engaged—the coefficient
of productive capacity—has in recent times continually
been increasing at a continually accelerated rate, and the
situation holds a clear promise of a still more inordinate
productive capacity in the course of further time and
change. The technicians are forever occupied with con-
triving new ways and means designed to compass that
end,.+


1As has been remarked in an earlier passage, “inordinate”
is here employed in something of a technical sense, as meaning
excessively and unguardedly productive, beyond the ordinary


The Industrial System 231


In so speaking of a “New Order of Things” there is no
intention to imply that the new is divided from the old
by a catastrophic break of continuity. To use a geologic
figure of speech, there has been no faulting of the strata.
No sudden thrust has upset the orderly advance of tech-
nological knowledge and practice. There has been an
orderly cumulative advance which has gone forward
without serious interruption and at a constantly increas-
ing rate of advance. It is an instance of cumulative
growth, which has now passed a critical point of such a
nature as to give rise to a new situation which differs
effectually from what went before.

In the case of America this cumulative growth of the
industrial arts and of the industrial system has been par-
ticularly notable since about the middle of the nineteenth
century. Coupled with this advancing industrial situation
and conditioned upon it, there has at the same time gone
forward a sweeping progressive reorganisation of the busi-
ness community, which has placed the country’s business
affairs on a footing of credit and corporate ownership.
With the result that toward the close of the century the
financial community, who command the country’s solvency
and dispense the country’s credit, found themselves in a
position to take over the control and the usufruct of the
country’s industrial system by taking over the ownership
of those strategically dominant members of the indus-
needs of business in ordinary times. That is to say, if the
available resources in the way of materials, equipment and
man-power were to be employed under competent technical man-
-agement with a view to maximum production, the output of in-
dustry would be greatly in excess of what the traffic will bear,
considered as a business proposition. Not that the output would
exceed the consumptive capacity of the underlying population,
but only that it would be too large to yield the maximum net


gain in terms of price to the business concerns of the country.
‘Tnordinate”’ refers to the needs of business, not to livelihood.


2, Absentee Ownership


trial system that are known as the “Key Industries.”
Since then the key industries have been progressively
taken over into the absentee ownership of the country’s
credit institutions, and this absentee ownership has pro-
gressively been consolidated and arranged in manageable
shape. The arrangement has now been brought to a
passable degree of balance and stability, although the
work has not been brought to a neatly finished con-
clusion; nor need it be. Nor is there any present like-
lihood that this working arrangement will be rounded out
into a statistically all-inclusive block of absentee owner-
ship in the hands of a formally consolidated going con-
cern of investment-bankers.

Irrepressible new technological advances are forever
running out new ramifications of industry, which are for-
ever requiring further attention at the hands of these
captains of ownership. So that the work of taking things
over is an endless task, at the same time that something
less than universal ownership will serve the purpose quite
handsomely. All that is needed for the purpose of an
effectual usufruct of the country’s work and output is a
strategically effectual control of the country’s industrial
system as a going concern, and that much is now an ac-
complished fact. The several branches and strata of the
industrial system overlap and interlock in such a way as
to vest a strategically effectual control of the whole in the
hands of those who command the standard natural re-
sources and control the key industries. All that remains
needful to be done is to bring the several absentee con-
cerns who control the key industries to a settled and facile
footing of collusion, and much has been accomplished
along that line these last few years.


In America, as an outcome of the nineteenth century,


The Industrial System 235


the industrial work of the community has fallen into the
shape of a three-fold division or stratification of indus-
tries which work together in a balanced whole, a moving
equilibrium of interlocking processes of production: (a)
the primary, initial, or key industries, so called, which
command the greater natural resources of the country and
turn out the prime staple necessaries of the mechanical in-
dustry in the way of power, transportation, fuel, and
structural material; (b) the secondary or continuation in-
dustries, manufactures, which turn these crude supplies
and services into consumable goods and distribute them;
(c) agriculture.

This may seem a gratuitous and illogical classification,
particularly as regards agriculture. It is quite evident,
of course, that agriculture has to do with the greatest and
most essential of the country’s natural resources, at the
same time that it is the indispensable source of supply for
a wide and varied range of staple industries. So it is
as usual as it is unquestionably proper to class agri-
culture with the “extractive industries,’ and not unusual
to give it the first place in that class; and there is no
fault to be found with that arrangement. The conven-
tional scheme would be: (a) extractive industries; (b)
manufactures; (c) distribution. Which would be a sound
logical plan and classification of productive industry, in
the absence of business considerations.

On the other hand the three-fold division which is
spoken for above is drawn in view of those business con-
siderations that are decisive for the conduct of industry
here and now. It is not intended to violate or set aside
the grouping of industries that has been usual in the
theoretical speculation of the economists, but is made only
for present convenience. What is aimed at is a con-
venient definition of the facts for the present argument,


234 Absentee Ownership


which has to do with the relations between business and
industry in America in the twentieth century; and the
three-fold division spoken for above answers this pur-
pose. Each of these three industrial groups or strata
occupies a peculiar place in the industrial system, in re-
spect of ownership and business connections. There are
at the same time no sharp lines of division between the
three groups. They overlap, interlock and blend; and
each group will show doubtful and marginal cases; but
in the large, as component factors in the framework of
the industrial system, each group stands out by itself,
typically distinct from the rest, particularly in respect of
the business considerations by which each is bound or ac-
tuated.

At the same time it is also not to be overlooked that
these three strata of productive industry are marked by
characteristic differences on the technological side, as well
as in respect of the business considerations that govern
them. They each stand on a somewhat special and dis-
tinctive footing in the industrial arts; all the while that
they all move within the framework of the modern indus-
trial system and are, each in its degree, dominated by that
mechanical industry that gives its distinctive character
to the system as a whole and as contrasted with what has
gone before. But the three groups or departments of in-
dustry do not share alike or in the same degree in that
characteristic shift to a mechanical footing that has re-
sulted from the industrial revolution of the past one hun-
dred and fifty years.

As it runs now, the industrial system centers in quan-
tity production of goods and services by use of inanimate
energies engaged in mechanical work, or engaged in chemi-
cal processes that are of a mechanical nature and effect.
Typically, the standard processes of this modern in-


The Industrial System 235


dustry engage inanimate forces and materials; or materi-
als and forces which can effectually be applied on a me-
chanical plan. In this respect the current state of the
industrial arts differs notably from its own past as well
as from the industrial systems that still prevail among
outlying and backward peoples,—backward, that is, in
respect of the mechanical technology. In the main and
typically, this state of the industrial arts is a technology
of physics and chemistry; having to do with inanimate
ways and means, and carrying on its most characteristic
work by use of inorganic processes and materials.

But all the while it remains true, of course, that this
mechanistic state of the industrial arts has come out of
a past phase in which workmanship ran on another
plan ; a past in which the industrial arts were dominated by
a different range of conceptions. Through some ninety-
nine per cent., at least, of this past period of experience
and growth the industrial arts have been, in the main and
typically, a technology of animate (human) energies,
workmanlike manipulation, and organic processes of fe-
cundity, growth and nurture; and there are many hold-
overs out of the organic technology of the past that still
make up a very substantial part of the industrial system.

Agriculture, e.g., still rests on a body of such old-
fashioned holdovers, much of it of unknown antiquity
and out of touch with the logic of the mechanical industry.
Yet in the main and as contrasted with what has gone
before, and allowing for extensive holdovers, the indus-
trial system that engages the civilised nations runs on a
technology of physics and chemistry, and its work con-
verges on quantity production of mechanically standard-
ised goods and services. Therefore manufactures are
the focus of the industrial system. It is a technology of
manufacture, of mechanical standardisation and quantity


236 Absentee Ownership


production; and the same technical principles and pro-
cedures are all the while reaching out into the outlying
fields of agriculture and back into the other extractive in-
dustries that have to do with the primary supply of power,
fuel, and raw and structural materials.

As the case now stands the manufacturing industries
are able and ready to meet all current needs of the market
by the use of the existing equipment and man-power, and
the technicians and workmen are ready at any time to ex-
tend, amplify and intensify the available equipment and
industrial processes to take care of any new growth in
the demand for goods. The manufacturing industries,
where mechanical power and quantity production rule the
case, are inordinately productive, in the sense that they
are ready at any time to cover a demand for gad greatly
in excess of their ordinary output.

It is one of the features of the current situation that
there is always an available slack which can be taken up
in case of need, a margin of unemployed equipment and
man-power ready to go to work, and a fringe of techni-
cal knowledge which has not yet been turned to account
but which is fit to speed up the quantity production of
staple goods at any point where an additional output may
be called for. In effect, the work and output of the
manufacturing industries are not now limited by the pro-
ductive capacity of their equipment, workmen, or tech-
nical processes. But they are subject to limitation on
the one side by the available supply of power and ma-
terials, and on the other side by the market for their
output; and the available supply of power and essential
materials is limited, in the main and decisively, by the
current output of the key industries which command the
country’s staple resources ; which output in turn is limited
by consideration of what the traffic will bear, at the hands


The Industrial System 237


of the absentee owners of the staple resources and their
business agents. On both sides, therefore, the output of
staple goods in the manufacturing industries is limited,
not by productive capacity or by capacity for consumption,
but by business considerations. And the business con-
siderations which chiefly decide what the volume of out-
put of manufactured goods shall be are the considerations
which govern the key industries and their output of
power, fuel, and raw and structural materials.

It follows that the manufacturing industries as a class
are dependent immediately on the key industries and on
the terms which the management of the key industries may
choose to offer them, somewhat arbitrarily. From which
it follows also that the manufacturers as a class neces-
sarily conduct their enterprise on a short-term plan;
governed by the visible supply and the orders outstand-
ing; since the management of the sovereign key indus-
tries, like other business men, keep their own counsel as
to what they will do about their own business,—when and
how and how far they may see fit to alter the terms on
which they are willing to supply the necessary materials
of industry. So the manufacturers must hold themselves
ready to slack off or to speed up, to widen or narrow the
margin of unemployment, with a vigilant eye to the main
chance and waiting watchfully for any adroit manceuvres
in the key industries.

So also it follows that the manufacturing industries as
a class are on a competitive footing; competing for the
available supply of power and primary materials, but more
particularly competitors for custom in the market. This
competition has been taking on a special character dur-
ing the past two or three decades, not contemplated in
the manuals of economic theory, and as it is in some

degree a novel development due to a complication of cir-


238 Absentee Ownership


cumstances and calling for detailed analysis, a fuller con-
sideration of it will best be deferred to a later chapter.

The place and nature of the key industries in the in-
dustrial system scarcely require elaborate discussion here.
They are such as the name, “key industries,” implies.
And they are key industries because they command the
main run of the country’s staple resources. Technologic-
ally the key industries come into the same class with manu-
factures, and some of the best work of applied chemistry
and physics is to be found here; as, e.g., in metallurgy
and the refining of petroleum. But as business concerns
the key industries stand in a special relation to the in-
dustrial system. They hold the initiative by virtue of
their hold on the staple natural resources; and by active
collusion or by routine which has been settled on lines
of collusion they have during the last few decades come
to exercise a decisive control over the industrial system
at large, so that the country’s industry will now speed up,
slack off, or shut down, very much as the massive concerns
in the background among these key industries may decide;
and their decision in these matters is, of course, guided
not by consideration of serviceability to industry at large
or to the livelihood of the underlying population but by
pursuit of the largest obtainable net gain for themselves.

Of course, there is in this respect no difference in prin-
ciple between the business management of the key indus-
tries and business-as-usual anywhere else. It is only
that the business of the key industries is in a peculiarly
fortunate position, such a position of virtual monopoly
and free initiative as all business men in all lines of enter-
prise aim to achieve if they can. It should be added that
this strangle-hold of the key industries upon the country’s
industry at large has been gaining in breadth, rigor, and


The Industrial System 239


security, and that the present outlook is for further gains
of the same nature.?

In practice there is no sharp line to be drawn between
the key industries and the common run of manufactures.
They all belong together within the lines of the machine
industry, and the business interests which control them
make no account of any technical distinction between the
two groups of industrial enterprises. In coal, oil, steel,
and transportation, e.g., the business concerns inter-
ested have been reaching out among the manufacturing
industries which draw on them for service and materials,
and have been acquiring an interest also in the business of
distribution. And many manufacturing concerns have on
occasion, for security and despatch, reached back among
the key industries and secured a hold on some needed line
of staple resources. As an illustrative instance, corporate
interests whose business centres in the extraction, refin-
ing, and transportation of petroleum and its products
have gone largely into merchandising business as distrib-
utors of their own output, wholesale and retail, and at
the same time they are also to be found intimately inter-
ested in a business way in linseed oil and the manufacture
of paints and pigments, as, e. g., white-lead, as well as in
soaps, candles, unguents, medicines, and cosmetics. So
also there are industrial business concerns that have to
do with manufacturing and that would have to be classed
as manufactures in the technological respect, at the same


2The past three or four years (1920-1923) have shown how
these matters stand. The country’s industry has hung in a state
of suspended animation while the business concerns that take
care of coal, iron and transportation have been engaged—no
doubt righteously and legally—in bringing the man-power em-
ployed in those industries to profitable terms by a campaign of
protracted unemployment and privation.


240 Absentee Ownership


time that they occupy a strategical position of much the
same character as the key industries. Such are, e.g., the
meat-packers and the flour-millers; and there are other
concerns interested in sugar, gas, electricity, telephones,
trolley lines, and the like, that fall more or less patently in
the same doubtful or ambiguous class.

Among all these, that group of business concerns of
which the packers and millers are the type-form occupies a
special position, peculiarly difficult to classify. On the
formal face of things they are manufacturers, but in ef-
fect they command those natural resources from which
their raw materials are drawn. In effect their command
of the tributary agricultural resources is so unqualified
that it will scarcely be an over-statement to say that they
hold these natural resources of the farming region in usu-
fruct, with power of use and abuse. It is also quite safe
to say that this usufruct of the farm resources has been
capitalised and included among the assets of these corpor-
ations so as to count in a substantial way in the current
market value of their outstanding corporate securities,
Of course it does not follow, nor need one entertain a sus-
picion, that the corporate interests in question have ever
abused the power which their virtual monopoly of the
country’s resources in meat and grain so vests in them.
The point of interest here is rather that the cleavage be-
tween the key industries and the common run of manu-
factures is by no means neatly observed in business prac-
tice, although the technical distinction between the two
is fairly obvious. The trail of the net gain will cross
technological frontiers as readily as national frontiers.®

8 The underlying principle of it all was formulated in another
connection by Jacob Fugger back in the 16th century: ... “er
ware kleinmutig ... wollte verdienen dieweil er konnte.”—


Quoted by Sombart, Moderne Kapitalismus, first edition, vol. I.
p. 306.


The Industrial System 241


The third of these contrasted industrial groups, or
strata, in the three-fold division spoken for above, the
farm community, is more sharply set off from the rest
of the industrial system, both technologically and in re-
spect of the business relations by which it is governed.
In both respects farming is on a footing different from
the rest ; and the reason for its different business footing is
its different technological character.

Outside of farming, the main body of the industrial
system has undergone a revolutionary experience during
the past one-hundred-fifty years. The industrial system
at large, outside of farming, has been reshaped by
the machine industry and that standardised quantity-pro-
duction which the machine industry has brought into ac-
tion. The industrial system at large is dominated by the
technology of physics and chemistry; it is essentially a
system of mechanical power, inanimate materials, and in-
organic processes. On the other hand agriculture still
rests on a body of industrial arts that are older than the
Industrial Revolution,—older even than that handicraft
system which the technology of physics and chemistry has
been displacing. In farming, these mechanical appli-
ances and applications of mechanical power are still
“labor-saving devices,” and they still come into the case
only as accessory ways and means which “facilitate and
abridge” the manual operations of the husbandman.
All these things have hitherto touched agriculture only
in a superficial way. They do not make the output;
they only help along in the manipulation and distribution
of it.

The agriculture from which the civilised peoples draw
their livelihood and on which civilised life depends is a
system of “mixed farming” which does not differ, in its
elements, from the mixed farming of neolithic Europe


242 Absentee Ownership


some ten or twelve thousand years ago. It is mixed
farming. That is to say it makes use of a certain equip-
ment of domestic animals and crop-plants; and the equip-
ment as well as the methods and purposes of it all are
still, in their elements, the same as ruled the case in the
husbandry of neolithic Europe. The industry still con-
tinues to turn out essentially the same output of grain,
milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, wool, and hides; and it
turns out these necessaries of civilised life by recourse to
the same technology of breeding and nurture, fortified by
a variety of mechanical helps.

But these mechanical helps and expedients do not make
the output and “are not of the essence of this contract.”
Farm produce is still an output of those processes of
growth and nurture that date back for their technological
character to the domestication of plants and animals in
prehistoric times. And the mixed farming of the civilised
nations still rests on the technological foundations that
were laid for it when the crop-plants and domestic ani-
mals found their way into neolithic Europe. Improve-
ments in methods and appliances have been many and
various, but those improvements and advances that have
cut at all deeply into the substance of husbandry have
been advances in breeding and tillage; that is to say,
they have continued the work of domestication which the
neolithic husbandmen already had taken in hand some ten
or twelve thousand years ago. The methods of breed-
ing and nurture as well as the equipment of livestock
and crop plants have been improved and extended, and the
farmers’ work has been “facilitated and abridged’ here
and there by the use of many mechanical contrivances, as
well as by the introduction of more productive contriv-
ances in the way of crop-plants unknown to neolithic
Europe, as, e.g., corn (maize) and potatoes and cotton;


The Industrial System 243


but all the while it remains true that those technological
improvements and advances which have counted sub-
stantially toward an enhanced output of farm produce
have continued to be something in the nature of elabora-
tion and refinement on the same old procedure of breed-
ing and nurture that supplied the necessaries of life in
neolithic times.

There is no call to undervalue the service which the
machine industry and industrial chemistry have rendered,
but when all has been said and allowed for it remains
true that these agencies of the Industrial Revolution have
not made farming over in their own image, and that hus-
bandry is after all a matter of the skilled breeding and
nurture of animals and crop-plants; and the conditioning
circumstances which govern these elemental processes of
breeding and nurture are still the ancient circumstances
of space, air, rainfall, sunshine, soil, and seasons. These
conditioning circumstances still govern the farm industry
and the life of the farm population. The American hus-
bandry, mixed farming, is necessarily spread abroad over
the face of the land. Livestock and crops live and multi-
ply only in that way, and the farm population under
whose skilled care they live and multiply will have to live
with them. That is the neolithic way.

Quantity-production and the large-scale process come
into this mixed farming mainly by way of a figure of
speech. It is true, the farm unit has been growing larger
gradually during the past half or three quarters century,
both on an average and in the typical case; and that such
has been the drift of things during this interval is due
to mechanical improvements, to the use of mechanical
power and the like applications of the technology of
physics and chemistry; but it also remains true that hus-
bandry is not built upon these inanimate factors, and that,


244 Absentee Ownership


in the large, the scale and pace of things in farming still
wait on the processes of breeding and nurture, not on the
massing of inanimate forces and the concatenation of in-
animate chemical reactions.

The farm population is still given over to a workday
surveillance of these processes of breeding and nurture.
Farm life is still a neighborhood life of homely detail and
seasonal fortuities ; and the inveterate habituation to which
the farm population is subject still makes for the good
old spirit of parochialism and personalities, of neighbor-
hood gossip and petty intrigue. The organisation of the
work necessarily runs to small-scale parcelment and isola<
tion; relatively small working units which are necessarily
masterless and self-directing in their processes of work,
however greatly they may be tied-up, hampered and re-
tarded by pecuniary obligations to absentee owners out-
side.

Because of this necessary parcelment, and because of
the intimately personal character of the farmer’s technical
knowledge and proficiency, he is still the ‘independent
farmer” in respect of the day’s work. Only in a slight,
external, and essentially inconsequential way, are the farm
population subject to that wide-sweeping, impersonal,
mechanistic discipline of standardisation and mass move-
ment that gives its character to the industrial system at
large. The abiding and pervasive factors of habituation
for the husbandman and his folks are still the homely
movements of human nature working in collusion with the
animate forces of plant and animal life, settled habits of
thought that have to do with breeding and nurture. With
the result, among other things, that the rural community is
still shot through with prehistoric animism in a degree
that passes the comprehension of any person whose habits
of thought have been shaped by the technology of physics


The Industrial System. 245


and chemistry. So it has come about that the rural com-
munity is still the repository of timeworn superstitions,
magical, religious, and political, such as would do credit
to the best credulity of neolithic man.

Technologically speaking, and seen in the light of the
latterday industrial arts, agriculture is grounded in a sys-
tem of holdovers that have come down from remote antiq-
uity and embody habits of thought that are suited to the
institutional structure of those good old days; days which
antedate not only the machine industry and Big Business,
but the era of handicraft as well. By technical necessity
the farming industry is still conducted on a plan of dis-
persion, discontinuous parcelment, and individual respon-
sibility, so far as regards the day’s work. But in point
of business relations the farmer is caught in the net of
the system at large; which is a system of absentee owner-
ship and works out in a network of credit, markets, organ-
ised salesmanship, corporate capitalisation, and Big Busi-
ness managed on the principle of what the traffic will
bear. To the farmer and his folks all these things are
external circumstances over which he has no control, but
to which he and his folks are required to conform on
pain of “getting left.” He is within the system but not
of it. He and the work of his hands are in it as a bone
of contention ; something for adroit salesmen to buy cheap
and sell dear, and something to which absentee title is to
be acquired by a tactical use of credit.


4To this pervasive animistic credulity of the rural community
the salesmanlike folks of the country town have to “play up,”
in their unremitting pursuit of profitable customers. So that
by force of salesmanlike pusillanimity the country towns are
driven to underbid the lowest survivals of neolithic animism
in a competitive endeavour to conform to all holdovers of super-
stition that may conceivably have a commercial value; as has
been explained in an earlier passage.


246 Absentee Ownership


Reluctantly but as a matter of course the farmer and
all his work and ways are involved in the all-pervading
system of credit, for more or less. It is a business sys-
tem, and business runs on credit, and the Big Business
which dominates the system begins and ends its work
within the convolutions of credit. In the rural commu-
nity, on the other hand, the rule still runs that indebtedness
is an “incumbrance” to be got away from as fast and far
as may be. That is to say, the farmer is a victim of the
credit system, not a manipulator of it. His property is
not assets to be employed as collateral by use of which to
swell his capitalisation, but “production goods,” visible
means of support to be jealously kept clear of the money-
lender, if such a thing were possible.®

The farmer and his folks and work are bound by the
run of the market, but he does not create or control the
run of the market by any exercise of deliberation or dis-
cretion on his part. It is not his market, except in the
sense that he is dependent on it. Perhaps he “ought” to
control his market, and make the terms on which he will
buy and sell; but in practical fact his choice in the matter
goes no farther than to take or leave the terms that are
offered him. The run of the market is made for him and
he can take it or leave it, but mostly take it lest a worse
thing befall him. The run of the market is made up on
the principle of what the traffic will bear for Big Business,


5 Right lately, the farmers and their delegates among the na-
tion’s official personnel have been much occupied with contriv-
ances for facilitating and amplifying “farm credits,” designed
to bring agriculture and the farm population within the pale of the
credit-system and enable them to turn their assets to account as
collateral on which to expand their effective capitalisation. Of
course, as seen from another angle, the whole project may. also’
look like a contrivance to induce the farm population to increase
their liabilities and overhead charges beyond what their earn-
ing-capacity will bear.


The Industrial System 247


by those massive business interests that move obscurely
in the background,—railway interests, ware-house inter-
ests, jobbing interests, packing interests, milling interests,
farm-implement interests, coal interests, oil interests, steel
interests, cordage interests, and the like.

And every once in a while the farmers make a broad
gesture of collusive strategy and concerted action. Every
once in a while there springs up a hope, born of despera-
tion, that the massive interests which move in the back-
ground of the market are to be set at naught by the
farmers’ taking thought together in a business way; or
they are to be confounded by some intelligent alignment
of rural political forces. And always this collusive
strategy of the rural communities disintegrates into a par-
celment of self-seeking detail and mutual sharp practice,
and always the political mass-action of the independent
farmers runs out in a dust-heap of parochial chicanery.
And the rural community remains an inalienable domain
of that business enterprise that buys cheap and sells dear.


In respect of industrial articulation, as regards technical
interdependence and mutual support among the members
or strata of the existing system, the case stands somewhat
as follows. The industrial arts, the employment of this
technology of physics and chemistry, come to a head in
the manufacturing industries, dominated by standard
mechanical processes and quantity production. This in-
dustrial system owes its unexampled productivity to the
mechanistic technology of the manufacturing industries,
and the apex of technological growth is in that field.
These industries draw on farming and the key industries
for mechanical power, man-power and materials, at the
same time that they supply ways and means that are indis-
pensable to the work in farming and the key industries.


248 Absentee Ownership


The whole constitutes a balanced system of work, a mov-
ing equilibrium of interlocking processes, in which the
efficiency of any given part is conditioned on the due
working of all the rest. No part of the system can do
its share of the work in isolation or in severalty, and
any degree of failure or curtailment at any point, in rate,
volume or quality of output, entails a degree cf curtail-
ment and inefficiency throughout the system. The dom-
inant factor in this moving equilibrium of work, techno-
logically speaking, is the manufacturing industry, and it is
on the output of this industry that the efficiency of the
industrial system converges.

Such is the technical character of the system as an
industrial organisation, and such would be its working
balance and articulation in the absence of other incentives
and considerations than the production of useful goods.
But under the existing system of ownership that consider-
ation is not decisive. The incentive of business is not
to produce goods but to make money, and business con-
siderations are decisive in the control and management
of the industrial system. And the articulation and
balance of the industrial system as it is organised for
business purposes is accordingly a different one. Tech-
nologically the apex of the system is the manufacturing
industry, but in the business organisation of it the key
industries are at the apex; and they hold this dominant
position by owning the right to retard or curtail the sup-
ply of necessary power and materials that goes to the
manufacturing industries. Industrially the country’s
farming is the primary source of its livelihood, and there-
fore of its available man-power, but in the business organ-
isation the farm community serves as ways and means of
that commercial enterprise that handles the country’s
manufactured products, which in turn is subject to such


The Industrial System 249


businesslike curtailment and retardation as the pursuit of
profits in the key industries may entail.


What has just been said about the industrial system
describes the situation in America. And what is true of
America will hold true with an inconsequential change of
words for the industrial system more at large, to include
the civilised nations, in about the same measure in which
they are civilised; or a more guarded statement would be,
in the same measure in which they are included in the
framework of the modern European civilisation. In many
of the characteristic features of the case America may be
taken as an exemplar of the civilised world, particularly
as regards the civilised world’s present status in industry
and business.

The civilised nations, in the degree in which they are
civilised, are all unavoidably bound together in a single
working system of industry, and they are now similarly
bound up in a comprehensive system of business enter-
prise; although the articulations of business run on lines
somewhat different from those technological lines of spe-
cialisation and mutual support that bind the civilised peo-
ples in an inclusive organisation of industry. In the in-
dustrial respect, as determined by the state of the indus-
trial arts, the civilised peoples are held in a net-work of
interlocking processes of work, so close-knit and so far-
reaching as to make them a single going concern working
together toward a maximum quantity production of staple
goods by use of the world’s known resources of mechanical
power, raw materials and man-power. All this is quite ob~
vious, and it is coming to be quite familiar, at large and
in detail, to the technical men within whose horizon these
matters lie.

But in respect of their business interests, or rather in


250 Absentee Ownership


respect of the strategy of their business men, the civilised
nations are not similarly bound together in a cooperative
commonwealth. Business enterprise, being competitive,
runs at cross purposes. And it is these cross purposes of
business enterprise that chiefly obstruct the due articula-
tion of industr#al undertakings and so act to derange and
eurtail the work in hand, both in the industrial system
at large and in the detail conduct, of industrial undertak-
ings within any given national frontiers. As the matter
stands now the division between nations is a division of
business interests, and national policies are chiefly occu-
pied with the competitive cross purposes of vested inter-
ests which do business under one flag and another. This,
too, is quite obvious, and it is a familiar matter of course,
at large and in detail, to the absentee owners and states-
amen who have to take care of these matters.


CHAPTER X


THE TECHNOLOGY OF PHysIcs AND CHEMISTRY


As is well known and has often been described, the
machine industry of recent times took its rise by a grad-
ual emergence out of handicraft in England in the
eighteenth century. Since then the same industrial arts
have progressively been getting the upper hand in all the
civilised nations, in much the same degree in which these:
nations have come to be counted as civilised. There has,
been a progressive mechanisation of the ways and means:
of living as well as of the ways and means of productive
industry, and this mechanisation has in recent times been
going forward at a constantly accelerated rate, and it is
still in progress, with no present promise of abatement
or conclusion.

Not until the middle of the nineteenth century can it be
said that this mechanical industry, and the consequent
mechanical organisation of work and life, had got the
upper hand in any country outside of Great Britain;
although the machine and its procedure had begun to make
serious inroads in all those countries that came within the
sweep of European commerce. Since then, by progressive
diffusion of the machine industry and progressive advance
in technology, the state of the industrial arts at large has
so far been remodeled that this mechanical industry now
stands dominant at the apex of a complex and comprehen-
sive industrial system which includes the civilised world

251


252 Absentee Ownership


in a net-work of ways and means drawn on a mechanical
plan.t


1 The limits and ramifications of this industrial system run in
a peculiar fashion, on peculiar lines of coincidence. Loosely
and for the time being, but with such a degree of consistency as
to make it worth noting, this state of industry has made itself
at home only among those peoples that get their livelihood from
the mixed farming of the temperate latitudes,—from that man-
ner of husbandry which traces back to neolithic Europe and
which still makes use of substantially the same equipment of
crop-plants and domestic animals that came into use at that
time. It may all be a matter of fortuitous coincidence. It is
not easy to find an organic connection or correlation between
the mechanical technology and this special type of mixed farm-
ing; and yet it is also not easy to avoid the tacit assumption
that the two are in some way intimately bound up together; and
certain opaque facts of recent experience argue that way.

E. g., the Great War was carried on as a contest of mechani-
cal appliances, a competitive enterprise in the technology of
mechanics and chemistry, backed by man-power whose livelihood
was drawn from this type of mixed farming. This great ad-
venture involved and made use of substantially all those peoples
whose industry is regulated by the mechanical technology and
whose subsistence is drawn from this type of husbandry, and
virtually no others; and in the end the decision was reached on
these two counts; technological mastery, and the food-supply of
the temperate latitudes. Throughout the conflict, underlying
all the pursuit of funds and munitions and conditioning it, ran
the desperate need of a standard subsistence—grain, meat, milk,
animal fats, wool, leather—all standardised on the basis of that
mixed farming that has come down from neolithic times. And
as if to complete the experiment and bring the relative value of
these two factors in the fight to a conclusive test, there has been
the continued run of hostilities that have engaged European (and
American) statecraft since the return of peace.

The most notable of these is the case of Russia. The obstinate
and hitherto inconclusive endeavour of the Associated Powers to
break Soviet Russia has been, in the main, a contest between
finance, commerce and mechanical industry on the one side and
mixed farming on the other side. It has been a conflict of des-
peration between the most advanced among the industrial and
commercial nations on the one side and the most nearly neolithic
population of peasant farmers on the other, in which the Allied
and Associated Powers have endeavored to bring the peasant


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 253


The mechanical industry, with its technology of physics
and chemistry, stands dominant at the apex of the indus-
trial system. So far as the technology of physics and
chemistry has taken effect, the industrial system at large
has fallen into line as an orderly ramification of productive
processes that work together as a rounded and balanced
whole, an industrial going concern, a composite of inter-
locking ways and means organised on an impersonal plan
of give and take. It centers about the use of mechanical
power and inanimate materials, to be turned to productive
account by use of specialised and standardised processes
of mechanics and chemistry in charge of technicians and
technically skilled workmen. The standardised processes
of production according to this mechanistic plan interlock
in a moving equilibrium of work, in a sensitively balanced
interdependence of supply and output. From which it
results that any curtailment, disproportion, or retardation
at any point will entail retardation and derangement of
the work throughout the system; and a degree of failure
at any point will entail a more than proportionate degree
of derangement through all the ramifications of work
that are touched by this give and take. Any degree of
obstruction or shortage at any critical point will set up a
more than proportionate volume of retardation and de-


farmers to terms by shutting them off from the use of the in-
dustrial and commercial system of Christendom and turning the
resources of that system against them. Hitherto the peasant
farmers have, on the whole, held their ground against the forces
brought to bear by the financiers and the captains of industry,
and the likelihood of their being brought to reason seems, on
the whole, increasingly remote. At the same time the peasant
farmers of Russia appear all the while to be shaping the course
of things more and more to their own notion at home. European
civilisation appears not yet to have passed the stage at which
mixed farming is the prime conditioning factor in its material


fortunes.


254 Absentee Ownership


rangement in the rest of the working mechanism. The
due working of the whole or of any part is accordingly
conditioned on the due allocation of power-resources and
materials, as well as on the unhampered employment of
all the available technical insight and man-power. A
withdrawal of efficiency at any critical point, in respect of
power, materials, man-power, or technical guidance, en-
tails derangement and lowered efficiency of the working
whole. Of capital importance amcng these critical points
in the industrial system are the “key industries,” so called
because they stand in this critical and commanding rela-
tion to the whole.

The later advances in the industrial arts have taken
such a turn as to throw the technicians more and more into
a position of immediate and unremitting responsibility,
in all this mechanical organisation of work. So that the
industrial system, drawn on this mechanical plan, will
do its work in a competent fashion only on condition that
competent technical men are placed in charge of it, at large
and in detail, unhampered by other than technical con-
siderations. The industrial system has progressively been
taking on this character of mechanical articulation and
mechanical intolerance. At the same time, and indeed by
the same move, the technicians, in whose habits of thought
this state of the industrial arts lives and has its being,
have become more and more broadly addicted to the
mechanistic logic of the inorganic sciences and more in-
tolerant of all those conventional truths and amenities that
lie beyond the borders of tangible fact. Workday pre-
occupation with these exacting and nicely balanced matters
of fact gives them a character of intolerantly impersonal
skepticism touching all things that are of the nature of
imponderables. It is a constructive skepticism, since the
engineer’s work is constructive work, but it is skepticism


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 255


none the less. They are engaged on contriving and
directing ways and means of doing things, but it is ways
and means of doing things in space of three dimensions,
and the technician’s preoccupations do not lap over into
the realm of the imponderables.?

Neither the industrial system nor the brotherhood of
technicians, in whose habits of thought this industrial
system is contained, have yet reached that unmitigated
state of mechanisation and brute logic which this de-
scription of it would imply. But it is headed that way
and is moving at a constantly accelerated rate. There
still are large remnants of old-fashioned human nature in
the make-up of the twentieth-century engineer, such as
once grew and flourished in the mellower days of handi-~
craft and illiteracy. But then, the engineer is something
new under the sun, and that impersonal outlook om
things, which his training is likely to entail has not yet
had time to be conventionalised into a settled matter of
common sense; just as those material sciences of physics
and chemistry on which he feeds are also something new,
in some degree still alien to the common-sense scheme
of things.

In effect, the technician has come up and grown great
as a factor in productive industry, has grown to be one
of the major institutions in modern life, in very much


2“To these from birth is belief forbidden; from these till death


is relief afar,
They are concerned with matters hidden; under the earth-line


their altars are.


They do not teach that their God will rouse them a little before


the nuts work loose; .
They do not preach that His Pity allows them to leave their


work whenever they choose.”
Rupyarp Kipiine, “The Sons of Martha.”


256 Absentee Ownership


the same degree and in the same time as the financier,
the captain of solvency, has displaced the captain of indus-
try and become the paramount factor in business. So
that while the technician is now, and increasingly, the
paramount factor in technology, he is by no means master
of the industrial system or of the economic situation ; inas-
much as the economic situation is a composite of indus-
try and business, and the conduct of business is not
entrusted to the technicians. The technicians and the
business men are the outstanding factors in the case, the
conjugate foci of the economic system; and the orbit of
the economic world now swings about these two foci,
which are beginning to draw apart.


An earlier chapter has endeavored to describe the rise,
dominance, and eventual decline or disintegration of the
Captain of Industry, considered as one of the major insti-
tutions of civilised life. As the name implies, he set out
with being a pioneer in industrial enterprise, a designer,
builder and manager of industrial equipment and a fore-
man of the work in hand. At the same time he was a
business man and took care of the financial end of the
enterprise, buying and selling, “hiring and firing,” invest-
ment and promotion. Presently, as the mechanical indus-
tries of which he was a captain grew greater and advanced
to a larger scale, with an increasingly detailed and exact-
ing specialisation and standardisation of processes and
products, and with an increasing resort to credit, the Cap-
tain of Industry under the pressure of circumstances
gradually divested himself of his technical or industrial
functions and tapered off into a business man of the
commercial type. His attention and energies were taken


8 Cf. J. W. Roe, English and American Tool Builders, (Yale
University Press, 1916.)


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 287


up more and more exclusively with the run of the mar-
ket, with margins of cost and profit, and especially with
the ever increased exactions and opportunities of credit
and investment. By the middle of the nineteenth century
the captain of industry, considered as a staple article of
institutional furniture, had in effect run out or gone in the
discard in the British industrial community; and by the
same date he had risen into dominance and was beginning
to disintegrate in the American world of affairs. As a
“business proposition,” that is to say as a staple requisite
among the ways and means of profitable business, the
captain of industry was already beginning to shift over
into, or to be displaced by, the company promoter, the
financial magnate, and the corporation financier. It
should scarcely be necessary to trace the course of his
disguises and mutations from that point on, through the
succeeding half-century of projects, promotions, and cor-
poration finance that has eventually given rise to the cap-
tain of solvency, investment-banker, and corporation
excutive of the twentieth century.

The discontinuance and disintegration of the captain of
industry was due to the continued advance of the indus-
trial arts. This advance took such a turn, in the way
of specialisation and complexity, that no industrial enter-
prise of standard size and grade could continue to be
competently managed under the divided attention of any
one man; divided between the mechanical requirements
of the industry and the financial requirements of the busi-


4 Beginning with the civil-war period the center of the Ameri-
can stage is occupied by a swiftly increasing company of financial
magnates and manipulators, e.g., “Commodore” Vanderbilt, Jay
Cooke, “Jim” Fiske, Oakes Ames, Jay Gould, and presently John
D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, J. J. Hill—Cf. Burton J.
Hendrick, The Age of Big Business; Isaac Lippincott, Economic
Development of the United States.


258 Absentee Ownership


ness. It was an advance in the scale and complication of
equipment and work, in specialisation and standardisation,
in applied mechanics and chemistry, which entailed the
substitution of technical precision in the place of rule-of-
thumb; and along with this progressive change in the
technical complexion of the case there was a similarly
exacting growth in the business to be done, an increasing
volume and an increasing nicety and multiplicity of details.
Out of this increasing recourse to detailed, exact, objective
knowledge there arose the industrial experts, engineers,
technicians, who progressively took over the industrial
functions of the captain of industry and left him free to
devote his attention to business alone.

In the third quarter of the century chemical science
also began to take effect as a material factor in tech-
nology, and about the same time electrical science rose
into consequence as an industrial force. Chemical proc-
esses had of course had their part in the industrial arts
before that date, but it had on the whole been a matter
of chemical rule-of-thumb rather than of chemical science,
of general information and common notoriety rather than
exact and calculable processes worked out by detailed
experiment and computation in the chemical laboratories.
Neither the industrial chemist nor the industrial laboratory
had been counted in among the ways and means of pro-
duction.

Metallurgy, e. g., as well as much of the work in dyeing,
tanning, baking, brewing, and the like, have always been
of the nature of chemical industry; but it was not until
the middle of the nineteenth century and after that these
things began to bulk large in the industrial arts and then
fell into the hands of the chemical technicians and took
their place in the technological scheme as recondite mat-
ters of applied science. All these things had been matters


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 259


of accumulated experience and had held their place in the
common sense of the day’s work, along with the familiar
use of the mechanical principles and appliances,—familiar
in their elements to all men by common notoriety. They
were matters which any intelligent layman could under-
stand and turn to account on a footing of workday in-
formation helped out by some slight touch of special
experience, of the nature of an informal apprenticeship.
But by insensible process of growth all these matters of
technological use and wont took on a more exacting char-
acter, such as gradually to take them out of the untrained
reach of businesslike laymen, however ingenious and in-
telligent, and thereby gave rise to a new factor of pro-
duction, the technicians, engineers, experts, men grounded
in the material sciences and instructed in the specialised
application of them.

So the interval since the middle of the nineteenth
century stands in contrast to what went before, as a more
or less sharply defined period of special growth in the
industrial arts, during which the mechanical industry has
progressively shifted to a footing of applied science, and
during which also the immediate designing and conduct
of the work has progressively been taken over by the
technicians. At the same time and by force of the same
drift of circumstance the captain of industry, the owner-
employer, business manager, has progressively been shifted
to one side,—to the business side, the “financial end.”
Being a layman in matters of industry—that is to say in
matters of technically applied science—the business man
has perforce become an absentee, an outsider so far as
concerns any creative work. Though he is an outsider
with a deciding vote on what goes on inside. The “divi-
sion of labor” has taken this turn. It has progressively
eliminated and removed the businesslike layman from


260 Absentee Ownership


the effectual personnel of industry and has progressively
vested the effectual management of production in these
technical men.

Not that this progressive elimination of the laymen has
yet been completed, even as regards responsible work of
a technical nature. Indeed, it is still an article of popular
belief, grounded in traditional common sense, that the
control of productive industry must in the nature of
things be entrusted to absentee laymen, even in those lines
of production where the work can not effectually be car-
ried on without the constant attention of technically
trained men. Even within the mechanical industries the
displacement of businesslike laymen by competent tech-
nicians has not yet gone so far as to vest full discretion
in the technical experts, even in the conduct of mechanical
details. At the best or farthest it can be said that the
technicians decide in detail what is to be done, if anything,
and how it is to be done; while the absentee laymen
decide summarily what and how much is not to be done.
Such is the state of the case in detail in those lines of
production where the mechanical industry has already
taken effect in a passably complete degree. But in the
large, in what may be called industrial affairs, in the
planning and execution of projects that call for a com-
prehensive technical balancing and articulation of large
industrial processes,—in these larger conjunctures, where
any lack of technical insight and sobriety will have par-
ticularly grave and far-reaching consequences,—there the
discretion and control continues to be exercised by absen-
tee laymen who take measures on other than technical
grounds.

It will be seen that neither the induction of technicians
into the responsible conduct of industry nor the elimina-
tion of laymen from work that is of a technical nature is


-


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 261


yet nearly complete. Nor, it should be added, is such
an outcome desired. It is contrary to common sense and
would not be allowed by law and custom. Indeed, it is
a sate presumption that any outspoken proposal or proj-
ect to hasten or precipitate this progressive retirement
of businesslike laymen from the superior management of
these technical affairs would turn out to be seditious,
so soon as the jurisdiction of the courts could be brought
to bear on the question. It would involve the abrogation
or disallowance, in whole or in part, of the rights of
absentee ownership; and absentee ownership is safe-
guarded by a special clause of the American constitution.
There need be no apprehension that the present unreserved
control of the industrial arts by businesslike laymen will
be discontinued, just yet. While it is quite evident that the
conduct of productive industry, especially in its larger and
more difficult undertakings, calls progressively for a more
profound and wider technical insight and a more single-
minded technical discretion and control, yet the general
staff of the industrial system continues to be made up of
businesslike laymen.


The state of the industrial arts, as it runs on the lines
of the mechanical industry, is a technology of physics and
chemistry. That is to say, it is governed by the same
logic as the scientific laboratories. The procedure, the
principles, habits of thought, preconceptions, units of
measurement and of valuation, are the same in both cases,
so far as regards any furtherance of the work in hand.
Other considerations may come into the case, other pre-
conceptions, principles, units of valuation; but these others
can come into bearing only as factors of disturbance from
outside the orderly procedure of the work in hand, and
can only deflect, retard, and curtail the work in hand.


262 Absentee Ownership


The mechanistic technology makes use of the same
range of facts as the laboratories, handled in the same im-
personal way and directed to the same manner of objec-
tive results. In both cases alike it is of the first impor-
tance to eliminate the “personal equation,” to let the work
go forward and let the forces at work take effect quite ob-
jectively, without hindrance or deflection for any personal
end, interest, or gain. It is the technician’s place in indus-
try, as it is the scientist’s place in the laboratory, to serve
as an intellectual embodiment of the forces at work, isolate
the forces engaged from all extraneous disturbances, and
let them take full effect along the lines of designed work.
The technician is an active or creative factor in the case
only in the sense that he is the keeper of the logic which
governs the forces at work. And he can be said to make
these forces work and to have created the results that
emerge under his hands, only in the sense that he has taken
due care to see that these impersonal forces work out ac-
cording to the logic which his experiments and calculations
have formulated out of the ascertained behavior of the
brute facts.

These brute forces that so are brought to bear in crea-
tive industry are of an objective, impersonal, unconven-
tional nature, of course. They are of the nature of
opaque fact. Pecuniary gain is not one of these imper-
sonal facts. Any consideration of pecuniary gain that
may be injected into the technician’s working plans will
come into the case as an intrusive and alien factor, whose
sole effect is to deflect, retard, derange and curtail the work
in hand. At the same time considerations of pecuniary
gain are the only agency brought into the case by the
business men, and the only ground on which they exercise
a control of production. Their office is to take care of
the pecuniary interests of the absentee owners. In the


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 263


nature of things, by force of the rights of ownership, they
can, at will, selectively obstruct, forbid, curtail, deflect,
derange, retard; but they can not bear a creative hand
in what is going forward, inasmuch as their knowledge,
interest, insight, and reasoning concerning the work that
is going forward are not drawn in terms of the forces
which enter creatively into the case. Yet, for good and
conclusive reasons the final control of all these matters
vests in the businesslike laymen. They are reasons of
absentee ownership, and they are good and conclusive
because they are a matter of settled habit. The claims of
absentee ownership are as irrelevant to the conduct of
industry as a fourth dimension of space is to the calcula-
tions of the mechanical engineers ; but the claims of absen-
tee ownership after all are paramount, and they are sound
and conclusive according to established law and custom.

The technology of physics and chemistry is not derived
from established law and custom, and it goes on its way
with as nearly complete a disregard of the spiritual truths
of law and custom as the circumstances will permit.
The realities with which the technicians are occupied are
of another order of actuality, lying altogether within the
three dimensions that contain the material universe, and
running altogether on the logic of material fact. In effect
it is the logic of inanimate facts. The realities of tech-
nology are such things as wind and weather, topography
and water courses, soil, climatic regions, coastlines and
harbors, contour lines and geological formations, fuel, ores
and fluxes, temperatures and chemical values, energy,
mass, tensile strength, velocities, inertia and impact.


Progressively imbued with these habits of thought and
driven by these preconceptions, the technicians had from
the outset been working along these lines of tangible, im-


264 Absentee Ownership


personal reality; and by the middle, or the third quarter,
of the nineteenth century they were coming within sight
of their technological frontiers as drawn by the available
knowledge of useful things in that time. Their achieve-
ment up to that time was in substance a technology of
mechanics, fairly well rounded out. Not that the re-
sources of mechanics had been worked out, nor even that
the domain of mechanical power and mechanical appli-
ances had been fully explored. The technological poten-
tialities of mechanics were not nearing exhaustion, but the
technicians of that time—inventors, designers, engineers—
were after all in a position to say that, in the large and
in its elements, they knew then what manner of things
they had to do with and what manner of things they
could reasonably promise to do with them. They had at
their command those elements of mechanical power,
mechanical contrivance, and structural material that would
work out in a rounded system of mechanical operations,
complete in itself, a balanced and self-contained going con-
cern of productive industry. The further work in sight,
within the frontiers of their technological province, was a
work of further extension, articulation, and perfection of
mechanical contrivances and processes; substantially a
work of continuation and elaboration.

Seen in the perspective of a later time this technological
situation of the middle nineteenth century is notable for
what it got along without. It has a provincial air. But
seen in the light of its own time it was passably com-
plete, except for further practicable extensions and re-
finements of mechanical detail. There had been worked
out a practicable and effectually inclusive system of
transportation by land and water, by use of mechanical
structures and mechanical power, competent and capable
of extension and enlarged capacity at will. So there was


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 265


also a competent mechanical system of lighting, capable
of further elaboration but complete in its elements, even
to the nineteenth-century inventions of the friction match
and the lamp-chimney,—so far complete, in effect, that
the next move in that connection has been in the nature
of “obsolescence by supersession.” The tool-builders of
the early nineteenth century had pushed their work
through to the construction of a finished series of machine-
tools which still continue, with improvements and exten-
sions in detail, to meet the needs of the mills and machin-
ists. And, in great part as an effect of these machine-
tools, standardisation of mechanical units, units of gauge,
work, and materials, was beginning to dominate the life
of industry and was giving rise to those principles of
interchangeable parts and automatic process that lie at the
root of quantity production. The industrial system as a
working whole was falling into shape as a mechanical
articulation of standard processes.

But taken as a whole and seen in the perspective of the
twentieth century the mechanical industry of that time
looks like a technological province. Industrial electricity
and industrial chemistry had virtually no place in that
scheme of things. There was no petroleum, virtually no
industrial use of rubber, and virtually no use of cement.
These things were not precisely unknown, but they were
things which it was not then quite necessary to know
anything about. The working scheme of things got along
well enough without them. Refrigeration was still un-
known, industrially; the hermetically sealed tin had not
become a part of daily life; and the internal-combustion
engine had not been invented, not even the rudimentary
Otto gas-engine. As an after-effect of Faraday’s experi-
ments and speculations on “The viscosity of the mag-
netic field” in the second quarter of the century, the


266 Absentee Ownership


dynamo and the electrical industry came into the tech-
nologist’s world in the course of the latter half of the
nineteenth century. Over the same interval of time, tak-
ing its departure from the experiments and speculations of
Berthelot on the synthesis of organic compounds in the
third quarter of the century, industrial chemistry has arisen
and by insensible degrees has run its creative tentacles
through the technological system from the ground up.#

It is true, chemical processes had been in daily use from
the earliest times, in metallurgy, tanning, fermentation, and
the like; but it is a significant fact that the phrase, “indus-
trial chemistry,” was not known and not needed until the
other day. So also electricity was not unknown, and
there is no call to overlook or minimise the industrial use
of such appliances as the Morse telegraph; but a “live
wire” is a conception that arose in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century, and “volts,” “amperes,” and “kilo-
watts” are units of measurement that were not needed
until the other day. In the third quarter of the century
the technical vocabulary was still complete without these
neologisms, and the logic of industrial procedure was
complete without the conceptions for which they speak.
Since that time chemical and electrical engineers and appli-
ances have been multiplying on the face of the land like
the frogs of Exodus, until the only remaining certainty
is that if there is any root or branch of industry that is
free from them today they will invade it tomorrow.

It is of the essence of this mechanical plan of industry
that the work to be done is done on a mechanical plan.
The logic of it is the logic of inanimate forces and
masses deliberately liberated according to design. Where-
ever chemical and electrical science come into the scheme
of work they fall into line as ways and means in the carry-


42. Cfi., e.g., Slosson, Creative Chemistry.


By


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 267


ing out of a complex mechanical process. The activities
and materials which the mechanical industry makes use of
and the ways and means by which it makes use of them
are of a brute nature, mechanical, inanimate, such that the
time, place, rate and volume of their operation can be
arranged at will.

Even where animate factors are employed, as they are
increasingly employed in the processes of fermentation
and the like, these animate materials, too, are handled on
a mechanical plan. They are liberated and controlled in
the mass, impersonally, according to calculated design, in
terms of volume, “cultures,” media, concentrations, tem-
peratures, time allowance, with the same freedom and the
same nicety of computed effect as the reagents of inor-
ganic chemistry. The whole callous procedure belongs to
the mechanical order of things. It has none of the solici-
tous personal concern that goes, e. g., to make up the
day’s work of a shepherd. The seasonal work of hus-
bandry and the farmer’s dealings with his crops and live-
stock continues to have a quality of personality—the
farmer lives with these things, even where mechanical
appliances and standardised feeding, fertilisers and irriga-
tion, have gone farthest in the way of bringing mixed
farming into line with the impersonal drive of the machine
process.

This mechanical system of work has the peculiar quality
that it can be managed at will, that it is not subject to
seasonal and fortuitous circumstances over which men
have no control; “acts of God’ do not intervene except
by human neglect or ignorance. The system is com-
plex, intricate and extensive ; daily growing more complex,
intricate and extensive; but it is a creature of human
information and initiative, and all its complex and inter-
woven motions have been formulated out of experience


268 Absentee Ownership


and run wholly within the lines of known objective fact.
It is a creation out of known mechanical fact and the
knowledge that has gone to its making and that continues
to go to its maintenance and working is of the nature of
data. There are no mysteries in the mechanical technique
and no occult or magical agencies in the way of a trend,
bent, reservation, or inscrutable eventuality. Such ob-
scure factors as may come into the case are taken over
and allowed for as known variables of hitherto unascer-
tained magnitude; and the system moves on in terms of
the calculated brute factors, the data, with such margin
of allowance for error as experience has shown to be
called for; for in this technology even the margin of
ignorance that has to be allowed for and circumvented is
carried as a datum to which a working value is assigned
on grounds of expert approximation. The technology of
physics and chemistry is altogether matter-of-fact, and
its facts are of the nature of data, brute, refractory,
impersonal and irresponsible. It is open and aboveboard,
but it is also exacting and implacable.

The mechanical system of industry is manageable at
will, in detail and at large, but only on the proviso (a)
that all technical knowledge that is in use must be acces-
sible, without restraint or reservation, to all the techni-
clans concerned, and (b) that there must be no inter-
ference on other than technical grounds. Restraint or
reservation, holding out information in the way of trade
secrets, injects an incalculable element of error into all
related lines of work. The industrial system is an edi-
fice of interlocking processes of work, each of which is a
reasoned method of procedure, and the reasoning on which
each proceeds is based on the information available as
to what is going on and what is intended in all the rest;
information as to the methods of work, current and pro-


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 269


spective, and the nature, rate and volume of output as well
as the kind, quality and quantity of materials employed.
For none of these interlocking processes of work is
carried on, or can be carried on, independently of the
rest. Any degree of isolation involves a degree of
error in the specifications of the work, and any withhold-
ing of information consequently brings perplexity and
derangement to all the rest.

This will hold true in a special degree for the great
staple industries, but it is true also in a degree for all
subsidiary lines of production. They are bound in a
network of give and take of such a nature that the lines
of interdependence are endless. The correlation and run-
ning adjustment in the work to be done is taken care of by
calculation based on the available data as to what is be-
ing done in one line and another and what is in prospect,
on information or inference as to the kind and quantity
of what each and several of these lines of production
are ready to give and what and how much they will take.
In so far as these calculations governing the kind, rate
and volume of work to be done are based on guess-work
they are bound to run over or under the true figures and
so to result in waste and scarcity and therefore in a more
or less pronounced derangement all down the line.

Secrecy and mystification may be “good for trade,” but
they are altogether bad for industry ; sabotage may be in-
dispensable in business although it is invariably disastrous
to production. A trade secret is a “business proposition”
and may be profitable to its keeper, and the like is true
for all secrecy of accounts; at least such is believed to be
the case. Unemployment of materials, equipment, and
man-power, curtailment of output, may be a sound busi-
ness proposition and may bring gain to the business; at
least the belief is commonly acted on. But all these


270 Absentee Ownership


things are invariably wasteful in their industrial bearing,
and invariably bring derangement and retardation in the
related lines of industry, which will on occasion amount
to disaster ; and the net loss to industry always exceeds the
net gain to the business.


The mechanical industry in that simpler form in which
it stood before the coming of industrial chemistry and
electricity, was, even then, taking on this character of
articulation and interplay of productive processes, so
that even at that date the industrial system made up a
loosely balanced going concern of production. And as
fast and far as the mechanisation of industry gained, in
scope, range, volume and territorial extension, the articu-
lation of working processes grew continually closer and
the balance of give and take within the system grew more
exacting and more critical. Yet these matters had not
then gone so far as to bring home to the thoughtful men
of that time the critical importance of a due balance, pro-
portion, and articulation among the interlocking processes
of the industrial system.°


5JIn 1832 Charles Babbage spoke as of a matter of course in
restating Adam Smith’s observation, that “Perhaps the most im-
portant principle on which the economy of a manufacture de-
pends, is the division of labor amongst the persons who per-
form the work.” (On the Economy of Machinery and Manu-
factures, chapter xviii. “On the Division of Labor.) Bab-
bage’s observations on the British industrial system were made
at a time when British manufactures were still managed, in the
main, by captains of industry of the traditional type, on a plan
of unguarded competitive production for an open market; the
scale of work and equipment was still relatively slight, and
specialisation had not gone far; standardisation of processes; ap-
pliances, and output was still in its beginnings. (See Babbage,
ch. x, “Of the Identity of Work when it is of the Same Kind,”
etc.) The machine process and quantity production had not
at that time taken effect as pace-maker and prime mover in in-


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 271


When the growth of industrial chemistry and electric-
ity set in there also set in, by insensible degrees, a new
era in the articulation of industrial processes. The con-
trast between what went before and what followed after
is by no means sharp, but it is fairly wide; more par-
ticularly, it has grown wide as time has gone by. The
difference between before and after is due in part to the
continued growth of those technological factors that had
made the situation of the earlier time, in part to the in-
trusion of new agencies which made for increased com-
plexity of operations and a larger scale. It would
scarcely be an overbold figure of speech to say that un-
der the old dispensation of the middle nineteenth century
the technological plan of things was drawn in two di-
mensions, whereas under the new technological dispen-
sation, so far as chemical and electrical science have taken
effect, the industrial system and its growth may be said to
move in space of three dimensions.

The number and interplay of technological factors en-
gaged in any major operation in industry today are re-
lated to the corresponding facts of the middle nineteenth
century somewhat as the mathematical cube is related to
the square; and the increase and multiplication of these
technological factors is going forward incontinently, at
a constantly accelerated rate.


dustry in so obvious a fashion as to force this new state of things


on his attention.

It is even more significant that at a still later date, in the fifties
and sixties, from observation of the same industrial system, Karl
Marx set up a doctrine which makes “Labor Power” the sole
creative factor as well as the common measure in all productive
work. Neither of these men is unduly bound by the traditions
of economic science, and yet neither one of them was provoked
by the run of the facts as he saw them to conceive the in-
dustrial system at large as a going concern. They were still
content to speak of industry as an affair of detachable factors
and independent segments of work going on in severalty.


272 Absentee Ownership


By the middle of the century the work of designing
and supervising the processes of production was already
beginning to pass into the hands of specially trained ex-
perts, engineers, technicians. It was beginning to ex-
ceed the best powers of intelligent laymen working on a
footing of general information. The course of things
since then, and the rate and scope of the change that has
been going forward, is shown by the exuberant growth of
the engineering professions, in numbers, competency, and
diversity, as well as by their ubiquitous place in the work-
day conduct of industrial undertakings. In the twentieth
century the technicians have become one of the standard
factors in production; as much so as the country’s nat-
ural resources of timber, coal, oil, and ores. Indeed,
these things are natural resources, instead of being feat-
ures of the landscape, because the technicians know how
to turn them to account. And the extent and variety
of the country’s natural resources are constantly in-
creasing, because and by so much as the technicians are
continually learning to make use of a larger number and
variety of these things. The question of natural re-
sources is, after all, a question of technical insight.

In the beginning the technicians came into the case by
progressive infiltration, as designers, consultants, over-
seers of special details that were too recondite to be taken
care of by intelligent laymen on a footing of general in-
formation. And these technical details that required ex-
pert attention grew continually more urgent and more
numerous; they coalesced into ever larger composite
working units and fell into progressively closer, more
numerous and more exacting articulations among them-
selves and with the sources of mechanical power and use-
ful materials; with the result that every successive move
in this technological growth and complication made two


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 273


technicians grow where one grew before; and all the
while the meshwork of technology has grown and tight-
ened, and always a technician stands at every apex of
growth. Until today, throughout the system of the me-
chanical industries, it has become a matter of course that
the conduct as well as the designing of any industrial
plant or process that is to make use of the advanced in-
dustrial arts cannot safely be entrusted to others than
technically trained men. The safe and sane plan of com-
mon sense now dictates that industrial operations must
be conducted by competent technicians. And this holds
true in a special degree for the larger operations and the
more formidable organisations of work and equipment,
where many technological factors and a wide range of ma-
terials and processes are drawn together for teamwork in
quantity production on an extensive scale. So it should
also hold true in a superlative degree as regards the over-
sight and control of the industrial system at large as a
going concern; the balance, articulation, and mutual sup-
port among the several lines of production and distribu-
tion that go to make up the system.

However, the rule of the technicians does not go all
the way. It began with taking over minor details and
fractional outlines of design and operation, and it has
hitherto progressed only so far as to cover now what
may be called the major details of the industrial system.
The planning and surveillance of productive industry at
large, in those bearings that are of capital systematic im-
portance, have not yet been taken over by technically
trained men. All that is still in the hands of laymen
working at cross purposes. Plainly, this capital work of
correlation, apportionment, balance and continuity, con-
trol of the mutual give and take among the several lines
and branches of production, should call for the most in-


274. Absentee Ownership


telligent and most scrupulously dispassionate exercise of
technical insight and deliberation. Technologically speak-
ing, this is the apex of the industrial system. The work
should logically devolve on a technical General Staff.
But hitherto all this work of sovereign technical juris-
diction remains in the hands of laymen working at cross
purposes, and it continues to be conducted on certain broad
principles of ignorance, neglect and sabotage; all in
deference to the paramount rights of absentee ownership.

The sovereign jurisdiction in all this highly technical
scheme of industry vests in the non-technical business
men. Their dealings with the industrial system and all
its works are governed not by the calculus of productive
work but by the calculus of net gain in terms of price.
In the nature of things, the aims, considerations and rul-
ings injected into the run of work by these laymen on
these grounds are irrelevant, incompetent, and impertinent,
and not germane to the case of creative industry; being
grounded in that alien fourth dimension of the economic
situation that is called Business Expediency.


To put these generalities and abstractions in more con-
crete terms, so far as scant space will permit. The in-
dustrial system is a composite organisation of work which
falls into three interlocking divisions or strata of in-
dustrial undertakings, as has already been shown in an
earlier passage:—the Key Industries, Manufactures, and
Farming. These three groups or classes of industrial
undertakings differ from one another not so much in their
technological character and relations as in the business
considerations which govern them. Technically the two
first named belong together as a high-wrought and wide-
sweeping application of the mechanical industry, while


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 275


the same scheme of mechanical processes and appliances
laps over into the work of farming also.

As working parts in the system, the several industrial
undertakings which make up its three divisions are all
inextricably bound together in an endless web of give
and take. They are, each and several, mutually con-
tinuations of one another. Co-ordination and mutual aid
between these three divisions of the industrial system, at
large and in detail, is the first requisite of production on
this plan. At the same time it is something which can
be duly taken care of only by eternal vigilance and un-
hampered teamwork on the part of a suitable corps of
technically trained and experienced men. Whereas, in
practice, by force of the rights of ownership, all these
matters are habitually taken care of by afterthought and
guesswork.

Technically speaking, there is, e.g., no break of con-
tinuity in the working-up of lumber, from the time when
the lumberman takes it off the stump to the time when
it comes out from under the hands of the house-carpenter
in the shape of finished floors, doors and casings in place,
or the time when the cabinet-maker has turned it out as
furniture, or when the builder of sign-boards has worked
it into the scenery along the highway and inscribed it
with the legend, “Eventually, why not now?” Indus-
trially, in all its ramifications, this wood-working is an
unbroken sequence of special processes of work; each
successive process of elaboration is standardised with a
view to the shape in which its material comes in, to the
power and appliances by which the work is to be done,
and by the standard shapes in which the same material is
to be passed on into the next succeeding process in the
industrial chain. And at every point in the sequence it


276 Absentee Ownership


is of the essence of the case that the work should go for-
ward in unbroken continuity, supplied at a known rate
and volume of materials of standard kinds, gauges and
grades. Uncertainty, interruption, or evasion at any
point counts unavoidably as derangement and unem-
ployment throughout the sequence of work. In practice,
for reasons of business expediency, there is deliberate
evasion, delay, and uncertainty at as many points in this
sequence of work as there are subdivisions of ownership
along the way; for alongside the chain of working proc-
esses there runs an equal chain of businesslike owners
working at cross purposes with one another.

The like holds true, only in a more formidable way, for
the steel industry. Technically it is of the essence of the
case that the right ores and the suitable coke and fluxes
should go, without hindrance, to all those steel-works that
are fit for the work in hand and necessary to turn out
such a rate and volume of output as will meet the work-
ing needs of the industries concerned, and that they should
go to no others; due regard being had to the means of
transportation and the points of delivery. Technologi-
cally speaking, the working-up of the steel supply into
finished products begins with the selection of the ores
and other raw materials and with the location and plan-
ning of the steel works, including due provision for the
housing and livelihood of the man-power engaged. From
that point on the work goes forward—or should go for-
ward—in a calculated sequence of standardised processes
and products, designed to run in unbroken continuity
and to supply the ways and means of work through the
further stages of elaboration, in standard units of kind,
gauge, grade, and delivery, as assigned by competent tech-
nicians working in concert. So, e.g., the production of
any given article of farm implements or machinery tech-


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 277


nically begins with the selection of ores, fluxes and proc-
esses suitable to make a steel of the special character re-
quired, it runs through a chain of processes by which the
parts are fashioned and assembled, and it ends only when
the transportation agencies have delivered the implement
on the ground where it is to be used; and even then the
case continues in the way of sundries, repairs and re-
placements, until the life-history of the implement is con-
cluded. All of which is contained in the technological
premises and is capable of detailed and unambiguous
specification in mechanical units of the kind familiar to
the engineers, and none of which can go forward except
in some sort of articulate correlation with all the rest.
Ambiguity comes in only when business considerations
enter, and ambiguity unavoidably comes in wherever busi-
ness considerations enter.

In practice, the production of steel is a “business propo-
sition.” It is controlled by an absentee management with
an eye single to the net gain of absentee owners. Steel
production is a “key industry”; that is to say, the busi-
ness men who control it are able to withhold resources and
limit the output of one of the prime requisites of other
industries at will. It is the invariable practice of “safe
and sane” management to limit the output to “what the
traffic will bear,’—that is to say, to what will yield the
largest net gain to the absentee owners. The business
management of such a “key industry” have no responsi-
bility and incur no blame for any derangement, waste or
unemployment which this “safe and sane” business prac-
tice entails on the rest of the industrial system.® It is


6 The present (1919-1923) situation shows what these entailed
consequences are like—Cf., e.g. Waste in Industry, by the
Committee of the Federated American Engineering Societies,
(New York, 1921, chapters i, ii, xi, xii; also Report on the


278 Absentee Ownership


only that the calculus of business runs in terms that are
not commensurable with the calculus of the industrial
process. The calculus of business is a calculus of money-
value, which is not a mechanical or material fact; where-
as the calculus of industry is a calculus of mechanical,
tangible, material values. From which it follows that
any intrusion of business strategy into the conduct of
industry will be sabotage.

The case is of the same complexion when turned the
other way about. Farming, e.g., draws on the machine
industries, and therefore eventually on the key indus-
tries in steel, coal, oil, transportation, etc., for its neces-
sary equipment and workday supplies. But at the same
time the output of grain, meat, and dairy products makes
up the livelihood of the man-power that is consumed
in these key industries and in subsidiary and accessory
ramifications of the industrial system. These elements of
the community’s livelihood run through a technically con-
tinuous process of working-up and distribution, by use of
mills, packing houses, railways, retailers, and the like;
and technically it is of the essence of the case that this
process of production, working-up, and distribution should.
go forward in unbroken continuity on a concerted schedule
of work and output, with no avoidable shortage, waste,
delay, or evasion along the way. In practice the trans-
portation, milling, packing, distribution, and retailing,
is controlled by absentee owners with an eye single to their
own net gain in terms of price, by a strategy of evasion,
secrecy, shortage, waste, and delay.


This sketch of the technological system and its work-


Steel Strike of 919, by the Commission of the Interchurch
World Movement; and Public Opinion and the Steel Strike, by
The Same. (New York, 1921.)


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 279


ing is evidently overdrawn as well as incomplete. It de-
scribes the possibilities of the case rather than the actual
run of things. There are good and sufficient reasons why
the industries which embody this technology of physics
and chemistry do not in practical fact reach this pitch
of productive work, as well as why the balance and articu-
lation of industrial processes are not nearly so complete,
comprehensive and exacting as this description would
imply. The largest and most generally applicable of these
reasons for under-efficiency is the all-pervading sabotage
that is brought into the work by the present businesslike
control of production and distribution; and the nature
and consequences of this businesslike management will
merit a more detailed analysis and exposition. But there
are also other infirmities in the situation, partly intrinsic
to the technology and its personnel, partly due to use and
wont, law and custom, knowledge and belief prevalent in
the community.

The infirmities of the technology, as such, are in the
main the infirmities of growth and consequent obsoles-
scence. The technological scheme is engaged in an un-
remitting growth, which proceeds by cumulative change in
detail, and the apices of growth are numerous and more
or less isolated, even if account be taken only of the more
significant and substantial changes that are going
forward. What may be called the cross-references or in-
osculations of the technological growth come into bearing
only by further contrivance which proceeds on further
familiarity with the new elements of knowledge, such as
comes only on the ground of something like common no-
toriety.7. It will commonly take some time for any new


7So, e.g., the use of reénforced concrete came out of a tech-
nological symphysis involving several elementary facts of work-
day knowledge and practice, each of which had been a matter of


280 Absentee Ownership


method or process to find its way into the various uses
which it will eventually serve, and to be tested out in these
uses; and there is commonly some practical doubt and
hesitation, to be tested out in detail, as to the rate and ex-
tent in which an improved or alternative process will
eventually supersede earlier methods of doing the work.®
These things take time and carry a margin of uncertainty,
hesitation, experiment, and obsolescence, such as to leave
the system as a whole in a chronically unfinished and in-
completely balanced state, due to continued growth. In
a sense, the technological system is never fully abreast of
itself.

The technological system is an organisation of intelli-
gence, a structure of intangibles and imponderables, in
the nature of habits of thought. It resides in the habits
of thought of the community and comes to a head in the
habits of thought of the technicians. This technology
of physics and chemistry that goes to make the mechanical
system of industry is an organisation of habits of thought
which run on the ground of mechanistic logic, the logic
of impersonal activities which run wholly within the con-
fines of the three dimensions of space. It makes no use
of conventional, sentimental, religious, or magical truths.
But the habits of thought of the community run, in the
main, on conventional, sentimental, religious, and magical
lines, and are governed by the logic native to that order of
realities.

The received system of institutions which governs hu-


common notoriety since a date older than the birth of the men
at whose hands the new move was made.

8E.g., the partial and gradual supersession of the Bessemer
Converter by the Open Hearth and the recourse to the “basic”
process in steel making, with the consequent shifting to a different
range of iron ores and a partial relocation of the industrial
plants.


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 281


man thought and conduct among the civilised peoples is
a fabric of conventional, sentimental, religious, and magi-
cal habits of thought. These institutions are of a spirit-
ual nature; that is to say, the logic by which they are ac-
tuated runs wholly outside the confines of the three di-
mensions of space. As seen from the standpoint of
physics and chemistry, they are of a supernatural or prae-
ternatural complexion. The mechanistic logic of physics
and chemistry comes into this institutional order of things
as an interloper, a non-conformist with an alien strain.
The technology of physics and chemistry, therefore, works
under something of a handicap, in an institutional en-
vironment imbued with a logical bias that is alien to its
bent and inhospitable to its free growth.

Like other men, the technicians are citizens of the world
in which they live and creatures of the institutional en-
vironment out of which they spring. Such is the declara-
tion of the material sciences, and such is the deliverance
of the mechanistic logic on that head. Like other men,
the technicians and the technically trained workmen come
through their years of growth and use and wont with
more or less of the same logical bias that pervades the
community at large,—a bias of the animistic order that
runs on conventional proprieties, moralities, religious and
magical symbols and superstitions. Under these circum-
stances, the measure in which these men who carry on the
mechanical technology achieve a mastery of its mechanistic
logic is always a matter of more or less. Their mentality
is more or less of an addiction to matter-of-fact habits
of thought governed, with more or less mitigation, by
the mechanistic logic, and always carrying more or less
extensive adhesions of that tissue of superstitions that
goes to build up the Christian gentleman and the patriotic
citizen. It is only that in the technicians and technically


282 Absentee Ownership


trained workmen the miraculous convictions of religion
and the magical “forced movements” of nationalism have
suffered a degree of sterilisation. It is a question of more
or less, and it is the constant care of the pillars of society
to see that the degree of sterilisation suffered by these
antiquities of the human spirit shall in no instance exceed
a salutary modicum.

In the civilised scheme of education and training for
the young, solicitude converges on those elements of
knowledge and belief that run outside the confines of the
three dimensions of space. The foundations of knowl-
edge and belief are laid in the miracles of the faith
and the magic of national allegiance. It is a matter of
course to all right-minded citizens of all the Christian na-
tions that a child must first learn to say his prayers and
salute the flag.® In the institutional scheme of the civil-
ised nations the beginning of wisdom is the fear of God;
whereas in the technology of physics and chemistry the
beginning of wisdom is to forget Him. And some forget
‘Him more, others less, but none altogether. Latterly, as
an aftermath of the atrocities of war, an increased stress
has been laid on bending the young idea to religious de-
votion and patriotic fervor, and thereby, in effect, bending
the incoming generation away from the bias of the me-
chanistic logic; which will count for what it may be worth
in defeat of the technological spirit.t°


9TIn point of institutional value these things are of the first con-
sequence, but when brought within the three dimensions of
space and submitted to the logic of physics and chemistry the
potent sacraments of Holy Church are no different from the
futile incantations of the Black Art, and the Star-spangled Ban-
ner (Long may it wave!) foots up as a wasteful exposure of a
woollen fabric to the elements.

10 All the while it is not to be overlooked that the case of
America is bound up with the case of Europe, in respect of its
technological science and man-power. Technologically, America


The Technology of Physics and Chemistry 283


At the same time the commercial bent of the community
at large and of its educational system works to the same
general effect. The old generation of engineers have been
pretty well commercialised by lifelong attendance on
business expediency in the service of business concerns
whose sole standard of efficiency is net gain in terms of
price. By inveterate habit these elders go to their day’s
work in a spirit of salesmanship; and their outlook on
the engineer’s work is an outlook on what it will bring,
quite as much as on what it will do. In all this the elder
engineers are quite at one with the common sense of the
community at large as well as with the settled convictions
of the substantial citizens who pursue the net gain and
stand as pillars of society. Under the aegis of these pil-
lars of society and borne up by the commercialised com-
mon sense of the underlying population, those who have
the care of schooling the country’s young men are divert-
ing more and more of the country’s educational resources
to the service of salesmanship, training for a business
career. By so much as this endeavor to divert the schools
to the service of salesmanship has the designed effect it
acts to draw off talent and training from the service of
workmanship and to curtail the reserve of human material
on which the technological advance will be able to draw.
At the same time its acts in its degree pervasively to lessen
the single-mindedness of that contingent of young men
who go into the work of technology.


is after all a province or outlier of the European general body;
so that America faces a virtually assured decline in this respect,
—presumably a fatal decline. The technical man-power lost in
the War is not being replaced; the conditions imposed by the
businesslike Peace do not permit it; particularly not in those
countries of continental Europe on which the continued growth
and maintenance of technical science have come to depend.


CHAPTER XI
MANUFACTURES AND SALESMANSHIP


LoosELy, the organisation-table of industry falls into three
main branches or divisions: The Key Industries; Manu-
factures; and Farming; as has already been shown in an
earlier passage. These lines of division are not sharp
and clear; the running contact and interdependence be-
tween these divisions being close and critical, as has also
appeared already. But such a three-fold division is, after
all, effectual, and it is readily to be seen in the large. So
also, the network of business organization and manage-
ment runs into three similar divisions, although in the or-
ganisation of business the lines of cleavage are even less
clear and less fixed.

Of these three divisions, the Key Industries stand at
the apex of the industrial system and control the issues
of industrial life for the rest. The control which is ex-
ercised in this way at the apex is exercised not for the
benefit of industry at large but for the profit of the
owners (and management) of the key industries, as has
also appeared already. The manufactures—continuation
industries—and their management stand in a relation to
the rest of the community which is analogous to that in
which the key industries stand to the rest of the indus-
trial system; but with the difference that the management
of these continuation industries have only a vicarious or
delegated power, in that their initiative and discretion are

284


Manufactures and Salesmanship 285


bounded by the measures which may be taken independ-
ently by the management of the key industries.

Whenever and in so far as the use of mechanical ways
and means is the ruling factor in the work to be done, the
processes of industry are inordinately productive, as has
already been explained. Therefore it is necessary for the
businesslike management of these industries to observe a
degree of moderation, if the market is not to be overstocked
to an unprofitable extent. It is necessary to regulate the
rate and volume of output with a view to profitable prices,
and this will involve more or less unemployment of the
available equipment and man-power, a variable margin of
unemployment, a strategic withholding of productive ef-
ficiency for business ends. This Conscientious With-
drawal of Efficiency is what is had in mind here in speak-
ing of Sabotage. The urgency of such a salutary margin
of sabotage on output, as well as the ordinary width of
the margin, has increased unremittingly during the past
half-century, and this increasing urgency of it has been
more particularly notable during the past two or three
decades.

It is by this reasonable restriction of output that the
management of the key industries controls the issues of
life for the rest of the industrial system. So it is also by
measures of the same character that the management of
the manufacturing industries governs the conditions of
life for the rest of the community, in a businesslike en-
deavor to meet the needs of the market in a profitable
way. For one reason and another the Farmers, on the
other hand, are not in a position to apply such a salutary
modicum of sabotage to their work and output or to reg-
ulate prices to their own liking in the same way. They
are too many, too scattered, too widely varied in their
work and their interests, besides being inveterately rooted


286 Absentee Ownership


in self-help and sharp practice. So that the Farmers are
by way of being the residuary losers, at whose cost much
of this business is carried on.


Ever since this country began to make the turn from
an agricultural to an “industrial” footing, the American
manufacturing industry has been producing for a closed
market. The American tariff policy also took on an ag-
gravated form about that time, and this has contributed
greatly to restrict the available market to the purchasing
power of the home population, at the same time that it
has enabled American special interests to maintain a high
level of prices for their output. The volume of this
closed market has continually grown greater, with the
growth of population and the use of larger resources ; but
the productive capacity of the manufacturing industries
-has also continually increased at a more rapid rate, due
to the same circumstances and to the additional factor of
a continually increasing efficiency in the industrial arts.
Industry has continued to be “inordinately” productive,
increasingly so. Therefore the urgency of a strategic
limitation of the output has also continually increased.
The various concerns that have been doing business in
manufactures have been competitive sellers in a limited
market whose purchasing capacity has habitually fallen
short of the productive capacity of the industries which
supply the marketable output. On pain of bankruptcy,
therefore, it has been incumbent on these business con-
cerns to use moderation and limit their saleable output to
the needs of the market,’ and at the same time to com-
pete among themselves for profitable sales. Any busi-
ness concern’s need of sales is indefinitely extensible, while


1“The needs of the market,” of course, means “what the mar-
ket will carry off at profitable prices.”


Manufactures and Salesmanship 287


the total volume of sales at any given time is fixed within
a narrow margin. Salesmanship is the art of taking over
a disproportionate share of this run of sales, at a profit-
able price.

These business concerns are competitive sellers, but
they are so circumstanced by their closed market that they
can, on the whole, not underbid one another at all effectu-
ally in the price of their wares. Underbidding involves
an enlarged aggregate output, which implies an enlarged
market. In effect, their competitive strategy is confined
to two main lines of endeavour:—to reduce the
production-cost of a restricted output; and to increase
their sales without lowering prices.

On the cost side of this account, again, their constant
recourse has been, habitually and increasingly, to endeav-
our to keep production-costs down by keeping down
wages.” On the side of sales and salesmanship the out-


2 Other items that enter into production-costs, as, e.g., the
staple raw and structural materials and the power employed, are
scarcely amenable to manipulation from the side of the manu-
facturing business. It is, on the whole, a question of take it or
leave it. The business concerns who dispose of the key in-
dustries and the staple natural resources are massive bodies
and occupy a secure position at the apex of the system, and those
who deal with them find it unprofitable to kick against the
pricks. Except for the somewhat special case of those manu-
facturing concerns which do business in farm products, there is
small chance of practicing parsimony in production at the cost
of any others than the hired man-power. And as a business
proposition parsimony becomes a question of shifting production-
cost to someone else.

On the other hand the provocation to parsimony in wages is
insidious and speciously promising. The industrial man-power is
voluminous, but it is scarcely compact enough to be called mas-
sive. Hitherto and for the time being it seems quite unlikely that
these workmen can be drawn together in such massive formation
as would enable them to make head against the business concerns
which, between them, control the key industries and the manu-
factures and transportation system. By force of circumstances


288 Absentee Ownership


come has been a continued increase of selling-costs and a
continually more diligent application to salesmanship.
Under both of these heads the passing years of the new
century have shown a rising curve, and under both heads
the rise has been steeper since the War.

There is no call here to go into the merits of trade-
unionism and collective bargaining for wages, or to re-
view the run of “labor troubles” in recent times. These
topics are controversial and irritating, and also they are
of the nature of subsidiary detail, so far as concerns the
present argument. But the broad fact that hired labor
is of the essence of the situation under absentee owner-
ship can not similarly be left on one side. Hired labor
is an essential factor in the case, and the fact that the
man-power employed in industry necessarily goes to its
work for wages—on the principle of “hiring and firing”
—has grave consequences for the conduct of industry and
its efficiency.

As has been explained in an earlier passage, and as is
sufficiently evident, the industrial system is a running bal-
ance of interlocking processes which stand in such rela-
tions of give and take that no one section or process or


these concerns that make up the great body of the business com-
munity work together, in effect, to a common end in their ne-
gotiations with the hired workmen; the common end being the
defeat of the workmen and the consequent shifting upon them of
so much of the production-costs as the traffic will bear. In this
contest the employer-owners present a massive formation, at
the same time that they habitually find themselves legally and
morally in the right, resting their case on ancient principles of
law and custom; so that any intervention from the side of the
constituted authorities will habitually work out to their profit.
The bias of the established order and of its appointed keepers
runs in favor of business; so that the keepers of law and order
will, in effect, be the guardians of the business interests against
all comers. And the same bias of principles still runs also
throughout the body of hired workmen.


Manufactures and Salesmanship 289


sequence of processes engaged in the work is independent
of the rest. Wherever and so far as the mechanical in-
dustry has gone into effect the measure of team-work be-
tween the constituent processes engaged is the measure of
its productive efficiency. When and so far as this run-
ning balance of give and take falls away, the system will
not work. It is a system of mechanical powers and
skilled workmanship running on the mechanically stand-
ardised team-work of its constituents; and the factor
which finally shapes and carries out this creative team-
work in the concrete details of production is the dis-
ciplined man-power engaged. It is as an embodiment of
disciplined workmanship that this man-power enters crea-
tively into the work of production; and as such it is indis-
pensable. It is true, of course, that the man-power with-
out the due equipment, material resources, and technical
direction, will come to naught as a creative force. So
will also these other factors in the case without the due
man-power, duly trained. By itself any one of them is
of no account, but each is indispensable in the combina-
tion. It is only in team-work, duly balanced, that these
things become creative industrial forces. The only dis-
pensable factor in the case is the owner.

It is by force of his workmanship that the workman
counts at all for production. But wherever and so far
as absentee ownership has taken effect, it is by force
of his salesmanship that he takes his place in the shop.
The whole duty of salesmanship is to sell dear and deliver
a minimum. With their turn for succinct speech, the
Romans covered it all with the maxim: Caveat emptor.
It is as an articulation in a working team that the workman
does work, if any; but it is as a detached salesman of
man-power that he comes in for his job.

Since and so far as the mechanical state of the indus-


290 Absentee Ownership


trial arts has gone into action, industry has been placed on
a footing of absentee ownership and labor has become a
commodity, to be sold dear and delivered at a minimum.
At the same time the régime of absentee ownership per-
force excludes personal relations and personal considera-
tions between workmen and employers,—the type-form of
employer under this régime being an impersonal incorpo-
ration. So far as human infirmities of a sentimental sort
will permit, therefore, the wage relation under this régime
should fall into wholly impersonal, or depersonalised,
lines ; with no recourse to the blandishments of the huck-
stering salesman and with an unashamed appeal to the
objective facts of demand and supply.

The “employment market,’ or “labor market,” has
visibly been approaching this finished shape, progressively
ever since the country began to make the turn from agri-
culture and neighborhood workmanship to an industrial
footing on the mechanical plan; but it should also be evi-
dent to any moderately dispassionate observer that this
progressive approach to objective nakedness in the nego-
tiations of the employment market has not yet reached
the last conceivable degree of perfection. This failure
to reach perfection, during the past two or three quarter-
centuries of habituation to the new régime, appears to be
due to the very tenacious hold of ancient habits and
transmitted preconceptions; and perhaps also to a work-
manlike bent which appears to be innate in the race, and
which will not tolerate an unreserved shift from work-
manship to salesmanship.* The traditional preconcep-


3 Tf a native bent of this kind is to be ascribed, it should ap-
parently be with the reservation that severe and protracted ad-
verse habituation will very greatly, if not altogether, neutralise it
in any given case, and that there also are an appreciable num-
ber of individuals in whom this bent is of so slight a force, by
comparison with their other propensities, as to leave them vir-


Manufactures and Salesmanship 291


tion which came down from the old order of industry,
under the régime of husbandry, handicraft and neighbor-
hood workmanship, ran imperatively to the effect that hu-
man work should be of some objective human use, and it
has been a slow-dying prejudice. The bias of salesman-
ship on the other hand is, as it has always been, to get
a margin of something for nothing, and the wider the
margin the more perfect the salesman’s work. The popu-
lation which underlies the régime of absentee ownership
and hired labor, and which makes up the industrial man-
power, have come out of that earlier dispensation of
unguarded workmanship, and they still carry over a resi-
due of its habits of thought. Should they finally lose this
residue of workmanlike sentiment that now cumbers their
negotiations with the absentee corporations, the system
of mechanical industry conducted on a basis of invest-
ment would evidently no longer work. That is to say,
it would no longer yield a net output of goods and serv-
ices. Even something less than a total loss of the work-
manlike animus would bring this industrial system to a
stalemate. The state of the case may be described by
saying that there is a critical pitch or level of effectual
workmanlike animus which must be maintained if the in-
dustrial system is to work along as a self-sustained going
concern of production. Any decline below this critical
level would bring the great industrial adventure to a close,
presumably after a more or less protracted period of dis-
order and decay.*


tually exempt from its bias—Cf. The Instinct of Workman-
ship, ch. ii and iv; also John Dewey, Human Nature and

4In effect, the question has been entertained by some, whether
American industry, as well as the industry of civilised Europe,
has fallen below this critical level of effectual workmanship
since the War. Other causes have contributed,—as, e.g., the


292 Absentee Ownership


The industrial man-power entered upon this era of
mechanical industry and absentee ownership well imbued
with the animus of workmanship and of salesmanship,
both. The two habits of thought are, both of them, a
legacy come down from the era of handicraft, house-
hold industry, and neighborly bargaining. And together
they lie at the root of the established order of rights, ob-
ligations and immunities in industry and business. In
America particularly the actuating incentives of life have
been these two, to the passable exclusion or abeyance of
other spiritual prime-movers, more particularly through
that formative period during which the working prin-
ciples of Americanism were matured, assimilated, and
stabilised. The frame of mind in which the familiar use
of “hiring and firing” is grounded dates back to the old
order; when the individual workman still was technically
complete and self-sufficient in his work, and entered on
any undertaking as a self-sufficient salesman of his own
rounded personal skill, dexterity and judgment, in a bar-
gain with a personal employer.

By degrees, as absentee ownership has progressively
taken over the ways and means of industrial life, the re-
lation of the workman to the work in hand has lost the
personal note and has come to be the relation of a hired


destruction of equipment, man-power, and morale, caused by the
War, and the reinforcement of business principles brought on
by the Peace,—and it is also by no means clear that the visible
decline of the workmanlike animus is not a transient recession
under stress. Yet the question is by no means an idle one,
whether these several causes driving to a common objective have
not, between them, put the situation in the way of assured
eventual wreck. At the best it is a point in doubt. Of these
causes of decay the two formidable ones are the loss of workman-
like morale and the over-growth of salesmanlike enterprise.
Either or both should be sufficient, ‘in the absence of disturbing
causes.”


Manufactures and Salesmanship 2903


man to his job. By degrees also, as the workmen have
progressively learned that they are transients and by-
standers in whatever concerns the organization and aims
of any given industrial enterprise, they have also learned
to draw together on a more or less lucidly collusive plan
to make the most of their position in the impersonal em-
ployment market. The resulting organisations of work-
men have been “trade unions”—that is to say they have
been drawn on lines of workmanship—but they have been
formed for a businesslike purpose. The avowed spirit
of the thing has been the spirit of salesmanship. The
unions have been orgenized with a view to drive a bar-
gain, and from the outset it has been their constant aim
to sell dear, and from near the outset they have also
aimed to deliver a minimum. Through it all there has
run the ancient bent of workmanship, to the effect that
a workman has work to do as well as a job to hold. But
with time and continued experience in businesslike nego-
tiations it has by degrees been borne in upon them that
as a business proposition it is the first duty of a workman
to hold a job; that he has work to do is a secondary
consideration.

In all bargaining, in all transactions of merchandising
and price-making, the limitation of the merchantable sup-
ply is of the essence of the case. And the more single-
minded and salesmanlike the parties to the transactions
may be, the more diligently will they consider ways and
means of limiting the supply to such a point as will most
profitably enforce a scarcity value of their vendible out-
put. In the course of time and continued attention to
salesmanship, therefore, the unions and their members
have been learning that, as regards the work to be done
in holding their jobs, it is to be their constant concern to
devise plausible ways of withholding it. In the nature of


204 Absentee Ownership


things,—that is to say in the nature of salesmanship,—
the unions are organizations for the restraint of trade.
It is a delicate question, hitherto not finally decided, how
far they are to be accounted “conspiracies” in restraint
of trade. Necessarily they are of that general complex-
ion, being business organizations; and they have been
continually taking on more of that businesslike complex-
ion, since there can be no effectual salesmanship without
some limitation on the supply of the vendible goods.
The American Federation of Labor may be taken as a
type. The outcome is that both parties to the negotia-
tions in the employment market have now reached a pass-
ably unequivocal recognition of this state of things. Em-
ployers and workmen, both, have come to realise that the
sole decisive argument on either side is a refusal to go
on. The rest of the voluminous disputation which habit-
ually surrounds their negotiations is known to both parties
to be so much verbiage designed to cloud the issue.
Hitherto this outcome has not been worked out to a
finished clarity. There still remains, especially on the side
of the workmen, a lingering sense of unworthiness in so
putting salesmanship in the place of workmanship. The
habitual position taken by the employer-owners in these
disputes is fairly clear and unembarrassed, but hitherto
the workmen have been unable to go all the way along
these lines of salesmanlike strategy, such as to draw them
together into an inclusive and massive formation driving
to a common onset against a common adversary; such,
e. g., as has sometimes been sketched out under the dread
catchword of “One Big Union.” They are still tangled
in personalities, not realising that their common adversary
is a state of affairs rather than a conspiracy of sinners.
And there is also still extant among them a tenacious
residue of that ancient way of thinking according to which


Manufactures and Salesmanship 295


a workman should work for a living and should, in some
moral sense, be able to claim a livelihood for which he is
ready to work. In one way and another they are unable
to see their own case in the untroubled perspective of
salesmanship, in which it is to be seen that the chief end
of man is to get a margin of something for nothing, at
the cost of any whom it may concern. Their spiritual
complexion is not yet fully commercialised, even though
the great body of them may already have begun to realise
that sabotage is the beginning of wisdom in industrial
business. They may already believe it with their head,
but they do not yet know it with their heart.

Something is also to be said in abatement on the other
side, on the side of the business men who manage the
industries and who hire and fire. They too are not quite
clear, have not yet come into a fully objective apprecia-
tion of the facts in the case; although the remnant of
handicraft tradition that sticks in their habitual thinking
is not precisely to the same effect, and can scarcely be
rated as a handicap. Stripped of its adventitious verbi-
age the position habitually taken by these substantial
citizens comes to this, that in common honesty the work-
men should work for a living and the owner-employers
should invest for a profit; leaving the substantial citizens
to decide what may be a suitable livelihood for the work-
men. In substance the constituted authorities of the na-
tion also fall into line with the substantial citizens on this
head; as how should they not? Again it is a position
taken on grounds of inveterate prepossession rather than
objective reasoning. Neither side has yet contemplated
the converse of this proposition, that the owner-employers
should invest for a living and the workmen should work
for a profit; leaving the workmen to fix on a suitable
livelihood for the employer-owners.


296 Absentee Ownership


Traditional prepossessions apart, the one of these prop-
ositions is about as good as the other, of course; and
neither of them falls in with the objective run of facts
under the new order of business, as conducted on the im-
personal footing of absentee ownership. Under the dis-
passionate logic of business, neither party is bound in
common honesty to anything more than selling dear and
delivering a minimum. So also, the common good does
not lie within the range of incentives that govern these
negotiations ; nor, indeed, within the range of considera-
tions which set the limits of tolerance; except so far as
“the common good” is taken to mean “business-as-usual.””
And with each recurring wrangle the preamble of vituper-
ation and sanctimony becomes more abridged and the ar-
gument shifts more quickly and more overtly to its final
terms,—the “big stick” of coercive inaction, passive re-
sistance, unemployment, sabotage. The parties to the bar-
gaining have come to be avowed adversaries who are
learning to line up as enemies, habitually preoccupied
with projects of mutual defeat. It should accordingly
not be a question of whether, but only of how soon the
strategy of mutual defeat will result in an inclusive defeat
of the combined forces of industry and business; and
that should apparently resolve itself into a question of how
soon the industrial man-power will, in effect, learn the com-
plete lesson of salesmanlike sabotage——the employer-
owners have already learned it well enough to serve the
turn.

And all the while the constituted authorities of the na-
tion constitute a Business Administration whose duties
are prescribed for them by that provision of the Constitu-
tion which provides that citizens must not be deprived of
their property except by due process of law; which being
interpreted means, in effect, that the powers and immu-


Manufactures and Salesmanship 297


nities of absentee ownership are to be enforced and safe-
guarded by any suitable use of force and at any cost to
the taxpayers. Circumstances have turned in such a way
as to make this the large and ordinary application of this
proviso. And by the same turn of circumstances the con-
stituted authorities have, in effect and in the main, become
attorneys for one party to the industrial quarrel, thereby
stimulating irritation and quickening the convergence of
events to a blind corner. The industrial system requires
that the management and the industrial man-power should
be engaged on an increasingly close team-work in produc-
tion ; in effect and increasingly, on grounds of sound busi-
ness they are giving much of their attention to teamwork
in sabotage.


But in all these manceuvres of businesslike manage-
ment the industrial man-power is, after all, the party of
the second part. The business enterprise that is of the
first as well as of initial consequence is the enterprise of
the business men who have the responsible management
of industry. It is on them that the responsibility rests and
the interest centers. And the argument therefore re-
turns to the policies and tactics habitually employed among
concerns which do business in the manufacturing industries
and supply goods for the market, and to the circumstances
which surround and determine their activities. This ru-
bric covers also the merchandising business, wholesale
and retail, as well as the manufacturing business in the
narrower sense, which delivers the merchantable goods
for distribution in the market. There is no longer a con-
sistent cleavage between these two lines of enterprise,
and a practicable line of distinction between them can no
longer be drawn,—so far as concerns the present argu-
ment. Together they make up that field of enterprise


298 Absentee Ownership


that has to do with the output and distribution of mer-
chantable goods, as contrasted with the key industries on
the one hand and the farm population on the other hand.

As has already been remarked in an earlier passage,
the great objective circumstance which dominates the busi-
ness of supply and distribution is the fact of a closed
market. This circumstance determines the volume of
the output, within a fairly narrow margin of fluctuation.
It is an objective actuality, so far as bears on the traffic
of the manufacturers and merchants, stubborn as ob-
jective facts habitually are. But it is after all an actual-
ity created by the convergence of several circumstances,
each of which may be resolved into matters of use and
wont. These determining circumstances which set the
bounds of the market are such as: (a) the running bal-
ance of sabotage on the output of raw and structural ma-
terials, administered for their own ends by the manage-
ment of the key industries and by those interests that
stand in a similar relation of arbitrary control to the out-
put of farm products; the ground on which this initial
sabotage is carried out being the absentee ownership (or
usufruct) of natural resources, and its end being an en-
hanced free income for the management and their ab-
sentee owners; (b) the price system, which decides that
the end of endeavor shall be to make money rather than
to make goods, and so decides that the making of goods
shall be used with wise moderation as a means of making
money; the end sought being therefore a maximum ag-
gregate price, as contrasted with a maximum output of
goods; (c) by force of the same price system, the pur-
chasing-power of those who buy the merchantable goods
is limited by their available funds for expenditure, as
contrasted with their productive power; (d) within this


Manufactures and Salesmanship 299


framework of prescriptive convention, essentially in the
nature of inveterate ceremonial observances, there is
drawn by authority the factitious bar of a tariff in re-
straint of trade, by which the bounds of the market are
drawn closer and the available purchasing power is re-
stricted to a higher price level.

The outcome of it all is simple enough. These vari-
ous business concerns are competitors for a closed volume
of traffic. Or more specifically, they are competitive
sellers each of which necessarily endeavors to increase his
net share in the available purchasing fund; the total vol-
ume of purchasing funds available at any given time be-
ing fixed within a relatively narrow margin of fluctua-
tion. So that each of these competitive sellers can gain
only at a corresponding loss to the rest. At the same time
there is, by and large, no outlook for competition in this
market by the method of increased output at substantially
reduced prices. That expedient was tried and found
wanting. The large and progressively larger net returns
do not come on that footing, on the whole.® That type
of competition presumes an open market and a declining
price level, all of which is obsolete.

The manufacturers and merchants, therefore, are en-
gaged on a business of competitive selling in a closed mar-
ket in which prices may fluctuate but can not substan-
tially decline; a market in which one seller’s gain is an-

5 Tt is not to be overlooked, of course, that there are such phe-
nomena as the Ford cars and the chain-stores and mail-order
houses, which cut into the profitable traffic on a footing of quan-
tity production and underbidding. But all men know these con-
cerns to be disturbers of the peace and enemies of society, whom
the business community at large would be glad to outlaw. They
are the filibusters who drive a trade on the too trustful integrity


of the business community at large and the too lenient justice
of the nation’s Business Administration.


300 Absentee Ownership


other’s loss.6 The business reduces itself to a traffic in
salesmanship, running wholly on the comparative merit of
the rival commodities, or rather of the rival salesmen.
One result has been a very substantial and progressive in-
crease of sales-cost; very appreciably larger than an in-
spection of the books would show. The producers have
been giving continually more attention to the saleability
of their product, so that much of what appears on the
books as production-cost should properly be charged to
the production of saleable appearances. The distinction
between workmanship and salesmanship has progressively
been blurred in this way, until it will doubtless hold true
now that the shop-cost of many articles produced for the
market is mainly chargeable to the production of saleable
appearances, ordinarily meretricious. So, e.g., whatever
its other (and undeniable) merits may be, the vogue of
“package goods” is to be credited wholly to salesmanship,
and its cost is chargeable in the main to that account.
The designing and promulgation of saleable containers,
—that is to say such containers as will sell the contents
on the merits of the visual effect of their container,—has
become a large and, it is said, a lucrative branch of the
business of publicity. It employs a formidable number
of artists and “copy writers” as well as of itinerant spokes-
men, demonstrators, interpreters; and more than one
psychologist of eminence has been retained by the pub-
licity agencies for consultation and critical advice on the
competitive saleability of rival containers and of the labels
and doctrinal memoranda which embellish them. The
cost of all this is very appreciable, but it is a necessary
cost. Taking them one with another, it is presumably


6 As this matter was recently summed up at a staff conference
of a certain noted advertising concern: “Blank has got the
market; it is our problem to dislodge him.”


Manufactures and Salesmanship 301


safe to say that the containers account for one-half the
shop-cost of what are properly called “package goods,”
and for something approaching one-half of the price paid
by the consumer. In certain lines, doubtless, as, e.g., in
cosmetics and household remedies, this proportion is ex-
ceeded by a very substantial margin; in these lines, in-
deed, the choice of suitable—that is to say saleable—con-
tainers surrounded with suitable—that is to say saleable
—doctrinal sentences, is the matter of grave moment; the
specific nature of the contents being, on the whole, of
subsidiary consequence, if any.’ It is also the confident
testimony of persons who are in a position to know, that
except for line and color, shape and surface, of the con-
tainers, and apart from verbal differences in the doctrinal
matter which surrounds them, any distinctive character
in these various articles of intimate personal use is some-
thing very difficult to get at.®


7 This is not said by way of aspersion. In these intimate mat-
ters of health and fabricated beauty the beneficent workings of
faith are manifest; if it should not rather be said that the mani-
fest benefit derived from these many remedies, medicaments,
lotions, unguents, pastes and pigments, is in the main a work of
faith which acts tropismatically on the consumer’s bodily frame,
with little reference to the pharmaceutical composition of the con-
tents of the purchased container, provided that they are not un-
duly deleterious. The case may, not without profit, be as-
similated to certain of the more amiable prodigies wrought in
the name of Holy Church, where it is well known that the
curative efficacy of any given sainted object is something quite
apart from its chemical constitution. Indeed, here as at many
other points salesmanship touches the frontiers of the magical
art; and no man will question that, as a business proposition, a
magical efficacy is a good thing to sell.

8 All the while, it appears on inquiry that the number of dis-
tinct articles—distinct in point of name and container—carried
in stock under the head of “Toilet Goods” on the first
floor of a well-known New-York department store exceeds
10,000. So it also appears on the same inquiry that floor space
so devoted to the distribution of these 10,000 yields larger net


302 Absentee Ownership


Saleable containers are only the beginning of wisdom
in latterday manufacture and merchandising. But they
merit attention as being typical and illustrative of the
latterday growth of salesmanship and of the latterday
spirit of business at its homeliest and best. They are
typical of the ways and means of salesmanship also in the
respect that they serve a useful purpose for the consumer
in the way of convenience and cleanliness at the same
time that they enable the contents to be sold at an en-
hanced price. There is always something ,of such a vari-
able fringe of substantial service attaching to the ordinary
ways and means of salesmanlike publicity, whether in the
way of containers or in that standard run of doctrinal
pronouncements that will come to mind as the type-form
of such publicity;® and it is the ordinary duty of the
salesman to make it appear that this outlying fringe of
usefulness is the whole end and purpose of it all. One
will be a competent salesman in much the same measure
as one effectually “puts over” this line of make-believe.

The concerns which do business in this field are compet-
earnings per square foot than any other similar area of floor space
employed by this prosperous business concern. Of course the
10,000 items are not all, or nearly all, containers of fabricated
beauty, but even a cursory view of the premises will find such
containers very much in evidence, and will also show that this
particular case presents nothing exceptional.

. 9 This is, of course, not intended to say that the net effect
of these things, apart from their beneficial effect on sales, is or-
dinarily of a serviceable character; but only that there are miti-
gating circumstances. Materially speaking, these things are in
the nature of nuisances, but there is something to be said in
abatement. There is commonly a variable, often negligible,
fringe of serviceable information, and the like, attaching to their
salesmanlike use. In their net effect, sign-boards, placards, car-
cards, posters, electrical blinkers, and the like devices, are a
public nuisance, of course—de facto, not de jure—but to a vari-


able, though fractional, extent their subsidiary and unintended
effects may often be serviceable.


Manufactures and Salesmanship 303


itors in a closed market. That is to say, they are com-
petitors for a share in the available purchasing-power that
comes into the market, so that the one concern gains at
the others’ cost. From which it follows that any device
or expedient which approves itself as a practicable means
of cutting into the market, on the part of any one of the
competitive concerns, presently becomes a necessity to all
the rest, on pain of extinction. The means of “getting
ahead” is also the means of “keeping up.”’ Any concern
which neglects its opportunities and falls behind is in a
way to fall out of the game.° The net aggregate result
is a competitive multiplication of the ways and means of
salesmanship at a competitively increasing net aggregate
cost. The selling-cost per unit of the goods sold rises ac-
cordingly, and the price to the consumer rises to meet
the enhanced selling-cost. The rising cost of salesman-
ship becomes a rising overhead charge on the business,
regulated by the pressure of competitive selling, but
hitherto trending upwards, apparently with a gradually
accelerated rise.

10 There are exceptional cases, perhaps more apparent than
convincing, where old established merchant-houses have continued
to do business in a modest but profitable way on a footing of
clientele and goodwill coming down from the custom of past
years. Indeed, such a house will have a substantial advantage
so long as its clientéle holds out, in that it incurs but a minimum
of expense for publicity at the same time that it comes in for
its volume of sales at the enhanced prices which the rising costs
of publicity at large entail. Increased sales-costs entail rising
prices and widening margins for the general body of competing
concerns, while the old established firm, which rests its business
on its ancient clientéle, shares in the rising prices and widening
margins without a porportionate share in the rising costs of pub-
licity. So that a concern so placed will be in a position to
maintain its volume of net earnings even while the volume of its
custom is shrinking. The circumstance is perhaps best to be
rated as a case of past salesmanship capitalized and carried over
as intangible assets.


304. Absentee Ownership


As is the case with other business charges and ex-
penditures, the effectual limit on sales-costs, including
whatever is to be counted in as ways and means of sell-
ing, is what the traffic will bear. But sales-costs present
some slight peculiarities in this respect, being subject to
certain peculiar circumstances. By use of the proper ex-
pedients—which may be taken to mean the same as saying,
by judicious expenditure of sufficiently large sums—the
sales of any given line of merchantable goods, or of any
given concern dealing in such goods, may be increased
indefinitely. This is a well-assured proposition in folk-
psychology. Beyond a certain point (to be determined by
experience) an increase of sales will be had only at an in-
creasing sales-cost per unit of goods sold; and beyond a
certain further point (similarly to be determined by expe-
rience) any further increase of sales will cost more than
it will bring,—that is to say the selling-cost per unit will
then exceed the seller’s net price-margin over production-
cost, which is more than the traffic will bear. A judi-
cious expenditure on sales-cost should evidently approach
this point, without passing it.

But the other sellers in the same market, whether they
sell the same line of goods or other lines, are compet-
itors for the same custom and will push their sales-
enterprise on the same plan. Which puts the sellers, all
and several, on the defensive against one another’s sales-
manship; which comes to a competitively defensive ex-
penditure on sales-costs, of such a character that none of
the competing sellers can afford to fall short in his ex-
penditures on salesmanship,—on penalty of failure. That
is to say, as a business proposition, the traffic in manu-
facturing and merchandising will no longer bear a scant
overhead charge in the way of sales-costs; or such a
charge as would once have been called a reasonable over-


Manufactures and Salesmanship 305


head on that score. The conditions imposed by a closed
competitive market have taken such a turn that parsimony
in the matter of sales-costs will be fatai, in the ordinary
case. He who hesitates is lost. Taking one such sales-
enterprise with another, what the traffic will bear appears,
in effect, to run between the two points indicated above,
but to rise consistently toward the higher. Judicious ex-
penditure on salesmanship, therefore, will play between
these limits, touching the higher limit more frequently
than the lower; with certain consequences to be noted
presently.

The experience of the last few years, since salesman-
ship has come unequivocally to take the first place in the
business of manufacturing and merchandising, has also
brought out a further peculiar circumstance which at-
taches to this enterprise of selling goods and services in
a closed market. A large, and increasing, number of
the competing lines lend themselves effectually to large-
scale production in the matter of salesmanship. Judicious
and continued expenditure on publicity and the like ex-
pedients of salesmanship will result in what may fairly
be called a quantity-production of customers for the pur-
chase of the goods or services in question.1t Experience
has shown what might be expected, that the cost of pro-

11 There is, of course, no actual fabrication of persons en-
dowed with purchasing-power ad hoc, although much of the
language employed by the publicity-agencies appears to promise
something of that kind; nor is there even any importation of an
unused supply of such customers from abroad,—the law does
not allow it. Viewed in the large, what actually is effected is
only a diversion of customers from one to another of the com-
peting sellers, of course. But as seen from the isolated stand-
point of any given selling-concern it foots up to a production of
new customers or the upkeep of customers already in use by the
given concern. So that this acquisition and repair of customers
may fairly be reckoned at a stated production-cost per unit;
and this operation lends itself to quantity production.


306 Absentee Ownership


duction per unit of customers by the use of the later per-
fected methods and appliances of sales-publicity is subject
to the well-known economic law of increasing returns,
very much as it applies to quantity production generally,
wherever machine processes are employed on an appre-
ciably large scale.

It may be called to mind, though the fact should be
familiar enough, that with the continued growth and
standardisation of the business and its procedure in recent
years, very much of sales-publicity has with good effect
been reduced to mechanical units of space, speed, num-
ber, frequency, and the like. Much the same is true for
very much of the other apparatus of salesmanship, in-
cluding a reasonable proportion of the personnel. It has
accordingly become practicable now to check and tally this
work and its major effects in units of tangible perform-
ance. So that the fabrication of customers can now be
carried on as a routine operation, quite in the spirit of
the mechanical industries and with much the same degree
of assurance as regards the quality, rate and volume of
the output; the mechanical equipment as well as its com-
plement of man-power employed in such production of
customers being held to its work under the surveillance of
technically trained persons who might fairly be called pub-
licity engineers. Such technicians are now diligently bred
and trained for this use by all the reputable seminaries of
learning.*?


12 The schools, on private foundation or at the public charge,
are turning a greatly intensified and amplified attention to the
needs of salesmanship and the propagation of salesmen, and they
are turning out a rapidly swelling volume of graduates in this
art of “putting it over.” Indeed, this scholastic propagation of
salesmen may fairly be cited as an example of quantity pro-
duction; standardised both in its processes and in its output.

The production of customers by sales-publicity is evidently


Manufactures and Salesmanship 307


It is familiarly known to economists that up to a cer-
tain, fluctuating but effectual, limit an increasing volume
of output may be turned out by methods of quantity pro-
duction at a decreasing cost per unit. This law of in-
creasing returns, or decreasing cost, will apply in the pro-
duction of customers by large-scale publicity very much
as in the large-scale mechanical industry generally. In
the business of sales-publicity this upper limit of in-
creasing returns is relatively high. So that up to a fairly
high limit the aggregate sales-costs on a larger volume of
sales will be progressively more reasonable, relatively
to the net aggregate returns from the sales. The rule
does not apply throughout or uniformly, but it applies
rather widely and in an increasing number of lines, par-
ticularly among the staple lines of merchandise. It fol-
lows that within the application of the rule the larger
selling-concerns, with larger funds and expenditures, will
have something of an advantage over concerns of a
smaller and middling size.

It should and appears to follow that so far as this
rule of quantity-production applies, the larger advertisers
among these competing concerns will tend to displace
those of a smaller and middling size. The latter will drop
the same thing as a production of systematised illusions organ-
ised into serviceable “action patterns’—serviceable, that is,
for the use of the seller on whose account and for whose profit
the customer is being produced. It follows therefore that the
technicians in charge of this work, as also the skilled person-
nel of the working-force, are by way of being experts and experi-
menters in applied psychology, with a workmanlike bent in the
direction of what may be called creative psychiatry. Their
day’s work will necessarily run on the creative guidance of
habit and bias, by recourse to shock effects, tropismatic re-
actions, animal orientation, forced movements, fixation of ideas,


verbal intoxication. It is a trading on that range of human in-
firmities which blossom in devout observances and bear fruit in


the psychopathic wards.


308 Absentee Ownership


out of the running, inconspicuously. This traffic in pub-
licity and customers runs within a closed market, as has
already been remarked, and it feeds on a loosely fixed
aggregate volume of purchasing-power; so that at any
given time, whatever increase of custom is gained by any
given selling-concern will be lost by others, and whatever
custom is shifted by publicity to any given commodity
(e. g., yeast-cakes) is thereby shifted away from another
or others (e.g., soap-powders).1* Hitherto the rule ap-
pears to hold good, on the whole, that the large selling-
concerns and the large adventures in publicity are gaining
at the expense of the smaller ones and are displacing the
latter, particularly those of a middling size. The rule is
by no means hard and fast, no more so here than in the
industrial use of quantity-production. And it is also
noticeable that the growtk of these larger absentee. selling-
concerns is not greatly reducing the number of those
small-scale concerns that continue to do business on a
footing of intimate personal attention to their customers,
and that carry their point by word and gesture. What
may be called “hand tooling” still holds its place in the
field of salesmanship. Very much as is the case in produc-
tive industry, where many minor and intimate trades and
crafts still find a living in the crevices of the industrial
system, so here also.

In this market virtually all sellers (manufacturers and
merchants) are competitors of virtually all other sellers,
irrespective, on the whole, of the diversity of goods of-
fered for sale. The total offering of goods for sale

13 Jn strict accuracy and to avoid the appearance of oversight, it
should be added that such a closed market, that is to say the
volume of purchasing-power available, will be narrowed by ap-


proximately so much as these expenditures on salesmanship may
amount to in the aggregate.


Manufactures and Salesmanship 309


takes up the total volume of available purchasing-power.1*
But not all kinds and classes of merchantable goods lend
themselves equally to propaganda by methods of the large-
scale absentee salesmanship. The quantity-production of
customers is visibly more applicable in some lines than in
others. The experience of the past few years teaches,
on the whole, that articles of intimate personal use and
articles of conspicuous personal use lend themselves in
some peculiar degree to this manner of propaganda. The
volume of publicity devoted to the sale of such articles,
as well as the resulting increased volume of sales, argues
quite unequivocally to that effect. These articles and
their consumption bear, or are plausibly alleged to bear,
in a felicitous way on the personal well-being or the per-
sonal prestige of the consumer; and customers appear to
be peculiarly open to argument and persuasion on these


heads.*®
As has already been remarked, the quantity-production


14 There is the qualification, to be noted for what it may be
worth, that the current, very urgent, sales-publicity may be pre-
sumed to divert a little something from savings to consumptive
expenditures, and so may add that much of a margin of funds
to the volume of purchasing-power currently available for ex-
penditure on advertised goods. For what it may be worth, this
unremitting impulsion to spend rather than save is to be counted
in as a factor in the case.

15 It has long been a commonplace among those who are inter-
ested in these matters that proprietary remedies, “patent medi-
cines” and the like—what are sometimes called “nostrums’—
can always be marketed with a good profit by use of a suitable
kind and amount of publicity, somewhat irrespective of any
inherent merit in the goods,—provided always that the seller-
proprietor and his publicity-agent go about the business with the
requisite lack of scruple. Something to the same effect holds
true of sales-enterprise in many productions of commercialised
art, which are plausibly alleged to be conducive to the prestige
of the consumer; as e. g., grave-stones, lap-dogs, parlor-furniture,
cosmetic pigments, fashionable dress and equipage generally.


310 Absentee Ownership


of customers by appliances of publicity is a craft which
runs on applied psychology. The raw material in which
the work is to be done is human credulity, and the output
aimed at is profitable fixed ideas. Current experience in
publicity appears to show that among the human sensibil-
ities upon which a sagacious salesmanship will spend its
endeavors the most fruitful are Fear and Shame. Hu-
man credulity appears to be peculiarly tractable under
the pressure of a well conceived appeal to fear and shame,
and to set into obstinate and extraordinary shapes (action
patterns) on relatively slight habituation along these lines.
The fear and shame on which the sales-publicity*® proceeds
in its work of turning credulous persons into profitable
customers are the fear of mortal disease and the fear of
losing prestige. It is not easy, nor perhaps is it worth
while, to attempt any hard and fast distinction between
the sense of shame and the fear of losing prestige; at
least in this connection and for the present argument.
These are ubiquitous traits of the race. The former rises,
apparently, to a gradually advancing pitch of sensibility
(and credulity) with advancing age; while the latter, the
solicitude for instant personal prestige, counts for more
in the period of adolescence and early maturity.** So the


16 Of the secular order, as contrasted with the propaganda of
the Faith; for it is to be remarked—and it carries a comfortable
note of authentication for salesmanship at large—that the stu-
pendous spiritual edifice of Holy Church also rests quite secure
on this profitable gift of credulous and lasting fear stabilised
with tireless publicity.

17 The fear of losing prestige has often been confused with
personal vanity; a mistake due to incomplete analysis of the
facts in the case. Closer attention to certain everyday facts,
e.g., will satisfy any passably judicious bystander that the
spirit which chiefly moves the young generation in these premises.
is not a boundless aspiration to out-bid and out-run all com-
petitors and reach a preéminent notoriety for a splendid and
colorful personal presence. Cosmetic pigments and preposterous


Manufactures and Salesmanship 3Tt


publicity agents of the sovereign remedies “throw a scare
into” the old generation, while the salesmen of the pro-
prietary beautifiers work on the aspirations of the young.
The beautifiers are in the nature of “pacifiers.” Between
them they account for a very large and lucrative volume
of absentee salesmanship, as well as a large aggregate of
sales-costs, and a large diversion of custom from other
lines of expenditures. The intrinsic merits of this traffic
in fear and credulity will call for no reflections.
Salesmanship which has to do with merchandising fol-
lows two main lines: publicity (advertising), and personal
bargaining.** Of the two, quantity-production of pub-


garments are applied to the person with a view to avoid falling
short of the blamelessly best, to avoid unfavorable notice rather
than to achieve notoriety, to “keep up with the times,” rather
than to set the pace. And it is to this fear of derogatory no-
toriety that the expert advertisers of these ways and means of
fabricated beauty address themselves and adapt the flow of their
intoxicating verbiage. Even a cursory view of advertising mat-
ter bearing on this point will show that its dominant note is
minatory; it runs, by constant suggestion, on the evil case of
those foolish virgins who “get left” in the matter of personal
prestige.

On any common-sense reflection it should seem highly improb-
able that anything but unreasoning fear would drive any person
to the habitual use of these singular means of adornment. It is
also known to ethnologists that practices of a similar nature
and of somewhat the same esthetic value among the peoples of
the lower cultures—as, e.g., tattooing and scarification, tooth-
filing, nose-boring, lip-buttons—rest directly and unequivocally
on the fear of losing prestige. And at this point, as indeed at
many others, it is profitable to call to mind that the hereditary
human nature of these Europeans and their colonies is still the
same as that of their savage forebears was in the Neolithic Age,
some ten or twelve thousand years ago.

18 Salesmanship which is not immediately concerned with mer-
chandising is less closely bound up with these two standard ways
and means; as, e. g., in the manceuvres of salesmanship by which
business is conducted in the key industries and in the money
market. The more habitual recourse here is sabotage, an expert


R12 Absentee Ownership


licity has been gaining over the personal bargain ever
since the business of selling began its advance to the large
scale. Publicity is absentee salesmanship, and fits into
the run of things along with absentee ownership. It is
as an expedient of merchandising in absentia that publicity
has fully come into its own.® But while sales-publicity
has been gaining ground, it is doubtful if personal bar-
gaining has lost ground, even relatively to the increased
volume of sales. What is not doubtful is that between
them the two account for a larger employment of man-
power and a larger consumption of materials than ever
before, whether counted in absolute figures or relatively
to the aggregate volume of goods sold. In other words,
more time, effort, and equipment—per unit of merchan-
dise—goes into salesmanship, now than in the past; the
sales-cost per unit is larger now, whether the. unit be
counted in terms of price or by weight and tale.

The cause of this advancing sales-cost is quite simple:
—production-cost by modern industrial methods being
less, the margin which can be taken up in sales-cost is
more. In the nature of things sales-cost will rise to the
restriction of supply, though by no means to the entire neglect
of publicity and bargaining. These lines of business will be con-
sidered in a later chapter.

19Jn its elements, of course, sales-publicity is nothing new;
but in its eventual working-out under absentee ownership it has
disclosed a character and significance beyond anticipation and be-
yond ancient example. Yet much of the doctrinal matter that goes
into print in behalf of yeast-cakes, “style-plus” clothing, lip-
sticks, face-creams, and the like, still reads not unlike that an-
cient achievement in publicity, the royal preamble to the Code of
Hammurabi, said to date from the twenty-first century B.C.
There is in both the same diligent attention to over-statement
and the same unfailing avoidance of all that is to be said in
abatement.

And as has already been indicated, the normal guide of sales-


publicity is the old Latin formula:—Suppressio veri, suggestio
falsi.


Manufactures and Salesmanship 313


maximum which the traffic will bear. If the net returns
to any or all of the sellers who are already in the market
should rise to any figure that can be called inordinate,
one or another of two alternatives will follow. The
sellers already in the market will competitively push their
sales-cost, their expenditures on publicity and bargainers,
to such a figure as to leave no inordinate returns; or new
sellers will see their chance to come in for a profit and so
will cut into the volume of sales and the margin of re-
turns.

Both methods are in constant operation. Just now
their action is masked and in some degree held in abey-
ance, in that the situation is undergoing a somewhat
sweeping change. The large-scale publicity has made
good as a profitable enterprise, and the large-scale com-
petitors have not yet begun that closer-shorn and truceless
competition among themselves for dominant control of
the market, which is presumably coming to a head in due
time. It is all contained in the workday premises of
absentee ownership and absentee salesmanship. For the
time being, the pioneers in this large sales-publicity are
enjoying the fruits of their businesslike initiative, in the
way of generous net returns; particularly the very large
ones among them, who are having things very much their
own way; which means low shop-costs, ample sales-costs,
high selling-prices, and lucrative margins, with large ag-
gregate net returns. But very much as is true in the

mechanical industry, so also in this large-scale mechanical
publicity, what one concern with ample funds can do an-
other concern with funds of the same amplitude in the
same or another line of merchandising can do as well, just:
so soon as the pioneers have sufficiently proved the case.
The pioneers—the current sellers of soap-powders, yeast-
cakes, rubber heels, motor cars, “cost-plus” clothing for


314 Absentee Ownership


young men, and the like—are due presently to be over-
taken, and their easy market cut into by others who are
ready to do just as well, with the result that sales-costs
by this method will rise to the maximum which the traf-
fic will bear, leaving no more than ordinary returns on
the investment. The net result in the end should be a
further increase of the prices paid by consumers and a
further growth of advertising agencies and their busi-
ness.

The number of concerns and the aggregate capital and
personnel engaged in the business of sales-publicity is
already very considerable, and the growth in all these
respects, as well as in the volume of the business hitherto,
goes on unchecked, with a very promising outlook for
continued growth at an accelerated rate in the near fu-
ture.*° The growth of this business, and the growing ne-
cessity of it as a means of competitive selling, has been
particularly notable during the past dozen years; and at
the same time it has undergone an extensive standardisa-
tion and specialisation, by which the work has come to be
effectually subdivided and apportioned among the per-


20 The oldest existing advertising agency, according to figures
supplied by the New York Council of the American Association
of Advertising Agencies (known to the trade as the A. A. A. A.)
was founded in 1864. It is still one of the largest, most reli-
able and most successful. It has now a business turnover of
something approaching $15,000,000, and has established branch
offices in several of the larger American and European cities.
‘The life-history of this corporation may fairly be taken as typi-
cal of the business. It has been successful from the outset and
has done an increasing volume of business since its foundation,
but its largest growth and most gratifying success lies within
the past decade. Its business turnover for the current year runs
in excess of that of any previous year; not even excepting 1920,
when the Treasury decision to the effect that expenditures on
advertising are exempt from the Income Tax led to an ex-
‘traordinary: increase in such expenditures.


Manufactures and Salesmanship 315,


sonnel within each concern at the same time that the field
of publicity has been divided among the several concerns,.
according to locality and according to the nature of the
work, particularly according to the ways and means em-
ployed, as, e.g., between news-print and “outdoor ad-
vertising.” *4


21 Something may conveniently be said of the comparative
merits, costs, volume, and present standing of these two chief
divisions of sales-publicity. During the past year, eg., at a
conference of the well-informed men of the country, interested in
these matters, the estimate was offered that “national” advertising
(as distinguished from “local”) in the newspapers of the coun-
try amounts at present to some $600,000,000, rather over tham
under. Well-informed persons within the body of conferees have
held that $700,000,000 or $750,000,000 would be nearer the facts.
The total expenditures for advertising in 1922, in newspapers and
magazines, has been some $800,000,000; while estimates for 1923,
run over $1,000,000,000.

Of outdoor advertising, Mr. E. O. Perrin, of the Media De~
partment in the J. Walter Thompson Co., says that, “untik
1919 it amounted to about $5,000,000. Since then, the increase has
been tremendous, and last year (1921) the total volume of out=-
door advertising in the United States exceeded $30,000,000.—
Prices vary greatly—according to size and location—some of the.
spectacular displays rent at extremely high figures. The big
Wrigley (chewing-gum) electric sign at Times Square, New
York, costs the advertiser $108,000 a year.”—E. O. Perrin, “The
Development of Outdoor Advertising,” in The J. Walter Thomp~
son News, February, 1922. At a conference of outdoor adver-=
tisers the previous year in Baltimore it was stated, on a deliberate
estimate, that that year’s expenditures on sign-boards alone—
what are known in the trade jargon as “Bulletins” and “Posters”
—were running over $60,000,000.

“In the city of Chicago ... it is possible to secure forty-eight
painted walls and bulletins at a cost of $1,250 per month. The
cost of a full page for one insertion in Chicago’s largest news-
paper is $1,708. In Kansas City, a display of one hundred
standard twenty-four sheet posters costs $755.60 per month, as:
against $1,064 for one full page in the leading newspaper. A
representative poster campaign covering the entire country and
consisting of 17,196 posters wonld cost the advertiser about
$140,000 per month.” (The Same.)


316 Absentee Ownership


News-print publicity, as the use of printed matter in
circulation may conveniently be called, is doubtless the
largest “medium” employed for the making of sales; as
it is also the most familiar and habitual, as well as the
most costly in the aggregate, whether cost be counted
in terms of the work and materials consumed, in the price
paid for it by the advertisers, or in what it adds to the
prices paid for goods by the consumers. It will include
primarily advertising matter in newspapers and periodi-
cals, but it includes also circulars, circular letters, and
leaflets distributed by mail or by hand, and there is also
to be counted in virtually all of the very considerable and
constantly increasing number of trade periodicals de-
voted to special lines of the manufacturing and mer-
chandising business, as well as the pages of trade-news
and business information carried by the common run
of papers, dailies, weeklies and others. On a deliberate
estimate based on such data as are readily available it
appears that advertising matter of the standard forms


“Tn this connection it is interesting to note that although the
outdoor medium was first used on a large scale by the makers
of patent medicines, it is now employed by nearly every type of
advertiser. .. . The use of outdoor advertising during the Liberty
Loan drives, as well as in recent political campaigns, is too well
known to need comment.

“Outdoor advertising is now conducted by a large number of
companies scattered all over the country, many of whom are in
competition with each other in various territories. ... The
Thomas Cusack Company. Considerably more than half of the
total volume of outdoor advertising in the United States last year
was placed by that organization. The Thomas Cusack Com-
pany owns and operates both paint and poster plants in several
hundred cities and towns throughout the country, and also
places advertising in nearly all the small independent plants. In
fact this company is the only organisation through which com-
plete national campaigns can be secured. There are now be-
tween seven and eight thousand men on the Thomas Cusack pay-
roll.” (The Same.)


Manufactures and Salesmanship S17


will account for something like one-half of the space
occupied by printed matter in newspapers, including
weeklies, rather under than over, and something appreci-
ably less than one-half of the printed space in magazines,
taking them one with another. If to this total of what
would be listed as advertising space proper be added the
trade-news, fashion, and financial columns, of the news-
papers and the papers and magazines that are wholly or
chiefly occupied with the interests of salesmanship, the
total will rise appreciably over one-half the printed mat-
ter that goes into circulation in the way of newspapers and
magazines. In point of expense the aggregate which is
so devoted to sales-publicity doubtless runs very appreci-
ably over one-half of the total of printed matter; ad-
vertising matter, financial news, and business comment
and review being on the whole the most costly reading
matter that goes to the make-up of a newspaper, both
in the production of its “copy” and in the typographical
composition and press work.??


22Jt is, accordingly, scarcely an over-statement to say that
something like one half of the wood-pulp that goes through the
paper mills, together with one-half the man-power and mechani-
cal equipment engaged in the paper industry and the printing
trades, is consumed in the making of competitive sales, the net
effect of which is to raise the prices paid for goods by the con-
sumers. The yearly consumption of newsprint paper in the
United States and Canada is about 2,600,000 tons, according to
figures submitted at a meeting of the Canadian Pulp and Paper
Association.

As giving some indication of what the figures for expenditure
on sales-publicity are like, in the periodical press outside of
newspapers, it is reported on reliable authority that the total
advertising revenues of 72 publications of this class for 1920 came
to $132,414,799. This was the year immediately affected by the
decision which exempts advertising expenditures from the in-
come tax. The corresponding figures for 1919 were $97,208,791,
those for 1918, $61,312,888. The corresponding total for “Color
Copy” (1920) was $39,644,545. As a maximum value of adver-


318 Absentee Ownership


The two major divisions of sales-advertising are ““News-
Print,” and “Outdoor” Advertising.? But there are
also many and various minor devices employed in the
service of absentee salesmanship,. which between them
make up a sufficiently formidable total. They comprise,
e.g., such things as show-windows,”* indoor display of
wares, decorative interiors, posters and personnel, trade
marks, “slogans,” demonstrators, decorative and doctrinal
containers.

None of these ways and means are new, in principle,
though some of them, as, e. g., the “spectacular” outdoor
signs, are as new in detail as the mechanical devices which
they turn to account. Nor is their use confined to what
would be precisely called sales-publicity. Yet in all the use
of these things there is this much in common, that they are


tising space in periodicals of this class, a single (preferred) page
of a single issue of the presumed leader among them sold, in
the winter of 1921, at the standard rate of $11,000; coupled with
an engagement to buy the same space at the same rate in 13
issues during the year. This price does not cover the prepara-
tion of the illustrations or the reading matter, which are supplied
at the expense of the advertiser—Cf. Advertising in National
Publications 1914-1920, Curtis Publishing Company, 1921. (For
private circulation.) Expenditures for advertising in news-
papers are said to run about seven times as high as what goes
to the magazines.

23 Outdoor displays have been classed under three standard
forms: Bulletins (“Any outdoor sign which is handpainted in
colors”); Poster (“A lithographed paper sign which is pasted
on a metal panel”); and Spectacular displays (“An electric dis-
play built on a skeleton steel frame with flashing devices”).

24“Big corporations with many branches have separate window
‘display departments with a staff of men expert in various
‘branches of the art, designing, color, and some even have a
psychologist on the staff to decide whether the finished effect will
‘prove alluring to the public.

“The great amount of material used in these windows has
already made itself felt in several industries, the Copper and
Brass Association figuring that 2,000,000 pounds of copper will
be consumed during 1922,”


Manufactures and Salesmanship 219


employed competitively in an endeavour to draw on the
sympathies and the substance of the underlying popula-
tion ; they are useful as a means by which those who make
use of them come in for a competitive share in the usu-
fruct of the underlying population, its services, workman-
ship, and material output. They have all been turned to
account, early and late, in such enterprises as public loans,
recruiting campaigns for army and navy, electioneering
campaigns, campaigns for contributions to charities, relief,
and such demi-military enterprises as the Red Cross; and
most notably of all for the Propaganda of the Faith.


Nore to CHAPTER XI


Writers who discuss these matters have not directed
attention to the Propaganda of the Faith as an object-
lesson in sales-publicity, its theory and practice, its ways
and means, its benefits and its possibilities of gain. Yet
it is altogether the most notable enterprise of the kind.
The Propaganda of the Faith is quite the largest, oldest,
most magnificent, most unabashed, and most lucrative en-
terprise in sales-publicity in all Christendom. Much is to
be learned from it as regards media and suitable methods
of approach, as well as due perseverence, tact, and effront-
ery. By contrast, the many secular adventures in salesman-
ship are no better than upstarts, raw recruits, late and slender
capitalisations out of the ample fund of human credulity.
It is only quite recently, and even yet only with a dawning
realisation of what may be achieved by consummate ef-
frontery in the long run, that these others are beginning to
take on anything like the same air of stately benevolence
and menacing solemnity. No pronouncement on _ rubber-
heels, soap-powders, lip-sticks, or yeast-cakes, not even
Sapphira Buncombe’s Vegetative Compound, are yet able
to ignore material facts with the same magisterial detach-
ment, and none has yet commanded the same unreasoning
assent or acclamation. None other have achieved that
pitch of unabated assurance which has enabled the pub-
licity-agents of the Faith to debar human reason from


320 Absentee Ownership


scrutinising their pronouncements. These others are do-
ing well enough, no doubt; perhaps as well as might rea-
sonably be expected under the circumstances, but they
are a feeble thing in comparison. Saul has slain his
thousands, perhaps, but David has slain his tens of thou-
sands.

There is, of course, no occasion for levity in so calling
to mind these highly significant works of human infatuation,
past and current. Nor should it cast any shadow of pro-
fanation on any of the sacred verities when it is so called
to mind that, when all is said, they, too, rest after all on
the same ubiquitously human ground of unreasoning fear,
aspiration, and credulity, as do the familiar soap-powders,
yeast-cakes, lip-sticks, rubber tires, chewing-gum, and
restoratives of lost manhood, whose profitable efficacy is
likewise created and kept in repair by a well-advised sales-
publicity. Indeed, it should rather seem the other way
about. That the same principles of sales-publicity are
found good and profitable for the traffic in: spiritual
amenities and in these material comforts should serve to
show how deep and pervasively the scheme of deliverance
and rehabilitation is rooted in the merciful gift of credu-
lous infatuation. It should redound to the credit of the
secular arm of sales-publicity rather than cast an asper-
sion on those who traffic in man’s spiritual needs; and
should go to show how truly business-as-usual articulates
with the business of the Kingdom of Heaven. As it is
with the traffic in these divinely beneficial intangibles, so
it is with the like salesmanship on the material plane; the
marvels of commercial make-believe, too, seek and find a
lodgment in the popular knowledge and belief by way of
a tireless publicity, such as blessed experience has long
and profitably proved and found good in the Propaganda
of the Faith. Ways and means which so have proved
gainful to His publicity-agents and conducive to the Glory
of God—indeed indispensable to the continued upkeep of
that Glory—are being drawn into the service of the secular
Good of Man; so attesting the excellence of that devoutly
familiar form of words which describes the swmmum bonum
as a balanced ration of divine glory and human use. It is


Manufactures and Salesmanship S27


worth noting in this connection that those Godfearing
business men who administer the nation’s affairs appear to
realise this congruity between sacred and secular sales-
manship; so much so that they have on due consideration
found that investment in commercial advertising is right-
fully exempt from the income tax, very much as the assets
and revenues of the churches are tax-exempt. The one
line of publicity, it appears is intrinsic to the good of man,
as the other is essential to the continued Glory of God.

There is more than one reason for speaking of these
matters here, and for speaking of them in a detached and
objective way as mere workday factors of human con-
duct,—leaving all due sanctimony on one side for the time
being, without thereby questioning the need and merit of
such sanctimony as an ordinary means of grace, or the ex-
pediency of it as a standard vehicle of sales-publicity in
putting over the transcendent verities of the Faith. It all
implies no call and no inclination to lay profane hands on
these verities. Taken objectively as a human achievement,
the high example of the Propaganda of the Faith should
serve as a moral stimulus and a pacemaker. The whole
duty of sales-publicity is to “put it over,” as the colloquial
phrasing has it; and in the matter of putting it over, it is
plain that the laurel, the palms, and the pzan are due to go
to the publicity-agents of the Faith, without protest. The
large and enduring success of the Propaganda through the
ages is an object-lesson to show how great is the efficacy of
ipse dixit when it is put over with due perseverence and
audacity. It also carries a broad suggestion as to what
may be the practical limits eventually to be attained by
commercial advertising in the way of capitalisable earning-
capacity.

Commercial sales-publicity of the secular sort evidently
falls short, hitherto, in respect of the pitch and volume of
make-believe which can be put over effectually and profit-
ably. But it also falls short conspicuously at another criti-
cal point. It is of the nature of sales-publicity, to promise
much and deliver a minimum. Suppressio vert, suggestio
falsi. Worked out to its ideal finish, as in the promises and
performance of the publicity-agents of the Faith, it should
be the high good fortune of the perfect salesman in the sec-


222 Absentee Ownership


ular field also to promise everything and deliver nothing.

Hitherto this climax of salesmanlike felicity has not been
attained in the secular merchandising enterprise, except in
a sporadic and dubious fashion. On the other hand, hitherto
the publicity-agents of the Faith have habitually promised
much and have delivered substantially none of the material
advertised, and have “come through” with none of the
tangible performances promised by their advertising matter.
All that has been delivered hitherto has—perhaps all for the
better—been in the nature of further publicity, often with a
use of more pointedly menacing language; but it has always
been more language, with a moratorium on the liquidation
of the promises to pay, and a penalty on any expressed
doubt of the solvency of the concern. There have of
course, from time to time, been staged certain sketchy prodi-
gies, in the nature of what the secular outdoor advertisers
would call “spectacular displays,” apparently designed to
demonstrate the nature and merits of the goods kept in
stock. These have not infrequently been highly ingenious,
and also quite convincing to such persons as are fit to be con-
vinced by them. They have carried conviction to those
persons whose habitual beliefs are of a suitable kind. But
as viewed objectively and as seen in any other than their
own dim religious light, these admirable feats of manifesta-
tion have been after all essentially ephemeral and nugatory
hitherto; very much of a class with those lunch-counter sam-
ple-packages that are designed to demonstrate the expansive
powers of some noted baking-powder, in miniature and with
precautions. They are after all in the nature of publicity-
gestures, eloquent, no doubt, and graceful, but they are not
the goods listed in the doctrinal pronouncements; no more
than the wriggly gestures with which certain spear-headed
manikins stab the nightly firmament over Times Square are
an effectual delivery of chewing-gum. Bona-fide delivery
of the listed goods would have to be a tangible performance
of quite another complexion, inasmuch as the specifications
call for Hell-fire and the Kingdom of Heaven; to which the
most heavily capitalised of these publicity concerns of the
supernatural adds a broad margin of Purgatory.

There is, of course, no call and no inclination to take the


Manufactures and Salesmanship — 323


publicity-agents of the Faith to task for failure to deliver
the goods listed in their advertising matter. Quite other-
wise, indeed. Since the sales-publicity from which these
publicity-concerns derive their revenue plays on unreason-
ing fear and unreasoning aspiration, the output of goods
listed in their advertising matter, falls under the two general
heads of Hell-fire and the Kingdom of Heaven; so that, on
the whole, their failure to deliver the goods is perhaps fortu-
nate rather than otherwise. Hell-fire is after all a com-
modity the punctual delivery of which is not desired by the
ultimate consumers; and according to such descriptive
matter as is available the Kingdom of Heaven, on the other
hand, should not greatly appeal to persons of sensitive taste,
being presumably something of a dubiously gaudy affair,
something in the nature of three rings and a steam-calliope,
perhaps. It might have been worse.

This failure to deliver the goods is brought up here only
as an object-lesson which goes to show what and how great
are the powers of sales-publicity at its best; as exemplified in
a publicity enterprise which has over a long period of time
very profitably employed a very large personnel and a very
extensive and costly material equipment, coupled with no
visible ability or intention to deliver any material part
of the commodities advertised, or indeed to deliver anything
else than a further continued volume of the same magisterial
publicity that has procured a livelihood for its numerous
personnel and floated its magnificent overhead charges in
the past. In this lucrative enterprise the Propaganda of
the Faith employs a larger and more expensive personnel
and a larger equipment of material appliances, with larger
running expenses and larger revenues,—not only larger
than any given one line among the secular enterprises in
sales-publicity, but larger than the total of all that goes into
secular sales-publicity in all the nations of Christendom.

Of such sacred sales-publicity concerns operating as
certified agents for this marketing of supernatural intan-
gibles, the Census of 1916 enumerates 202 chain-store or-
ganizations, comprising a total of 203,432 retail establish-
ments occupied exclusively with the sale of such publicity
to the ultimate consumers; of whom there is one born
every minute, and who are said to be carried on the


324 Absentee Ownership


books of these retailers to the number of 41,926,854. It has
been confidently estimated, on the ground of these data, that
the effectual number of paying customers will be approxi-
mately 90,000,000; regard being had to the very appreciable
floating clientéle and the great number of effectual con-
sumers attached to and associated with the customers of
record. The stated value of “church property’ is
$1,676,600,582. These tangible assets are exempt from
taxation.

The figures of this enumeration are suggestive, but it
takes account of only such establishments as are formally
chartered to do business exclusively in the retail distribution
of sacred sales-publicity. It covers no more than the certi-
fied apparatus for retail merchandising of the output. If re-
gard be had to the equipment and personnel engaged in the
fabrication, sorting, storage, ripening and mobilisation of
the output, these figures will be found impossibly scant. If
regard be had to the very considerable number of schools
for the training of certified publicity-agents in Divinity and
for generating a suitable bias of credulity in the incoming
generation, as well as to the mighty multitude of convents,
clubs, camps, infirmaries, retreats, missions, charities, ceme-
teries, and periodicals, in whole or in part given over to this
work and its personnel, at home and abroad, it will be evident
that any of the figures commonly assigned, whether for the
material equipment, the receipts and disbursements, or for
the operative personnel engaged on the propaganda, should
freely be doubled, at least.”

The man-power employed in this work of the Propa-
ganda is also more considerable than that engaged in any
other calling, except Arms, and possibly Husbandry. Prel-
ates and parsons abound all over the place, in the high, the
middle, and the low degree; too many and too diversified, in
person, station, nomenclature, and vestments, to be rightly
enumerated or described,—bishops, deans, canons, abbots and
abbesses, rectors, vicars, curates, monks and nuns, elders,
deacons and deaconesses, secretaries, clerks and employees
of Y. M. C. A., Epworth Leagues, Christian Endeavors, etc.,


1Cf. Part I of Report on Religious Bodies, 1916 by the
Bureau of the Census.


Manufactures and Salesmanship Res


beadles, janitors, sextons, sunday-school teachers, mission-
aries, writers, editors, printers and vendors of sacred litera-
ture, in books, periodicals and ephemera. All told—if it
were possible—it will be evident that the aggregate of
human talent currently consumed in this fabrication of ven-
dible imponderables in the nth dimension, will foot up to a
truly massive total, even after making a reasonable allow-
ance, of, say, some thirty-three and one-third per cent., for
average mental deficiency in the personnel which devotes
itself to this manner of livelihood.?


2 Extra Services at St. Patrick’s

Special Holy Week services are scheduled for each day at St.
Patrick’s Cathedral.

To-morrow night there will be a sermon by the Rev. W. B.
Martin and benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, while the
tenebre will be sung at 4 P.M. in commemoration of the
sufferings and death of Christ.

On Holy Thursday communion will be given every half hour
between 6 and 9g a.M. and at 10 A.M. There will be pontifi-
cal mass, blessing of the holy oils, and procession to the
repository. The tenebrze will be sung at 4 P.M. and the holy
hour will begin at 8 P.M.

On Good Friday adoration at the repository will take place
from 8 to 10 A.M., followed by singing of the sacred psalms,
sermon, unveiling of the holy cross, procession to the repos-
itory, mass of the presanctified, and reverencing of the holy
cross.

The Passion sermon on Friday will be preached by Mgr. Lavelle,
rector. The tenebre will be sung at 4 P. M.

The blessing of the new fire will take place at 8 o’clock on
Saturday. The paschal candle and the baptismal font also will
be blessed.

Mass on Easter Sunday will be pontificated by the archbishop,
who also will give the papal blessing. Pontifical vespers will
take place at 4 p.m—The Globe and Commercial Advertiser,


New York, Tuesday, March 27, 1923.


CHAPTER XII


Tue Larcer USE OF CREDIT


THE pivotal factor in the business enterprise of this new
era is the larger use of credit which has come into action
during the last few decades; larger in absolute scale and
volume as well as in the ratio which it bears to those
underlying tangible assets on which it is conceived tou rest.
This volume of credit is more widely detached from all
material objects and operations, and increasingly so.

The business men of the nineteenth century, too, habitu-
ally conducted their affairs on a basis of credit, with
slight, infrequent and inconsequential recourse to trans-
actions in cash or in kind; increasingly so as the century
advanced and as the credit system progressively matured
into something like that stability and self-sufficiency which
it now has attained. Prices ran on a credit basis, as a
workday matter of course and of convenience, and vir-
tually no payments of any consequence were made or
expected to be made in any other medium than credit-
instruments; so that the price-system had already in the
nineteenth century become, in effect, a system of credit-
prices. The banknote currency employed was a volume
of credit-instruments, to which the underlying specie-re-
serve stood in the relation of a contingent emergency fund
and a base-line of inflation. The “deposit currency”
which served as the chief medium of exchange and method
of payment was somewhat more widely out of touch with
any cash basis, being related to the underlying specie-

326


The Larger Use of Credit 227


reserve at the second remove only. At no time would the
price-level decline to or near its cash base-line, except in
a convulsive way in times of commercial crisis. At such
times the familiar credit-instruments by use of which
business was carried on would fall somewhat under sus-
picion, transiently, and the margin of price-inflation
would then be greatly narrowed.

So soon as business picked up again and brisk times
returned after these periods of partial deflation, the
habitual credit-inflation would regain any lost ground and
would then ordinarily run to a slightly higher level than
before. Through all this fluctuating price-inflation that
so made hard times or prosperity there runs a certain air
of irresponsibility or fortuity, particularly through the
earlier half or three quarters of the century. The busi-
ness community was still unable to control its necessary
credit relations at all effectually. The country’s credit
relations were not ready to be organised on a reasonably
compact and inclusive plan, such as would combine sta-
bility with a sufficiently flexible administration of de-
tails. They were therefore subject to ungoverned sea-
sonal and local contingencies, which upset the balance be-
tween credits and debits from time to time and so spread
derangement and consternation abroad through the busi-
ness community.

The precise point of the difficulty appears to have been

1 The ordinary width of this margin of inflation is a matter
for conjecture rather than computation. It varied appreciably
even in ordinary times, and it grew gradually wider on the
whole as the century advanced. Toward the close of the cen-
tury a reasonable estimate would perhaps make it something
between 500 per cent. and 1000 per cent. of what the price level
might conceivably have been in the absence of bank credit.


But since substantially no business was conducted on any
other than a credit basis there are no data on which to base


a secure opinion.


328 Absentee Ownership


that there was no effectual concert or collusion govern-
ing the use of credit at large in that earlier time. The
debits and credits on which business was kept afloat were
not subject to effectual joint control; there was no ef-
fectual pooling of assets and liabilities. So that debtors
and creditors, even those of the larger sort, were still
somewhat at cross purposes; with no effectual teamwork
between those massive creditors and debtors, who, be-
tween them, make up the substantial core of the business
community. The large debtors were not identified with
their creditors in point of management and control, at
least not in a degree sufficient to maintain a reasonably
stable balance of things on a basis of community interest.
In more concrete terms, the general run of the key in-
dustries had not been tied up with the larger banks.

This difficulty has since been obviated, at least in a
great degree if not altogether. The larger lines of owner-
ship, both in the industries of the country and in its credit
institutions, have been drawn together on somewhat com-
mon ground, with such effect that those massive debits
and credits which are of decisive consequence for the
stability of the credit system, in the large, are now owned,
or can be managed, in a collective fashion and to a com-
mon end. Therefore the level of credit-prices is now
quite reasonably under control, at the hands of the parties
most largely interested in its maintenance. So much so
that there should no longer be any serious apprehension
that the credit system may break down at an inopportune
moment or that the price-level will suffer any material
decline. A break might, of course, come on advisedly,
by concert among those massive credit concerns which
have, in effect, taken over the administration of the gen-~
eral body of credit. But such an eventuality need scarcely
be contemplated; or if so, it may be contemplated with


The Larger Use of Credit 329


equanimity, inasmuch as it could be brought on only by
deliberate action of the chief parties in interest, and
therefore presumably only for their common good.”
Such has been the outcome in the large and in sub-
stantial effect. It has brought a new and more stable
order of things in business, as well as a new and more
precarious order of things in industry. The outcome
takes effect in a large and sweeping fashion; but it has
come into action by way of a multiplicity of shifting de-
tails, as is necessarily the case where a new order of things
arises by a process of habituation to new circumstances.
It is the upshot of many minor changes which have con-
verged—or are converging—to this effect, by drift of cir-
cumstance rather than by reasoned design, perhaps even
without any degree of effectual prevision on the part of
those who have been the chief actors in the case. It is


2The run of things in these respects since the War should
be sufficiently reassuring to anyone who might be apprehensive.
An inflated capitalisation has been kept intact as a whole and
has steadily been increased, and inflated market prices have been
maintained without substantial abatement during these years,
at the cost of persistent inaction in industry; in the face of
extreme provocation to go to work and a very appreciable run
of popular hardship and discontent due to continued unemploy-
ment and restriction of output. Whereas, if those concerns
which control the financial end of things had kept their hands
off and let the inflated credit situation come to a head, a
drastic liquidation of the country’s business affairs would doubt-
less have gone into effect in due course and brought on an
effectual retrenchment in capitalisation and prices; whereupon
the country’s industries would shortly have got under way and
would speedily have made good the wastes of the War, and
supplied all ordinary needs. Indeed, there is no reason to doubt
that the resulting industrial production, if it had been allowed
to run free, would by this time (1923) have added as much to
the tangible wealth of the country as would equal all the book-
values of those inflated assets which their financial guardians
have been safeguarding with unemployment and commercial
paper through these years of privation and unrest.


330 Absentee Ownership


also worth noting that the resulting state of things, in the
respect which is in question here, has not been formally
acknowledged or recognised by the parties concerned,—
unless the need of occasionally denying its existence be
accepted as amounting to an admission of it; and more
particularly it has no legal existence. Indeed, the actual
state of things in this respect is doubtless quite impossible
de jure; which will of course mean only that it is some-
thing new, newer than the traditions of the law.

Its roots run through the economic tissues of the nine-
teenth ceutury, and the historical date of its beginnings
would have to be assigned on grounds of taste and pre-
conception by any historian who might deal with this
matter, and it would accordingly differ greatly according to
his point of view and his point of attention. But since the
argument here is concerned with the business situation as
it has been taking shape during the past two decades, it
should answer the present purpose to strike into the
run of things in the nineties for a point of departure, and
give attention chiefly to the changes which have come on
since that period ; letting that which has already been said
in earlier chapters serve by way of orientation; particu-
larly what has been said on the rise of corporation finance
and on the increasing resort to credit during the cen-


tury.®
A convenient point of departure for the rise of the


3 Many excellent manuals and monographs have dealt with the
conduct of business in the late nineteenth century; so many and
so well as to make any selective citation difficult as well as
invidious. But because the argument leans on these two in a
peculiar degree, special reference is made to the analysis of the
business situation at the close of the century as contained in
W. C. Mitchell’s Business Cycles, and in the chapters on Credit
and Capitalisation in The Theory of Business Enterprises.


The Larger Use of Credit 331


new era in business enterprise may be found in the late
nineties; and the new departure may be said to have
been set afoot in the financiering of mergers and holding-
companies during those years by the late J. Pierpont
Morgan and those others who presently followed his lead.

In that time the holding-company came to stand as the
advanced and perfected type-form of corporate ownership
and control as employed in the conduct of industrial busi-
ness. It was a well-considered advance over the earlier
methods of absentee ownership and absentee management.
In point of form, the holding-company is of a more per-
fect order of absenteeism, in that by this device the law-
ful owner draws back farther by one remove from any
personal relation with the property which he owns and
from which he derives an income; whether the property
in question be tangible assets or ‘a vested usufruct. At
the same time the owner’s claim on and control over his
property shifts to a more impersonal or statistical foot-
ing, if possible; to a footing of standardised quantitative
allotment in terms of percentual units. His relation to
the property and its use thereby comes to carry a slighter
effectual responsibility for any action taken, or for any
tangible outcome of such action taken by the corporate
management to which he has in effect delegated his rights
and powers. In the holding-company, even more ob-
viously than in the ordinary corporation, the owner del-
egates the powers of ownership, and retains only its rights
and immunities. So also it leaves him a correspondingly
slighter chance of personally influencing any action taken
by the management.

The holding-company has commonly been of a large
size; and that fact has likewise had the effect of sub-
merging the individual owner and his personal bias and
initiative. The result is a pronounced degree of imper-


332 Absentee Ownership


sonality and standardised routine. So also, in the prac-
tical conduct of its affairs by the holding-company, the
effectual control and management of any corporate busi-
ness has passed into the hands of a relatively smaller
minority of the ultimate owners, and at the same time the
effectual control exercised by this relatively small minor-
ity of the owners has taken on a more unequivocally sta-
tistical character. So much so, indeed, that their ef-
fectual oversight and control will ordinarily touch noth-
ing more tangible or more personal than certain figures
supplied by the corporation’s accountants; commonly
numbers running to some half-a-dozen digits, having to
do with certain price-totals.

The holding-company is no longer viewed with appre-
hension, as it once was; nor does it hold that dominant
place in the business of credit and capitalisation which it
held about the turn of the century. Not that it has gone
out of use or out of mind. It has been proven and found
good and has become a part of the standard apparatus
of business, a commonplace formality of the routine.
But at the outset, when the holding-company was coming
into use, it was the effectual means of reorganising the
business of the key industries on an enlarged, more elabo-
rate and more manageable plan. It served to bring these
industrial business concerns together into larger agglom-
erations than had been practicable up to that time, and
it served also to detach the ownership of these concerns
from their management more widely and effectually than
before. By this move the whole apparatus and manage-
ment of industrial business was placed on a foundation of
credit in a more unqualified fashion than before, and
thereby the management of the business was enabled to
“trade on a thinner equity” * than had been practicable


4 The expression, “trading on the equity,” as employed in this


The Larger Use of Credit 333


in the past. Corporation finance was enabled to take on
still more of the character of standardised routine. So
that the holding-company has been an instrument and an
exemplar of that drift of things in the conduct of busi-
ness which has brought on the current state of things, and
which has made the difference between the situation of
the nineties and that of the present.

Much of the use which the holding-company has served
has been that of standardising the routine of “big busi-
ness” and familiarising the business community with that
larger scale and wider detachment that is characteristic
of the ordinary use of credit and the ordinary duties of
ownership in this later time. In a very passable fashion
men have learned all that now, so that it is no longer
beset with the distrust of the unknown,—which is said to
be a nearly universal infirmity of sound business men.
What the use of the holding-company once served to drive
them to has now become a familiar matter of course.

Something to much the same effect is to be said for the
use of “interlocking directorates,” which also once loomed
up in popular apprehension as a formidable, if not a men-
acing, innovation in the conduct of business. The in-
terlocking directorate has also not passed out of use. It,
too, is still a convenient arrangement for purposes of mu-
tual understanding and support. But these purposes for
which these devices were once resorted to as a means of
constraint, have now become habitual matters of routine ;
and the devices therefore have ceased to claim that de-
gree of attention which they were once presumed to merit.
They are no longer of the essence of the case.


connection, is borrowed from W. H. Lyon, Capitalisation, where
a very competent discussion of this principle is to be found in
chapter il.


334 Absentee Ownership


The late J. Pierpont Morgan saw an opportunity and
turned it to account. It is not likely, and it does not ap-
pear, that he rated himself as a path-finder or in any
sense as the pioneer of a new era in business enterprise,
or that he harbored any ambition or design to change the
face of the business community. For all his large in-
itiative and his large powers and responsibilities, he was
a notably unassuming person; being apparently driven
by nothing more spectacular than the habitual incentives
of safe and sane business of the larger sort; ° although his
larger initiative led him beyond his contemporaries and
associates, and at times, indeed, led him close to the fron-
tiers of sound business practice.

The undertakings which are associated with his memory
at this point, and which played a typical part in leading
over to the new era, may be described in general terms
somewhat as follows. At that time (late nineties) there
were a large number and variety of established business
concerns doing business primarily in certain of the key
industries, notably steel, ore, coal, and railways. Many
of these concerns were in a moderately bad way financi-
ally, for one reason and another. They were, not un-
commonly, unable to command such a volume of credit
as was needed in the conduct of their business. They were
commonly over-capitalised—in excess of their market
value as going concerns and notably in excess of the
value of their tangible assets. So they were carrying
overhead charges somewhat in excess of what their cur-
rent earnings would warrant; and their earnings were de-
clining rather than otherwise.

This state of their affairs was due in some measure to
a more or less pronounced obsolescence. It was in part


5 As is related of Jakob Fugger, “Er wollte verdienen dieweil
er konte.”


The Larger Use of Credit 335


an obsolescence of their industrial plant, but with more
critical effect these concerns also suffered from a rapidly
growing obsolescence of locality, particularly as related
to the means of transportation on which they depended
for their supply of raw materials and for the delivery of
their marketable output. In some instances their busi-
ness facilities were also going out of date; their mar-
kets were in process of obsolescence, through a shifting of
the population, through changes of custom and usage,
through being cut under by other concerns doing busi-
ness in the same market. There had been ceaseless change
in the technique of these industries during the life-time
of these business concerns; and more particularly dur-
ing the lifetime of the “underlying companies” and in-
dustrial plants on which these industrial business con-
cerns were based; for the greater number of those con-
cerns that are in question here were composite organisa-
tions, built up out of previously existing corporations and
firms, by merger, purchase, and consolidation. And
throughout this period of industrial growth, changes in
the processes of industry and in the localisation of the
various industries had been going forward; due in great
part to the growth and redistribution of the population
and to continued extensions and enlargement of the trans-
portation systems. New natural resources also continued
to be drawn into the industrial system and to be engrossed
by certain of the larger owners. All of which conspired
to put these business concerns out of date and out of
joint with the conditions of the market. Perhaps the
gravest of the factors which contributed to this obsoles-
cence and perplexity of these industrial business concerns
was the competitive character of their market, both for
raw materials and labor and for disposal of the output;
and this competitive market was all the more precarious


336 Absentee Ownership


because the productive capacity of the existing plants was
already greater than the market would carry off at a
profitable price, even within the shelter of a high pro-
tective tariff. The most embarrassing appears to have
been the inconsiderate competitive position taken by those
Carnegie properties which presently came to play so mag-
isterial a role in precipitating the formation of the U. S.
Steel Corporation.®

Not infrequently the management of these previously
established industrial business concerns was in the hands
of elderly and opinionated owners, who had an old-
fashioned sentimental interest each in his own corpora-
tion, as being his own creation, and whose occupation
would be gone in case their own concern were to be
merged with others or sunk in an inclusive holding-com-
pany. These survivers of an earlier business régime were
by way of being “captains of industry” of the obsolete
sort, in that they commonly combined some degree
of technical training, experience, and aspiration, with
a customary knowledge of the markets and of cor-
poration finance. And they were commonly out of date
in both respects, by force of what may be called obsoles-
cence by displacement in technical practice and in financial
usage. They were patriarchal holdovers, with much of
the intolerance that will commonly invest the self-made
patriarch. Things had been moving forward in mat-
ters of knowledge and practice during the lifetime of


6 For descriptions and argument on this movement in the
nineties and after, Cf. the testimony of various witnesses before
the U. S. Industrial Commission, in the Commission’s Report,
vols. I, IX and XIII. So also W. Z. Ripley, Trusts, Pools and
Corporations; E. S. Meade, Trust Finance, and Corporation
Finance; W. S. Stevens, Industrial Combinations and Trusts;
C. W. Gerstenberg, Materials of Corporation Finance; A. S.
Dewing, Corporate Promotions and Reorganization.


The Larger Use of Credit 337


these elderly captains and their establishments, and among
the forward changes were such as made imperatively for
a larger scale and a more far-reaching team-work in the
processes of production, a larger use of credit, and for a
more carefully guarded competition in the markets. And
none of this fell in readily with the settled habits of these
elderly captains or with the standing business relations
among their several concerns.

These industrial business concerns, and their under-
lying companies and plants, had in their time been pro-
jected with a view to the traffic of a fairly open competi-
tive market, and they had expanded by successive ex-
tensions and accretions, and so had grown to maturity
under conditions which that traffic had created. With the
progressive filling-out and closing-in of this market they
found themselves, progressively, in the position of com-
petitive producers for a closed market of variable vol-
ume. They were consequently somewhat overstocked
with industrial plants of a fair productive capacity, which
not unusually duplicated one another, and which had been
placed somewhat hastily by rule of thumb in somewhat
haphazard locations, and had grown from relatively small
beginnings by a process of patchwork and extension. And
all the while their combined productive capacity rather
exceeded the capacity of their market—at any such price
as would afford them a “reasonable profit” on their out-
put. In this sense the market was closing in. It was be-
coming too narrow for a free run of output at the price-
levei at which these enterprises had been projected. The
period of competitive business in the key industries was
closing. So that continued open competition among them
became “cutthroat competition”; such as to entail present
and prospective decline of their earning-capacity. As
one consequence of this situation, they were greatly in


338 Absentee Ownership


need of additional credits for use in their business, at a
time when their credit capacity was falling off and their
liabilities were already becoming distressingly burden-
some.

When the affairs of the corporations in the key indus-
tries had reached this pass, the dean of the banking com-
munity saw his own occasion in the present needs and the
dubious prospects of these industrial business concerns.
Of course there were others, too, and not a few, who
were ready to see the same opportunity and to profit by it
so soon as it had been placed before them in an object-
lesson. The conjuncture was essentially that of a sweep-
ing transition and realignment, incident to the passing of
the common run of the key industries from a footing of
competitive business in an ample market to a footing of
collusive traffic in a closed market too narrow .for un-
guarded competitive production.’

As the event has taught, the executive use of the coun-
try’s credit resources in a large way and on a reasoned
plan was the appointed means by which the due recon-
struction of the business was to be worked out, and also
the means by which the needful running collusion in the
further conduct of the business was to be enforced and
regulated. The holding-company and the merger, to-
gether with the interlocking directorates, and presently the
voting trust, were the ways and means by which the bank-
ing community took over the strategic regulation of the
key industries, and by way of that avenue also the
control of the industrial system at large. By this move
the effectual discretion in all that concerns the business
management of the key industries was taken out of the


7 There is, of course, no sharp date-line to be drawn in such
a case, but 1897 will serve to mark this turn of affairs as well
as any.


The Larger Use of Credit 339


hands of corporation managers working in severalty and
at cross purposes, and has been lodged in the hands of
that group of investment bankers who constitute in effect
a General Staff of financial strategy and who between
them command the general body of the country’s credit
resources. This general staff, or inner group, command
the credit resources of the country at large; although it
would presumably not do to say, at least not just yet,
that they—the large business financiers and their banking-
houses—own or comprise or constitute the credit resources
of the country.

Out of this drift of things the “Investment Banker”
has emerged, to serve as a powerful instrumental factor in
working out the new alignment of ownership and indus-
trial business, and presently to take his place as one of the
essential workday institutions of the business community.
It should perhaps be remarked that he is not yet in exist-
ence de jure, but only de facto. Just yet he is still in
process of standardisation as regards his precise nature
and uses; so that no sharply defined description of him
and his work can be drawn, just yet, although there is
some thing to be said of him and his functions. He
is the source or the channel, as the case may be, of cap-
italisation and of corporation credit at large,—a source if
he amounts to a banking-house of the first magnitude, a
channel if his place in the economy of Nature is that of
a subordinate. At the same time and in his appropriate
degree he is the standard container of such credit and
the standard repository, original or vicarious, of the larger
intelligence and discretion in these fiscal matters. He
initiates movement or pressure in the conduct of business,

8Cf. A. S. Dewing. The Financial Policy of Corporations,
vol. II, ch. ii and vii. In the same connection see also The


Same, vol. III, ch. ix, on the Voting Trust. Also Hastings
Lyon, Corporation Finance, Part II, ch. ii and 111.


340 Absentee Ownership


or he transmits initiative and pressure. In point of
pedigree, considered as an institution, his formal line of
descent out of the past traces back to the business of un-
derwriting, as it ran in the time before the banking com-
munity had taken over the general initiative and fore-
sight in the conduct of industrial business. But he is
also rooted in the business of commercial banking and
banks of issue, as well as in the trust-companies that have
come up and grown great in his own time; and then there
is about him, too, a broad hint of the bill-broker of earlier
times. In point of form, he is affiliated with his client-
corporations as creditor, underwriter, sponsor, banker,
broker. In effect, he is the comptroller of their fiscal af-
fairs and, within reason, the master of their solvency; be-
ing custodian of their absentee owners’ interests at large.
Hitherto, and in so far as it has touched the larger con-
tingencies of business, this work of initiative, discretion,
foresight, and control, which has become incumbent on
the country’s investment bankers, has habitually taken
effect by way of collusion or concerted action. This con-
cert of action is of the essence of the case. It is by
virtue of such concert among the larger and more re-
sponsible ones that they constitute in effect the General
Staff of the business community—what may be called the
One Big Union of the Interests. Under the surveillance
of this general staff, it has become incumbent on the in-
vestment bankers as an organized body to deal with the
run of business as an organic moving equilibrium. This
highly responsible task enjoins a collusive sobriety, a col-
lective and concerted moderation, such as is intended in
the colloquial phrase, “sitting tight.’ Whe investment
y bankers collectively are the community custodians of ab-
sentee ownership at large, the general staff in charge of
the pursuit of business. And since the conduct of in-


The Larger Use of Credit 341


dustry is incidental to the pursuit of business, the state
of industry and the rate, volume and balance of pro-
duction also are dependent on their sagacity and good-
will. So that it is here, if anywhere, that responsibility
for the country’s material welfare may be said to rest.

In his time, the great pioneering creator of mergers
and holding-companies came to stand as the chief of in-
vestment bankers and the dean of the congregation of
corporation finance. And from that time on, the invest-
ment bankers have progressively taken over the control
of industrial business in the large. Investment-banking
as it is conducted now, owes its rise and character to the
circumstances of that time, and it has continued to work
out along much the same lines to which it was then
brought by the experience of Morgan and his associates.
This financial enterprise may therefore be said to have
arisen out of the mobilisation of those banking resources
which were already employed in underwriting corporate
capitalisations, and to have arisen as an enterprise in
mergers, recapitalisations, and bonuses; but it presently
fell into settled lines as a standardised routine of invest-
ing funds and allocating credits. This standardised rou-
tine of investment and allocation is what engrosses the
energies of the community of investment bankers. It is
also the ways and means by which they, working together
as a general staff of financial strategy, govern the coun-
try’s business at large and so regulate the ordinary rate
and volume of productive industry. In all this, the con-
tinued merging of old concerns and creation of new ones
goes forward as a routine matter of administration in-
cident to the allocation of credits. And the credits are
—also as a routine matter-of-course—allocated with an
eye single to the greater gain of the investment bankers
who see to the allocation of them.


342 Absentee Ownership


In its beginnings, in the nineties, this enterprise in
mergers and recapitalisation was primarily concerned with
bringing certain elderly units of the industrial business
community to terms, by a persuasive use of financial
pressure ; to prevail upon them to surrender their several
corporate powers and enter into some arrangement in the
way of a merger, commonly under the form of a holding-
company. By this means these concerns ceased to
govern their own affairs individually, were drawn in un-
der a centralised management, and so ceased to be effectual
competitors in the market. In the main this reorganisa-
tion had to do with business concerns which were in the
position of holdovers in the key industries, and more par-
ticularly such of them as were in financial straits, as a
good proportion of them were.

In this connection it has also been believed, on cir-
cumstantial evidence, that the great financier, and after
him also the lesser ones, would now and again take pains
to manceuvre such an embarrassed concern into financial
extremities ; such as would incline its management to sur-
render the controlling interest and to allow a suitable
“bonus” to the captains of finance who managed the reor-
ganisation.

During the early years of the period it was this bonus
that was the immediate object sought by the reorganising
financier, and the chief incentive to the reorganisation.
The bonus commonly took the form of a block of securi-
ties issued in the name of the new incorporation. And it
was commonly quite a substantial bonus, so as to take
up a very appreciable percentage of the new capitalisa-
tion. This bonus which the underwriter of the new cor-
poration securities came in for appears to have been the
valuable consideration sought by these financiers in under-
taking these early mergers and recapitalisations. It does


The Larger Use of Credit 343


not appear that these financiers commonly set out with
the purpose of taking over the management of the incor-
porations which they created. But the transactions which
they entered into in their pursuit of the bonus entailed
commitments and obligations which stood over after the
initial transactions had been concluded. The recapitalisa-
tion and its endorsement at the hands of the financier,
or investment banker, together with the practice of taking
over his bonus in the form of a block of securities issued
by the new incorporation, entailed a continued community
of interest between the investment banker and the new in-
corporations which he had created. A community interest
of a special sort, in that it committed the investment
banker—the financier and his banking-house—to a con-
tinued responsibility for the success of the new incorpora-
tion ; which in turn vested the banker with power to act,
and lodged in his hands a virtually plenary discretion in
the oversight and management of the new incorporation.
The outcome has been that the banking-houses which have
engaged in this enterprise have come in for an effectual
controlling interest in the corporations whose financial
affairs they administer. And it is this outcome that has
proved to be the enduring and decisive factor in the new
business situation created by this recourse to mergers and
recapitalisations under the auspices of the investment
bankers.

At least in some very consequential instances, the
further course of events and the further manceuvres and
commitments in the way of recapitalisation and credit
extensions, were also governed by the pressure of neces-
sity bearing on the investment bankers in the case. The
financiering bankers were involved in the affairs of their
client corporations in such a critical fashion as to re-
quire a further move of coalition and recapitalisation, as a


344 Absentee Ownership


measure of safety. That consolidation of interests which
resulted in the U. S. Steel Corporation, e.g., was pre-
cipitated by pressure of this kind. At the same time it
is worth noting that the financier who, under pressure,
carried out this consolidation of the steel interests came
in for a bonus in the form of a block of the new cor-
poration’s securities bearing a face value of $50,000,000 ;
in which sum the new corporation formally became in-
debted to its sponsor, as payment for his services.? This
bonus was in the nature of an addition to the corpora-
tion’s capitalisation. And it may be added that in the
end, after some further financial manceuvres, the securities
which made up this bonus came to be worth fully their
face value.

The bonus which so lay at the root of these early re-
organisations of industrial business habitually took the
shape of a block of corporation securities representing
new capital values added to the total capitalisation in the
operation of recapitalising the underlying properties; the
capitalised value—face value, book value—of these prop-
erties being thereby augmented by that much. Such has
been the standard usage. It is in effect a matter of rou-
tine. The bonus which so entered into the total capitalisa-
tion represented no acquisition of new capital; in the sense
that it added no new funds and no new tangible assets to
the total; but only new liabilities, added to the total of the
corporation securities that resulted from recapitalisation.
That is to say, according to the standard routine in the
matter, the total outstanding securities, representing the


® There was also a block of 6 per cent. gold bonds, secured
by a lien on the tangible assets of the Carnegie properties,
payable to Andrew Carnegie for having brought the required
pressure to bear on the great financiers, and for allowing the
Carnegie steel properties to go into the coalition at an inflated
valuation.


The Larger Use of Credit 345


previous capitalisation of the underlying companies, were
increased by that much without any corresponding in-
crease of the underlying assets. It was a transaction
in credit pure and simple, a creation of new credit values;
or it was a redistribution of the old values under cover
of a make-believe creation of new assets.

Also habitually, apart from any underwriter’s bonus, in
any such reorganisation the total capitalisation of the re-
sulting collective holding-company is made somewhat
larger than the sum of the outstanding capital securities
of the underlying companies, and very appreciably larger
than the aggregate market value of the underlying tang-
ible assets. Habitually, as a matter of standard usage,
the recapitalisation of industrial properties in this way
has resulted in an increased volume of outstanding cor-
poration securities, with or without, but commonly with-
out, any increase in the underlying material assets. This
addition to the volume of outstanding capital securities
arising out of any such reincorporation may run to fifty
per cent., of the total previous capitalisation of the under-
lying companies, or to some such figure, more or less.

The outcome of successive reorganisations has accord-
ingly been a series of successive recapitalisations at a suc-
cessively higher figure, resulting in a progressively in-
creased yolume of outstanding credit instruments and in-
volving a corresponding progressive revaluation of, the
underlying assets at a progressively enhanced figure. As
a rule rather than as an exception, in the key industries,
the operation has been repeated in several successive re-
capitalisations of the same properties into successively
larger coalitions. In effect it has been a creation of new
values by an extension of credit. And in the main this
progressively increased valuation of these corporate assets
has been justified by the event. Indeed, the assets of the


346 Absentee Ownership


larger coalitions which have been created in this way have
habitually increased in value even apart from and in ex-
cess of any such credit operations designed to add some-
thing to the face value of the outstanding securities.

Such transactions in corporation finance were the out-
standing feature of the business situation during the ten
or a dozen years which overlapped the turn of the cen-
tury, and the like transactions have continued to be an
active factor in the conduct of industrial business since
then; most notably and with the gravest consequences in
the key industries. There has been a continued run of
consolidations with recapitalisation at a higher figure, and
new incorporations with flotations of new securities. The
visible purpose of them, as seen from the side of the in-
vestment bankers, and the presumptive aim of the trans-
actions, as transactions in corporation finance, has been
the creation of new capitalised wealth by new extensions
of credit. The benefit of the newly created capitalisations
has, in the main, inured to the investment-banking houses
which have carried on this work. In great part, the gains
which accrue from investment banking still are derived
from transactions of this class.1*

10 So, e. g., the market value of the securities of the U. S.
Steel Corporation, or of the various Standard Oil subsidiaries,
has persistently gone over par, even when large issues of stock-
dividends have been set afloat.

111t has not been customary to describe transactions of this
class in precisely these terms. It is even doubtful if writers
on corporation finance and investment banking would accept
what has been said above as a faithful description of the
relevant facts. Habitually, the point of view of such writers,
and more particularly their point of attention, has been some-
what different from the perspective which governs the present
argument. It has been customary to discuss transactions in
corporation finance from the side of the tangible assets and
their use, rather than from the side of investment and valuation.


The argument here is concerned with the workday uses of credit
in transactions of capitalisation.


The Larger Use of Credit 347


Recapitalisation at an increased figure has been the
standard practice in reorganising and merging industrial
business concerns during this period. New incorpora-
tions on any reasonably large scale have followed the same
general principle, in that the capitalisation has commonly
exceeded the value of the underlying assets. And with
a very fair degree of generality this inflation of the cap-
ital-values of corporations and their assets has proved to


When new incorporations or reorganisations, involving new
and larger flotations of securities, are here spoken of as transac-
tions looking to the creation of capitalised wealth by new
extensions of credit, it is not intended to say that such new
extensions of credit will enlarge the existing volume of “pro-
ductive goods.” It is not intended to say that such addition to
the outstanding credit obligations will create material assets, or
will in any way directly add to or augment the country’s tangible
possessions, or enhance the tangible performance of the country’s
productive industry. As a matter of tradition, it has been cus-
tomary to believe that some such effect will commonly follow
indirectly from such new and increased capitalisation, but that
is a question with which the argument is not concerned at this
point. Immediately and traceably, the creative effect which these
transactions have is altogether in the nature of a creation of
intangible assets. Indirectly and presumptively, by what may be
called a repercussion of optimism, there may also result some-
thing in the way of increased industrial activity and an enlarge-
ment of industrial plant; but all that lies outside the immediate
operations of investment banking or corporation finance. Such
tangible facts are not of the same order of things as an issue of
fiduciary paper.

Intangible assets may be created by a suitable extension of
credit embodied in corporation securities, as has been abundantly
shown by the run of things during the past quarter-century.
To their owners these intangible assets will be an effectual item
of capitalised wealth, as is likewise shown by the experience of
the same years. It is true, such intangible assets constitute no
part of the country’s material possessions and have no creative
part in the tangible performance of the country’s industrial
forces. They are wholly in the nature of an absentee claim to a
share in the country’s income; in the last analysis, of course, a
claim on the product of industry, to which all the while they
have contributed nothing, By and large, intangible assets consti-


348 Absentee Ownership


be sound; in the sense that the inflated corporations have
presently, if not from the outset, approached or reached
such an earning-capacity as to justify their inflated cap-
italisation. The assets so created by a transaction in
credit have proved to be sound assets, good property.
The increased earning-capacity of such inflated recap-
italisations has been conditioned on an advance of the
price-level for the sales from which the earnings are


tute a valid claim to get something for nothing; and such a claim
may be created by an extension of credit; and to its owner it is
wealth to the amount of what it is worth. It is also a market-
able commodity, and it may be employed as collateral by means
of which to procure a further extension of credit, which may be
turned to account in the same way and with the like ulterior
effect.

These intangible assets, capitalisations of usufruct, which so
are created and added to the existing book-values of the coun-
try’s wealth, constitute a new claim on the existing volume of
income; therefore they constitute a substraction from the body of
income which would otherwise go to other, earlier claimants.
The owners of these newly created intangibles, therefore, come
in for the effectual value of their newly acquired assets at the
cost of a corresponding loss to the general body of owners. By
force of these transactions, in credit and capitalisation, the ex-
isting property owners and workmen lose as much as the owners
of the new assets gain, plus the cost of the operations. The
loss which so falls on the general body of owners (and work-
men) is a loss only in the material respect, by weight and tale of
the things which their incomes will purchase, not a loss in respect
of the book-values of their assets. The credit extension which
goes to the creation of these new assets will mask the confisca-
tory character of the transaction by adding the face value of the
new assets—and ordinarily something more—to the outstanding
volume of market values. The new credits go into the market
as an addition to the current volume of purchasing-power;
thereby correspondingly lowering the purchasing-power of the
money unit. It foots up to an inflation of the total volume of
wealth in hand as rated in ‘terms of price, with no corresponding
increase of tangible possessions; whereby the investment bankers
and their clients come in for an increased share of the wealth in
hand, at the cost of the general body of owners and workmen.
—Cf. also Theary of Business Enterprise, ch. iii, pp. 99-132,
ch. iv, pp. 148-168, 174-176.


The Larger Use of Credit 349


drawn, or on keeping up the established price-level in the
face of declining production-costs. To maintain or ad-
vance the level of prices in this way requires an effectual
freedom from unguarded competition in the market,
among the business concerns engaged in the traffic; and
the most advantageous arrangement for the purpose will
be a virtual absence of competition; such as has been the
rule, e. g., in the steel business, and such as has come near
being the rule in coal. This can be accomplished by a
reasonable degree of collusion and concerted action. By
this means the margin of earnings is enlarged, at the same
time that the hazards of the business are greatly re-
duced or virtually eliminated.”

The required degree of concerted action, or the need-
ful reasonably collusive regulation of things, has not
called for a close-knit organisation of the banking com-
munity in set form, or, indeed, for anything like a for-
mally defined compact of joint action among the ruling
captains of solvency and their underlying banking-houses.
These latterday transactions in credit and capitalisation
are of so transparently gainful a nature as to enjoin on
all the parties in interest what amounts in effect to a col-
lusive regulation of things, even in the absence of any
provision for a formally concerted plan of action. The
transactions which make the outcome are large, particu-
larly such of them as are patently worth-while and worth
bearing a hand in, and the business procedure in the case
has already fallen into something of a standard routine,


12 By “sound business management,” proceeding on such a rea-
sonable understanding among themselves, the investment bankers
who command the credit resources of the country are enabled
to trade on a progressively thinner equity; so that they are able
safely to enlarge the volume of outstanding credit, indefinitely,
by means of a progressive creation of intangible assets on which
to base a further extension of credit, etc.


350 Absentee Ownership


in pursuance of which this manner of large and lucrative
transactions recur in a somewhat orderly succession; and
the operations are of such a character as to make it plain
to the meanest understanding that they will be carried
through to a safe and lucrative conclusion only by such
team-work among the several investment-concerns as will
obviate all cross purposes, and will at the same time pro-
vide a broad collective reserve of credit resources and
eliminate all hazard of unforeseen contingencies. And
bankers are imbued with a reasonably conservative spirit,
such as will conduce to safe and sane business of this
kind.

Any member of the banking community who might so
far exceed the limits of conventionally blameless cupidity
as to be led into cross purposes and fall short of reason-
able team-work at a critical juncture, would expect to be
counted out of the game at the next turn. He would lose
that most essential item among his own intangible assets,
the goodwill of his fellow bankers, deprived of which he
would no longer come in for that steady run of workday
business that makes the broad foundation of his earnings.
At the same time he would, in effect, cease to be an in-
vestment banker. Such is the turn which things have
taken. In effect, whether it runs to commercial banking
or in the field of investment, banking is essentially not
now a competitive business, except collectively as against
the underlying population. And investment banking in
an eminent degree is a line of enterprise in which it is
incumbent on all the parties in interest to take hands and
help, in which one good turn deserves another, and in
which there can be no tolerance for men who wantonly
disregard the rules of the game. Any flotation of securi-
ties, but more particularly any major operation of such


The Larger Use of Credit 351


a character as to promise large and easy gains, is in prac-
tical effect an occasion for mutual support among the
makers of credit, and for faithful teamwork throughout an
extensive network of banking-concerns, who are bound in
an orderly system of correspondence and through whose
hands the credit instruments that are to be marketed will
have to pass on their way to those investors who may be
called the ultimate consumers of this product. For any
bank or banker it is the part of wisdom faithfully to
“stand in” and in all sobriety to take an equitable share
in the margin of profit that is to be derived from these
sales of credit.

This bond of union and concert that so holds the in-
vestment bankers to a profitable routine of team-work in
disposing of this running output of credit instruments
is greatly strengthened by the fact that the country’s com-
mercial banking is already established on the same lines
of team-work and joint interest; it is taken care of by the
same community of bankers, governed by a like routine
of equitable give and take, in pursuance of which also all
excesses and delinquencies are penalised with automatic
punctuality. In the business of commercial banking, too,
the superior discretion and initiative are perforce vested
in the massive financial concerns that inhabit the coun-
try’s financial metropolis, and whose massive resources en-
able them to create credit somewhat at will, and to regu-
late its expansion and allocation. By force of circum-
stances these banking concerns of the first magnitude
make up the living nucleus of the banking community, and
by force of circumstances it is the part of wisdom as
well as of professional ethics for the lesser and outlying
members of the craft to wait faithfully on the motions of
these masters of solvency, who by force of circumstances


352 Absentee Ownership


constitute the General Staff of the banking community.**

The investment banker, severally and collectively, is
custodian of the credit-interests of his own banking-house
and of his clients. He is a custodian with plenary dis-
cretion, de facto; the exigencies of absentee ownership
make him so. In the nature of the case these interests
are the interests of absentee ownership, like other credit


13 Tn due time this force of circumstances, which so has drawn
the banking community together in a centralised ramification of
equitable give and take under the collusive surveillance of the
great credit houses of the metropolis, has been given a local
habitation and a name, by act of a businesslike Congress, in the
installation of the Federal Reserve Board. The working-out of
this measure appears to have been wholly salutary and to have
fallen quite neatly in with the drift of circumstances that has
shaped the men and structure of Big Business. It is true, the
surveillance and disciplinary powers formally vested in the Board
neither derive from nor devolve upon the massive banking-
houses of the metropolis; nor, on the other hand, do they extend
by specification to anything beyond commercial banking and
the issuance of fiduciary currency. But it is the same concate-
nation of banking concerns, bound in the same inclusive system
of financial correspondence, by which the commercial paper and
the paper currency are taken care of, that also takes care of the
country’s credit resources and their allocation and distribution
through the channels of investment banking; and the work is car-
ried on by the same personnel, at the same time, through the
same channels, and by use of a solvency resting on the same
assets. The creative use of credit in generating and floating
corporation securities is, after all, no more than another branch
of that business of issuing, endorsing, and transferring fiduciary
paper, that has to do with bank-notes and commercial banking.
The transactions are of the same general kind. The banker’s
incentive in both cases is also the same margin of gain to be
got for letting someone else go to work, whether it takes the
form of a bonus or commission for the flotation of corporation
securities, or a rediscount, or an excess of note-issues over the
legal reserve; the method of earning this margin of profits is the
same trading on the confidence of clients and customers; and
the ulterior effect of the traffic is the same expansion of money-
values through depreciation of the unit of purchasing-power.—
Cf. H. L. Reed, The Development of Federal Reserve Policy.


The Larger Use of Credit 353


interests, and in the nature of the case their custody takes
effect in the way of an absentee control over that business
and industry out of which the gains of these absentee
owners arise. In effect, absentee ownership is a claim on
free income to be drawn from the property owned; so
that the property is necessarily of the nature of assets,
in so far as it is held in absentee ownership; and “assets”
is a financial category. Also in the nature of the case,
the resulting absentee government of current business and
industry, which so is vested in these custodians of
credit, is in the nature of a fiscal administration, a stra-
tegic regimentation of assets, essentially a running allo-
cation of credit allowances; which can take effect only
by way of withholding needed credit extensions from
doubtful and undesirable enterprises,—doubtful or unde-
sirable in their bearing on the “income stream’ that
goes to the bankers and their clients. So that the powers
and sanctions commanded by these custodians are of a
permissive sort. That is to say, their strategy and ad-
ministration are necessarily of a negative, quiescent, sed-
ative character, something in the way of a provisional
veto power, a contingent check on untoward undertakings
and excursions, a fiscal disallowance of such projects in
business and industry as do not manifestly promote the
advantage of those absentee interests that are taken care
of by the given investment banker or group of bankers,
in effect a species of fiscal sabotage. |


Crudely and in general terms the working-out of this
absentee government of business and industry by this
general staff of solvency may be described as follows.
It works by way of an allocation of credit allowances
among the clients of these custodians of solvency, pref-
erentially and particularly among those corporate con-


354 Absentee Ownership


cerns that are clients of those larger captains of solvency
who are effective members of the general staff,—concerns
which are bound to these captains by a community in-
terest of a businesslike sort. The credit resources of the
country, the main body and dominant mass of which are
under the hands of this general staff of solvency, may be,
and by pressure of ordinary businesslike cupidity they
will be, employed productively in the creation of new
wealth, in the way of intangible assets, after the fashion
already explained in an earlier passage. In ordinary
times this expansive creation of intangible wealth goes for-
ward in a cumulative fashion, by routine; it is part of
the ordinary day’s work of the banking community.
This newly, progressively, created wealth is in the nature
of capitalised overhead charges on current business and
industry.

In practical effect, the rate at which such new assets will
be created is determined by two main factors: (a) the
volume of credit obligations already outstanding and as-
similated into the routine of business ratings and trans-
actions, and (b) what may be called the tensile strength
of the business community’s temper as regards new com-
mitments in the way of liabilities and capitalisation. The
latter is often spoken of loosely as “public confidence.”
Neither of these two factors which condition the rate of
output of intangible wealth is a constant quantity; as one
might say, neither has a constant coefficient of efficiency.
And neither can be measured and reduced to a quite satis-
factory statistical statement in objective terms. They
are, therefore, not fully amenable to control by statistical
computation or by an apparatus of bookkeeping. Ac-
cordingly the rate of production of intangibles and over-
head charges is not a constant one, nor can it or its fluctu-
ations be quite safely calculated beforehand. There is


The Larger Use of Credit 355


still in all this traffic a substantial margin of contingencies,
which leaves a certain elbowroom for the personal equa-
tion of the captains, for sagacity and rule-of-thumb. The
personal equation of these captains runs to “safety first” ;
at least so they say. Accordingly that element of uncer-
tainty and hazard which still enters into the case will
greatly further a faithful collusion among the sound cap-
tains of solvency.

When all due allowance has been made, therefore, the
tate of production of intangibles will still be a rate which
may be estimated with a very fair degree of approxima-
tion by those persons who are conversant with the credit
business and its resources. And barring accident, this
ordinary rate of production of intangibles should evidently
rise progressively higher as the outstanding and “digested”
mass of obligations on which it is conditioned grows
progressively larger; so that under ordinary circumstances
the rate of output of these capitalised liabilities will be
subject to a cumulative acceleration, although no definite
coefficient of acceleration can be assigned.’

14 The standard manuals of economic theory make no reference
to any such cumulative acceleration in the ordinary rate of. out-
put of capitalisation of liabilities, as a factor in the economic
system with which their speculations are occupied, although
writers on corporation finance have called attention to the
practice from time to time. Economists habitully have seen the
whole matter in another light. Economic theories have habitually
been standardised in forms which would meet the requirements
of that earlier “cash economy” that has been falling out of the
scheme of things in recent times. Under the old order the use
of credit was a matter of “deferred payments,” rather than an
instrumentality of absentee ownership. So economists have not
been in the habit of looking to the volume of outstanding obli-
gation and intangibles—capitalised overhead charges—as a crea-
tive factor in the continued expansion of liabilities and capitali-
sation; particularly not the certified economists of the ancient
line. (Cf. e. g., J. Laurence Laughlin, The Principles of Money,


chapters on Credit and on the Refined System of Barter). Their
perspective has been somewhat faithfully foreshortened to fit the


356 Absentee Ownership


Credit is extended by the keepers of the credit resources
in the form of current credit-accounts—typically “de-
posits”—as well as in the flotation of new securities; it is
extended to such business concerns of a sizable magni-
tude as prove themselves worthy. Those are eligible who
can be depended on duly to pay over to their creditors
such fixed charges as are borne by the credit instruments
so created. They are worthy, of course, because and in
the measure in which they continue to yield a secure net
income to the dispensers of credit and to the absentee
owners whose guardians the dispensers are. Directly or
indirectly, the resulting credit instruments go to swell the
volume of collateral on which the fabric of credit is
erected and on which further extensions are negotiated.
These credit extensions in this way enable the concerns in
question to trade on a thinner equity. That is to say,
such business concerns are thereby enabled to enter into


legal formalities of incorporation and the stipulations of eco-
nomic doctrine as drawn up in the middle nineteenth century; at
a time when it was still passably true in practice, or at least in
the established tradition, that any extension of credit would be
presumed to be secured by tangible assets available as collateral,
in the case of negotiable securities, or by an available reserve of
specie in the case of paper money. That was under the old order
of business practice and the still older order of legal and theoreti-
cal conceptions. There is no call to take exception, or to call
ungraceful attention to that ever-widening fringe of intangibles
which was by that time progressively enveloping the nineteenth-
century fabric of cash assets, and which eventually has overrun
and surmounted it.

All that was under the old order, or under the rigorous tradi-
tion of it; while the slow-dying presumption still held its ground,
that “assets” means “tangible property”; that corporate capital
is measured by the initial cash cost of the corporation’s plant;
and that intangibles can be capitalised only by subreption, by
making believe that they are transferable objects of use and have
a ratable cost of production—as, e.g., patented processes and
contrivances—and so entering them on the books along with
the tangible properties and writing them into the capitalised
assets at a make-believe purchase price. Except de jure, all that


The Larger Use of Credit 357


larger commitments and undertake outlays that are more
largely in excess of their tangible assets than before; to
go into the market with a purchasing-power expanded by
that much—or a little something more—beyond their
available possessions, tangible and intangible. Which goes
to enlarge the effective purchasing-power in the market
without enlarging the supply of vendible goods in the
market; which will act to raise or maintain the level of
prices, and will therefore enlarge the total of the com-
munity’s wealth as rated in money-values, independently
of any increase of tangible possessions; all of which is
“good for trade.”

Any business concern which is in this way enabled to
trade on a thinner equity will, by so much, be placed at
an advantage as against the rest, provided that the rest do
not come in for a similar advantage by a similar recourse
to credit. Any advantage so gained is of a competitive or


has changed and passed, progressively with the passage of time
and the accumulation of new usages and conceptions. In effect,
assets are now capitalised on their earning-capacity regardless
of cost or tangibility; the corporation is rated and capitalised at
its value as a business concern, and among its valued and ratable
possessions is its ability to borrow. An industrial corporation
is necessarily rated on the sales-capacity of its industrial plant;
that is to say, the prime factor in capitalisation is now in the
nature of an intangible. Things have taken such a turn.

In the further course of capitalisation the capitalised intangi-
bles, duly covered with negotiable securities, serve as collateral
on which to secure an extension of credit, to be capitalised and
covered with securities, which will be acceptable collateral so
soon as they are “digested,” etc. There is no question of the
main fact; it is only a question of the rate of cumulative pro-
gression. It should also be noted that such liabilities may also
serve as a creative factor in the progressive expansion of credit
values without being formally capitalised in the shape of cor-
poration securities conveying title to alleged assets. This is well
shown by the case of government bonds or treasury notes and
certificates, which are quite unexceptionable collateral at the same
time that they neither represent tangible assets nor enter into the


capital account of a corporation.


358 Absentee Ownership


differential character, in that it presupposes that the rest
will not make use of the same expedient, and it will im-
mediately be offset and neutralised if and in so far as
the like recourse to credit is adopted by the rest. From
which it follows that all those who are to be saved, in the
business sense, will go and do likewise. The practical
outcome, as all men know, has been that the generality of
such business concerns will habitually make such use of
their borrowing capacity as they can, on pain of failure.
From which it follows that such recourse to credit brings
no net advantage to them, either as a differential or in
the aggregate.

But it also follows that by this competitive recourse to
credit these business concerns, commercial and industrial,
all and several become clients of the dispensers of credit,
and are loaded approximately to capacity with suitable
overhead charges payable to the absentee holders of their
paper, whether in the form of commercial credits or of
corporation debentures. Whereby the business community
at large, being made up of such business concerns doing
business on such a credit basis, comes to be dependent
on these dispensers of credit for the means of commercial
subsistence and salvation,—in the degree in which this
“credit economy”’ prevails.*®


15 This outcome follows in so far as business comes to be con-
ducted on a credit basis. It is the working-out of a progressively
improved stability of credits and improved facilities for their ex-
peditious negotiation. The greater the ease with which credit
extensions are negotiated, and the greater the security of out-
standing obligations, the more will the use of credit become an
everyday necessity and the more urgent will be the inducement to
make full use of one’s borrowing capacity; and the larger will
be the volume of outstanding obligations and the resultant ag-
gregate of overhead charges falling on business and industry.
And evidently no net gain accrues from this traffic, except what


The Larger Use of Credit 359


To commercial and industrial business as a whole no
net aggregate gain accrues from this traffic in credits.
But to the lenders there accrues a differential gain which
is offset by a corresponding loss to the rest of the com-
munity ; a net aggregate gain equal to the aggregate over-
head charges borne by the resulting obligations, less the
cost of carrying on the traffic in credits.1® Therefore, the
fuller the utilisation of credit and the greater its stability,
the thinner will be the equity on which business is carried
on; the larger will be the aggregate of overhead charges
to be paid over to the trustees and owners of the credit
resources; and the closer will the conduct of business
and industry be bound up with the measures taken, for
their own profit, by those captains of solvency who com-
mand the credit resources of the country.

Such would be the upshot of the matter, “other things
remaining the same.” And if such were the whole of the
case the futility of it should presently become patent even
to the business men who are immersed in this expansive
credit and who (proximately) pay the cost. But other
things do not remain the same, and among these other
things is the price-level; which rises and continues to
rise to meet the rising volume of purchasing-power that
is thrown loose on the market at large by the current
ubiquitous recourse to credit.


goes to the dispensers of credit; which is evidently of the nature
of a differential gain at the cost of the business community at
large.

16 What amount is to be deducted as net eventual loss on the
score of this cost of operation may be estimated, with a degree
of approximation, from the total cost of carrying on the coun-
try’s banking business, which is chiefly occupied with just this
work; a reasonable allowance being made for other services
rendered by the banks. What then remains of the sum of the
cost of the traffic may be set down as paid to the bankers and


360 Absentee Ownership


And like other persons, the business men are creatures
of habit. By unbroken habit, prices are the substance of
things in the working conceptions of the business men.
Therefore their habitual frame of mind enables them to
believe, or effectually to make believe, that they are gainers
by as much as the prices advance; because they are en-
abled to foot up their assets and their net receipts in so
much larger a number of smaller units of value. Such
is the force of habit. The business man faithfully views
the dollar sub specie eternitatis, even when he knows bet-
ter. In extenuation of this businesslike imbecility it
should also be noted that the men who do business are
kept from reflecting on this state of the case by the fact
that the cost of it all does not fall on them, finally and
visibly, but on that underlying population with whom they
deal, also called “the ultimate consumer.” .

As a further consequence, which is more immediately
to the point here, by force of this endless network of
credit that ties up the business concerns of the country
in an interdependence of fiscal give and take, they are at
the same time, each in his degree, large and small, tied
in under the paramount fiscal jurisdiction of these keepers
of the country’s credit resources, as clients whose fortunes
are forever in the balance and whose continued good for-
tune is conditioned on their continuing to be lucrative
clients.

The key industries, it is true, occupy a special position
in this regard, and the argument will return to their case
presently. Smaller and outlying industrial and commer-
cial concerns may be touched only at the second remove,
by the outer ramifications of the fiscal organisation, but


their creditor clients for having enabled the country’s business
concerns, one with another, to inflate the figures of their re-
ceipts and disbursements.


The Larger Use of Credit 361


they are all caught in the network of credit which serves
the workday needs of all those who do business. And in-
asmuch as the country’s industry is in the hands of the
business men and is carried on as a business enterprise, it
follows also that any question of industrial employment
and of the rate and volume of production is likewise and
perforce referred back to the same fiscal grounds and
incentives, at any point that involves a question of ini-
tiative or eventual control. So that the industrial sys-
tem, too, the productive use of the country’s man-power
and industrial plant, likewise waits on the collusive fiscal
strategy of the same custodians of absentee credit.
Whereby the livelihood of the underlying population be-
comes, in the language of mathematics, a function of the
state of mind of the investment bankers, whose abiding
precept is: When in doubt, don’t.


Progressively, indeed at a cumulative rate, as the credit
resources have been drawn together under a wide-reach-
ing routine of profitable give and take, under the respon-
sible surveillance of half-a-dozen massive credit institu-
tions at the financial metropolis, the whole business of
making credits and regulating them has gained in expe-
dition and security; so that it has now reached an ad-
mirable footing of stability and swift execution. Stab-
ility, greater security from unforeseen or undesigned con-
tingencies, will enable trading in credits and capitalisa-
tion on a thinner equity; which signifies a larger volume
of fixed charges payable to the makers of credit, on the
resultant increased volume of outstanding obligations;
which means that the custodians of credit are enabled to
take over the assets of the business community with in-
creasingly greater expedition; which in turn will increase
the stability of the business as well as the measure of


362 Absentee Ownership


control exercised by the keepers of credit over the conduct
of business and industry at large. Eventually, therefore,
the country’s assets should, at a progressively accelerated
rate, gravitate into the ownership, or at least into the con-
trol, of the banking community at large; and within the
banking community ownership and control should gravi-
tate into the hands of the massive credit institution that
stand at the fiscal center of all things.

The stability of this fabric of credit, as well as the
facility and effect with which its control of business and
industry will be brought to bear, is greatly promoted by
the inner concatenations of the system; particularly by
the working arrangements and the bonds of common in-
terest that gather about the nucleus of credit institutions
at the fiscal center. These concatenations are of such a
nature that, in great part, the chief banking-houses and
their chief clients are now identical in point of their busi-
ness interest; to a very appreciable extent identical in
point of ownership. So that the same “Interest”—that
is to say the same group of absentee owners working to-
gether as a team in pursuit of gain—will not infrequently
be found to be the dominant owners on both the debit and
the credit side of a given account; both within a given
financial banking-house or group of affiliated banks and
in the greater ones of the corporations whose credit and
securities are taken care of by the given banking-house
and its affiliated banks,”


17 So, e.g., the same “Interest” which dominates the corporate
business and industry in oil will at the same time dominate the
leading banking establishment with which this oil business has to
do, as well as its extensive retinue of affiliated banks. Among
those business men who do business in oil it is a matter of
course that the very extensive network of affiliated banks that
are dominated by the Standard Oil Interest will faithfully serve
that Interest in its endeavours to engross the oil resources of the


The Larger Use of Credit 363


Such an arrangement will conduce in a marked degree
to the stability of all suitable credit-extensions, capitalisa-
tions, and flotations; suitable, i.e., for the purposes of
those who make up the general staff of solvency. At the
same time it affords a ready means of discountenancing
or disallowing ill-advised and adventurous projects, such
as do not lend themselves to profitable capitalisation under
the same auspices. Such, in effect, is the lie of the land in
the domain of credit.

Any given one of these massive Interests will be the
dominant factor in a number of corporate enterprises of
the larger sort, each of which will do a large credit busi-
ness with several of the greater banking-houses and their
affiliated banks. It is a matter of common notoriety, if
not of record, that the great Interests have been gaining
ground of this sort at a progressively accelerated rate;
gaining both in point of mass and financial consequence
and in the reach and variety of the ramifications of their
ownership throughout the business community. And it is
fairly to be expected that their progress will continue un-
abated on somewhat the same lines in the calculable fu-
ture. There results an intimate linking-up of client and
custodian, a community interest between creditor and
debtor, such as should virtually preclude any consequential
derangement of the equilibrium of debits and credits ex-
cept by mutual consent. In practical effect, the outcome
is a pooling of credits and debits, within the financial
sweep of the Interests. In practical effect, therefore, the
preponderant mass of outstanding obligations and in-
tangibles has come to rest in stable equilibrium, not to
be upset except by choice of the interested parties, in pur-


country. Much the same disposition of forces is to be found in
steel and railroads, of course. It is in no way obnoxious, either
to the law or to business ethics.


364 Absentee Ownership


suit of their joint gain, at the cost of the rest of the busi-
ness community.'®

This assured stability of the general fabric of credit
serves greatly to augment the tensile strength of the busi-
ness men’s endurance in the face of new commitments.
So that their goodwill and tolerance becomes available
for capitalisation in behalf of the investment bankers at
a higher coefficient than before. Whereby the output of
new credit extensions and new capitalisations is enabled
safely to expand at an unexampled rate.


So far, the argument has run to the effect that this
American “credit economy,” ?® organised in this way, will
work unremittingly to draw the assets of the business
community in under the ownership of those massive In-
terests whose captains constitute the general. staff of
solvency, in the manner already described. Such is doubt-
less the main drift of the forces engaged. But if the


18 Tt is always conceivable, of course, that this American pool
of solvency, or some one or more of the major Interests com-
prised in it, may under urgent pressure enter into hazardously
extensive commitments toward the outside,—e.g., toward in-
solvent European clients. This may give rise to contingencies of
so grave a nature as would eventually leave the pool at loose
ends, derange the team-work of the Interests, and precipitate an
unadvised and unmanaged liquidation. In view of the known
European commitments of certain American Interests, it has
been believed by apprehensive persons that the current situation
in Europe is likely to contain the elements of such an eventu-
ality. It is known that there is such an element of hazard for
the American Interests in the case, but no person outside the
American General Staff of Solvency, as already spoken of be-
fore, is in a position to hold a reasoned opinion on the com-
plexion and magnitude of that hazard; and those persons who
so are in a position to speak are maintaining a large and salu-
tary reticence.

19 As students will recognise, this term is borrowed from
Knies and Hildebrand, who brought it into use in a somewhat
wider application.


The Larger Use of Credit 365


proposition were left standing in this unqualified form it
would be too bald to serve as a sufficient description of
what is actually taking place or of what is immediately
in prospect. The main drift and its convolutions do not
make so simple a tableau. It is necessary to note that the
Interests and their captains and custodians do not appear
to drive at all consistently and with a single mind toward
such an undivided ownership of the assets engaged; nor
does such an outcome habitually follow from their man-
agement of affairs, as a formal outcome, de jure.

It appears that, at least for the present and in great
part, what is actually sought and obtained by their ma-
nceuvres is an effectual usufruct of these resources, rather
than a formal acquisition and tenure of them in strict
ownership. For many of the purposes of continued gain,
such an effectual usufruct of the country’s resources will
serve as well as their formal ownership, at the same time
that it can be administered quite as readily and profitably
under the existing forms of law, and is less likely to ir-
ritate the public sensibilities. In effect, through the due
working of this traffic in credit and capitalisation, the In-
terests and their custodians come in for the formal owner-
ship of a progressively increasing share of these assets;
and at the same time and by force of the same traffic they
also come in for a progressively larger and more secure
usufruct in the assets which still continue formally in
the ownership of those concerns that have become their
clients and that are dependent on their continued good
will for indispensable credits by means of which to do
business.

The case of the common run of these business con-
cerns—that is to say, of the business community at large
—as it is taking shape during these last years under the
perfected credit economy, has a notable and instructive


366 Absentee Ownership


parallel and analogue in the plight of the prairie farmers,
who have fallen into a state of something like effectual
clientship and usufruct at the call of the implement makers,
commission men, warehouse men, millers, packers, and
railways. De facto, by drift of circumstances and sound
business methods, these large business concerns which deal
with the farmers and deal in their produce and their sup-
plies have now come in for a reasonably secure and in-
clusive usufruct in the work and output of this farm
population. The country bankers and country merchants,
of course, also come in for their equitable share.
Throughout this farming community there is a fairly
steady drift of ownership into the hands of these business
concerns with which the farm population does business;
which takes effect in great part through the use of credit
in the way of book accounts and deferred payments. But
apart from absentee ownership of tenant farms and a
certain, quite appreciable, volume of farm indebtedness,
there is habitually no formal title of ownership, actual
or contingent, covering the farmers or their work and
output and vesting in the usufructuaries. The more sub-
stantial and more profitable source of gain to these con-
cerns and Interests that make up the farmer’s markets
is doubtless their de facto vested right to do business
with the farm population on their own terms.?°

20 To avoid dispute and exception, it may be as well to admit
and note that such rights of usufruct have doubtless been cap-
italised in the capitalisation of these concerns that do business
with the farm population, and that so they have been covered
with corporation securities and incorporated in the assets of
the corporations in question. In this way they doubtless make
a very substantial mass of capitalised intangibles in the aggre-
gate, and constitute a valuable body of assets; in the case of
many such business concerns presumably these are the chief ele-
ments in their capitalisation. In so far, of course, this relation


of usufruct has been given a formally legal existence, being
capitalised and covered with negotiable corporation securities.


The Larger Use of Credit 307


The current relation of usufruct between the packers,
millers, warehouse men, and railroads, on the one side,
e.g., and their underlying farm population on the other
side, has no existence de jure, of course; the principles
of jurisprudence which touch these matters being of an
earlier date and not covering these features. It is only
that as a practical matter of fact these Interests are in
a position to make the terms on which the prairie farmers
will go on with their work, if any; all the while that the
farmers are left quite free to take or leave the terms of-
fered, but with the reservation that their livelihood is
contingent on their taking them. By this businesslike ar-
rangement the farm population comes in for a very tol-
erable subsistence, to be had for steady work; while the
railroads, packers, millers, etc., come in for a capitalised
usufruct of the farm population and its work and for a
steady run of earnings,—such a run of earnings as the
traffic will bear.

In much the same fashion those major Interests on the
financial plane, whose custodians are in command of the
credit resources of the country at large, are enabled, in-
formally and by a standard routine of management, to take
over a reasonably complete usufruct in the run of busi-
ness carried on by the business community at large. All
the while this arrangement need involve no formal tenure
of ownership of the underlying business traffic on their
part. It may quite practically be done, as it is being done
and as the circumstances entail that it must be done, by
informal concert of action among those major Interests
which are massive enough to make their pretensions good,
and by a disciplinary “rationing” of the lesser business
units in the allowance of credits with which to carry on
their business. The packers, millers, etc., who do busi-
ness with the farm population on a footing of usufruct


368 Absentee Ownership


may be entitled to rank among these major Interests that
serve as custodians of the country’s solvency, or they
may belong among the lesser order of clients through
whom the income-stream runs ;—all that is a question of
detail and personalities, which does not materially touch
the general sweep and balance of the credit system and
its appointed work.

Its appointed work, appointed by the drift of circum-
stances, is the due tutelage of the business concerns of
the country and the governance of their conduct of the
country’s business and industry, with an eye single to the
largest procurable net gains for those aggregations of
absentee ownership that are spoken of as the Interests.


The procurable net gain in which the Interests are in-
terested is counted in terms of the money-unit, of course ;
and it is invariably rated, received, accumulated, carried
forward, disbursed, and accounted for, by way of a
credit-instrument of some sort, book-account or transfer-
able paper. Material wealth, metallic money, does not
pass from hand to hand in this business traffic, except in
transactions so small as to call for the use of what the
economists call “token-money”; which is, in effect, an-
other form of credit-instrument. The nearest approach
to the material realities in the handling of these elements
of income and disbursement is the use of banknotes ; which
is in the main confined to minor transactions. In ordinary
times banknotes are presumed to outrun their specie basis
by something over 500 per cent.; of late years they have
fluctuated within an interval of perhaps twice that ampli-
tude. It is in units of this fiduciary currency that the
gains of business are valued and accounted for, and that
the earning-capacity of any given business concern will
be capitalised.


The Larger Use of Credit 369


The increasing centralisation and codperative spirit of
the banking community, helped out by the good offices of
the Federal Reserve, have been adding materially to the
security of the outstanding note-issues. So that this in-
creased volume of paper money commands an increased
measure of public confidence. That is to say, the paper-
money business is enabled to trade on a thinner equity.
The note-issues have been enabled to depart somewhat
more widely from the specie basis on which they are, at
least ostensibly, hypothecated. In effect, these credit-in-
struments which serve as the habitual measure of values
are less exposed to the hazard of being called to account,
at the same time that they are more widely detached from
any material base.

It is this fiduciary currency that serves as the workday
ground of reality in the pursuit of business, transactions
being concluded in its terms and gains being “realised”
in its units. Evidently, this fiduciary currency is of the
nature of certified make-believe, in the main; being a
volume of intangibles hypothecated on the sound sense of
the banking community and the Federal Reserve Board.
The tutelage and governance exercised by these custo-
dians of solvency over the conduct of business, therefore,
has come to rest on this groundwork of outstanding lia-
bilities which so are shielded from any ordinary hazard of
liquidation, and their manceuvres of guidance and man-
agement are confined to a give and take between credit-
instruments of one description and another. The work is
carried on by a systematic rationing of credit allowances.


The purpose and end of the traffic so carried on by the
keepers of solvency is the up-keep and enlargenient of
the run of gains that will be credited to the party of the
first part. As has already been noted in an earlier pas-


370 Absentee Ownership


sage, the gains which so are to be credited to the creditors
are drawn from the receipts of the underlying business
traffic, as an overhead charge on the working assets en-
gaged in business. To enable such an augmented over-
head charge to be carried by the underlying business traf-
fic—and to be carried at a net profit—the gross receipts
of this business traffic must also be enlarged by the same
move and in a corresponding measure. The safe and sane
procedure by which to bring receipts up to a practical
maximum in any business enterprise is to limit the supply
of vendible goods or services out of the sale-price of
which the receipts arise, and thereby to advance the price
per unit of supply up to the limit of what the traffic will
bear, as has also been explained already. In ordinary
times the supply and the sale-price will already have been
adjusted, within reason, to what the traffic will bear, re-
gard being had to the current level of prices and the
available volume of purchasing-power. Therefore, to en-
large the receipts of the underlying business traffic and
so enable it to carry an enlarged overhead charge, it will
be necessary to raise the limit of what the traffic will bear;
which is accomplished automatically by the increase of
purchasing-power that is thrown on the market in the cre-
ation of the new credits which impose this new over-
head charge, in that the new purchasing-power granted in
these credits will go to raise the price per unit of vendible
things and so will go to swell the aggregate price-receipts
of the traffic by that much.

As a proposition in business and accountancy the out-
come of these manceuvres is quite admirable ; as a proposi-
tion in industry and livelihood it will stand somewhat dif-
ferent. It brings an increase of aggregate wealth and in-
come as counted in money-values, independently of any
increase of tangible possessions. But as a business propo-


The Larger Use of Credit ewe.


sition that is just as good, if not better. Such creation
of new credits has much the same effect as the produc-
tion of new gold used to have under the old dispensa-
tion; ** but with the difference that the expansion of
prices created by credit rests on the tensile strength of
the popular credulity instead of the output of gold. Yet
this later ground of price-inflation is presumably quite as
secure as the earlier, more particularly by grace of the
Federal Reserve Board’s vigilant stabilisation of note-
issues and commercial rediscounts.


It will be seen that the argument on this head runs on
a progressive, automatic, and presumably interminable
inflation of money-values; or on a continued depreciation
of the effectual money-unit; according as one may choose
to view it. Under the old dispensation of unconcerted
banking, in so far as the money-unit was eventually ac-
countable to an impersonal specie basis, such an inflation
would be riding for an eventual fall, whereof there were
repeated demonstrations. But under the new dispensa-
tion, since and so far as the price-level has become ac-
countable to the sound business sense of the Federal Re-
serve Board and the keepers of the credit resources, no
such sinister eventuality need be apprehended. The gen-
eral staff of solvency have the situation in hand, and
their interest in its maintenance may be counted on to
endure.

The secure upward trend of the price-level, and its
buoyant endurance under difficulties during the last few
years, should sufficiently demonstrate the superior stability
of a price-inflation which rests on constituted authority
and businesslike common sense. Provided that the price-
level continues to rise at a reasonable rate, such a tem-


21 See chapter vii, Section iv.


272 Absentee Ownership


perate rate as will not greatly jar the popular credulity
and such as the sound business principles of its guardians
may reasonably be counted on to dictate, then there should
be no reason to apprehend that this price-level may not
safely be advanced indefinitely, to the continued gain of
those who stand to gain by it.

To any footloose observer it will be evident that the
general price-level has been rising, without serious break
or abatement, during the past quarter-century. The new
gold has had something to do with this movement, more
particularly during the earlier part of this period, and the
new credit facilities have had more to do with it, partic-
ularly in later years. In a very appreciable degree this
movement of price-inflation has been masked by the con-
tinued advance in the industrial arts, which has run along
without abatement over the same period and has greatly
increased the productive capacity of the country’s industry,
and which so has acted powerfully and unremittingly to
lower the cost of production of the output, and thereby ta
depress prices of vendible goods and services.


In the face of a steadfast resistance from the side of
safe and sane business, particularly from the financial
section of the business community, the continued new
growth of the technology of physics and chemistry has
continued to insinuate a progressively heightened produc-
tive efficiency into the industrial system, cumulatively and
ubiquitously, and with a particularly stubborn drive along
the lines of quantity production; such as to depress the
costs and enlarge the scope and rate in the quantity produc-
tion of vendible goods and services. If these improve-
ments in the ways and means of industry had been given a
free run through this period, and if prices had not at the
same time been inflated by use of credit, the higher poten-


The Larger Use of Credit 373


tial of production at which these technological improve-
ments have enabled the industrial system to do its work
should in the course of this period have lowered produc-
tion-costs at large to such a level as would have brought
general prices down to an inconspicuous fraction of the
current figures.

But such a free run of production, such as the techni-
cians would be ready to set afoot if they were given a
free hand, would mean a full employment of the available
forces of industry, regardless of what the traffic would
bear in point of net profit from sales; it would bring on
such an inordinate output of vendible goods and services
as to glut the market and precipitate an irretrievable de-
cline of the price-level, and consequently also a fatal de-
cline of earnings and a default and liquidation of capital-
ised earning-capacity,—a disastrous liquidation of capital-
ised intangibles. Therefore such a free run of production
has not been had nor aimed at; nor is it at all expedient,
as a business proposition, that anything of the kind should
be allowed.

Still, under all that handicap of cautious businesslike
retardation which sound business principles have entailed,
the continued growth of the mechanical technology has
taken effect in cheapened production in so large a measure
as to have greatly masked that progressive inflation of
prices which the larger use of credit has brought on and
carried forward during the same interval. With the
partial exception of the crude products of the soil, there
is no one of the major lines of production that has not
been gravely affected by it. From time to time the tech-
nological advance has even been able to give the progres-
sive inflation of prices the appearance of being no more
than a stabilisation and maintenance of the price-level; al-
though in the long run the cumulative expansion of credit,


374 Absentee Ownership


reénforced with a resolute businesslike restriction of out-
put all along the line, has proved to be the stronger, and
has proved to be the determining factor in that paral-
lelogram of economic forces the resultant of which has
been a sustained upward trend of general prices and a
cumulative capitalisation of intangibles.


Apart from scattered speculative gains which may come
to shrewd outsiders here and there, those who stand to
gain by this long run of expansion in money-values are
the constituent members of the One Big Union of financial
Interests. Between them they make up the party of the
first part in that advancing press of credit transactions
by which the expansion is made and maintained.?” This
One Big Union is not precisely a trade-union of bankers;
although it is on the ground of investment banking and
by use of transactions in credit and capitalisation that
the One Big Union’s tutelage and regulation of business
and industry goes into effect. It is essentially a union
of Interests, not of persons; at least not in a personal
bearing ; although it is through measures taken by those


22 De jure there is no such One Big Union of the Interests, of
course. It is perhaps needless to say so. This descriptive phrase
applies only de facto. And even de facto the One Big Union
of the Interests appears, hitherto, scarcely to have had a settled
local habitation and a name. Only in respect of the One Big
Union’s surveillance of note issues and rediscounts can it be
said the Federal Reserve has given its membership a “Central”
—if one may take a metaphor from the usage of the telephone.
The One Big Union, hitherto, has no corporate existence. It
foots up to a concert of action and policy enforced by the drift
of circumstances, rather than by deliberation and a reasoned plan
looking to the long run. But by drift of circumstances—the drift
of sound business principles and a common solicitude—their
several movements result, in effect, in such a convergence of
forces and such a concert of policy and action as to merit the
name.


The Larger Use of Credit a7


persons who are the appointed custodians of these In-
terests that those business principles by which they live
have come to regulate these large matters, in point of
tactics, scope and policy, not in point of detail manceuvres.
There has been, hitherto, no such degree of organised
responsibility and control as would permit this General
Staff of custodians to dictate specific manceuvres to their
clients, except it be at a critical juncture, when the com-
mon good of the Interests is in the balance or when the
fabric of credit and capitalisations is exposed to some im-
minent hazard. If the name be employed in such a loosely
descriptive fashion, the One Big Union of the Interests
will come to much the same thing as what is covered by
the colloquial phrase, “Big Business,” but with a particu-
lar reference to that community-interest and that solidarity
of principles which is entailed by the common respon-
sibilities and the common benefits of the larger absentee
ownership.

These Interests which so are drawn together, by force
of circumstances, into this inchoate One Big Union of
absentee ownership are many and various; but they have
at least one distinctive trait in common, viz. large ab-
sentee ownership. It is also a characteristic fact that the
Interests, or their assets, are quite generally if not in-
variably engaged in two or more lines of business at the
same time, and that each of these distinct lines of busi-
ness engages these assets to their full amount. Two such
lines of business carried on in this way simultaneously
for the same Interest and by the use of the same assets
will touch and mutually reénforce one another in respect
of their solvency, although they will be quite distinct in
respect of their corporate identity and the technical char-
acter of the business traffic carried on by each.

The one line will be financial, in the nature of invest-


376 Absentee Ownership


ment banking, occupied with the creative use of credit
resources, capitalisations and flotations; while the other
line will be commercial or industrial business of the cor-
porate sort, perhaps more frequently the latter, occupied
with the output and sale of vendible goods or services.
Few if any of these Interests, or blocks of absentee owner-
ship, are not to be counted with in both of these bearings ;
particularly such of them as rise into a position of dom-
inance in the business community. The type-form would
be that which is shown by those well-known dominating
Interests whose force of ownership is to be counted with
equally in the banking community at the fiscal metropolis
and in one or another of the key industries, as, e.g.,
steel, coal, oil, or railways. But of much the same value
and effect, for the purpose of the present argument, are
those other notable Interests which combine a metropolitan
enterprise in solvency and capitalisations with large in-
dustrial undertakings that are not commonly classed as
key industries; as, e.g., sugar-refining, meat-packing,
flour-milling, the manufacture of explosives, or trolley
lines. Illustrative instances will readily come to mind.

This characteristic bifurcation, or spread, of the In-
terests, or, if one prefers the expression, this conjugation
of industrial and fiscal enterprises under the same block
of absentee ownership, is by no means a casual or for-
tuitous occurrence. It is of the essence of the case and
lies at the root of the current situation. It is not in any
conclusive sense an effect of personal choice and inclina-
tion, for it is contained in that drift of circumstances out
of which the whole situation arises, and which no per-
sonal bias or caprice can turn aside or defeat. The un-
derlying and conclusive fact of the matter is that such
procedure is profitable ; which is conclusive for the pursuit
of business.


The Larger Use of Credit 377


Such double use of the available assets will yield double
earnings ; indeed, ordinarily something more.  Sufficiently
large assets engaged as corporate capital, say in one of
the key industries, will at the same time and to their
full amount, and without prejudice to their earning-capac-
ity as corporation assets serve also to their full amount
as assets of solvency in the fiscal enterprise of the met~
ropolitan investment banking, provided always that the
assets are held in sufficiently large blocks. Indeed, the
more fully and profitably such assets are employed in
such industrial business, especially if they are engaged
on a large and dominant scale, the better will be their
rating in the business community and the more securely
and fully will they serve as the substance of that solvency
on which the traffic in credit extensions and capitalisations
is carried on. The larger the success, in point of earn-
ings, and the more assured the prospective earning-ca-
pacity of any such block of assets, the larger and more as-
sured will be its solvency and its funded carrying-power
as a factor in the business of investment banking, and
the more effectually, therefore, can it be mobilised for
the creation of new credit extensions and new intangibles.
Its effectual capital-value is enlarged by so much.?* For
what they are worth, industrial assets of the larger sort

23 Such enlargement of effectual capital-value of given assets by
the proven earning-capacity of an industrial business concern is
well shown, e.g., in the case of the Standard Oil securities
that were outstanding some years ago; when the market value,
and the consequent value as collateral, of the common stock ad-
vanced by steady growth of earnings till it reached some 700 per
cent. over its face value. As an element of solvency and a credit-
bearing asset that parcel of securities then counted at their market
value, of course, not at their face value; as was also seen and
turned to account presently in the issuance of stock dividends of


some 700 per cent. Substantially the same operation has been
repeated by the various Standard Oil properties during the past


year (1922).


378 Absentee Ownership


have, therefore, such a secondary—or perhaps rather a
primary—service to render their owners, or their consti-
tuted custodians, under the conditions inaugurated by this
new order of business enterprise that runs on funded
credits. The whole fabric of business is built on and
about this double use of asserts, and its movements are reg-
ulated by the circumstances which govern this double use.

Sound business principles—the principles of the main
chance—will not allow the benefits of such double service
of assets to be overlooked, nor will they let this fruitful
duplication of earning-capacity go to waste. To lend it-
self most profitably to such double service, the parcel of
assets in question should be of reasonably massive propor-
tions, such as to place its owner or manager on a footing
of some strategic independence and initiative among those
large absentee owners on whose assets the country’s credit
‘system is erected and with whom he will have to nego-
tiate for whatever share is coming to him out of the
‘proceeds of that business. All the while it is also true,
and it lies in the collusive nature of the fiscal system and
its work, that many businesslike owners who command
‘only relatively small and inconsequential parcels of assets
will elbow their way into participation in the traffic, to
come in for whatever margin of supernumerary profits
they can touch while serving as outliers of the system and
subsidiaries of the larger captains of duplication.

This is one of the prime considerations on the strength
of which their banking operations are carried on by that
multitude of minor and outlying banking concerns that
‘do business as branches, subsidiaries, and correspondents,
immediately or remotely dependent on the favorable atti-
tude of the major concerns at the metropolitan center of
solvency. These outliers are bound into the working sys-


The Larger Use of Credit 379


tem of credit by a bond of profitable compliance with the
tactical dispositions made by its masters. On this ground
do the ramifications of the system run. Without this
faithful docility which characterises these outlying cor-
respondents, the efficiency of the system as a generator
of intangibles and incomes would be greatly curtailed, if
indeed it could come to anything substantially lucrative at
all in that case. By this double use of assets, and by help
of this all-pervading give and take of profitable margins
and commissions, the assets which are so employed are
made to pay their way both going and coming, as one might
say. The organisation is in the nature of a contrivance
for killing two birds with one stone, or for making two
overhead charges grow where one grew before, if one
should prefer that form of the adage.

In the nature of the case, those massive aggregations:
of absentee ownership that are elected by circumstance:
to make up the One Big Union of the Interests, and to
share in its counsels, revenues and perquisites, will neces-
sarily take on such a duplex working formation; what-
ever may have been the underlying sources from which
their assets have once been derived, or the employments:
in which they may once have been engaged during their
growth and maturation. The earning-capacities which en-
ter into their composition as assets, and the personnel
which administers them as Interests, may be of one deriva-
tion or another; they may, e.g., have come out of oil or
out of commercial banking. But whether a given Interest
has in its initial phase been identified with industrial busi-
ness or with financial undertakings, its destiny under the
circumstances which establish and regulate the new order
of things in business will be to throw the full weight of its
assets and prestige into both lines alike, so soon as it


380 Absentee Ownership


reaches the due measure of maturity in mass and in years
of discretion.**


In respect of their financial commitments and _ their
share in the guidance of the country’s financial policy at
large, these several Interests and their several custodians
stand together on reasonably common ground; but the
like is not to be said of their strategy and tactics as con-
cerns engaged in industrial business. As financial Inter-
ests they are drawn together in team-work for their com-
mon good and are able to take measures in common, look-
ing to their joint advantage and particularly to their
mutual security, to the security of their several commit-
ments and the maintenance of the level of capitalisation.
‘Whereas in their capacity of industrial business Interests
they are habitually somewhat at odds, if not at cross pur-
poses; being in the position of rival salesmen in a limited
market. As industrial Interests, that is to say as business
‘concerns which do business in an output of vendible prod-
‘ucts, they all are in some degree in the position of rivals
in trade, sellers of alternative goods in a closed market,
in which one tradesman misses what another takes of the
available purchasing-power. In this bearing the most
amicable contact which the circumstances of the case and
the ethics of trade will admit among them is the watch-
ful courtesy of a negotiated peace,—a peace negotiated
for their mutual relief from “cutthroat competition” and
for the common gain of the same Interests in their ca-

24 Consider, e.g., two such typical credit institutions of the
first rank as J. Pierpont Morgan & Co. and the National City
Bank, which have come into the business from widely different
beginnings and antecedents, but which now count at their full
weight both in industrial enterprise and as banking houses.

It is also interesting to note that the dates from which the
two take their departure as prime-movers in this twofold pur-


suit of gain, coincide in a loose way with the period out of
which the new order of credit and capitalisation took its rise.


The Larger Use of Credit 381


pacity of credit-brokers, investment bankers, creators of
capitalised intangibles. It is, therefore, as massive par-
cels of funded solvency and formidable strategists in cap-
italisation that they come together as constituents of the
One Big Union of the Interests ; and it is as such that they
safeguard that peace of moderation and mutual conces-
sions that broods over the traffic of industrial business.

All the while, of course, it is the same Interests, the
same parcels of assets and administered by the same
responsible personnel, moved by the same incentive of net
aggregate gain in terms of price, that do business in both
connections. It is incumbent on these custodians and
strategists of the Interests, collectively and severally, to
regulate and administer affairs in a large way both in the
traffic of industrial business and in the marketplace of
credit and capital. But the seat of executive power as
well as the high court of judicature, touching all the
major issues of business traffic of whatever complexion,
under this new order, are to be found on the financial
ground, in the bailiwick of the high magistrates of sol-
vency. Circumstances have taken such a turn.”


25 There is a singular, but presumably idle, coincidence of dates:
and characteristics between this de facto magistracy of solvency,
its scope and powers, on the one side, and the rise and scope of
the Injunction as applied in American court practice on the
other side. Both are unprecedented, both have grown out of
inconspicuous beginnings and have come to their present sov-
ereign powers within the same general period of time; the same
period during which the large-scale industrial business and the
free capitalisation of credits have also come into bearing, and
have in time come to dominate the country’s industrial system
and its scheme of life. Both serve the ends of the larger absentee
ownership, in the main and de facto. Both combine judiciary
with executive powers, and the powers of both are of an inhibi-
tory sort; essentially powers of retardation and inertia, powers
which take effect by way of penalising activicies that are not
otherwise obnoxious to law or morals. It appears also that, in,


382 Absentee Ownership


Chief among the circumstances which have given this
‘turn to the pursuit of business, and which so have given
rise to the new order of things and the sovereign powers
of the larger credit, has been the circumstance that a busi-
nesslike competition in production and marketing was run-
ning loose among the major industries in the late nineties,
at such an unguarded rate as to be a menace to the traf-
fic; such as threatened to entail a grievous retrenchment
of the outstanding capitalisations and jeopardise the fixed
charges payable on outstanding debentures. The discord
in the industrial business was rising to an intolerable
pitch and volume, such as to threaten the continued earn-
ing-capacity of the business corporations that were caught
in it. The new order of things has emerged from the
remedial measures which that state of affairs invited, as
has been explained in an earlier passage in describing the
rise of the investment bankers. It lies in the nature of
this industrial business, as conducted in a closed market
by competitive business concerns, to breed dissension, dis-


trust and cross purposes among the Interests engaged in
the traffic.?®


practical effect, the two mutually befriend and sustain one an-
other.

26 This description of the case, as necessarily running to dis-
trust, cross purposes, and sharp practice, applies to the conduct
of the business, not to the mechanics of production. It is a
proposition concerning business principles and practice, not con-
cerning the technique of industry. It remains true all the while,
of course, that in point of workmanship, in point of efficient
tangible performance, as contrasted with the strategy of sales-
manship, the industries are always and everywhere best served
‘by a cordial and calculated codperation between the various
industrial units that make up the industrial system. The maxi-
mum net production is to be reached only along that line.
But business enterprise is a pursuit of maximum net gain in
terms of price, not of maximum production in terms of goods.
It is an enterprise in salesmanship, whether the trading is done
in material goods or in the credit instruments.


The Larger Use of Credit 383


In due time, so soon as the corporate interests that
were contending for the traffic had grown to formidable
proportions and their market was closing in, this unhappy
state of affairs became intolerable. So, under the spur
of desperation, there has presently emerged the new order
of collusive moderation under the administrative guidance
of the One Big Union of the Interests. Concert and mu-
tual accommodation in the conduct of this industrial busi-
ness is effectually dictated not by the technical require-
ments of industry but by considerations of finance, with
a ‘view to mutual financial ‘benefits, by financial conces-
sions and alliances, under pressure of financial necessity.

Financial ‘peace and stability is a matter of the first
consequence to the interests, and to all those who are
concerned in the business of capitalised credits. The
fabric of credit and capitalisation is essentially a fabric
of concerted make-believe resting on the routine credulity
of the business community at large. It is therefore con-
ditioned on the continued preservation of this prevalent
credulity in a state of unimpaired tensile strength, which
calls for eternal vigilance on the part of its keepers. The
fabric, therefore, is always in a state of unstable equilibri-
um, liable to derangement and extensive disintegration in
case of an appreciable disturbance at any critical point,
with unhappy consequences for the business of capitalisa-


In the technological respect, as a proposition in workmanship
and tangible performance, the industries of the country are
bound together in an orderly network of interlocking processes
of production; but in respect of the business interests engaged,
as a proposition in salesmanship and sales-profits, in their capacity
of business concerns, these many parcels of industrial property
are at cross purposes, being in the position of competing bid-
ders for custom. The strategy of salesmanship and net gain
brings with it into the industrial system the defects of its own
qualities, and among these defects is an inveterate bias of dis-
trust and sharp practice.


384 Absentee Ownership


tion and overhead charges. Hence the eminently wise
and unremitting exhortation to retain or restore confidence,
and to return to “normalcy” in case the popular credulity
has suffered a lapse. This care is incumbent on the In-
terests of the One Big Union. So that it is incumbent on
them to stand united and play safe, to avoid shock, to
promote moderation and tranquillity throughout the world
of credit and capitalisation ; for it is after all a confidence
game—in the blameless sense of the phrase—and is to be
played according to the rules governing games of that
psychological nature. To this end these major Interests,
which in their financial entity make up the One Big Union,
will use a reasonable degree of neighborly accommodation
in pursuing their several advantages as special interests
in the traffic of industrial and commercial business. And
to the same salutary end the minor participants, subsidi-
aries, outliers and interlopers in the industrial business
will be rationed in respect of their needful credit ex-
tensions, according to the same reasoned plan looking
to the stability of price-levels and outstanding capitalisa-
tions.

The outcome of this régime of financial peace and
stability is not that rivalry and sharp practice are elim-
inated from current industrial and commercial business,
not even from industrial business of that larger sort which
will generate a “Special Interest”; but only that the rivalry
and competitive manceuvring runs within reasonable and
salutary bounds; that is to say, reasonable and salutary
tor the purposes of profitable financiering, as touches out-
standing credits and the level of capitalisation. Reason
and security in this bearing have to do with the mainte-
nance and enlargement of earnings, of income in terms
of money, and of possessions in terms of price; not with
the maintenance and enlargement of productive output


The Larger Use of Credit 385


or of livelihood. Competitive manceuvres in industrial
business under this régime, therefore, may without hazard
run free in so far as they will not tend to impair the price-
level. It is on the price-level that the level of capitalisa-
tion rests, at the same time that the volume of capitalisa-
tion determines the price-level, in the main and in the long
run.


Competitive manceuvres which will leave the price-level
intact, or which will tend to raise it, will be manceuvres
of competitive salesmanship, not of competitive produc-
tion, of course. Now and again such manceuvres of
salesmanship will involve an increased output of the line
of goods or services to be sold, in case the manceuvres
enlarge the volume of sales. As an incident of the busi-
ness, in such a case efficient salesmanship may provoke
an increased production of the given line of goods. Ina
closed market, that is to say in a market which runs on
a provisionally fixed volume of purchasing-power, such
increased production and sale in any one given line of
goods will be balanced (approximately) by an equivalent
curtailment of output and sales in other lines which come
in competition, directly or indirectly; or otherwise the
price-level will be deranged. In effect and in the main it
is a question of alternative purchases.?”

27 So, e. g., increased sales of yeast-cakes, cosmetics, Red Cross
doles, furs, or rubber tires—wares which have of late been sell-
ing in very notably increased quantities as a result of large and
persistent advertising—will be offset by a shrinkage of sales in
other, alternative lines, as, e.g., fruits, flannels, alcoholic bev-
erages, savings-bank accounts, or butcher’s-meats.

The current situation of this business community at large,
which so does business in commercial and industrial traffic
within the bounds appointed by the massive Interests of the
One Big Union, is a situation of much the same complexion as


that which has prevailed in the country towns of the Middle
West, as already explained in an earlier chapter. The trafhc


386 Absentee Ownership


This state of the case leaves a fairly large scope for
initiative and enterprise in salesmanship. And as is well
known a very large and steadily increasing expenditure
of talents, funds, and apparatus, has gone into this work
in salesmanship in recent years. Even those major in-
dustrial Interests which would seem to be in a position
to make their own terms, the terms on which they will
buy their materials and on which they will dispose of
their marketable output, have been going strong on this
rivalry in salesmanship, as, e. g., the packers or the millers.
They too are driving hard against these pliable but resili-
ent barriers of competitive salesmanship in a closed mar-
ket. The only ones among these industrial business enter-
prises which are passably exempt from the cares of sales-
manlike rivalry are those which have to do immediately
with one or another of the key industries, And even they
are not wholly exempt, as may be seen, e.g., in the
case of the oil business, whose sign-boards, advertise-
ments, and decorated sales-booths are to be met at every
turn; while their very reputable spokesmen continue to
solicit the popular good-will with the most assiduously
devout and humanitarian verbiage.


It is after all in the Key Industries—in coal, steel, oil,
lumber, railways, waterpower—that the administrative
center of this system of industrial business traffic lies ; just


runs on the same general lines of reserved and evasive rivalry
within and of sturdy solidarity toward the outside, toward the
underlying population; very much as the local community of re-
tailers carries on the business traffic of a typical country town.
Except for its larger dimensions it is much the same thing over
again, both as regards the manner and the degree in which the
cost of it all falls on the underlying population. In both cases
it is an enterprise in usufruct carried on under a loosely defined
code of Live and Let Live, designed to safeguard the joint ad-
vantage of the usufructuaries.


The Larger Use of Credit 387


as its executive center lies outside the industrial system
proper, in the massive credit institutions of the fiscal
metropolis. And it is on these key industries, in the main
and primarily, that the dominant Interests of the One Big
Union rest their weight of absentee ownership and pivot
the sweep of their industrial dominion. The Key In-
dustries are so called because the rest of the industrial
system waits on their operations; so that they set the pace
and govern the practicable rate and volume of employ-
ment and output for the industrial system at large,—
practicable, that is, in point of business expediency.

The management of the key industries works out, in
effect, as an administrative control of the industrial sys-
tem at large; immediately in and through the mechanical
industries, and indirectly also throughout the underlying
industrial system. But all the while the management of
the key industries is neither prompted nor guided by any
such far-reaching administrative purpose, nor is it biassed
by any sentiment of administrative responsibility in that
connection. This guidance of industrial affairs is all, in
a way, an undesigned and fortuitous by-product of the
steadfast pursuit of their own advantage by those Interests
that do business in the key industries. The measures
taken by the Interests are directed to no such end. But
such is the exacting balance and concatenation of the work
and of its ways and means, under this mechanistic state
of the industrial arts and under the price-system, that the
operations of these key industries which turn out the
primary output of coal, steel, oil, and transport, will un-
avoidably make the pace for the rest of the mechanical
industries, whether by design or not.

As a matter of common sense and a fact of common
notoriety, the key industries are managed on the busi-
nesslike principle of charging what the traffic will bear;


388 Absentee Ownership


that is to say, what will bring the largest net gain to their
owners and managers. It is a simple, though sometimes
delicate, question of restricting the rate and volume of
their output to such a figure as will yield the largest net
return in terms of price, when the price is determined
by this restriction of the output.”*

Those other massive industrial undertakings that come
into the same class with the key industries in respect of
their dominant mass and reach and in the respect that
they are concerned immediately with the prime neces-
sities of life, stand on much the same footing in this
matter as the key industries proper ; as, e. g., meat-packing,
flour-milling, or sugar-refining. The management of
these has the initiative in industrial business; that is to
say, the initiative rests finally with the financial manage-
ment of these concerns. Therefore, the Interests which
have the financial custody and direction of these key in-
dustries are in a position to make the terms on which
industrial production will be carried on, and it is for the
management of the underlying industries in the system to
take or leave the terms which are offered them.


28 The net aggregate price-return is a product of two variaples;
one of which—the output—varies at the discretion of the busi-
nesslike management, and the second of which—the price per
unit—is a function of the first. “What the traffic will bear” is
that volume of output which will give the largest product when
multiplied into the price per unit. Hence the need of a vigilant
restraint on production.

The principle of restraint which so comes to govern the busi-
ness of what the traffic will bear has been spoken of as the “law
of balanced return”; as being a principle which determines the
expedient maximum of output in any given case, and which
therefore also determines what will be the expedient size of an
industrial business unit in any given line of production and sale.
—Cf. A. S. Dewing, The Financial Policy of Corporations, vol.
iv, ch. ii.


The Larger Use of Credit 389


The business men in charge of these key industries are
able to use this discretion with a passably free hand, in-
asmuch as these industries stand at the apex of the in-
dustrial system,—the apex of growth and of industrial
strategy. Their management is vested with the initiative
in industrial matters. Their administrative policy con-
sequently falls into relatively simple lines, in its general
application. In its elements, it comes to the broad ques-
tion of how large an output of these prime ways and
means of industry will yield the largest net aggregate
price-return to the business men in charge and to their
absentee owners. In its practical application this will
foot up to a question of how far production had best be
allowed to go, or how nearly full an employment of the
available equipment and man-power will yield the largest
net income, for the time being, to these owners and their
managers; which may be restated as a question of how
large a running margin of unemployment will best serve
this purpose.

In ordinary times there is always such a running margin
of unemployment, both in the key industries and in those
underlying industries which depend on them for their nec-
essafy ways and means. And even in busy times few if
any 9f these industries will ever come up to anything
like the volume of production that would result from a
free use of the same man-power and material resources
under compet2nt technical management with an eye single
to production. Sound business considerations will not
permit it. The businesslike duties of management turn
constantly on a sagacious restriction of output at the point
of “balanced return,’ and on the many exacting details
of speeding-up and slowing-down, of laying-off and tak-
ing-on, of hiring and firing, which arise out of this neces-


390 Absentee Ownership


sary strategy of balanced unemployment. Balanced Re-
turn involves Balanced Unemployment.

The gains of business enterprise, whether in the key
industries or in the underlying industries of the system,
are money-values and they are derived from the margin
of sales-price over the cost of the output. The aim of
business is to widen this margin and to come in for as
large a share of it as may be. The margin may be wid-
ened by raising the sales-price or by lowering the cost of
the output. And any given business concern may increase
its share in this margin by more efficient salesmanship.
These are the points to be covered by the strategy of in-
dustrial business management.

As has already been explained above, the price-level
at large will rise progressively in response to that pro-
gressively enlarged volume of purchasing-power which
arises out of the progressive creation of credits in the
ordinary course of investment, merchandising, and cor-
poration finance. This expansion is  self-propagating.
Each successive advance of the price-level calls for a cor-
responding increment of the working-capital of all those
concerns that do business within its scope ; which includes
virtually all of the business community. The needful in-
crease of working-capital is got by a creation of new
credits ; which goes to increase the volume of purchasing-
power; which goes to raise the general level of prices,
etc. It is a matter of workday routine, and is, in effect,
to be broken into only by such a general liquidation of
credits as is no longer to be apprehended, since the Fed-
eral Reserve and the One Big Union of the Interests have
taken over the stabilisation of credits on a reasoned plan.

The major financial transactions of investment-banking
work out to the same effect, these being also in the nature
of a creation of credits, capitalisations, and overhead


The Larger Use of Credit 391


charges. So that the progressive rise of the price-level
goes forward in an orderly, and conservative, way, as a
secondary but unavoidable outcome of business-as-usual.
By so much, industrial business enterprise at large is as-
sured of a reasonable and progressively widening margin
of money-values over the cost of its merchantable output,
provided always that the (money) cost of the output does
not also advance in like measure.?®

As has been explained in an earlier chapter, the busi-
ness concerns of the underlying industrial system, the
concerns that do business in commerce and manufactures,
as these words are commonly understood, are engaged in
competition among themselves for a share in the run of
the market,—competitive management designed to increase
each concern’s share in the distribution of the available


29It will be seen that the current situation in this respect
thas much in common with the interval of prosperity, inflation,
or speculative advance, that makes up the rising segment of
such a business cycle as the experience of the nineteenth century
and the discussions of the nineteenth-century economists have
made familiar; but with a difference. There is in the current
situation an element of sobriety and a factor of salutary reserve
that were lacking in the nineteenth century. Prosperity ran
somewhat headlong in those days, and came, in the ordinary
course, to a headlong liquidation, ending in panic, crisis and de-
pression. Under the conservative surveillance of the Federal
Reserve and the One Big Union of the Interests in the twentieth
century the prosperity of business—that is to say the inflation
of capital and prices—does not run riot. It is an orderly ad-
vance, in the course of which the progressive creations of credit
and capital are duly stabilised and “digested,” distributed and
consolidated under the aegis of the Interests, with such effect
as to make them a secure ground on which to hypothecate
further creations of the same character, in indefinite progression.
And no undesigned liquidation need be apprehended in this case,
since the major debits and credits are pooled, in effect, by
being drawn in under the custody of these major Interests thac
informally make up the One Big Union. Both the need of
credits and the progressive creation of them are indefinitely


extensible.


392 Absentee Ownership


purchasing-power. Their market is a closed one, in a
large way, in that the volume of purchasing-power avail-
able for distribution among them at any given time is a
fixed quantity. Under current conditions the volume of
purchasing-power will expand by a more or less orderly
progression in the course of time and with the continued
expansion of the outstanding volume of credit. But for
the time being it is limited within fairly definite though
not inflexible bounds. Salesmanship may divert given
items and fractions of this outstanding volume of pur-
chasing-power from one line of sales to another, but it
does not in any appreciable degree enlarge the total vol-
ume of sales at any given time.*° Expenditure on sales-
cost, taken as a whole, will therefore count as a deduc-
tion from the available margin of sales-price over cost
of output. Yet continued and progressively increasing
attention to salesmanship, and a continued and progres-
sively increasing expenditure on sales-cost, are primary
and essential to any reasonably large success in this field
of business enterprise under the current. conditions.*4

30 The “market” as here used is the volume of effective demand
for things to be bought at the current level of prices, and it
may be taken to mean the national market or the international
market at large, according to the context of the argument. In
either case it is a “closed market,” in the sense that the available
purchasing-power which constitutes the demand in this market
falls short of the productive capacity of the industrial system,
at the ruling level of prices. Hence attention and expenditure in
this field of business enterprise has been converging on sales-
manship rather than on increased production, with the result that
total sales-costs have gained largely and progressively, at the same
time that the rate and volume of output have remained relatively
stationary on the whole.

31One of the secondary consequences of this imperative re-
course to salesmanship and enhanced sales-cost is to be noted
in this connection. In great part salesmanship takes effect by


way of establishing a conventional need for articles which have
previously been superfluities, shifting given articles of con-


The Larger Use of Credit 393


Again, inasmuch as the gains of business, the earnings
of enterprise and invested capital, are always eventually to
be drawn from the margin of sales-price over production-
cost, it is incumbent on all business management to cur-
tail production-cost so far as may be. The earnings of
invested capital are of the nature of overhead charges,
for the sake of which the business is carried on, and any
curtailment of which will therefore foot up to so much of
a defeat of the purpose for which business is carried on.
It follows that any curtailment of production-cost which
shall be reasonable, within the logic of business enter-
prise, must be a curtailment in expenditures on those
factors of production which are not capitalised or included
among the rateable assets of the business community.
Which comes to saying that the curtailment, if any, must
take effect in those expenditures which go to the industrial
man-power and the outlying farm population ; these factors
of the industrial system being not capitalised and, for
the time being, not capitalisable, and so being not carried
on the books as assets to which the business is bound over
in the way of fixed charges.

In respect of their business interests, therefore, there
results a division or cleavage of the people who live un-
der this system of industrial business, whereby the busi-
ness community, heading up in the Interests of the One


sumption from the focting of superfluities to that of necessary
articles of livelihood, necessities by conviction of morals and
decency rather than by requirement of subsistence or physical
comfort. By so much the necessities of life for the consumers
will be enlarged, and by so much the (moral) subsistence mini-
mum to be provided for out of wages will be raised, without
a corresponding increase in the workmanlike efficiency of the
wage-earners; which acts in its degree tc increase the labor-cost
per unit of the marketable output of industry, and therefore also
to narrow the margin of sales-price over production-cost. E.g.,
the moral necessity of consuming furs, cosmetics, or high heels.


394 Absentee Ownership


Big Union, comes to stand over against the underlying
population, which is taking articulate shape in the labor
organisations and the sentimental swarming gyrations of
the farmers. Quite generally these organisations and
projected movements among the underlying population
run true to the “action-pattern” of business-as-usual, in
that their consistent aim is to come in for an increasing
share in the margin of Sales-price over production-cost.
This they endeavor to accomplish by bargain and sale, en-
forced by a well-considered limitation of their marketable
supply, quite in the spirit of that larger financial business
enterprise that administers the affairs of the capitalised
manufactures, and that governs the rate and volume of
the industrial output by a conscientious withdrawal of ef-
ficiency, as dictated by the law of balanced return. In
these endeavours the fortunes of the underlying popula-
tion are subject to ebb and flow; but in the nature of the
case it is mostly ebb. The underlying population, it is
true, is caught in the business system; but it is after all
not an executive factor in the system; only a creative
factor, which is quite another matter. It comes into the
strategy of business enterprise at large in a more passive
way, aS man-power to be employed at discretion in the
pursuit of earnings on capitalised industry, according to
the law of balanced return, and as a body of ultimate
consumers to be supplied at discretion in the pursuit of
commercial gains, according to the principle of what the
traffic will bear.

As organised industrial man-power, particularly as
mobilised in the shape of standard labor-unions, these ele-
ments of the underlying population are consistently en-
deavoring, with a fluctuating measure of success, to en-
force an indefinitely extensible claim in the way of bet-


The Larger Use of Credit 395


ter pay. But in the nature of the case these endeavours
if successful will ordinarily come to nothing more than a
running process of catching up. The better pay is bet-
ter in terms of price. But in the nature of the case
the general level of prices continues to rise under cur-
rent conditions of credit, capitalisation, and salesmanship.
And since these progressively better-paid workmen are
at the same time ultimate consumers of the goods whose
prices continue progressively to advance, they continue
to lose in the higher cost of living whatever they gain in
the advance of wages. With a change of phrase the same
proposition applies to the farm population. And it should
be noted in the same connection, as applying without much
distinction to all classes and conditions of ultimate con-
sumers, that all the while the ever-increasing personnel
and proficiency employed in salesmanship continues to
convert additional articles of superfluous consumption
into items of morally necessary use; at the same time that
the increasing expenditure on sales-costs goes unremit-
tingly to raise the price of living.

The organised industrial man-power endeavours, with
a fluctuating measure of success, to make good its claim
to an enlarged allowance of livelihood. The ways and
means employed in these endeavours foot up, invariably,
to a standardised conscientious withdrawal of efficiency,
designed to bring the Interests to terms by a punitive re-
striction of the industrial output. In effect, this is the
sole purpose for which the industrial man-power has been
organised. So also the farmers are aspiring to make head
against the Interests and to reinstate themselves as “In-
dependent Farmers” after the good old fashion of the
day before yesterday. The Independent Farmer is one
of the lost arts of the nineteenth century. They are hop-


396 Absentee Ownership


ing to contrive some sort of a businesslike plan of con-
certed action by which to put themselves collectively in
line as a practicable Interest that shall be able to make
terms and reshape the scheme of things nearer to the
bucolic heart’s desire. By and large, the remedial as-
pirations of these farmers appear to fall under three sev-
eral heads: restriction of output; restraint of trade; and
expansion of credits. Their great hope appears to cen-
ter on an inflation of prices by a conscientious withdrawal
of productive efficiency and an inflation of purchasing-
power. By this means they hope to cover their outstand-
ing liabilities and procure their needed working-capital.
Their aspirations, at least, are businesslike.

Meantime the Interests, the One Big Union of the
Major Interests and the network of minor concerns
through which the business of credit and capitalisation
runs, are engaged on a loosely collusive plan for bringing
the industrial man-power to reasonable—that is to say
profitable—terms by the punitive use of unemployment.
At the same time the volume of outstanding capitalisation
is being continuously augmented by a continued flow of
securities, in great part representing recapitalisations of
existing assets, and working-capital to be applied toward
increased sales-costs. By and large, or “in principle,”
the Interests and the Federal Reserve take a position of
prudent conservatism; in practical effect the drift of busi-
nesslike exigencies decides that, as a matter of trans-
actions in detail, the continued issue of new capital-
securities runs well up in the hundreds of millions weekly ;
while the physical aggregate of the capitalised assets ap-
pears on the whole to be declining in a moderate way,
through uncovered wear and tear. More particularly will
it be seen that the physical ways and means are falling
short when it is considered that both the numbers of the


The Larger Use of Credit 397,


population and the requirements per capita go on increas-
ing, with no sensible net addition to the ways and means
of life and production, while an increasing proportion of
the available ways and means is spent on sales-costs.


CHAPTER XIII


THE SECULAR TREND


/ As has been explained in earlier chapters, and as will
readily be seen by any intelligent person who takes an in-
terest in these matters, secular life among the peoples of
Christendom is governed in recent times by three several
systems of use and wont, sovereign action-patterns in-
duced by the run of past habituation:—the mechanical
system of industry; the price-system; and the national es-
tablishment. The existing industrial system is dominated
by the technology of physics and chemistry, and is a prod-
uct of recent times, a profoundly modified derivative of
the handicraft industry. The current price-system is
dominated by absentee ownership and is also a greatly al-
tered outgrowth of the handicraft industry and its petty
trade; its continued growth in recent times has, in effect,
changed it into a credit-price system. The nation, con-
sidered as a habit of thought, is a residual form of the
predatory dynastic State of early modern times, super-
ficially altered by a suffusion of democratic and parlia-
mentary institutions in recent times.

By continued growth of use and wont in recent times
the price-system has in effect become a credit-price
system; and driven by the same growth the system of
ownership has to all intents and purposes become a system
of absentee ownership, in all that concerns any effectual
initiative and authority in the conduct of economic affairs.
The effectual control of the economic situation, in busi-

398


The Secular Trend 399


ness, industry, and civil life, rests on the control of credit.
Therefore the effectual exercise of initiative, discretion,
and authority is perforce vested in those massive aggre-
gations of absentee ownership that make up the Interests.
Within certain wide limits of tolerance, therefore, the
rest of the community, the industrial system and the un-
derlying population, are at the disposal of the Interests,
as ways and means of business, to be managed in a tem-
perate spirit of usufruct for the continued and cumulative
benefit of the major Interests and their absentee owners.
The nation, both as a habit of thought and as a govern-
mental going concern, comes into the case, in effect and
in the main, as an auxiliary agency the function of which
is to safeguard, extend and facilitate this work of surveil-
lance and usufruct which has by drift of circumstances
become incumbent on the Interests.

Such appears to be the state of the case, in the large
and in so far as the forces engaged have yet fallen into
definite lines and groupings, in those respects which come
in question here.


v It will be seen, accordingly, that the current economic
situation is drawn on lines of a two-sided division of its
forces or elements:—the Interests; and the underlying
population. Such is the situation, typically, in the case
of America; and such is also the state of things in the
other civilised countries, in much the sarne measure in
which they are civilised according to the same pattern.
The Interests, properly speaking, are made up of those
blocks of absentee ownership which are sufficiently mas-
sive to come into the counsels of the One Big Union of the
Interests. Associated with these in their work, as co-
partners, auxiliaries, subsidiaries, extensions, purveyors
of traffic, are the minor Interests and the business com-


400 Absentee Ownership


munity at large; primarily the banking community. The
work which they have in hand is to do business for a
profit by use of the industrial system and the underlying
population. For the purposes of business the underlying
population has two uses :—as industrial man-power; and
as ultimate consumers,—that is to say as ultimate pur-
chasers, since the business interest does not extend be-
_ yond the ultimate sale of the goods.

To do a profitable business one should buy cheap and
sell dear, as all reasonable men know. In its dealings
with the underlying population the business community
buys their man-power and sells them their livelihood. So
it is incumbent on the business men in the case to buy
the industrial man-power as cheap as may be, and to sell
the means of living to the ultimate consumer as dear as
may be. All of which is a platitudinous matter of course.

The source of profits is the margin of sales-price over
production-cost (or purchase-cost). In earlier chapters it
has already been explained how this margin is widened by
raising the level of sales-prices; both by efficient sales-
manship in the merchandising trades and by a continued
expansion of the outstanding volume of purchasing-
power through a continued creation of credits at
the hands of the investment bankers and similar credit-
establishments. In the same connection something has
also been said of the service which the agencies of gov-
ernment render, in the way of enhancing prices by con-
tributing to the security of this expanded volume of credit
and so helping to make it indefinitely expansible without
risk,

On the side of costs the underlying population comes
into the case as being the industrial man-power that is to
be bought, including the skill and technical knowledge
that makes up the state of the industrial arts. On this


The Secular Trend 401


side this population comes in as vendors of the ways
and means of production. For the present purpose they
may be classed loosely under two heads :—the indus-
trial workmen; and the farmers. Also loosely and with
a negligible fringe of exceptions it may be said that both
of these groups of industrial man-power come into the
negotiations on a businesslike footing, governed by the
principles of the price-system and aiming to sell as dear
as may be.

In these endeavours to sell dear the farmers have
hitherto met with no measurable success, apparently
for want of effectual collusion. In effect and in the com-
mon run the farm population and its work and liveli-
hood are a species of natural resources which the busi-
ness community holds in usufruct, in the nature of inert
materials exposed to the drift of circumstances over which
they have no control, somewhat after the analogy of
bacteria employed in fermentation.

The case of the industrial man-power in the narrower
sense is somewhat different, the case of the specialised
workman engaged in the mechanical industries. In great
part, and more or less effectually, these have been drawn
together in craft-unions to do their bargaining on a col-
lusive plan for the more profitable sale of their man-
power. In the typical case these unions are businesslike
coalitions endeavoring to drive a bargain and establish
a vested interest, governed by the standard aims and
methods of the price-system.1_ The unions habitually em-
ploy the standard methods of the merchandising business,
endeavoring to sell their vendible output at the best price

1 The American Federation of Labor may be taken as a type-
form; although it goes perhaps to an extreme in its adherence


to the principles and procedure of merchandising, in all its aims
and negotiations, its constant aim being an exclusive market and


a limitation of supply.


402 Absentee Ownership


obtainable; their chief recourse in these negotiations be-
ing a limitation of the supply, a strategic withdrawal of
efficiency by means of strikes, union rules, apprenticeship
requirements, and devices for consuming time unproduc-
tively. The nature of the business does not admit the
use of sales-publicity in this traffic in anything like the
same measure in which that expedient is employed in or-
dinary merchandising. Hence the strategic stress of their
salesmanship falls all the more insistently and effectually
on the limitation of the vendible supply ; a running balance
of unemployment and orderly inefficiency under union
tules, rising promptly to the proportions of an embargo on
productive work in any emergency. The aim being a
scarcity-price for work done, quite in the spirit of busi-
ness-as-usual.

Meantime the continued flow of credits and capitalisa-
tions continues to expand the volume of purchasing-power
in the market, and so continues to enhance the price-cost
of living for the workmen, along with the rising level
of general prices. Which provokes the organised work-
men to a more assiduous bargaining for higher wages;
which calls for a more exacting insistence on mediocrity
and obstruction in the day’s work and a more instant
mobilisation in the way of strikes. On sound busi-
ness principles, the organised workmen’s remedy for scar-
city of livelihood is a persistent curtailment of output.

As a secondary effect—which may presently, in the
course of further habituation, turn out to be its gravest
consequence—this struggle for existence by way of sabot-
age fosters a rising tide of hostility and distrust between
the parties to the bargain. There would seem to be in
prospect a progressively settled and malevolent hostility
on the part of the embattled workmen over against their
employers and the absentee owners for whose ease and


The Secular Trend 403


gain they are employed; which should logically be counted
on to rise in due course to that pitch of vivacity where it
will stick at nothing. But in the mean time the logical
recourse of the workmen in their negotiations for wages
and livelihood, according to the logic of sound business
under the price-system, is a strategic withdrawal of effi-
ciency, of a passive sort, increasing in frequency and am-
plitude to keep pace with the increasing urgency of their
case.

And the urgency of their case is increasing progres-
sively, in the nature of things. The increasing stability
of the credit system, such as it has attained during the
past decade, enables the price-level to rise progressively,
and thereby progressively to increase the price-cost of
living. At the same time the business community, the
absentee owners with whom the workmen are carrying on
their acrimonious argument about wages and livelihood,
are in a progressively stronger position and a progres-
sively more determined frame of mind. They have
learned to act in concert and have also learned that, in a
business way, the industrial man-power is their common
enemy, against which it is for them to make common
cause, within reason,—that is to say within the bounds of
profitable business.

While the business men are endeavoring to enhance the
reasonable gains of business by expanding the volume of
capital and lifting the level of prices, and so widening
the margin of sales-prices over production-costs, the or-
ganised workmen are forever cutting in on the same mar-
gin by pushing up the labor-cost. And on this employ-
ers’ side of the argument, as well as on the side of the
embattled workmen, the standard and reasonable recourse
by which to bring their opponents to reason is a strategic
use of unemployment, a conscientious withdrawal of ef-


404 Absentee Ownership


ficiency, carried to such a point as will bring an effectual
degree of privation on the ultimate consumers, including
the workmen, without reducing the net aggregate sales-
price of the decreased output when sold at the resulting
enhanced price per unit. In all these negotiations there
is, on the employers’ side also, relatively little effectual
use to be made of salesmanlike publicity. The ordinary
and effectual means employed is privation brought on by
unemployment. So also, in these endeavors to economise
on labor-cost as well as in the flotation of credits, capital-
isations, and overhead charges, a more intelligent concert
of action and a wider solidarity of interests on the side of
the employers and owners is of great service; in that it
enables the business of strategic unemployment to be car-
ried out with a wider sweep and with increased confidence
and security.”


At this point the national establishment, federal and
local, comes into the case, by way of constituted authority
exercising surveillance and punitive powers. In effect
and ordinarily the intervention of governmental agencies
in these negotiations between the owners and the work-
men redounds to the benefit of the former. Such is nec-
essarily the case in the nature of things. In the nature
of things, as things go in any democratic community,
these governmental agencies are administered by a busi-
nesslike personnel, imbued with the habitual bias of busi-
ness principles—the principles of ownership; that is
to say, under current conditions, the rights, powers, and
immunities of absentee ownership. In the nature of the
case, the official personnel is drawn from the business com-
munity,—lawyers, bankers, merchants, contractors, etc.;

2 As has appeared, e.g., in the wide-concerted campaign lately


carried on for the suppression of the unions, spoken of by
courtesy as a “campaign for the open shop.”


The Secular Trend 405


in the main and ordinarily drawn from the country towns
and the trading-centers; “practical men,’ whose precon-
ceptions and convictions are such as will necessarily
emerge from continued and successful experience in the
conduct of business of that character. Lawyers and
magistrates who have proved their fitness by their suc-
cessful conduct of administrative duties and litigations
turning on the legal niceties of ownership, and in whom
the iogic of ownership has become second nature.?


3 There is no fault to be found with all this, of course; but
it is necessary to note the fact. It is one of the substantial
factors in the case, and it lies in the nature of things in any
democratic community. Life and experience in these demo-
cratic communities is governed by the price-system. Efficiency,
practical capacity, popular confidence, in these communities are
rateable only in terms of price. “Practical” means “business-
like.” Driven by this all-pervading bias of business principles
in all that touches their practical concerns, no such democratic
community is capable of entrusting the duties of responsible
office to any other than business men. Hence, in increasing
measure as the situation has moved forward and approached the
current highly businesslike order of things, the incumbents of
office are necessarily persons of businesslike antecedents, dom-
inated by the logic of ownership, essentially absentee ownership.
Legislators, executives, and judiciary are of the same deriva-
tion in respect of the bias which their habits of life have en-
gendered and in respect of the drift to which their bias sub-
jects them in their further conduct of affairs. There need of
course be no question of the good faith or the intelligence of these
responsible incumbents of office. It is to be presumed that in
these respects they will commonly grade up to the general average,
or something not far short of that point. But by force of the
businesslike personal equation that is ingrained by habit in the
official personnel, the growth of use and wont, of law and cus-
tom, of precedent and enactment, during recent times has fallen


into lines drawn on considerations of expediency for business;
it has followed that line of least resistance which the sound bias


of legislators, executives, and judiciary has made easy and
reasonable, at the same time that it has conformed to the logical
bent of the substantial citizens. Doubtless in good faith and on
sound principles, the ceaseless proliferation of statutes, decisions,


406 Absentee Ownership


In the negotiations between owners and workmen there
is little use for the ordinary blandishments of salesman-
ship. The two parties to the quarrel—for it is after all
a quarrel—have learned to know what to count on.
And the bargaining between them therefore settles down
without much circumlocution into a competitive use of
unemployment, privation, restriction of work and output,
strikes, shut-downs and lockouts, espionage, pickets, and
similar manceuvres of mutual derangement, with a large
recourse to menacing language and threats of mutual
sabotage. The colloquial word for it is “labor troubles.”
The business relations between the two parties are of the
nature of hostilities, suspended or active, conducted in
terms of mutual sabotage; which will on occasion shift
from the footing of such obstruction and disallowance as
is wholly within the law and custom of business, from the
footing of legitimate sabotage in the way of passive re-
sistance and withholding of efficiency, to that illegitimate
phase of sabotage that runs into violent offenses against


precedents, and constitutional interpretations, has run, in the
main and with increasing effect, on these lines that converge on
the needs and merits of absentee ownership.

As a late and notable illustrative instance of this logical bias,
it has been found on judicial consideration that such corporate
income as is distributed under the absentee form of a stock-
dividend is legally exempt from the income tax.

So again, in the main and ordinarily, the “injunction” which
has lately come into extensive application in American practice
is an expedient for the conservation and enforcement of the rights
and immunities of absentee ownership in case of controversy
between owners and workmen. The injunction has other uses,
but in practical effect this is its main and ordinary use. Ef-
fectual recourse to the injunction to enforce the demands of the
workmen is of rare occurrence and of doubtful legitimacy. In
effectual scope and force the injunction has grown with the
growth of the scope and range of absentee ownership and at the
call of issues which have arisen out of its administration and
safe-keeping.


The Secular Trend 407


persons and property. The negotiations have habitually
and increasingly taken on this character of a businesslike
dissension. So much so that they have come to be spoken
of habitually in terms of conflict, armed forces, and war-
like strategy. It is a conflict of hostile forces which is
conducted on the avowed strategic principle that either
party stands to gain at the cost of the other.‘


*Many public spirited citizens, and many substantial citizens
with an interest in business, deplore this spirit of division and
cross purposes that pervades the ordinary relations betveen
owners and workmen in the large industries. And in homilet-
ical discourse bearing on this matter it is commonly insisted that
such division of sentiment is uncalled for, at the same time that
it works mischief to the common good, that “the interests of
labor and capital are substantially identical,’ that dilatory and
obstructionist tactics bring nothing better than privation and
discontent to both parties in controversy, as well as damage
and discomfort to the community at large.

Such homiletical discourse is commonly addressed to the
workmen. It is a plain fact of common sense, embedded in im-
memorial habit, that the business men who have the manage-
ment of industrial production must be free to limit their output
and restrain employment with a view to what the traffic will
bear. That is a matter of sound business, authentic and meri-
torious. Whereas unemployment brought to bear by collusion
among the workmen in pursuit of their special advantage will
interfere with the orderly earnings of business and thereby
bring discouragement and adversity upon the business com-
munity, and so will derange and retard the processes of in-
dustry from which the earnings are drawn. As things go, be-
cause the continued subsistence and material comforts of the
community are contingent upon the continued profits of the
business men in charge, prosperity is a function of earnings, not
of wages; and the material fortunes of the community at large
are in practical fact bound up with the continued peace of mind
of the absentee owners of the industries, which in turn is bound
up with the continued run of free income from the business.
This is commonplace and familiar, an habitual fact of common
sense, to which no sound man has a right or an inclination to
take exception; for settled usage makes all things right. The
workmen are not similarly within the familiar bounds of common
sense in applying unemployment and restriction of output to en-


408 Absentee Ownership


It is of the essence of the new order in business that
the tactical units now run larger than before, in larger
parcels and with a greater degree of compactness and
solidarity in action. In industrial business this is ex-
emplified in the growth of corporations and in the tactical
grouping of corporations under the surveillance of those
massive Interests that govern the pitch and volume of
business activity. In effect, as tactical units in the con-
duct of industrial business, the corporations are associa-
tions of absentee owners who are working together on a


force their notions of what the traffic will bear in the way of
wages. Their assumption of a business standing in an argument
with their employers and owners violates common sense; that
is to say it is not their right according to the precedents of use
and wont, however securely it may be within the statutory for-
malities. It is not sound common sense, because it has not been
ingrained by workday habituation into the action-pattern of the
community. By use and wont hitherto the workmen have in
practical effect been free to take or leave the terms offered by
their owner-employers; and by use and wont the employer-
owners have been free to offer such terms as the traffic would
bear in the way of earnings. But increasingly for some time past
the workmen have been drawing together on a businesslike plan
of demanding all that the traffic will bear in the way of wages,
and of enforcing their demands by the same businesslike recourse
to unemployment and retardation that has long served the
needs of the employer-owners in their dealings with the market
and the livelihood of the ultimate consumers. In its character
of industrial man-power, this organised fraction of the under-
lying population is endeavoring to negotiate for terms on the foot-
ing of a de-facto Business Interest. (The agricultural man-
power, and the population at large as a body of consumers, have
not yet made an effectual move of the kind.) And right lately
the organisation, animus, and tactics of these industrial work-
men have been brought to such a point of businesslike efficiency
as to constitute a menace to reasonable earnings and to a rea-
sonable balanced return on the outstanding capitalisation. There-
fore, since prosperity depends on a continued free run of earn-
ings on the outstanding capitalisation, the businesslike attitude
and tactics of the organised workmen are also a menace to the
prosperity of the community at large.


The Secular Trend 409


joint plan in a joint pursuit of gain. So that in effect
such a corporation is a method of collusion and concerted
action for the joint conduct of transactions designed to
benefit the allied and associated owners at the cost of
any whom it may concern. In effect, therefore, the joint-
stock corporation is a conspiracy of owners; and as such
it transgresses that principle of individual self-help that
underlies the system of Natural Rights; in which demo-
cratic institutions as well as the powers and immunities
of ownership are grounded. But the exigencies of busi-
ness enterprise in recent times, as conditioned by the wide-
reaching articulations of trade and industry, call for such
large tactical units as will necessarily be composite in
point of personnel and collusive in point of owner-
ship.

And the official personnel of civil government, the
constituted authorities who have had the making and sur-
veillance of precedents and statutory regulations touch-
ing these matters in recent times, have necessarily been
persons of businesslike antecedents, imbued with an in-
veterate businesslike bias, governed by business principles,
if not also by business interests. Business exigencies,
borne along on this habitual bent of the legislators and
judiciary, and enforced by the workday needs of the sub-
stantial citizens, have decided that such collusion, con-
spiracy, or coalition as takes the form of (absentee) own-
ership is right and good, to be safeguarded in all the
powers and immunities of ownership by the constituted
authorities at any cost to the community at large. So
that any strategic withdrawal of efficiency incident to the
conduct of business by such an organisation of collusive
ownership, any restriction of output to what the traffic
will bear, any unemployment of equipment and man-power
with a view to increased earnings on capital, has the


410 Absentee Ownership


countenance of the constituted authorities and will be de-
fended by a suitable use of force in case of need.

It is otherwise, in a degree, with the collusive organi-
sations of workmen. Being not grounded in ownership,
their legal right of conspiracy in restraint of trade is doubt-
ful at the best. It has also not the countenance of the
substantial citizens ® or of the minor business men, of the
pulpit, or the public press. The effectual limits on strikes
are somewhat narrower than on lockouts. Boycotts in
support of strikes are illegal, and the more effectual
methods of picketing are disallowed by courts and police,
except in negligible cases. Since the striking workmen
are not owners of the plant that is to be laid idle by their
striking, they are excluded from the premises, and they
are therefore unable to watch over the unemployment
which they have precipitated, and to see to its unbroken
continuance. This is a grave disability. The owners
are more fortunate in this respect. The power to dispose
of matters in the conduct of industry commonly attaches
to ownership, and is not legally to be claimed on other
grounds. The employer-owners are in a much better posi-
tion to take care of any desired unemployment, as in case
of a lockout. In the same connection it should be recalled
that effectual collusion and concert of action is more a
matter of routine and takes effect in a more compact and
complete fashion on the side of the owners, who are al-
ready organised as a corporate unit. The block of owner-
ship embodied in any ordinary business corporation of
the larger sort covers a larger segment of the industrial
processes involved in any given strike or lockout than
does the body of industrial man-power with which the cor-
poration is contending. This will more particularly be


5 As has been remarked in an earlier passage, a “substantial
citizen” is an absentee owner of much property.


The Secular Trend 4It


the case where and in so far as the old-fashioned craft-
unions have not been displaced by an industrial union.
It comes to a conflict between a corporate whole on the
side of the owners against a fragment of the working
forces on the side of the workmen.

So again, in any eventual resort to force, the workmen
are under a handicap as against the owners,—a handicap
due to law and precedent as well as to the businesslike
predilections that are habitual among the personnel of
the constituted authorities. Labor troubles are disorders
of business, and business is a matter of ownership, while
work and livelihood are not. The presumption, in law
and custom and official predilection, is against the use of
force or the possession or disposal of arms by persons
or associations of persons who are not possessed of ap-
preciable property. It is assumed, in effect, that the use
of weapons is to protect property and guard its rights;
and the assumption applies to the use of weapons by pri-
vate persons as well as to the armed forces of government.
Under the statutes regulating the possession and use of
weapons, such, e.g., as the so-called “Sullivan Law” of
New York, it will be found that permits to carry weapons
are issued in the main to substantial citizens, corporations,
and to those incorporations of mercenaries that are known
by courtesy as detective agencies ; these latter being in the
nature of auxiliary forces employed on occasion by
corporations which may be involved in strikes or lock-
outs. All this is doubtless as it should be, and doubtless
the intention of it is salutary. So also it will be found
that the state constabularies, as well as any units of the
National Guards that may be called out on occasion of
labor troubles, are, quite habitually and as a matter of
routine, employed in safeguarding corporation property
and guarding against trespassers on the corporation’s


412 Absentee Ownership


premises or interference with the corporation’s em-
ployees.®

This is not to be construed as partisanship, but rather
as defensive measures for the preservation of things as
they are, or as they recently have been. But the effect is
much the same, by and large. It signifies that other than
peaceable methods are not effectually at the disposal of
the organised workmen in the recurring quarrel with
their owner-employers. Of late years the difficulties in
the way of any recourse to forcible measures, or even
of preparation for demonstrations in force on the part of
the unions, have been appreciably increased by the judicial
use of the injunction. The injunction has been applied
with increasing frequency and an ampler sweep and scope,
and its restraint has fallen on the organised workmen, as
a rule, rather than on the owners. In effect, the use
of the injunction as a means of creating an actionable
“contempt of court” enables the authorities to penalise
by anticipation; which has visibly turned the endeavours
of the unions into channels of passive resistance in pref-
erence to anything in the way of overt action. There
can be no question but that, in its bearing on the rights
and immunities of absentee ownership, this freer use
of the injunction has had a notably salutary effect. In
one way and another the organised workmen are perforce
and progressively reduced to tactics of passive resistance,
to tactics of unemployment and retardation by a strategic
withdrawal of efficiency, after the same general pattern
of inconspicuous restriction and retardation which the
owners of industry habitually employ in adjusting the
rate and volume of output to what the traffic will bear.
And such undivided attention to the strategy of inaction


6 Cf. e.g., Report on the Steel Strike of 1919, by the Interchurch
Movement, pp. 235-248.


The Secular Trend 413


on the part of the workmen is already giving them a
visibly increasing proficiency, and is hastening the adop-
tion of a standard routine of retardation. That is to
say, the industrial man-power is by force of circumstances
taking the same businesslike position as their owner-
employers ; prudently seeking their own advantage at the
cost of any whom it may concern, unmoved by passion, ex-
cept the passion for the main chance.

In so meeting their owner-employers on their own busi-
nesslike ground of graduated curtailment and abeyance
the organised workmen are still somewhat at a disad-
vantage. They have not the countenance of popular sym-
pathy in any unreserved way, inasmuch as they do not
speak for a recognised businesslike vested interest.
Morally the workmen are still in a precarious position,
according to the common sense of a community which is
by unbroken habit bound to rate all economic actions and
claims in terms of price and ownership. The workmen
are under a moral disability at this point, in that the in-
dustrial man-power has not been formally capitalised
and written into an issue of corporation securities or
similar credit-instruments bearing a fixed charge. It is
not covered with negotiable paper, such as would in-
vest it with a morally defensible claim to an undiminished
income, and would therefore justify any conduct which
may serve to make good such a claim. This ethical in-
firmity of the embattled workmen’s case should logically
be remedied in some measure by habituation; by their
getting used to it and getting their fellow-citizens used to
it. In a degree such an effect of habituation is already
visible, in the greater tolerance with which the community
puts up with the inconveniences that result from the ob-
structive tactics employed in labor troubles.

But whatever may be the relative strength of the two


414 Absentee Ownership


parties to this controversy, present or prospective, the
negotiations between them are visibly falling into more
tangible and more standardised shape and are conducted
on increasingly businesslike principles of what the
traffic will bear, and on both sides alike the negotiations as
to what the traffic will bear are carried on in terms of
competitive unemployment, mutual defeat, designed to
hold the work and output down to such a minimum as will
yield the most profitable price per unit to one party or
the other. In due consequence, as the contending forces
achieve a more effectual mobilisation on a larger scale,
and as these tactics of inaction and retardation take ef-
fect with greater alacrity and consistency, the practicable
minimum of work and output should logically become
the ordinary standard practice. So that in “ordinary
times” the effectual volume of work and output should
run at a minimum. ,

So soon as the contending forces achieve a sufficiently
alert and inclusive mobilisation on both sides, and bring
their strategy to a finished and consistent routine, this
ordinary balanced minimum of work and output should
logically fall somewhat short of the ordinary consumptive
needs of the underlying population. The fluctuations
should run under, as a general rule. It is reasonable to
expect that any fluctuations in excess would be curbed
with all due dispatch by a watchful businesslike applica-
tion of unemployment on one side and the other. In
effect, the contending forces are doing team-work in the
strategic use of unemployment. Business principles
worked out on conservative lines of “watchful waiting”
and “safety first’”’ may be counted on with some confidence
to keep the run of current production temperately short
of current consumptive needs, so soon as these business-
like dispositions have been completed,—in the absence of


The Secular Trend 415


disturbing causes; and fluctuations in deficiency would
come in as workday incidents of the tactical routine.
This follows in the nature of the case. The conflict of
interests in the case is a conflict of business interests, in
which each of the contending parties endeavors to bring
the other to terms by as unremitting a pressure of priva-
tion as the traffic will bear, leaving the benefit of the doubt
quite consistently on the side of deficiency.

The manner in which this routine of deficiency is ex-
pected to work out, on business principles consistently ap-
plied, is shown in a concrete way in the situation of
American industrial business as it has been running dur-
ing the interval since the Armistice. The dispositions
on both sides of the controversy have not yet been per-
fected, but the results already achieved are enough to
serve as notice of what may eventually be looked for.
Strategic unemployment of plant and man-power results
in a depletion of stocks on hand; a deficiency of mainte-
nance, repairs and replacements; resulting in an impair-
ment of the means of production, a consequent lowering
of the practicable level of production and output, and a
correspondingly lowered base-line on which further tac-
tics of competitive unemployment will run. The logic
of the case, as well as the object-lessons of current ex-
perience, appears to say somewhat unequivocally that these
mutual businesslike negotiations in unemployment will in
all reason work out in so closely-shorn a withdrawal of
productive efficiency as to yield but a scant margin for
maintenance and necessary extensions and a still more
dubious margin for necessary repairs and replacements.”


7An illustrative instance is that of the American railways,
which have been suffering a shrinkage of physical assets for
want of due repairs and replacements. The commitments of the
railway corporations in the way of fixed charges hinder their


416 Absentee Ownership


A further line of considerations runs to the same gen-
eral effect. The several tactical units engaged in this
business of strategic unemployment for a revenue, the
concerns which do business in industry and its output
as well as the associations of workmen that negotiate with
them for a division of the proceeds, are, each and several,
fractional segments of a larger composite industrial mech-
anism and of the industrial system at large. Each unit
large or small, composite or single, pursues its own ends,
negotiates for its own differential advantage at the cost
of any whom it may concern, by a strategic retardation
of the industrial process within that segment of the whole
which is subject to its particular jurisdiction as a busi-
ness concern, in detachment from the rest of the system
or with slight and contingent regard for any ulterior con-
sequences which its tactics of unemployment may have
for the rest. Such is the nature of that system and canon
of free competition which has stood over out of the
eighteenth century as an axiomatic fact of Natural Right,
and which still underlies the law and morals of business
enterprise.


applying an adequate proportion of their earnings to repairs and
replacements, at the same time that the rigidity of their outstand-
ing capitalisation hinders their writing off the resulting deprecia-
tion and obsolescence of the plant; whereby they are driven to
charging more than the traffic will bear in the way of freight
and passenger rates as well as in the way of retrenchment on
wages and dismissal of workmen. All of which works together
cumulatively toward a progressive decline of efficiency and a
more accentuated policy of strategic unemployment.

The remedy which is ordinarily applied in such a case is that
universal solvent of business exigencies, the creation of new
credit obligations, with which to provide needed working capital,
and which are duly capitalised with the due complement of fixed
charges, payable out of an advance of prices due to the result-
ing increased volume of outstanding purchasing-power helped
out by a temperate limitation of output.


The Secular Trend 417


As business concerns, and therefore as tactical units
in the management of industrial business, these several
segments of the business community go about their busi-
ness on a competitive basis, on the principle of “putting
it over”; also called caveat emptor. But as industrial
factors, and therefore as technological units engaged in
the conduct of industrial production, they are members
of a close-knit industrial system, bound in a comprehensive
fabric of interlocking processes of work, in such a way that
the continued working of any one member is conditioned
on the due working of the rest. Technologically each
member of the system, each of these tactical units, is
bound to bear its due part in the ceaseless give and take
of interlocking industrial processes. So that any retar-
dation or suspension of the rate and volume of output at
any point in the industrial system will check the work
throughout a series of industrial plants and processes that
go before and that follow after in the balanced sequence
of operations, and it will therefore cripple the indus-
trial system at large by that much.

Owing to this articulated character of industrial work
as carried on by the methods of the mechanical industry,
the ulterior (systemic) consequences of any strategic sus-
pension or retardation of work at any point are likely
to be more serious than the direct waste and loss incurred
at the initial point, where the strategic unemployment is
applied. This applies with especial force, of course, in
the case of unemployment initiated in the key industries;
but it will apply in only a lessening degree outward from
the key industries throughout that fabric of “continuation
industries” whose interlocking processes of work play
into one another to maintain the due rate and volume of
output ; and it will apply with increasing urgency and ef-
fect as the industrial system takes on more of the char-


418 Absentee Ownership


acter of the mechanical industry and is organised on the
lines of quantity production.®

In recent times, and especially in recent years, the bal-
ance, articulation, and interdependence of industrial proc-
esses has been growing visibly greater, wider, more deli-
cate, and more imperative. At the same time the facilities
for instant and drastic suspension of work in the various
mechanical industries are being greatly perfected; both
in the way of a swift and resolute mobilisation of the
workmen and in the way of loyal concert of action and
standard methods of unemployment among the owner-
employers and the governmental agencies of surveillance
and enforcement.

The work of industrial confusion by recourse to unem-
ployment in the pursuit of business has been greatly facili-
tated and abridged. The recourse to unemployment is
readier and more sweeping, and the articulations of in-
dustry are growing progressively more extensive and more
exacting, resulting in a wider and profounder effect in
the way of derangement and deficiency due to suspension
of work at any point. These two lines of improvement
in methods—in business and in technology—converge and
concur in such a way that the ceaseless, though fluctuat-
ing, application of unemployment entailed by the current
exigencies of business will have presently—if not rather,
has already—brought the industrial system to such a
state of chronic, though fluctuating, derangement as will
result in a chronic, though fluctuating, margin of defici-
ency; whereby the rate and volume of output of those
goods and services that make up the livelihood of the


8 The case has latterly been well illustrated by what happens
in the way of ulterior consequences for industry at large when
work is suspended or seriously abridged (for strategic purposes),
in coal-mining, railroad transportation, or steel production.


The Secular Trend 419


community will fall short of current needs by a progres-
sively widening margin of deficiency. The eventual out-
come of such progressive disallowance of work, disability,
and privation, can, of course, not be predicted; although
it seems plain that there should be an eventual limit to its
continuance.®


Over against this orderly drift into retardation and in-
dustrial paralysis there are, of course, other factors at
work running to the contrary effect. There is a con-
tinued run of discoveries, inventions, adaptations, and
short-cuts in the industrial arts, new ways and means
and new uses of the old. With the result that the coef-
ficient of productive capacity per unit of man-power con-
tinues to gain in a cumulative fashion. New processes,


° All the while there need, also of course, result no decline in
the community’s total wealth, as counted in money-values. Busi-
ness should presumably continue on a conservatively prosperous
footing, with fluctuating variations, and with an increasing devo-
tion to salesmanship and overhead. Any shrinkage in physical
possessions, in the current output of goods and services, or in the
available means of subsistence and physical comfort, could and
presumably would be offset, or more than offset, by a conserv-
ative creation and capitalisation of new credits, with new and
valuable fixed charges. Such a running creation of capitalised
wealth will be all the more imperatively called for, in that the
progressively widening deficiency in the material supply, coupled
with rising prices and rising costs, will entail an urgent and
progressive need of additional funds to serve as working capital.

It is perhaps unnecessary to note that such a view of these
matters will not have the countenance of the certified economic
experts. Those economists and public men who still faithfully
construe the current situation in terms of the nineteenth century,
as defined by formulas which have stood over from the eighteenth
century, will scarcely see these matters in this light. By re-
ceived preconception, credit is deferred payment, capital is as-
sembled “production goods,” business is the helper of productive
industry, salesmanship is the facility of the “middleman,” money
is “the great wheel of circulation” employed in a “refined sys-
tem of barter,” and absentee ownership is a rhetorical solecism.


420 Absentee Ownership


new materials from near and far, are continually being
turned to account, and new methods of turning old ma-
terials to account and of codrdinating known processes
for the more efficient use of old resources, as well as for
incorporating new resources into the routine of the day’s
work,—these improvements and accelerations in the in-
dustrial arts continue to insinuate themselves into the
fabric of the industrial system, in spite of the uniformly
conservative management on the part of the business com-
munity as touches all new projects and project-makers in
the industrial field.

But all such advances in the mechanic arts bring new
complications in the working structure of the industrial
system; whether the innovations come by way of an in-
creased scale of operation or by way of a new procedure
in the mechanics of production and distribution; whether
they draw into the complex of industry material and
power-resources previously unknown or unused,—as, e. g.,
petroleum and the obscure industrial metals, or power
transmission by electricity; or they facilitate and abridge
the work in hand—as, e.g., the Bessemer and the basic
processes in steel production, or the internal combustion
engine for use in vehicles, or the synthetic production of
drugs, dyes, and condiments. At every move the network
of technological interrelations will be drawn to a finer
mesh, a more close-knit and more widely inclusive web

vof give and take, within which the working balance of co-
ordinations runs on a continually closer margin of toler-
ance. With the result that a disturbance, in the nature
of retardation or deficiency at any critical point, will carry
derangement and sabotage farther and faster than before
through the main lines and into the intricate working de-
tails of production. With every further move along the
lines on which the industrial arts are advancing, there-


The Secular Trend 421


fore, sabotage—that is to say strategic unemployment at
the instance of the owner-employers or of the workmen
—becomes a swifter and more widely corrosive agency of
miscarriage and decay.

At the same time, and in great part by help of these
same technical appliances and powers, the business com-
munity is able, also in a progressive fashion, to bring
sound conservative business principles to bear on indus-
try in a swifter and more comprehensive way and with
a slighter margin of error. That is to say, novelties will
be disallowed with a freer hand and the tactical mam
ceuvres of unemployment wili gain something in frequency
and amplitude; measures to suppress or disable the or-
ganisations of workmen and malcontents will take on added
scope, assurance, vigor, and despatch. And the organ-
ised workmen, too, are coming to realise the increasing
need as well as the increasing facilities for meeting their
owners on a business footing and carrying on their ne-
gotiations in strategic unemployment and retardation with
a wider and more effectual codrdination and manceuvres
and a more provident attention to their needful financial
resources.?°

Under these circumstances it seems reasonable to ex-
pect that the systematic retardation and derangement of
productive industry which is entailed by the current busi-
nesslike management will work out in a progressive abate-

10 Right lately, since 1920, certain of the more businesslike
unions haye gone into banking with a view to financing their
own affairs. So far the plan appears to be practicable. It is
expected that by this means these unions will be able to extend,
consolidate and standardise those measures of unemployment and
retardation that are advisable in their business. It should greatly
“facilitate and abridge the labor” of conscientiously withdraw-
ing efhciency in those lines of work with which these unions


have to do. The farmers, too, are looking hopefully, and des-
perately, in the same direction with a similar end in view.


422 Absentee Ownership


ment of the margin of net output of the industrial system ©
at large; that this progressive abatement of the net indus-
trial output will presently reach and pass the critical point
of no net return—as counted in physical units of liveli-
hood; and that in the calculable future the industrial
system, so managed on sound business principles, will run
on lines of a progressively “diminishing return,” con-
verging to an eventual limit of tolerance in the way of a
reduced subsistence minimum; beyond which the situation
at large should apparently be liable to revision by an in-
trusion of some sort of “disturbing causes.”

It is conceivable that the civilised peoples might yet
save themselves alive out of this impasse, in spite of their
addiction to business, if it were not for their national in-
tegrity.

Business-as-usual, helped out by its later extensions and
facilities, may be counted on to hold the ordinary level
of employment and output down to the minimum of what


11 All the while there is not, at least not for the time being,
any reason to apprehend that this progressive deficit of indus-
trial production will cause a shrinkage in the country’s aggregate
wealth—as counted in money-values; or even that the current
rate of increase of such wealth will fall off. All that is in the
main a question of capitalisation, and therefore it is a question
of the continued creation of credit and overhead charges. The
aggregate of possessions, as counted in terms of “production
goods” and livelihood, should presumably continue to fall off, as
during the past few years; but wealth, as counted in money-
values, should presumably continue to increase, perhaps at an
accelerated rate, as during the past years. And as a matter of
course the wealth in hand should continue, perhaps at an ac-
celerated rate, to gravitate into progressively larger blocks of
absentee ownership.

Just now (1923) the appearances would seem to say that
the critical point of no net aggregate product has been reached
and passed within recent years, since the Armistice. Yet it is
quite possible that these appearances are transient and misleading.
There is no reasonable doubt but that the countries of Europe
have been running on a deficit, industrially speaking, during these


The Secular Trend 423


the traffic will bear, with a reasonable degree of consist-
ency, and with something of a conservative downward
trend to a lower minimum. Frequent and substantial
oscillations below the ordinary level are to be looked for,
due to repeated and inconclusive trials of endurance be-
tween the owners and the workmen, in their businesslike
endeavors to bring one another to terms in a struggle of
mutual discomfort. These persistent excursions below
the ordinary level should have a cumulative effect and
establish a downward trend in the average run, such as
to depress the practicable minimum. Provided always
that a partial failure, or abrupt recession, of the state of
the industrial arts, due to curtailment of technological
instruction and personnel at home or abroad, does not
bring the whole case to a precipitate liquidation.

As is the current practice, these manceuvres of strategic
deficiency will continue to be financed by a conservative
but effectual creation of capitalised credits, in great part if


years; and indeed on a progressively widening margin of deficit.

In effect, these Europeans have also curtailed their techno-
logical personnel by uncovered consumption of technical man-
power during the War; while the production and upkeep of
technological personnel and facilities are now running short of
current needs, in rate, volume and quality, due to the present
state of Peace. So that the Europeans, and by consequence the
Americans also, face a technological deficit, and therefore a fore-
sumptive disintegration of their industrial system.

Nor need it be doubted that the Americans have also been run-
ning slightly short of a net balance in their industrial output,
as counted in physical units. But a cautious appraisal would
perhaps say that this net industrial deficiency may be a transient
effect due to transient causes connected with the War and the
inordinately businesslike terms of the Peace; and that so soon as
the international bargaining between the Interests has been con-
cluded, and so soon as the earnings of the “profiteers,’ past and
prospective, shall have been duly stabilised and capitalised, this
businesslike embargo on industry and livelihood will be lifted.
Such appears to be the expectation of the statesmen. It is a
point in doubt.


424 Absentee Ownership


not in the main. Such is, in effect, the established prac-
tice on the side of the owners, and such is now beginning to
be the recourse also of the organised workmen. By this
means these recurring depressions of the ordinary level
of employment and output will, in some measure and
progressively, be incorporated in the routine and will pro-
gressively lower the minimum which the traffic will bear.
Such will necessarily be the case, inasmuch as any de-
ficiency brought about in this way in the physical output
will not count as a deficiency in money-values and will
therefore not disturb the course of the businesslike ne-
gotiations on which the whole matter turns. Money-
values are the conclusive realities of business, and the out-
standing money-values will not suffer so long as the
price per unit is suitably enhanced by a limitation of the
output and an enlargement of the outstanding volume of
purchasing-power. The progressive reduction of out-
put through unemployment will take effect in physical
terms of goods and services, not in terms of price, as
current experience goes to show; price being a function of
scarcity and purchasing-power.

In the long run, so soon as the privation and chronic
derangement which follows from this application of busi-
ness principles has grown unduly irksome and becomes
intolerable, there is due to come a sentimental revulsion
and a muttering protest that “something will have to be
done about it,”—as, e. g., in the case which has arisen in
the coal industry. Thoughtful persons will then devise
remedial measures. As a matter of course, in a com-
munity which is addicted to business principles, the re-
medial measures which are brought under advisement in
such a case by responsible citizens and officials are bound
to be of a businesslike nature; designed in all reason to
safeguard the accomplished facts of absentee ownership


The Secular Trend 425


in the natural resources involved and in the capitalised
overhead charges which have been incorporated in the
business. Necessarily so, for the community at large is
addicted to business principles, and the official personnel
is so addicted in an especial degree, in the nature of
things.

Yet all the while there are certain loose ends in this
fabric of business convictions which binds the mentality
of these peoples. There is always the chance, more or less
imminent, that in time, after due trial and error, on duly
prolonged and intensified irritation, some sizable element
of the underlying population, not intrinsically committed
to absentee ownership, will forsake or forget their moral
principles of business-as-usual, and will thereupon en-
deavor to take this businesslike arrangement to pieces and
put the works together again on some other plan, for bet-
ter Or worse.


“Other things remaining the same,” some such shifting
»f the economic base should be due to follow, eventually.
Not because a better plan than the present businesslike
yne has been projected or is likely to be conceived; but
ecause, “human nature being such as it is,” the present
yusinesslike management of the industrial system is in-
‘ompetent, irrelevant, and not germane to the livelihood
»f the underlying population. It is not that absentee
ywnership is wrong, in principle. “The law allows it,
ind the court awards it.” It is only that its concrete
working-out is incompatible with the current state of the
ndustrial arts, and that the material welfare of the civil-
sed peoples is conditioned on the full and orderly opera-
ion of the industrial system in which this state of the
rts is embodied.

This precarious state of the case is now beginning to


426 Absentee Ownership


engage the attention of the substantial citizens and of
their constituted authorities—on whom it is incumbent,
through good report and evil report, to guard the status
quo of capitalised overhead charges. Being “practical
men,” they bend their energies to the preservation of an
arrangement which will not work, lest a worse evil befall.
The accomplished facts of absentee ownership must and
shall be preserved; and it is for the authorities and the
substantial citizens to take measures to that end. The
national integrity of the civilised peoples comes into the
case as a pivotal factor at this point.

Whatever will bear the appearance of being a national
interest, of being bound up with the fortunes of the na-
tional establishment, will find a ready lodgment in the
popular sentiment as an article of patriotic infatuation.
Such things become right and good, and it becomes the
dutiful privilege of all citizens to cherish these things and
to devote their substance and energies to the furtherance
of them, without scrutiny or afterthought. Indeed, fur-
ther scrutiny of any article of belief or practice which has
found lodgment in the community’s habits of thought as
a standard item of national aspiration or national pre-
tension will be odious, to the point of presumptive crim-
inality. So also, whatever can be made to bear the ap-
pearance of hindering or trifling with those aspirations
that are covered by the habitual canons of national in-
tegrity in force at a given time and place are presump-
tively treasonable. Such treason is the gravest of crimes,
—next after lése majesté. Indeed, the spirit of national
integrity touches the skirts of divinity and carries more
than a trace of religious intolerance. So that the crime
of treason comes near to the unique atrocity of sin against
the Holy Ghost. In both cases there is the same duti-
ful renunciation of sobriety and reason in dealing with de-


The Secular Trend 427


linquents, and the same presumption of guilt in the ac-
cused.

Uncritical devotion to the national pretensions being
a meritorious habit, it is also a useful article of camou-
flage, a shelter for gainful enterprises and transactions
which might otherwise be open to doubt, a means of
avoiding unfavorable notice and of procuring a profitable
line of good-will. In this sense it has come to have a
merchantable value, so that professions of such devotion
have become a businesslike matter-of-course among those
who follow “gainful pursuits.’ Which weeds out profit-
less argument and reflection in these premises and dis-
penses with any irritating afterthought. And men will
commonly believe and live up to those things which they
habitually profess. That is the meaning of autosuggestion.
“Auto-intoxication” can not properly be applied in this
connection, since the term has been assigned a specific
meaning in medical usage.

What is yet more to the point is the secondary effect
of these businesslike professions of national faith, in that
the young are taught to believe what their elders profess
to believe. This indoctrination of the young by un-
deviating habituation in word and deed, precept and ex-
ample, is very much in the foreground of their schooling
just now, and it should logically bring grave conse-
quences in the way of an accentuated nationalist bias in the
incoming generation. It is something like drill in the
manual of arms, both in respect of the mental qualities in-
volved and in respect of the automatic responses induced
in persons subjected to it. The resulting action-pattern
of national animation runs on much the same lines as
the habitual use of the Paternoster and Rosary, and
carries the like uncritical assurance of well-doing.


428 Absentee Ownership


In an earlier chapter something has already been said |
of the salesmanlike piety that is habitually professed by
those who do business in the country towns. They and ali
their folks and ways are given to blamelessly devout ob-—
servances and professions, by routine of the day’s work
in pursuit of salesmanlike gains. There is no especial
degree of hypocrisy and no appreciable mental strain
involved in their so professing and acting on a belief in re-
ligious verities of which they neither have nor seek an
understanding. It is all a foregone conclusion, a busi-
nesslike matter-of-course incident to their “gainful pur-
suit.” But in this as in other matters men (and women)
come to believe what they habitually profess, and with a
jealous solicitude they train their offspring, by precept,
example, and systematic schooling, into due conformity
with these canons of salvation and profitable respectabil-
ity. So also as regards the secular faith and observances
of national integrity. And in an eminent sense the coun-
try towns have the making of the community’s ideals and
mentality, beyond any other one agency. In much the
same measure they have also the making of the country’s
official personnel and their mentality. National integ-
rity, religious intolerance, and business principles march
together under the banners of the country town in a
co-partnership of means and ends, for the Glory of God
and the good of man.

In any democratic community, such as the American,
the official personnel which is vested with jurisdiction and
initiative will be, in the main, such as the country town
has made them, by exacting habituation and by selective
elimination of the unfit. Fitness for responsible office
being, on the whole, tested by conformity to these three
canonical articles: national integrity, devout observance,
and business-as-usual. A democratic community addicted


The Secular Trend 429


to business enterprise and devout observances will not
tolerate an official personnel endowed with a different
equipment of habitual predilections. Exceptions may oc-
cur, but they are sporadic and negligible, and they fall into
abeyance at any juncture of national exigency. Such a
community will trust no one but its substantial citizens;
which is another way of saying the same thing. Anyone
may assure himself of the truth of this statement, as a
general proposition, by a cursory survey of the case as it
presents itself at large or at any point.

These persons who make up this official personnel, and
in whose hands is the power to act, locally, departmentally,
and at large, will go into action as practical men, faithful
to the joint governance of these settled habits of thought
whose creatures they are. With a mentality compounded
of national integrity and business principles they will de-
voutly follow out the drift of the two conjointly ; to such
effect that in the official apprehension the community’s
fortunes are bound up with the pursuit of its business
enterprise; that is to say, with the continued gains of its
absentee owners. It lies in the nature of democratic in-
stitutions that any such community will select its official
personnel from among its absentee owners, that is to say
its substantial citizens. And it lies in the nature of the
substantial citizen-official to let business interests coalesce
with the national integrity in such a way as to make the
safe-keeping of business-as-usual the first and constant
care of the official establishment. So that any conjunc-
tion of circumstances which may threaten to encroach
on the accomplished facts of absentee ownership or of
capitalised overhead charges at any point will forthwith
be rated as a menace to the national integrity and a call
for official measures of repression to guard the public’s
safety.


430 Absentee Ownership


Business-as-usual and the national integrity are joint
and integral factors in that complex of habits of thought
that makes up the official mentality ; so that any irritation
of the official sensibilities along either line will unavoid-
ably bring a response along the two together and indis-
criminately. In that parallelogram of forces in which
business principles and the sense of national integrity
combine jointly to move and direct the democratic officials
there is no distinguishing the two joint factors. The fact
may also be worth noting, although it is essentially of
secondary consequence, that since any given democratic
official is also in effect a substantial citizen, his pecuniary
interests as an owner in his own right will fall into line
with his civic principles at large in this mattter, and will
therefore coalesce with his civic virtue and give urgency
and singleness of purpose; with the result that the
weight of the official establishment, national and local,
will in the nature of things be brought to bear on
the side of ownership at any juncture of doubt or
dissension.

The point of immediate interest here is not any merit
or demerit that may attach to this run of the facts, but
only the fact that such is the run of them.

So far as concerns the argument at this point, the up-
shot of this run of the facts is that the habit of thinking
in terms of national solidarity and civic allegiance, in-
grained in the community at large as well as in its official
personnel, comes into the case as an effectual bar to any
departure from the standard routine. Faithful adherence
to business principles and to the businesslike manage-
ment of industry is second nature to the substantial citi-
zen. But by process of growth, such businesslike manage-
ment of the industrial system has become incompatible
with the current state of the industrial arts; so that the


The Secular Trend 431


continued management of industry for business purposes
results in an industrial stalemate.

In that intractable dissension which divides the owner-
employers and the organised workmen, the resources and
appliances of constituted authority are brought into ac-
tion on the side of the employer-owners, in effect and in
the main. That such should be the case lies in the na-
ture of things; partly for reasons reflected in the last
few paragraphs above. Also in great part this run of
the facts is grounded in ancient and standard law and cus-
tom, as well as in current statute and precedent.

The rights, powers, and immunities of ownership, in-
cluding the incidents of free contract, are grounded in
principles of law and usage which are by ancient habit
deeply embedded in the popular common sense as well as
in the common law. This body of law and usage grew
out of habituation to an earlier order of things, and has
therefore stood over from some time before anything like
the present system of industry and business had come into
action; before ownership and its share in the manage-
ment of industry had passed over into absentee ownership
and engendered the current credit system. So that these
ancient principles of law and of common sense, in which
the rights, powers, and immunities of ownership are
grounded, are by way of being holdovers. The material
circumstances have moved out of their way. But all the
while that the shift to absentee ownership and credit has
been going forward, the ancient principles have been
progressively construed, adapted, and amplified to meet
the newly arisen exigencies; and the work of construction
and amplification has been ‘carried on by men whose im-
mersion in business affairs has imbued them with a stead-
fast bias; to such effect that, as a matter of formal scope


432 Absentee Ownership


and authority, the ancient principles have been enabled to
sanction whatever arrangements may be expedient for
absentee ownership and its administration. In point of
statutory provision and constructive precedent, the rights,
powers, and immunities of absentee ownership and cap-
italised overhead charges have all that sanction and sta-
bility that belong to habits of thought which are embedded
in immemorial common sense. They are right and good,
in point of statutory provision and constructive prece-
dent, before the law; indeed, the law and the lawgivers
have been busy with their enforcement and reénforcement,
for some time past.

But they are not equally secure in point of common
sense ; that is to say, the grounds of habitual morality are
not similarly stable. The material exigencies of life and
the habituation enforced by them have not been running on
precisely the same lines as those exigencies of business
which have given rise to these statutory provisions and
constructive precedents. At any juncture where a discrep-
ancy arises between law and common sense it is incum-
bent on the constituted authorities to take precautionary
measures and guard the provisions of law against inroads
of common sense. Under the circumstances, therefore,
it has become the prime and particular duty of the con-
stituted authorities to safeguard the rights, powers, and
immunities of absentee ownership, at any cost to the
underlying population.

Under “the majestic equality of the law,” the organ-
ised workmen enjoy the same rights, powers, and im-
munities of absentee ownership and capitalised over-
head charges as their owner-employers with whom they
are forever at odds. But their circumstances are differ-
ent, and the incidence of these legal provisions is there-
fore different in their case. They have, in effect, no en-


The Secular Trend 433


forceable absentee rights and powers, and they have been
unable to capitalise their income into fixed overhead
charges on industry, collectible in absentia. They and
their claims and circumstances do not fit into the legal
ramework of business-as-usual conducted on the cur-
rent plan; which is their misfortune, if not their fault.
The legal validity of any of those demands and perquisites
for which they contend is of a slight and dubious nature.
Being not capitalised into a corporate entity with fixed
charges and limited liability, as their absentee owners are,
any concerted action on their part is likely to be obnoxi-
ous to the law which penalises conspiracy. A few hun-
dred or a few thousand absentee owners acting in col-
lusion as stockholders in a corporation, on the other side
of the controversy, are not guilty of conspiracy in the
eyes of the law. So also, since the workmen are not
owners of the plant about the use or unemployment of
which the controversy turns, they have no right of access
to the premises and are therefore unable to supervise and
enforce the unemployment of the works in support of
their contention. It is otherwise with the employer-own-
ers. By and large, the legitimate powers of the workmen
in such a controversy extend no farther than to take or
leave the terms offered them by the employer-owners.
Even a boycott is obnoxious to the law.

In effect it is recognised as a matter of common sense
that this right of individual and passive unemployment
is scarcely adequate to serve the turn in their negotia-
tions with their owner-employers. Quite visibly the sub-
stantial citizens and the constituted authorities are of
that mind. Indeed they are animated with a lively ap-
prehension on that score, and precautionary measures are
taken to guard against anticipated excesses on the part
of the workmen at this point. There is no similar ap-


434 Absentee Ownership


prehension and no similar precautions are taken as re-
gards the owner-employers. It is quite plainly the per-
suasion of the substantial citizens and the official person-
nel that the organised workmen may, at any juncture,
be provoked by these disabilities into exceeding the limits
of sabotage countenanced by the law—the passive with-
drawal of efficiency—and that they will be likely, on due
provocation, to resort to such “direct action” as will
jeopardise the rightful holdings and incomes of the ab-
sentee owners in the case. The substantial citizens and
the official personnel are moved by no serious apprehen-
sion that precautionary measures are necessary to restrain
the employer-owners within the law. The ordinary legal
correctives and remedies are sufficient for that pur-
pose. Whereas such precautionary measures of forcible
repression to keep recalcitrant workmen within due
bounds and to safeguard the interests of the owners belong
in the standard routine of things to be done. No doubt,
all this is as it should be, in view of the relevant facts.1#


12J3t has been said, with a disquieting verisimilitude though
perhaps with unwarranted breadth, that “The Intelligence Serv-
ice of the Army has for its primary purpose” a surveillance of
certain obnoxious civil organisations; and the organisations
enumerated as obnoxious are organisations of workmen and
farmers,—the list includes the American Federation of Labor.
It is to be presumed that such an avowal will not be found
formally correct. It is at least inexpedient; but there is a dis-
quieting verisimilitude about it, in view of the known facts.

Apart from international intrigue and intimidation, almost
wholly in pursuit of business interests, the workday use of the
administration’s military arm is to keep the domestic peace. In
practical effect and in the common run, the enforcement of do-
mestic peace works out in restraining unruly workmen and safe-
guarding the interests of property and business, in the recurrent
cases of dispute between owners and employees. The like will
apply generally to measures of “preparedness” in the way of
armed force; whether under the auspices of the Federal ad-
ministration or as carried on in the several states; whether they


The Secular Trend 435


By force of ancient law and custom and by the later
drift of circumstances it has come about that the re-
sources and apparatus of constituted authority, whether
by administrative direction or permissively, will in the
main serve the needs of the employer-owners in their
controversial dealings with their industrial man-power.
It will not be denied that this state of the case has a very
appreciable dramatic and sentimental value ; but the merits
of the arrangement, whether as a question of public


come under the name of the National Guard, State Militia, State
Constabulary, or Municipal Police,—although some substantial
reservation is to be entered as regards the last mentioned. The
like is also true of those private enterprises in preparedness, the
so-called Detective Agencies, which make a business of supply-
ing mercenaries and “under-cover men.” These mercenary
fighting men are used by the employer-owners, almost wholly,
as against the workmen. This private traffic in mercenaries is
presumably quite right and proper, being permitted by the
authorities and approved by the substantial citizens; although
with some demur from the side of the organised workmen.

To complete the sketch at this point it is necessary to note that
in those states or municipalities where the carriage or possession
ef firearms is subject to “Permit,” the prohibition of arms
will chiefly affect the workmen and others who have no
substantial standing as owners or custodians of property;
the need of guarding valuable property rights being the usual
ground on which such permits are issued. Whether by inten-
tion or not, this regulation has the effect of leaving the em-
ployer-owners and their retainers armed, while the workmen are
not armed except by evasion of the law. In the same
connection, and as a characteristic circumstance, it appears that
the larger industrial corporations come somewhat habitually
into the market for firearms and ammunition, as good and valu-
able customers. This corporate preparedness includes rifles and
machine-guns; whereas there appears to be little demand on the
part of the sarne concerns for guns of such calibre as would be
at all properly called artillery, such as “quick-firers” and “trench-
mortars.”

What has just been said is no more than a pro forma recital
of obvious facts, of course. It is a description of the state of
the case at large, and is to be taken with such qualifications as
may be called for in detail.


436 Absentee Ownership


morals or of class interest, will not engage the argument
at this point. What is of immediate interest is the ob-
jective consequences of the arrangement. One of these
immediate consequences is an abiding sense of grievance
and hostility on both sides of the negotiations, but more
pronounced perhaps on the side of the workmen. Mutual
distrust and sharp practice has come to be of the essence
of the case; working out in a standard policy of mutual
defeat.

By force of law and custom, as progressively construed
and amplified by successive generations of businesslike
officials, any manceuvres which violate or exceed the im-
munities and powers of ownership are disallowed in this
strategy of mutual defeat by which the working of the
industrial system is governed. This bears on the ma-
neeuvres of the workmen in a peculiarly drastic way,
since they are vested with none of the powers and im-
munities of ownership,—except in that Pickwickian sense
in which “the majestic equality of the law” deals imparti-
ally with rich and poor. In effect, their powers and im-
munities in these premises are wholly of a negative order,
such as will enable them to do nothing, to withhold ef-
ficiency, to lie idle and to put in their working-time as
wastefully and ineffectively as the circumstances will
permit ; in short to go in for that negative sabotage which
is of the essence of business management in industry.
So they concentrate their endeavors and ingenuity on this
line. Bent on defeating their owner-employers by such
ways and means as are at their disposal, they apply them-
selves with all diligence to delivering as nearly nothing
as may be in return for such wages as their latest ma-
nceuvres in unemployment have enabled them to carry off,
for the trartsient time being. So that by what foots up
to a concerted policy of mutual defect the two parties in


The Secular Trend 437


interest work together to pare the effectual work and
output of industry down to whatever level of deficiency
the traffic will bear in the short run.

In the short run, under the spur of tactical necessity,
the traffic will bear and the exigencies will enjoin so ef-
fectual a disallowance of work and output as to leave
a margin of livelihood and maintenance uncovered, and
to entail a shrinkage of the available man-power and ma-
terial equipment. Under the hands of a businesslike of-
ficial personnel, supported by a like-minded body of sub-
stantial citizens, the vindication of property rights coa-
lesces in principle with the vindication of the national
integrity, to such effect that any proposal to disallow or
abridge the sovereign rights of absentee ownership in the
conduct of industry will be constructive sedition. So that
the spur of tactical necessity will drive with an unmiti-
gated incentive to the one line of strategy which this pos-
ture of things leaves open,—an alert and obstinate dis-
allowance of work and output. Short runs of intensi-
fied strategic sabotage come therefore to predominate in
the contest between employers and employees; succeeding
one another with increasing urgency and decreasing in-
tervals; so that the long run falls into shape as a dis-
continuous chain of deficits, with scant and vanishing in-
ternodes of recovery. This describes the present rather
than the future. And since the several lines of pro-
ductive industry are bound by the state of the industrial
arts into an increasingly intricate and exacting network
of give and take, they will each and several be subject to
undesigned and unforseen stoppages induced by tactical
stoppages in related lines of industry, with increasing
frequency and amplitude as business principles take the
upperhand and the spirit of salesmanship finally displaces
workmanship in the conduct of industry. All the while


438 Absentee Ownership


any shrinkage in the rate and volume of output and any
curtailment of the material factors engaged is to be cov-
ered over and made good on the books with a capitalisa-
tion of credits and a rising level of prices, due to an in-
creased volume of purchasing-power thereby thrown on the
market. A progressively increasing volume of working
capital is required for the conduct of an increasingly stub-
born campaign of labor troubles and an increasingly large
and exacting expenditure on sales-publicity; which is to
be covered with a running creation of credits, duly cap-_
italised and thrown on the market as an addition to the
outstanding purchasing-power.


In recent times, and in a progressively increasing meas-
ure, the national establishments and the spirit of national
integrity among the peoples of Christendom have been an
agency of dissension and distress, a means of curtailing
and impairing the material conditions of life for the under-
lying population, and an arrangement for the increase and
diffusion of ill-will among men. Such is their major
and ordinary outcome. Coupled with this is commonly
some slight differential advantage to some special In-
terest in whose service these agencies are employed. In
recent times the differential gains which so accrue from
this usufruct of national ill-will, inure in the main, to
certain commercial and financial Interests sheltered un-
der the national Flag.

The net aggregate amount of these differential gains
which so accrue to these special Interests at the cost of
such ill-will and distress to the common run will ordinarily
foot up to no more than a vanishing percentage of their
net aggregate cost to the underlying populations that are
employed in the traffic. In the material respect these in-
stitutional holdovers work out in a formidable aggregate


The Secular Trend 439


loss of life and livelihood; while in the spiritual respect
their staple output is a tissue of dissension, distrust, dis-
honesty, servility, and bombast. The net product is mu-
tual and collective defeat and grief.®


13 As has been remarked in an earlier passage, this charac-
terisation has nothing to say as regards the moral or esthetic
excellence of these institutional holdovers, as to the righteous-
ness, goodness, or beauty of national integrity, patriotic in-
tolerance, or political intrigue. These are questions of taste and
fashion, about which there is no disputing. Nor do these ques-
tions touch the present argument, which has to do with the ob-
jective consequences of these institutional factors.

By derivation, in point of institutional pedigree, the demo-
cratic nations of Christendom are a “filial generation” of those
dynastic and territorial monarchies which filled Europe with a
muddle of war and politics in early modern times. And these
national establishments, and the spirit of national integrity on
which they trade, are still essentially warlike and political. That
is to say, predation is still the essence of the thing. The ways
and means of the traffic are still force and fraud, at home and
abroad. The actualities of that “self-determination of nations”
which has so profoundly engaged the sentiments of thoughtful
persons, always foots up to a self-determination in respect of
warlike adventures, political jobbery, and territorial aggrandise-
ment. Witness the newly self-determining nations, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia.

There are, doubtless, many mitigating circumstances, and many
fanciful card-houses of cultural and linguistic conceits erected
in good faith by the apologists of Chauvinism. But in point of
fact, “realpolitik” continues to make satisfactory use of the
chauvinists in a pursuit of its own ends by force and fraud. So
also the universal type-form of national solemnities, even when
staged by the mildest mannered and most amiable curators of
the spiritual antiquities, continues to be a worshipful magnifica-
tion of past warlike adventures, backed with a staging of
histrionic obsequies of war-heroes, with parade of guns, uniforms
and battle standards. “Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said, ‘This is my own, my native
land,” when the national anniversary is being magnified with
warlike fireworks and bombast, while veterans, Red Cross nurses
and Boy Scouts parade their uniforms to martial music under
banners? In any one of these democratic commonwealths the
acid test of sound and serviceable citizenship still is the good old


440 Absentee Ownership


Apart from any glamor of national prowess, in the way
of blood and wounds, the nations have also a certain sen-
timental value as standard containers, each of its distinc-
tive cultural tincture, very precious to persons of culti-
vated tastes in these matters. So also, as a matter of his-
tory these national commonwealths, as well as the terri-
torial states in their time, have served to alleviate local
animosities, each within its jurisdiction, and to bring con-
sistency and correlation into the process of industry and
of civil life within their several territories. But all that
is beside the point today. The work of correlation, stand-
ardisation, and concatenation of local units and of the
processes of work and life has been taken over, irretriev-
ably, by the industrial arts, which do not go by favor of
nationalities. The industrial arts, and the industrial
system in which they go into action, have no use for and
no patience with local tinctures of culture and the obstruct-
ive routine of statecraft. The mechanistic system of in-
dustry is of a collective and codperative nature, essenti-
ally and of necessity a joint enterprise of all the civil-
ised peoples, in so far as their civilisation is of the oc-
cidental pattern; and there is substantially only one such
pattern. This industrial system runs on a balanced spec-
ialisation of work among its working members ; standard-
ised quantity production, which is always and of necessity
in excess of the local needs; free draught on a limitless
range of material resources from far and near. No iso-
lated industrial undertaking and no isolated cultural ac-
tivity is self-sufficient within the sweep of this industrial
system of Christendom. And any degree of wilful iso-


propensity to fight for the flag without protest or afterthought.
There is no question but this is a meritorious frame of mind.
It is also the frame of mind which is sedulously drilled into the
incoming generation.


The Secular Trend 441


lation is straitway and automatically penalised by a cor-
responding degree of impotence, under the impassive run
of the industrial system at large, which draws impartially
on far and near. In this new industrial order of things the
national establishments and their frontiers and function-
aries come in as an extraneous apparatus of deflection and
obstruction, employed to perpetuate animosities and gen-
erate lag, leak, and friction.

Of this nature are customs-duties, shipping-subsidies,
trade-concessions, consular service, passport regulations,
national protection and enforcement of claims in foreign
parts. Much has been said in censure of these and the
like contrivances of discrimination, and much more in
the way of censure is doubtless merited. The closer the
scrutiny of this apparatus and its working, the more de-
plorable it all proves to be, in its material consequences.
But this notorious imbecility of it all does after all not
immediately concern the argument at this point. It is of
more immediate interest to note that in all these diplomatic,
legislative, and administrative measures in restraint of
trade and industry, the measures are taken for the benefit
of business, to stabilise, fortify and enhance the gains of
one and another among the special business Interests that
are domiciled in the country; that the national establish-
ment is in this way employed in the service of these busi-
ness concerns, at the cost of the national community at
large; that in this way the national interests have come
to be identified with the gainful traffic of these business
Interests ; that the sense of national integrity is by habitua-
tion to this routine of subservience made to cover the
maintenance of business-as-usual and the insurance of
capitalised earnings. The subservience of the national
establishment and the official personnel to the aims and
manceuvres of business becomes a fact of prescriptive


442 Absentee Ownership


use and wont, passes into law and custom, and is em-
bedded in the community’s common sense as a matter of
workday routine.

In the last analysis the nation remains a predatory or-
ganism, in practical effect an association of persons moved
by a community interest in getting something for noth-
ing by force and fraud. There is, doubtless, also much
else of a more genial nature to be said for the nation as
an institutional factor in recent times. The voluminous
literature of patriotic encomium and apology has already
said all that is needed on that head. But the irreducible
core of national life, what remains when the non-essentials
are deducted, still is of this nature; it continues to be
self-determination in war and politics. Such is the in-
stitutional pedigree of the nation. It is a residual de-
rivative of the predatory dynastic State, and as such it still
continues to be, in the last resort, an establishment for the
mobilisation of force and fraud as against the outside, and
for a penalised subservience of its underlying populdtion
at home.

In recent times, owing to the latterday state of the in-
dustrial arts, this national pursuit of warlike and political
ends has come to be a fairly single-minded chase after un-
earned inconie to be procured by intimidation and intrigue.
It has been called Imperialism; it might also, in a col-
loquial phrasing, be called national graft. By and large, it
takes the two typical forms of graft: official salaries (The
White Man’s Burden), as in the British crown colonies
and the American dependencies; and of special conces-
sions and advantageous bargains in the way of trade,
credits and investments, as, e.g., the British interests in
Africa and Mesopotamia or the American transactions
in Nicaragua and Haiti. The official salaries which are
levied by this means on the underlying population in


The Secular Trend 443


foreign parts inure directly to the nation’s kept classes,
in their role of official personnel, being in the nature of
perquisites of gentility and of political suction, The spe-
cial benefits in the way of profitable trade and investment
under national tutelage in foreign parts inure to those
special Interests which are in close touch with the na-
tion’s official personnel and do business in foreign parts
with their advice and consent.

All the while, of course, all this trading on the national
integrity is carried on as inconspicuously as may be, quite
legally and morally under democratic forms, by night and
cloud, and is covered over with such decently voluble
prevarication as the case may require, prevarication of a
decently statesmanlike sort; such a volume and texture of
prevarication as may serve to keep the national left hand
from knowing what the right hand is doing, the left hand
in these premises being the community at large, as con-
trasted with the Interests and the official personnel. In
all such work of administrative prevarication and demo-
cratic camouflage the statesmen are greatly helped out by
the newspapers and the approved agencies that gather
and purvey such news as is fit to print for the purpose
in hand. The pulpit, too, has its expedient uses as a
publicity agency in furtherance of this gainful pursuit of
national enterprise in foreign parts.

However, the present argument is not concerned with
the main facts and material outcome of this imperial
statecraft considered as a “gainful pursuit,” but only
with the ulterior and residual consequences of the traffic
in the way of a heightened sense of national integrity and
a closer coalescence of this national integrity with the
gainful pursuits of all these dominant business Interests
that engage the sympathies of the official personnel. By
this means the national integrity becomes ever more closely


444 Absentee Ownership


identified, in the popular apprehension, with the security
and continued enlargement of the capitalised overhead
charges of those concerns which do business in foreign
parts; whereby the principles of business and absentee
ownership come in for an added sanction; so that the of-
ficial personnel which has these matters in charge is en-
abled to give a more undivided attention and a more head-
long support to any manceuvres of strategic sabotage on
industrial production which the exigencies of gainful busi-
ness may dictate, whether at home or abroad.

Statecraft as a gainful pursuit has always been a furtive
enterprise. And in due proportion as the nation’s state-
craft is increasingly devoted to the gainful pursuit of in-
ternational intrigue it will necessarily take on a more fur-
tive character, and will conduct a larger proportion of its
ordinary work by night and cloud. Which leads to a sub-
stitution of coercion in the place of consultation in the
dealings of the official personnel with their underlying
population, whether in domestic or foreign policy; and
such coercion is increasingly accepted in a complaisant,
if not a grateful, spirit by the underlying population, on
a growing conviction that the national integrity is best
provided for by night and cloud. So therefore it also
follows that any overt expression of doubt as to the na-
tional expediency of any obscure transaction or line of
transactions entered into by the official personnel in the
course of this clandestine traffic in gainful politics, whether
at home or abroad, will presumptively be seditious; and
unseasonable inquiry into the furtive movements of the
official personnel is by way of becoming an actionable
offense ; since it is to be presumed that, for the good of
the nation, no one outside of the official personnel and
the business Interests in collusion can bear any intelligent
part in the management of these delicate negotiations, and


The Secular Trend 445


any premature intimation of what is going on is likely
to be “information which may be useful to the enemy.”
Any pronounced degree of skepticism touching the ex-
pediency of any of the accomplished facts of political
intrigue or administrative control is due to be penalised
as obnoxious to the common good. In the upshot of it all,
the paramount rights, powers, aims, and immunities of
ownership, or at least those of absentee ownership, come
in for a closer identification with the foundations of the
national establishment and are hedged about with a double
conviction of well-doing.

In that strategy of businesslike curtailment of output,
debilitation of industry, and capitalisation of overhead
charges, which is entailed by the established system of
ownership and bargaining, the constituted authorities in
all the democratic nations may, therefore, be counted on
to lend their unwavering support to all manceuvres of
business-as-usual, and to disallow any transgression of or
departure from business principles. Nor should there
seem any probability that the effectual run of popular
sentiment touching these matters will undergo any ap-
preciable change in the calculable future. The drift of
workday discipline, as well as of deliberate instruction,
sets in the conservative direction. For the immediate
future the prospect appears to offer a fuller confirmation
in the faith that business principles answer all things.
The outlook should accordingly be that the businesslike
control of the industrial system in detail should presently
reach, if it has not already reached, and should speedily
pass beyond that critical point of chronic derangement in
the aggregate beyond which a continued pursuit of the
same strategy on the same businesslike principles will
result in a progressively widening margin of deficiency
in the aggregate material output and a progressive shrink-
age of the available means of life.

THE END


ey


TR, ha ee: ie
Bits: es ri ig om ¢: tiath Ax
ciate x Fisk , 9 ra) Pd

. a es


Meee ot tat aaa


ee
MATS


atrtks


é py ey
J hig et


Dor i


Ag


ea
Spe ectnn


dassetnc nesta


ion


=


jane


eereew tr iope


a


Romeeat
