Tue VesTeD INTERESTS AND THE Common Man, 1919


Tue PuaceE oF ScIENCE IN MopERN CIVILISATION AND OTHER Es-
SAYS, 1919


Tue ENGINEERS AND THE Prick SysTEM, 192!


ABSENTEE OWNERSHIP AND Business ENTERPRISE IN RECENT
Times: THE CasE oF AMERICA, 1923


Tue Laxp#ia Saca. Translated from the Icelandic, with an Intro-
duction, 1925


Essays 1s Our Cuancinc OrpeEr, 1934 (A posthumous collection
of papers from periodicals; edited by Leon Ardzrooni)


SEE ALSO


TuorsTEIN VEBLEN AND His AMERICA, BY JosEPH DorFMAN,
1934


Wuar VEBLEN Taucut. Selected Writings of Thorstein Veblen,
1936 (Edited with an Introduction by Wesley C. Mitchell)


THE VESTED INTERESTS
AND THE COMMON MAN


(“The Modern Point of View
and the New Order’)


BY


THORSTEIN VEBLEN


THE VIKING PRESS, INC.
NEW YORK MCMXLVI


COPYRIGHT, 1919,
BY B. W. HUEBSCH, Inc.


First published May, 1919
Second Printing, November, 1919
Third Printing, January, 1933


REISSUED BY THE VIKING PRESS
FEBRUARY, 1946


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BY VAIL-BALLOU PRESS, INC,


_ PREFACE


These papers have already appeared, in a slightly
abridged form, in the Dial; running from the 19th
October, 1918, to the 25th January, 1919, under the
general caption: The Modern Point of View and
the New Order. They are here reprinted in a col-
lected form in response to requests which have come
to hand. Except for a more detailed description at
one point and another this text does not differ ma-
terially from the papers in the Dial. In point of
scope and logical content this discussion resumes the
argument of a course of lectures before students in
Amherst College in May, 1918.

The aim of these papers is to show how and, as
far as may be, why a discrepancy has arisen in the
course of time between those accepted principles of
law and custom that underlie business enterprise and
the businesslike management of industry, on the one
hand, and the material conditions which have now
been engendered by that new order of industry that
took its rise in the late 18th century, on the other
hand; together with some speculations on the civil
and political difficulties set afoot by this discrepancy
between business and industry.


March, 1919.


iidyita om a: Sea Seige ‘
ns rt ye 2 amis’ Hulagalt he Sia a
any bie ¢ ‘


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


I Tue INSTABILITY OF KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF, I
Il Tue Srapitiry or Law AND CusToM, 17

II] Tue Strate oF THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS, 35

IV Free Income, 63
V Tue Vestep INTERESTS, 85

VI Tue Drvine RicHT oF NATIONS, 114

VIL Live anv Let Live, 138


VIII Tue VesTep INTERESTS AND THE CoMMON
Man, 158


leo


A: 4 Anna ide ew hear Dae


, a ole
a a i af of L ~~.
re i A = = Ae os 8, ‘
/ ' =e a at :


‘ ; : -
> aa art Aedete ia 2 +71


I
THE INSTABILITY OF KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF


As is true of any other point of view that may be
characteristic of any other period of history, so also
the modern point of view is a matter of habit. It
is common to the modern civilised peoples only in so
far as these peoples have come through substantially
the same historical experience and have thereby ac-
quired substantially the same habits of thought and
have fallen into somewhat the same prevalent frame
of mind. This modern point of view, therefore, is
limited both in time and space. It is characteristic
of the modern historical era and of such peoples as
lie within the range of that peculiar civilisation
which marks off the modern world from what has
gone before and from what still prevails outside of
its range. In other words, it is a trait of modern
Christendom, of Occidental civilisation as it has run
within the past few centuries. This general state-
ment is not vitiated by the fact that there has been
some slight diffusion of these modern and Western
ideas outside of this range in recent times.

By historical accident it happens that the modern
point of view has reached its maturest formulation
and prevails with the least faltering among the
French and English-speaking peoples; so that these
peoples may be said to constitute the center of diffu-

4


2 THE VESTED INTERESTS


sion for that system of ideas which is called the mod-
ern point of view. Outward from this broad center
the same range of ideas prevail throughout Chris-
tendom, but they prevail with less singleness of con-
viction among the peoples who are culturally more
remote from this center; increasingly so with each
farther remove. ‘These others have carried over a
larger remainder of the habits of thought of an
earlier age, and have carried them over in a better
state of preservation. It may also be that these
others, or some of them, have acquired habits of
thought of a new order which do not altogether fit
into that system of ideas that is commonly spoken of
as the modern point of view. That such is the case
need imply neither praise nor blame. It is only that,
by common usage, these remainders of ancient habits
of thought and these newer preconceptions that do
not fit into the framework of West-European con-
ventional thinking are not ordinarily rated as intrin-
sic to the modern point of view. They need not
therefore be less to the purpose as a guide and crite-
rion of human living; it is only that they are alien
to those purposes which are considered to be of
prime consequence in civilised life as it is guided and
tested by the constituent principles of the modern
point of view.

What is spoken of as a point of view is always a
composite affair; some sort of a rounded and bal-
anced system of principles and standards, which are
taken for granted, at least provisionally, and which
serve as a base of reference and legitimation in all
questions of deliberate opinion. So when any given
usage or any line of conduct or belief is seen and


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 3


approved from the modern point of view, it comes
to the same as saying that these things are seen and
accepted in the light of those principles which mod-
ern men habitually consider to be final and sufficient.
They are principles of right, equity, propriety, duty,
perhaps of knowledge, belief, and taste.

It is evident that these principles and standards
of what is right, good, true, and beautiful, will vary
from one age to another and from one people to
another, in response to the varying conditions of
life; inasmuch as these principles are always of the
nature of habit; although the variation will of
course range only within the limits of that human na-
ture that finds expression in these same principles of
right, good, truth, and beauty. So also, it will be
found that something in the way of a common meas-
ure of truth and sufficiency runs through any such
body of principles that are accepted as final and self-
evident at any given time and place,— in case this
habitual body of principles has reached such a degree
of poise and consistency that they can fairly be said
to constitute a stable point of view. It is only be-
cause there is such a degree of consistency and such
a common measure of validity among the commonly
accepted principles of conduct and belief today, that
it is possible to speak intelligently of the modern
point of view, and to contrast it with any other point
of view which may have prevailed earlier or else-
where, as, e.g., in the Middle Ages or in Pagan
Antiquity.

The Romans were given to saying, Tempora mu-
tantur, and the Spanish have learned to speak indul-
gently in the name of Costumbres del pais. The


4 THE VESTED INTERESTS


common law of the English-speaking peoples does
not coincide at all points with what was indefeasibly
right and good in the eyes of the Romans; and still
less do its principles countenance all the vagaries of
the Mosaic code. Yet, each and several, in their
due time and institutional setting, these have all been
tried and found valid and have approved themselves
as securely and eternally right and good in princi- -
ple.

Evidently these principles, which so are made to
serve as standards of validity in law and custom,
knowledge and belief, are of the nature of canons,
established rules, and have the authority of prece-
dent, prescription. ‘They have been defined by the
attrition of use and wont and disputation, and they
are accepted in a somewhat deliberate manner by
common consent, and are upheld by a deliberate
public opinion as to what is right and seemly. In
the popular apprehension, and indeed in the appre-
hension of the trained jurists and scholars for the
time being, these constituent principles of the ac-
cepted point of view are “‘ fundamentally and eter-
nally right and good.” But this perpetuity with
which they so are habitually invested in the popular
apprehension, in their time, is evidently such a qual-
ified perpetuity only as belongs to any settled out-
growth of use and wont. They are of an institu-
tional character and they are endowed with that de-
gree of perpetuity only that belongs to any institu-
tion. So soon as a marked change of circumstances
comes on,— a change of a sufficiently profound, en-
during and comprehensive character, such as per-
sistently to cross or to go beyond those lines of use


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 5


and wont out of which these settled principles have
emerged,— then these principles and their standards
of validity and finality must presently undergo a re-
vision, such as to bring on a new balance of princi-
ples, embodying the habits of thought enforced by a
new situation, and expressing itself in a revised
scheme of authoritative use and wont, law and cus-
tom. In the transition from the medieval to the
modern point of view, e. g., there is to be seen such
a pervasive change in men’s habitual outlook, an-
-swering to the compulsion of a new range of circum-
stances which then came to condition the daily life of
the peoples of Christendom.

In this mutation of the habitual outlook, between
medieval and modern times, the contrast is perhaps
most neatly shown in the altered standards of knowl-
edge and belief, rather than in the settled domain
of law and morals. Not that the mutation of hab-
its which then overtook the Western world need
have been less wide or less effectual in matters of
conduct; but the change which has taken effect in
science and philosophy, between the fourteenth cen-
tury and the nineteenth, e. g., appears to have been
of a more recognizable character, more easily de-
fined in succinct and convincing terms. It has also
quite generally attracted the attention of those men
who have interested themselves in the course of his-
torical events, and it has therefore become some-
thing of a commonplace in any standard historical
survey of modern civilisation to say that the scheme
of knowledge and belief underwent a visible change
between the Middle Ages and modern times.

It will also be found true that the canons of knowl-


6 THE VESTED INTERESTS


edge and belief, the principles governing what is fact
and what is credible, are more intimately and intrin-
sically involved in the habitual behavior of the hu-
man spirit than any factors of human habit in other
bearings. Such is necessarily the case, because the
principles which guide and limit knowledge and be-
lief are the ways and means by which men take stock
of what is to be done and by which they take thought
of how it is to be done. It is by the use of their
habitual canons of knowledge and belief, that men
construct those canons of conduct which serve as
guide and standards in practical life. _Men do not
{pass appraisal on matters which lie beyond the
reach of their knowledge and belief, nor do they
formulate rules to govern the game of life beyond
that limit.

So, congenitally blind persons do not build color
schemes; nor will a man without an “ear for
music” become a master of musical composition.
So also, “ the medieval mind” took no thought and
made no provision for those later-arisen exigencies
of life and those later-known facts of material sci-
ence which lay yet beyond the bounds of its medieval
knowledge and belief; but this ‘“ medieval mind ”’
at the same time spent much thought and took many
excellent precautions about things which have now
come to be accounted altogether fanciful,— things
which the maturer insight, or perhaps the less fertile
conceit, of a more experienced age has disowned
as being palpably not in accord with fact.

That is to say, things which once were convinc-
ingly substantial and demonstrable, according to the
best knowledge and belief of the medieval mind,


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 7


can now no longer be discerned as facts, according
to those canons of knowledge and belief that are
now doing duty among modern men as conclusive
standards of reality. Not that all persons who are
born within modern times are thereby rendered un-
able to know and to believe in such medieval facts,
e. g., as horoscopes, or witchcraft, or gentle birth,
or the efficacy of prayer, or the divine right of kings;
but, taken by and large, and in so far as it falls un-
der the control of the modern point of view, the
deliberate consensus of knowledge and belief now
runs to the effect that these and other imponderables
like them no longer belong among ascertained or as-
certainable facts; but that they are on the other
hand wholly illusory conceits, traceable to a mis-
taken point of view prevalent in that earlier and
cruder age.

The principles governing knowledge and _ be-
lief at any given time are primary and pervasive, be-
yond any others, in that they underlie all human de-
liberation and comprise the necessary elements of
all human logic. But it is also to be noted that these
canons of knowledge and belief are more imme-
diately exposed to revision and correction by expe-
rience than the principles of law and morals. So
soon as the conditions of life shift and change in any
appreciable degree, experience will enforce a revi-
sion of the habitual standards of actuality and credi-
bility, because of the habitual and increasingly ob-
vious failure of what has before habitually been re-
garded as an ascertained fact. ‘Things which, un-
der the ancient canons of knowledge, have habitually
been regarded as known facts,— 4s, €. g., witchcrak,


8 THE VESTED INTERESTS


or the action of bodies at a distance,— will under
altered circumstances prove themselves by expe-
rience to have only a supposititious reality.

Any knowledge that runs in such out-worn terms
turns out to be futile, misleading, meaningless; and
the habit of imputing qualities and behavior of this
kind to everyday facts will then fall into disuse, pro-
gressively as experience continues to bring home the
futility of all that kind of imputation. And pres-
ently the habit of perceiving that class of qualities
and behavior in the known facts is therefore grad-
ually lost. So also, in due time the observances and
the precautions and provisions embodied in law and
custom for the preservation or the control of these
lost imponderables will also fall into disuse and dis-
appear out of the scheme of institutions, by way of
becoming dead letter or by abrogation. Partic-
ularly will such a loss of belief and insight, and the
consequent loss of those imponderables whose
ground has thereby gone out from under them, take
effect with the passing of generations.

An Imponderable is an article of make-believe
which has become axiomatic by force of settled habit.
It can accordingly cease to be an Imponderable by
a course of unsettling habit. Those elders in whom
the ancient habits of faith and insight have been in-
grained, and in whose knowledge and belief the im-
ponderables in question have therefore had a vital
reality, will presently fall away; and the new gen-
eration whose experience has run on other lines are
in a fair way to lose these articles of faith and in-
sight, by disuse. It is a case of obsolescence by ha-
bitual disuse. And the habitual disuse which so al-


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 9


lows the ancient canons of knowledge and belief to
fall away, and which thereby cuts the ground from
under the traditional system of law and custom, is
reenforced by the advancing discipline of a new or-
der of experience, which exacts an habitual appre-
hension of workday facts in terms of a different kind
and thereby brings on a revaluation and revision of
the traditional rules governing human relations.
The new terms of workday knowledge and belief,
which do not conform to the ancient canons, go to
enforce and stabilise new canons and standards, of
a character alien to the traditional point of view.
It is, in other words, a case of obsolescence by dis-
placement as well as by habitual disuse.

This unsettling discipline that is brought to bear
by workday experience is chiefly and most imme-
diately the discipline exercised by the material con-
ditions of life, the exigencies that beset men in their
everyday dealings with the material means of life;
inasmuch as these material. facts are insistent and
uncompromising. And the scope and method of
knowledge and belief which is forced on men in their
everyday material concerns will unavoidably, by ha-
bitual use, extend to other matters as well; so as also
to affect the scope and method of knowledge and be-
lief in all that concerns those imponderable facts
_ which lie outside the immediate range of material ex-
perience. It results that, in the further course of
changing habituation, those imponderable relations,
conventions, claims and perquisites, that make up
the time-worn system of law and custom will una-
voidably also be brought under review and will be
revised and reorganised in the light of the same


ge) THE VESTED INTERESTS


new principles of validity that are found to be suf-
ficient in dealing with material facts.

Given time and a sufficiently exacting run of ex-
perience, and it will follow necessarily that much the
same standards of truth and finality will come to
govern men’s knowledge and valuation of facts
throughout; whether the facts in question lie in the
domain of material things or in the domain of those
imponderable conventions and preconceptions that
decide what is right and proper in human intercourse.
It follows necessarily, because the same persons,
bent by the same discipline and habituation, take
stock of both and are required to get along with
both during the same lifetime. More or less rigor-
ously the same scope and method of knowledge and
valuation will control the thinking of the same in-
dividuals throughout; at least to the extent that any
given article of faith and usage which is palpably at
cross purposes with this main intellectual bent will
soon begin to seem immaterial and irrelevant and
will tend to become obsolete by neglect.

Such has always been the fate which overtakes any
notable articles of faith and usage that belong to a
bygone point of view. Any established system of
law and order will remain securely stable only on
condition that it be kept in line or brought into line
to conform with those canons of validity that have
the vogue for the time being; and the vogue is a mat-
ter of habits of thought ingrained by everyday ex-
perience. And the moral is that any established
system of law and custom is due to undergo a revi-
sion of its constituent principles so soon as a new
order of economic life has had time materially to


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF II


affect the community’s habits of thought. But all
the while the changeless native proclivities of the
race will assert themselves in some measure in any
eventual revision of the received institutional sys-
tem; and always they will stand ready eventually to
break the ordered scheme of things into a paralytic
mass of confusion if it can not be bent into some
passable degree of congruity with the paramount na-
tive needs of life.


_ What is likely to arrest the attention of any stu-
dent of the modern era from the outset is the pecul-
iar character of its industry and of its intellectual
outlook; particularly the scope and method of mod-
ern science and technology. ‘The intellectual life of
modern Europe and its cultural dependencies differs
notably from what has gone before. There 1s all
about it an air of matter-of-fact both in its technol-
ogy and in its science; which culminates in a “‘ mech-
anistic conception”’ of all those things with which
scientific inquiry is concerned and in the light of
which many of the dread realities of the Middle
Ages look like superfluous make-believe.

But it has been only during the later decades of
the modern era — during that time interval that
might fairly be called the post-modern era — that
this mechanistic conception of things has begun se-
riously to affect the current system of knowledge and
belief; and it has not hitherto seriously taken effect
except in technology and in the material sciences.
So that it has not hitherto seriously invaded the es-
tablished scheme of institutional arrangements, the
system of law and custom, which governs the rela-


12 THE VESTED INTERESTS


tions of men to one another and defines their mutual
rights, obligations, advantages and disabilities.
But it should reasonably be expected that this estab-
lished system of rights, duties, proprieties and disa-
bilities will also in due time come in for something in
the way of a revision, to bring it all more nearly into
congruity with that matter-of-fact conception of
things that lies at the root of the late-modern civil-
isation.

The constituent principles of the established sys-
tem of law and custom are of the nature of impon-
derables, of course; but they are imponderables
which have been conceived and formulated in terms
of a different order from those that are convincing
to the twentieth-century scientists and engineers.
Whereas the line of advance of the scientists and en-
gineers, dominated by their mechanistic conception of
things, appears to be the main line of march for
modern civilisation. It should seem reasonable to
expect, therefore, that the scheme of law and custom
will also fall into line with this mechanistic concep-
tion that appears to mark the apex of growth in
modern intellectual life. But hitherto the ‘‘ due
time ” needed for the adjustment has apparently not
been had, or perhaps the experience which drives
men in the direction of a mechanistic conception of
all things has not hitherto been driving them hard
enough or unremittingly enough to carry such a re-
vision of ideas out in the system of law and custom.
The modern point of view in matters of law and cus-
tom appears to be somewhat in arrears, as measured
by the later advance in science and technology.

But just now the attention of thoughtful men cen-


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 13


ters on questions of practical concern, questions of
law and usage, brought to a focus by the flagrant
miscarriage of that organisation of Christendom
that has brought the War upon the civilised nations.
The paramount question just now is, what to do to
save the civilised nations from irretrievable disaster,
and what further may be accomplished by taking
thought so that no similar epoch of calamities shall
be put in train for the next generation. It is real-
ised that there must be something in the way of a
“reconstruction” of the scheme of things; and it is
also realised, though more dimly, that the recon-
struction must be carried out with a view to the
security of life under such conditions as men will
put up with, rather than with a view to the impecca-
ble preservation of the received scheme of law and
custom. All of which is only saying that the con-
stituent principles of the modern point of view are to
be taken under advisement, reviewed and — con-
ceivably — revised and brought into line, in so far
as these principles are constituent elements of that
received scheme of law and custom that is spoken of
as the status quo. It is the status quo in respect of
law and custom, not in respect of science and tech-
nology or of knowledge and belief, that is to be
brought under review. Law and custom, it is be-
lieved, may be revised to meet the requirements of
civilised men’s knowledge and belief; but no man
of sound mind hopes to revise the modern system
of knowledge and belief so as to bring it all into con-
formity with the time-worn scheme of law and cus-
tom of the status quo.

Therefore the bearing of this stabilised modern


14 THE VESTEDUNTERESTs


point of view, stabilised in the eighteenth century,
on these questions of practical concern is of present
interest,— its practical value as ground for a rea-
sonably hopeful reconstruction of the war-shattered
scheme of use and wont; its possible serviceability
as a basis of enduring settlement; as well as the
share which its constituent principles have had in the
creation of that status quo out of which this epoch
of calamities has been precipitated. The status quo
ante, in which the roots of this growth of misfor-
tunes and impossibilities are to be found, lies within
the modern era, of course, and it is nowise to be
decried as an alien, or even as an unforeseen, out-
growth of this modern era. By and large, this
eighteenth-century stabilised modern point of view
has governed men’s dealings within this era, and its
constituent principles of right and honest living must
therefore, presumptively, be held answerable for
the disastrous event of it all,— at least to the extent
that they have permissively countenanced the growth
of those sinister conditions which have now ripened
into a state of world-wide shame and confusion.
How and how far is this modern point of view,
this body of legal and moral principles established
in the eighteenth century, to be accounted an acces-
sory to this crime? And if it be argued that this
complication of atrocities has come on, not because
of these principles of conduct which are so dear to
civilised men and so blameless in their sight, but only
in spite of them; then, what is the particular weak-
ness or shortcoming inherent in this body of princi-
ples which has allowed such a growth of malignant
conditions to go on and gather head? If the mod.


KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF 15


ern point of view, these settled principles of conduct
by which modern men collectively are actuated in
what they will do and in what they will permit,— if
these canons and standards of clean and honest liy-
ing have proved to be a fatal snare; then it becomes
an urgent question: Is it safe, or sane to go into
the future by the light of these same established can-
ons of right, equity, and propriety that so have been
tried and found wanting?

Perhaps the question should rather take the less
didactic form: Will the present experience of calam-
ities induce men to revise these established princi-
ples of conduct, and the specifications of the code
based on them, so effectually as to guard against any
chance of return to the same desperate situation in
the calculable future? Can the discipline of recent
experience and the insight bred by the new order of
knowledge and belief, reenforced by the shock of
the present miscarriage, be counted on to bring such
a revision of these principles of law and custom as
will preclude a return to that status quo ante from
which this miscarriage of civilisation has resulted?
The latter question is more to the point. History
teaches that men, taken collectively, learn by habit-
uation rather than by precept and reflection; par-
ticularly as touches those underlying principles of
truth and validity on which the effectual scheme of
law and custom finally rests.

In the last analysis it resolves itself into a ques-
tion as to how and how far the habituation of the
recent past, mobilised by the shock of the present
conjuncture, will have affected the frame of mind
of the common man in these civilised countries; for


16 THE VESTED INTERESTS


in the last analysis and with due allowance for a
margin of tolerance it is the frame of mind of the
common man that makes the foundation of society
in the modern world; even though the elder states-
men continue to direct its motions from day to day
by the light of those principles that were found good
some time before yesterday. And the fortunes of
the civilised world, for good or ill, have come to
turn on the deeds of commission and of omission of
these advanced peoples among whom the frame of
mind of the common man is the finally conditioning
circumstance in what may safely be done or left un-
done. The advice and consent of the common run
has latterly come to be indispensable to the conduct
of affairs among civilised men, somewhat in the same
degree in which the community is to be accounted
a civilised people. It is indispensable at least in a
permissive way, at least to the extent that no line of
policy can long be pursued successfully without the
permissive tolerance of the common run; and the
margin of tolerance in the case appears to be nar-
rower the more alert and the more matter-of-fact
the frame of mind of the common man.


II


THE STABILITY OF LAW AND CUSTOM


IN so far as concerns the present question, that is to
say as regards those standards and principles which
underlie the established system of law and custom,
the modern point of view was stabilised and given a
definitive formulation in the eighteenth century; and
in so far as concerns the subsequent conduct of prac-
tical affairs, its constituent principles have stood over
without material change or revision since that time.
So that for practical purposes it is fair to say that
the modern point of view is now some one hundred
and fifty years old.

It will not do to say that it is that much behind
the times; because its time-worn standards of truth
and validity are a very material factor in the make-
up of “‘our time.” That such is the case is due in
great part to the fact that this body of principles
was stabilised at that time and that they have there-
fore stood over intact, in spite of other changes that
have taken place. It is only that the principles
which had been tested and found good under the con-
ditions of life in the modern era up to that time
were at that time held fast, canvassed, defined, ap-
proved, and stabilised by being reduced to documen-
tary form. In some sense they were then written

17


18 THE VESTED INTERESTS


into the constitution of civilised society, and they
have continued to make up the nucleus of the doc-
ument from that time forth; and so they have be-
come inflexible, after the fashion of written consti-
tutions.

In the sight of those generations who so achieved
the definite acceptance of these enlightened modern
principles, and who finally made good their formal
installation in law and usage as self-balanced.canons
of human conduct, the principles which they so ar-
rived at had all the sanction of Natural Law,— im-
personal, dispassionate, indefeasible and immutable;
fundamentally and eternally right and good. That
generation of men held “‘ these truths to be self-evi-
dent’; and they have continued so to be held since
that epoch by all those peoples who make up the
effectual body of modern civilisation. And the
backward peoples, those others who have since then
been coming into line and making their claim to a -
place in the scheme of modern civilised life, have
also successively been accepting and (passably) as-
similating the same enlightened principles of clean
and honest living. Christendom, as a going concern
of civilised peoples, has continued to regulate its af-
fairs by the help of these principles, which are still
held to be a competent formulation of the aspira-
tions of civilised mankind. So that these modern
principles of the eighteenth century, stabilised in doc-
umentary form a hundred and fifty years ago, have
stood over in immutable perfection until our time,—
a monument more enduring than brass.

These principles are of the nature of habits of
thought, of course; and it is the nature of habits of


LAW AND CUSTOM 19


thought forever to shift and change in response to
the changing impact of experience, since they are
creatures of habituation. But inasmuch as they
have once been stabilised in a thoroughly competent
fashion in the eighteenth century, and have been
drafted into finished documentary form, they have
been enabled to stand over unimpaired into the pres-
ent with all that weight and stability that a well-de-
vised documentary formulation will give. It is true,
so far as regards the conditions of civilised life dur-
ing the interval that has passed since these modern
principles of law and custom took on their settled
shape in the eighteenth century, it has been a period
of unexampled change,— swift, varied, profound
and extensive beyond example. And it follows of
necessity that the principles of conduct which were
approved and stabilised in the eighteenth century, un-
der the driving exigencies of that age, have not alto-
gether escaped the complications of changing circum-
stances. ‘They have at least come in for some
shrewd interpretation in the course of the nineteenth
century. There have been refinements of definition,
extensions of application, scrutiny and exposition of
implications, as new exigencies have arisen and the
established canons have been required to cover un-
foreseen contingencies; but it has all been done with
the explicit reservation that no material innovation
shall be allowed to touch the legacy of modern prin-
ciples handed down from the eighteenth century, and
that the vital system of Natural Rights installed in
the eighteenth century must not be deranged at any
point or at any cost.


20 THE VESTED INTERESTS


It is scarcely necessary to describe this modern
system of principles that still continues to govern hu-
man intercourse among the civilised peoples, or to
attempt an exposition of its constituent articles. It
is all to be had in exemplary form, ably incorporated
in such familiar documents as the American Declara-
tion of Independence, the French Declaration of the
Rights of Man, and the American Constitution; and
it is all to be found set forth with all the circum-
stance of philosophical and juristic scholarship in the
best work of such writers as John Locke, Montes-
quieu, Adam Smith, or Blackstone. It has all been
sufficiently canvassed, through all its dips, spurs and
angles, by the most competent authorities, who have
brought their best will and their best abilities to
bear on its elucidation at every point, with full doc-
umentation. Besides which, there is no need of re-
condite exposition for the present purpose; since all
that is required by the present argument is such a de-
gree of information on these matters as is familiar
to English-speaking persons by common notoriety.

At the same time it may be to the purpose to call
to mind that this secular profession of faith enters
creatively into that established order of things which
has now fallen into a state of havoc because it does
not meet the requirements of the new order. This
eighteenth-century modern plan specifically makes
provision for certain untoward rights, perquisites
and disabilities which have, in the course of time and
shifting circumstance, become incompatible with con-
tinued peace on earth and good-will among men.

There are two main counts included in this mod-
ern — eighteenth-century — plan, which appear un-


LAW AND CUSTOM As


remittingly to make for discomfort and dissension
under the conditions offered by the New Order of
things: — National Ambition, and the Vested Rights
of ownership. Neither of the two need be con-
demned as being intrinsically mischievous. Indeed,
it may be true, as has often been argued, that both
have served a good purpose in their due time and
place; at least there is no need of arguing the con-
trary. Both belong in the settled order of civilised
life; and both alike are countenanced by those prin-
ciples of truth, equity and validity that go to make
up the modern point of view. It is only that now,
as things have been turning during the later one hun-
dred years, both of these immemorially modern
rights of man have come to yield a net return of
hardship and ill-will for all those peoples who have
bound up their fortunes with that kind of enterprise.
The case might be stated to this effect, that the fault
lies not in the nature of these untoward institutions
of national sovereignty and vested rights, nor in
those principles of self-help which underlie them, but
only in those latterday facts which stubbornly refuse
to fall into such lines as these forms of human enter-
prise require for their perfect and beneficent work-
ing. The facts, particularly the facts of industry
and science, have outrun these provisions of law
and custom; and so the scheme of things has got out
of joint by that much, through no inherent weakness
in the underlying principles of law and custom. The
ancient and honorable principles of self-help are as
sound as ever; it is only that the facts have quite
unwarrantably not remained the same. The fault
lies in the latterday facts, which have not continued


a2 THE VESTED INTERESTS


in suitable shape. Such, in effect, has been the view
habitually spoken for by many thoughtful persons
of a conservative turn, who take an interest in con-
certing measures for holding fast that which once
was good, in the face of distasteful facts.

The vested right of ownership in all kinds of prop-
erty has the sanction of the time-honored principles
of individual self-direction, equal opportunity, free
contract, security of earnings and belongings,—
self-help, in the simple and honest meaning of the
word. It would be quite bootless to find fault with
these reasonable principles of tolerance and security.
Their definitive acceptance and stabilisation in the
eighteenth century are among the illustrious achieve-
ments of Western civilisation; and their roots lie
deep in the native wisdom of mankind. ‘They are
obvious corollaries under the rule of Live and let
live,— an Occidental version of the Golden Rule.
Yet in practical effect those vested rights which rest
blamelessly on these reasonable canons of tolerance
and good faith have today become the focus of vex-
ation and misery in the life of the civilised peoples.
Circumstances have changed to such effect that pro-
visions which were once framed to uphold a system
of neighborly good-will have now begun to run coun-
ter to one another and are working mischief to the
common good.

Any impartial survey of the past one-hundred-fifty
years will show that the constituent principles of this
modern point of view governing the mutual rights
and obligations of men within the civilised nations
have held their ground, on the whole, without ma-
terial net gain or net loss. It is the ground of Nat-


LAW AND CUSTOM ¥23


ural Rights, of self-help and free bargaining. Civil
rights and the perquisites and obligations of owner-
ship have remained substantially intact over this in-
terval of a hundred and fifty years, but with some
slight advance in the way of Live and let live at cer-
tain points, and some slight retrenchment at other
points. So far as regards the formal stipulations,
in law and custom, the balance of class interests
within these countries has, on the whole, not been se-
riously disturbed. In this system of Natural Rights,
as it has worked out in practice, the rights of owner-
ship are paramount; largely because the other per-
sonal rights in the case have come to be a matter of
course and so have ceased to hold men’s attention.
So, in the matter of the franchise, e. g., the legal
provisions more nearly meet the popular ideals of
the modern point of view today than ever before.
On the other hand the guiding principles in the case
at certain other points have undergone a certain re-
finement of interpretation with a view to greater
ease and security for trade and investment; and
there has, in effect, been some slight abridgement of
the freedom of combination and concerted action at
any point where an unguarded exercise of such free-
dom would hamper trade or curtail the profits of
business,— for the modern era has turned out to be
an era of business enterprise, dominated by the par-
amount claims of trade and investment. In point of
formal requirements, these restrictions imposed on
concerted action “‘ in restraint of trade ” fall in equal
measure on the vested interests engaged in business
and on the working population engaged in industry.
So that the measures taken to safeguard the natural


24 THE VESTED INTERESTS


rights of ownership apply with equal force to those
who own and those who do not. ‘‘ The majestic
equality of the law forbids the rich as well as the
poor to sleep under bridges or to beg on the street
corners.’ But it has turned out on trial that the
vested interests of business are not seriously ham-
pered by these restrictions; inasmuch as any formal
restriction on any concerted action between the own-
ers of such vested interests can always be got around
by a formal coalition of ownership in the shape of a
corporation. The extensive resort to corporate
combination of ownership, which is so marked a fea-
ture of the nineteenth century, was not foreseen and
was not taken into account in the eighteenth century,
when the constituent principles of the modern point
of view found their way into the common law. The
system of Natural Rights is a system of personal
rights, among which the rights of ownership are
paramount; and among the rights of ownership is
the right of free disposal and security of ownership
and of credit obligations.

The same line of evasion is not available in the
same degree for concerted action between persons
who own nothing. Still, in neither case, neither as
regards the owners of the country’s wealth nor as
regards the common man, can these restrictions on
personal freedom of action be said to be a serious
burden. And any slight mutilation or abridgement
of the rule of self-help in their economic relations
has been offset by an increasingly broad and liberal
construction of the principles of self-direction and
equality among men in their civil capacity and their
personal relations. Indeed, the increasingly exact-


LAW AND CUSTOM 25


ing temper of the common man in these countries
during this period has made such an outcome una-
voidable. By and large, in its formal vindication of
personal liberty and equality before the law, the
modern point of view has with singular consistency
remained intact in the shape in which its principles
were stabilised in the eighteenth century, in spite of
changing circumstances. In point of formal compli-
ance with their demands, the enlightened ideals of
the eighteenth century are, no doubt, more com-
monly realised in practice today than at any earlier
period. So that the modern civilised countries are
now, in point of legal form and perhaps also in prac-
tical effect, more nearly a body of ungraded and
masterless men than any earlier generation has
known how to be.


In this modern era, as well as elsewhere and in
other times, the circumstances that make for change
and reconstruction have been chiefly the material cir-
cumstances of everyday life,— circumstances affect-
ing the ordinary state of industry and ordinary in-
tercourse. These material circumstances have
changed notably during the modern era. There has
been a progressive change in the state of the indus-
trial arts, which has materially altered the scope and
method of industry and the conditions under which
men live in all the civilised countries. Accordingly,
as a point of comparison, it will be to the purpose to
call to mind what were the material circumstances,
and more particularly the state of the industrial arts,
which underlay and gave character to the modern
point of view at the period when its constituent prin-


26 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ciples were found good and worked out as a stable
and articulate system, in the shape in which they
have continued to be held since then.

The material conditions of industry, trade and
daily life during the period of transition and ap-
proach to this modern ground created that frame of
mind which we call the modern point of view and
dictated that reconstruction of institutional arrange-
ments which has been worked out under its guidance.
Therefore the economic situation which so underlay
and conditioned this modern point of view at the per-
iod when it was given its stable form becomes the
necessary point of departure for any argument bear-
ing on the changes that have been going forward
since then, or on any prospective reconstruction that
may be due to follow from these changed conditions
in the calculable future.

On this head, the students of history are in a sin-
gularly fortunate position. The whole case is set
forth in the works of Adam Smith, with a compre-
hension and lucidity which no longer calls for praise.
Beyond all other men Adam Smith is the approved
and faithful spokesman of this modern point of view
in all that concerns the economic situation which it
assumes as its material ground; and his description
of the state of civilised society, trade and industry,
as he saw it in his time and as he wished it to stand
over into the future, is to be taken without abate-
ment as a competent exposition of those material
conditions which were then conceived to underlie civ-
ilised society and to dictate the only sound recon-
struction of civil and economic institutions according
to the modern plan.


LAW AND CUSTOM op


But like other men, Adam Smith was a creature of
his own time, and what he has to say applies to the
state of things as he saw them. What he describes
and inquires into is that state of things which was
to him the “ historical present”; which always sig-
nifies the recent past,— that is to say, the past as it
had come under his observation and as it had shaped
his outlook.

As it is conventionally dated, the Industrial Revo-
lution took effect within Adam Smith’s active life-
time, and some of its more significant beginnings
passed immediately under his eyes; indeed, it is re-
lated that he took an active personal interest in at
least one of the epoch-making mechanical inventions
from which the era of the machine industry takes its
date. Yet the Industrial Revolution does not lie
within Adam Smith’s “ historical present,” nor does
his system of economic doctrines make provision for
any of its peculiar issues. What he has to say on
the mechanics of industry is conceived in terms de-
rived from an older order of things than that ma-
chine industry which was beginning to get under
way in his own life-time; and all his illustrative in-
stances and arguments on trade and industry are also
such as would apply to the state of things that was
passing, but they are not drawn with any view to that
new order which was then coming on in the world
of business enterprise.

The economic situation contemplated by Adam
Smith as the natural (and ultimate) state of industry
and trade in any enlightened society, conducted on
sane and sound lines according to the natural order
of human relations, was of a simple structure and


28 THE VESTED INTERESTS


may be drawn in few lines,— neglecting such minor
extensions and exceptions as would properly be taken
account of in any exhaustive description. Industry
is conceived to be of the nature of handicraft; not
of the nature of mechanical engineering, such as it
has in effect and progressively come to be since his
time. It is described as a matter of workmanlike
labor, ‘‘ and of the skill, dexterity and judgment with
which it is commonly applied.’ It is a question of
the skilled workman and his use of tools. Mechan-
ical inventions are “‘labor-saving devices,” which
“facilitate and abridge labor.’”’ The material
equipment is the ways and means by manipulation of
which the workman gets his work done. ‘“ Capital
stock’ is spoken of as savings parsimoniously ac-
cumulated out of the past industry of its owner, or
out of the industry of those persons from whom he
has legally acquired it by inheritance or in exchange
for the products of his own labor. Business is of
the nature of “ petty trade’”’ and the business man is
a ‘‘ middle man” who is employed for a livelihood
in the distribution of goods to the consumers.
Trade is subsidiary to industry, and money is a ve-
hicle designed to be used for the distribution of
goods. Credit is an expedient of the needy; a du-
bious expedient. Profits (including interest) are
justified as a reasonable remuneration for productive
work done, and for the labor-saving use of property
derived from the owner’s past labor. The efforts
of masters and workmen alike are conceived to be
bent on turning out the largest and most serviceable
output of goods; and prices are competitively deter-
mined by the labor-cost of the goods.


LAW AND CUSTOM 29


Like other men Adam Smith did not see into the
future beyond what was calculable on the data given
by his own historical present; and in his time that
later and greater era of investment and financial en-
terprise which has made industry subsidiary to bus-
iness was only beginning to get under way and only
obscurely so. So that he was still able to think of
commercial enterprise as a middle-man’s traffic in
merchandise, subsidiary to a small-scale industry on
the order of handicraft, and due to an assumed pro-
pensity in men “to truck, barter, and exchange one
thing for another.”’ And so much as he could not
help seeing of the new order of business enterprise
which was coming in was not rated by him as a sane
outgrowth of that system of Natural Liberty for
which he spoke and about which his best affections
gathered. In all this he was at one with his thought-
ful contemporaries.

That generation of public-spirited men went, per-
force, on the scant data afforded by their own his-
torical present, the economic situation as they saw
it in the perspective and with the preconceptions of
their own time; and to them it was accordingly plain
that when all unreasonable restrictions are taken
away, ‘ the obvious and simple system of natural lib-
erty establishes itself of its own accord.” To this
“natural”? plan of free workmanship and free trade
all restraint or retardation by collusion among bus-
iness men was wholly obnoxious, and all collusive
control of industry or of the market was accordingly
execrated as unnaturz! and subversive. It is true,
there were even then some appreciable beginnings of
coercion and retardation — lowering of wages and


30 THE VESTED INTERESTS


limitation of output — by collusion between owners
and employers who should by nature have been com-
petitive producers of an unrestrained output of
goods and services according to the principles of that
modern point of view which animated Adam Smith
and his generation; but coercion and unearned gain
by a combination of ownership, of the now familiar
corporate type, was virtually unknown in his time.
So Adam Smith saw and denounced the dangers of
unfair combination between ‘“‘ masters” for the ex-
ploitation of their workmen, but the modern use of
credit and corporation finance for the collective con-
trol of the labor market and the goods market of
course does not come within his horizon and does
not engage his attention.

So also Adam Smith knows and denounces the use
of protective tariffs for private gain. That means
of pilfering was familiar enough in his time. But
he spends little indignation on the equally nefarious
use of the national establishment for safeguarding
and augmenting the profits of traders, concession-
aires, investors and creditors in foreign parts at the
cost of the home community. That method of tax-
ing the common man for the benefit of the vested
interests has also grown to more formidable propor-
tions since his time. The constituent principles of
the modern point of view, as accepted advisedly or
by oversight by Adam Smith and his generation,
supply all the legitimation required for this larce-
nous use of the national establishment; but the means
of communication were still too scant, and the larger
use of credit was too nearly untried, as contrasted
with what has at a later date gone to make the com-


LAW AND CUSTOM 31


mercial ground and incentive of imperialist politics.
Therefore the imperialist policies of public enter-
prise for private gain also do not come greatly
within the range of Adam Smith’s vision of the fu-
ture, nor does the “ obvious and simple system” on
which he and his generation of thoughtful men take
their stand comprise anything like explicit declara-
tions for or against this later-matured chicane of the
gentlemen-investors who have been managing the
affairs of the civilised nations.


Adam Smith’s work and life-time falls in with the
high tide of eighteenth-century insight and under-
standing, and it marks an epoch of spiritual achieve-
ment and stabilisation in civil institutions, as well
as in those principles of conduct that have governed
economic rights and relations since that date. But
it marks also the beginning of a new order in the
state of the industrial arts as well as in those mate-
rial sciences which come directly in touch with the
industrial arts and which take their logical bent from
the same range of tangible experience. So it hap-
pens that this modern point of view reached a stable
and symmetrical finality about the same date when
the New Order of experience and insight was be-
ginning to bend men’s habits of thought into lines
that run at cross purposes with this same stabilised
point of view. It is in the ways and means of in-
dustry and in the material sciences that the new
order of knowledge and belief first comes into evi-
dence; because it is in this domain of workday facts
that men’s experience began about that time to take
a decisive turn at variance with the received canons.


82 THE VESTED INTERESTS


A mechanistic conception of things began to displace
those essentially romantic notions of untrammeled
initiative and rationality that governed the intellec-
tual life of the era of enlightenment which was then
drawing to a close.

It is logically due to follow that the same general
principles of knowledge and validity will presently
undergo a revision of the same character where they
have to do with those imponderable facts of human
conduct and those conventions of law and custom
that govern the duties and obligations of men in so-
ciety. Here and now as elsewhere and in other
times the stubborn teaching that comes of men’s ex- ©
perience with the tangible facts of industry should
confidently be counted on to make the outcome, so
as to bring on a corresponding revision of what is
right and good in that world of make-believe that
always underlies any established system of law and
custom. The material exigencies of the state of in-
dustry are unavoidable, and in great part unbending;
and the economic conditions which follow imme-
diately from these exigencies imposed by the ways
and means of industry are only less uncompromising
than the mechanical facts of industry itself. And
the men who live under the rule of these economic
exigencies are constrained to make their peace with
them, to enter into such working arrangements with
one another as these unbending conditions of the
state of the industrial arts will tolerate, and to cast
their system of imponderables on lines which can be
understood by the same men who understand the in-
dustrial arts and the system of material science which
underlies the industrial arts. So that, in due course,


LAW AND CUSTOM 33


the accredited schedule of legal and moral rights,
perquisites and obligations will also presently be
brought into passable consistency with the ways and
means whereby the community gets its living.

But it is also logically to be expected that any re-
vision of the established rights, obligations, perqui-
sites and vested interests will trail along behind the
change which has taken effect in the material circum-
stances of the community and in the community’s
knowledge and belief with regard to these material
circumstances; since any such revision of ancient
rights and perquisites will necessarily be consequent
upon and conditioned by that change, and since the
axioms of law and custom that underlie any estab-
lished schedule of rights and perquisites are always
of the nature of make-believe; and the make-believe
is necessarily built up out of conceptions derived
from the accustomed range of knowledge and be-
lief.

Out-worn axioms of this make-believe order be-
come superstitions when the scope and method of
workday knowledge has outgrown that particular
range of preconceptions out of which these make-
believe axioms are constructed; which comes to say-
ing that the underlying principles of the system of
law and morals are therewith caught in a process of
obsolescence,—‘‘ depreciation by supersession and
disuse.’”’ By a figure of speech it might be said that
the community’s: intangible assets embodied in this
particular range of imponderables have shrunk by
that much, through the decay of these impondera-
bles that are no longer seasonable, and through their
displacement by other figments of the human brain,


34 ‘THE VESTED INTERESTS


— a consensus of brains trained into closer conso-
nance with the latterday material conditions of life.
Something of this kind, something in the way of de-
preciation by displacement, appears now to be over-
taking that system of imponderables that has been
handed down into current law and custom out of
that range of ideas and ideals that had the vogue be-
fore the coming of the machine industry and the ma-
terial sciences.

Since the underlying principles of the established
order are of this make-believe character, that is to
say, since they are built up out of the range of con-
ceptions that have habitually been doing duty as the
substance of knowledge and belief in the past, it fol-:
lows in the nature of the case that any reconstruction
of institutions will be made only tardily, reluctantly,
and sparingly; inasmuch as settled habits of thought
are given up tardily, reluctantly and sparingly. And
this will particularly be true when the reconstruction
of unseasonable institutions runs counter to a set-
tled and honorable code of ancient principles and a
stubborn array of vested interests, as in this instance.
Such is the promise of the present situation, and such
is also the record of the shift that was once before
made from medieval to modern times. It should be
a case of break or bend.


III


THE STATE OF THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS


THE modern point of view, with its constituent prin-
ciples of equal opportunity, self-help, and free bar-
gaining, was given its definitive formulation in the
eighteenth century, as a balanced system of Natural
Rights; and it has stood over intact since that time,
and has served as the unquestioned and immutable
ground of public morals and expediency, on which
the advocates of enlightened and liberal policies have
always been content to rest in their case. The truths
which it holds to be self-evident and indefeasible are
conceived to be intrinsically bound up in an over-rul-
ing Order of Nature; in which thoughtful men ha-
bitually believed at that time and in which less
thoughtful men have continued to believe since then.
This eighteenth-century order of nature, in the magic
name of which Adam Smith was in the habit of
speaking, was conceived on lines of personal initia-
tive and activity. It is an order of things in which
men were conceived to be effectually equal in all
those respects that are of any decided consequence,
— in intelligence, working capacity, initiative, op-
portunity, and personal worth; in which the creative
factor engaged in industry was the workman, with
his personal skill, dexterity and judgment; in which,
it was believed, the employer (‘“ master ’’) served
35


36 THE VESTED INTERESTS


his own ends and sought his own gain by consistently
serving the needs of creative labor, and thereby
serving the common good; in which the traders
(“‘ middle-men ”) made an honest living by supply-
ing goods to consumers at a price determined by
labor cost, and so serving the common good.

This characterisation of the ‘“ obvious and sim-
ple system ” that lies at the root of the liberal ideals
may seem too much of a dream to any person who
shuns “the scientific use of the imagination”: its
imponderables may seem to lack that axiomatic self-
suficiency which one would like to find in the spirit-
ual foundations of a working system of law and cus-
tom. Indeed, the best of its imponderables are in
a fair way now to drop back into the discard of uncer-
tified make-believe. But in point of historical fact
it appears to have stood the test of time and use,
so far as appears formally on the face of law and
custom. For a hundred years and more it has con-
tinued to stand as a familiar article of faith and as-
piration among the advocates of a Liberal policy in
civil and economic affairs; and Adam Smith’s follow-
ers — the economists and publicists of the Liberal
movement — have spoken for it as being the normal
system of economic life, the “‘ natural state of man,”
from which the course of events has been conceived
to depart only under pressure of “ disturbing
causes,” and to which the course of events must be
pruned back at all hazards in the event of any threat-
ened advance or departure beyond the “ natural ”
bounds set by this working ideal.

However, the subsequent course of events has
shown no indisposition to depart from this normal


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 37


system of economic life, this “natural state of
man,” on the effectual reality of which the modern
point of view rests its inviolate principles of law
and morals and economic expediency. A new order
of things has been taking effect in the state of the in-
dustrial arts and in the material sciences that lie
nearest to that tangible body of experience out of
which the state of the industrial arts is framed.
And the new order of industrial ways and means has
been progressively going out of touch with the es-
sential requirements of this established scheme of
individual self-help and personal initiative, on the
realisation and maintenance of which the best en-
deavors of the Liberals have habitually been spent.

Under the new order the first requisite of ordi-
nary productive industry is no longer the work-
man and his manual skill, but rather the mechan-
ical equipment and the standardised processes in
which the mechanical equipment is engaged. And
this latterday industrial equipment and_ process
embodies not the manual skill, dexterity and judg-
ment of an individual workman, but rather the ac-
cumulated technological wisdom of the community.
Under the new order of things the mechanical equip-
ment — the ‘‘ industrial plant ’’ — takes the initia-
tive, sets the pace, and turns the workman to account
in the carrying-on of those standardised processes
of production that embody this mechanistic state of
the industrial arts; very much as the individual crafts-
man in his time held the initiative in industry, set
the pace, and made use of his tools according to his
own discretion in the exercise of his personal skill,
dexterity and judgment, under that now obsoles-


38 THE VESTED INTERESTS


cent industrial order which underlies the eighteenth-
century modern point of view, and which still colors
the aspirations of Liberal statesmen and economists,
as well as the standard economic theories.

The workman — and indeed it is still the skilled
workman — is always indispensable to the due work-
ing of this mechanistic industrial process, of course;
very much as the craftsman’s tools, in his time, were
indispensable to the work which he had in hand.
But the unit of industrial organization and proce-
dure, what may be called the “ going concern ” in pro-
duction, is now the outfit of industrial equipment, a
works, engaged in a given standardised mechanical
process designed to turn out a given output of stand-
ardised product; it is the plant, or the shop. And
under this new order of industrial methods and val-
ues it has already come to be a commonplace of
popular “ knowledge and belief ” that the mechani-
cal equipment is the creative factor in industry, and
the “ production” of the output is credited to the
plant’s working capacity and set down to its account
as a going concern; whereas the other factors en-
gaged, as e. g., workmen and materials, are counted
in as auxiliary factors which are indispensable but
subsidiary,— items of production-cost which are in-
corporated in the running expenses of the plant and
its productive process.

Under the new order the going concern in pro-
duction is the plant or shop, the works, not the
individual workman. The plant embodies a
standardised industrial process. The workman is
made use of according as the needs of the given me-
chanical process may require. The time, place,


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 39


rate, and material conditions of the work in hand
are determined immediately by the mechanically
standardised process in which the given plant is en-
gaged; and beyond that all these matters are de-
pendent on the exigencies and manoeuvres of busi-
ness, largely by way of moderating the rate of pro-
duction and keeping the output reasonably short of
maximum capacity. The workman has become sub-
sidiary to the mechanical equipment, and productive
industry has become subservient to business, in all
those countries which have come in for the latterday
state of the industrial arts, and which so have fallen
under the domination of the price system.

Such is the state of things throughout in those
greater industries that are characteristic of the New
Order; and these greater industries now set the pace
and make the standards of management and valua-
tion for the rest. At the same time these greater
industries of the machine era extend their domina-
tion beyond their own immediate work, and enforce
a standardisation of much the same mechanical char-
acter in the community at large; in the ways and
means of living as well as in the ways and means
of work. The effects of their mechanically stand-
ardised production, in the way of goods and services
as well as in the similarly standardised traffic
through which these goods and services are dis-
tributed to the consumers, reach out into the every-
day life of all classes; but most immediately and im-
peratively they reach the working class of the in-
dustrial centers. So they largely set the pace fot
the ordinary occupations of the common man even
‘apart from any employment in the greater mechani-


40 THE VESTED INTERESTS


cal industries. It is especially the latterday sys-
tem of transport and communication as it works out
under the new order — highly mechanical and exact-
ingly scheduled for time, rate and place — that so
controls and standardises the ordinary life of the
common man on mechanical lines.

The training enforced by this mechanical stand-
ardisation, therefore, is of much the same order
throughout the community as it is within the me-
chanical industries proper, and it drives to the same
outcome,— submergence of the personal equation.
So that the workday information and the reasoning
by use of which all men carry on their daily life
under the new order is of the same general char-
acter as that information and reasoning which
guides the mechanical engineers; and the unremit-
ting habituation to its scope and method, its princi-
ples of knowledge and belief, leads headlong to a
mechanistic conception of things, ways, means, ends,
and values, whether it is called by that name or not.
The resulting frame of mind is often spoken of as
Materialism. This impersonal character of work-
day habituation is particularly to be counted on to
take decisive effect wherever the latterday scheme of
mechanical standardisation takes effect with all that
wide sweep and massive drift with which it now
dominates the larger centers of population.


Since the modern era began, the state of the in-
dustrial arts has been undergoing a change of type,
such as the followers of Mendel would call a “ mu-
tation.” And in the course of this mutation the
workman and his part in the conduct of industry


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 4I


have suffered as great a dislocation as any of the
other factors involved. . But it is also to be ad-
mitted that the typical owner-employer of the earlier
modern time, such as he stood in the mind’s eye of
the eighteenth-century doctrinaires,— this  tradi-
tional owner-employer has also come through the
period of the mutation in a scarcely better state of
preservation. At the period of this stabilisation of
principles in the eighteenth century, he could still
truthfully be spoken of as a “‘ master,” a foreman
of the shop, and he was then still invested with a
large reminiscence of the master-craftsman, as
known in the time of the craft-gilds. He stood forth
in the eighteenth-century argument on the Natural
Order of things as the wise and workmanlike de-
signer and guide of his workmen’s handiwork, and
he was then still presumed to be living in workday
contact and communion with them and to deal with
them on an equitable footing of personal interest.
Such a characterisation of the capitalist-employer
who was doing business at the time of the Industrial
Revolution may seem over-drawn; and there is no
need of insisting on its precise accuracy as a descrip-
tion of eighteenth-century facts. But it should not
be extremely difficult to show that substantially such
a figure of an employer-owner was had in mind by
those who then argued the questions of wages and
employment and laid down the lines on which the
employment of labor would be expected to arrange
itself under the untroubled system of enatural lib-
erty. But what is more to the point is that which is
beyond question. In practical fact, almost as fully
as in the speculations of the doctrinaires, the em-


42 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ployer of labor in the staple industries of that time
was, in his own person, commonly also the owner of
the establishment in which his hired workmen were
employed; and also — again in passable accord with
the facts — he was presumed personally to come to
terms with his workmen about wages and conditions
of work. Employment was considered to be a re-
lation of man to man. That much is explicit in the
writings which bear the date-mark of this modern
Liberal point of view; and the same assumption has
continued to stand over as a self-sufficient premise
among the defenders of the free competitive system
in industry, for three or four generations after that
period.

But the course of events has gone its own way,
and about that time — somewhere along in the mid-
dle half of the eighteenth century — that type of
employer began to be displaced in those staple indus-
tries which have since then set the pace and made the
outcome for wages and conditions of work. So
soon as the machine industry began to make head-
way, the industrial plant increased in size, and the
number of workmen employed in each establishment
grew continually larger; until in the course of time
the large scale of organisation in industry has put
any relation of man to man out of the question be-
tween employers and workmen in the leading in-
dustries. Indeed, it is not unusual to find that in
an industrial plant of a large or middling size, a
factory, mill, works, mine, shipyard or railway of
the ordinary sort, very few of the workmen would
be able, under oath, to identify their owner. At the
same time, and owing to the same requirements of


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 43


large-scale and mechanical organisation, the owner-
ship of the works has also progressively been chang-
ing character; so that today, in the large and leading
industries, the place of the personal employer-owner
is taken by a composite business concern which rep-
resents a combination of owners, no one of whom is
individually responsible for the concern’s transac-
tions. So true is this, that even where the ownership
of a given industrial establishment still vests wholly
or mainly in a single person, it has commonly been
found expedient to throw the ownership into the
corporate form, with limited liability.

The personal employer-owner has virtually disap-
peared from the great industries. His place is now
filled by a list of corporation securities and a staff of
corporation officials and employees who exercise a
limited discretion. The personal note is no longer
to be had in the wage relation, except in those back-
ward, obscure and subsidiary industries in which the
mechanical reorganisation of the new order has not
taken effect. So, even that contractual arrangement
which defines the workman’s relation to the estab-
lishment in which he is employed, and to the anony-
mous corporate ownership by which he is employed,
now takes the shape of a statistical reckoning, in
which virtually no trace of the relation of man to
man is to be found. Yet the principles of the mod-
ern point of view governing this contractual rela-
tion, in current law and custom, are drawn on the
assumption that wages and conditions of work are
arranged for by free bargaining between man and
man on a footing of personal understanding and
equal opportunity.


44 THE VESTED INTERESTS


That the facts of the New Order have in this way
departed from the ground on which the constituent
principles of the modern point of view are based,
and on which therefore the votaries of the estab-
lished system take their stand,—this state of
things can not be charged to anyone’s personal ac-
count and made a subject of recrimination. In fact,
it is not a case for personal discretion and responsi-
bility in detail, but rather for concerted action look-
ing to some practicable working arrangement.

The personal equation is no longer a material
factor in the situation. Ownership, too, has been
caught in the net of the New Order and has been
depersonalised to a degree beyond what would have
been conceivable a hundred years ago, especially so
far as it has to do with the use of material resources
and man power in the greater industries. Owner-
ship has been “‘ denatured” by the course of events;
so that it no longer carries its earlier duties and re-
sponsibilities. It used to be true that personally re-
sponsible discretion in all details was the chief and
abiding power conferred by ownership; but wher-
ever it has to do with the machine industry and
large-scale organisation, ownership now has virtu-
ally lost this essential part of its ordinary functions.
It has taken the shape of an absentee ownership of
anonymous corporate capital, and in the ordinary
management of this corporate capital the greater
proportion of the owners have no voice.

This impersonal corporate capital, which is tak-
ing the place of the personal employer-owner of
earlier times, is the outcome of a mutation of the
scheme of things in business enterprise, scarcely less


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 45


, profound than the change which has overtaken the
material equipment in the shift from handicraft
methods to the machine technology. In practical
fact today, corporate capital is the capitalised earn-
ing capacity of the corporation considered as a go-
ing business concern; and the ownership of this capi-
tal therefore foots up to a claim on the earnings of
the corporation.

Corporate capital of this kind is impersonal in
more than one sense: it may be transferred piece-
meal from one owner to another without visibly af-
fecting the management or the rating of the con-
cern whose securities change hands in this way; and
the personal identity of the owner of any given block
of this capital need not be known even to the con-
cern itself, to its administrative officers, or to those
persons whose daily work and needs are bound up
with the daily transactions of the concern. For
most purposes and as regards the greater proportion
of the investors who in this way own the corpora-
tion’s capital, these owners are, in effect, anonymous
creditors, whose sole effectual relation to the enter-
prise is that of a fixed “‘ overhead charge ”’ on its op-
erations. Such is the case even in point of form as
regards the investors in corporate bonds and pre-
ferred stock. The ordinary investor is, in effect, an
anonymous pensioner on the enterprise; his relation
to industry is in the nature of a liability, and his
share in the conduct of this industry is much like the
share which the Old Man of the Sea once had in the
promenades of Sinbad.

No doubt, any reasonably skilful economist —
any certified accountant of economic theory — could


46 THE VESTED INTERESTS


successfully question the goodness of this characteri-_
sation of corporate capital. It is, in fact, not such
a description as is commonly met with in those
theories of ownership and investment that trace back
to the formal definitions of Ricardo and Adam
Smith. Nor is this description of latterday facts
here set down as a formal definition of corporate
capital and its uses; nor is it designed to fit into that
traditional scheme of conceptions that still holds the
attention of the certified economists. Its aim is the
less ambitious one of describing, in a loose and in-
formal way, what is the nature and uses of this
corporate capital and its ownership, in the appre-
hension of the common man out of doors. He is
not so familiar with the recondite wisdom of the
past, or with subtle definitions, other than the latter-
day subtleties of the market, the crop season, the
blast-furnace and refinery, the internal-combustion
engine, and such like hard and fast matters with
which he is required to get along from day to day.
The purpose here is only to bring out, without un-
due precision, what these interesting phenonema of
capital, investment, fixed charges, and the like, may
be expected to foot up to in terms of tangible per-
formance, in the unschooled reflections of the com-
mon man, who always comes in as “ the party of the
second part” in all these manoeuvres of corporation
finance. He commonly has no more than a slender
and sliding grasp of those honorable principles of
certified make-believe that distinguish the modern
point of view in all that relates to property and its
uses; but he has had the benefit of some exacting
experience in the ways of the new order and jts


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 47


standards of reckoning. By consequence of much
untempered experience the common man is begin-
ning to see these things in the glaring though fitful
light of that mechanistic conception that rates men
and things on grounds of tangible performance,—
without much afterthought. As seen in this light,
and without much afterthought, very much of the
established system of obligations, earnings, per-
quisites and emoluments, appears to rest on a net-
work of make-believe.

Now, it may be deplorable, perhaps inexcusable,
that the New Order in industry should engender
habits of thought of this unprofitable kind; but then,
after all, regrets and excuses do not make the out-
come, and with sufficient reason: attention today
centers on the outcome.


To the common man who has taken to reckoning
in terms of tangible performance, in terms of man
power and material resources, these returns on in-
vestment that rest on productive enterprise as an
overhead charge are beginning to look like unearned
income. Indeed, the same unsympathetic precon-
ception has lately come in for a degree of official
recognition. High officials who are presumed to
speak with authority, discretion and an unbiassed
mind have lately spoken of incomes from invest-
ments as ‘‘ unearned incomes,” and have even en-
tertained a project for subjecting such incomes to a
differential rate of taxation above what should fairly
be imposed on ‘‘ earned incomes.”’ All this may, of
course, be nothing more than an unseasonable lapse
of circumspection on the part of the officials, who


%


48 THE VESTED INTERESTS


have otherwise, on the whole, consistently lived up
to the best traditions of commercial sagacity; and a
safe and sane legislature has also canvassed the mat-
ter and solemnly disallowed any such invidious dis-
tinction between earned and unearned incomes.
Still, this passing recognition of unearned incomes
is scarcely less significant for being unguarded; and
the occurrence lends a certain timeliness to any in-
quiry into the source and nature of that net pro-
duct of industry out of which any fixed overhead
charges of this kind are drawn.

To come to an understanding of the source and
origin of this margin of disposable revenue that goes
to the earnings of corporate capital, it is necessary
to come to an understanding of the industrial system
out of which the disposable margin of revenue
arises. Productive industry yields a margin of net
product over cost, counting cost in terms of man
power and material resources; and under the es-
tablished rule of self-help and free bargaining as it
works out in corporation finance, this margin of net
product has come to rest upon productive industry
as an overhead charge payable to anonymous out-
siders who own the corporation securities.

There need be no question of the equity of this ar-
rangement, as between the men at work in the in-
dustries and the beneficiaries to whom the overhead
charge is payable. At least there is no intention
here to question the equity of it, or to defend the
arrangement against any question that may be
brought. It is also to be remarked that the whole
arrangement has this appearance of gratuitous hand-


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 49


icap and hardship only when it is looked at from
‘the crude ground level of tangible performance.
When seen in the dry light of the old and honest
principles of self-help and equal opportunity, as un-
derstood by the substantial and well-meaning citi-
zens, it all casts no shadow of iniquity or inexpedi-
ency.

So, without prejudice to any ulterior question
which may be harbored by one and another, the
question which is here had in mind is quite simply
as to the production of this disposable margin of
net product over human cost. And to pass muster
today, any attempted answer will be required to meet
that exacting and often inconvenient insistence on
palpable fact which is of the essence of the new
order of knowledge and belief. It is necessary to
reach an understanding of these things in terms of
tangible performance, in such terms as are germane
to that new order of knowledge and belief out of
which the perplexity arises, rather than in those
terms of equitable imputation that lie at the root of
the certified economic doctrines and of corporation
finance.

These relevant facts are neither particularly ob-
scure nor particularly elusive; only, they have had
little attention in the argument of economists and
politicians. Still less in the speculations of the cap-
tains of finance. The partition of incomes has al-
ways been more easily understood by these practi-
cally-minded persons, and it is also a more engross-
ing subject of argumentation than the production of
goods. This would be particularly true for these


50 1 | THE VESTED INTERESTS


economists and politicians, who are imbued with
that legalistic spirit which pervades the modern
point of view and all its votaries.

But it is known to all, even to the most safely
guarded persons who do not come in contact with
industry or production, or even with the products
of the staple industries, that industry at large will
always turn out something in the way of a net
margin of product over human cost,— over human
effort and necessary consumption. It holds true as
far back as the records have anything to say. It
is evidently a question of the productivity of the in-
dustrial arts. Men at work turn out a net product
because they know how and are interested in doing
it; and their output is limited by the industrial meth-
ods which they have the use of. But the output is
limited in such a way that it always exceeds the cost
by more or less, barring accident. By and large,
throughout past time the industrial arts have been
gaining in efficiency, and the ordinary margin of net
product over cost has consequently gone on widen-
ing. This is much of the meaning of ‘‘ an advance
in the industrial arts.”

In an earlier time, by law and custom, the net
margin of product habitually went to a master class,
so-called, as the ‘‘ earnings’ or the due emoluments
of their mastery over those industrious classes who
carried forward and gave effect to the state of the
industrial arts as known in their time. By virtue of
their mastery and its incorporation in the institu-
tions of the time, they had an equitable, and effect-
ual, vested interest in the net product of the com-
munity’s industry; and by virtue of the same settled


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 5a


principles of law and custom it was for them to see
to the due consumption of any such net product
above cost. In later times, and particularly in mod-
ern times and in the civilised countries, those im-
memorial principles of privilege equitably vested in
the master class have fallen into discredit as being
not sufficiently grounded in fact; so that mastery
and servitude are disallowed and have disappeared
from the range of legitimate institutions. The en-
lightened principles of self-help and personal equal-
ity do not tolerate these things. However, they do
tolerate free income from investments. Indeed, the
most consistent and most reputable votaries of the
modern point of view commonly subsist on such in-
come.

Ever since these enlightened principles of the
modern point of view were first installed in the
eighteenth century as the self-evident rule of reason
in civilised life, the industrial arts have also con-
tinued to gain in productive efficiency, at an ever-
accelerated rate of gain; so that today the industrial
methods of the machine era are highly productive,
beyond any earlier state of the industrial arts or
anything that is known outside the range of this
new order of industry. The output of this indus-
trial system yields a wider margin of net product
over cost than has ever been obtainable by any other
or earlier known method of work. It consequently
affords ground for an uncommonly substantial
vested interest in this disposable net margin.

But the industrial system of the new order will
work at the high rate of efficiency of which it is ca-
pable, only under suitable conditions. It is a com-


52 THE VESTED INTERESTS


prehensive system of interdependent working parts,
organised on a large scale and with an exacting ar-
ticulation of parts,— works, mills, railways, ship-
ping, groups and lines of industrial establishments,
all working together on a somewhat delicately bal-
anced plan of mutual give and take. No one mem-
ber or section of this system is a self-sufficient indus-
trial enterprise, even if it is true that no one member
is strictly dependent on any other one. Indeed, no
one member or section, group or line of industrial
establishments, in this industrial universe of the new
order, is a productive factor at all, except as it fits
into and duly gives and takes its share in the work
of the system as a whole. Such exceptions to this
rule of interlocking processes as may appear on first
examination, are likely to prove exceptions in ap-
pearance only. They are chiefly the backward
trades and occupations which have not had the
benefit of the Industrial Revolution and do not be-
long under the new, mechanistic order of industry;
or they are trades, occupations and works devoted
to the consumption of goods or to the maintenance
of the rules governing the distribution and consump-
tion of wealth, as, for instance, banking, menial
service, police service and the apparatus of the law,
the learned professions and the fine arts.

It is also of the essence of this industrial system
and its technology that it necessarily involves the in-
dustrial community as a whole, its working popula-
tion and its material resources; and the measure of
its successful operation is determined by the effectual
team-work of its constituent parts. And the indus-
trial system of the new order is drawn on a large


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 53


scale and rests on a comprehensive specialisation of
processes and standardisation of output; so that the
“community”? which is required for the necessary
team-work is necessarily a large community; larger
than the total population and resources that would
have served the like purpose under any earlier state
of the industrial arts, at the same time that the
needed coordination of processes is also wider and
more delicately balanced than ever before. Indeed,
the “ industrial community ” of the new order is al-
ways and necessarily larger than any existing na-
tional unit. The ramification of give and take under
the new industrial system invariably overlaps the
national frontiers, among all those peoples who oc-
cupy what would be called an ‘‘ advanced’ place in
industry. The system, and therefore the industrial
community engaged in team-work under this system,
is drawn on cosmopolitan or international lines, both
in respect of the body of technological knowledge
which is turned to account and in respect of the
range and volume of materials necessary to be used
according to this new order in productive industry.

Evidently the total output of product turned out
under this industrial system, the ‘“‘ annual produc-
tion,” to use Adam Smith’s phrase, or the “ annual
dividend,” to use a phrase taken from later
usage,— this total output is the output of the total
community working together as a balanced organisa-
tion of industrial forces engaged in a moving equi-
librium of production. No part or fraction of the
community is a productive factor in its own right
and taken by itself, since no work can be done by
any segment of the community in isolation from the


54 THE VESTED INTERESTS


rest; no one plant or works would be a producer in
the absence of all the rest. The total product is the
product of the total community’s work; or rather it
is the product of the work of that fraction of the
people who are employed in productive work,—
which is not quite the same thing, since there is
much work spent on the consumption of goods, and
on ways and means for such consumption, as well as
on their production.

Indeed, it is by no means certain that there is not
more time, strain and ingenuity spent on the con-
sumption of goods than on their production. Apart
from sports, menial service, fashionable dress and
equipage, pet animals and mandatory social
amenities, there would also have to be included un-
der the ways and means of consumption virtually
all that goes into salesmanship and advertising.
Virtually all of these things have to do with the
organised consumption of goods; and virtually all
are therefore to be written off as waste motion, so
far as regards their effect on the net productive ef-
ficiency of the industrial community, or of the in-
dustrial system whose tissues are consumed in en-
terprise of that kind. The amount which is to be
written off as consumptive waste in this way is ap-
proximately the same as the net margin of product
over cost; and according to the enlightened prin-
ciples of self-help and equal opportunity, as these
principles work out under the new order of industry,
it is for the investors to take care of this consump-
tive waste and to see that no unconsumed residue is
left over to cumber the market and produce a glut.


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 55


Evidently, too, the amount of the annual produc-
tion depends on the state of the industrial arts which
the working population has the use of for the time
being; which is in the main a matter of technological
knowledge and popular education. So that the
question of productivity and net productivity may be
stated in general terms to the following effect: The
possible or potential productive capacity of any
given community, having the disposal of a given
complement of man power and material resources,
is a matter of the state of the industrial arts, the
technological knowledge, which the community has
the use of; this sets the limit, determines the
“maximum ”’ production of which the community is
capable. The actual production in such a commun-
ity will then be determined by the extent to which the
available technological efficiency is turned to ac-
count; which is regulated in part by the intelligence,
or “‘ education,” of the working population, and in
greater part by market conditions which decide how
large a product it will be. profitable for the business
men to turn out. The net product is the amount by
which this actual production exceeds its own cost,
as counted in terms of subsistence, and including the
cost of the necessary mechanical equipment; this
net product will then approximately coincide with
the annual keep, the cost of maintenance and re-
placement, of the investors or owners of capitalised
property who are not engaged in productive indus-
try; and who are on this account sometimes spoken
of as the “kept classes.” Indeed, it would seem
that the number and average cost per capita of the


56 THE VESTED INTERESTS


kept classes, communibus annis, affords something
of a rough measure of the net product habitually
derived from the community’s annual production.
The state of the industrial arts, therefore, is the
indispensable conditioning circumstance which de-
termines the productive capacity of any given com-
munity; and this is true in a peculiar degree under
this new order of industry, in which the industrial
arts have reached an unexampled development.
The same decisive factor may also be described as
“the community’s joint stock of technological
knowledge.’ ‘This common stock of technological
knowledge decides what will be the ordinary ways
and means of industry, and so it decides what will
be the character and volume of the output of product
which a given man power is capable of turning out.
Evidently no man power and no working population
can turn out any annual product without the use of
something in the way of technological knowledge,
that is to say some state of the industrial arts. The
working community is a productive factor only by
virtue of, and only up to the limit set by, the state
of the industrial arts which it has the use of. The
contrast of industrial Japan or of industrial Ger-
many before the middle of the nineteenth century
and after the close of the century will serve for il-
lustration; that is to say before and after those
peoples had come in for the use of the technology of
the machine era. The disposable excess of the
yearly product over cost is a matter of the efficiency
of the available state of technological knowledge,
and of the measure in which the working popula-
tion is put in a position to make use of it. These, of


INDUSTRIAL ARTS oY


course, are obvious facts, which it should scarcely be
necessary to recite, except that they are habitually
overlooked, perhaps because they are obvious.

The Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth cen-
tury was a revolution in the state of the industrial
arts, of course; it was a mutation of character in the
common stock of technological knowledge held and
used by the industrial population of the civilised
countries from that time forward. The shift from
the older to the new order of industry was of such a
nature as to call for the use of an extensive equip-
ment of mechanical apparatus, progressively more
and more extensive as the change to the machine
technology went on; and at the same time the dis-
posable margin of product above cost also progres-
sively went on increasing with each further increase
of the community’s joint stock of technological
knowledge.

This body of technological knowledge, the state
of the industrial arts, of course has always contin-
ued to be held as a joint stock. Indeed this joint
stock of technology is the substance of the commun-
ity’s civilisation on the industrial side, and therefore
it constitutes the substantial core of that civilisation.
Like any other phase or element of the cultural heri-
tage, it is a joint possession of the community, so
far as concerns its custody, exercise, increase and
transmission; but it has turned out, under the pe-
culiar circumstances that condition the use of this
technology among these civilised peoples, that its
ownership or usufruct has come to be effectually
vested in a relatively small number of persons.
Unforeseen and undesigned, the mechanical circum-


58 THE VESTED INTERESTS


stances of the new order in industry have reversed
the practical effects of the common law in respect
of self-help, equal opportunity and free bargaining.
The mechanics of the case has worked out this re-
sult by cutting away the ground on which those prin-
ciples were based at the time of their acceptance
and installation.

The machine technology requires for its working
a large and specialised mechanical apparatus, an
ever increasingly large and increasingly elaborate
material equipment. So also it requires a large and
diversified supply of material resources, both in raw
materials and in the way of motive power. It is
only on condition that these requirements are met
in some passable fashion that this industrial system
will work at all, and it is only as these requirements
are freely met that the machine industry will work
at a high efficiency. At the same time the settled
principles of law and usage and public policy handed
down from the eighteenth century have in effect de-
cided, and continue to decide, that all material
wealth is, rightly, to be held in private ownership,
and is to be made use of only subject to the un-
hampered discretion of the legally rightful owner.
Meantime the highly productive state of the indus-
trial arts embodied in the technological knowledge
of the new order can be turned to account only by
use of this material equipment and these natural
resources which continue to be held in private owner-
ship. From which it follows that these material
means of industry, and the state of the industrial
arts which these material means are to serve, can be
turned to productive use only so far and on such


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 59


conditions as the rightful owners of the material
equipment and resources may choose to impose;
which enables the owners of this indispensable ma-
terial wealth, in effect, to take over the use of these
industrial arts for their own sole profit. So that
the usufruct of the community’s technological knowl-
edge has come to vest in the owners of such material
wealth as is held in sufficiently large blocks for the
purpose.

Therefore, by award of the settled principles of
equity and self-help embodied in the modern point
of view, as stabilised in the eighteenth century, the
owners of the community’s material resources —
that is to say the investors in industrial business —
have in effect become ‘‘ seized and possessed of ”’
the community’s joint stock of technological knowl-
edge and efficiency. Not that this accumulated
knowledge of industrial forces and processes has
passed into the intellectual keeping of the investors
and been assimilated into their mentality, even to the
extent of a reasonably scanty modicum. It remains
true, of course, that the investors, owners, kept
classes, or whatever designation is preferred, are
quite exceptionally ignorant of all that mechanics of
industry whose usufruct is vested in them; they are,
in effect, fully occupied with other things, and their
knowledge of industry ordinarily does not, and need
not, extend to any rudiments of technology or in-
dustrial process. It is not as intelligent persons, but
only as owners of material ways and means, as
vested interests, that they come into the case. The
exceptions to this rule are only sufficiently numerous
to call attention to themselves as exceptions.


60 THE! VESTEDUINTERESTS


As an intellectual achievement and as a working
force the state of the industrial arts continues, of
course, to be held jointly in and by the community at
large; but equitable title to its usufruct has, in effect,
passed to the owners of the indispensable material
means of industry. Though not hitherto by formal
specification and legal provision, their assets include,
in effect, the state of the industrial arts as well as
the mechanical appliances and the materials without
which these industrial arts are of no effect. It is
true, a little something, and indeed more than a
little, has been done toward the due legal recogni-
tion of the investor’s usufruct of the community’s
technological efficiency, in the recognition of vested
interests and intangible assets as articles of private
property defensible at law. But on the whole, and
until a relatively recent date, the investors’ tenure of
this usufruct has been allowed to rest informally on
their control of the community’s material assets.
Still, the outlook now appears to be that something
further may presently be done toward a more secure
and unambiguous tenure of this usufruct, by suitable
legal decisions bearing on the inviolability of vested
interests and intangible assets. The outcome is, in
effect, that these owners have equitably become the
sole legitimate beneficiaries of the community’s dis-
posable margin of product above cost.

These are also simple facts and patent, and they
should seem sufficiently obvious without argument.
They have also been explained at some length else-
where. But this recital of what should already be
commonplace information seems necessary here for
the sake of a more perspicuous continuity in the


INDUSTRIAL ARTS 61


B
present argument. To many persons, perhaps to


the greater proportion of those unpropertied per-
sons that are often spoken of collectively as ‘the
common man,” the state of things which has just
been outlined may seem untoward. And further re-
flection on the character and prospective conse-
quences of this arrangement is likely to add some-
thing more to the common man’s apprehension of
hardship and insecurity to come. Therefore it may
be well to recall that this state of things has been
brought to pass not by the failure of those principles
of equity and self-help that lie at the root of it all
but rather by the eminently unyielding stability and
suficiency of these principles under new conditions.
It is not due to any inherent weakness or shiftiness
in these principles of law and custom; which have
faithfully remained the same as ever, and which
all men admit were good and sound at the period
of their installation. But it is beginning to appear
now, after the event, that the inclusion of unre-
stricted ownership among those rights and perqui-
sites which were allowed to stand over when the
transition was made to the modern point of view is
likely to prove inexpedient in the further course of
growth and change.

Unrestricted ownership of property, with inherit-
ance, free contract, and self-help, is believed to
have been highly expedient as well as eminently
equitable under the circumstances which conditioned
civilised life at the period when the civilised world
made up its mind to that effect. And the discrep-
ancy which has come in evidence in this later time
is traceable to the fact that other things have not


62 THE VESTED INTERESTS


remained the same. The odious outcome has been
made by disturbing causes, not by these enlightened
principles of honest living. Security and unlimited
discretion in the rights of ownership were once
rightly made much of as a simple and obvious safe-
guard of self-direction and self-help for the common
man; whereas, in the event, under 2 new order of
circumstances, it all promises to be nothing better
than a means of assured defeat and vexation for
the common man.


IV


FREE INCOME


INDusTRY of the modern sort — mechanical, spe-
cialised, standardised, drawn on a large scale — is
highly productive. When this industrial system of
the new order is not hindered by outside control it
will yield a very large net return of output over
cost,— counting cost in terms of man power and
necessary consumption; so large, indeed, that the
cost of what is necessarily consumed in productive
work, in the way of materials, mechanical appliances,
and subsistence of the workmen, is inconsiderable by
comparison. The same thing may be described by
saying that the necessary consumption of subsistence
and industrial plant amounts to but an inconsider-
able deduction from the gross output of industry at
any time. So inordinately productive is this fa-
miliar new order of industry that in ordinary times
it is forever in danger of running into excesses and
turning out an output in excess of what the
market — that is to say the business situation — will
tolerate. There is constant danger of “ overpro-
duction.”” So that there is commonly a large vol-
ume of man power unemployed and an appreciable
proportion of the industrial plant lying idle or half
idle. It is quite unusual, perhaps altogether out of
the question, to let all or nearly all the available
63


64 THE VESTED INTERESTS


plant and man power run at full capacity even for
a limited time.

It is, of course, impossible to say how large the
net aggregate product over cost would be — count-
ing the product in percentages of the necessary
cost — in case this industrial system were allowed
to work at full capacity and with free use of all the
available technolegical knowledge. ‘There is no
safe: ground for an estimate, for such a thing has
never been tried, and no near approach to such a
state of things is to be looked for under the existing
circumstances of ownership and control. Even un-
‘der the most favorable conditions of brisk times the
business situation will not permit it. There will
at least always be an indefinitely large allowance to
be reckoned for work and substance expended on
salesmanship, advertising, and competitive manage-
ment designed to increase sales. ‘This line of ex-
penditures is a necessary part of businesslike man-
agement, although it contributes nothing to the out-
put of goods, and in that sense it is to be counted
as a necessary deduction from the net productive
capacity of the industrial system as it runs. It would
also be extremely difficult to make allowance for
this deduction, since much of it is not recognised as
such by the men in charge and does not appear on
their books under any special descriptive heading.
In one way and another, and for divers and various
reasons, the net production of goods serviceable for
human use falls considerably short of the gross out-
put, and the gross output is always short of the
productive capacity of the available plant and man
power.


FREE INCOME 65


Still, taken as it goes, with whatever handicap of
these various kinds is to be allowed for, it remains
patently true that the net product greatly exceeds
the cost. So much so that whatever is required for
the replacement of the material equipment consumed
in production, plus “reasonable returns” on this
equipment, commonly amounts to no more than a
fraction of the total output. The resulting margin
of excess product over cost plus reasonable returns
on the material equipment is due to the high pro-
ductive efficiency of the current state of the indus-
trial arts and is the source of that free income which
gives rise to intangible assets. The distinction be-
tween tangible assets and intangible is not a hard
and fast one, of course, but the difference is sufi-
ciently broad and sufficiently well understood for use
in the present connection, so long as no pains is
taken to confuse these terms with needless technical
verbiage.

To avoid debate and digression, it may be re-
marked that “‘ reasonable returns”? is also here used
in the ordinary sense of the expression, without fur-
ther definition, as being sufficiently understood and
precise enough for the argument. The play of mo-
tives and transactions by which a rough common
measure of reasonable returns has been arrived at
is taken for granted. A detailed examination of all
that matter would involve an extended digression,
and nothing would be gained for the argument.

According to the traditional view, which was
handed on from the period before the coming of
corporation finance, and which still stands over as
an article of common belief in the certified economic


66 THE VESTED INTERESTS


theories, ‘‘ capital” represents the material equip-
ment, valued at its cost, together with funds in hand
required as a ‘‘ working capital” to provide ma-
terials and a labor force. On this view, corpora-
tion securities are taken to cover ownership of the
plant and the needed working capital; and there has
been a slow-dying prejudice against admitting that
anything less tangible than these items should prop-
erly be included in the corporate capitalisation and
made a basis on which to issue corporate securities.
Hence that stubborn popular prejudice against
“watered stock’ which corporation finance had to
contend with all through the latter half of the nine-
teenth century. ‘ Watered stock” is now virtually
a forgotten issue. Corporation finance has dis-
posed of the quarrel by discontinuing the relevant
facts.

There is still a recognised distinction between
tangible assets and intangible; but it has come to
be recognised in corporation practice that the only
reasonable basis of capitalisation for any assets, tan-
gible or intangible, is the earning-capacity which
they represent. And the amount of capital is a
question of capitalisation of the available assets.
So that, if the material equipment, e. g., is duly capi-
talised on its earning-capacity, any question as to its
being “ watered” is no longer worth pursuing; since
stock can be said to be “ watered ” only by compari-
son with the cost of the assets which it covers, not in
relation to its earning-capacity. The latter point is
taken care of by the stock quotations of the market.
On the other hand, intangible assets neither have
now nor ever have had any other basis than capitali-


FREE INCOME 67


sation of earning capacity, and any question of
water in their case is consequently quite idle.
Intangible assets will not hold water.

Corporation finance is one of the outgrowths of
the New Order. And one of the effects wrought by
corporation finance is a blurring of the distinction
between tangible assets and intangible; inasmuch as
both are now habitually determined by a capitalisa-
tion of earning-capacity, rather than by their ascer-
tained cost, and it is difficult, if not impossible, to
draw a hard and fast line between that part of a
concern’s earning-capacity which is properly to be as-
signed to its plant and that which is due to its con-
trol of the market. Still, an intelligible distinction
is maintained in common usage, between tangible as-
sets and intangible, even if the distinction is some-
what uncertain in detail; and such a distinction is
convenient, so long as too sharp a contrast between
the two is not insisted on.

The earning-capacity of the tangible assets is pre-
sumed to represent the productive capacity of the
plant, considered as a mechanical apparatus en-
gaged in an industrial process for the production of
goods or services; it is presumed to rest on the mar-
ket value of the mechanical output of the plant.
The plant is a productive factor because and in so
far as it turns to practical account the state of the
industrial arts now in use,— the community’s joint
stock of technological knowledge. So soon, or so
far, as the plant and its management falls short of
meeting the ordinary requirements of this current
state of the industrial arts, and fails to make use of
such technological knowledge as is commonly em-


68 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ployed, the whole works ceases by that much to be
a productive factor. The productive efficiency,
and the productive value, of any given item of
industrial equipment is measured by its effective
use of the technological knowledge current in the
community for the time being. So also, the produc-
tive value of any given body of natural resources —
land, raw materials, motive power — is strictly de-
pendent on the degree in which it fits into the indus-
trial system as it runs.

This dependence of productive value on conform-
ity to and use of the state of the industrial arts is
constantly shown in the case of land and similar nat-
ural resources, by the fluctuation of rental values.
Land and other resources will be more valuable the
more suitable they are for present and prospective
use. — The like is true for the mechanical equipment,
perhaps in a more pronounced degree. Industrial
plant, e. g., is always liable to depreciation by obso-
lescence in case the state of the industrial arts
changes in such a way that the method of work em-
bodied in the particular article of equipment is dis-
placed by new and more suitable methods, more suit-
able under the altered circumstances. In such a
case, which is of very frequent occurrence under the
new order of industry, any given plant, machine, or
similar contrivance may lose all its value as a means
of production. And so also, on the other hand, a
given plant, as, for instance, a given railway system
or dock, may acquire additional productive value
through changes in the industrial system which make
it more suitable for present use.

Evidently the chief, or at least the indispensable,


FREE INCOME 69


element of productive efficiency in any item of indus-
trial equipment or resources is the use which it makes
of the available technological knowledge; and evi-
dently, too, its earning-capacity as a productive fac-
tor depends strictly on the same fact,— the usufruct
of the state of the industrial arts. And all the
while the state of the industrial arts, which the in-
dustrial equipment so turns to account for the bene-
fit of its owner, continues to be a joint stock of in-
dustrial knowledge and proficiency accumulated,
held, exercised, increased and transmitted by the
community at large; and all the while the owner of
the equipment is some person who has contributed
no more than his per-capita quota to this state of the
industrial arts out of which his earnings arise. In-
deed the chances are that the owner has contributed
less than his per-capita quota, if anything, to that
common fund of knowledge on the product of which
he draws by virtue of his ownership, because he is
likely to be fully occupied with other things,— such
things as lucrative business transactions, e. g., or the
decent consumption of superfluities.

And at this point the difference between tangible
assets and intangible comes in sight, or at least the
ground of the habitual distinction- between the two.
Tangible assets, it appears, are such assets as repre-
sent the earning-capacity of any mechanically pro-
ductive property; whereas intangible assets represent
assured income which can not be assigned to any spe-
cific material factor as its productive source. In-
tangible assets are the capitalised value of income
not otherwise accounted for. Such income arises
out of business relations rather than out of industry;


70 THE VESTED INTERESTS


it is derived from advantages of salesmanship, ra-
ther than from productive work; it represents no
contribution to the output of goods and services, but
only an effectual claim to a share in the “ annual div-
idend,”— on grounds which appear to be legally
honest, but which can not be stated in terms of me-
chanical cause and effect, or of productive efficiency,
or indeed in any terms that involve notions of
physical dimensions or of mechanical action.

When the theoreticians explain and justify these
returns that go to adroit salesmanship, or ‘‘ mana-
gerial ability,” as it is also called, it invariably turns
but that the grounds assigned for it-are of the na-
ture of figures of speech — metaphor or analogy.
Not that these standard theoretical explanations are
to be set aside as faulty, inadequate or incomplete;
their great volume and sincerity forbids that. It is
rather that they are to be accepted as a faithful ac-
count of an insubstantial fact in insubstantial terms.
And they are probably as good an account of the
equitable distribution of free income as the princi-
ples of the modern point of view will tolerate.

But while intangible assets represent income
which accrues out of certain immaterial relations be-
tween their owners and the industrial system, and
while this income is accordingly not a return for me-
chanically productive work done, it still remains true,
of course, that such income is drawn from the annual
product of industry, and that its productive source
is therefore the same as that of the returns on tan-
gible assets. The material source of both js the
same; and it is only that the basis on which the in-
come is claimed is not the same for both. It is not


FREE INCOME 7


a difference in respect of the ways and means by
which they are created, but only in respect of the
ways and means by which these two classes of income
are intercepted and secured by the beneficiaries to
whom they accrue. The returns on tangible assets
are assumed to be a return for the productive use of
the plant; returns on intangible assets are a return
for the exercise of certain immaterial relations in-
volved in the ownership and control of industry and
trade.


Best known by name among intangible assets is
the ancient rubric of ‘ good-will,” technically so
called; which has stood over from before the coming
of the new order in business enterprise. This has
long been considered the original type-form of intan-
gible assets as a class. By ancient usage the term
denotes a customary preferential advantage in trade;
it is not designed to describe a body of benevolent
sentiments. Good-will has long been known, dis-
cussed and allowed for as a legitimate, ordinary and
valuable immaterial possession of men engaged in
mercantile enterprise of all kinds. It has been held
to be a product of exemplary courtesy and fair deal-
ing with customers, due to turning out goods or
services of an invariably sound quality and honest
measure, and indeed due to the conspicuous practice
of the ordinary Christian virtues, but chiefly to com-
mon honesty. Similarly valuable, and of a similarly
immaterial nature, is the possession of a trade-secret,
a trade-mark, a patent-right, a franchise, any statu-
tory monopoly, or a monopoly secured by effectually
cornering the supply or the market for any given


*


72 THE VESTED INTERESTS


line of goods or services. From any one of these
a profitable advantage may be derived, and they
have therefore a market value. They afford their
possessor a preferential gain, as against his compet-
itors or as against the general body of customers
which the state of the industrial arts and the organi-
sation of business throws in his way. After the an-
alogy of good-will, it has been usual to trace any
such special run of free income to the profitable use
of a special advantage in the market, which is then
appraised as a valuable means of gain and comes to
figure as an asset of its possessor. But all this goes
to explain how these benefits go to these beneficiar-
les; it does not account for the fact that there is pro-
duced a net output of product available for free dis-
tribution to these persons.

These supernumerary and preferential gains, ‘“ ex-
cess profits,’ or whatever words may best describe
this class of free income, may be well deserved by
these beneficiaries, or they may not. The income in
question is, in any case, not created by the good de-
serts of the beneficiaries, however meritorious their
conduct may be. Honesty may conceivably be the
best policy in mercantile pursuits, and it may also
greatly serve the convenience of any community in
which an honest merchant is found; yet honest deal-
ing, strictly speaking, is an agency of conservation
rather than of creation. A trade-secret may also
be profitable to the concern which has the use of it,
and the special process which it covers may be es-
pecially productive; but the same article of techno-
logical knowledge would doubtless contribute more
to the total productivity of industry if it were shared


: FREE INCOME 73


freely by the industrial community at large. Such
technological knowledge is an agency of production,
but it is the monopoly of it that is profitable to its
Possessor as a special source of gain. The like ap-
plies to patent-rights, of course. Whereas monop:
olies of the usual kind, which control any given line
of industry by charter, conspiracy, or combination
of ownership, derive their special gains from their
ability to restrain trade, limit the output of goods or
services, and so “ maintain prices.”

Intangible assets of this familiar kind are very
common among the business concerns of the new
order, particularly among the larger and more pros-
perous of them, and they afford a rough measure of
the ability of these concerns profitably to restrict
production. The very large aggregate value of
such assets indicates how imperative it is for the con-
Juct of industrial business under the new order to
‘estrict output within reasonable limits, and at the
same time how profitable it is to be able to prevent
he excessively high productive capacity of modern
ndustry from outrunning the needs of profitable bus-
ness. For the prosperity of business it is necessary
‘o keep the output within reasonable limits; that is to
ay, within such limits as will serve to maintain rea-
onably profitable prices; that is to say, such prices
is will yield the largest obtainable net return to the
‘oncefns engaged in the business. In this connec-
ion, and under the existing conditions of investment
ind credit, ‘‘ reasonable returns’’ means the same
hing as “the largest practicable net returns.” It -
Il foots up to an application of the familiar princi-
le of “ charging what the traffic will bear”; for in


74 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the matter of profitable business there is no reasona-
ble limit short of the maximum. In business, the
best price is always good enough; but, so also, noth-
ing short of the best price is good enough. Buy
cheap and sell dear.

Intangibles of this kind, which represent a “ con-
scientious withdrawal of efficiency,” an effectual con-
trol of the rate or volume of output, are altogether
the most common of immaterial assets, and they
make up altogether the largest class of intangibles
and the most considerable body of immaterial wealth
owned. Land values are of much the same nature
as these corporate assets which represent capitalised
restriction of output, in that the land values, too, rest
mostly on the owner’s ability to withhold his prop-
erty from productive use, and so to drive a profitable
bargain. Rent is also a case of charging what the
trafic will bear; and rental values should properly
be classed with these intangible assets of the larger
corporations, which are due to their effectual control
of the rate and volume of production. And apart
from the rental values of land, which are also in the
nature of monopoly values, it is doubtful if the total
material wealth in any of the civilised countries will
nearly equal the total amount of this immaterial
wealth that is owned by the country’s business men
and the investors for whom they do business.
Which evidently comes to much the same as saying
that something more than one-half of the net prod-
uct of the country’s industry goes to those persons
in whom the existing state of law and custom vests
a plenary power to hinder production.

It is doubtful if the total of this immaterial wealth


FREE INCOME 75


sexceeds the total material wealth in the advanced
‘industrial countries; although it is at least highly
probable that such is the case, particularly in the
‘richer and more enlightened of these countries; as,
e. g., in America or the United Kingdom, where the
principles of self-help and free bargain have con-
sistently had the benefit of a liberal —that is a
broad — construction and an unbending applica-
tion. The evidence in the case is not to be had
in such unambiguous shape as to carry conviction,
for the distinction between tangible assets and intan-
gible is not consistently maintained or made a mat-
ter of record. So, e.-g., it is not unusual to find that
corporation bonds — railroad or industrial — which
secure their owner a free income and are carried as
an overhead charge by the corporation, are at the
same time a lien on the corporation’s real property;
which in turn is likely to be of less value than the
corporation’s total liabilities. Evidently the case is
sufficiently confusing, considered as a problem in the
economic theory of capital, but it offers no particular
difficulty when considered as a proposition in corpor-
ation finance.

There is another curious question that will also
have to be left as a moot question, in the absence of
more specific information than that which is yet avail-
able; more a question of idle curiosity, perhaps, than
of substantial consequence. How nearly is it likely
that the total gains which accrue to these prosperous
business concerns and their investors from their con-
scientious withdrawal of efficiency will equal the to-
tal loss suffered by the community as a whole from
the incidental reduction of the output? Net pro-


76 THE VESTED INTERESTS


duction is kept down in order to get a profitable
price for the output; but it is not certain whether the
net production has to be lowered by as much or more
than the resulting increased gain which this business-
like strategy brings to the businesslike strategists.
The strategic curtailment of net production below
productive capacity is net loss to the community as a
whole, including both the business men and their
customers; the gains which go to these business con-
cerns in this way are net loss to the community as a
whole, exclusive of the business concerns and their
investors. The resulting question is, therefore, not
whether the rest of the community loses as much as
the business men gain,— that goes without saying,
since the gains of the business men in the case are
paid over to them by the rest of the community in
the enhanced (or maintained) price of the prod-
ucts; but rather it is a question whether the rest of
the community, the common man, loses twice as much
as the business concerns and their investors gain.
The whole case has some analogy with the phe-
nomena of blackmail, ransom, and any similar enter-
prise that aims to get something for nothing; al-
though it is carefully to be noted that its analogy
with these illegitimate forms of gainful enterprise
must, of course, not be taken to cast any shadow of
suspicion on the legitimacy of all the businesslike sa-
botage that underlies this immaterial corporate cap- .
ital and its earning-capacity. In the case of black-
mail, ransom, and such like illegal traffic in extor-
tion, it is known that the net loss suffered by the loser
and the gainer together exceeds the net gain which
accrues to the beneficiary, by as much as the cost of


FREE INCOME a7


enforcement plus the incidental inconvenience to
both parties to the transaction. At the same time,
the beneficiary’s subsequent employment and con-
sumption of his “‘ ill-gotten gains,” as they are some-
times called, whether he consumes them in riotous
living or in the further pursuit of the same profitable
line of traffic.— all this, it is believed, does not in
any degree benefit the rest of the community. As
seen in the perspective of the common good, such
enterprise in extortion is believed to be quite waste-
fully disserviceable.

Now, this analogy may be taken for what it is
worth; ‘“‘ Analogies do not run on all-fours.” But
when seen in the same perspective, the question of
loss and gain involved in the case of these intangible
assets and their earning-capacity falls into something
like this shape: Does the total net loss suffered by
the community at large, exclusive of the owners of
these intangibles, exceed two-hundred percent of the
returns which go to these owners? or, Do these
intangibles cost the community more than twice what
they are worth to the owners ? — the loss to the com-
munity being represented by the sum of the overhead
burden carried on account of these intangibles plus
the necessary curtailment of production involved in
maintaining profitable prices. The overhead bur-
den is paid out of the net annual production, after
the net annual production has been reduced by so
much as may be necessary to “ maintain prices at a
reasonably profitable figure.”

A few years ago any ordinarily observant person
would doubtless have answered this question in the
negative, probably without hesitation. So also, any


78 THE VESPED INTERESTS


ordinarily intelligent votary of the established order,
as, e. g., a corporation lawyer, a commercial trade
journal, or a trade-union official, would doubtless, at
that period, have talked down such a question out of
hand, as being fantastically preposterous. ‘That
would have been before the war experience began to
throw light into the dark places of business enter-
prise as conducted under the new order of industry.
Today (October, 1918) — it is to be admitted with
such emotion as may come to hand — this question
is one which can be entertained quite seriously, in
the light of experience. In the recent past, as mat-
ters have stood up to the outbreak of the war, the
ordinary rate of production in the essential indus-
tries under businesslike management has habitually
and by deliberate contrivance fallen greatly short of
productive capacity. This is an article of informa-
tion which the experience of the war has shifted from
the rubric of ‘Interesting if True” to that of
‘* Common Notoriety.”

The question as to how much this “ incapacity by
advisement” has commonly amounted to may be at-
tempted somewhat after this fashion. ‘Today, under
compulsion of patriotic devotion, fear, shame and
bitter need, and under the unprecedentedly shrewd
surveillance of public officers bent on maximum pro-
duction, the great essential industries controlled by
the vested interests may, one with another, be consid-
ered to approach — perhaps even conceivably to ex-
ceed — a fifty-percent efficiency; as counted on the
basis of what should ordinarily be accomplished by
use of an equally costly equipment having the dis-
posal of an equally large and efficient labor force and


FREE INCOME 79


equally good natural resources, in case the organisa-
tion were designed and managed with an eye single
to turning out a serviceable product, instead of, as
usual, being managed with an eye single to private
gain in terms of price.

To the spokesmen of “ business as usual” this
rating of current production under the pressure of
war needs may seem extravagantly low; whereas, to
the experts in industrial engineering, who are in the
habit of arguing in terms of material cost and me-
chanical output, it will seem extravagantly high.
Publicly, and concessively, this latter class will speak
of a 25 percent efficiency; in private and confiden-
tially they appear disposed to say that the rating
should be nearer to 10 percent than 25. To avoid
any appearance of an ungenerous bias, then, present
actual production in these essential industries may be
placed at something approaching 50 percent of what
should be their normal productive capacity in the ab-
sence of a businesslike control looking to “‘ reason-
able profits.” It is necessary at this point to call to
mind that the state of the industrial arts under the
new order is highly productive,— beyond example.

This state of the case, that production in the es-
sential industries presumably does not exceed 50 per-
cent of the normal productive capacity, even when
driven under the jealous eye of public officers vested
with power to act, is presumably due in great part to
the fact that these officers, too, are capable business
men; that their past training and present bent is such
as has been given them by long, exacting and suc-
cessful experience in the businesslike management of
industry; that their horizon and perspective in all


80 THE VESTED INTERESTS


that concerns industry are limited by the frame of
mind that is native to the countinghouse. They,
too, have learned how to think of industry and its
administration in terms of profit on investment, and,
indeed, in no other terms; that being as near as their
daily work has allowed them to take stock of the
ways and means of industry. So that they are still
guided, in some considerable part, by considerations
of what is decent, equitable and prudent in the sight
of conservative business men; and this bias neces-
sarily goes with them in their dealings with those
ubiquitous, intricate and systematic dislocations of
the industrial system which have been found profita-
ble in the management of industry on a footing of
competitive sabotage. They still find it reasonable
to avoid any derangement of those vested interests
that live on this margin of intangible assets that rep-
resents capitalised withdrawal of efficiency.

In so characterising the situation there is, of
course, no inclination to impute blame to these bus-
inesslike officials who are patriotically giving their
best abilities and endeavors to this work of enforc-
ing an increased production in the essential indus-
tries and diverting needed labor and materials from
the channels of waste; nor is it intended to cast as-
persions on the good faith or the honorable motives
of those grave captains of industry whom the offi-
cials find it so difficult to divert from the business
man’s straight and narrow path of charging what
the traffic will bear. ‘“ They are all honorable
men.” But like other men they are creatures of
habit; and their habit of mind is the outcome of ex-
perience in that class of large, responsible and re-


FREE INCOME 81


munerative business affairs that lie somewhat remote
from the domain of technology, from that field where
the mechanistic logic of the industrial arts has some-
thing to say. It is only that the situation as here
spoken of rests on settled usage, and that the usage
is such as the businesslike frame of mind is suited to;
at the same time that this businesslike usage, of fixed
charges, vested interests and reasonable profits, does
not fully comport with the free swing of the indus-
trial arts as they run under the new order of tech-
nology. Nor is there much chance of getting away
from this situation of “incapacity by advisement,”
even under pressure of patriotic devotion, fear,
shame and need, inasmuch as the effectual public
opinion has learned the same bias and will scarcely
entrust the conduct of its serious interests to any
other than business men and business methods.

To return to the argument. It may be conceded
that production in the essential industries, under pres-
sure of the war needs, rises to something like a 50
percent efficiency. At the same time it is presum-
ably well within the mark to say that this current
output in these essential industries will amount to
something like twice their ordinary output in time
of peace and business as usual. One-half of 50 per-
cent is 25 percent; and so one comes in sight of the
provisional conclusion that under ordinary condi-
tions of businesslike management the habitual net
production is fairly to be rated at something like
one-fourth of the industrial community’s productive
capacity; presumably under that figure rather than
over.

In the absence of all reflection this crude es-


82 THE VESTED INTERESTS


timate may seem recklessly hasty, perhaps it may
even be thought scandalously unflattering to our sub-
stantial citizens who have the keeping of the com-
munity’s material welfare; but a degree of observa-
tion and reflection will quickly ease any feeling of an-
noyance on that score. So, e.g., if the account as
presented above does not appear to foot up to as
much as the conclusion would seem to require, fur-
ther account may be taken of that side-line of bus-
iness enterprise that spends work and materials in an
effort to increase the work to be done, and to in-
crease the cost per unit of the increased work; all
for the benefit of the earnings of the concern for
whose profit it is arranged. It may be called to
mind that there still are half-a-dozen railway pas-
senger stations in such a town as Chicago, especially
designed to work at cross purposes and hinder the
trafic of competing railway corporations; that on
the basis of this ingeniously contrived retardation of
trafic there has been erected a highly prosperous
monopoly in the transfer of baggage and passengers,
employing a large equipment and labor force and
costing the traveling public some millions of useless
outlay yearly; with nothing better to show for it
than delay, confusion, wear and tear, casualties and
wrangles, twenty-four hours a day; and that this ar-
rangement is, quite profitably, duplicated through-
out the country as often and on as large a scale as
there are towns in which to install it. So again,
there is an exemplary weekly periodical of the most
widely reputable and most profitable class, with a
circulation of more than two million, which habit-
ually carries some 60 to 80 large pages of competi-


FREE INCOME 83


tive advertising matter, at a time when the most ex-
acting economy of work and materials is a matter
of urgent and acknowledged public need; with noth-
ing better to show for it than an increased cost of all
the goods advertised, most of which are superfluities.
This, too, is only a typical case, duplicated by the
thousand, as nearly as the businesslike management
of the other magazines and newspapers can achieve
the same result. These are familiar instances of
business as usual under the new order of industry.
They are neither extreme nor extraordinary. In-
deed the whole business community is run through
with enterprise of this kind so thoroughly that this
may fairly be said to be the warp of the fabric. In
effect, of course, it is an enterprise in subreption; but
in point of moral sentiment and conscious motive it
is nothing of the kind.

All these intricate arrangements for doing those
things that we ought not to have done and leaving
undone those things that we ought to have done are
by no means maliciously intended. They are only
the ways and means of diverting a sufficient share of
the annual product to the benefit of the legitimate
beneficiaries, the kept classes. But this apparatus
and procedure for capturing and dividing this share
of the community’s annual dividend is costly — one
is tempted to say unduly costly. It foots up to, per-
haps, something like one-half of the work done, and
it is occupied with taking over something like one-half
of the output produced by the remaining one-half of
the year’s work. And yet, as a business proposi-
tion. it seems sound enough, inasmuch as the income
which it brings to the beneficiaries will presumably


84 THE VESTED INTERESTS


foot up to something like one-half of the country’s
annual production.

There is nothing gained by finding fault with any
of this businesslike enterprise that is bent on getting
something for nothing, at any cost. After all, it is
safe and sane business, sound and legitimate, and
carried on blamelessly within the rules of the game.
One may also dutifully believe that there is really
no harm done, or at least that it might have been
worse. It is reassuring to note that at least hith-
erto the burden of this overhead charge of 50 per-
cent plus has not broken the back of the industrial
community. It also serves to bring under a strong
light the fact that the state of the industrial arts as it
runs under the new order is highly productive, inor-
dinately productive. And, finally, there should be
some gain of serenity in realising how singularly
consistent has been the run of economic law through
the ages, and recalling once more the reflection
which John Stuart Mill arrived at some half-a-cen-
tury ago, that, ‘‘ Hitherto it is questionable if all the
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the |
day’s toil of any human being.”


Vv


THE VESTED INTERESTS


THERE are certain saving clauses in common use
among persons who speak for that well-known order
of pecuniary rights and obligations which the mod-
ern point of view assumes as “ the natural state of


man.” Among them are these: “ Given the state
of the industrial arts”; ‘‘ Other things remaining
the same’’; ‘‘ In the long run”’; “‘ In the absence of


disturbing causes.” It has been the praiseworthy
endeavor of the votaries of this established law and
custom to hold fast the good old plan on a strategic
line of interpretation resting on these provisos.
There have been painstaking elucidations of what is
fundamental and intrinsic in the way of human insti-
tutions, of what essentially ought to be, and of what
must eventually come to pass in the natural course
of time and change as it is believed to run along un-
der the guidance of those indefeasible principles that
make up the modern point of view. And the dis-
quieting incursions of the New Order have been dis-
allowed as not being of the essence of Nature’s con-
tract with mankind, within the constituent principles
of the modern point of view stabilised in the eight-
eenth century.

Now, as has already been remarked in an earlier
passage, the state of the industrial arts has at no

85


86 THE VESTED INTERESTS


time continued unchanged during the modern era;
consequently other things have never remained the
same; and in the long run the outcome has always
been shaped by the disturbing causes. All this re-
flects no discredit on the economists and publicists
who so have sketched out the natural run of the pres-
ent and future in the dry light of the eighteenth-cen-
tury principles, since their reservations have not been
observed. The arguments have been as good as the
premises on which they proceed, and the premises
have once been good enough to command unques-
tioning assent; although that is now some time ago.
The fault appears to lie in the unexampled shifty
behavior of the latterday facts. Yet however
shifty, these facts, too, are as stubborn as others of


their kind.


The system of free competition, self-help, equal
opportunity and free bargaining which is contem-
plated by the modern point of view, assumes an in-
dustrial situation in which the work and trading of
any given individual or group can go on freely by it-
self, without materially helping or hindering the
equally untrammeled working of the rest. It has,
of course, always been recognised that the coun-
try’s industry makes up something of a connected
system; so that there would necessarily be some de-
gree of mutual adjustment and accommodation
among the many self-sufficient working units which
together make up the industrial community; but these
working units have been conceived to be so nearly
independent of one another that the slight measure
of running adjustment needed could be sufficiently


THE VESTED INTERESTS 87


taken care of by free competition in the market.
This assumption has, of course, never been altogether
sound at any stage in the industrial advance; but it
has at least been within speaking distance of facts
so late as the eighteenth century. It was a possible
method of keeping the balance in the industrial sys-
tem before the coming of the machine industry.
Quite evidently it commended itself to the enlight-
ened common sense of that time as a sufficiently
workable ideal. So much so that it then appeared
to be the most practical solution of the industrial and
social difficulties which beset that generation. It is
fairly to be presumed that the plan would still be
workable in some fashion today if the conditions
which then prevailed had continued unchanged
through the intervening one hundred and fifty years,
if other things had remained the same. All that
was, in effect, before the coming of the machine tech-
nology and the later growth of population.

But as it runs today, according to the new indus-
trial order set afoot by the machine technology, the
carrying-on of the community’s industry is not well
taken care of by the loose corrective control which
is exercised by a competitive market. That method
is too slow, at the best, and too disjointed. ‘The in-
dustrial system is now a wide-reaching organisation
of mechanical processes which work together on a
comprehensive interlocking plan of give and take,
in which no one section, group, or individual unit is
free to work out its own industrial salvation except
in active copartnership with the rest; and the whole
of which runs on as a moving equilibrium of forces
in action. This system of interlocking processes


88 THE VESTED INTERESTS


and mutually dependent working units is a more or
less delicately balanced affair. Evidently the sys-
tem has to be taken as a whole, and evidently it will
work at its full productive capacity only on condition
that the coordination of its interlocking processes be
maintained at a faultless equilibrium, and only when
its constituent working units are allowed to run full
and smooth. But a moderate derangement will not
put it out of commission. It will work at a lower
efciency, and continue running, in spite of a very
considerable amount of dislocation; as is habitually
the case today.

At the same time any reasonably good working
efficiency of the industrial system is conditioned on a
reasonably good coordination of these working
forces; such as will allow each and several of the
working units to carry on at the fullest working ca-
pacity that will comport with the unhampered work-
ing of the system as a balanced whole. But evi-
dently, too, any dislocation, derangement or retarda-
tion of the work at any critical point — which comes
near saying at any point — in this balanced system of
work will cause a disproportionately large derange-
ment of the whole. The working units of the indus-:
trial system are no longer independent of one an-
other under the new order.

It is, perhaps, necessary to add that the industrial
system has not yet reached anything like the last
degree of development along this line; it is at least
not yet a perfected automatic mechanism. But it
should also be added that with each successive ad-
vance into the new order of industry created by the
machine technology, and ata continually accelerated


THE VESTED INTERESTS 89


rate of advance, the processes of industry are being
_more thoroughly standardised, the working units ~
of the system as a whole demand a more undeviating
maintenance of its moving equilibrium, a more ex-
acting mechanical correlation of industrial opera-
tions and equipment. And it seems reasonable to ex-
pect that things are due to move forward along this
line still farther in the calculable future, rather than
the reverse.

This state of things would reasonably suggest that
the control of the industrial system had best be en-
trusted to men skilled in these matters of technology.
The industrial system does its work in terms of me-
chanical efficiency, not in terms of price. It should
accordingly seem reasonable to expect that its con-
trol would be entrusted to men experienced in the
ways and means of technology, men who are in the
habit of thinking about these matters in such terms
as are intelligible to the engineers. The material
welfare of the community is bound up with the due
working of this industrial system, which depends on
the expert knowledge, insight, and disinterested
. judgment with which it is administered. It should
accordingly have seemed expedient to entrust its ad-
ministration to the industrial engineers, rather than
to the captains of finance. The former have to do
with productive efficiency, the latter with the higgling
of the market.

However, by historical necessity the discretionary
control in all that concerns this highly technological
system of industry has come to vest in those persons
who are highly skilled in the higgling of the market,
the masters of financial intrigue. And so great is


90 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the stability of that system of law and custom by
grace of which these persons claim this power, that
any disallowance of their plenary control over the
material fortunes of the community is scarcely within
reason. All the while the progressive shifting of
ground in the direction of a more thoroughly mech-
anistic organisation of industry goes on and works
out into a more and more searching standardisation
of works and methods and a more exacting correla-
tion of industries, in an ever increasingly large and
increasingly sensitive industrial system. All the
while the whole of it grows less and less manageable
by business methods; and with every successive move
the control exercised by the business men in charge
grows wider, more arbitrary, and more incompatible
with the common good.

Business affairs, in the narrow sense of the ex-
pression, have in time necessarily come in for an
increasing share of the attention of those who exer:
cise the control. The businesslike manager’s atten-
tion is continually more taken up with “ the financial
end” of the concern’s interests; so that by enforced
neglect he is necessarily leaving more of the details
of shop management and supervision of the works
to subordinates, largely to subordinates who are pre-
sumed to have some knowledge of technological
matters and no immediate interest in the run of the
market. They are in fact persons who are pre-
sumed to have this knowledge by the business men
who have none of it. But the larger and final dis-
cretion, which affects the working of the industrial
system as a whole, or the orderly management of
any considerable group of industries within the gen-


THE VESTED INTERESTS gl


eral system,— all that is still under the immediate
control of the businesslike managers, each of whom
works for his own concern’s gain without much after-
thought. The final discretion still rests with the
businesslike directorate of each concern — the
owner or the board — even in all questions of phys-
ical organisation and technical management; al-
though this businesslike control of the details of pro-
duction necessarily comes to little else than accep-
tance, rejection, or revision of measures proposed
by the men immediately in charge of the works; to-
gether with a constant check on the rate and volume
of output, with a view to the market.

In very great part the directorate’s control of the
industry has practically taken the shape of a veto on
such measures of production as are not approved by
the directorate for businesslike reasons, that is to
say for purposes of private gain. Business is a pur-
suit of profits, and profits are to be had from profit-
able sales, and profitable sales can be made only if
prices are maintained at a profitable level, and prices
can be maintained only if the volume of marketable
output is kept within reasonable limits; so that the
paramount consideration in such business as has to
do with the staple industries is a reasonable limita-
tion of the output. ‘‘ Reasonable”? means “ what
the traffic will bear”; that is to say, “ what will yield
the largest net return.”

Hence in the larger mechanical industries, which
set the pace for the rest and which are organised on
a standardised and more or less automatic plan, the
current oversight of production by their businesslike
directorate does not effectually extend much beyond


92 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the regulation of the output with a view to what
the traffic will bear; and in this connection there is
very little that the business men in charge can do ex-
cept to keep the output short of productive capacity
by so much as the state of the market seems to re-
quire; it does not lie within their competence to in-
crease the output beyond that point, or to increase
the productive capacity of their works, except by
way of giving the technical men permission to go
ahead and do it.

The business man’s place in the economy of na-
ture is to ‘“‘make money,” not to produce goods.
The production of goods is a mechanical process, in-
cidental to the making of money; whereas the mak-
ing of money is a pecuniary operation, carried on by
bargain and sale, not by mechanical appliances and
powers. ‘The business men make use of the me-
chanical appliances and powers of the industrial sys-
tem, but they make a pecuniary use of them. And
in point of fact the less use a business man can make
of the mechanical appliances and powers under his
charge, and the smaller a product he can contrive to
turn out for a given return in terms of price, the
better it suits his purpose. The highest achieve-
ment in business is the nearest approach to getting
something for nothing. What any given business
concern gains must come out of the total output of
productive industry, of course; and to that extent
any given business concern has an interest in the con-
tinued production of goods. But the less any given
business concern can contrive to give for what it
gets, the more profitable its own traffic will be.


THE VESTED INTERESTS 93


Business success means “‘ getting the best of the bar-
gain.”

The common good, so far as it is a question of
material welfare, is evidently best served by an un-
hampered working of the industrial system at its full
capacity, without interruption or dislocation. But it
is equally evident that the owner or manager of any
given concern or section of this industrial system
may be in a position to gain something for himself
at the cost of the rest by obstructing, retarding or
dislocating this working system at some critical point
in such a way as will enable him to get the best of
the bargain in his dealings with the rest. This ap-
pears constantly in the altogether usual, and alto-
gether legitimate, practice of holding out for a bet-’
ter price. So also in the scarcely less usual, and no
less legitimate, practice of withholding needed
ground or right of way, or needed materials or in-
formation, from a business rival. Indeed it has
been rumored that one of the usual incentives which
drew the patriotic one-dollar-a-year men from their
usual occupations to the service of their country was
the chance of controlling information by means of
which to ‘‘ put it over” their business rivals. All
these things are usual and a matter of course, be-
cause business management under the conditions cre-
ated by the new order of industry is in great part
made up of these things. Sabotage of this kind is
indispensable to any large success in industrial bus-
iness.

But it is also evident that the private gain which
the business concerns come in for by this manage-


94 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ment entails a loss on the rest of the community, and
that the loss suffered by the rest of the community is
necessarily larger than the total gains which these
manoeuvres bring to the business concerns; inasmuch
as the friction, obstruction and retardation of the
moving equilibrium of production involved in this
businesslike sabotage necessarily entails a dispropor-
tionate curtailment of output.

However, it is well to call to mind that the com-
munity will still be able to get along, perhaps even
to get along very tolerably, in spite of a very ap-
preciable volume of sabotage of this kind; even
though it does reduce the net productive capacity
to a fraction of what it would be in the absence of
all this interference and retardation; for the current
state of the industrial arts is highly productive. So
much so that in spite of all this deliberate waste and
confusion that is set afoot in this way for private
gain, there still is left over an absolutely large res-
idue of net production over cost. The community
still has something to go on. The available margin
of free income — that is to say, the margin of pro-
duction over cost — is still wide; so that it allows
a large latitude for playing fast and loose with the
community’s livelihood.

Now, these businesslike manoeuvres of deviation
and delay are by no means to be denounced as being
iniquitous or unfair, although they may have an un-
fortunate effect on the conditions of life for the com-
mon man. ‘That is his misfortune, which law and
custom count on his bearing with becoming fortitude.
These are the ordinary and approved means of car-
rying on business according to the liberal principles


THE VESTED INTERESTS 95


of free bargain and self-help as established in the
eighteenth century; and they are in the main still
looked on as a meritorious exercise of thrift and sa-
gacity — duly so looked on, it is to be presumed.
At least such is the prevailing view among the sub-
stantial citizens, who are in a position to speak from
first-hand knowledge. It is only that the exercise
of these homely virtues on the large scale on which
business is now conducted, and when dealing with
the wide-reaching articulations of the industrial sys-
tem under the new order of technology,— under
these uncalled-for circumstances the unguarded ex-
ercise of these virtues entails business disturbances
which are necessarily large, and which bring on mis-
chievous consequences in industry which are dispro-
portionately larger still.

It is also true, the businesslike managers of indus-
trial enterprise have also other things to do, besides
holding the marketable supply of goods and serv-
ices down to such an amount as is expected to bring
the most profitable prices, or diverting credulous
customers from one seller to another by competi-
tive advertising. But it should also be noted that
there is next to no business enterprise, if any, whose
chief end is not profitable sales, or profitable bar-
gains which mean the same thing as profitable sales.
They are therefore engaged unremittingly in one or
another of the approved lines of competitive man-
agement with a view to profitable trafic for them-
selves, and to creating an advantage for themselves
‘n the market. It is a poor-spirited concern that
does not constantly aim to create for itself such a po-
sition of advantage as will give it something of a


96 THE* VESTED INTERESTS


vested interest in the traffic. Such a concern is
scarcely fit to survive; nor is it likely to.

It is not that business enterprise is wholly taken
up with such like manoeuvres of restraint, obstruc-
tion and competitive selling. ‘This is only part of
the business men’s everyday work, although it is not
a minor part. In any competitive business commun-
ity this line of duties will take up a large share of the
business men’s attention and will engage their best
and most businesslike abilities. More particularly
in the management of the greater industrial enter-
prises of the present day, the larger as well as the
more lucrative part of the duties of those who direct
affairs appears commonly to be of this nature. That
such should be the case lies in the nature of things
under the circumstances which now prevail. It
would not be far out of the way to say that any oc-
cupations in which this rule does not apply are occu-
pations which have not, or have not yet, come into
line as members in good standing in that new order
of business enterprise which is based on the machine
industry governed by the liberal principles of the
eighteenth century.

‘Our people, moreover, do not wait to be coached
and led. They know their own business, are quick
and resourceful at every readjustment, definite in
purpose, and self-reliant in action. . . . The Ameri-
can business man is of quick initiative. The ordinary
and normal processes of private initiative will not,
however, provide immediate employment for all of
the men of our returning armies.’ Such is the es-
teem in which American business men are held by
American popular opinion and such is also the view


THE VESTED INTERESTS 97


which American business men are inclined to take
of their own place and value in the community.
There need be no quarrel with it. But it will be in
place to call attention to the statement that “ The or-
dinary and normal processes of private initiative will
not, however, provide immediate employment for all
the men.”’ It should be added, as is plain to all men,
that these ordinary and normal processes of private
initiative never do provide employment for all the
men available. In fact, unemployment is an ordi-
nary and normal phenomenon. So that even in the
present emergency, when the peoples of Christen-
dom are suffering privation together for want of
goods needed for immediate use, the ordinary and
normal processes of private initiative are not to be
depended on to employ all the‘available man power
for productive industry. The reason is well known
to all men; so well known as to be uniformly taken
for granted as a circumstance which is beyond hu-
man remedy. It is the simple and obvious fact that
the ordinary and normal processes of private initia-
tive are the same thing as “‘ business as usual,” which
controls industry with a view to private gain in
terms of price; and the largest private gain in terms
of price can not be had by employing all the availa-
ble man power and speeding up the industries to
their highest productivity, even when all the peoples
of Christendom are suffering privation together
for want of the ordinary necessaries of life. Pri-
vate initiative means business enterprise, not indus-
try.
But all the same, the profits of business come out
of the product of industry; and industry is con-


98 THEs VESTED INTERESTS


trolled, accelerated and slowed down with a view to
business profits; and one outcome of this arrange
ment so far, in America, has been the complacent
estimate of this business enterprise formulated in
the passage quoted above. ‘The result of a business-
like management of industry for private gain in
America has on the whole been a fairly high level of
prosperity. For this there are two main reasons:
(a) the exceptionally great natural resources of the
country; and (b) the continued growth and spread
of population. (a) Business enterprise, that is to
say private ownership, has taken over these re-
sources, by a process of legalised seizure, and has
used them up as rapidly as may be, with a view to
private gain; all of which has gone to make private
business profitable to that extent, although it has im-
poverished the underlying community by using up its
natural resources. (b) The continued growth and
spread of population, by natural increase and by im-
migration, has furnished the business men of this
country a continually expanding market for goods;
both for goods to be used in production and trans-
portation and for finished articles of consumption.
Hence the American business men have been in the
fortunate position of not having to curtail the out-
put of industry harshly and persistently at all points.
It is, in effect, for this continued growth of their mar-
ket, caused by the growth of population, that the
business men claim credit when they “ point with
pride”? to the resourcefulness and quick initiative
with which they have “‘ developed the country.” To
their credit be it said, they have on the whole not
hindered the country’s prosperity beyond what the


THE VESTED INTERESTS 99


trafic would bear; and the peculiar situation of this
country hitherto has been such that the trafhic of
business would bear a nearly uninterrupted expansion
of industry at perhaps something like one-half of
its possible rate of expansion. To their own gain,
and to the relief of the underlying community, they
have been enabled profitably to let the country’s in-
dustry run on a moderately high level of efficiency,—
with more or less, but always a very appreciable
amount, of unemployment, idle plant, and waste of
resources.

All that industry which comes in under the dom-
inant machine technology — that is to say all that
fairly belongs in the new order of industry — is now
governed by business men for business ends, in what
is to be done and what is to be left undone. And
wherever business enterprise has taken over the di-
rection of things the management is directed in part
to the production of a marketable supply, and in
part to arranging for a profitable sale of the supply;
and the strategy available for this latter, and indis-
pensable, work lies almost wholly within the lines of
competitive management already spoken of. In
case these manoeuvres of businesslike deviation and
defeat are successful and fall into an orderly system
whose operation may be continued at will, or in so
far as this management creates an assured strategic
advantage for any given business concern, the result
is a vested interest. This may then eventually be
capitalised in due form, as a body of intangible as-
sets. As such it goes to augment the business com-
munity’s accumulated wealth. And the country 1s
statistically richer per capita.


100 THE VESTED INTERESTS


A vested interest is a marketable right to get
something for nothing. This does not mean that
the vested interests cost nothing. They may even
come high. Particularly may their cost seem high
if the cost to the community is taken into account, as
well as the expenditure incurred by their owners for
their production and up-keep. Vested interests are
immaterial wealth, intangible assets. As regards
their nature and origin, they are the outgrowth of
three main lines of businesslike management: (a)
Limitation of supply, with a view to profitable sales;
(b) Obstruction of traffic, with a view to profitable
sales; and (c) Meretricious publicity, with a view
to profitable sales. It will be remarked that these
are matters of business, in the strict sense. They
are devices of salesmanship, not of workmanship;
they are ways and means of driving a bargain, not
ways and means of producing goods or services.
The residue which stands over as a product of these
endeavors is in the nature of an intangible asset, an
article of immaterial wealth; not an increase of the
tangible equipment or the material resources in
hand. The enterprising owners of the concern may
be richer by that much, and so perhaps may the bus-
iness community as a whole — though that is a pre-
cariously dubious point — but the community at
large is no better off in any material respect. _

This account, of course, assumes that all this busij-
ness is conducted strictly within the lines of commer-
cial honesty. It would only be tedious and mislead-
ing to follow up and take account of that scattering
recourse to force or fraud that will never wholly be
got rid of in the pursuit of gain, whether by way of


THE VESTED INTERESTS IOI


business traffic or by more direct methods. Still, it
may well be in place to recall that the code of com-
mercial honesty applies only between the parties to
a bargain, and takes no account of the interests of
any third party, except by express injunction of the
law; still less does it imply any degree of regard for
the common good. Commercial honesty, of course,
is the honesty of self-help, or caveat emptor, which
js Latin for the same thing.

In the ordinary course of management some con-
siderable amount of means and effort is spent in the
pursuit of profitable sales and in creating or acquir-
ing an advantage in their further pursuit. The en-
during result, if any, is a body of intangible assets
in the nature of what is called good-will. The or-
dinary expenditure incurred for this purpose is so
considerable, in fact, that the “‘ selling cost ” will not
infrequently be far and away the larger part of those
costs that are to be covered by the price of adver-
tised goods or advertised trafic. This necessary
consumption of work and means with a view to in-
crease sales and to create a prospective increase of
profits is to be counted as net waste, of course; in
the sense that it contributes nothing to the total out-
put of serviceable goods, present or prospective.
The net aggregate result is to lay equipment idle,
hinder traffic, and induce credulous persons now and
again to change their mind about what things they
will buy.

Roughly, any business concern which so comes in
for an habitual run of free income comes to have a
vested right in this ‘‘ income stream,” and this pre-
ferred standing of the concern in this respect 1s


102 THE VESTED INTERESTS


recognised by calling such a concern a “vested
interest,” or a ‘‘ special interest.” Free income of
this kind, not otherwise accounted for, may be cap-
italised if it promises to continue, and it can then be
entered on the books as an item of immaterial
wealth, a prospective source of gain. So long as it
has not been embodied in a marketable legal instru-
ment, any such item of intangible assets will be noth-
ing more than a method of notation, a book-keeper’s
expedient. But it can readily be covered with some
form of corporation security, as, e. g., preferred
stock or bonds, and it then becomes an asset in due
standing and a vested interest endowed with legal
tenure.

Ordinarily any reasonably uniform and permanent
run of free income of this kind will be covered by
an issue of corporate securities with a fixed rate of
interest or dividends; whereupon the free income in
question becomes a fixed overhead charge on the
concern’s business, to be carried as an item of or-
dinary and unavoidable outlay and included in the
necessary cost of production of the concern’s output
of goods or services. But whether it is covered by
an issue of vendible securities or carried in a less
formal manner as a source of income not otherwise
accounted for, such a vested right to get something
for nothing will rightly be valued and defended
against infraction from outside as a proprietary
right, an item of immaterial but very substantial
wealth.

There is nothing illegitimate or doubtful about
this incorporation of unearned income into the or-
dinary costs of production on which “ reasonable


THE VESTED INTERESTS 103


profits”’ are computed. ‘‘ The law allows it and
the court awards it.” To indicate how utterly con-
gruous it all is with the new order of business enter-
prise it may be called to mind that not only do the
captains of corporation finance habitually handle the
matter in that way, but the same view is accepted by
those public authorities who are called in to review
and regulate the traffic of the business concerns gov-
erned by these captains of finance. ‘The later find-
ings are apparently unequivocal, to the effect that
when once a run of free income has been capitalised
and docketed as an asset it becomes a legitimate
overhead charge, and it is then justly to be counted
among necessary costs and covered by the price
which consumers should reasonably pay for the con-
cern’s offering of goods or services.

Such a finding has come to be a fairly well settled
matter of course both among the officials and among
the law-abiding investors, so far as regards those
intangible assets that are covered by vendible se-
curities carrying a fixed rate; and the logic of this
finding is doubtless sound according to the principles
of the modern point of view, which were put into
stable form before the coming of corporation
finance. There may still be a doubt or a question
whether valuable perquisites of the same nature,
which continue to be held loosely as an informal
vested interest, as, e. g., merchantable good-will, are
similarly entitled to the benefit of the common law
which secures any owner in the usufruct of his prop-
erty. To such effect have commonly been the find-
ings of courts and boards of inquiry, of Public
Utility Commissions, of such bodies as the Inter-


104 THE VESTED INTERESTS


state Commerce Commission, the Federal Trade
Commission, and latterly of divers recently installed
agencies for the control of prices and output in be-
half of the public interest; so, for instance, right
lately, certain decisions and recommendations of the
War Labor Board.

Any person with a taste for curiosities of human
behavior might well pursue this question of capital-
ised free income into its further convolutions, and
might find reasonable entertainment in so doing.
The topic also has merits as a subject for economic
theory. But for the present argument it may suf-
fice to note that this free income and the businesslike
contrivances by which it is made secure and legiti-
mate are of the essence of this new order of business
enterprise; that the abiding incentive to such enter-
prise lies in this unearned income; and that the in-
tangible assets which are framed to cover this line
of “earnings,” therefore, constitute the substantial
core of corporate capital under the new order. In
passing, it may also be noted that there is room for a
division of sentiment as regards this disposal of the
community’s net production, and that peremptory
questions of class interest and public policy touch-
ing these matters may presently be due to come to
a hearing.


To some, this manner of presenting the case may
seem unfamiliar, and it may therefore be to the pur-
pose to restate the upshot of this account in the
briefest fashion: Capital — at least under the new
order of business enterprise — is capitalised pros-
pective gain. From this arises one of the singu-


THE VESTED INTERESTS 105


larities of the current situation in business and its
control of industry; viz., that the total face value, or
even the total market value of the vendible securities
which cover any given block of industrial equipment
and material resources, and which give title to its
ownership, always and greatly exceeds the total mar-
ket value of the equipment and resources to which
the securities give title of ownership, and to which
alone in the last resort they do give title. “The mar-
gin by which the capitalised value of the going con-
cern exceeds the value of its material properties is
commonly quite wide. Only in the case of small and
feeble corporations, or such concerns as are balanc-
ing along the edge of bankruptcy, does this margin of
intangible values narrow down and tend to disap-
pear. Any industrial business concern which does
not enjoy such a margin of capitalised free earning-
capacity has fallen short of ordinary business suc-
cess and is possessed of no vested interest.

This margin of free income which is capitalised in
the value of the going concern comes out of the net
product of industry over cost. It is secured by suc-
cessful bargaining and an advantageous position in
the market; which involves some derangement and
retardation of the industrial system,— so much so
as greatly to reduce the net margin of production
over cost. Approximately the whole of this remain-
ing margin of free income goes to the business men
in charge, or to the business concerns for whom this
management is carried on. In case the free income
which is gained in this way promises to continue, it
presently becomes a vested right. It may then be
formally capitalised as an immaterial asset having a


106 THE VESTED INTERESTS


recognised earning-capacity equal to this prospective
free income. That is to say, the outcome is a cap-
italised claim to get something for nothing; which
constitutes a vested interest. The total gains which
hereby accrue to the owners of these vested rights
amount to something less than the total loss suffered
by the community at large through that delay of
production and derangement of industry that is in-
volved in the due exercise of these rights. In other
words, and as seen from the other side, this free in-
come which the community allows its kept classes in
the way of returns on these vested rights and in-
tangible assets is the price which the community is
paying to the owners of this imponderable wealth
for material damage greatly exceeding that amount.
But it should be kept in mind and should be duly
credited to the good intentions of these businesslike
managers, that the ulterior object sought by all this
management is not the 100 per cent of mischief to
the community but only the ro per cent of private
gain for themselves and their clients.


So far as they bear immediately on the argument
at this point the main facts are substantially as set
forth. But to avoid any appearance of undue nov-
elty, as well as to avoid the appearance of neglect-
ing relevant facts, something more is to be said in
the same connection. It is particularly to be noted
that credit for certain material benefits should be
given to this same business enterprise whose chief
aim and effect is the creation of these vested rights
to unearned income. It will be apparent to anyone
who is at all familiar with the situation, that much


THE VESTED INTERESTS 107


of the intangible assets included in the corporate cap-
ital of this country, e.g., does not represent de-
rangement which is actually inflicted on the indus-
trial system from day to day, but rather the price of
delivery from derangement which the businesslike
managers of industry have taken measures to dis-
continue and disallow.

A concrete illustration will show what is intended.
For some time past, and very noticeably during the
past quarter-century, the ownership of the large in-
dustrial concerns has constantly been drawing to-
gether into larger and larger aggregations, with a
more centralised control. The case of the steel in-
dustry is typical. For a considerable period, be-
ginning in the early nineties, there went on a process
of combination and recombination of corporations
in this industry, resulting in larger and larger ag-
gregations of corporate ownership. Commonly,
though perhaps not invariably, some of the unprofit-
able duplication and work at cross purposes that was
necessarily involved in the earlier parcelment of
ownership was got rid of in this way, gradually with
each successive move in this concentration of own-
ership and control. Perhaps also invariably there
was a substantial saving made in the aggregate vol-
ume of business dealings that would necessarily be
involved in carrying on the industry. Under the
management of many concerns each intent on its
own pecuniary interest, the details of business trans-
actions would be voluminous and intricate, in the
way of contracts, orders, running accounts, working
arrangements, as well as the necessary financial op-
erations, properly so called. Much of this would


108 THE VESTED INTERESTS


be obviated by taking over the ownership of these
concerns into the hands of a centralised control; and
there would be a consequent lessening of that delay
and uncertainty that always is to be counted on
wherever the industrial operations have to wait on
the completion of various business arrangements, as
they habitually do. There is circumstantial evi-
dence that very material gains in economy and ex-
pedition commonly resulted from these successive
moves of consolidation in the steel business. And
this discontinuance of businesslike delay and calcu-
lated maladjustment was at each successive move
brought to a secure footing and capitalised in an in-
creased issue of negotiable corporation securities.

It will also be recalled that, as a matter of routine,
each successive consolidation of ownership involved
a recapitalization of the concerns so brought together
under a common head, and that commonly if not in-
variably the resulting recapitalisation would be
larger than the aggregate earlier capital of the un-
derlying corporations. Even where, as sometimes
has happened, there was no increase made jn the
nominal capitalisation, there would still result an
effectual increase; in that the market value of the
securities outstanding would be larger after the op-
eration than the value of the aggregate capital of the
underlying corporations had been before. There
has commonly been some gain in aggregate capital-
isation, and the resulting increased capitalisation has
also commonly proved to be valid. The market
value of the larger and more stable capitalisation
has presently proved to be larger and more stable
than the capitalisation of the same properties under


THE VESTED INTERESTS 109


the earlier régime of divided ownership and control.
What has so been added to the aggregate capitalisa-
tion has in the main been the relative absence of
work at cross purposes, which has resulted from the
consolidation of ownership; and it is to be accounted
a typical instance of intangible assets. The new and
larger capitalisation has commonly made good; and
this is particularly true for those later, larger and
more conclusive recombinations of corporate owner-
ship with which the so-called era of trust-making in
the steel business came to a provisional conclusion.
The U. S. Steel Corporation has vindicated the wis-
dom of an unreserved advance on lines of consolida-
tion and recapitalisation in the financing of the large
and technical industries.

For reasons well understood by those who are ac-
quainted with these things, no one can offer a
confident estimate, or even a particularly intelligent
opinion, as to the aggregate amount of overhead
burden and intangible assets which has been written
into the corporate capital of the steel business in
the course of a few years of consolidation. For
reasons of depreciation, disuse, replacement, exten-
sion, renewal, changes in market conditions and.in
technical requirements, the case is too intricate to
admit anything like a clear-cut identification of the
immaterial items included in the capitalisation. But
there is no chance to doubt that in the aggregate
these immaterial items foot up to a very formidable
proportion of the total capital.

And what is true for the steel business in this re-
spect will doubtless apply even more unreservedly in
transportation, or in such a case as the oil business.


I1O THE VESTED INTERESTS


The latter may be taken as a typical case, differing
from steel in some of the circumstances which condi-
tion its business organisation, but comparable with
steel in respect of the necessity for a centralised con-
trol. In the oil business a rough classification of
assets would take some such shape as this: (a)
Monopolisation of natural resources, (b) Control
of markets by limitation of the supply, (c) Plant.
Of these three, the last named, the material equip-
ment, would unquestionably be found to be altogether
the slightest and least valuable. What is not doubt-
ful, in the steel business or in any of the other in-
dustrial enterprises that run on a similar scale and
a similar level of technology, is that the owners of
the corporate capital have come in for a very sub-
stantial body of intangible assets of this kind, and
that these assets of capitalised free income will foot
up to several times the total value of the material
assets which underlie them.

It is evident that the businesslike management of
industry under these conditions need not involve de-
rangement and cross purposes at every turn. It
should always be likely that the business men in
charge will find it to their profit to combine forces,
eliminate wasteful traffic, allow a reasonably free
and economical working of the country’s productive
powers within the limits of a profitable price, and so
come in for a larger total of free income to be di-
vided amicably among themselves on a concerted
plan. This can be done by means of a combination
of ownership, such as the corporations of the pres-
ent time. But there is a difficulty of principle in-
volved in this use of incorporation as a method of


THE VESTED INTERESTS III


combining forces. Such a consolidation of owner-
ship and control on a large scale appears to be, in
effect, a combination of forces against the rest of the
community or in contravention of the principles of
free competition. In effect it foots up to the same
thing as a combination in restraint of trade; in form
it is a concentration of ownership. Combination of
owners in restraint of trade is obnoxious to the lib-
eral principles of free bargaining and self-help;
consolidation of ownership by purchase or incorpora-
tion appears to be a reasonable exercise of the right
of free bargaining and self-help. There is accord-
ingly some chance of a difference of opinion at this
point and some risk of playing fast and loose with
these liberal principles that disallow conspiracy in
restraint of trade. This difficulty of principle has
been sought to be got over by believing that a com-
bination of ownership in restraint of trade does not
amount to a conspiracy in restraint of trade, within
the purport of these liberal principles. There is a
great and pressing need of such a construction of
these principles, which would greatly facilitate the
work of corporation finance; but it is to be admitted
that some slight cloud still rests on this manner of
disposing of ownership. It involves abdication or
delegation of that discretionary exercise of property
rights which has been held to be of the essence of
ownership.

The new state of things brought about by such a
consolidation is capitalised as a permanent source
of free income. And if it proves to be a sound busi-
ness proposition the new capitalisation will measure
the increase of income which goes to its promoter or


112 THE VESTED INTERESTS


to the corporation in whose name the move has been
made; and if the work is well and neatly done, no
one else will get any gain from it or be in any way
benefited by the arrangement. It is a_ business
proposition, not a fanciful project of public utility.
The capitalised value of such a coalition of owner-
ship is not measured by any heightened production
or any retrenchment of waste that may come in its
train, nor need the new move bring any saving or
any addition to the community’s net productive re-
sources in any respect. Indeed, it happens not in-
frequently that such a waste-conserving coalition of
ownership leads directly to a restriction of output,
according to the familiar run of monopoly rule. So
frequently will restriction, enhanced prices, unem-
ployment, and hardship follow in such a case, that it
has come to be an article of popular knowledge and
belief that this is the logical aim and outcome of
any successful manoeuvre of the kind.

So also, though its output of marketable goods or
services may be got on easier terms, the new and
larger business concern which results from the co-
alition need be no more open-handed or humane in
its dealings with its workmen. There will, in Face,
be some provocation to the contrary. A more pow-
erful corporation is in a position to make its own
terms with greater freedom, which it then is for the
workmen to take or leave, but ordinarily to take; for
the universal rule of businesslike management — to
charge what the traffic will bear — continues to hold
unbroken for any business concern, irrespective of
its size or its facilities. As has already been noted
in an earlier passage, charging what the traffic will


THE “VESTED INTERESTS 113


bear is the same as charging what will yield the
largest net profit.


There stand over two main questions touching the
nature and uses of these vested interests: — Why
do not these powerful business concerns exercise
their autocratic powers to drive the industrial system
at its full productive capacity, seeing that they are
in a position to claim any increase of net production
over cost? and, What use is made of the free income
which goes to them as the perquisite of their
vested interest? The answer to the former ques-
tion is to be found in the fact that the great busi-
ness concerns as well as the smaller ones are all
bound by the limitations of the price system, which
holds them to the pursuit of a profitable price, not
to the pursuit of gain in terms of material goods.
Their vested rights are for the most part carried as
an overhead charge in terms of price and have to be
met in those terms, which will not allow an increase
of net production regardless of price. The latter
question will find its answer in the well-known
formula of the economists, that ‘“‘ human wants are
indefinitely extensible,” particularly as regards the
consumption of superfluities. The free income
which is capitalised in the intangible assets of the
vested interests goes to support the well-to-do in-
yestors, who are for this reason called the kept
classes, and whose keep consists in an indefinitely
extensible consumption of superfluities.


VI


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS


THIs sinister fact is patent, that the great war has
arisen out of a fateful entanglement of national pre-
tensions. And it is a fact scarcely less patent that
this fateful status quo ante arose out of the ordinary
run of that system of law and custom which has
governed human intercourse among civilised nations
in our time. The underlying principles of this sys-
tem of law and custom have continued to govern hu-
man intercourse under a new order of material cir-
cumstances which has come into effect since these prin-
ciples were first installed. These enlightened prin-
ciples that go to make up the modern point of view
as regards law and morals are of the eighteenth
century, whereas the new order in industry is of the
twentieth, and between these two dates lies an in-
terval of unexampled change in the material condi-
tions of life.

To all this it will be said, of course, that warfare
is not a new invention, and that the national ambi-
tions and animosities out of which wars have always
arisen are of older date than the modern point of
view and the machine industry; but it will also not
be denied that the great war which is now coming to
a provisional close is the largest and most atrocious
epoch of warfare known to history, and that it has,
in point of fact, arisen out of this status quo which

114


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 115


has been created by these enlightened principles of
the modern point of view in working out their con-
sequences on the ground of the new order of in-
dustry.


The great war arose within that group of nations
which have the full use of the industrial arts, which
conduct their business and control their industries
on the lines of these enlightened principles of the
eighteenth century, and whose national ambitions
and policies are guided by the preconceptions of
national self-determination and self-assertion which
these modern civilised peoples have habitually found
to be good and valid. The group of belligerents
has included primarily the great industrial nations,
and the outcome of the war is being decided by the
industrial superiority of the advanced industrial peo-
ples. A host of slightly backward peoples — back-
ward in the industrial respect — have been drawn
into this contest of the great powers, but these have
taken part only as interested outliers and as auxil-
iaries to be drawn on at the discretion of the chief
belligerents. It has been a contest of technological
superiority and industrial resources, and in the end
the decision of it rests with the greater aggregation
of industrial forces. Frightfulness and warlike
abandon and all the beastly devices of the heathen
have proved to be unavailing against the great in-
dustrial powers; partly because these things do not
enduringly serve the technological needs of the con-
test, partly because they have run counter to that
massive drift of sentiment which animates the great
industrial peoples.


116 THE VESTED INTERESTS


The center of the warlike disturbance has been
the same as the center of growth and diffusion of the
new order of industry. And in both respects, both
as regards participation in the war and as regards
their share in the new order of industry, it is not a
question of geographical nearness to a geographical
center, but of industrial affiliation and technological
maturity. The center of disturbance and participa-
tion is a center in the technological respect; and in
the end the battle goes to those few great industrial
peoples who are nearest, technologically speaking,
to the apex of growth of the new order. These
need be superior in no other respect; the contest is
decided on the merits of the industrial arts. And
in this connection it may be in place to call to mind
again that the state of the industrial arts is always
a joint stock of knowledge and proficiency held, ex-
ercised, augmented and carried forward by the in-
dustrial community at large as a going concern.
What the war has vindicated, hitherto, is the great
eficiency of the mechanical industry.

But the ambitions and animosities which precipi-
tated this contest, and which now stand ready to
bring on a renewal of it in due time, are not of the
industrial order, and eminently not of the new order
of technology. They have been more nearly bound
up with those principles of self-help that have stood
over from the recent past, from the time before the
new order of industry came into bearing.. And there
is a curious parallel between the consequences worked
out by these principles in the economic system within
each of these nations, on the one hand, and in the
concert of nations, on the other hand. Within the


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 117


nation the enlightened principles of self-help and
free contract have given rise to vested interests
which control the industrial system for their own
use and thereby come in for a legal right to the
community’s net output of product over cost. Each
of these vested interests habitually aims to take over
as much as it can of the lucrative traffic that goes on
and to get as much as it can out of the traffic, at the
cost of the rest of the community. After the same
analogy, and by sanction of the same liberal prin-
ciples, the civilised nations, each and several, are
vested with an inalienable right of ‘“ self-determina-
tion”; which being interpreted means the self-ag-
grandisement of each and several at the cost of the
rest, by a reasonable use of force and fraud. And
there has been, on the whole, no sense of shame or
of moral obliquity attaching to the use of so much
force and fraud as the traffic would bear, in this
national enterprise of self-aggrandisement. Such
has been use and wont among the civilised nations.

Meantime the new order of industry has come into
bearing, with the result that any disturbance which
is set afoot by any one of these self-determining na-
tions in pursuing its own ends is sure to derange
the conditions of life for all the others, just so far as
these others are bound up in the same comprehen-
sive organization of trade and industry. Full and
free self-determination runs counter to the rule of
Live and let live. After the same fashion the busi-
nesslike manoeuvres of the vested interests within
the nations, each managing its own affairs with an
eye single to its own advantage, deranges the or-
dinary conditions of life for the common man, and


118 THE VESTED INTERESTS


violates the rule of Live and let live by that much.
Self-determination, full and free, necessarily en-
croaches on the conditions of life for all the others.

So, just now there is talk of disallowing or abridg-
ing the inalienable right of free nations by so much
as is imperatively demanded for reasonably secure
conditions of life among these civilised peoples, and
especially so far as is required for the orderly pur-
suit of profitable business by the many vested inter-
ests domiciled in these civilised countries. The pro-
ject has much in common with the measures which
have been entertained for the restraint of any in- |
sufferably extortionate vested interests within the
national frontiers.

In both cases alike, both in the proposed regula-
tion of businesslike excesses at home and in the pro-
posed league of pacific nations, the projected meas-
ures of sobriety and tolerance appear to be an infrac-
tion of that inalienable right of self-direction that
makes up the substantial core of law and custom ac-
cording to the modern point of view. ‘There is
much alarm felt by the demagogues at the danger
which is said to threaten the national “ sover-
eignty ’’; just as the vested interests are volubly ap-
prehensive of the “sacred rights of property.”
And in both cases alike the projected measure of
sobriety, tolerance and incidental infraction are de-
signed to go no farther than is unequivocally de-
manded by the imperative needs of continued life on
earth; leaving the benefit of the doubt always on the
side of the insufferable vested interests or the mis-
chievous national ambitions, as the case may be;
and leaving the impression that it all is a concessive


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 119


surrender of principles under compulsion of circum-
stances that will not wait. There is also in both
cases alike a well-assured likelihood that the tenta-
tive revision of vested interests and of national pre-
tensions is to be no more than an incompetent re-
medial precaution, a makeshift shelter from the
wrath to come.

It is evident that in both cases alike we have to
do with an incursion of ideas and considerations that
are alien to the established liberal principles of hu-
man intercourse; but it is also evident that these
ideas and considerations have the sanction of that
new order of things that runs in terms of tangible
performance and enforces its requisitions with cruel
and unusual punishments. It is these punishments
that are to be evaded or suspended, and immunity is
sought by diplomatic measures of formality and de-
lay rather than by tangible performance. In such a
case the keepers of the established order will always
look to evasion and entertain a hope of avoiding
casualties and holding the line by the use of a clev-
erly designed masquerade.

It is the express purpose of the projected league of
pacific nations to keep the sovereign rights of na-
tional self-determination intact for all comers; it is
to be a league of nations, not a league of peoples.
But it should be sufficiently obvious, whether it is
avowed or not, that these sovereign rights can be
maintained by these means only in a mutilated form.
Within the framework of any such league or com-
mon understanding the nations, each and several,
can continue to exercise these rights only on the
basis of a mutual agreement to give up so much of


120 THE VESTED INTERESTS


their national pretensions as are patently income
patible with the common good.. It involves a con-
cessive surrender of the sovereign right of self-ag-
grasidisement, and perhaps also an extension of the
rule of Live and let live to cover minor nationalities
within the national frontiers; a mutual agreement to
piay fair under the new rules that are to govern the
conduct of national enterprise. Any injunction to
play fair is an infraction of national sovereignty.
Hitherto no liberal statesman has been so audacious
as to ‘imagine the king’s death” and lay profane
hands on the divine right of nations to seek their
own advantage at the cost of the rest by such means
as the rule of reason shall decide to be permissible.
It is only that licence is to be hedged about, and all
insufferable superfluity of naughtiness is provision-
ally to be disallowed. .
There is this evident resemblance and kinship be-
tween the vested interests of business and the soy-
ereign rights of nations, but it does not amount to
identity. There is always something more to the
national sovereignty and the national pretensions;
although these precautionary measures that are now
under advisement as touches the legitimate bounds
of both do run on singularly similar lines and are of
a similarly tentative and equivocal nature. In the
prudent measures by which statesmen have set them-
selves to curb the excesses of the greater vested in-
terests within the nation their aim has quite con-
sistently been to guard the free income of the lesser
vested interests against the unseasonable rapacity of
the greater ones; all the while that the underlying
community has come into the case only as a fair field


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 121


of business enterprise at large, within which there
is to be maintained a reasonable degree of equal op-
portunity among these interests, big and little, in
whom, one with another, vests the effectual usufruct
of the underlying community.

It may be necessary to remark, by way of paren-
thesis, that while this description of these corrective
measures may seem to hint at a fault, that is by no
means its purpose. The fault may be there, of
course, but if so it has no bearing on the argument
at this point. It should also be remarked in the
same connection that this description of facts does
not overlook the well-conceived verbal reservations
and preambles with which cautious statesmen habitu-
ally surround the common good in the face of any
unseasonable rapacity on the part of the greater
vested interests; it is only that the run of the facts
has been quite patently to the effect so indicated. In
the same connection it may also not be out of place
to recall that a vested interest is a prescriptive right
to get something for nothing; in which again the
kinship and resemblance between vested interests in
business and the sovereign rights of nations comes
into view.

So, on the other hand, the great war has brought
into a strong light the obvious fact that, given the
existing state of the industrial arts, any unseasonable
rapacity on the part of the great Powers in exer-
cising their inalienable right of national self-deter-
mination will effectually suppress the similarly in-
alienable right of self-determination in any minor
nationality that gets in the way. All of which is
obnoxious to the liberal principle of self-help or to


122 THE VESTED INTERESTS


that of equal opportunity. Unhappily, these two
guiding principles of the modern point of view —
self-help and equal opportunity — have proved to
be incompatible with one another under the circum-
stances of the new order of things. So there has
come into view this project of a league, by which it
is proposed to play fast and loose with the inalien-
able right of national self-help by setting up some
sort of a collusive arrangement between the Powers,
a conspiracy in restraint of national intrigue, look-
ing to a reasonable disallowance of force and fraud
in the pursuit of national ambitions.

Under the material circumstances of the new or-
der those correctives that were once counted on to
keep the run of things within the margin of toler-
ance have ceased to be a sufficient safeguard. By
use and wont, in the Liberal scheme of statecraft as
well as in the scheme of freely competitive business,
implicit faith has hitherto been given to the re-
medial effect of punitive competition and the punitive
correction of excesses by law and custom. It has
been a system of adjustment by punitive after-
thought. All of which may once have been well
enough in its time, so long as the rate and scale of
the movement of things were slow enough and small
enough to be effectually overtaken and set to rights
by afterthought. The modern — eighteenth-century
— point of view presumes an order of things which
is amenable to remedial adjustment after the event.
But the new order of industry, and that sweeping
equilibrium of material forces that embodies the new
order, is not amenable to afterthought. Where hu-
man life and human fortunes are exposed to the


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 123


swing of the machine system, or to the onset of na-
tional ambitions that are served by the machine in-
dustry, it is safety first or none. However, ripe
statesmen and over-ripe captains of finance have so
secure a grasp of first principles that they are still
able to believe quite sincerely in the good old plan
of remedial afterthought, and it still commands the
affectionate service of the jurists and the diplomatic
corps. Meantime the far-reaching, swift-moving,
wide-sweeping machine technology has been drawn
into the service of national pretensions, as well as of
the vested interests that find shelter under the na-
tional pretensions, and both the remedial diplomats
and the self-determination of nations are on the way
to become a tale that was told.


The divine right of nations appears to be a
blurred after-image of the divine rights of kings.
It rests on ground more archaic and less open to
scrutiny than the Natural Right of self-direction as
it applies in the case of individual persons. It is a
highly prized national asset, in the nature of an im-
ponderable; and, very much as is true of the divine
right of kings, any spoken doubt of its paramount
validity comes near being a sin against the Holy
Ghost. It can not safely be scrutinised or defined in
matter-of-fact words. As is true of the divine right
of kings, so also as regards the divine right of na-
tions, it is extremely difficult to show that it serves
the common good in any material way, in any way
that can be formulated or verified in terms of tan-
gible performance. Evidently it does not come in
under that mechanistic conception that rules the


124 THE VESTED INTERESTS


scheme of knowledge and belief wherever and so
far as material science and the machine technology
have reshaped men’s habits of thought. Indeed, it
is not a technological conception, late or early. It
is not statable in terms of mechanical efficiency, or
even in terms of price. Hence it is spoken of, often
and eloquently, as being “ beyond price.” It is more
nearly akin to magic and religion. It should per-
haps best be conceived as an end in itself, or a thing-
in-itself — again in close analogy with the divine
right of kings. But there is no question of its sub-
stantial reality and its paramount efficacy for good
and ill.

The divine — that is to say inscrutable and irre-
sponsible — right of kings reached its best estate
and put on divinity in the stirring times of the Era
of State-making; when the princes and prelates “‘ tore
each other in the slime.” It was of a proprietary
nature, a vested interest, something in the nature of
intangible assets which embodied the usufruct of the
realm, including its population and resources, and
which could be turned to account in the pursuit of
princely or dynastic advantages at home and abroad.
This divine right of princes was disallowed among
the more civilised peoples on the transition to mod-
ern ways of thinking, and the sovereign rights of the
prince were then taken over — at least in form and
principle — by the people at large, and they have
continued to be held by them as some sort of im-
ponderable ‘‘ community property,”’— at least in
point of form and profession. The vested interest
of the prince or the dynasty in the usufruct of the
underlying community is thereby presumed to have


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 125


become a collective interest vested in the people
of the nations and giving them a “right of user”?
in their own persons, knowledge, skill and resources.

The mantle of princely sovereignty has fallen on
the common man — formally and according to the
letter of the legal instruments. In practical effect,
as “‘ democratic sovereignty ” it has been converted
into a cloak to cover the nakedness of a government
which does business for the kept classes. In prac-
tical effect, the shift from the dynastic politics of the
_era of state-making to the Liberal policies based on
the enlightened principles of the eighteenth century
has been a shift from the pursuit of princely domin-
ion to an imperialistic enterprise for the protection
and furtherance of those vested interests that are
domiciled within the national frontiers. That such
has been the practical outcome is due to the fact that
these enlightened principles of the eighteenth cen-
tury comprise as their chief article the “‘ natural”
right of ownership. The later course of events has
decided that the ownership of property in sufficiently
large blocks will control the country’s industrial sys-
tem and thereby take over the disposal of the com-
munity’s net output of product over cost; on which
the vested interests live and on which, therefore, the
kept classes feed. Hence the chief concern of those
gentlemanly national governments that have dis-
placed the dynastic states is always and consistently
the maintenance of the rights of ownership and in-
vestment.

However, these pecuniary interests of investment
and free income are not all that is covered by the
mantle of democratic sovereignty. Nor will it hold


126 THE VESTED INTERESTS


true that the common man has no share in the legacy
of sovereignty and national enterprise which the en-
lightened democratic commonwealth has taken over
from the departed dynastic régime. The divine
right of the prince included certain imponderables, as
well as the usufruct of the material resources of the
realm. ‘There were the princely dignity and honor,
which were no less substantial an object of value and
ambition and were no less tenaciously held by the
princes of the dynastic régime than the revenues and
material ‘“‘sinews of war” on which the prestige
and honor rested. And the common man of the
democratic commonwealth has at least come in for
a ratable share in these imponderables of prestige
and honor that so are comprised under the divine
right of the nation. He has an undivided interest
in the glamour of national achievement, and he can
swell with just pride in contemplating the triumphs
of his gentlemanly government over the vested in-
terests domiciled in any foreign land, or with just
indignation at any diplomatic setback suffered by the
vested interests domiciled in his own.

There is also a more tangible, though more petty,
advantage gained for the common man in having
formally taken over the sovereignty from the dead
hand of the dynastic prince. The common man be-
ing now vested with the divine right of national soy-
ereignty, held in undivided community ownership, it
is ceremonially necessary for the gentlemanly stew-
ards of the kept classes to consult the wishes of this
their sovereign on any matters of policy that can not
wholly be carried through in a diplomatic corner
and under cover of night and cloud. He, collect-


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 127


ively, holds an eventual power of veto. And this
power of veto has in practice been found to be some-
thing of a safeguard against any universal and en-
during increase of hardship at the hands of the gen-
tlemen-investors to whom the conduct of the nation’s
affairs has been “‘entrusted;’’ a very modest safe-
guard, it is true, but always of some eventual con-
sequence. There is the difference that in the demo-
cratic commonwealth the common man has to be
managed rather than driven,— except for minor
groups of common men who live on the lower-com-
mon levels, and except for recurrent periods of legis-
lative hysteria and judiciary blind-staggers. And it
is pleasanter to be managed than to be driven.
Chicane is a more humane art than corporal pun-
ishment. Imperial England is, after all, a milder-
mannered stepmother than Imperial Germany.

And always the common man comes in for his rat-
able share in the glamour of national achievement,
in war and peace; and this imponderable gain of the
spirit is also something. The value of these col-
lective imponderables of national prestige and col-
lective honor is not to be made light of. These
count for very much in the drift and set of national
sentiment, and moral issues of national moment are
wont to arise out of them. Indeed, they constitute
the chief incentive which holds the common man to
an unrepining constancy in the service of the “na-
tional interests.” So that, while the tangible shell
of material gain appears to have fallen to the demo-
cratic community’s kept classes, yet the “ psychic
income” that springs from national enterprise, the
spiritual kernel of national elation they share with


128 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the common man on an equitable footing of com-—
munity interest.

The vested rights of the nation are of hel essence
of that order of things which enjoys the unqualified
sanction of the modern point of view. Like any
other vested interest, these rights are conceived in
other terms than those which are native to the new
order of material science and technology. They
are of an older and more spiritual order, so far as
regards the principles of knowledge and belief on
which they rest. But whatever may be their re-
moter pedigree, they have the sanction of that body
of principles that is called the modern point of view,
and they belong in the scheme of things handed on
by the Liberal movement of the eighteenth and nine-
teenth century. Apart from the imponderable val-
ues which fall under the head of national prestige,
these vested rights of the nation can be defined as
an extension to the commonwealth of the same
natural rights of self-direction and personal security
— free contract and self-help — that are secured to
the individual citizen under the common law.

Yet, while the national policies of the democratic
commonwealths are managed by Liberal statesmen
in behalf of the vested interests, they still run on
the ancient lines of dynastic statecraft, as worked
out by the statesmen of the ancient régime; and the
common man is still passably content to see the traf-
fic run along on those lines. The things which are
considered desirable to be done in the way of na-
tional enterprise, as well as the sufficient reasons
for doing them, still have much of the medieval
color. National pretensions, enterprise, rivalry, in-


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 129


trigue and dissensions among the democratic com-
monwealths are still such as would have been in-
telligible to Macchiavelli, Frederick the Great, Met-
ternich, Bismarck, or the Elder Statesmen of Japan.
Diplomatic intercourse still runs in the same terms
of systematised prevarication, and still turns about
the same schedule of national pretensions that con-
tented the medieval spirit of these masters of dynas-
tic intrigue. As a matter of course and of common
sense the nations still conceive themselves to be
rivals, whose national interests are incompatible,
and whose divine right it is to gain something at one
another’s cost, after the fashion of rival bandits or
business concerns. ‘They still seek dominion and
still conceive themselves to have extra-territorial in-
terests of a proprietary sort. They still hold and
still seek vested rights in colonial possessions and in
extra-territorial priorities and concessions of divers
and dubious kinds. There still are conferences,
stipulations and guarantees between the Powers,
touching the ‘‘Open Door” in China, or the equi-
table partition of Africa, which read like a chapter
on Honor among Thieves.

All this run of national pretensions, wrangles, do-
minion, aggrandisement, chicane, and ill-will, is noth-
ing more than the old familiar trading stock of the
diplomatic brokers who do business in dynastic force
and fraud —also called Realpolitik. ‘The demo-
cratic nations have taken over in bulk the whole
job-lot of vested interests and divine rights that
once made the monarch of the old order an unfail-
ing source of outrage and desolation. In the hands
of those ‘“‘ Elder Statesmen” who once did business


130 THE VESTED INTERESTS


under the signature of the dynasty, the traffic in state-
craft yielded nothing better than a mess of superflu-
ous affliction; and there is no reason to apprehend
that a continuation of the same traffic under the man-
agement of the younger statesmen who now do busi-
ness in the name of the democratic commonwealth
is likely to bring anything more comfortable, even
though the legal instruments in the case may carry
the rubber-stamp O. K. of the common man. The
same items will foot up to the same sum; and in
either case the net gain is always something appre-
ciably less than nothing.

These national interests are part of the medieval
system of ends, ways and means, as it stood, complete
and useless, at that juncture when the democratic
commonwealth took over the divine rights of the
crown. It should not be extremely difficult to un-
derstand why they have stood over, or why they
still command the dutiful approval of the common
man. It is a case of aimless survival, on the whole,
due partly to the inertia of habit and tradition, partly
to the solicitous advocacy of these assumed national
interests by those classes — the trading and office-
holding classes —— who stand to gain something by
the pursuit of them at the cost of the rest. By ten-
acious tradition out of the barbarian past these peo-
ples have continued to be rival nations living in a
state of habitual enmity and distrust, for no better
reason than that they have not taken thought and
changed their mind.

After some slackening of national animosities and
some disposition to neglect national pretensions dur-
ing the earlier decades of the great era of Liberal-


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 131


ism, the democratic nations have been gradually
shifting back to a more truculent attitude and a
more crafty and more rapacious management in all
international relations. This aggressive chauvinis-
tic policy has been called Imperialism. The move-
ment has visibly kept pace, more or less closely, with
the increasing range and volume of commerce and
foreign investments during the same period. And
to further this business enterprise there has been an
ever increasing resort to military power. It is rea-
-sonably believed that traders and investors in for-
eign parts are able to derive a larger profit from
their business when they have the backing of a pow-
erful and aggressive national government; particu-
larly in their dealings with helpless and backward
peoples, and more particularly if their own national
government is sufficiently unscrupulous and over-
bearing,— which may confidently be counted on so
long as these governments continue to be adminis-
tered by the gentlemanly delegates of the vested in-
terests and the kept classes.

As regards the intrinsic value which is popularly
attached to the imponderable national possessions,
in the way of honor and prestige, there is little to be
said, beyond the stale reflection that there is no dis-
puting about tastes. It all is at least a profitable
illusion, for the use of those who are in a position
to profit by it. Such as the crown and the office-
holders. But the people of the civilised nations be-
lieve themselves to have also a material interest of
some sort in enlarging the national dominions and
in extending the foreign trade of their business men
and safeguarding the foreign claims of their vested


132 THE VESTED INTERESTS


interests. And the Americans, like many others,
harbor the singular delusion that they can derive a
collective benefit from obstructing the country’s
trade at the national frontiers by means of a tariff
barrier, and so defeating their own industry by that
much. It is a survival out of the barbarian past, out
of the time when the dynastic politicians were oc-
cupied with isolating the nation and making it self-
sufficient, as an engine of warlike enterprise for the
pursuit of dynastic ambitions and the greater dis-
comfort of their neighbors. In an increasing degree
as the new order of industry has come into bearing,
any such policy of industrial isolation and self-suf-
ficiency has become more dificult and more injuri-
ous; for a free range and unhindered specialisation
is of the essence of the new industrial order.

The experience of the war has shown conclu-
sively that no one country can hereafter supply its
own needs either in raw materials or in finished
goods. Both the winning and the losing side have
shown that. The new industrial order necessarily
overlaps the national frontiers, even in the case of
a nation possessed of so extensive and varied natural
resources as America. So that in spite of all the
singularly ingenious obstruction of the American
tariff the Americans still continue to draw on for-
eign sources for most or all of their tea, coffee,
sugar, tropical and semi-tropical fruits, vegetable
oils, vegetable gums and pigments, cordage fibers,
silks, rubber, and a bewildering multitude of minor
articles of daily use. Even so peculiarly American
an industry as chewing-gum is wholly dependent on
foreign raw material, and quite unavoidably so.


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 133


The most that can be accomplished by any tariff un-
der these circumstances is more or less obstruction.
Isolation and self-sufficiency are already far out of
the question.

. But there are certain vested interests which find
their profit in maintaining a tariff barrier as a means
of keeping the price up and keeping the supply down;
and the common man still faithfully believes that
the profits which these vested interests derive in this
way from increasing the cost of his livelihood and
decreasing the net productivity of his industry will
benefit him in some mysterious way. He is per-
suaded that high prices and a scant supply of goods
at a high labor cost is a desirable state of things.
This is incredible, but there is no denying the fact.
He knows, of course, that the profits of business
go to the business men, the vested interests, and to
no one else; but he is still beset with the picturesque
hallucination that any unearned income which goes
to those vested interests whose. central office is in
New Jersey is paid to himself in some underhand
way, while the gains of those vested interests that
are domiciled in Canada are obviously a grievous
net loss to him. The tariff moves in a mysterious
way, its wonders to perform.

To all adult persons of sound mind, and not un-
duly clouded with the superstitions of the price sys-
tem, it is an obvious matter of fact that any pro-
tective tariff is an obstruction to industry and a
means of impoverishment, just so far as it is ef-
fective. The arguments to the contrary invariably
turn out to be pettifogger’s special pleading for some
vested interest or for a warlike national policy, and


134 THE VESTED INTERESTS


these arguments convince only those persons who
are able to believe that a part is greater than the
whole. It also lies in the nature of protective
tariffs that they always cost the nation dispropor-
tionately much more than they are worth to those
vested interests which profit by them. In this re-
spect they are like any other method of businesslike
sabotage. ‘Their aim, and presumably their effect,
is to keep the price up by keeping the supply down,
to hinder competitors and retard production. As
in other instances of businesslike sabotage, there-
fore, the net margin of advantage to those who profit
by it is greatly less than what it costs the community.

Yet it is to be noted that the Americans have
prospered, on the whole, under protective tariffs
which have been as ingeniously and comprehensively
foolish as could well be contrived. There is even
some color of reason in the contentions of the pro-
tectionists that the more reasonable tariffs have com-
monly been more depressing to industry than the
most imbecile of them. All of which should be
disquieting to the advocates of free trade. The
defect of the free-trade argument, and the disappoint-
ment of free-trade policies, lies in overlooking the
fact that in the absence of an obstructive tariff sub-
stantially the same amount of obstruction has to be
accomplished by other means, if business is to pros-
per. And business prosperity is the only manner
of prosperity known or provided for among the
civilised nations. It is the only manner of pros-
perity on which the divine right of the nation gives
it a claim. A protective tariff is only an alterna-
tive method of businesslike sabotage. If and so


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 135


far as this method of keeping the supply of goods
within salutary bounds is not resorted to, other
means of accomplishing the same result must be em-
ployed. For so long as investment continues to
control industry the welfare of the community is
bound up with the prosperity of its business; and
business can not be carried on without reasonably
profitable prices; and reasonably profitable prices
can not be maintained without a salutary limitation
of the supply; which means slowing down production
to such a rate and volume as the traffic will bear.

A protective tariff is only one means of crippling
the country’s industrial forces, for the good of busi-
ness. In its absence all that matter will be taken
care of by other means. The tariff may perhaps
be a little the most flagrant method of sabotage by
which the vested interests are enabled to do a rea-
sonably profitable business; but there is nothing
more than a difference of degree, and not a large
difference at that. So long as industry is managed
with a view to a profitable price it is quite indis-
pensable to guard against an excessive rate and vol-
ume of output. In the absence of all businesslike
sabotage the productive capacity of the industrial
system would very shortly pass all reasonable
bounds, prices would decline disastrously and over-
head charges would not be covered, fixed charges on
corporation securities and other credit instruments
could not be met, and the whole structure of busi-
ness enterprise would collapse, as it occasionally has
done in times of “ over-production.”” There is no
doing business without a fair price, since the net
price over cost is the motive of business. A pro-


136 THE VESTED INTERESTS


tective tariff is, in effect, an auxiliary safeguard
against overproduction. Incidentally the fact that
its imposition does not result in insufferable hard-
ship serves also to show that the new order of in-
dustry is highly productive, quite inordinately pro-
ductive in fact. And it is a divine right of the
nation to use its discretion and offset this inordinate
efficiency of its common stock of knowledge by
adroitly crippling its own commerce and the com-
merce of its neighbors, for the benefit of those
vested interests that are domiciled within the na-
tional frontiers.

But the divine right of national self-direction also
covers much else of the same description, besides |
the privilege of setting up a tariff in restraint of
trade. ‘There are many channels of such discrim-
ination, of divers kinds, but always it will be found
that these channels are channels of sabotage and
that they serve the advantage of some group of
vested interests which do business under the shelter
of the national pretensions. There are foreign in-
vestments and concessions to be procured and safe-
guarded for the nation’s business men by moral
suasion backed with warlike force, and the common
man pays the cost; there is discrimination to be
exercised and perhaps subsidies and credits to be
accorded those of the nation’s business men who de-
rive a profit from shipping, for the discomfiture of
alien competitors, and the common man pays the
cost; there are colonies to be procured and admin-
istered at the public expense for the private gain of
certain traders, concessionaires and administrative
ofice-holders, and the common man pays the cost.


THE DIVINE RIGHT OF NATIONS 137


Back of it all is the nation’s divine right to carry
arms, to support a competitive military and naval
establishment, which has ceased, under the new or-
der, to have any other material use than to enforce
or defend the businesslike right of particular vested
interests to get something for nothing in some par-
ticular place and in some particular way, and the
common man pays the cost and swells with pride.


VII


LIVE AND LET LIVE


THE Nation’s inalienable right of self-direction and
self-help is of the same nature and derivation as the
like inalienable right of self-help vested in an irre-
sponsible king by the grace of God. In both cases
alike it is a divine right, in the sense that it is irre-
sponsible and will not bear scrutiny, being an arbi-
trary right of self-help at the cost of any whom it
may concern. There is the further parallel that in
both cases alike the ordinary exercise of these rights
confers no material benefit on the underlying com-
munity. In practical effect the exercise of such di-
vine rights, whether by a sovereign monarch or by
the officials of a sovereign nation, works damage
and discomfort to one and another, within the na-
tional frontiers or beyond them, with nothing better
to show for it than some relatively slight gain in
prestige or in wealth for some relatively small group
of privileged persons or vested interests. And the
gain of those who profit by this means is always got
at the cost of the common man at home and abroad.
These inalienable rights are an abundant source of
grievances to be redressed at the cost of the common
man.

It has long been a stale commonplace that the
quarrels of competitive kings in pursuit of their di-
vine rights have brought nothing but damage and

138


LIVE AND LET LIVE 139


discomfort to the underlying peoples whose mate-
rial wealth and man power have been made use of
for national enterprise of this kind. And it is no
less evident, though perhaps less notorious, that the
pursuit of national advantages by competitive na-
tions by use of the same material wealth and man
power unavoidably brings nothing better than the
same net output of damage and discomfort to all the
peoples concerned. ‘There is of course the reserva-
tion that in the one case the kings and their accom-
plices and pensioners have come in for some gain
in prestige and in perquisites, while in the case of
the competitive nations certain vested interests and
certain groups of the kept classes stand to gain
something in the way of perquisites and free income;
but always and in the nature of the case the total
gain is less than the cost; and always the gain goes
to the kept classes and the cost falls on the common
man. So much is notorious, particularly so far as
it is a question of material gain and loss. So far
as it is an immaterial question of jealousy and pres-
tige, the line of division runs between nations, but
as regards material gain and loss it is always a di-
vision between the kept classes and the common man;
and always the common man has more to lose than
the kept classes stand to gain.

The war is now concluded, provisionally, and
“peace is in prospect for the immediate future, also
provisionally. As is true between individuals, so
also among the nations, peace means the same thing
as Live and Let Live, which also means the same
‘thing as a world made safe for democracy. And
the rule of Live and Let Live means the discontinu-


140 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ance of animosity and discrimination between the na-
tions. ‘Therefore it involves the disallowance of
such incompatible national pretensions as are likely
to afford ground for international grievances,—
which comes near involving the disallowance of all
those claims and perquisites that habitually go in
under the captions of “ national self-determination ”
and “national integrity,” as these phrases are em-
ployed in diplomatic intercourse. At the same time
it involves the disallowance of all those class pre-
tensions and vested interests that make for dissension
within the nation. _ IIl-will is not a practicable basis
of peace, whether within the nation or between the
nations. So much is plain matter of course. What
may be the chances of peace and war, at home and
abroad, in the light of these blunt and obvious prin-
ciples taken in conjunction with the diplomatic ne-
gotiations now going forward at home and abroad,
— all that is sufficiently perplexing.

At home in America for the transient time being,
the war administration has under pressure of neces-
sity somewhat loosened the strangle-hold of the
vested interests on the country’s industry; and in so
doing it has shocked the safe and sane business men
into a state of indignant trepidation and has at the
same time doubled the country’s industrial output.
But all that has avowedly been only for the transient
time being, ‘“‘ for the period of the war,” as a dis-
tasteful concession to demands that would not wait.
So that the country now faces a return to the pre-
carious conditions of a provisional peace on the lines ,
of the status quo ante. Already the vested inter-
ests are again tightening their hold and are busily


LIVE AND LET LIVE sta


arranging for a return to business as usual; which
means working at cross-purposes as usual, waste of
work and materials as usual, restriction of output as
usual, unemployment as usual, labor quarrels as
usual, competitive selling as usual, mendacious ad-
vertising as usual, waste of superfluities as usual by
the kept classes, and privation as usual for the com-
mon man. All of which may conceivably be put up
with by this people “‘ lest a worse evil befall.” All
this runs blamelessly in under the rule of Live and
Let Live as interpreted in the light of those en-
lightened principles of self-help that have come
down from the eighteenth century and that go to
make up the established scheme of law and order,
although it does not meet the needs of the same rule
as it would be enforced by the exigencies of the new
order in industry.

Meanwhile, abroad, the gentlemen of the old
school who direct the affairs of the nations are laying
down the lines on which peace is to be established
and maintained, with a painstaking regard for all
those national pretensions and discriminations that
have always made for international embroilment,
and with an equally painstaking disregard for all
those exigencies of the new order that call for a
de facto observance of the rule of Live and Let Live.
It is notorious beyond need of specification that the
new order in industry, even more insistently than
any industrial situation that has gone before, calls
for a wide and free intercourse in trade and in-
dustry, regardless of national frontiers and national
jealousies. In this connection a national frontier,
as it is commonly made use of in current state-


142 THE VESTED INTERESTS


craft, is a line of demarkation for working at cross-
purposes, for mutual obstruction and distrust. It
is only necessary to recall that the erection of a new
national frontier across any community which has
previously enjoyed the privilege of free intercourse
unburdened with customs frontiers will be felt to
be a grievous burden; and that the erection of such
a line of demarkation for other diplomatic work at
mutual cross-purposes is likewise an unmistakable
nuisance.

Yet, in the peace negotiations now going for-
ward the gentlemen of the old school to whom the
affairs of the nations have been “ entrusted ”— by
shrewd management on their own part — continue
to safeguard all this apparatus of mutual defeat and
distrust,— and indeed this is the chief or sole object
of their solicitude, as it also is the chief or sole ob-
ject of those vested interests for whose benefit the
diplomatic gentlemen of the old school continue to
manage the affairs of the nations.

The state of the case is plainly to be seen in the
proposals of those nationalities that are now coming
forward with a new claim to national self-determina-
tion. Invariably any examination of the bill of
particulars set up by the spokesmen of these pro-
posed new national establishments will show that the
material point of it all is an endeavor to set up a
national apparatus for working at mutual cross-
purposes with their neighbors, to add something to
the waste and confusion caused by the national dis-
criminations already in force, to violate the rule of
Live and Let Live at some new point and by some
further apparatus of discomfort.


LIVE AND LET LIVE 143


There are nationalities that get along well enough,
to all appearance, without being “nations” in that
militant and obstructive fashion that is aimed at in
these projected creations of the diplomatic nation-
makers. Such are the Welsh and the Scotch, for
instance. But it is not the object-lesson of Welsh
or Scottish experience that guides the new projects.
The nationalities which are now escaping from a
rapacious imperialism of the old order are being
organized and managed by the safe and sane gentle-
men of the old school, who have got their notions
of safety and sanity from the diplomatic intrigue
of that outworn imperialism out of which these op-
pressed nationalities aim to escape. And _ these
gentlemen of the old school are making no move in
the direction of tolerance and good will —as how
should they when all their conceptions of what is
right and expedient are the diplomatic preconcep-
tions of the old regime. ‘They, being gentlemen of
the old school, will-have none of that amicable and
unassuming nationality which contents the Welsh and
the Scotch who have tried out this matter and have in
the end come to hold fast only so much of their
national pretensions as will do no material harm.
What is aimed at is not a disallowance of bootless
national jealousies, but only a shift from an intoler-
able imperialism on a large scale to an ersatz-im-
perialism drawn on a smaller scale, conducted on
the same general lines of competitive diplomacy and
serving interests of the same general kind — vested
interests of business or of privilege.

The projected new nations are not patterned on


the Welsh or the Scottish model, but for all that


144 THE VESTED INTERESTS


there is nothing novel in their design; and how —
should there be when they are the offspring of the
imagination of these safe and sane gentlemen of
the old school fertilised with the ancient conceptions
of imperialistic diplomacy and national prestige?
In effect it is all drawn to the scale and pattern al-
ready made notorious by the Balkan states. It
should also be safe to presume that the place and
value of these newly emerging nations in the comity
of peoples under the prospective régime of pro-
visional peace will be something not notably different
from what the Balkan states have habitually placed
on view; which may be deprecated by many well-
meaning persons, but which is scarcely to be undone
by well-wishing. The chances of war and politics
have thrown the fortunes of these projected new
nations into the hands of these politic gentlemen of
the old school, and by force of inveterate habit these
very practical persons are unable to conceive that
anything else than a Balkan state is fit to take the
place of that imperial rule that has now fallen into
decay. So Balkan-state national establishments ap-
pear to be the best there is in prospect in the new
world of safe democracy.

So true is this, that even in those instances, such
as the Finns and other fragments of the Russian im-
perial dominions, where a newly emerging nation has
set out to go on its way without taking pains to
safeguard the grievances of the old order,— even in
these instances that should seem to concern no one
but themselves, the gentlemen of the old school who
guard the political institutions of the old order in
the world at large find it impossible to keep their


LIVE AND LET LIVE 145


hands off and to let these adventurous pilgrims of
hope go about their own business in their own way.
Self-determination proves to be insufferable if it
partakes of the new order rather than of the old,
at least so long as the safe and sane gentlemen of
the old school can hinder it by any means at their
command. It is felt that the vested interests which
underlie the gentlemen of the old school would not
be sufficiently secure in the keeping of these unshorn
and unshaven pilgrims of hope, and the doubt may
be well taken. So that, within the intellectual hori-
zon of the practical statesmen, the only safe, sane,
and profitable manner of national establishment and
national policy for these newcomers is something
after the familiar fashion of the Balkan states; and
it may also be admitted quite broadly that these
newly arriving peoples commonly are content to seek
their national fortunes along precisely these Balkan-
state lines; although the Finns and their like are per-
haps to be counted as an unruly exception to the rule.

These Balkan states, whose spirit, aims, and ways
are so admirable in the eyes of the gentlemanly
keepers of the old political and economic order, are
simply a case of imperialism in the raw. They are
all and several still in the pickpocket stage of dynas-
tic statemaking, comparable with the state of Prus-
sia before Frederick the Great Pickpocket came to
the throne. And now, with much sage counsel from
the safe and sane statesmen of the status quo ante,
Czechs, Slovaks, Slovenes, Ruthenians, Ukrainians,
Croats, Poles and Polaks are breathlessly elbowing
their way into line with these minuscular Michiavel-
‘lians. Quite unchastened by their age-long experi-


146 THE VESTED INTERESTS


ence in adversity they are all alike clamoring for
national establishments stocked up with all the
time-tried contrivances for discomfort and defeat.
With one hand they are making frantic gestures of
distress for an ‘‘ outlet to the sea’? by means of
which to escape insufferable obstruction of their over-
seas trade by their nationally minded neighbors,
while with the other hand they are feverishly at
work to contrive a customs frontier of their own, to- —
gether with other standard devices for obstructing
their neighbors’ trade and their own, so soon as they
shall have any trade to obstruct. Such is the force
of habit and tradition. In other words, these peo-
ples'are aiming to become self-determining nations
in good standing.

And all the while it is plain to all men that a
national “ outlet to the sea’ has no meaning in time
of peace and in the absence of national governments
working at cross-purposes. Which comes near to
saying that the sole material object of these new
projects in nation-making is to work at cross-pur-
poses with their neighbors across the new-found
national frontiers. So also it is plain that this mu-
tual working at cross-purposes between the nations
hinders the keeping of the peace, even when it is all
mitigated with all the approved apparatus of dip-
lomatic make-believe, compromise, and intrigue.
Just as it is plain that the peace is not to be kept by
use of armaments, but all the while national arma-
ments are also included as an indispensable adjunct
of national life, in all the projects of these new na-
tions of the Balkan pattern. The right to carry
arms is an inalienable right of national self-deter-


LIVE AND LET LIVE 147


mination and an indispensable means of self-help,
as understood by these nation-makers of the old
school. So also it is plain that national pretensions
in the field of foreign trade and investment, and all
the diversified expedients for furthering and pro-
tecting the profitable enterprise of the vested inter-
ests in foreign parts, run consiscently at cross-pur-
poses with the keeping of the peace.

And all the while the rule of Live and Let Live,
as it works out within the framework of the new
industrial order, will not tolerate these things. But
the rule of Live and Let Live, which embodies the
world’s hope of peace on earth and a practicable
modicum of good will among men, is not of the
essence of that time-worn statesmanship which is
now busily making the world safe for the vested
interests. Neglect and disallowance of those things
that make for embroilment does not enter into the
counsels of the nation-makers or of those stupendous
figures of veiled statecraft that now move in the
background and are shaping the destinies of these
and other nations with a view to the status quo ante.


All these peoples that now hope to be nations have
long been nationalities. A nation is an organisation
for collective offence and defence, in peace and war,
— essentially based on hate and fear of other na-
tions; a nationality is a cultural group, bound to-
gether by home-bred affinities of language, tradition,
use and wont, and commonly also by a supposed
community race,— essentially based on sympathies
and sentiments of self-complacency within itself.
The Welsh and the Scotch are nationalities, more


148 THE VESTED INTERESTS


or less well defined, although they are not nations —
in the ordinary meaning of the word; so also are the
Irish, with a difference, and such others as the Finns ©
and the Armenians. The American republic is a —
nation, but not a nationality in any full measure.
The Welsh and the Scotch have learned the wisdom ~
of Live and Let Live, within the peace of the Em-
pire, and they are not moving to break bounds and
set up a national integrity after tne Balkan pattern. ©
The case of the Irish is peculiar; at least so they
say. They, that is to say the Irish by sentiment
rather than by domicile, the Irish people as con-
trasted with the vested interests of Ulster, of the
landlords, of the Church, and of the bureaucracy,—
these Irish have long been a nationality and are now
mobilising all their force to set up a Balkan state, —
autonomous and defensible, within the formal
bounds of the Empire or without. Their case is
peculiar and instructive. It throws a light on the
margin of tolerance, of what the trafic will bear,
beyond which an increased pressure on a subject
population will bring no added profit to the vested
interests for whose benefit the pressure is brought
to bear. It is a case of the Common Man hard
ridden in due legal form by the vested interests of
the Island, and of the neighboring island, which
are duly backed by an alien and biased bureaucracy
aided and abetted by the priestly pickpockets of the
poor. So caught in this way between the devil and
the deep sea, it is small wonder if they have chosen
in the end to follow counsels of desperation and are
moving to throw their lot into the deep sea of na-
tional self-help and international intrigue. They


LIVE AND LET LIVE 149


have reached the point where they have ceased to
say: ‘‘It might have been worse.’’ The case of
the Finns, Jews, and Armenians is not greatly differ-
ent in general effect.

It is easy to fall into a state of perturbation about
the evil case of the submerged, exploited, and op-
pressed minor nationalities; and it is not unusual to
jump to the conclusion that national self-determina-
tion will surely mend their evil case. National self-
determination and national integrity are words to
conjure with, and there is no denying that very sub-
stantial results have been known to follow from
such conjuring. But self-determination is not a
sovereign remedy, particularly not as regards the
material conditions of life for the common man, for
that somewhat more than nine-tenths of the popula-
tion who always finally have to bear the cost of any
national establishment. It has been tried, and the
point is left in doubt. So the case of Belgium or of
Serbia during the past four years has been scarcely
less evil than that of the Armenians or the Poles.
Belgium and Serbia were nations, in due form, very
much after the pattern aimed at in the new pro-
jected nations already spoken of, whereas the Ar-
menians and the Poles have been subject minor na-
tionalities. Belgium, Serbia, and Poland have been
subject to the ravages of an imperial power which
claims rank as a civilised people, whereas the Ar-
menians have been manhandled by the Turks. So,
again, the Irish are a subject minor nationality,
whereas the Roumanians are a nation in due form.
In fact the Roumanians are just such a Balkan state
as the Irish aspire to become. But no doubt the


150 THE 'VESTED. INTERESTS


common man is appreciably worse off in his material
circumstances in Roumania than in Ireland. Japan,
too, is not only a self-determining nation with a full
charge of national integrity, but it is a Great Power;
yet the common man—the somewhat more than
nine-tenths of the population — is doubtless worse
off in point of hard usage and privation in Japan
than in Ireland.

In further illustration of this doubt and perplex-
ity with regard to the material value of national
self-determination, the case of the three Scandinavian
countries may be worth citing. They are all and
several self-determining nations, in that Pickwickian
sense in which any country which is not a Great
Power may be self-determining in the twentieth cen-
tury. But they differ in size, population, wealth,
power, and political consequence. In these respects
the sequence runs: Sweden, Denmark, Norway, the
latter being the smallest, poorest, least self-determin-
ing, and in point of self-determining nationalism al-
together the most spectacularly foolish of the lot.
But so far as concerns the material conditions of life
for the common man, they are unmistakably the most
favorable, or the most nearly tolerable, in Norway,
and the least so in Sweden. The upshot of evidence
from these, and from other instances that might be
cited, is to leave the point in doubt. It is not evj-
dent that the common man has anything to gain by
national self-determination, so far as regards his
material conditions of life; nor does it appear, on
the evidence of these instances, that he has much to
lose by that means.

These Scandinavians differ from the Balkan states


LIVE AND LET LIVE Ist


in that they perforce have no imperialistic ambitions.
There may of course be a question on this head so
far as concerns the frame of mind of the royal es-
tablishment in the greater one of the Scandiravian
kingdoms; there is not much that is worth saying
about that matter, and the less that is said, the less
annoyance. It is a matter of no significance, any-
way. The Scandinavians are in effect not imperial-
istic, perforce. Which means that in their interna-
tional relations they formally adhere to the rule of
Live and Let Live. Not so in their domestic policy,
however. They have all endowed themselves with
all the encumbrances of national pretensions and
discrimination which their circumstances will admit.
Apart from a court and church which foot up to
nothing more comfortable than a gratuitous bill of
expense, they are also content to carry the burden of
a national armament, a protective tariff, a national
consular service, and a diplomatic service which
takes care of a moderately burdensome series of
treaty agreements governing the trade relations of
the Scandinavian business community; all designed
for the benefit of the vested interests and the kept
classes of the nation, and all at the cost of the com-
mon man.

The case of these relatively free, relatively unas-
suming, and relatively equitable national establish-
ments is also instructive. They come as near the
rule of Live and Let Live as any national establish-
ment well can and still remain a national establish-
ment actuated by notions of competitive self-help.
But all the while the national administration runs
along, with nothing better to show to any impar-


152 THE VESTED INTERESTS


tial scrutiny than a considerable fiscal burden and a
moderate volume of hindrance to the country’s indus- —
try, together with some incidental benefit to the vested
interests and the kept classes at the cost of the under-
lying community. These Scandinavians occupy a pe-
culiar position in the industrial world. They are
each and several too small to make up anything like
a self-contained industrial community, even under
the most unreserved pressure of national exclusive-_
ness. ‘Their industries necessarily are part and par-
cel of the industrial system at large, with which they
are bound in relations of give and take at every
point. Yet they are content to carry a customs tar-
iff of fairly grotesque dimensions and a national con-
sular service of more grotesque dimensions still.
This situation is heightened by their relatively sterile
soil, their somewhat special and narrow range of nat-
ural resources, and their high latitude, which: pre-
cludes any home growth of many of the indispensa-
ble materials of industry under the new order. Yet
they are content to carry their customs tariff, their
special commercial treaties, and their consular sery-
ice — for the benefit of their vested interests.

It should seem that this elaborate superfluity of -
national outlay and obstruction should work great
hardship to the underlying community whose in-
dustry is called on to carry this burden of lag, leak,
and friction. And doubtless the burden is suffi-
ciently real. It amounts, of course, to the nation’s
working at cross-purposes with itself, for the benefit
of those special interests that stand to gain a little
something by it all. But in this as in other works
of sabotage there are compensating effects, and these


LIVE AND LET LIVE 153


should not be overlooked; particularly since the case
is fairly typical of what commonly happens. The
waste and sabotage of the national establishment
and its obstructive policy works no intolerable hard-
ship, because it all runs its course and eats its fill
within that margin of sabotage and wasteful con-
sumption that would have to be taken care of by
some other agency in the absence of this one. That
is to say, something like the same volume of sabot-
age and waste is indispensable to the prosperity of
business under the conditions of the new order, so
long as business and industry are managed under the
conditions imposed by the price system. By one
means or another prices must be maintained at a
profitable level for reasons of business; therefore the
output must be restricted to a reasonable rate and
volume, and wasteful consumption must be provided
for, on pain of a failing market. And all this may
as well be taken care of by use of a princely court,
an otiose church, a picturesque army, a well-fed dip-
lomatic and consular service, and a customs frontier.
In the absence of all this national apparatus of sa-
botage substantially the same results would have to
be got at by the less seemly means of a furtive con-
spiracy in restraint of trade among the vested inter-
ests. There is always something to be said for the
national integrity.

The case of these Scandinavian nations, taken in
connection and comparison with what is to be seen
elsewhere, appears to say that a national establish-
ment which has no pretensions to power and no im-
perialistic ambitions is preferable, in point of econ-
omy and peaceable behavior, to an establishment


154 THE VESTED INTERESTS


which carries these attributes of self-determination
and self-help. The more nearly the national in-
tegrity and self-determination approaches to make-
believe the less mischief is it likely to work at home
and the more nearly will it be compatible with the
rule of Live and Let Live in dealing with its neigh-
bors. And the further implication is plain without
argument, that the most beneficent change that can
conceivably overtake any national establishment
would be to let it fall into “innocuous desuetude.”
Apparently, the less of it the better, with no appar-
ent limit short of the vanishing point.

Such appears to be the object-lesson enforced by
recent and current events, in so far as concerns the
material fortunes of the underlying community at
large as well as the keeping of the peace. But it
does not therefore follow that all men and classes
will have the same interest in so neutralising the
nation’s powers and disallowing the national pre-
tensions. The existing nations are not of a homo-
geneous make-up within themselves — perhaps less
so in proportion as they have progressively come un-
der the rule of the new order in industry and in busi-
ness. ‘There is an increasingly evident cleavage of
interest between industry and business, or between
production and ownership, or between tangible per-
formance and free income,— one phrase may serve
as well as another, and neither is quite satisfactory to
mark the contrast of interest between the common
man on the one hand and the vested interests and
kept classes on the other hand. But it should be
sufficiently plain that the national establishment and
its control of affairs has a value for the vested in-


LIVE AND LET LIVE 155


terests different from what it has for the underlying
community.

Quite plainly the new order in industry has no
use or place for national discrimination or national
pretensions of any kind; and quite plainly such a
phrase as “national integrity’? has no shadow of
meaning for this new industrial order which over-
runs national frontiers and overcomes national dis-
crimination as best it can, in all directions and all
the time. For industry as carried on under the new
order, the overcoming of national discrimination is
part of the ordinary day’s work. But it is otherwise
with the new order of business enterprise,— large-
scale, corporate, resting on intangible assets, and
turning on free income which flows from managerial
sabotage. The business community has urgent need
of an efficient national establishment both at home
and abroad. A settled government, duly equipped
with national pretensions, and with legal and mili-
tary power to maintain the sacredness of contracts
at home and to enforce the claims of its business men
abroad,— such an establishment is invaluable for the
conduct of business, though its industrial value may
not unusually be less than nothing.

Industry is a matter of tangible performance in
the way of producing goods and services. And in
this connection it is well to recall that a vested in-
terest is a prescriptive right to get something for
nothing. Now, any project of reconstruction, the
scope and method of which are governed by consid-
erations of tangible performance, is likely to allow
only a subsidiary consideration or something less to
the legitimate claims of the vested interests, whether


156 THE VESTEDIINTERES 15


they are vested interests of business or of privilege.
It is more than probable that in such a case national
pretensions in the way of preferential concessions in
commerce and investment will be allowed to fall into
neglect, so far as to lose all value to any vested in-
terest whose fortunes they touch. These things have
no effect in the way of net tangible performance.
They only afford ground for preferential pecuniary
rights, always at the cost of someone else; but they
are of the essence of things in that pecuniary order
within which the vested interests of business live
and move. So also such a matter-of-fact project of
reconstruction will be likely materially to revise out-
standing credit obligations, including corporation
securities, or perhaps even bluntly to disallow claims
of this character to free income on the part of bene-
ficiaries who can show no claim on grounds of cur-
rent tangible performance. All of which is inimical
to the best good of the vested interests and the kept
classes.

Reconstruction which partakes of this character
in any sensible degree will necessarily be viewed with
the liveliest apprehension by the gentlemanly states-
men of the old school, by the kept classes, and by the
captains of finance. It will be deplored as a sub-
version of the economic order, a destruction of the
country's wealth, a disorganisation of industry, and
a sure way to poverty, bloodshed, and pestilence.
In point of fact, of course, what such a project may
be counted on to subvert is that dominion of owner-
ship by which the vested interests control and retard
the rate and volume of production. The destruction
of wealth in such a case will touch, directly, only the


TIVEOSND Le LIVE * | 154


value of the securities, not the material objects to
which these securities have given title of ownership;
it would be a disallowance of ownership, not a de-
struction of useful goods. Nor need any disorgani-
sation or disability of productive industry follow
from such a move; indeed, the apprehended cancel-
ment of the claims to income covered by negotiable
securities would by that much cancel the fixed over-
head charges resting on industrial enterprise, and so
further production by that much. But for those

persons and classes whose keep is drawn from pre-
- scriptive rights of ownership or of privilege the con-
sequences of such a shifting of ground from vested
interest to tangible performance would doubtless be
deplorable. In short, ‘‘ Bolshevism is a menace”’;
and the wayfaring man out of Armenia will be likely
to ask: A menace to whom?


VIII


THE VESTED INTERESTS AND THE
COMMON MAN


IN the eighteenth century certain principles of en-
lightened common sense were thrown into formal
shape and adopted by the civilised peoples of that
time to govern the system of law and order, use
and wont, under which they chose to live. So far
as concerns economic relations the principles which
so became incorporated into the system of civilised
law and custom at that time were the principles of
equal opportunity, self-determination, and self-help.
Chief among the specific rights by which this civil-
ised scheme of equal opportunity and self-help were
to be safeguarded were the rights of free contract
and security of property. These make up the sub-
stantial core of that system of principles which is
called the modern point of view, in so far as con-
cerns trade, industry, investment, credit obligations,
and whatever else may properly be spoken of as
economic institutions. And these still stand over
today, paramount among the inalienable rights
of all free citizens in all free countries; they are
the groundwork of the economic system as it runs
today, and this existing system can undergo no ma-
terial change of character so long as these paramount
rights of civilised men continue to be inalienable.
158


THE COMMON MAN 159


Any move to set these rights aside would be subver-
sive of the modern economic order; whereas no re-
vision or alteration of established rights and usages
will amount to a revolutionary move, so long as it
does not disallow these paramount economic rights.

When the constituent principles of the modern
point of view were accepted and the modern scheme
of civilised life was therewith endorsed by the civ-
ilised peoples, in the eighteenth century, these rights
of self-direction and self-help were counted on as
the particular and sufficient safeguard of equity
and industry in any civilised country. They were
counted on to establish equality among men in all
their economic relations and to maintain the indus-
trial system at the highest practicable degree of pro-
ductive efficiency. They were counted on to give
enduring effect to the rule of Live and Let Live.
And such is still the value ascribed to these rights
in the esteem of modern men. The maintenance
of law and order still means primarily and chiefly
the maintenance of these rights of ownership and pe-
cuniary obligation.

But things have changed since that time in such
a way that the rule of Live and Let Live is no
longer completely safeguarded by maintaining these
rights in the shape given them in the eighteenth cen-
tury,— or at least there are large sections of the
people in these civilised countries who are beginning
to think so, which is just as good for practical pur-
poses. Things have changed in such a way since
that time, that the ownership of property in large
holdings now controls the nation’s industry, and
therefore it controls the conditions of life for those


160 THE VESTED INTERESTS


who are or wish to be engaged in industry; at the
same time that the same ownership of large wealth
controls the markets and thereby controls the con-
ditions of life for those who have to resort to the
markets to sell or to buy. In other words, it has
come to pass with the change of circumstances that
the rule of Live and Let Live now waits on the dis-
cretion of the owners of large wealth. In fact, those
thoughtful men in the eighteenth century who made
so much of these constituent principles of the mod-
ern point of view did not contemplate anything like
the system of large wealth, large-scale industry, and
large-scale commerce and credit which prevails to-
day. They did not foresee the new order in in-
dustry and business, and the system of rights and
obligations which they installed, therefore, made
no provision for the new order of things that has
come on since their time.

The new order has brought the machine industry,
corporation finance, big business, and the world mar-
ket. Under this new order in business and indus-
try, business controls industry. Invested wealth in
large holdings controls the country’s industrial sys-
tem, directly by ownership of the plant, as in the
mechanical industries, or indirectly through the mar-
ket, as in farming. So that the population of these
civilised countries now falls into two main classes:
those who own wealth invested in large holdings
and who thereby control the conditions of life for
the rest; and those who do not own wealth in suffi-
ciently large holdings, and whose conditions of life
are therefore controlled by these others. It is a di-
vision, not between those who have something and


THE COMMON MAN 161


those who have nothing — as many socialists would
be inclined to describe it — but between those who
own wealth enough to make it count, and those who
do not.

And all the while the scale on which the control
of industry and the market is exercised goes on in-
creasing; from which it follows that what was large
enough for assured independence yesterday is no
longer large enough for tomorrow. Seen from an-
other direction, it is at the same time a division be-
tween those who live on free income and those who
live by work,— a division between the kept classes
and the underlying community from which their
keep is drawn. It is sometimes spoken of in this
bearing — particularly by certain socialists ——as a
division between those who do no useful work and
those who do; but this would be a hasty generalisa-
tion, since not a few of those persons who have no
assured free income also do no work that is of ma-
terial use, as e. g., menial servants. But the gravest
significance of this cleavage that so runs through the
population of the advanced industrial countries lies
in the fact that it is a division between the vested in-
terests and the common man. It is a division be-
tween those who control the conditions of work and
the rate and volume of output and to whom the net
output of industry goes as free income, on the one
hand, and those others who have the work to do and
to whom a livelihood is allowed by these persons in
control, on the other hand. In point of numbers it
is a very uneven division, of course.

A vested interest is a legitimate right to get some-
thing for nothing, usually a prescriptive right to an


162 THE VESTED INTERESTS


income which is secured by controlling the traffic at
one point or another. The owners of such a pre-
scriptive right are also spoken of as a vested in-
terest. Such persons make up what are called the
kept classes. But the kept classes also comprise
many persons who are entitled to a free income on
other grounds than their ownership and control of
industry or the market, as, e. g., landlords and other
Persons classed as “‘ gentry,” the clergy, the Crown
—where there is a Crown — and its agents, civil
and military. Contrasted with these classes who
make up the vested interests, and who derive an in-
come from the established order of ownership and
privilege, is the common man. He is common in
the respect that he is not vested with such a pre-
scriptive right to get something for nothing. And
he is called common because such is the common lot
of men under the new order of business and indus-
try; and such will continue (increasingly) to be the
common lot so long as the enlightened principles of
secure ownership and self-help handed down from
the eighteenth century continue to rule human affairs
by help of the new order of industry.

The kept classes, whose free income is secured to
them by the legitimate rights of the vested interests,
are less numerous than the common man — less nu-
merous by some ninety-five per cent or thereabouts —
and less serviceable to the community at large in
perhaps the same proportion, so far as regards any
conceivable use for any material purpose. In this
sense they are uncommon. But it is not usual to
speak of the kept classes as the uncommon classes,
inasmuch they personally differ from the common run


THE COMMON MAN 163


of mankind in no sensible respect.. It is more usual
to speak of them as “the better classes,’ because
they are in better circumstances and are better able
to do as they like. Their place in the economic
scheme of the civilised world is to consume the net
product of the country’s industry over cost, and so
prevent a glut of the market.


But this broad distinction between the kept classes
and their vested interests on the one side and the
-common man on the other side is by no means hard
and fast. There are many doubtful cases, and a
shifting across the line occurs now and again, but
the broad distinction is not doubtful for all that.
The great distinguishing mark of the common man
is that he is helpless within the rules of the game as
it is played in the twentieth century under the en-
lightened principles of the eighteenth century.

There are all degrees of this helplessness that
characterises the common lot. So much so that cer-
tain classes, professions, and occupations — such as
the clergy, the military, the courts, police, and legal
profession — are perhaps to be classed as belonging
primarily with the vested interests, although they
can scarcely be counted as vested interests in their
own right, but rather as outlying and subsidiary

vested interests whose tenure is conditioned on their
serving the purposes of those principal and self-direct-
ing vested interests whose tenure rests immediately
on large holdings of invested wealth. ‘The income
which goes to these subsidiary or dependent vested
interests is of the nature of free income, in so far
that it is drawn from the yearly product of the un-


164 THE VESTED INTERESTS


derlying community; but in another sense it is
scarcely to be counted as “ free” income, in that its
continuance depends on the good will of those con-
trolling vested interests whose power rests on the
ownership of large invested wealth. Still it will be
found that on any test vote these subsidiary or aux-
iliary vested interests uniformly range themselves
with their superiors in the same class, rather than
with the common man. By sentiment and habitual
outlook they belong with the kept classes, in that
they are staunch defenders of that established order
of law and custom which secures the great vested in-
terests in power and insures the free income of the
kept classes. In any twofold division of the popu-
lation these are therefore, on the whole, to be ranged
on the side of the old order, the vested interests, and
the kept classes, both in sentiment and as regards the
circumstances which condition their life and comfort.

Beyond these, whose life-interests are, after all,
closely bound up with the kept classes, there are
other vested interests of a more doubtful and per-
plexing kind; classes and occupations which would
seem to belong with the common lot, but which range
themselves at least provisionally with the vested in-
terests and can scarcely be denied standing as such.
Such, as an illustrative instance, is the A. F. of L.
Not that the constituency of the A. F. of Lean
be said to live on free income, and is therefore to be
counted in with the kept classes — the only reserva-
tion on that head would conceivably be the corps of
officials in the A. F. of L., who dominate the policies
of that organisation and exercise a prescriptive right
to dispose of its forces, at the same time that they


THE COMMON MAN 165


habitually come in for an income drawn from the
underlying organisation. The rank and file assur-
edly are not of the kept classes, nor do they visibly
come in for a free income. Yet they stand on the
defensive in maintaining a vested interest in the per-
rogatives and perquisites of their organisation.
They are apparently moved by a feeling that so long
as the established arrangements are maintained they
will come in for a little something over and above
what would come to them if they were to make com-
mon cause with the undistinguished common lot. In
other words, they have a vested interest in a narrow
margin of preference over and above what goes to
the common man. But this narrow margin of net
gain over the common lot, this vested right to get
a narrow margin of something for nothing, has hith-
erto been sufficient to shape their sentiments and out-
look in such a way as, in effect, to keep them loyal to
the large business interests with whom they nego-
tiate for this narrow margin of preference. As is
true of the vested interests in business, so in the case
of the A. F. of L., the ordinary ways and means of
enforcing their claim to a little something over and
above is the use of a reasonable sabotage, in the
way of restriction, retardation, and unemployment.
Yet the constituency of the A. F. of L., taken man
for man, is not readily to be distinguished from the
common sort so far as regards their conditions of
life. The spirit of vested interest which animates
them may, in fact, be nothing more to the point than
an aimless survival.

Farther along the same line, larger and even more
perplexing, is the case of the American farmers, who


166 THE VESTED INTERESTS


also are in the habit of ranging themselves, on the
whole, with the vested interests rather than with the
common man. By sentiment and outlook the farm-
ers are, commonly, steady votaries of that established
order which enables the vested interests to do a “ big
business’ at their expense. Such is the tradition
which still binds the farmers, however unequivocally
their material circumstances under the new order of
business and industry might seem to drive the other
way. In the ordinary case the American farmer is —
now as helpless to control his own conditions of life
as the commonest of the common run. He is caught
between the vested interests who buy cheap and the
vested interests who sell dear, and it is for him to
take or leave what is offered,— but ordinarily to
take it, on pain of “ getting left.”

There is still afloat among the rural population
a slow-dying tradition of the ‘Independent Far-
mer,” who is reputed once upon a time to have lived
his own life and done his own work as good him
seemed, and who was content to let the world wag.
But all that has gone by now as completely as the
other things that are told in tales which begin with
‘Once upon a time.” It has gone by into the same
waste of regrets with the like independence which
the country-town retailer is believed to have enjoyed
once upon a time. But the country-town retailer,
too, still stands stiffly on the vested rights of the
trade and of the town; he is by sentiment and habit-
ual outlook a business man who guides, or would
like to guide, his enterprise by the principle of charg-
ing what the traffic will bear, of buying cheap and
selling dear. He still manages to sell dear, but he


THE COMMON MAN 167


does not commonly buy cheap, except what he buys
of the farmer, for the massive vested interests in
the background now decide for him, in the main,
how much his traffic will bear. He is not placed so
very differently from the farmer in this respect, ex-
cept that, being a middleman, he can in some appre-
ciable degree shift the burden to a third party. The
third party in the case is the farmer; the massive
vested interests who move in the background of the
market do not lend themselves to that purpose.

_ Except for the increasing number of tenant farm-
ers, the American farmers of the large agricultural
sections still are owners who cultivate their own
ground. They are owners of property, who might
be said to have an investment in their own farms,
and therefore they fancy that they have a vested in-
terest in the farm and its earning-capacity. They
have carried over out of the past and its old order of
things a delusion to the effect that they have some-
thing to lose. It is quite a natural and rather an
engaging delusion, since, barring incumbrances, they
are seized of a good and valid title at law, to a very
tangible and useful form of property. And by due
provision of law and custom they are quite free to
use or abuse their holdings in the land, to buy and
sell it and its produce altogether at their own pleas-
ure. It is small wonder if the farmers, with the
genial traditions of the day before yesterday still
running full and free in their sophisticated brains,
are given to consider themselves typical holders of a
legitimate vested interest of a very substantial kind.
In all of which they count without their host; their
host, under the new order of business, being those


168 THE VESTED INTERESTS


massive vested interests that move obscurely in the
background of the market, and whose rule of life it
is to buy cheap and sell dear.

In the ordinary case the farmers of the great
American farming regions are owners of the land
and improvements, except for an increasing propor-
tion of tenant farmers. But it is the farmer-owner
that is commonly had in mind in speaking of the
American farmers as a class. Barring incum-
brances, these farmer-owners have a good and valid
title to their land and improvements; but their title
remains good only so long as the run of the market
for what they need and for what they have to sell does
not take such a turn that the title will pass by process
of liquidation into other hands, as may always hap-
pen. And the run of the market which conditions
the farmer’s work and livelihood has now come to
depend on the highly impersonal manoeuvres of
those massive interests that move in the background
and find a profit in buying cheap and selling dear.
In point of law and custom there is, of course, noth-
ing to hinder the American farmer from considering
himself to be possessed of a vested interest in his
farm and its working, if that pleases his fancy. The
circumstances which decide what he may do with
his farm and its equipment, however, are prescribed
for him quite deliberately and quite narrowly by
those other vested interests in the background, which
are massive enough to regulate the course of things
in business and industry at large. He is caught in
the system, and he does not govern the set and mo-
tions of the system. So that the question of his
effectual standing as a vested interest becomes a


THE COMMON MAN 169


question of fact, not of preference and genial
tradition.

A vested interest is a legitimate right to get some-
thing for nothing. The American farmer — say,
the ordinary farmer of the grain-growing Middle
West — can be said to be possessed of such a vested
interest if he habitually and securely gets some-
thing in the way of free income above cost, counting
as cost the ordinary rate of wages for work done on
the farm plus ordinary returns on the replacement
value of the means of production which he employs.
Now it is notorious that, except for quite exceptional
cases, there are no intangible assets in farming; and
intangible assets are the chief and ordinary indica-
tion of free income, that is to say, of getting some-
thing for nothing. Any concern that can claim no
intangible assets, in the way of valuable good-will,
monopoly rights, or outstanding corporation securi-
ties, has no substantial claim to be rated as a vested
interest. What constitutes a valid claim to stand-
ing as a vested interest is the assured customary abil-
ity to get something more in the way of income than
a full equivalent for tangible performance in the
way of productive work.

The returns which these farmers are in the habit
of getting from their own work and from the work
of their household and hired help do not ordinarily
include anything that can be called free or unearned
income,— unless one should go so far as to declare
that income reckoned at ordinary rates on the tangi-
ble assets engaged in this industry is to be classed
as unearned income, which is not the usual meaning
of the expression. It may be that popular opinion


170 THE VESTED INTERESTS


on these matters will take such a turn some time
that men will come to consider that income which is
derived from the use of land and equipment is
rightly to be counted as unearned income, because it
does not correspond to any tangible performance in
the way of productive work on the part of the per-
son to whom it goes. But for the present that is not
the popular sense of the matter, and that is not the
meaning of the words in popular usage. For the
present, at least, reasonable returns on the replace-
ment value of tangible assets are not considered to
be unearned income.

It is true, the habits of thought engendered by the
machine system in industry and by the mechanically
standardised organisation of daily life under this
new order, as well as by the material sciences, are
of such a character as would incline the common
man to rate all men and things in terms of tangible
performance rather than in terms of legal title and
ancient usage. And it may well come to Pass, in
time, that men will consider any income unearned
which exceeds a fair return for tangible performance
in the way of productive work on the part of the
person to whom the income goes. The mechanistic
logic of the new order of industry drives in that
direction, and it may well be that the frame of mind
engendered by this training in matter-of-fact ways
of thinking will presently so shape popular sentiment
that all income from property, simply on the basis
of ownership, will be disallowed, whether the prop-
erty is tangible or intangible. All that is a specula-
tive question running into the future. It is to be
recognised and taken account of that the immutable


THE COMMON MAN 171


principles of law and equity, in matters of owner-
ship and income as well as in other connections, are
products of habit, and that habits are always liable
to change in response to altered circumstances, and
the drift of circumstances is now apparently setting
in that direction. But popular sentiment has not
yet reached that degree of emancipation from those
good old principles of self-help and secure ownership
that go to make up the modern (eighteenth-century)
point of view in law and custom. The equity of
income derived from the use of tangible property
may presently become a moot question; but it is not
so today, outside of certain classes in the population
whom the law and the courts are endeavoring to
discourage. It is the business of the law and the
courts to discourage any change of insight or opinion.

It appears, therefore, that his conditions of life
should throw the American farmer in with the com-
mon man who has substantially nothing to lose, be-
yond what the vested interests of business can al-
ways take over at their own discretion and in their
own good time. In point of material fact he has
ceased to be a self-directing agent; and self-help
has for him come substantially to be a make-believe;
although, of course, in point of legal formality he
still continues to enjoy all the ancient rights and
immunities of secure ownership and self-help. Yet
it is no less patent a fact of current history that
the American farmer continues, on the whole, to
stand fast by those principles of self-help and free
bargaining which enable the vested interests to play
fast and loose with him and all his works. Such
is the force of habit and tradition.


172 THE VESTED INTERESTS


The reason, or at least the preconception, by force
of which the American farmers have been led, in
effect, to side with the vested interests rather than
with the common man, ¢omes of the fact that the
farmers are not only farmers but also owners of
speculative real estate. And it is as speculators in
land-values that they find themselves on the sjde of
unearned income. As_ land-owners they aim and
confidently hope to get something for nothing in the
unearned increase of land-values. But all the while
they overlook the fact that the future increase of
land-values, on which they pin their hopes, is already
discounted in the present price of the land,— except
for exceptional and fortuitous cases. As is known
to all persons who are at all informed on this topic,
farmland holdings in the typical American farming
regions are overcapitalised, in the sense that the cur-
rent market value of these farm-lands is considerably
greater than the capitalised value of the income to
be derived from their current use as farmlands.
This excess value of the farmlands is a speculative
value due to discounting the future increased value
which these lands are expected to gain with the fur-
ther growth of population and with increasing facil-
ities for marketing the farm products of the locality.
It is therefore as a land speculator holding his land
for a rise, not as a husbandman cultivating the soil
for a livelihood, that the prairie farmer, e. g., comes
in for an excess value and an overcapitalisation of
his holdings. All of which has much in common
with the intangible assets of the vested interests, and
all of which persuades the prairie farmer that he


THE COMMON MAN 173


is of a class apart from the common man who has
nothing to lose.

But he can come in for this unearned gain only
by the eventual sale of his holdings, not in their cur-
rent use as a means of production in farming. As
a business man doing a speculative business in farm-
lands the American farmer, in a small way, runs true
to form and so is entitled to a modest place among
that class of substantial citizens who get something
for nothing by cornering the supply and “ sitting
tight.”” And all the while the massive interests that
move obscurely in the background of the market are
increasingly in a position, in their own good time, to
disallow the farmer just so much of this still-born
gain as they may dispassionately consider to be con-
venient for their own ends. And so the farmer-spec-
ulator of the prairie continues to stand fast by the
principles of equity which entitle these vested inter-
ests to play fast and loose with him and all his works.

The facts of the case stand somewhat different
as regards the American farmer’s gains from his
work as a husbandman, or from the use which he
makes of his land and stock in farming. His re-
turns from his work are notably scant. So much
so that it is still an open question whether, taken
one with another, the American farmer’s assets in
land and other equipment enable him, one year with
another, to earn more than what would count as
ordinary wages for the labor which these assets
enable him to put into his product. But it is be-
yond question that the common run of those Amer-
ican farmers who “ work their own land”’ get at


174 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the best a very modest return for the use of their
land and stock,— so scant, indeed, that if usage
admitted such an expression, ic would be fair to
say that the farmer, considered as a going concern,
should be credited with an appreciable item of ‘“ neg-
ative intangible assets,” such as habitually to reduce
the net average return on his total active assets ap-
preciably below the ordinary rate of discount. His
case, in other words, is the reverse of the typical bus-
iness concern of the larger sort, which comes in for
a net excess over ordinary rates of discount on its
tangible assets, and which is thereby enabled to
write into its accounts a certain amount of intangi-
ble assets, and so come into line as a vested interest.
The farmer, too, is caught in the net of the new or-
der; but his occupation does not belong to that new
order of business enterprise in which earning-capac-
ity habitually outruns the capitalised value of the
underlying physical property.


Evidently the cleavage due to be brought on by
the new order in business and industry, between the
vested interests and the common man, has not yet
fallen into clear lines, at least not in America. The
common man does not know himself as such, at least
not yet, and the sections of the population which go
to make up the common lot as contrasted with the
vested interests have not yet learned to make com-
mon cause. The American tradition stands in the
way. This tradition says that the people of the
republic are made up of ungraded masterless men
who enjoy all the rights and immunities of self-dj-
rection, self-help, free bargaining, and equal oppor-


THE COMMON MAN 175


tunity, quite after the fashion that was sketched into
the great constituent documents of the eighteenth
century.

Much doubt and some discontent is afoot. It is
becoming increasingly evident that the facts of ev-
eryday life under the new order do not fall in with
the inherited principles of law and custom; but the
farmers, farm laborers, factory hands, mine work-
men, lumber hands, and retail tradesmen have not
come to anything like a realisation of that new order
of economic life which throws them in together on
one side of a line of division, on the other side of
which stand the vested interests and the kept classes.
They have not yet come to realise that all of them
together have nothing to lose except such things as
the vested interests can quite legally and legitimately
deprive them of, with full sanction of law and cus-
tom as it runs, so soon and so far as it shall suit
the convenience of the vested interests to make such
amove. ‘These people of the variegated mass have
no safeguard, in fact, against the control of their
conditions of life exercised by those massive inter-
ests that move obscurely in the background of the
market, except such considerations of expediency as
may govern the manoeuvres of those massive ones
who so move obscurely in the background. That
is to say, the conditions of life for the variegated
mass are determined by what the traffic will bear,
according to the calculations of self-help which guide
the vested interests, all the while that the farmers,
workmen, consumers, the common lot, are still ani-
mated with the fancy that they have themselves
something to say in these premises.


176 THE VESTED INTERESTS


It is otherwise with the vested interests, on the
whole. They take a more perspicuous view of their
own case and of the predicament of the common
man, the party of the second part. Whereas the
variegated mass that makes up the common lot have
not hitherto deliberately taken sides together or de-
fined their own attitude toward the established sys-
tem of law and order and its continuance, and so are
neither in the right nor in the wrong as regards this
matter, the vested interests and the kept classes, on
the other hand, have reached insight and definition
of what they need, want, and are entitled to. They
have deliberated and chosen their part in the divi-
sion, partly by interest and partly by ingrained ha-
bitual bent, no doubt,— and they are always in the
right. They owe tHeir position and the blessings
that come of it — free income and social preroga-
tive — to the continued enforcement of these eight-
eenth-century principles of law and order under con-
ditions created by the twentieth-century state of the
industrial arts. Therefore, it is incumbent on them,
in point of expediency, to stand strongly for the es-
tablished order of inalienable eighteenth-century
rights; and they are at the same time in the right,
In point of law and morals, in so doing, since what
is right in law and morals is always a question of set-
tled habit, and settled habit is always a legacy out
of the past. To take their own part, therefore, the
vested interests and the kept classes have nothing
more perplexing to do than simply to follow the
leadings of their settled code in all questions of law
and order and thereby to fall neatly in with the lead-
ing of their own pecuniary advantage, and always


THE COMMON MAN 177


and on both counts to keep their poise as safe and
sound citizens intelligently abiding by the good old
principles of right and honest living which safeguard
their vested rights.

The common man is not so fortunate. He can-
not effectually take his own part in this difficult con-
juncture of circumstances without getting on the
wrong side of the established run of law and morals.
Unless he is content to go on as the party of the
second part in a traffic that is controlled by the mas-
sive interests on the footing of what they consider
-that the traffic will bear, he will find himself in the
wrong and may even come in for the comfortless
attention of the courts. Whereas if he makes his
peace with the established run of law and custom,
and so continues to be rated as a good man and true,
he will find that his livelihood falls into a dubious
and increasingly precarious case. It is not for noth-
ing that he is a common man.

So caught in a quandary, it is small wonder if the
common man is somewhat irresponsible and un-
steady in his aims and conduct, so far as touches
industrial affairs. A pious regard for the received
code of right and honest living holds him to a sub-
missive quietism, a make-believe of self-help and fair
dealings; whereas the material and pecuniary cir-
cumstances that condition his livelihood under this
new order drive him to fall back on the underlying
rule of Live and Let Live, and to revise the estab-
lished code of law and custom to such purpose that
this underlying rule of life shall be brought into bear-
ing in point of fact as well as in point of legal for-
mality. And the training to which the hard matter-


178 THE VESTED INTERESTS


of-fact logic of the machine industry and the mechan-
ical organisation of life now subjects him, constantly
bends him to a matter-of-fact outlook, to a rating of
men and things in terms of tangible performance,
and to an ever slighter respect for the traditional
principles that have come down from the eighteenth
century. The common man is constantly and in-
creasingly exposed to the risk of becoming an unde-
sirable citizen in the eyes. of the votaries of law and
order. In other words, vested rights to free income
are no longer felt to be secure in case the common
man should take over the direction of affairs.

Such a vested right to free income, that is to say
this legitimate right of the kept classes to their keep
at the cost of the underlying community, does not
fall in with the lines of that mechanistic outlook and
mechanistic logic which is forever gaining ground
as the new order of industry goes forward. Such
free income, which measures neither the investor’s
personal contribution to the production of goods nor
his necessary consumption while engaged in industry,
does not fit in with that mechanistic reckoning that
runs in terms of tangible performance, and that
grows ever increasingly habitual and convincing with
every further habituation to the new order of things
in the industrial world. Vested perquisites have no
place in the new scheme of things; hence the new
scheme is a menace. It is true, the well stabilised
principles of the eighteenth century still continue to
rate the investor as a producer of goods; but it is
equally true that such a rating is palpable nonsense
according to the mechanistic calculus of the new or-
der, brought into bearing by the mechanical industry


THE COMMON MAN 179


and material science. ‘This may all be an untoward
and distasteful turn of circumstances, but there is no
gain of tranquillity to be got from ignoring it.

So it comes about that, increasingly, throughout
broad classes in these industrial countries there is
coming to be visible a lack of respect and affection
for the vested interests, whether of business or of
privilege; and it rises to the pitch of distrust and
plain disallowance among those peoples on whom the
preconceptions of the eighteenth century sit more
lightly and loosely. It still is all vague and shifty.
~So much so that the guardians of law and order are
still persuaded that they ‘“‘have the situation in
hand.” But the popular feeling of incongruity and
uselessness in the current run of law and custom un-
der the rule of these timeworn preconceptions is vis-
ibly gaining ground and gathering consistency, even
in so well ordered a republic as America. A cleay-
age of sentiment is beginning to run between the
vested interests and the variegated mass of the com-
mon lot; and increasingly the common man is grow-
ing apathetic, or even impervious, to appeals
grounded on these timeworn preconceptions of
equity and good usage.

The fact of such a cleavage, as well as the exist-
ence of any ground for it, is painstakingly denied by
the spokesmen of the vested interests; and in sup-
port of that comfortable delusion they will cite the
exemplary fashion in which certain monopolistic
labor organisations “‘ stand pat.” It is true, such a
quasi-vested interest of the A. F. of L., which unbid-
den assumes to speak for the common man, can
doubtless be counted on to “‘ stand pat” on that sys-


180 THE VESTED INTERESTS


tem of imponderables in which its vested perquisites
reside. So also the kept classes, and their stewards
among the keepers of law and custom, are inflexibly
content to let well enough alone. They can be
counted on to see nothing more to the point than a
stupidly subversive rapacity in that loosening of the
bonds of convention that so makes light of the sacred
rights of vested interest. Interested motives may
count for something on both sides, but it is also true
that the kept classes and the businesslike managers of
the vested interests, whose place in the economy of
nature it is to make money by conforming to the
received law and custom, have not in the same de-
gree undergone the shattering discipline of the New
Order. They are, therefore, still to be found stand-
ing blamelessly on the stable principles of the Mod-
ern Point of View.

But a large fraction of the people in the indus-
trial countries is visibly growing uneasy under these
principles as they work out under existing circum-
stances. So, e.g., it is evident that the common
man within the United Kingdom, in so far as the
Labor Party is his accredited spokesman, is increas-
ingly restive under the state of “ things as they are,”
and it is scarcely less evident that he finds his abid-
ing grievance in the Vested Interests and that system
of law and custom which cherishes them. And
these men, as well as their like in other countries,
are still in an unsettled state of advance to positions
more definitely at variance with the received law and
custom. In some instances, and indeed in more or
less massive formation, this movement of dissent


THE COMMON MAN 18i


has already reached the limit of tolerance and has
found itself sharply checked by the constituted keep-
ers of law and custom.

It is perhaps not unwarranted to count the I. W.
W. as such a vanguard of dissent, in spite of the
slight consistency and the exuberance of its move-
ments. After all, these and their like, here and in
other countries are an element of appreciable weight
in the population. They are also increasingly nu-
merous, in spite of well-conceived repressive meas-
_ ures, and they appear to grow increasingly sure. And

it will not do to lose sight of the presumption that,
while they may be gravely in the wrong, they are
likely not to be far out of touch with the undistin-
guished mass of the common sort who still continue
to live within the law. It should seem likely that
the peculiar moral and intellectual bent which marks
them as ‘“‘ undesirable citizens ’’ will, all the while,
be found to run closer to that of the common man
than the corresponding bent of the law-abiding bene-
ficiaries under the existing system.

Vaguely, perhaps, and with a picturesque irre-
sponsibility, these and their like are talking and
thinking at cross-purposes with the principles of free
bargain and self-help. There is reason to believe
that to their own thinking, when cast in the terms
in which they conceive these things, their notions of
reasonable human intercourse are not equally fan-
tastic and inconclusive. So, there is the dread word,
Syndicalism, which is quite properly unintelligible
to the kept classes and the adepts of corporation fi-
nance, and which has no definable meaning within


182 THE VESTED INTERESTS


the constituent principles of the eighteenth century.
But the notion of it seems to come easy, by mere
lapse of habit, to these others in whom the discipline
of the New Order has begun to displace the precon-
ceptions of the eighteenth century.

Then there are, in this country, the agrarian syn-
dicalists, in the shape of the Nonpartisan League,—
large, loose, animated, and untidy, but sure of itself
in its settled disallowance of the Vested Interests,
and fast passing the limit of tolerance in its inatten-
tion to the timeworn principles of equity. How se-
rious is the moral dereliction and the subversive
stupidity of these agrarian syndicalists, in the eyes
of those who still hold fast to the eighteenth century,
may be gathered from the animation of the business
community, the commercial clubs, the Rotarians, and
the traveling salesmen, in any place where the
League raises its untidy head. And as if advisedly
to complete the case, these agrarians, as well as their
running-mates in the industrial centers and along the
open road, are found to be slack in respect of their
national spirit. So, at least, it is said by those who
are interested to know.

It is not that these and their like are ready with
‘‘a satisfactory constructive program,” such as the
people of the uplift require to be shown before they
will believe that things are due to change. It is
something of the simpler and cruder sort, such as his-
tory is full of, to the effect that whenever and so far
as the timeworn rules no longer fit the new material
circumstances they presently fail to carry conviction
as they once did. Such wear and tear of institu


THE COMMON MAN 183


tions is unavoidable where circumstances change;
and it is through the altered personal equation of
those elements of the population which are most di-
rectly exposed to the changing circumstances that
the wear and tear of institutions may be expected to
take effect. To these untidy creatures of the New
Order common honesty appears to mean vaguely
something else, perhaps something more exacting,
than what was “nominated in the bond” at the
time when the free bargain and self-help were writ-
ten into the moral constitution of Christendom by
the handicraft industry and the petty trade. And
why should it not?


THE END


nets RV: Pocomenitne met ras se
eee reat ea bei pag 4) | te
Csr + FB Aes Cae R ole) good b ‘neh te
“ites nr 1 =e a ‘Ae eae pit
Saltere ui Tati sapere wee 4
: biel abs fu ‘nee a oar wt


Mast Si at Wet siti Fe


4 es er U
i DIG wey 3 Aue


‘aesscaTvaldithy
