The Instinct of Workmanship
Thorstein Veblen (1914)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Thorstein Veblen's 'The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the Industrial Arts' (New York: Macmillan, 1914). Sourced from the 1918 impression scan via Internet Archive. Library stamps and date-due matter trimmed from the front. The 1914 work is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE  INSTINCT  OF  WORKMANSHIP


BOOKS  BY  THORSTEIN  VEBLEN

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  LEISURE  CLASS

THE  THEORY  OF  BUSINESS  ENTERPRISE

THE  INSTINCT  OF  WORKMANSHIP

IMPERIAL  GERMANY

AND  THE  INDUSTRIAL  REVOLUTION

THE  NATURE  OF  PEACE

AND  THE  TERMS  OF  ITS  PERPETUATION

THE  HIGHER  LEARNING  IN  AMERICA


THE  INSTINCT  OF
WORKMANSHIP ;^


And  the  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts

BY

THORSTEIN  VEBLEN


NEW  YORK

B.  W.  HUEBSCH

MCMXVm


(■^


v>4


/


COPYRIGHT  1914
By  the  Macmillan  Company
All  rights  reserved.

Published  March.  1914.
New  edition  published  by  B.  W.  Huebsch.  July.  1918.


r


\<)


o


I


TO
B  K  N


PREFACE

The  following  essay  attempts  an  analysis  of  such  cor-
relation as  is  visible  between  industrial  use  and  wont  and
those  other  institutional  facts  that  go  to  make  up  any
given  phase  of  civilisation.  It  is  assumed  that  in  the
growth  of  culture,  as  in  its  current  maintenance,  the
facts  of  technological  use  and  wont  are  fundamental  and
definitive,  in  the  sense  that  they  underlie  and  condition
the  scope  and  method  of  civilisation  in  other  than  the
technological  respect,  but  not  in  such  a  sense  as  to  pre-
clude or  overlook  the  degree  in  which  these  other  con-
ventions of  any  given  civilisation  in  their  turn  react  on
the  state  of  the  industrial  arts.

The  analysis  proceeds  on  the  materialistic  assumptions
of  modern  science,  but  without  prejudice  to  the  underly-
ing question  as  to  the  ulterior  competency  of  this  ma-
terialistic conception  considered  as  a  metaphysical  tenet.
The  inquiry  simply  accepts  these  mechanistic  assump-
tions of  material  science  for  the  purpose  in  hand,  since
these  afford  the  currently  acceptable  terms  of  solution
for  any  scientific  problem  of  the  kind  in  the  present  state
of  preconceptions  on  this  head.

As  should  appear  from  its  slight  bulk,  the  essay  is  of
the  nature  of  a  cursory  survey  rather  than  an  exhaustive
inquiry  with  full  documentation.  The  few  references
given  and  the  authorities  cited  in  the  course  of  the  argu-
ment are  accordingly  not  to  be  taken  as  an  inclusive

vii


viii  Preface

presentation  of  the  materials  on  which  the  inquiry  rests.
It  will  also  be  remarked  that  where  authoritative  docu-
ments are  cited  the  citation  is  general  and  extensive
rather  than  specific  and  detailed.  Wherever  detailed
references  are  given  they  will  be  found  to  bear  on  specific
facts  brought  into  the  argument  by  way  of  illustrative
detail.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  I  ^^^^

PAGE

Introductory i


CHAPTER  II
Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology . 38

CHAPTER  III
The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  . . .103

CHAPTER  IV
The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture . . 138

CHAPTER  V

Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System . . . 187

CHAPTER  VI
The  Era  of  Handicraft 231

CHAPTER  VII
The  Machine  Industry 299


THE  INSTINCT  OF  WORKMANSHIP


THE  INSTINCT  OF  WORKMANSHIP

CHAPTER  I

Introductory

For  mankind  as  for  the  other  higher  animals,  the  life
of  the  species  is  conditioned  by  the  complement  of  in-
stinctive proclivities  and  tropismatic  aptitudes  with
which  the  species  is  typically  endowed.  Not  only  is  the
continued  life  of  the  race  dependent  on  the  adequacy  of
its  instinctive  proclivities  in  this  way,  but  the  routine
and  details  of  its  life  are  also,  in  the  last  resort,  deter-
mined by  these  instincts.  These  are  the  prime  movers  in
human  behaviour,  as  in  the  behaviour  of  all  those  animals
that  show  self-direction  or  discretion.  Human  activity,
in  so  far  as  it  can  be  spoken  of  as  conduct,  can  never
exceed  the  scope  of  these  instinctive  dispositions,  by
initiative  of  which  man  takes  action.  Nothing  falls
within  the  human  scheme  of  things  desirable  to  be  done
except  what  answers  to  these  native  proclivities  of  man.
These  native  proclivities  alone  make  anything  worth
while,  and  out  of  their  working  emerge  not  only  the
purpose  and  efficiency  of  life,  but  its  substantial  pleas-
ures and  pains  as  well.

Latterly  the  words  "instinct'^  and  "instinctive"  are
no  longer  well  seen  among  students  of  those  biological


2  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

sciences  where  they  once  had  a  great  vogue.  Students
who  occupy  themselves  with  the  psychology  of  animal
behaviour  are  cautiously  avoiding  these  expressions,  and
in  this  caution  they  are  doubtless  well  advised.  For
such  use  the  word  appears  no  longer  to  be  serviceable  as
a  technical  term.  It  has  lost  the  requisite  sharp  defini-
tion and  consistency  of  connotation,  apparently  through
disintegration  under  a  more  searching  analysis  than  the
phenomena  comprised  under  this  concept  had  previously
been  subjected  to.  In  these  biological  sciences  interest
is  centering  not  on  the  question  of  what  activities  may
be  set  down  to  innate  propensity  or  predisposition  at
large,  but  rather  on  the  determination  of  the  irreducible
psychological — and,  indeed,  physiological — elements  that
go  to  make  up  animal  behaviour.  For  this  purpose
"instinct"  is  a  concept  of  too  lax  and  shifty  a  definition
to  meet  the  demands  of  exact  biological  science.

For  the  sciences  that  deal  with  the  psychology  of
human  conduct  a  similarly  searching  analysis  of  the
elementary  facts  of  behaviour  is  doubtless  similarly  de-
sirable; and  under  such  closer  scrutiny  of  these  facts  it
will  doubtless  appear  that  here,  too,  the  broad  term
"instinct"  is  of  too  unprecise  a  character  to  serve  the
needs  of  an  exhaustive  psychological  analysis.  But  the
needs  of  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  causes  of  the
growth  of  institutions  are  not  precisely  the  same  as  those
of  such  an  exhaustive  psychological  analysis.  A  genetic
inquiry  into  institutions  will  address  itself  to  the  growth
of  habits  and  conventions,  as  conditioned  by  the  ma-
terial environment  and  by  the  innate  and  persistent
propensities  of  human  nature;  and  for  these  propensities,
as  they  take  effect  in  the  give  and  take  of  cultural  growth,


Introductory  3

no  better  designation  than  the  time-worn  "instinct"  is
available.

In  the  light  of  recent  inquiries  and  speculations  it  is
scarcely  to  be  questioned  that  each  of  these  distinguish-
able propensities  may  be  analysed  into  simpler  constit-
uent elements,  of  a  quasi-tropismatic  or  physiological
nature;  ^  but  in  the  Hght  of  every-day  experience  and
common  notoriety  it  is  at  the  same  time  not  to  be  ques-
tioned that  these  simple  and  irreducible  psychological
elements  of  human  behaviour  fall  into  composite  func-
tional groups,  and  so  make  up  specific  and  determinate
propensities,  proclivities,  aptitudes  that  are,  within  the
purview  of  the  social  sciences,  to  be  handled  as  irreducible
traits  of  human  nature.  Indeed,  it  would  appear  that
it  is  in  the  particular  grouping  and  concatenation  of
these  ultimate  psychological  elements  into  characteristic
lines  of  interest  and  propensity  that  the  nature  of  man
is  finally  to  be  distinguished  from  that  of  the  lower
animals.

These  various  native  proclivities  that  are  so  classed
together  as  ''instincts"  have  the  characteristic  in  com-
mon that  they  all  and  several,  more  or  less  imperatively,
propose  an  objective  end  of  endeavour.  On  the  other
hand  what  distinguishes  one  instinct  from  another  is
that  each  sets  up  a  characteristic  purpose,  aim,  or  object
to  be  attained,  different  from  the  objective  end  of  any
other  instinct.  Instinctive  action  is  teleological,  con-
sciously so,  and  the  teleological  scope  and  aim  of  each
instinctive  propensity  differs  characteristically  from  all
the  rest. The  several  instincts  are  teleological  categories,

1  Cf.  Jacques  Loeb,  Comparative  Physiology  of  the  Brain  and  Com-
Paratvie  Psychology,  ch.  i.


4  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  are,  in  colloquial  usage,  distinguished  and  classed
on  the  ground  of  their  teleological  content.  As  the  term
is  here  used,  therefore,  and  indeed  as  it  is  currently  under-
stood, the  instincts  are  to  be  defined  or  described  neither
in  mechanical  terms  of  those  anatomical  or  physiological
aptitudes  that  causally  underlie  them  or  that  come  into
action  in  the  functioning  of  any  given  instinct,  nor  in
terms  of  the  movements  of  orientation  or  taxis  involved
in  the  functioning  of  each.  The  distinctive  feature  by
the  mark  of  which  any  given  instinct  is  identified  is  to
be  found  in  the  particular  character  of  the  purpose  to
which  it  drives.^  ''Instinct,"  as  contra-distinguished
from  tropismatic  action,  involves  consciousness  and
adaptation  to  an  end  aimed  at.

It  is,  of  course,  not  hereby  intended  to  set  up  or  to
prescribe  a  definition  of  ''instinct"  at  large,  but  only  to
indicate  as  closely  as  may  be  what  sense  is  attached  to
the  term  as  here  used.  At  the  same  time  it  is  believed
that  this  definition  of  the  concept  does  violence  neither
to  colloquial  usage  nor  to  the  usage  of  such  students  as
have  employed  the  term  in  scientific  discussion,  particu-
larly in  discussion  of  the  instinctive  proclivities  of  man-
kind. But  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  this  definition
of  the  term  may  be  found  inapphcable,  or  at  least  of
doubtful  service,  when  applied  to  those  simpler  and  more
immediate  impulses  that  are  sometimes  by  tradition
spoken  of  as  "instinctive,"  even  in  human  behaviour, —
impulses  that  might  with  better  effect  be  designated

^  Cf .  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  ch.  xxiv  and  xxv,  where,  how-
ever, the  difference  between  tropism  and  instinct  is  not  kept  well  in
hand, — the  tropisms  having  at  that  date  not  been  subjected  to  inquiry
and  definition  as  has  been  true  since  then;  William  McDougall,  Introduce
Hon  to  Social  Psychology ^  ch.  i.


Introductory  5

*'tropismatic."  In  animal  behaviour,  for  instance,  as
well  as  in  such  direct  and  immediate  impulsive  human
action  as  is  fairly  to  be  classed  with  animal  behaviour,
it  is  often  a  matter  of  some  perplexity  to  draw  a  line
between  tropismatic  activity  and  instinct.  Notoriously,
the  activities  commonly  recognised  as  instinctive  differ
widely  among  themselves  in  respect  of  the  degree  of
directness  or  immediacy  with  which  the  given  response
to  stimulus  takes  place.  They  range  in  this  respect  all
the  way  from  such  reactions  as  are  doubtfully  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  simple  reflex  action  on  the  one  hand,  to
such  as  are  doubtfully  recognised  as  instinctive  because
of  the  extent  to  which  reflection  and  deliberation  enter
into  their  execution  on  the  other  hand.  By  insensible
gradation  the  lower  (less  complex  and  deHberate)  instinc-
tive acti\dties  merge  into  the  class  of  unmistakable  tropis-
matic sensibilities,  without  its  being  practicable  to  deter-
mine by  any  secure  test  where  the  one  category  should
be  declared  to  end  and  the  other  to  begin.  ^  Such  quasi-
tropismatic  activities  may  be  rated  as  purposeful  by
an  observer,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  seen  to  further
the  life  of  the  individual  agent  or  of  the  species,  while
there  is  no  consciousness  of  purpose  on  the  part  of  the
agent  under  observation;  whereas  ''instinct,"  in  the
narrower  and  special  sense  to  which  it  seems  desirable  to
restrict  the  term  for  present  use,  denotes  the  conscious
pursuit  of  an  objective  end  which  the  instinct  in  ques-
tion makes  worth  while.

The  ends  of  Hfe,  then,  the  purposes  to  be  achieved,  are
assigned  by  man's  instinctive  proclivities;  but  the  ways

'  Loeb,  Comparative  Physiology  of  the  Brain,  pp.  177-178.


6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  means  of  accomplishing  those  things  which  the  in-
stinctive proclivities  so  make  worth  while  are  a  matter
of  intelligence.  It  is  a  distinctive  mark  of  mankind  that
the  working-out  of  the  instinctive  proclivities  of  the  race
is  guided  by  intelligence  to  a  degree  not  approached  by
the  other  animals.  But  the  dependence  of  the  race  on
its  endowment  of  instincts  is  no  less  absolute  for  this
intervention  of  intelHgence ;  since  it  is  only  by  the  prompt-
ing of  instinct  that  reflection  and  deliberation  come  to
be  so  employed,  and  since  instinct  also  governs  the  scope
and  method  of  intelligence  in  all  this  employment  of
it.  Men  take  thought,  but  the  human  spirit,  that  is  to
say  the  racial  endowment  of  instinctive  proclivities,
decides  what  they  shall  take  thought  of,  and  how  and  to
what  effect.

Yet  the  dependence  of  the  scheme  of  life  on  the  com-
plement of  instinctive  procHvities  hereby  becomes  less
immediate,  since  a  more  or  less  extended  logic  of  ways
and  means  comes  to  intervene  between  the  instinctively
given  end  and  its  reahsation;  and  the  lines  of  relation
between  any  given  instinctive  proclivity  and  any  par-
ticular feature  of  himian  conduct  are  by  so  much  the
more  devious  and  round-about  and  the  more  difficult
to  trace.  The  higher  the  degree  of  intelligence  and  the
larger  the  available  body  of  knowledge  current  in  any
given  community,  the  more  extensive  and  elaborate  will
be  the  logic  of  ways  and  means  interposed  between  these
impulses  and  their  reahsation,  and  the  more  multifarious
and  comphcated  will  be  the  apparatus  of  expedients  and
resources  employed  to  compass  those  ends  that  are  in-
stinctively worth  while.

This  apparatus  of  ways  and  means  available  for  the


Introductory  7

pursuit  of  whatever  may  be  worth  seeking  is,  substan-
tially all,  a  matter  of  tradition  out  of  the  past,  a  legacy
of  habits  of  thought  accumulated  through  the  experience
of  past  generations.  So  that  the  manner,  and  in  a  great
degree  the  measure,  in  which  the  instinctive  ends  of  life
are  worked  out  under  any  given  cultural  situation  is
somewhat  closely  conditioned  by  these  elements  of  habit,
which  so  fall  into  shape  as  an  accepted  scheme  of  hfe.
The  instinctive  proclivities  are  essentially  simple  and
look  directly  to  the  attainment  of  some  concrete  objec-
tive end;  but  in  detail  the  ends  so  sought  are  many  and
diverse,  and  the  ways  and  means  by  which  they  may  be
sought  are  similarly  diverse  and  various,  involving  end-
less recourse  to  expedients,  adaptations,  and  concessive
adjustment  between  several  proclivities  that  are  all  suf-
ficiently urgent.

Under  the  discipline  of  habituation  this  logic  and  ap-
paratus of  ways  and  means  falls  into  conventional  lines,
acquires  the  consistency  of  custom  and  prescription,
and  so  takes  on  an  institutional  character  and  force.
The  accustomed  ways  of  doing  and  thinking  not  only
become  an  habitual  matter  of  course,  easy  and  obvious,
but  they  come  likewise  to  be  sanctioned  by  social  conven-
tion, and  so  become  right  and  proper  and  give  rise  to
principles  of  conduct.  By  use  and  wont  they  are  incor-
porated into  the  current  scheme  of  common  sense.  As
elements  of  the  approved  scheme  of  conduct  and  pursuit
these  conventional  ways  and  means  take  their  place  as
proximate  ends  of  endeavour.  Whence,  in  the  further
course  of  unremitting  habituation,  as  the  attention  is
habitually  focussed  on  these  proximate  ends,  they  occupy
the  interest  to  such  an  extent  as  commonly  to  throw  their


8  The  instinct  of  Workmanship

own  ulterior  purpose  into  the  background  and  often
let  it  be  lost  sight  of;  as  may  happen,  for  instance,  in  the
acquisition  and  use  of  money.  It  follows  that  in  much
of  human  conduct  these  proximate  ends  alone  are  present
in  consciousness  as  the  object  of  interest  and  the  goal  of
endeavour,  and  certain  conventionally  accepted  ways
and  means  come  to  be  set  up  as  definitive  principles  of
what  is  right  and  good;  while  the  ulterior  purpose  of  it
all  is  only  called  to  mind  occasionally,  if  at  all,  as  an
afterthought,  by  an  effort  of  reflection.^

Among  psychologists  who  have  busied  themselves  with
these  questions  there  has  hitherto  been  no  large  measure
of  agreement  as  to  the  number  of  specific  instinctive
procHvities  that  so  are  native  to  man;  nor  is  there  any
agreement  as  to  the  precise  functional  range  and  content
ascribed  to  each.  In  a  loose  way  it  is  apparently  taken
for  granted  that  these  instincts  are  to  be  conceived  as
discrete  and  specific  elements  in  human  nature,  each
working  out  its  own  determinate  functional  content
without  greatly  blending  with  or  being  diverted  by  the
working  of  its  neighbours  in  that  spiritual  complex  into
which  they  all  enter  as  constituent  elements.^  For  the
purposes  of  an  exhaustive  psychological  analysis  it  is
doubtless  expedient  to  make  the  most  of  such  discrete-
ness as  is  observable  among  the  instinctive  proclivities.
But  for  an  inquiry  into  the  scope  and  method  of  their
working-out  in  the  growth  of  institutions  it  is  perhaps
even  more  to  the  purpose  to  take  note  of  how  and  with

*  Cf.  Graham  Wallas,  Human  Nature  in  Politics,  especially  ch.  i.
2  Cf.,  e.  g.,  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  ch.  xxiv;  William  Mc-
Dougall,  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology ^  ch.  iii.


Introductory  9

what  effect  the  several  instinctive  proclivities  cross,
blend,  overlap,  neutralise  or  reenforce  one  another.

The  most  convincing  genetic  view  of  these  phenomena
throws  the  instinctive  proclivities  into  close  relation
with  the  tropismatic  sensibilities  and  brings  them,  in  the
physiological  respect,  into  the  same  general  class  with
the  latter.^  If  taken  uncritically  and  in  general  terms
this  view  would  seem  to  carry  the  implication  that  the
instincts  should  be  discrete  and  discontinuous  among
themselves  somewhat  after  the  same  fashion  as  the  tropis-
matic sensibilities  with  which  they  are  in  great  measure
bound  up;  but  on  closer  scrutiny  such  a  genetic  theory  of
the  instincts  does  not  appear  to  enforce  the  view  that
they  are  to  be  conceived  as  effectually  discontinuous
or  mutually  exclusive,  though  it  may  also  not  involve
the  contrary, — that  they  make  a  continuous  or  am-
biguously segmented  body  of  spiritual  elements.  The
recognised  tropisms  stand  out,  to  all  appearance,  as
sharply  defined  physiological  traits,  transmissible  by
inheritance  intact  and  unmodified,  separable  and  un-
blended, in  a  manner  suggestively  Kke  the  "unit  char-
acters'' spoken  of  in  latter  day  theories  of  heredity.^

*  Loeb,  Comparative  Physiology  of  the  Brain,  especially  ch.  xiii.

*  It  is  of  course  only  as  physiological  traits  that  the  tropisms  are  con-
ceived not  to  overlap,  blend  or  interfere,  and  it  is  likewise  only  in  respect
of  their  physiological  discontinuity  that  the  like  argument  would  bear
on  the  instincts.  In  respect  of  their  expression,  in  the  way  of  orientation,
movement,  growth,  secretion,  and  the  like,  the  tropismatic  response  to
dissimilar  stimuli  is  often  so  apparently  identical  that  expert  investigators
have  at  times  been  at  a  loss  to  decide  to  which  one  of  two  or  several
recognised  tropismatic  sensibilities  a  given  motor  response  should  be
ascribed.  But  in  respect  of  their  ultimate  physiological  character,  the
intimate  physiological  process  by  which  the  given  sensibility  takes  effect,
the  response  due  to  different  tropismatic  sensibilities  appears  in  each  case


lo  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

While  the  instinctive  sensibilities  may  not  be  explained
as  derivatives  of  the  tropisms,  there  is  enough  of  simi-
larity in  the  working  of  the  two  to  suggest  that  the  two
classes  of  phenomena  must  both  be  accounted  for  on
somewhat  similar  physiological  grounds.  The  simple
and  more  narrowly  defined  instinctive  dispositions,  which
have  much  of  the  appearance  of  immediate  reflex  nervous
action  and  automatically  defined  response,  lend  them-
selves passably  to  such  an  interpretation, — as,  for  ex-
ample, the  gregarious  instinct,  or  the  instinct  of  repulsion
with  its  accompanying  emotion  of  disgust.  Such  as
these  are  shared  by  mankind  with  the  other  higher
animals  on  a  fairly  even  footing;  and  these  are  relatively
simple,  immediate,  and  not  easily  sophisticated  or  offset
by  habit.  These  seem  patently  to  be  of  much  the  same
nature  as  the  tropismatic  sensibilities;  though  even  in
these  simpler  instinctive  dispositions  the  characteristic
quasi-tropismatic  sensibiHty  distinctive  of  each  appears
to  be  complicated  with  obscure  stimulations  of  the  nerve
centres  arising  out  of  the  functioning  of  one  or  another
of  the  viscera.  And  what  is  true  of  the  simpler  instincts
in  this  respect  should  apply  to  the  vaguer  and  more  com-
plex instincts  also,  but  with  a  larger  allowance  for  a  more
extensive  compHcation  of  visceral  and  organic  stimuli.-

Whether  these  subconscious  stimulations  of  the  nerve
centres  through  the  functioning  of  the  viscera  are  to  be
conceived  in  terms  of  tropismatic  reaction  is  a  difficult
question  which  has  had  little  attention  hitherto.  But  in
any  case,  whatever  the  expert  students  of  these  phenom-
ena may  have  to  say  of  this  matter,  the  visceral  or  or-

to  be  distinctive  and  not  to  blend  with  any  other  response  to  a  different
Stimulus,  with  which  it  may  happen  to  synchronise,


Introductory  ii

ganic  stimuli  engaged  in  any  one  of  the  instinctive  sensi-
bilities are  apparently  always  more  than  one  and  are
usually  somewhat  complex.  Indeed,  while  it  seems  super-
ficially an  easy  matter  to  refer  any  one  of  the  simple
instincts  directly  to  some  certain  one  of  the  viscera  as
the  main  or  primary  source  from  which  its  appropriate
stimulation  comes  to  the  nerve  centres,  it  is  by  no  means
easy  to  decide  what  one  or  more  of  the  viscera,  or  of  the
other  organs  that  are  not  commonly  classed  as  viscera,
will  have  no  part  in  the  matter.

It  results  that,  on  physiological  grounds,  the  common
run  of  human  instincts  are  not  to  be  conceived  as  sever-
ally discrete  and  elementary  proclivities.  The  same
physiological  processes  enter  in  some  measure,  though
in  varying  proportions,  into  the  functioning  of  each.
In  instinctive  action  the  individual  acts  as  a  whole,  and
in  the  conduct  which  emerges  under  the  driving  force
of  these  instinctive  dispositions  the  part  which  each
several  instinct  plays  is  a  matter  of  more  or  less,  not  of
exclusive  direction.  They  must  therefore  incontinently
touch,  blend,  overlap  and  interfere,  and  can  not  be  con-
ceived as  acting  each  and  several  in  sheer  isolation  and
independence  of  one  another.  The  relations  of  give  and
take  among  the  several  instinctive  dispositions,  there-
fore— of  inosculation,  "contamination"  and  cross  pur-
poses— are  presumably  slighter  and  of  less  consequence
for  the  simpler  and  more  apparently  tropismatic  impulses
while  on  the  other  hand  the  less  specific  and  vaguer  in-
stinctive predispositions,  such  as  the  parental  bent  or
the  procHvity  to  construction  or  acquisition,  will  be  so
comprehensively  and  intricately  bound  in  a  web  of  corre-
lation and  inter-dependence — will  so  unremittingly  con-


12  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

taminate,  offset  or  fortify  one  another,  and  have  each
so  large  and  yet  so  shifting  a  margin  of  common  ground
with  all  the  rest — that  hard  and  fast  lines  of  demarca-
tion can  scarcely  be  drawn  between  them.  The  best
that  can  practically  be  had  in  the  way  of  a  secure  defini-
tion will  be  a  descriptive  characterisation  of  each  dis-
tinguishable propensity,  together  with  an  indication  of
the  more  salient  and  consequential  ramifications  by
which  each  contaminates  or  is  contaminated  by  the  work-
ing of  other  propensities  that  go  to  make  up  that  complex
of  instinctive  dispositions  that  constitutes  the  spiritual
nature  of  the  race.  So  that  the  schemes  of  definition
that  have  hitherto  been  worked  out  are  in  great  part
to  be  taken  as  arrangements  of  convenience,  serviceable
apparatus  for  present  use,  rather  than  distinctions  en-
forced at  all  points  by  an  equally  sharp  substantial  dis-
creteness of  the  facts.  ^

This  fact,  that  in  some  measure  the  several  instincts
spring  from  a  common  ground  of  sentient  Hfe,  that  they
each  engage  the  individual  as  a  whole,  has  serious  conse-
quences in  the  domain  of  habit,  and  therefore  it  counts
for  much  in  the  growth  of  civiHsaticn  and  in  the  every-
day conduct  of  affairs.  The  physiological  apparatus  en-
gaged in  the  functioning  of  any  given  instinct  enters  in
part,  though  in  varying  measure,  into  the  working  of
some  or  of  any  other  instinct;  whereby,  even  on  physio-
logical grounds  alone,  the  habituation  that  touches  the
functioning  of  any  given  instinct  must,  in  a  less  degree
but  pervasively,  affect  the  habitual  conduct  of  the  same
agent  when  driven  by  any  other  instinct.  So  that  on
this  view  the  scope  of  habit,  in  so  far  as  it  bears  on  the

^  Cf.j  e.  g.,  McDougall,  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology,  ch.  i-iii.


Introductory  13

instinctive  activities,  is  necessarily  wider  than  the  par-
ticular concrete  line  of  conduct  to  which  the  habituation
in  question  is  due.

The  instincts  are  hereditary  traits.  In  the  current
theories  of  heredity  they  would  presumably  be  counted
as  secondary  characteristics  of  the  species,  as  being  in  a
sense  by-products  of  the  physiological  activities  that
give  the  species  its  specific  character;  since  these  theories
in  the  last  resort  run  in  physiological  terms.  So  the
instinctive  dispositions  would  scarcely  be  accounted  unit
characters,  in  the  Mendehan  sense,  but  would  rather
count  as  spiritual  traits  emerging  from  a  certain  concur-
rence of  physiological  unit  characters  and  varying  some-
what according  to  variations  in  the  complement  of  unit
characters  to  which  the  species  or  the  individual  may
owe  his  constitution.  Hence  would  arise  variations  of
individuality  among  the  members  of  the  race,  resting
in  some  such  manner  as  has  just  been  suggested  on
the  varying  endowment  of  instincts,  and  running  back
through  these  finally  to  recondite  differences  of  physio-
logical function.  Some  such  account  of  the  instinctive
dispositions  and  their  relation  to  the  physical  indi\^dual
seems  necessary  as  a  means  of  apprehending  them  and
their  work  without  assuming  a  sheer  break  between  the
physical  and  the  immaterial  phenomena  of  Hfe.

Characteristic  of  the  race  is  a  degree  of  vagueness  or
generality,  an  absence  of  automatically  determinate
response,  a  lack  of  concrete  eventuahty  as  it  might  be
called,  in  the  common  run  of  human  instincts.  This
vague  and  shifty  character  of  the  instincts,  or  perhaps


14  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

rather  of  the  habitual  response  to  their  incitement,  is  to
be  taken  in  connection  with  the  breadth  and  variability
of  their  physiological  ground  as  spoken  of  above.  For
the  long-term  success  of  the  race  it  is  manifestly  of  the
highest  value,  since  it  leaves  a  wide  and  facile  margin  of
experimentation,  habituation,  invention  and  accommo-
dation open  to  the  sense  of  workmanship.  At  the  same
time  and  by  the  same  circumstance  the  scope  and  range
of  conventionaKsation  and  sophistication  are  similarly
flexible,  wide  and  consequential.  No  doubt  the  several
racial  stocks  differ  very  appreciably  in  this  respect.

The  complement  of  instinctive  dispositions,  compris-
ing under  that  term  both  the  native  propensity  and  its
appropriate  sentiment,  makes  up  what  would  be  called
the  "spiritual  nature"  of  man — often  spoken  of  more
simply  as  "human  nature."  Without  allowing  it  to
imply  anything  like  a  dualism  or  dichotomy  between
material  and  immaterial  phenomena,  the  term  "spir-
itual" may  conveniently  be  so  used  in  its  colloquial
sense.  So  employed  it  commits  the  discussion  to  no
attitude  on  the  question  of  man's  single  or  dual  consti-
tution, but  simply  uses  the  conventional  expression  to
designate  that  complement  of  functions  which  it  has  by
current  usage  been  employed  to  designate.

The  human  complement  of  instincts  fluctuates  from
one  individual  to  another  in  an  apparently  endless  di-
versity, varying  both  in  the  relative  force  of  the  several
instinctive  proclivities  and  in  the  scheme  of  co-ordination,
coalescence  or  interference  that  prevails  among  them.
This  diversity  of  native  character  is  noticeable  among
all  peoples,  though  some  of  the  peoples  of  the  lower
cultures  show  a  notable  approach  to  uniformity  of  type,


Introductory  15

both  physical  and  spiritual.  The  diversity  is  particu-
lariy  marked  among  the  civilised  peoples,  and  perhaps
in  a  peculiar  degree  among  the  peoples  of  Europe  and
her  colonies.  The  extreme  diversity  of  native  character,
both  physical  and  spiritual,  noticeable  in  these  com-
munities is  in  all  probabiKty  due  to  their  being  made  up
of  a  mixture  of  racial  stocks.  In  point  of  pedigree,  all
individuals  in  the  peoples  of  the  Western  culture  are
hybrids,  and  the  greater  number  of  individuals  are  a
mixture  of  more  than  two  racial  stocks.  The  proportions
in  which  the  several  transmissible  traits  that  go  to  make
up  the  racial  type  enter  into  the  composition  of  these
hybrid  individuals  will  accordingly  vary  endlessly.  The
number  of  possible  permutations  will  therefore  be  ex-
tremely large;  so  that  the  resulting  range  of  variation
in  the  hybrids  that  so  result  from  the  crossing  of  these
different  racial  stocks  will  be  sufficiently  large,  even  when
it  plays  within  such  limits  as  to  leave  the  generic  human
type  intact.  From  time  to  time  the  variation  may  even
exceed  these  limits  of  human  normahty  and  give  a
variant  in  which  the  relative  emphasis  on  the  several
constituent  instinctive  elements  is  distributed  after  a
scheme  so  far  from  the  generically  human  type  as  to
throw  the  given  variant  out  of  touch  with  the  common
run  of  humanity  and  mark  him  as  of  unsound  mind  or  as
disserviceable  for  the  purposes  of  the  community  in
which  he  occurs,  or  even  as  disserviceable  for  life  in  any
society.

Yet,  even  through  these  hybrid  populations  there
runs  a  generically  human  type  of  spiritual  endowment
prevalent  as  a  general  average  of  human  nature  through-
out, and  suitable  to  the  continued  life  of  mankind  in


1 6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

society.  Disserviceably  wide  departures  from  this
generically  human  and  serviceable  type  of  spiritual  en-
dowment will  tend  constantly  to  be  selectively  eHminated
from  the  race,  even  where  the  variation  arises  from
hybridism.  The  hke  will  hold  true  in  a  more  radical
fashion  as  applied  to  any  variants  that  may  arise  through
a  Mendelian  mutation.

So  that  the  numerous  racial  types  now  existing  repre-
sent only  such  mutants  as  lie  within  the  limits  of  toler-
ance imposed  by  the  situation  under  which  any  given
mutant  type  has  emerged  and  survived.  A  surviving
mutant  type  is  necessarily  suited  more  or  less  closely  to
the  circumstances  under  which  it  emerged  and  first
made  good  its  survival,  and  it  is  presumably  less  suited
to  any  other  situation.  With  a  change  in  the  situation,
therefore,  such  as  may  come  with  the  migration  of  a
given  racial  stock  from  one  habitat  to  another,  or  with
an  equivalent  shifting  growth  of  culture  or  change  of
climate,  the  requirements  of  survival  are  likely  to  change.
Indeed,  so  grave  are  the  alterations  that  may  in  this  way
supervene  in  the  current  requirements  for  survival,  that
any  given  racial  stock  may  dwindle  and  decay  for  no
other  reason  than  that  the  growth  of  its  culture  has  come
to  subject  the  stock  to  methods  of  Kfe  widely  different
from  those  under  which  its  type  of  man  originated  and
made  good  its  fitness  to  survive.  So,  in  the  mixture  of
races  that  make  up  the  population  of  the  Western  nations
a  competitive  struggle  for  survival  has  apparently  always
been  going  on  among  the  several  racial  stocks  that  enter
into  the  hybrid  mass,  with  varying  fortunes  according
as  the  shifting  cultural  demands  and  opportunities  have
favoured  now  one,  now  another  type  of  man. These  cul-


Introductory  17

tural  conditions  of  survival  in  the  racial  struggle  for
existence  have  varied  in  the  course  of  centuries,  and  with
grave  consequences  for  the  life-history  of  the  race  and
of  its  culture;  and  they  are  perhaps  changing  more  sub-
stantially and  rapidly  in  the  immediate  present  than
at  any  previous  time  within  the  historical  period.  So
that,  for  instance,  the  continued  biological  success  of
any  given  one  of  these  stocks  in  the  European  racial
mixture  has  within  a  moderate  period  of  time  shifted
from  the  ground  of  fighting  capacity,  and  even  in  a
measure  from  the  ground  of  climatic  fitness,  to  that
of  spiritual  fitness  to  survive  under  the  conditions  im-
posed by  a  new  cultural  situation,  by  a  scheme  of  institu-
tions that  is  insensibly  but  incessantly  changing  as  it
runs.^

These  unremitting  changes  and  adaptations  that  go
forward  in  the  scheme  of  institutions,  legal  and  cus-
tomary, unremittingly  induce  new  habits  of  work  and  of
thought  in  the  community,  and  so  they  continually  instil
new  principles  of  conduct;  with  the  outcome  that  the
same  range  of  instinctive  dispositions  innate  in  the
population  will  work  out  to  a  different  effect  as  regards
the  demands  of  race  survival.  To  all  appearance,  what
counts  first  in  this  connection  toward  the  selective  sur-
vival of  the  several  European  racial  stocks  is  their  rela-
tive fitness  to  meet  the  material  requirements  of  life, —
their  economic  fitness  to  five  under  the  new  cultural
limitations  and  with  the  new  training  which  this  altered
cultural  situation  gives. But  the  fortunes  of  the  Western

^  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Otto  Ammon,  Die  Gesellschaftsordnung;  G.  Vacher  de  La-
pouge,  Les  selections  sociales,  and  Race  et  milieu  social,  especially  "Lois
fondamentales  de  rAnthroposociologie."


1 8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

civilisation  as  a  cultural  scheme,  apart  from  the  biological
survival  or  success  of  any  given  racial  constituent  in  the
Western  peoples,  is  Hkewise  bound  up  with  the  viability
of  European  mankind  under  these  institutional  changes,
and  dependent  on  the  spiritual  fitness  of  inherited  human
nature  successfully  and  enduringly  to  carry  on  the  altered
scheme  of  Hfe  so  imposed  on  these  peoples  by  the  growth
of  their  own  culture.  Such  limitations  imposed  on  cul-
tural growth  by  native  proclivities  ill  suited  to  civilised
life  are  sufficiently  visible  in  several  directions  and  in  all
the  nations  of  Christendom.

What  is  known  of  heredity  goes  to  say  that  the  various
racial  types  of  man  are  stable;  so  that  during  the  Hfe-
history  of  any  given  racial  stock,  it  is  held,  no  heritable
modification  of  its  typical  make-up,  whether  spiritual  or
physical,  is  to  be  looked  for.  The  typical  human  endow-
ment of  instincts,  as  well  as  the  typical  make-up  of  the
race  in  the  physical  respect,  has  according  to  this  current
view  been  transmitted  intact  from  the  beginning  of
humanity, — that  is  to  say  from  whatever  point  in  the
mutational  development  of  the  race  it  is  seen  fit  to  date
humanity, — except  so  far  as  subsequent  mutations  have
given  rise  to  new  racial  stocks,  to  and  by  which  this
human  endowment  of  native  procKvities  has  been  trans-
mitted in  a  typically  modified  form.  On  the  other  hand
the  habitual  elements  of  human  life  change  unremit-
tingly and  cumulatively,  resulting  in  a  continued  pro-
liferous growth  of  institutions.  Changes  in  the  institu-
tional structure  are  continually  taking  place  in  response  to
the  altered  discipline  of  hfe  under  changing  cultural  con-
ditions, but  human  nature  remains  specifically  the  same.


Introductory  19

The  ways  and  means,  material  and  immaterial,  by
which  the  native  proclivities  work  out  their  ends,  there-
fore, are  forever  in  process  of  change,  being  conditioned
by  the  changes  cumulatively  going  forward  in  the  insti-
tutional fabric  of  habitual  elements  that  governs  the
scheme  of  Hfe.  But  there  is  no  warrant  for  assuming
that  each  or  any  of  these  successive  changes  in  the  scheme
of  institutions  affords  successively  readier,  surer  or  more
facile  ways  and  means  for  the  instinctive  proclivities  to
work  out  their  ends,  or  that  the  phase  of  habituation  in
force  at  any  given  point  in  this  sequence  of  change  is
more  suitable  to  the  untroubled  functioning  of  these
instincts  than  any  phase  that  has  gone  before.  Indeed,
the  presumption  is  the  other  way.  On  grounds  of  selec-
tive survival  it  is  reasonably  to  be  presumed  that  any
given  racial  type  that  has  endured  the  test  of  selective
elimination,  including  the  complement  of  instinctive
dispositions  by  virtue  of  which  it  has  endured  the  test,
will  on  its  first  emergence  have  been  passably  suited  to
the  circumstances,  material  and  cultural,  under  which  the
type  emerged  as  a  mutant  and  made  good  its  survival;
and  in  so  far  as  the  subsequent  growth  of  institutions
has  altered  the  available  scope  and  method  of  instinctive
action  it  is  therefore  to  be  presumed  that  any  such  sub-
sequent change  in  the  scheme  of  institutions  will  in  some
degree  hinder  or  divert  the  free  play  of  its  instinctive
procHvities  and  will  thereby  hinder  the  direct  and  un-
sophisticated working-out  of  the  instinctive  dispositions
native  to  this  given  racial  type.

What  is  known  of  the  earlier  phases  of  culture  in  the
Hfe-history  of  the  existing  races  and  peoples  goes  to  say
that  the  initial  phase  in  the  Ufe  of  any  given  racial  type.


20  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  phase  of  culture  which  prevailed  in  its  environment
when  it  emerged,  and  under  which  the  stock  first  proved
its  fitness  to  survive,  was  presumably  some  form  of
savagery.  Therefore  the  fitness  of  any  given  type  of
human  nature  for  life  after  the  manner  and  under  the
conditions  imposed  by  any  later  phase  in  the  growth  of
culture  is  a  matter  of  less  and  less  secure  presumption
the  farther  the  sequence  of  institutional  change  has
departed  from  that  form  of  savagery  which  marked  the
initial  stage  in  the  hfe-history  of  the  given  racial  stock.
Also,  presumably,  though  by  no  means  assuredly,  the
younger  stocks,  those  which  have  emerged  from  later
mutations  of  type,  have  therefore  initially  fallen  into
and  made  good  their  survival  under  the  conditions  of  a
relatively  advanced  phase  of  savagery, — these  younger
races  should  therefore  conform  with  greater  facihty  and
better  effect  to  the  requirements  imposed  by  a  still
farther  advance  in  that  cumulative  compHcation  of
institutions  and  intricacy  of  ways  and  means  that  is
involved  in  cultural  growth.  The  older  or  more  primi-
tive stocks,  those  which  arose  out  of  earHer  mutations
of  type  and  made  good  their  survival  under  a  more
elementary  scheme  of  savage  culture,  are  presumably  less
capable  of  adaptation  to  an  advanced  cultural  scheme.

But  at  the  same  time  it  is  on  the  same  grounds  to  be
expected  that  in  all  races  and  peoples  there  should  always
persist  an  ineradicable  sentimental  disposition  to  take
back  to  something  like  that  scheme  of  savagery  for
which  their  particular  type  of  human  nature  once  proved
its  fitness  during  the  initial  phase  of  its  Hfe-history.  This
seems  to  be  what  is  commonly  intended  in  the  cry,
^'Back  to  Nature!" The  older  known  racial  stocks,


Introductory  21

the  offspring  of  earlier  mutational  departures  from  the
initially  generic  human  type,  will  have  been  selectively
adapted  to  more  archaic  forms  of  savagery,  and  these
show  an  appreciably  more  refractory  penchant  for  ele-
mentary savage  modes  of  life,  and  conform  to  the  de-
mands and  opportunities  of  a  "higher"  civilisation  only
with  a  relatively  slight  facility,  amounting  in  extreme
cases  to  a  practical  unfitness  for  civilised  life.  Hence
the  "White  Man's  burden"  and  the  many  perplexities
of  the  missionaries.

Under  the  Mendelian  theories  of  heredity  some  quah-
fication  of  these  broad  generalisations  is  called  for.  As
has  already  been  noted  above,  the  peoples  of  Europe,
each  and  several,  are  hybrid  mixtures  made  up  of  several
racial  stocks.  The  Hke  is  true  in  some  degree  of  most  of
the  peoples  outside  of  Europe;  particularly  of  the  more
important  and  better  known  nationahties.  These  various
peoples  show  more  or  less  distinct  and  recognisable  na-
tional types  of  physique — or  perhaps  rather  of  physiog-
nomy— and  temperament,  and  the  lines  of  differentiation
between  these  national  t3^es  incontinently  traverse  the
lines  that  divide  the  racial  stocks.  At  the  same  time
these  national  types  have  some  degree  of  permanence;  so
much  so  that  they  are  colloquially  spoken  of  as  types  of
race.  While  no  modern  anthropologist  would  confuse
nationaHty  with  race,  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that
these  national  hybrid  types  are  frequently  so  marked
and  characteristic  as  to  simulate  racial  characters  and
perplex  the  student  of  race  who  is  intent  on  identifying
the  racial  stocks  out  of  which  any  one  of  these  hybrid
populations  has  been  compounded. Presumably  these


22  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

national  and  local  types  of  physiognomy  and  tempera-
ment are  to  be  rated  as  hybrid  types  that  have  been
fixed  by  selective  breeding,  and  for  an  explanation  of
this  phenomenon  recourse  is  to  be  taken  to  the  latterday
theories  of  heredity.

To  any  student  familiar  with  the  simpler  phenomena
of  hybridism  it  will  be  evident  that  under  the  Mendehan
rules  of  hybridisation  the  number  of  biologically  suc-
cessful— viable — hybrid  forms  arising  from  any  cross
between  two  or  more  forms  may  diverge  very  widely
from  one  another  and  from  either  of  the  parent  t}^es.
The  variation  must  be  extreme  both  in  the  number  of
hybrid  types  so  constructed  and  in  the  range  over  which
the  variation  extends, — much  greater  in  both  respects
than  the  range  of  fluctuating  (non-typical)  variations
obtainable  under  any  circumstances  in  a  pure-bred  race,
particularly  in  the  remoter  filial  generations.  It  is  also
well  known,  by  experiment,  that  by  selective  breeding
from  among  such  hybrid  forms  it  is  possible  to  construct
a  composite  type  that  will  breed  true  in  respect  of.  the
characters  upon  which  the  selection  is  directed,  and  that
such  a  "pure  line''  may  be  maintained  indefinitely,  in
spite  of  its  hybrid  origin,  so  long  as  it  is  not  crossed  back
on  one  or  other  of  the  parent  stocks,  or  on  a  hybrid  stock
that  is  not  pure-bred  in  respect  of  the  selected  characters.

So,  if  the  conditions  of  Hfe  in  any  community  consist-
ently favour  a  given  type  of  hybrid,  whether  the  favour-
ing conditions  are  of  a  cultural  or  of  a  material  nature,
something  of  a  selective  trend  will  take  effect  in  such  a
community  and  set  toward  a  hybrid  type  which  shall
meet  these  conditions.  The  result  will  be  the  establish-
ment of  a  composite  pure  line  showing  the  advantageous


Introductory  23

traits  of  physique  and  temperament,  combined  with  a
varying  complement  of  other  characters  that  have  no
such  selective  value.  Traits  that  have  no  selective  value
in  the  given  case  will  occur  with  fortuitous  freedom,
combining  in  unconstrained  diversity  with  the  selec-
tively decisive  traits,  and  so  will  mark  the  hybrid  deriva-
tion of  this  provisionally  established  composite  pure  line.
With  continued  intercrossing  within  itself  any  given
population  of  such  hybrid  origin  as  the  European  peoples,
would  tend  cumulatively  to  breed  true  to  such  a  selec-
tively favourable  hybrid  type,  rather  than  to  any  one  of
the  ultimate  racial  types  represented  by  the  parent
stocks  out  of  which  the  hybrid  population  is  ultimately
made  up.  So  would  emerge  a  national  or  local  type,
which  would  show  the  selectively  decisive  traits  with
a  great  degree  of  consistency  but  would  vary  indefinitely
in  respect  of  the  selectively  idle  traits  comprised  in  the
composite  heredity  of  the  population.  Such  a  composite
pure  line  would  be  provisionally  stable  only;  it  should
break  down  when  crossed  back  on  either  of  the  parent
stocks.  This  "provisionally  stable  composite  pure  line'*
should  disappear  when  crossed  on  pure-bred  individuals
of  one  or  other  of  the  parent  stocks  from  which  it  is
drawn, — ^pure-bred  in  respect  of  the  allelomorphic  char-
acters which  give  the  hybrid  type  its  typical  traits.

But  whatever  the  degree  of  stability  possessed  by
these  hybrid  national  or  local  t}pes,  the  outcome  for
the  present  purpose  is  much  the  same;  the  hybrid  popula-
tions afford  a  greater  scope  and  range  of  variation  in
their  himian  nature  than  could  be  had  within  the  limits  of
any  pure-bred  race.  Yet,  for  all  the  multifarious  di-
versity of  racial  and  national  types,  early  and  late,  and


24  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

for  all  the  wide  divergence  of  hybrid  variants,  there  is
no  difficulty  about  recognising  a  generical  human  type  of
spiritual  endowment,  just  as  the  zoologists  have  no
difficulty  in  referring  the  various  races  of  mankind  to  a
single  species  on  the  ground  of  their  physical  characters.
The  distribution  of  emphasis  among  the  several  instinc-
tive dispositions  may  vary  appreciably  from  one  race  to
another,  but  the  complement  of  instincts  native  to  the
several  races  is  after  all  of  much  the  same  kind,  compris-
ing substantially  the  same  ends.  Taken  simply  in  their
first  incidence,  the  racial  variations  of  human  nature  are
commonly  not  considerable;  but  a  slight  bias  of  this
kind,  distinctive  of  any  given  race,  may  come  to  have
decisive  weight  when  it  works  out  cumulatively  through
a  system  of  institutions,  for  such  a  system  embodies  the
cumulative  sophistications  of  untold  generations  during
which  the  life  of  the  community  has  been  dominated  by
the  same  slight  bias.^

Racial  differences  in  respect  of  these  hereditary  spirit-
ual traits  count  for  much  in  the  outcome,  because  in  the
last  resort  any  race  is  at  the  mercy  of  its  instincts.  In
the  course  of  cultural  growth  most  of  those  civilisations
or  peoples  that  have  had  a  long  history  have  from  time
to  time  been  brought  up  against  an  imperative  call  to
revise  their  scheme  of  institutions  in  the  light  of  their
native  instincts,  on  pain  of  collapse  or  decay;  and  they
have  chosen  variously,  and  for  the  most  part  blindly,
to  live  or  not  to  live,  according  as  their  instinctive  bias

*  The  all-pervading  modern  institution  of  private  property  appears  to
have  been  of  such  an  origin,  having  cumulatively  grown  out  of  the  self-
regarding  bias  of  men  in  their  oversight  of  the  community's  material  in-
terests.


Introductory  25

has  driven  them.  In  the  cases  where  it  has  happened
that  those  instincts  which  make  directly  for  the  ma-
terial welfare  of  the  community,  such  as  the  parental
bent  and  the  sense  of  workmanship,  have  been  present
in  such  potent  force,  or  where  the  institutional  elements
at  variance  with  the  continued  Hfe-interests  of  the  com-
munity or  the  civiKsation  in  question  have  been  in  a
sufficiently  infirm  state,  there  the  bonds  of  custom,  pre-
scription, principles,  precedent,  have  been  broken — or
loosened  or  shifted  so  as  to  let  the  current  of  Hfe  and
cultural  growth  go  on,  with  or  without  substantial  re-
tardation. But  history  records  more  frequent  and  more
spectacular  instances  of  the  triumph  of  imbecile  institu-
tions over  Hfe  and  culture  than  of  peoples  who  have  by
force  of  instinctive  insight  saved  themselves  aHve  out
of  a  desperately  precarious  institutional  situation,  such,
for  instance,  as  now  faces  the  peoples  of  Christendom.

Chief  among  those  instinctive  dispositions  that  con-
duce directly  to  the  material  well-being  of  the  race,  and
therefore  to  its  biological  success,  is  perhaps  the  instinc-
tive bias  here  spoken  of  as  the  sense  of  workmanship.
The  only  other  instinctive  factor  of  human  nature  that
could  with  any  Hkelihood  dispute  this  primacy  would
be  the  parental  bent.  Indeed,  the  two  have  much  in
common.  They  spend  themselves  on  much  the  same
concrete  objective  ends,  and  the  mutual  furtherance  of
each  by  the  other  is  indeed  so  broad  and  intimate  as
often  to  leave  it  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty  to  draw
a  line  between  them.  Any  discussion  of  either,  there-
fore, must  unavoidably  draw  the  other  into  the  in-
quiry to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  and  a  characterisa-


26  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tion  of  the  one  will  involve  some  dealing  with  the
other.

As  the  expression  is  here  understood,  the  "Parental
Bent"  is  an  instinctive  disposition  of  much  larger  scope
than  a  mere  proclivity  to  the  achievement  of  children.^
This  latter  is  doubtless  to  be  taken  as  a  large  and  per-
haps as  a  primary  element  in  the  practical  working  of
the  parental  solicitude;  although,  even  so,  it  is  in  no
degree  to  be  confused  with  the  quasi-tropismatic  impulse
to  the  procreation  of  offspring.  The  parental  soHcitude
in  mankind  has  a  much  wider  bearing  than  simply  the
welfare  of  one's  own  children.  This  wider  bearing  is
particularly  evident  in  those  lower  cultures  where  the
scheme  of  consanguinity  and  inheritance  is  not  drawn
on  the  same  close  family  Hues  as  among  civiHsed  peoples,
but  it  is  also  to  be  seen  in  good  vigour  in  any  civiHsed
community.  So,  for  instance,  what  the  phrase-makers
have  called  "race-suicide''  meets  the  instinctive  and  un-
soHcited  reprobation  of  all  men,  even  of  those  who  would
not  conceivably  go  the  length  of  contributing  in  their
own  person  to  the  incoming  generation.  So  also,  vir-
tually all  thoughtful  persons, — that  is  to  say  all  persons
who  hold  an  opinion  in  these  premises, — will  agree  that
it  is  a  despicably  inhuman  thing  for  the  current  genera-
tion wilfully  to  make  the  way  of  Hfe  harder  for  the  next
generation,  whether  through  neglect  of  due  provision
for  their  subsistence  and  proper  training  or  through
wasting  their  heritage  of  resources  and  opportunity  by
improvident  greed  and  indolence.  Providence  is  a  virtue
only  so  far  as  its  aim  is  provision  for  posterity.

It  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  say  how  far  the  current
^  Cf.  McDougall,  Social  Psychology,  ch.  x.


Introductory  27

solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  the  race  at  large  is  to  be
credited  to  the  parental  bent,  but  it  is  beyond  question
that  this  instinctive  disposition  has  a  large  part  in  the
sentimental  concern  entertained  by  nearly  all  persons
for  the  Hfe  and  comfort  of  the  community  at  large,  and
particularly  for  the  community's  future  welfare.  Doubt-
less this  parental  bent  in  its  wider  bearing  greatly  reen-
forces  that  sentimental  approval  of  economy  and  effi-
ciency for  the  common  good  and  disapproval  of  wasteful
and  useless  hving  that  prevails  so  generally  throughout
both  the  highest  and  the  lowest  cultures,  unless  it  should
rather  be  said  that  this  animus  for  economy  and  efficiency
is  a  simple  expression  of  the  parental  disposition  itself.
It  might  on  the  other  hand  be  maintained  that  such  an
animus  of  economy  is  an  essential  function  of  the  instinct
of  workmanship,  which  would  then  be  held  to  be  strongly
sustained  at  this  point  by  a  parental  soHcitude  for  the
common  good.

In  making  use  of  the  expression,  '^instinct  of  workman-
ship" or  ''sense  of  workmanship,"  it  is  not  here  intended
to  assume  or  to  argue  that  the  proclivity  so  designated
is  in  the  psychological  respect  a  simple  or  irreducible
element;  still  less,  of  course,  is  there  any  intention  to
allege  that  it  is  to  be  traced  back  in  the  physiological
respect  to  some  one  isolable  tropismatic  sensibility  or
some  single  enzymotic  or  visceral  stimulus.  All  that  is
matter  for  the  attention  of  those  whom  it  may  concern.
The  expression  may  as  well  be  taken  to  signify  a  con-
currence of  several  instinctive  aptitudes,  each  of  which
might  or  might  not  prove  simple  or  irreducible  when
subjected  to  psychological  or  physiological  analysis.  For
the  present  inquiry  it  is  enough  to  note  that  in  human


28  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

behaviour  this  disposition  is  effective  in  such  consistent,
ubiquitous  and  resilient  fashion  that  students  of  human
culture  will  have  to  count  with  it  as  one  of  the  integral
hereditary  traits  of  mankind.^

As  has  already  appeared,  neither  this  nor  any  other
instinctive  disposition  works  out  its  functional  content
in  isolation  from  the  instinctive  endowment  at  large.

1  Latterly  the  question  of  instincts  has  been  a  subject  of  somewhat  ex-
tensive discussion  among  students  of  animal  behaviou",  and  throughout
this  discussion  the  argument  has  commonly  been  conducted  on  neuro-
logical, or  at  the  most  on  physiological  ground.  This  line  of  argument  is
well  and  lucidly  presented  in  a  volume  recently  published  {The  Science  of
Human  Behavior,  New  York,  1913)  by  Mr,  Maurice  Parmalee.  The  book
offers  an  incisive  critical  discussion  of  the  Nature  of  Instinct  (ch.  xi)  with
a  specific  reference  to  the  instinct  of  workmanship  (p.  252).  The  discus-
sion runs,  faithfully  and  competently,  on  neurological  ground  and  reaches
the  outcome  to  be  expected  in  an  endeavour  to  reduce  instinct  to  neuro-
logical (or  physiological)  terms.  As  has  commonly  been  true  of  similar
endeavours,  the  outcome  is  essentially  negative,  in  that "  instinct "  is  not  so
much  explained  as  explained  away.  The  reason  of  this  outcome  is  suflS-
ciently  evident;  "instinct,"  being  not  a  neurological  or  physiological  con-
cept, is  not  statable  in  neurological  or  physiological  terms.  The  instinct
of  workmanship  no  more  than  any  other  instinctive  proclivity  is  an
isolable,  discrete  neural  function;  which,  however,  does  not  touch  the
question  of  its  status  as  a  psychological  element.  The  effect  of  such  an
analysis  as  is  offered  by  Mr.  Parmalee  is  not  to  give  terminological  preci-
sion to  the  concept  of  "instinct"  in  the  sense  assigned  it  in  current  usage,
but  to  dispense  with  it;  which  is  an  untoward  move  in  that  it  deprives  the
student  of  the  free  use  of  this  familiar  term  in  its  familiar  sense  and  there-
fore constrains  him  to  bring  the  indispensable  concept  of  instinct  in  again
surreptitiously  under  cover  of  some  unfamiliar  term  or  some  terminologi-
cal circumlocution.  The  current  mechanistic  analyses  of  animal  be-
haviour are  of  great  and  undoubted  value  to  any  inquiry  into  human
conduct,  but  their  value  does  not  lie  in  an  attempt  to  make  them  super-
sede those  psychological  phenomena  which  it  is  their  purpose  to  explain.
That  such  supersession  of  psychological  phenomena  by  the  mechanistic
formulations  need  nowise  follow  and  need  not  be  entertained  appears,
e.  g.,  in  such  work  as  that  of  Mr.  Loeb,  referred  to  above,  Comparative
Physiology  of  the  Brain  and  Comparative  Psychology.


Introductory  29

The  instincts,  all  and  several,  though  perhaps  in  varying
degrees,  are  so  intimately  engaged  in  a  play  of  give  and
take  that  the  work  of  any  one  has  its  consequences  for
all  the  rest,  though  presumably  not  for  all  equally.  It  is
this  endless  ^  complication  and  contamination  of  instinc-
tive elements  in  human  conduct,  taken  in  conjunction
with  the  pervading  and  cumulative  effects  of  habit  in
this  domain,  that  makes  most  of  the  difficulty  and
much  of  the  interest  attaching  to  this  line  of  in-
quiry.

There  are  few  Hnes  of  instinctive  proclivity  that  are
not  crossed  and  coloured  by  some  ramification  of  the
instinct  of  workmanship.  No  doubt,  response  to  the
direct  call  of  such  half-tropismatic,  half-instinctive  im-
pulses as  hunger,  anger,  or  the  promptings  of  sex,  is  little
if  at  all  troubled  with  any  sentimental  suffusion  of  work-
manship; but  in  the  more  complex  and  dehberate  activi-
ties, particularly  where  habit  exerts  an  appreciable  effect,
the  impulse  and  sentiment  of  workmanship  comes  in
for  a  large  share  in  the  outcome.  So  much  so,  indeed,
that,  for  instance,  in  the  arts,  where  the  sense  of  beauty
is  the  prime  mover,  habitual  attention  to  technique  will
often  put  the  original,  and  only  ostensible,  motive  in  the
background.  So,  again,  in  the  life  of  religious  faith  and
observance  it  may  happen  now  and  again  that  theological
niceties  and  ritual  elaboration  will  successfully,  and  in
great  measure  satisfactorily,  substitute  themselves  for
spiritual  communion;  while  in  the  courts  of  law  a  tena-
cious following  out  of  legal  technicalities  will  not  infre-
quently defeat  the  ends  of  justice.

^  Endless  in  the  sense  that  the  effects  of  such  concatenation  do  not  run
to  a  final  term  in  any  direction.


30  The  Instinct  oj  Workmanship

As  the  expression  is  here  understood,  all  instinctive
action  is  intelligent  in  some  degree;  though  the  degree  in
which  intelligence  is  engaged  may  vary  widely  from  one
instinctive  disposition  to  another,  and  it  may  even  fall
into  an  extremely  automatic  shape  in  the  case  of  some
of  the  simpler  instincts,  whose  functional  content  is  of  a
patently  physiological  character.  Such  approach  to
automatism  is  even  more  evident  in  some  of  the  lower
animals,  where,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  some  in-
sects, the  response  to  the  appropriate  stimuli  is  so  far
uniform  and  mechanically  determinate  as  to  leave  it
doubtful  whether  the  behaviour  of  the  animal  might  not
best  be  construed  as  tropismatic  action  simply.^  Such
tropismatic  directness  of  instinctive  response  is  less
characteristic  of  man  even  in  the  case  of  the  simpler  in-
stinctive proclivities;  and  the  indirection  which  so  char-
acterises instinctive  action  in  general,  and  the  higher  in-
stincts of  man  in  particular,  and  which  marks  off  the

*  Many  students  of  animal  behaviour  are  still,  as  psychologists  gener-
ally once  were,  inclined  to  contrast  instinct  with  intelligence, and  to  con-
fine the  term  typically  to  such  automatically  determinate  action  as  takes
effect  without  dehberation  or  intelligent  oversight.  This  view  would
appear  to  be  a  remnant  of  an  earlier  theoretical  position,  according  to
which  all  the  functions  of  intelligence  were  referred  to  a  distinct  imma-
terial entity,  entelechy,  associated  in  symbiosis  with  the  physical  organ-
ism. If  all  such  preconceptions  of  a  substantial  dichotomy  between
physiological  and  psychological  activity  be  abandoned  it  becomes  a  mat-
ter of  course  that  intellectual  functions  themselves  take  effect  only  on  the
initiative  of  the  instinctive  dispositions  and  under  their  surveillance,  and
the  antithesis  between  instinct  and  intelligence  will  consequently  fall
away.  What  expedients  of  terminology  and  discrimination  may  then
be  resorted  to  in  the  study  of  those  animal  instincts  that  involve  a  mini-
mum of  intellect  is  of  course  a  question  for  the  comparative  psychologists.
Cf.,  for  instance,  C.  Lloyd  Morgan,  Introduction  to  Comparative  Psychol-
ogy (2nd  edition,  1906)  ch.  xii,  especially  pp.  206-209,  and  Eahit  and  In-
stincti  ch.  i  and  vi.


Introductory  31

instinctive  dispositions  from  the  tropisms,  is  the  indirec-
tion of  intelligence.  It  enters  more  largely  in  the  dis-
charge of  some  proclivities  than  of  others;  but  all  instinc-
tive action  is  intelligent  in  some  degree.  This  is  what
marks  it  off  from  the  tropisms  and  takes  it  out  of  the
category  of  automatism.^

Hence  all  instinctive  action  is  teleological.  It  involves
holding  to  a  purpose.  It  aims  to  achieve  some  end  and
involves  some  degree  of  intelligent  faculty  to  compass
the  instinctively  given  purpose,  under  surveillance  of
the  instinctive  proclivity  that  prompts  the  action.  And
it  is  in  this  surveillance  and  direction  of  the  intellectual
processes  to  the  appointed  end  that  the  instinctive  dis-
positions control  and  condition  human  conduct;  and  in
this  work  of  direction  the  several  instinctive  proclivities
may  come  to  conflict  and  offset,  or  to  concur  and  reen-
force  one  another's  action.

The  position  of  the  instinct  of  workmanship  in  this
complex  of  teleological  activities  is  somewhat  peculiar,
in  that  its  functional  content  is  serviceability  for  the
ends  of  life,  whatever  these  ends  may  be;  whereas  these
ends  to  be  subserved  are,  at  least  in  the  main,  appointed
and  made  worth  while  by  the  various  other  instinctive
dispositions.  So  that  this  instinct  may  in  some  sense  be
said  to  be  auxiHary  to  all  the  rest,  to  be  concerned  with
the  ways  and  means  of  Hfe  rather  than  with  any  one  given
ulterior  end.  It  has  essentially  to  do  with  proximate
rather  than  ulterior  ends.  Yet  workmanship  is  none  the
less  an  object  of  attention  and  sentiment  in  its  own  right.
Efficient  use  of  the  means  at  hand  and  adequate  manage-
ment of  the  resources  available  for  the  purposes  of  life
*  Cf.  H.  S.  Jennings,  Behavior  of  the  Lower  Animals,  ch,  xii,  xx,  xxi.


32  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

is  itself  an  end  of  endeavour,  and  accomplishment  of  this
kind  is  a  source  of  gratification.

All  instinctive  action  is  intelligent  and  teleological.
The  generality  of  instinctive  dispositions  prompt  simply
to  the  direct  and  unambiguous  attainment  of  their  specific
ends,  and  in  his  dealings  under  their  immediate  guidance
the  agent  goes  as  directly  as  may  be  to  the  end  sought, —
he  is  occupied  with  the  objective  end,  not  with  the  choice
of  means  to  the  end  sought;  whereas  under  the  impulse
of  workmanship  the  agent's  interest  and  endeavour  are
taken  up  with  the  contriving  of  ways  and  means  to  the
end  sought.

The  point  of  contrast  may  be  unfamiliar,  and  an  illus-
tration may  be  pertinent.  So,  in  the  instinct  of  pugnacity
and  its  attendant  sentiment  of  anger  ^  the  primary  im-
pulse is  doubtless  to  a  direct  frontal  attack,  assault  and
battery  pure  and  simple;  and  the  more  highly  charged
the  agent  is  with  the  combative  impulse,  and  the  higher
the  pitch  of  animation  to  which  he  has  been  wrought  up,
the  less  is  he  inclined  or  able  to  take  thought  of  how  he
may  shrewdly  bring  mechanical  devices  to  bear  on  the
object  of  his  sentiment  and  compass  his  end  with  the
largest  result  per  unit  of  force  expended.  It  is  only  the
well-trained  fighter  that  will  take  without  reflection  to
workmanlike  ways  and  means  at  such  a  juncture;  and
in  case  of  extreme  exasperation  and  urgency  even  such
a  one,  it  is  said,  may  forget  his  workmanship  in  the
premises  and  throw  himself  into  the  middle  of  things
instead  of  resorting  to  the  indirections  and  leverages  to
which  his  workmanlike  training  in  the  art  of  fighting
has  habituated  him.  So,  again,  the  immediate  prompt-
*  See  McDougall,  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology,  ch.  iii  and  x.


Introductory  33

ings  of  the  parental  bent  urge  to  direct  personal  interven-
tion and  service  in  behalf  of  the  object  of  solicitude.  In
persons  highly  gifted  in  this  respect  the  impulse  asserts
itself  to  succour  the  helpless  with  one's  own  hands,  to
do  for  them  in  one's  own  person  not  what  might  on  reflec-
tion approve  itself  as  the  most  expedient  line  of  conduct
in  the  premises,  but  what  will  throw  the  agent  most  per-
sonally into  action  in  the  case.  Notoriously,  it  is  easier
to  move  well-meaning  people  to  unreflecting  charity  on
an  immediate  and  concrete  appeal  than  it  is  to  secure  a
sagacious,  well  sustained  and  well  organised  concert  of
endeavour  for  the  amelioration  of  the  lot  of  the  unfor-
tunate. Indeed,  refinements  of  workmanlike  calculation
of  causes  and  effects  in  such  a  case  are  instinctively  felt
to  be  out  of  touch  with  the  spirit  of  the  thing.  They
are  distasteful;  not  only  are  they  not  part  and  parcel  of
the  functional  content  of  the  generous  impulse,  but  an
undue  injection  of  these  elements  of  workmanship  into
the  case  may  even  induce  a  revulsion  of  feeling  and  de-
feat its  own  intention.

The  instinct  of  workmanship,  on  the  other  hand,  oc-
cupies the  interest  with  practical  expedients,  ways  and
means,  devices  and  contrivances  of  efficiency  and  econ-
omy, proficiency,  creative  work  and  technological  mas-
tery of  facts.  Much  of  the  functional  content  of  the
instinct  of  workmanship  is  a  proclivity  for  taking  pains.
The  best  or  most  finished  outcome  of  this  disposition  is
not  had  under  stress  of  great  excitement  or  under  ex-
treme urgency  from  any  of  the  instinctive  propensities
with  which  its  work  is  associated  or  whose  ends  it  serves.
It  shows  at  its  best,  both  in  the  individual  workman's
technological  efficiency  and  in  the  growth  of  technological


34  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

proficiency  and  insight  in  the  community  at  large,  under
circumstances  of  moderate  exigence,  where  there  is  work
in  hand  and  more  of  it  in  sight,  since  it  is  initially  a  dis-
position to  do  the  next  thing  and  do  it  as  well  as  may  be;
whereas  when  interest  falls  off  unduly  through  failure
of  provocation  from  the  instinctive  dispositions  that
afford  an  end  to  which  to  work,  the  stimulus  to  workman-
ship is  hkely  to  fail,  and  the  outcome  is  as  likely  to  be  an
endless  fabrication  of  meaningless  details  and  much  ado
about  nothing.  On  the  other  hand,  in  seasons  of  great
stress,  when  the  call  to  any  one  or  more  of  the  instinctive
lines  of  conduct  is  urgent  beyond  measure,  there  is  likely
to  result  a  crudity  of  technique  and  presently  a  loss  of
proficiency  and  technological  mastery.

It  is,  further,  pertinent  to  note  in  this  connection  that
the  instinct  of  workmanship  will  commonly  not  run  to
passionate  excesses;  that  it  does  not,  under  pressure,
tenaciously  hold  its  place  as  a  main  interest  in  competi-
tion with  the  other,  more  elemental  instinctive  proclivi-
ties; but  that  it  rather  yields  ground  somewhat  readily,
suffers  repression  and  falls  into  abeyance,  only  to  reassert
itself  when  the  pressure  of  other,  urgent  interests  is
relieved.  What  was  said  above  as  to  the  paramount
significance  of  the  instinct  of  workmanship  for  the  life
of  the  race  will  of  course  suffer  no  abatement  in  so  recog-
nising its  characteristically  temperate  urgency.  The
grave  importance  that  attaches  to  it  is  a  matter  of  its
ubiquitous  subservience  to  the  ends  of  life,  and  not  a
matter  of  vehemence.

The  sense  of  workmanship  is  also  peculiarly  subject
to  bias.  It  does  not  commonly,  or  normally,  work  to  an
independent,  creative  end  of  its  own,  but  is  rather  con-


Introductory  35

cemed  with  the  ways  and  means  whereby  instinctively
given  purposes  are  to  be  accomplished.  According,  there-
fore, as  one  or  another  of  the  instinctive  dispositions  is
predominant  in  the  community's  scheme  of  Hfe  or  in  the
individual's  every-day  interest,  the  habitual  trend  of  the
sense  of  workmanship  will  be  bent  to  one  or  another  line
of  proficiency  and  technological  mastery.  By  cumula-
tive habituation  a  bias  of  this  character  may  come  to
have  very  substantial  consequences  for  the  range  and
scope  of  technological  knowledge,  the  state  of  the  indus-
trial arts,  and  for  the  rate  and  direction  of  growth  in
workmanlike  ideals.

Changes  are  going  forward  constantly  and  incontin-
ently in  the  institutional  apparatus,  the  habitual  scheme
of  rules  and  principles  that  regulate  the  community's
life,  and  not  least  in  the  technological  ways  and  means
by  which  the  hfe  of  the  race  and  its  state  of  culture  are
maintained;  but  changes  come  rarely — in  effect  not  at
all — in  the  endowment  of  instincts  whereby  mankind  is
enabled  to  employ  these  means  and  to  live  under  the
institutions  which  its  habits  of  Hfe  have  cumulatively
created.  In  the  case  of  hybrid  populations,  such  as  the
peoples  of  Christendom,  some  appreciable  adaptation
of  this  spiritual  endowment  to  meet  the  changing  re-
quirements of  civiHsation  may  be  counted  on,  through
the  estabhshment  of  composite  pure  lines  of  a  hybrid
type  more  nearly  answering  to  the  later  phases  of  culture
than  any  one  of  the  original  racial  types  out  of  which  the
hybrid  population  is  made  up.  But  in  so  slow-breeding
a  species  as  man,  and  with  changes  in  the  conditions  of
life  going  forward  at  a  visibly  rapid  pace,  the  chance  of


36  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

an  adequate  adaptation  of  hybrid  human  nature  to  new
conditions  seems  doubtful  at  the  best.  It  is  also  to  be
noted  that  the  vague  character  of  many  of  the  human
instincts,  and  their  consequent  pliabiHty  under  habitua-
tion, affords  an  appreciable  margin  of  adaptation  within
which  human  nature  may  adjust  itself  to  new  conditions
of  life.  But  after  all  has  been  said  it  remains  true  that
the  margin  within  which  the  instinctive  nature  of  the
race  can  be  effectively  adapted  to  changing  circumstances
is  relatively  narrow — narrow  as  contrasted  with  the  range
of  variation  in  institutions — and  the  limits  of  such
adaptation  are  somewhat  rigid.  As  the  matter  stands,
the  race  is  required  to  meet  changing  conditions  of  hfe
to  which  its  relatively  unchanging  endowment  of  instincts
is  presumably  not  wholly  adapted,  and  to  meet  these
conditions  by  the  use  of  technological  ways  and  means
widely  different  from  those  that  were  at  the  disposal  of
the  race  from  the  outset.  In  the  initial  phases  of  the
life-history  of  the  race,  or  of  any  given  racial  stock,  the
exigencies  to  which  its  spiritual  (instinctive)  nature  was
selectively  required  to  conform  were  those  of  the  savage
culture,  as  has  been  indicated  above, — ^presumably  in
all  cases  a  somewhat  "low"  or  elementary  form  of
savagery.  This  savage  mode  of  life,  which  was,  and  is,
in  a  sense,  native  to  man,  would  be  characterised  by  a
considerable  group  sohdarity  within  a  relatively  small
group,  living  very  near  the  soil,  and  unremittingly  de-
pendent for  their  daily  Hfe  on  the  workmanhke  efficiency
of  all  the  members  of  the  group.  The  prime  requisite  for
survival  under  these  conditions  would  be  a  propensity
unselfishly  and  impersonally  to  make  the  most  of  the
material  means  at  hand  and  a  penchant  for  turning  all


Introductory  37

resources  of  knowledge  and  material  to  account  to  sus-
tain the  life  of  the  group.

At  the  outset,  therefore,  as  it  first  comes  into  the  life-
history  of  any  one  or  all  of  the  racial  stocks  with  which
modern  inquiry  concerns  itself,  this  instinctive  disposi-
tion will  have  borne  directly  on  workmanlike  efficiency
in  the  simple  and  obvious  sense  of  the  word.  By  virtue
of  the  stability  of  the  racial  type,  such  is  still  its  character,
primarily  and  substantially,  apart  from  its  sophistication
by  habit  and  tradition.  The  instinct  of  workmanship
brought  the  Hfe  of  mankind  from  the  brute  to  the  human
plane,  and  in  all  the  later  growth  of  culture  it  has  never
ceased  to  pervade  the  works  of  man.  But  the  extensive
complication  of  circumstances  and  the  altered  outlook
of  succeeding  generations,  brought  on  by  the  growth  of
institutions  and  the  accumulation  of  knowledge,  have
led  to  an  extension  of  its  scope  and  of  its  canons  and
logic  to  activities  and  conjunctures  that  have  little
traceable  bearing  on  the  means  of  subsistence.


CHAPTER  II

Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology!

All  instinctive  behaviour  is  subject  to  development
and  hence  to  modification  by  habit.  ^  Such  impulsive
action  as  is  in  no  degree  intelligent,  and  so  suffers  no
adaptation  through  habitual  use,  is  not  properly  to  be
called  instinctive;  it  is  rather  to  be  classed  as  tropismatic.
In  human  conduct  the  effects  of  habit  in  this  respect  are
particularly  far-reaching.  In  man  the  instincts  appoint
less  of  a  determinate  sequence  of  action,  and  so  leave  a
more  open  field  for  adaptation  of  behaviour  to  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  case.  When  instinct  enjoins  little
else  than  the  end  of  endeavour,  leaving  the  sequence  of
acts  by  which  this  end  is  to  be  approached  somewhat  a
matter  of  open  alternatives,  the  share  of  reflection,  dis-
cretion and  deHberate  adaptation  will  be  correspondingly
large.  The  range  and  diversity  of  habituation  is  also
correspondingly  enlarged.

In  man,  too,  by  the  same  fact,  habit  takes  on  more  of
a  cumulative  character,  in  that  the  habitual  acquire-
ments of  the  race  are  handed  on  from  one  generation  to
the  next,  by  tradition,  training,  education,  or  whatever
general  term  may  best  designate  that  discipline  of  habitu-

1  Cf.  M.  F.  Washburn,  The  Animal  Mind,  ch.  x,  xi,  where  the  simpler
facts  of  habituation  are  suggestively  presented  in  conformity  with  current
views  of  empirical  psychology.

38


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 39

ation  by  which  the  young  acquire  what  the  old  have
learned.  By  similar  means  the  like  elements  of  habitual
conduct  are  carried  over  from  one  community  or  one
culture  to  another,  leading  to  further  complications.
Cumulatively,  therefore,  habit  creates  usages,  customs,
conventions,  preconceptions,  composite  principles  of
conduct  that  run  back  only  indirectly  to  the  native  pre-
dispositions of  the  race,  but  that  may  affect  the  working-
out  of  any  given  line  of  endeavour  in  much  the  same  way
as  if  these  habitual  elements  were  of  the  nature  of  a
native  bias.

Along  with  this  body  of  derivative  standards  and
canons  of  conduct,  and  handed  on  by  the  same  disciphne
of  habituation,  goes  a  cumulative  body  of  knowledge,
made  up  in  part  of  matter-of-fact  acquaintance  with
phenomena  and  in  greater  part  of  conventional  wisdom
embodying  certain  acquired  predilections  and  precon-
ceptions current  in  the  community.  Workmanship  pro-
ceeds on  the  accumulated  knowledge  so  received  and
current,  and  turns  it  to  account  in  dealing  with  the  ma-
terial means  of  hfe.  Whatever  passes  current  in  this
way  as  knowledge  of  facts  is  turned  to  account  as  far
as  may  be,  and  so  it  is  worked  into  a  customary  scheme
of  ways  and  means,  a  system  of  technology,  into  which
new  elements  of  information  or  acquaintance  with  the
nature  and  use  of  things  are  incorporated,  assimilated
as  they  come.

The  scheme  of  technology  so  worked  out  and  carried
along  in  the  routine  of  getting  a  Hving  will  be  serviceable
for  current  use  and  have  a  substantial  value  for  a  further
advance  in  technological  efficiency  somewhat  in  propor-
tion as  the  knowledge  so  embodied  in  technological  prac-


40  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tice  is  effectually  of  the  nature  of  matter-of-fact.  Much
of  the  information  derived  from  experience  in  industry
is  likely  to  be  of  this  matter-of-fact  nature;  but  much  of
the  knowledge  made  use  of  for  the  technological  purpose
is  also  of  the  nature  of  convention,  inference  and  au-
thentic opinion,  arrived  at  on  quite  other  grounds  than
workmanhke  experience.  This  aHen  body  of  informa-
tion, or  pseudo-information,  goes  into  the  grand  total
of  human  knowledge  quite  as  freely  as  any  matter  of
fact,  and  it  is  therefore  also  necessarily  taken  up  and
assimilated  in  that  technological  equipment  of  knowledge
and  proficiency  by  use  of  which  the  work  in  hand  is  to
be  done.

But  the  experience  which  yields  this  useful  and  pseudo-
useful  knowledge  is  got  under  the  impulsion  and  guid-
ance of  one  and  another  of  the  instincts  with  which  man
is  endowed,  and  takes  the  shape  and  color  given  it  by
the  instinctive  bias  in  whose  service  it  is  acquired.  At
the  same  time,  whatever  its  derivation,  the  knowledge
acquired  goes  into  the  aggregate  of  information  drawn
on  for  the  ways  and  means  of  workmanship.  Therefore
the  habits  formed  in  any  line  of  experience,  under  the
guidance  of  any  given  instinctive  disposition,  will  have
their  effect  on  the  conduct  and  aims  of  the  workman  in
all  his  work  and  play;  so  that  progress  in  technological
matters  is  by  no  means  an  outcome  of  the  sense  of  work-
manship alone.

It  follows  that  in  all  their  working  the  human  instincts
are  in  this  way  incessantly  subject  to  mutual  "contamina-
tion,'^ whereby  the  working  of  any  one  is  incidentally
affected  by  the  bias  and  proclivities  inherent  in  all  the
rest;  and  in  so  far  as  these  current  habits  and  customs  in


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 41

this  way  come  to  reenforce  the  predispositions  comprised
under  any  one  instinct  or  any  given  group  of  instincts,
the  bias  so  accentuated  comes  to  pervade  the  habits  of
thought  of  all  the  members  of  the  community  and  gives
a  corresponding  obliquity  to  the  technological  ground-
work of  the  community.  So,  for  instance,  addiction  to
magical,  superstitious  or  religious  conceptions  will  neces-
sarily have  its  effect  on  the  conceptions  and  logic  em-
ployed in  technological  theory  and  practice,  and  will
impair  its  efficiency  by  that  much.  A  people  much  given
to  punctilios  of  rank  and  respect  of  persons  will  in  some
degree  carry  these  habitual  predilections  over  into  the
field  of  workmanship  and  will  allow  considerations  of
authenticity,  of  personal  weight  and  consequence,  to
decide  questions  of  technological  expediency;  so  that
ideas  which  have  none  but  a  putative  efficiency  may  in
this  way  come  in  for  a  large  share  in  the  state  of  the  in-
dustrial arts.  A  people  whose  culture  has  for  any  reason
taken  on  a  pronounced  coercive  (predatory)  character,
with  rigorous  class  distinctions,  an  arbitrary  govern-
mental control,  formidable  gods  and  an  authoritative
priesthood,  will  have  its  industrial  organisation  and  its
industrial  arts  fashioned  to  meet  the  demands  and  the
logic  of  these  institutions.  Such  an  institutional  situa-
tion exerts  a  great  and  pervasive  constraint  on  the
technological  scheme  in  which  workmanship  takes  effect
under  its  rule,  both  directly  by  prescribing  the  things
to  do  and  the  time,  place  and  circumstance  of  doing
them,  and  indirectly  through  the  habits  of  thought  in-
duced in  the  working  population  li\'ing  under  its  rule.
Innovation,  the  utilisation  of  newly  acquired  techno-
logical insight,  is  greatly  hindered  by  such  institutional


42  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

requirements  that  are  enforced  by  other  impulses  than
the  sense  of  workmanship.

In  the  known  lower  cultures  such  institutional  com-
plications as  might  be  expected  greatly  to  hinder  or  de-
flect the  sense  of  workmanship  are  commonly  neither
large,  rigorous  nor  obvious.  Something  of  the  kind  there
apparently  always  is,  in  the  way,  for  instance,  of  the  cus-
tomary prerogatives  and  perquisites  of  the  older  men,  as
well  as  their  tutelary  oversight  of  the  younger  genera-
tion and  of  the  common  interests  of  the  group.  ^  When
this  rule  of  seniority  is  elaborated  into  such  set  forms  as
the  men's  (secret)  societies,  with  exacting  initiatory
ceremonies  and  class  tabus,  ^  its  effect  on  workday  Hfe
is  often  very  considerable,  even  though  the  community
may  show  little  that  can  fairly  be  classed  as  autocracy,
chieftainship,  or  even  aristocratic  government.  In  many
or  all  of  these  naive  and  early  developments  of  authority,
and  perhaps  especially  in  those  cultures  where  the  control
takes  this  inchoate  form  of  a  customary  "gerontocracy,"  ^
its  immediate  effect  is  that  an  abiding  sense  of  authen-
ticity comes  to  pervade  the  routine  of  daily  life,  such  as
effectually  to  obstruct  all  innovation,  whether  in  the  ways
and  means  of  work  or  in  the  conduct  of  life  more  at
large.  Control  by  a  gerontocracy  appears  to  reach  its
best  development  and  to  run  with  the  fullest  consistency
and  effect  in  communities  where  an  appreciable  degree
of  predatory  exploit  is  habitual,  and  the  inference  is
ready,  and  at  least  plausible,  that  this  institution  is  sub-

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia;
Seligmann,  The  Veddas.

2  Hutton  Webster,  Primitive  Secret  Societies,  especially  ch.  iii  and  iv.
'  J.  G.  Frazer,  Early  History  of  the  Kingship,  ch.  iv,  p.  107.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 43

stantially  of  a  predatory  origin,  that  the  principles
(habits  of  thought)  on  which  it  rests  are  an  outgrowth
of  pugnacity,  self-aggrandisement  and  fear.  Under
favouring  conditions  of  friction  and  jealousy  between
groups  these  propensities  will  settle  into  institutional
habits  of  authority  and  deference,  and  so  long  as  the
resultant  exercise  of  control  is  vested  by  custom  in  the
class  of  elders  the  direct  consequence  is  a  marked  abate-
ment of  initiative  throughout  the  community  and  a  con-
sequent appearance  of  conservatism  and  stagnation  in
its  technological  scheme  as  well  as  in  the  customary
usages  under  whose  guidance  the  community  lives.  ^  So
these  instinctive  propensities  which  have  no  primary
significance  in  the  way  of  workmanship  may  come  to
count  very  materially  in  shaping  the  group's  techno-
logical equipment  of  ideas  and  in  deflecting  the  sense
of  workmanship  from  the  naive  pursuit  of  material
efficiency.

The  rule  of  the  elders  appears  to  have  been  extremely
prevalent  in  the  earlier  phases  of  culture.  So  much  so
that  it  may  even  be  set  down  as  the  most  characteristic
trait  of  the  upper  savagery  and  of  the  lower  barbarism;
whether  it  takes  the  elaborately  institutionalised  form
of  a  settled  gerontocracy,  as  among  the  Australian  blacks,
with  sharply  defined  class  divisions  and  perquisites  and
a  consistent  subjection  of  women  and  children;  or  the
looser  customary  rule  of  the  Elders,  with  a  degree  of
deference  and  circumspection  on  the  part  of  the  younger
generation  and  an  uncertain  conventional  inferiority  of
women  and  children,  as  seen  among  the  pagans  of  the

*  E.  g.,  some  native  tribes  of  Australia;  cf.  Spencer  and  Gillen,  The
Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia^  especially  ch.  i.


44  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

Malay  peninsula/  the  Eskimo  of  the  Arctic  seaboard,^
the  Mincopies  of  the  Andamans,^  or,  on  a  somewhat
higher  level,  the  Pueblo  Indians  of  the  American  South-
west.'* Illustrative  instances  of  such  an  inchoate  organis-
ation of  authority  are  very  widely  distributed,  but  the
communities  that  follow  such  a  naive  scheme  of  life  are
commonly  neither  large,  powerful,  wealthy,  nor  much
in  the  pubHc  eye.  The  presumption  is  that  the  sense  of
authenticity  which  pervades  these  and  similar  cultures,
amoimting  to  a  degree  of  tabu  on  innovation,  has  had
m.uch  to  do  with  the  notably  slow  advance  of  technology
among  savage  peoples.  Such  appears  presumably  to
have  been  the  prevalent  run  of  the  facts  throughout  the
stone  age  in  all  quarters  of  the  Earth.

It  is  not  altogether  plain  just  what  are  the  innate  pre-
dispositions chiefly  involved  in  this  primitive  social
control  which  at  its  untroubled  best  develops  into  a
''gerontocracy."  There  can  apparently  be  httle  ques-
tion but  that  its  prime  motive  force  is  the  parental  bent,
expressing  itself  in  a  naive  impulsive  surveillance  of  the
common  interests  of  the  group  and  a  tutelage  of  the
incoming  generation.  But  here  as  in  other  social  re-
lations the  self -regarding  sentiments  unavoidably  come
into  play;  so  that  {a)  the  tutelage  of  the  elders  takes

^  Skeat  and  Blagden,  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.

2  J.  Murdoch,  "The  Point  Barrow  Eskimo,"  Report  of  the  Bureau  of
American  Ethnology,  1887-1888;  F.  Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo,"  Ibidy
1884-1885.

'  E.  H.  Man,  "On  the  Aboriginal  Inhabitants  of  the  Andaman
Islands,"  /.  A.  /.,  vol.  xii.

*  Reports,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  numerous  papers  by  different
writers,  perhaps  especially  Mrs.  Stevenson,  "The  Sia,"  nth  Report
(188Q-1890).


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 45

something  of  an  authoritative  tone  and  blends  self-
aggrandisement  with  their  quasi-parental  solicitude,  giv-
ing an  institutional  outcome  which  makes  the  young
generation  subservient  to  the  elders,  ostensibly  for  the
mutual  and  collective  good  of  both  parties  to  the  rela-
tion; (6)  if  predatory  or  warlike  exploit  in  any  degree
becomes  habitual  to  the  community  the  sentiment  of
self-aggrandisement  gets  the  upper  hand,  and  subserv-
ience to  the  able-bodied  elders  becomes  the  dominant
note  in  this  relation  of  tutelage,  and  their  parental  in-
terest in  the  welfare  of  the  incoming  generation  in  a  cor-
responding degree  goes  into  abeyance  under  the  pressure
of  the  appropriate  sentiments  of  pugnacity  and  self-
seeking,  giving  rise  to  a  coercive  regime  of  a  more  or  less
ruthless  character;  {c)  correlatively,  along  with  unweary-
ing insistence  on  their  own  prerogatives  and  collective
discretion,  on  the  part  of  the  elders,  there  goes,  on  the
part  of  the  community  at  large,  a  correspondingly  ha-
bitual acceptance  of  their  findings  and  the  precedents
they  have  established,  resulting  in  a  universal  addiction
to  the  broad  principles  of  unmitigated  authenticity,
with  no  power  anywhere  capable  of  breaking  across  the
accumulated  precedents  and  tabus.  Even  the  ruling
class  of  elders,  being  an  unwieldy  dehberative  body  or
executive  committee,  is  held  by  parliamentary  inertia,
as  well  as  by  a  circumspect  regard  for  their  prescriptive
rights,  to  a  due  observance  of  the  customary  law.  The
force  of  precedent  is  notoriously  strong  on  the  lower  levels
of  culture.  Under  the  rule  of  the  elders  deference  to
precedent  grows  into  an  inveterate  habit  in  the  young,
and  when  presently  these  come  to  take  their  turn  as
discretionary  elders  the  habit  of  deference  to  the  pre-


46  The  Instincts  of  Workmanship

cedents  established  by  those  who  have  gone  before  still
binds  them,  and  the  life  and  thought  of  the  community
never  escape  the  dead  hand  of  the  parent.

When  worked  out  into  an  institution  of  control  in
this  way,  and  crossed  with  the  other  instinctive  propen-
sities that  go  to  make  governmental  authority,  it  is  ap-
parently unavoidable  that  the  parental  bent  should
suffer  this  curious  inversion.  In  the  simplest  and  un-
sophisticated terms,  its  functional  content  appears  to  be
an  unselfish  sohcitude  for  the  well-being  of  the  incoming
generation — a  bias  for  the  highest  efficiency  and  fullest
volume  of  hfe  in  the  group,  with  a  particular  drift  to  the
future;  so  that,  under  its  rule,  contrary  to  the  dictum  of
the  economic  theorists,  future  goods  are  preferred  to
present  goods  ^  and  the  filial  generation  is  given  the

1  Current  economic  theory  commonly  proceeds  on  the  "  hedonistic
calculus",  so  called,  (cf.  Jeremy  Bentham,  Introduction  to  the  Principles
of  Morals  and  Legislation)  or  the  "hedonic  principle",  as  it  has  also  been
called,  (cf.  Pantaleoni,  Pure  Economics,  ch.  i).  This  "principle"  affords
the  major  premise  of  current  theory.  It  postulates  that  individual  self-
seeking  is  the  prime  mover  of  all  economic  conduct.  There  is  some  un-
certainty and  disagreement  among  latterday  economists  as  to  the  precise
terms  proper  to  be  employed  to  designate  this  principle  of  conduct  and
its  working-out;  in  the  apprehension  of  later  speculators  Bentham's
"pleasure  and  pain"  has  seemed  too  bald  and  materialistic,  and  they
have  had  recourse  to  such  less  precise  and  definable  terms  as  "gratifica-
tion," "satisfactions,"  "sacrifice,"  "utiHty"  and  "disutihty,"  "psychic
income,"  etc.,  but  hitherto  without  any  conclusive  revision  of  the  ter-
minology. These  differences  and  suggested  innovations  do  not  touch  the
substance  of  the  ancient  postulate.  Proceeding  on  this  postulate  the
theoreticians  have  laid  down  the  broad  proposition  that  "present  goods
are  preferred  to  future  goods";  from  which  arise  many  meticulous  diffi-
culties of  theory,  particularly  in  any  attempt  to  make  the  deliverances
of  theory  square  with  workday  facts.  The  modicum  of  truth  contained
in  this  proposition  would  appear  to  be  better  expressed  in  the  formula:
"Prospective  security  is  preterred  to  prospective  risk;"  which  seems  to


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 47

preference  over  the  parental  generation  in  all  that  touches
their  material  welfare.  But  where  the  self-regarding
sentiments,  self-complacency  and  self-abasement,  come
largely  into  play,  as  they  are  bound  to  do  in  any  culture
that  partakes  appreciably  of  a  predatory  or  coercive
character,  the  prerogatives  of  the  ruling  class  and  the
principles  of  authentic  usage  become  canons  of  truth
and  right  Hving  and  presently  take  precedence  of  work-
manhke  efhciency  and  the  fulness  of  Hfe  of  the  group.
It  results  that  conventional  tests  of  vaHdity  presently
accumulate  and  increasingly  deflect  and  obstruct  the

be  nearly  all  that  is  required  either  as  a  generalisation  of  the  human  mo-
tives in  the  case  or  as  a  premise  for  the  theoretical  refinements  aimed  at,
whereas  the  dictum  that  "present  goods  are  preferred  to  future  goods"
must,  on  reflection,  commend  itself  as  substantially  false.  By  and  large,
of  course,  goods  are  not  wanted  except  for  prospective  use — beyond  the
measure  of  that  urgent  current  consumption  that  plays  no  part  in  the
theoretical  refinements  for  which  the  dictum  is  invoked.  It  will  imme-
diately be  apparent  on  reflection  that  even  for  the  individual's  own  ad-
vantage "present  goods  are  preferred  to  future  goods"  only  where  and
in  so  far  as  property  rights  are  secure,  and  then  only  for  future  use.  It
is  for  productive  use  in  the  future,  or  more  particularly  for  the  sake  of
prospective  revenue  to  be  drawn  from  wealth  so  held,  by  lending  or  in-
vesting it,  that  such  a  preference  becomes  effective.  Apart  from  this
pecuniary  advantage  that  attaches  to  property  held  over  from  the  present
to  the  future  there  appears  to  be  no  such  preference  even  as  a  matter
of  individual  self-seeking,  and  where  such  pecuniary  considerations  are
not  dominant  there  is  no  such  preference  for  "present  goods."  It  is
present  "wealth,"  not  present  "goods,"  that  is  the  object  of  desire;  and
present  wealth  is  desired  mainly  for  its  prospective  advantage.  It  is
well  known  that  in  communities  where  there  are  habitually  no  business-
like credit  extensions  or  investments  for  profit,  savings  take  the  form  of
hoarding,  that  is,  accumulation  for  future  use  in  preference  to  present
consumption.  There  might  be  some  division  of  opinion  as  to  the  char-
acter of  the  prospective  use  for  which  goods  are  sought,  but  there  can  be
little  question  that  much,  if  not  most,  of  this  prospective  use  is  not  of  a
self-regarding  character  and  is  not  sought  from  motives  of  sensuous  gain.


48  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

naive  pursuit  of  workmanlike  efficiency,  in  large  part  by
obscuring  those  matters  of  fact  that  lend  themselves  to
technological  insight.

But  like  other  innate  predispositions  the  parental  bent
continually  reasserts  itself  in  its  native  and  untaught
character,  as  an  ever  resilient  soHcitude  for  the  welfare
of  the  young  and  the  prospective  fortunes  of  the  group.
As  such  it  constantly  comes  in  to  reenforce  the  instinct
of  workmanship  and  sustain  interest  in  the  direct  pursuit
of  efficiency  in  the  ways  and  means  of  life.  So  closely  in
touch  and  so  concurrent  are  the  parental  bent  and  the
sense  of  workmanship  in  this  quest  of  efficiency  that  it
is  commonly  difficult  to  guess  which  of  the  two  proclivi-
ties is  to  be  credited  with  the  larger  or  the  leading  part
in  any  given  line  of  conduct;  although  taken  by  and
large  the  two  are  after  all  fairly  distinct  in  respect  of
their  functional  content.  This  thorough  and  far-going
concurrence  of  the  two  may  perhaps  be  taken  to  mean
that  the  instinct  of  workmanship  is  in  the  main  a  pro-
pensity to  work  out  the  ends  which  the  parental  bent
makes  worth  while.

It  seems  to  be  these  two  predispositions  in  conjunction
that  have  exercised  the  largest  and  most  consistent  con-
trol over  that  growth  of  custom  and  conventional  prin-
ciples that  has  standardised  the  life  of  mankind  in  society
and  so  given  rise  to  a  system  of  institutions.  This  con-
trol bears  selectively  on  the  whole  range  of  institutions
created  by  habitual  response  to  the  call  of  the  other
instincts  and  has  the  effect  of  a  "common-sense'^  sur-
veillance which  prevents  the  scheme  of  life  from  running
into  an  insufferable  tangle  of  grotesque  extravagances.
That  their  surveillance  has  not  always  been  decisive


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 49

need  scarcely  be  specifically  called  to  mind;  human  cul-
ture in  all  ages  presents  too  many  imbecile  usages  and
principles  of  conduct  to  let  anyone  overlook  the  fact  that
disserviceable  institutions  easily  arise  and  continue  to
hold  their  place  in  spite  of  the  disapproval  of  native
common  sense.  The  selective  control  exercised  over
custom  and  usage  by  these  instincts  of  serviceability  is
neither  too  close  nor  too  insistent.  Wide,  even  extrava-
gant, departures  from  the  simple  dictates  of  this  native
common  sense  occur  even  within  the  narrow  range  of  the
domestic  and  minor  civil  institutions,  where  these  two
common-sense  predispositions  should  concur  to  create  a
prescriptive  usage  looking  directly  to  the  continuation
and  welfare  of  the  race.  Considerations,  or  perhaps
rather  conventional  preconceptions,  running  on  other
grounds,  as,  for  instance,  on  grounds  of  superstition  or
religion,  of  propriety  and  gentility,  of  pecuniary  or
political  expediency,  have  come  in  for  a  large  share  in
ordering  the  institutions  of  family  and  neighbourhood
Hfe.  Yet  doubtless  it  is  the  parental  bent  and  the  sense
of  workmanship  in  concurrence  that  have  been  the  prim-
ary and  persistent  factors  in  (selectively)  shaping  the
household  organisation  among  all  peoples,  however  great
may  have  been  the  force  of  other  factors,  instinctive  and
habitual,  that  have  gone  to  diversify  the  variegated
outcome.

It  appears,  then,  that  so  long  as  the  parental  solicitude
and  the  sense  of  workmanship  do  not  lead  men  to  take
thought  and  correct  the  otherwise  unguarded  drift  of
things,  the  growth  of  institutions — usage,  customs,  canons
of  conduct,  principles  of  right  and  propriety,  the  course
of  cumulative  habituation  as  it  goes  forward  under  the


50  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

driving  force  of  the  several  instincts  native  to  man, — ■
will  commonly  run  at  cross  purposes  with  serviceability
and  the  sense  of  workmanship.^

That  such  should  be  the  case  lies  in  the  nature  of
things,  as  will  readily  appear  on  reflection.  Under  given
circumstances  and  under  the  impulsion  of  a  given  in-
stinctive propensity  a  given  line  of  behaviour  becomes
habitual  and  so  is  installed  by  use  and  wont  as  a  principle
of  conduct.  The  principle  or  canon  of  conduct  so  gained
takes  its  place  among  the  habitual  verities  of  life  in  the
community  and  is  handed  on  by  tradition.  Under  further
impulsion  of  the  same  and  other  instinctive  propensities,
and  under  altered  circumstances,  conduct  in  other,  unre-
lated hues  will  be  referred  to  this  received  principle  as  a
bench-mark  by  which  its  goodness  is  appraised  and  to
which  all  conduct  is  accommodated,  giving  a  result  which
is  related  to  the  exigencies  of  the  case  only  at  the  second
remove  and  by  channels  of  habit  which  have  only  a
conventional  relevancy  to  the  case.  The  farther  this
manner  of  crossing  and  grafting  of  habitual  elements
proceeds  in  the  elaboration  of  principles  and  usage,  the

^  Traditionally  a  theoretical  presumption  has  been  held  to  the  contrary.
It  has  been  taken  for  granted  that  the  institutional  outcome  of  men's
native  dispositions  will  be  sound  and  salutary;  but  this  presumption
overlooks  the  effects  of  complication  and  deflection  among  instincts,  due
to  cumulative  habit.  The  tradition  has  come  down  as  an  article  of  un-
critical faith  from  the  historic  belief  in  a  beneficent  Order  of  Nature;
which  in  turn  runs  back  to  the  early-modern  religious  conception  of  a
Providential  Order  instituted  by  a  shrewd  and  benevolent  Creator;
which  rests  on  an  anthropomorphic  imputation  of  parental  solicitude  and
workmanship  to  an  assumed  metaphysical  substratum  of  things.  This
traditional  view  therefore  is  substantially  theological  and  has  that  degree
of  validity  that  may  be  derived  from  the  putative  characteristics  of  any
anthropomorphic  divinity.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 51

larger  will  be  the  mass  and  the  graver  will  be  the  com-
pKcation  of  materially  irrelevant  considerations  present
in  any  given  line  of  conduct,  the  more  extensive  and
fantastic  will  be  the  fabric  of  conventionalities  which
come  to  condition  the  response  to  any  one  of  the  innate
human  propensities,  and  the  more  '^irrelevant,  incompe-
tent and  impertinent"  will  be  the  line  of  conduct  pre-
scribed by  use  and  wont.  Except  by  recourse  to  the
sense  of  workmanship  there  is  no  evading  this  complica-
tion of  ineptitudes  and  irrelevancies,  and  such  recourse
is  not  easily  had.  For  the  bias  of  settled  habit  goes  to
sustain  the  institutional  fabric  of  received  sophistica-
tions, and  these  sophistications  are  bound  in  such  a  net-
work of  give  and  take  that  a  disturbance  of  the  fabric
at  any  point  will  involve  more  or  less  of  a  derangement
throughout.

This  body  of  habitual  principles  and  preconceptions
is  at  the  same  time  the  medium  through  which  experience
receives  those  elements  of  information  and  insight  on
which  workmanship  is  able  to  draw  in  contriving  ways
and  means  and  turning  them  to  account  for  the  uses  of
life.  And  the  conventional  verities  count  in  this  con-
nexion almost  wholly  as  obstructions  to  workmanHke
efficiency.  Worldly  wisdom,  insight  into  the  proprieties
and  expediencies  of  human  intercourse,  the  scheme  of
tabus,  consanguinities,  and  magical  efficacies,  3delds
very  little  that  can  effectually  be  turned  to  account  for
technological  ends.  The  experience  gained  by  habitua-
tion under  the  stress  of  these  other  proclivities  and  their
derivative  principles  is  necessarily  made  use  of  in  work-
manship, and  so  enters  into  the  texture  of  the  technologi-
cal system,  but  a  large  part  of  it  is  of  very  doubtful  value


52  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

for  the  purpose.  Much  of  this  experience  runs  at  cross
purposes  with  workmanship,  not  only  in  that  the  puta-
tive information  which  this  experience  brings  home  to
men  has  none  but  a  putative  serviceability,  but  also  in
that  the  habit  of  mind  induced  by  its  discipline  obscures
that  insight  into  matter  of  fact  that  is  indispensable  to
workmanlike  efficiency.

But  the  most  obstructive  derangement  that  besets
workmanship  is  what  may  be  called  the  self-contamina-
tion of  the  sense  of  workmanship  itself.  This  applies  in
a  peculiar  degree  to  the  earlier  or  more  elementary  phases
of  culture,  but  it  holds  true  only  with  lessening  force
throughout  the  later  growth  of  civiHsation.  The  hind-
rance to  technological  efficiency  from  this  source  will
often  rise  to  large  proportions  even  in  advanced  com-
munities, particularly  where  magical,  rehgious  or  other
anthropomorphic  habits  of  thought  are  prevalent.  The
difficulty  has  been  spoken  of  as  anthropomorphism,  or
animism, — which  is  only  a  more  archaic  anthropomor-
phism. The  essential  trait  of  anthropomorphic  concep-
tions, so  far  as  bears  on  the  present  argument,  is  that
conduct,  more  or  less  fully  after  the  human  fashion  of
conduct,  is  imputed  to  external  objects;  whether  these
external  objects  are  facts  of  observation  or  creatures
of  mythological  fancy.  Such  anthropomorphism  com-
monly means  an  interpretation  of  phenomena  in  terms
of  workmanship,  though  it  may  also  involve  much  more
than  this,  particularly  in  the  higher  reaches  of  myth-
making.  But  the  simpler  anthropomorphic  or  animistic
beliefs  that  pervade  men's  every-day  thinking  commonly
amount  to  little  if  anything  more  than  the  naive  imputa-


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 53

tion  of  a  workmanlike  propensity  in  the  observed  facts.
External  objects  are  believed  to  do  things;  or  rather  it
is  beheved  that  they  are  seen  to  do  things.

The  reason  of  this  imputation  of  conduct  to  external
things  is  simple,  obvious,  and  intimate  in  all  men's  ap-
prehension; so  much  so,  indeed,  as  not  readily  to  permit
its  being  seen  in  perspective  and  appreciated  at  anything
like  its  effectual  force.  All  facts  of  observation  are  neces-
sarily seen  in  the  Hght  of  the  observer's  habits  of  thought,
and  the  most  intimate  and  inveterate  of  his  habits  of
thought  is  the  experience  of  his  own  initiative  and  en-
deavours. It  is  to  this  ''apperception  mass "  that  objects
of  apperception  are  finally  referred,  and  it  is  in  terms  of
this  experience  that  their  measure  is  finally  taken.  No
psychological  phenomenon  is  more  familiar  than  this
ubiquitous  "personal  equation"  in  men's  apprehension
of  whatever  facts  come  within  their  observation.

The  sense  of  workmanship  is  like  all  human  instincts
in  the  respect  that  when  the  occasion  offers,  the  agent
moved  by  its  impulse  not  only  runs  through  a  sequence
of  actions  suitable  to  the  instinctive  end,  but  he  is  also
given  to  dwelKng,  more  or  less  sentimentally,  on  the
objects  and  activities  about  which  his  attention  is  en-
gaged by  the  promptings  of  this  instinctive  propensity.
In  so  far  as  he  is  moved  by  the  instinct  of  workmanship
man  contemplates  the  objects  with  which  he  comes  in
contact  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  relevancy  to  ul-
terior results,  their  aptitude  for  taking  effect  in  a  conse-
quential outcome.  Habitual  occupation  with  workman-
like conceptions, — and  in  the  lower  cultures  all  men  and
women  are  habitually  so  occupied,  since  there  is  no  con-
siderable class  or  season  not  engaged  in  the  quest  of  a


54  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

livelihood, — this  occupation  with  workmanlike  interests,
leaving  the  attention  alert  in  the  direction  towards
workmanlike  phenomena,  carries  with  it  habitual  think-
ing in  the  terms  in  which  the  logic  of  workmanship  runs.
The  facts  of  observation  are  conceived  as  facts  of  work-
manship, and  the  logic  of  workmanship  becomes  the
logic  of  events.  Their  apprehension  in  these  terms  is
easy,  since  it  draws  into  action  the  faculties  of  apper-
ception and  reflection  that  are  already  alert  and  facile
through  habitual  use,  and  it  assimilates  the  facts  in  an
apperceptive  system  of  relationships  that  is  Hkewise
ready  and  satisfactory,  convincing  through  habitual
service  and  by  native  procKvity  to  this  Hne  of  systematis-
ation.  By  instinct  and  habit  observed  phenomena  are
apprehended  from  this  (teleological)  point  of  view,  and
they  are  construed,  by  way  of  sytematisation,  in  terms
of  such  an  instinctive  pursuit  of  some  workmanUke  end.
In  latterday  psychological  jargon,  human  knowledge  is
of  a  "pragmatic"  character.

As  all  men  habitually  act  under  the  guidance  of  in-
stincts, and  therefore  by  force  of  sentiment  instinctively
look  to  some  end  in  all  activity,  so  the  objects  with  which
the  primitive  workman  has  to  do  are  also  conceived  as
acting  under  impulse  of  an  instinctive  kind;  and  a  bent,
a  teleological  or  pragmatic  nature,  is  in  some  degree
imputed  to  them  and  comes  as  a  matter  of  course  to  be
accepted  as  a  constituent  element  in  their  apprehended
make-up.  A  putative  pragmatic  bent  innate  in  external
things  comes  in  this  way  to  pass  current  as  observed
matter  of  fact.  By  force  of  the  sense  of  workmanship
external  objects  are  in  great  part  apperceived  in  respect
of  what  they  will  do;  and  their  most  substantial  charac-


Contamination  of  Insti^tcts  in  Primitive  Technology 55

teristic  therefore,  their  intimate  individual  nature,  in
so  far  as  they  are  conceived  as  individual  entities,  is
that  they  will  do  tilings.

In  the  workmanHke  apprehension  of  them  the  nature
of  things  is  twofold:  (a)  what  can  be  done  with  them  as
raw  material  for  use  under  the  creative  hand  of  the  work-
man who  makes  things,  and  (6)  what  they  will  do  as
entities  acting  in  their  own  right  and  working  out  their
own  ends.  The  former  is  matter  of  fact,  the  latter  matter
of  imputation;  but  both  alike,  and  in  the  naive  appre-
hension of  uncritical  men  both  equally,  are  facts  of  ob-
servation and  elements  of  objective  knowledge.  The
two  are,  of  course,  of  very  unequal  value  for  the  purposes
of  workmanship.  It  should  seem,  at  least  on  first  con-
tact with  the  distinction,  that  the  former  category  alone
can  have  effectually  conduced  or  contributed  to  work-
manlike efficiency,  and  so  it  should  be  the  only  substan-
tial factor  in  the  growth  of  technological  insight  and
proficiency:  while  the  latter  category  of  knowledge
should  presumably  have  always  been  an  unmitigated
hindrance  to  effective  work  and  to  technological  advance.
But  such  does  not  appear  on  closer  scrutiny  to  have
been  the  case  in  the  past:  whether  such  sheer  discrimina-
tion against  the  technological  serviceabihty  of  all  these
putative  facts  would  hold  good  in  latter-day  civilisation  is
a  question  which  may  perhaps  best  be  left  to  the  parties
in  interest  in  '^ pragmatic"  and  theological  controversy.

These  two  categories  of  knowledge,  or  of  cognoscenda,
are  incongruous,  of  course,  and  they  seem  incompatible
when  appKed  to  the  same  phenomena,  the  same  external
objects.  But  such  incongruity  does  not  disturb  anyone
who  is  at  all  content  to  take  facts  at  their  face  value,—


56  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

for  both  ways  of  apprehending  the  facts  are  equally  given
in  the  face  value  of  the  facts  apprehended.  And  on  the
known  lower  levels  of  culture  it  appears  that  in  the  work-
man's apprehension  of  the  facts  with  which  he  has  to
do  there  is  no  evident  strain  due  to  this  twofold  nature
and  twofold  interpretation  of  the  objects  of  knowledge.
So,  for  instance,  the  Pueblo  potter  (woman)  may  (puta-
tively)  be  aware  of  certain  inherent,  quasi-spiritual,
pragmatic  qualities,  claims  and  proclivities  personal  to
the  clay  beds  from  which  her  raw  material  is  drawn:
different  clay  beds  have,  no  doubt,  a  somewhat  different
quasi-personahty,  which  has,  among  other  things,  to  do
with  the  goodness  of  the  raw  material  they  afford.  Even
the  clay  in  hand  will  have  its  pragmatic  pecuHarities  and
idiosyncracies  which  are  duly  to  be  respected;  and,
notably,  the  finished  pot  is  an  entity  with  a  life-history
of  its  own  and  with  temperament,  fortunes  and  fatahties
that  make  up  the  substance  of  good  and  evil  in  its  world.*
But  all  that  does  not  perceptibly  affect  the  technology
of  the  Pueblo  potter's  art,  beyond  carrying  a  sequence
of  ceremonial  observance  that  may  run  along  by  the
side  of  the  technological  process;  nor  does  it  manifestly
affect  the  workmanHke  use  of  the  pot  during  its  life-
time, except  that  the  pragmatic  nature  of  the  given  pot
will  decide,  on  grounds  of  ceremonial  competency,  to
what  use  it  may  be  put.^ Matter  of  fact  and  matter  of

1  Cf.,  e.  g.,  F.  H.  Gushing,  "A  Study  of  Pueblo  Pottery  as  illustrative
of  Zufii  Culture  Growth,"  Report,  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1882-1883
(vol.  iv);  J.  W.  Fewkes,  "Archeological  Expedition  to  Arizona  in  1895,"
sections  on  "Pottery"  and  "Paleography  of  the  Pottery,"  ibid,  1896-
1897  (vol.  xviii);  W.  H.  Holmes,  "The  Ancient  Art  of  Chiriqui,"  ihidy
1884-1885  (vol.  vi).

2  The  restrictions  in  this  respect  are  mainly  those  which  devote  the


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 57

imputation  run  along  side  by  side  in  inextricable  con-
tact but  with  slight  apparent  mutual  interference  across
the  line.  The  potter  digs  her  clay  as  best  she  has  learned
how,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  workmanKke  efficiency,  in
which  empirical  laiowledge  of  the  mechanical  quahties
of  the  material  is  very  efficiently  combined  with  the  pot-
ter's trained  proficiency  in  the  discretionary  use  of  her
tools;  the  tools,  of  course,  also  have  their  (putative)
temperamental  idiosyncracies,  but  they  are  employed
in  her  hands  in  uncritical  conformity  with  such  matter-of-
fact  laws  of  physics  as  she  has  learned.  The  clay  is
washed,  kneaded  and  tempered  with  the  same  circum-
spect regard  to  the  opaque  facts  known  about  clay
through  long  handling  of  it.  What  and  how  much  tem-
pering material  may  best  be  used,  and  how  it  is  to  be
worked  in,  may  all  have  a  recondite  explanation  in  the
subtler  imputed  traits  of  the  clay;  a  certain  clay  may
have  a  putative  quasi-spiritual  affinity  for  certain  tem-
pering material;  but  the  work  of  selection  and  mixing  is
carried  out  with  a  watchful  regard  to  the  mechanical
character  of  the  materials  and  without  doubt  that  the
given  materials  will  respond  in  definite,  empirically
ascertained  ways  to  the  pressure  brought  on  them  by
the  potter's  hands,  and  without  questioning  the  matter
of  fact  that  such  and  so  much  of  manipulation  will  mix
such  and  so  much  of  tempering  material  with  the  given
lot  of  clay.  The  clay  is  ''as  wax  in  her  hands;"  what
comes  of  it  is  the  product  of  her  insight  and  proficiency.
Still  the  pragmatic  nature  of  all  these  materials  viewed
as  distinct  entities  is  never  to  be  denied,  and  in  those

"sacred"  vessels,  distinguished  by  peculiar  shapes  and  decorations,  to
particular  ceremonial  uses.


58  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

respects  in  which  she  does  not  creatively  design,  manipu-
late and  construct  the  work  of  her  hands,  its  putative
self-sufficiency  of  existence,  meaning  and  propensity
goes  on  its  own  recognisances  unshorn  and  inalienable.

Technological  efficiency  rests  on  matter-of-fact  knowl-
edge, as  contrasted  with  knowledge  of  the  traits  imputed
to  external  objects  in  making  acquaintance  with  them.
Therefore  every  substantial  advance  in  technological
mastery  necessarily  adds  something  to  this  body  of
opaque  fact,  and  with  every  such  advance  proportion-
ably  less  of  the  behaviour  of  inanimate  things  will  come
to  be  construed  in  terms  of  an  imputed  workmanlike  or
teleological  bent.  At  the  same  time  the  imputation  of
a  teleological  meaning  or  workmanHke  bent  to  the  ex-
ternal facts  that  are  made  use  of  is  Hkely  to  take  a  more
circumspect,  ingenious  and  idealised  form.  Under  the
circumstances  that  condition  an  increasing  technological
mastery  there  is  an  evergrowing  necessity  to  avoid  con-
flict between  the  imputed  traits  of  external  objects  and
those  facts  of  their  behaviour  that  are  constantly  in  evi-
dence in  their  technological  use.  In  so  far,  therefore,
as  a  simple  and  immediate  imputation  of  workmanlike
self-direction  is  seen  manifestly  to  traverse  the  facts  of
daily  use  its  place  will  be  supplied  by  more  shadowy
anthropomorphic  agencies  that  are  assumed  to  carry  on
their  life  and  work  in  some  degree  of  detachment  from
the  material  objects  in  question,  and  to  these  anthropo-
morphic agencies  which  so  he  obscurely  in  the  back-
ground of  the  observed  facts  will  be  assigned  a  larger  and
larger  share  of  the  required  initiative  and  self-direction.
For  so  alien  to  mankind,  with  its  instinctive  sense  of
workmanship,  is  the  mutilation  of  brute  creation  into


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 59

mere  opaque  matter-of-fact,  and  so  indefeasibly  does  the
"consciousness  of  kind"  assert  itself,  that  each  successive
renunciation  of  such  an  imputed  bias  of  workmanship  in
concrete  objects  is  sought  to  be  redeemed  by  pushing  the
imputation  farther  into  the  background  of  observed
phenomena  and  running  their  putative  workmanHke
bias  in  more  consummately  anthropomorphic  terms.  So
an  animistic  conception  ^  of  things  comes  presently  to
supplement,  and  in  part  supplant,  the  more  naive  and
immediate  imputation  of  workmanship,  leading  up  to
farther  and  more  elaborate  myth-making;  until  in  the
course  of  elaboration  and  refinement  there  may  emerge  a
monotheistic  and  providential  Creator  seated  in  an  in-
finitely remote  but  ubiquitous  space  of  four  dimensions.
This  imputation  of  bias  and  initiative  has  doubtless
lost  ground  among  civilised  communities,  as  contrasted
with  the  matter-of-fact  apprehension  of  things,  so  that
where  it  once  was  the  main  body  of  knowledge  it  now  is
believed  to  Hve  and  move  only  within  that  margin  of
things  not  yet  overtaken  by  matter-of-fact  information, —
at  least  so  it  is  held  in  the  vainglorious  scepticism  of  the
Western  culture.  Meantime  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
proclivity  to  impute  a  workmanhke  bias  to  external
facts  has  not  been  lost,  nor  has  it  become  inoperative
even  among  the  adepts  of  Occidental  scepticism.  On
the  one  hand  it  still  enables  the  modern  scientist  to
generalise  his  observations  in  terms  of  causation,  ^  and
on  the  other  hand  it  has  preserved  the  Hfe  of  God  the
Father  unto  this  day. It  is  as  the  creative  workman,  the

*  Cf.  E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  especially  ch.  xvii.
2Cf.  "The  Evolution  of  the  Scientific  Point  of  View,"  University  0]
California  Chronicle,  Oct.,  1908.


6o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

Great  Artificer,  that  he  has  taken  his  last  stand  against
the  powers  of  spiritual  twilight.

Out  of  the  simpler  workday  familiarity  with  the  raw
materials  and  processes  employed  in  industry,  in  the
lower  cultures,  there  emerges  no  system  of  knowledge
avowed  as  such;  although  in  all  known  instances  of  such
lower  cultures  the  industrial  arts  have  taken  on  a  sys-
tematic character,  such  as  often  to  give  rise  to  definite,
extensive  and  elaborate  technological  processes  as  well
as  to  manual  and  other  technological  training;  both  of
which  will  necessarily  involve  something  Kke  an  elemen-
tary theory  of  mechanics  systematised  on  grounds  of
matter-of-fact,  as  well  as  a  practical  routine  of  empirical
ways  and  means.  In  the  lower  cultures  the  growth  of
this  body  of  opaque  facts  and  of  its  systematic  coherence
is  simply  the  habitual  growth  of  technological  procedure.
Considered  as  a  knowledge  of  things  it  is  prosy  and  un-
attractive; it  does  not  greatly  appeal  to  men's  curiosity,
being  scarcely  interesting  in  itself,  but  only  for  the  use
to  be  made  of  it.  Its  facts  are  not  hghted  up  with  that
spiritual  fire  of  pragmatic  initiative  and  propensity  which
animates  the  same  phenomena  when  seen  in  the  Hght  of
an  imputed  workmanlike  behaviour  and.  so  construed  in
terms  of  conduct.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  phe-
nomena are  interpreted  anthropomorphically  they  are
indued  with  a  ''human  interest,"  such  as  will  draw  the
attention  of  all  men  in  all  ages,  as  witness  the  worldwide
penchant  for  myth-making.

Such  animistic  imputation  of  end  and  endeavour  to  the
facts  of  observation  will  in  no  case  cover  the  whole  of
men's  apprehension  of  the  facts.  It  is  a  matter  of  impu-
tation, not  of  direct  observation;  and  there  is  always  a


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 6i

fringe  of  opaque  matter-of-fact  bound  up  with  even  the
most  animistically  conceived  object.  Such  is  unavoidably
the  case.  The  animistic  conception  imputes  to  its  sub-
ject a  workmanHke  propensity  to  do  things,  and  such  an
imputation  necessarily  imphes  that,  as  agent,  the  object
in  question  engages  in  something  Hke  a  technological
process,  a  workmanHke  manipulation  wherein  he  has  his
will  with  the  raw  materials  upon  which  his  workmanHke
force  and  proficiency  spends  itself.  Workmanship  in-
volves raw  material,  and  in  the  respect  in  which  this  raw
material  is  passively  shaped  to  his  purposes  by  the
workman's  manipulation  it  is  not  conceived  to  be  ac-
tively seeking  its  own  ends  on  its  own  initiative.  So
that  by  force  of  the  logic  of  workmanship  the  imputation
of  a  worlynanHke  (animistic)  propensity  to  brute  facts,
itself  involves  the  assumption  of  crude  inanimate  matter
as  a  correlate  of  the  putative  workmanlike  agent.  The
anthropomorphic  fancy  of  the  primitive  workman,
therefore,  can  never  carry  the  teleological  interpretation
of  phenomena  to  such  a  finaHty  but  that  there  will  always
in  his  apprehension  be  an  inert  residue  of  matter-of-fact
left  over.  The  material  facts  never  cease  to  be,  within
reasonable  limits,  raw  material;  though  the  limits  may
be  somewhat  vague  and  shifting.  And  this  residue  of
crude  matter-of-fact  grows  and  gathers  consistency  with
experience  and  always  remains  ready  to  the  hand  of  the
workman  for  what  it  is  worth,  unmagnified  and  unbeau-
tified  by  anthropomorphic  interpretation.

The  animistic,  or  better  the  anthropomorphic,  elements
so  comprised  by  imputation  in  the  common-sense  appre-
hension of  things  will  pass  in  the  main  for  facts  of  ob-
servation. With  the  current  of  time  and  experience  this


62  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

may  under  favourable  conditions  grow  into  a  developed
animistic  system  and  come  to  the  dignity  of  myth,  and
ultimately  of  theology.  But  as  it  plays  its  part  in  the
cruder  uses  of  technology  its  common  and  most  obstruc-
tive form  is  the  inchoate  animism  or  anthropomorpliic
bias  spoken  of  above.  In  its  bearing  on  technological
efficiency,  it  commonly  vitiates  the  available  facts  in  a
greater  or  less  degree.  Matter-of-fact  knowledge  alone
will  serve  the  uses  of  workmanship,  since  workmanship
is  effective  only  in  so  far  as  its  outcome  is  matter-of-fact
work.  Any  higher  and  more  subtle  potencies  found  in
or  imputed  to  the  facts  about  which  the  artificer  is  en-
gaged can  only  serve  to  divert  and  defeat  his  efforts,  in
that  they  lead  him  into  methods  and  expedients  that
have  only  a  putative  effect.

This  obstructive  force  of  the  anthropomorphic  inter-
pretation of  phenomena  is  by  no  means  the  same  in  all
lines  of  activity.  The  difficulty,  at  least  in  the  earlier
days,  seems  to  be  greatest  along  those  lines  of  craft  where
the  workman  has  to  do  with  the  mechanical,  inanimate
forces — the  simplest  in  point  of  brute  concreteness  and
the  least  amenable  to  a  consistent  interpretation  in
animistic  terms.  While  man  is  conventionally  distin-
guished from  brute  creation  as  a  ''tool-using  animal,"
his  early  progress  in  the  de\dsing  and  use  of  efficient  tools,
taking  the  word  in  its  native  sense,  seems  to  have  gone
forward  very  slowly,  both  absolutely  and  as  contrasted
with  those  lines  of  workmanship  in  which  he  could  carry
his  point  by  manual  dexterity  unaided  by  cunningly
devised  implements  and  mechanical  contrivances;  ^  and

*  So,  e.  g.,  the  proficiency  of  Bushmen,  Veddas,  Australians,  American


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 6t,

still  more  striking  is  the  contrast  between  the  incredibly
slow  and  blindfold  advance  of  the  savage  culture  shown
in  the  sequence  of  those  typical  stone  implements  which
serve  conventionally  as  land-marks  of  the  early  tech-
nology, on  the  one  hand,  and  the  concomitant  achieve-
ments of  the  same  stone-age  peoples  in  the  domestication
and  use  of  plants  and  animals  on  the  other  hand.

No  man  can  offer  a  confident  conjecture  as  to  how  long
a  time  and  what  a  volume  of  experience  was  taken  up  in
the  growth  of  technological  insight  and  proficiency  up
to  the  point  when  the  neolithic  period  begins  in  European
prehistory.  In  point  of  duration  it  has  been  found  con-
venient to  count  it  up  roughly  in  units  of  geologic  time,
where  a  thousand  years  are  as  a  day.  Attempts  to  reduce
it  to  such  units  as  centuries  or  millennia  have  hitherto  not
come  to  anything  appreciable.  In  the  present  state  of  in-
formation on  this  head  it  is  doubtless  a  safe  conjecture
that  the  interval  between  the  beginning  of  the  human  era
and  the  close  of  palaeolithic  time,  say  in  Europe  or  within
the  cultural  sequence  in  which  Europe  belongs,  is  to  be
taken  as  some  multiple  of  the  interval  that  has  elapsed
from  the  beginning  of  the  neoHthic  culture  in  Europe
to  the  present;  ^  and  the  neolithic  period  itself  was  in  its
turn  no  doubt  of  longer  duration  than  the  history  of
Europe  since  the  bronze  first  came  in.^

Indians,  and  other  peoples  of  a  low  technological  plane,  in  tracking  game
has  been  remarked  on  with  great  admiration  by  all  observers;  and  the
efficiency  of  these  and  others  of  their  like  is  no  less  admirable  as  regards
swimming,  boating,  riding,  climbing,  stalking,  etc.

1  Cf.  G.  and  A.  de  Mortillet,  Le  Prehistoriqiie,  especially  the  chapter
"Donnees  chronologiques,"  pp.  662-664;  W.  G.  Sollas,  Ancient  Hunters,
ch.  i  and  xiv.

*  Cf .  Sophus  Miiller,  U Europe  Prehistorique,


64  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

The  series  of  stone  implements  recovered  from  palaeo-
lithic deposits  show  the  utmost  reach  of  palaeolithic
technology  on  its  mechanical  side,  in  the  way  of  work-
manlike mastery  of  brute  matter  simply;  for  these
implements  are  the  tools  of  the  tool-makers  of  that
technological  era.  They  indicate  the  ultimate  terms  of
the  technological  situation  on  the  mechanical  side,  for
the  craftsman  working  in  more  perishable  materials
could  go  no  farther  than  these  primary  elements  of  the
technological  equipment  would  carry  him.

The  strict  Hmitation  imposed  on  the  technology  of
any  culture,  on  its  mechanical  side,  by  the  "state  of  the
industrial  arts"  in  respect  of  the  primary  tools  and  ma-
terials available,  whether  availabihty  is  a  question  of
knowledge  or  of  material  environment,  is  illustrated,
for  instance,  by  the  case  of  the  Eskimo,  the  North-west
Coast  Indians,  or  some  of  the  islands  of  the  South  Sea.
In  each  of  these  cultures,  perhaps  especially  in  that  of
the  Eskimo,  technological  mastery  had  been  carried  as
far  as  the  circumstances  of  the  case  would  permit,  and
in  each  case  the  decisive  circumstances  that  Hmit  the
scope  and  range  of  workmanship  are  the  character  of
the  primary  tools  of  the  tool-maker  and  the  limits  of  his
knowledge  of  the  mechanical  properties  of  the  materials
at  his  disposal  for  such  use.  The  Eskimo  culture,  for
instance,  is  complete  after  its  kind,  worked  out  to  the
last  degree  of  workmanlike  mastery  possible  with  the
Eskimo's  knowledge  of  those  materials  on  which  he  de-
pended for  his  primary  tools  and  on  which  he  was  able
to  draw  for  the  raw  materials  of  his  industry.  At  the
same  time  the  Eskimo  shows  how  considerable  a  super-
structure of  the  secondary  mechanic  arts  may  be  erected


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 65

on  a  scant  groundwork  of  the  primary  mechanical  re-
sources.^

In  the  light  of  such  a  familiar  instance  as  the  Eskimo
or  the  Polynesian  culture  it  is  evident  that  very  much
must  be  allowed,  in  the  case,  e,  g.,  of  the  European  stone
age,  for  work  in  perishable  materials  that  have  disap-
peared; but  after  all  allowance  of  this  kind,  the  showing
for  palaeolithic  man  is  not  remarkable,  considering  the
ample  time  allowed  him,  and  considering  also  that,  in
Europe  at  least,  he  was  by  native  gift  nowise  inferior  to
some  of  the  racial  elements  that  still  survive  in  the  exist-
ing population  and  that  are  not  notoriously  ill  furnished
either  in  the  physical  or  the  intellectual  respect.  And
what  is  true  of  palaeohthic  times  as  regards  the  native
character  of  this  population  is  true  in  a  more  pronounced
degree  for  later  prehistoric  times. ^

The  very  moderate  pace  of  the  technological  advance
in  early  times  in  the  mechanic  arts  stands  out  more
strikingly  when  it  is  contrasted  with  what  was  accom-

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Report  of  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  1884-1885,  Franz
Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo;"  ihid,  1887-1888,  John  Murdoch,  "The
Point  Barrow  Eskimo."

2  What  is  assumed  here  is  what  is  commonly  held,  viz.  that  the  racial
stocks  that  made  up  the  late  palaeolithic  population  of  Europe  are  still
represented  in  a  moderate  way  in  the  racial  mixture  that  fills  Europe
today,  and  that  these  older  racial  types  not  only  recur  sporadically  in  the
European  population  at  large  but  are  also  present  locally  in  sufficient
force  to  give  a  particular  character  to  the  population  of  given  localities.
(See  G.  de  Mortillet,  Formation  de  la  nation  franqaise,  4me  partie,  and
Conclusions,  pp.  275-329.)  Great  changes  took  place  in  the  racial  com-
plexion of  Europe  in  the  beginning  and  early  phases  of  the  neoUthic
period,  but  since  then  no  intrusion  of  new  stocks  has  seriously  disturbed
the  mixture  of  races,  except  in  isolated  areas,  of  secondary  consequence
to  the  cultural  situation  at  large.

See  also  W.  G.  Sollas,  A  ncient  Hunters  and  their  Modern  Representatives*


66  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

pKshed  in  those  arts,  or  rather  in  those  occupations,  that
have  to  do  immediately  with  hving  matter.  Some  of
the  crop  plants,  for  instance,  and  presently  some  of  the
domestic  animals,  make  their  appearance  in  Denmark
late  in  the  period  of  the  kitchen  middens;  which  falls  in
the  early  stone  age  of  the  Danish  chronology,  that  is  to
say  in  the  early  part  of  the  neolithic  period  as  counted
in  terms  of  the  European  chronology  at  large.  These,
then,  are  improved  breeds  of  plants  and  animals,  very
appreciably  different  from  their  wild  ancestors,  arguing
not  only  a  shrewd  insight  and  consistent  management
in  the  breeding  of  these  domesticated  races  but  also  a
long  continued  and  intelKgent  use  of  these  items  of
technological  equipment,  during  which  the  nature  and
uses  of  the  plants  and  animals  taken  into  domestication
must  have  been  sufficiently  understood  and  taken  ad-
vantage of,  at  the  same  time  that  a  workmanhke  selec-
tion and  propagation  of  favourable  variations  was  carried
out.  Some  sHght  reflection  on  what  is  implied  in  the  suc-
cessful maintenance,  use  and  improvement  of  several
races  of  crop  plants  and  domestic  animals  will  throw
that  side  of  the  material  achievements  of  the  kitchen-
midden  peoples  into  sufficiently  high  contrast  with  their
chipped  flint  implements  and  the  degree  of  mechanical
insight  and  proficiency  which  these  implements  indicate.
To  this  Danish  illustrative  case  it  may  of  course  be
objected,  and  with  some  apparent  reason,  that  these
plants  and  animals  which  begin  to  come  in  evidence  in  a
state  of  domestication  in  the  kitchen  middens,  and  which
presently  afforded  the  chief  means  of  hfe  to  the  later
stone-age  population,  were  introduced  in  a  domestic
state  from  outside;  and  that  this  technological  gain  was


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 67

the  product  of  another  and  higher  culture  than  that  into
which  they  were  thus  intruded.  The  objection  will  have
what  force  it  may;  the  facts  are  no  doubt  substantially
as  set  forth.  However,  the  domestication  and  use  of
these  races  of  plants  and  animals  embodied  no  less  con-
siderable a  workmanHke  mastery  of  its  technological
problem  wherever  it  was  worked  out,  whether  in  Den-
mark— as  is  at  least  highly  improbable — or  in  Turkestan,
as  may  well  have  been  the  case.  And  the  successful
introduction  of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  among  the
kitchen-midden  peoples  from  a  higher  culture,  without
the  concomitant  introduction  of  a  corresponding  gain  in
the  mechanic  arts  from  the  same  source,  leaves  the  force
of  the  argument  about  as  it  would  be  in  the  absence  of
this  objection.  The  comparative  difficulty  of  acquiring
the  mechanic  arts,  as  compared  with"  the  arts  of  hus-
bandry, would  appear  in  much  the  same  hght  whether
it  were  shown  in  the  relatively  slow  acquirement  of  these
arts  through  a  home  growth  of  technological  mastery  or
in  the  relatively  tardy  and  inept  borrowing  of  them  from
outside.  So  far  as  bears  on  the  present  question,  much
the  same  habits  of  mind  take  effect  in  the  acquirement
of  such  a  technological  gain  whether  it  takes  place  by
home  growth  or  by  borrowing  from  without.  In  either
case  the  point  is  that  the  peoples  of  the  kitchen-middens
appear  to  have  been  less  able  to  learn  the  use  of  service-
able mechanical  expedients  than  to  acquire  the  tech-
nology of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding.  The  appearance
of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  (''mixed  farming")  at  this
period  of  Danish  prehistory,  without  the  concomitant
appearance  of  anything  Hke  a  similar  technological  gain
in  the  mechanic  arts,  argues  either  (a)  that  in  the  culture


6S  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

from  which  husbandry  was  ultimately  borrowed  and  in
which  the  domestication  was  achieved  there  was  no  simi-
larly substantial  gain  made  in  the  mechanic  arts  at  the
same  time,  so  that  this  culture  from  which  the  crop
plants  and  animals  originally  came  into  the  North  of
Europe  had  no  corresponding  mechanical  gain  to  offer
along  with  husbandry;  or  (b)  that  the  kitchen-midden
peoples,  and  the  other  peoples  through  whose  hands  the
arts  of  husbandry  passed  on  their  way  to  the  North,  were
unable  to  profit  in  a  like  degree  by  what  was  offered  them
in  the  primary  mechanic  arts.  The  known  evidence
seems  to  say  that  the  visible  retardation  in  the  mechanic
arts,  as  compared  with  husbandry,  in  prehistoric  Den-
mark was  due  partly  to  the  one,  partly  to  the  other  of
these  difficulties.

To  avoid  confusion  and  misconception  it  may  be  per-
tinent to  recall  that,  taken  absolutely,  the  rate  and  mag-
nitude of  advance  in  the  primary  mechanic  arts  in  Den-
mark at  this  time  was  very  considerable;  so  much  so
indeed  that  the  visible  absolute  gain  in  this  respect  has
so  profoundly  touched  the  imagination  of  the  students  of
that  culture  as  to  let  them  overlook  the  disparity,  in
point  of  the  rate  of  gain,  between  the  mechanic  arts  and
husbandry.  In  the  same  connection  it  is  also  to  be  re-
marked that  the  entire  neolithic  culture  of  the  kitchen-
middens,  as  well  as  their  husbandry,  was  introduced
from  outside  of  Europe,  having  been  worked  out  in  its
early  rudiments  before  the  kitchen-midden  peoples
reached  the  Baltic  seaboard.  At  the  same  time  the  raw
materials  for  the  mechanic  arts  of  the  neolithic  culture
were  available  to  the  kitchen-midden  technologist  in
abundant  quantity  and  unsurpassed  quality;  while  the


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 69

raw  material  of  husbandry,  the  crop  plants  and  domestic
animals,  were  exotics.  Further,  in  point  of  race,  and
therefore  presumably  in  point  of  native  endowment,  the
peoples  of  the  Baltic  seaboard  at  that  time  were  substan-
tially the  same  mixture  of  stocks  that  has  in  modern
times  carried  the  technology  of  the  mechanic  arts  in
western  Europe  and  its  colonies  to  a  pitch  of  mastery
never  approached  before  or  elsewhere.  And  the  retarda-
tion in  the  mechanic  arts  as  contrasted  with  husbandry
is  no  greater,  probably  less,  in  neoHthic  Denmark  than
in  any  other  culture  on  the  same  general  level  of  effi-
ciency.

Wherever  the  move  may  have  been  made,  in  one  or  in
several  places,  and  whatever  may  have  been  the  par-
ticular circumstances  attending  the  domestication  and
early  use  of  crop  plants  and  animals,  the  case  sums  up  to
about  the  same  result.  Through  long  ages  of  work  and
play  men  (perhaps  primarily  women)  learned  the  diffi-
cult and  deHcate  crafts  of  husbandry  and  carried  their
mastery  of  these  pursuits  to  such  a  degree  of  proficiency,
and  followed  out  the  lead  given  by  these  calHngs  with
such  effect,  that  by  the  (geologic)  date  of  early  neoKthic
times  in  Europe  virtually  all  the  species  of  domesticable
animals  in  three  continents  had  been  brought  in  and  had
been  bred  into  improved  races.  ^  At  the  same  time  the
leading  crop  plants  of  the  old  world,  those  on  whose
yield  the  life  of  the  Western  peoples  depends  today,  had

*  These  improved  races  are  commonly,  if  not  always,  a  product  of
hybridisation,  though  it  is  conceivable  that  such  a  race  might  arise  as  a
"sport,"  a  Mendelian  mutant.  To  establish  such  a  race  or  "composite
pure  line"  of  hybrids  and  to  propagate  and  improve  it  in  the  course  of
further  breeding  demands  a  degree  of  patient  attention  and  consistent


70  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

been  brought  under  cultivation,  improved  and  specialised
with  such  effect  that  all  the  advance  that  has  been  made
in  these  respects  since  the  early  neolithic  period  is  greatly
less  than  what  had  been  accomplished  up  to  that  time.
By  early  neolithic  times  as  counted  in  West  Europe,  or
by  the  early  bronze  age  as  counted  in  western  Asia,  the
leading  domestic  animals  had  been  distributed,  in  domes-
ticated and  improved  breeds,  throughout  central  and
western  Asia  and  the  inhabited  regions  of  Europe  and
North  Africa.  The  like  is  true  for  the  main  crop  plants
that  now  feed  the  occidental  peoples,  except  that  these,
in  domesticated  and  specialised  breeds,  were  distributed
through  this  entire  cultural  region  at  an  appreciably
earlier  date, — earHer  by  some  thousands  of  years.  ^ In

^  The  late  neolithic,  or  "seneolithic,"  culture  brought  to  light  by  Pum-
pelly  at  Anau  in  Transcaspia  shows  the  synchronism  of  advance  between
the  technology  of  the  mechanic  arts  on  the  one  hand  and  of  tillage  and
cattle-breeding  on  the  other  hand  in  a  remarkably  lucid  way.  The  site
is  held  to  date  back  to  some  8000  B.  C.  or  earlier  and  shows  continuous  oc-
cupation through  a  period  of  several  thousand  years.  The  settlers  at
Anau  brought  cereals  (barley  and  wheat)  when  the  settlement  was  made;
so  that  the  cultivation  of  these  grains  must  date  back  some  considerable
distance  farther  into  the  stone  age  of  Asia.  In  succeeding  ages  the  people
of  Anau  made  some  further  advance  in  the  use  of  crop  plants;  whether  by
improvement  and  innovation  at  home  or  by  borrowing  has  not  been  de-
termined. Presently,  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  thousand  years,  they
brought  into  domestication  and  adapted  to  domestic  use  by  selective
breeding  the  greater  number  of  those  species  of  animals  that  have  since
made  up  the  complement  of  live  stock  in  the  Western  culture.  In  the
mechanic  arts  the  visible  advance  is  slight  as  compared  with  the  work  in
cattle-breeding,  though  it  cannot  be  called  insignificant  taken  by  itself.
The  more  notable  improvements  in  this  direction  are  believed  to  be  due
to  borrowing.  Perhaps  the  most  characteristic  trait  of  the  mechanic
technology  at  Anau  is  the  total  absence  of  weapons  in  the  lower  half  of
the  deposits. — Raphael  Pumpelly,  Explorations  in  Turkestajt:  Prehistoric
Civilizations  of  Anau.  (Carnegie  Publication  No.  73.)  Washington,
1908.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 7 1

late  modern  times  there  have  been  added  to  the  civilised
world's  complement  of  crop  plants  a  very  large  and  im-
portant contingent  whose  domestication  and  develop-
ment was  worked  out  in  America  and  the  regions  of  the
Pacific;  though  most  of  these  belong  in  the  low  latitudes
and  are  on  that  account  less  available  to  the  Western
culture  than  what  has  come  down  from  the  prehistoric
cultures  of  the  old  world.  These  are  also  the  work  of  the
stone  age,  in  large  part  no  doubt  dating  back  to  palaeo-
lithic times.

America,  with  the  Polynesian  and  Indonesian  cultural
regions,  shows  the  correlation  and  the  systematic  dis-
crepancy in  time  between  the  rate,  range  and  magnitude
of  the  advance  in  tillage  on  the  one  hand  and  of  the
primary  mechanic  arts  on  the  other  hand.  When  this
culture  was  interrupted  it  had,  in  the  mechanical  re-
spect, reached  an  advanced  neoHthic  phase  at  its  best;
but  its  achievements  in  the  crop  plants  are  perhaps  to
be  rated  as  unsurpassed  by  all  that  has  been  done  else-
where in  all  time.^  In  the  primary  mechanic  arts  this
cultural  region  had  in  the  same  time  reached  a  stage  of
perfection  comparable  at  its  best  with  pre-dynastic
Egypt,  or  neolithic  Denmark,  or  pre-Minoan  Crete.
The  really  great  advance  achieved  was  in  the  selection,
improvement,  use  and  cultivation  of  the  crop  plants;  and
not  in  any  appreciable  degree  even  in  the  mechanical
appliances  employed  in  the  cultivation  and  consumption
of  these  crops;  though  something  considerable  is  to  be
noted  in  this  latter  respect  in  such  inventions  as  the  man-

1  Cf.  O.  F.  Cook,  "Food  Plants  of  Ancient  America."  Report  of  Smith-
sonian Institution,  1903.  E.  J.  Payne,  History  of  the  New  World  Called
Americay  vol.  i,  (1892),  pp.  336-427.


Ji  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

dioca  squeezer  and  the  metate;  and  great  things  were
done  in  the  way  of  irrigation  and  road  building.^  But
the  contrast,  for  instance,  between  the  metate  and  the
contrivances  for  making  paper  bread  on  the  one  side,  and
the  technologically  consummate  corn-plant  (maize)  on
the  other,  should  be  decisive  for  the  point  here  in  ques-
tion. The  mechanic  appliances  of  corn  cultivation  had
not  advanced  beyond  the  digging  stick,  a  rude  hoe  and
a  rudimentary  spade,  though  here  as  well  as  in  other
similar  connections  the  local  use  of  well-devised  irrigation
works,  terraced  fields,^  and  graneries  is  not  to  be  over-
looked; but  the  corn  itself  had  been  brought  from  its
grass-like  ancestral  form  to  the  maize  of  the  present  corn
crop.  Like  most  of  the  American  crop  plants  the  maize
under  selective  cultivation  had  been  carried  so  far  from
its  wild  form  as  no  longer  to  stand  a  chance  of  survival
in  the  wild  state,  and  indeed  so  far  that  it  is  still  a  matter
of  controversy  what  its  wild  ancestor  may  have  been.

Perhaps  the  races  of  this  American-Polynesian  region
are  gifted  with  some  special  degree  of  spiritual  (instinc-
tive) fitness  for  plant-breeding.  They  seem  to  be  en-
dowed with  a  particular  proclivity  for  sympathetically
identifying  themselves  with  and  patiently  waiting  upon
the  course  of  natural  phenomena,  perhaps  especially  the
phenomena  of  animate  nature,  which  never  seem  alien
or  incomprehensible  to  the  Indian.  Such  at  least  is  the
consistent  suggestion  carried  by  their  myths,  legends
and  symboHsm.  The  typical  American  cosmogony  is  a
tissue  of  legends  of  fecundity  and  growth,  even  more
than  appears  to  hold  true  of  primitive  cosmogonies

*  Cf.  E.  J.  Payne,  as  above.

2  Cf .,  e.  g.,  Lumholtz,  Unhiowti  Mexico,  vol.  i,  ch.  vi.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 73

elsewhere.^  And  yet  some  caution  in  accepting  such  a
generalisation  is  necessary  in  view,  for  instance,  of  the
mythological  output  along  similar  lines  on  the  Mediter-
ranean seaboard  in  early  times.  By  native  gift  the  Indian
is  a  "nature-faker,"  given  to  unlimited  anthropomor-
phism. Mechanical,  matter-of-fact  appreciation  of  ex-
ternal and  material  phenomena  seems  to  be  in  a  peculiar
degree  difficult,  irrelevant  and  incongruous  with  the
genius  of  the  race.  But  even  if  it  should  seem  that  this
race,  or  group  of  races,  is  peculiarly  given  to  such  sym-
pathetic interpretaion  of  natural  phenomena  in  terms  of
human  instinct,  the  difference  between  them  and  the
typical  racial  stocks  of  the  old  world  in  this  respect  is
after  all  a  difference  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  The  Hke
proclivity  is  in  good  evidence  throughout,  wherever  any
race  of  men  have  endeavoured  to  put  their  acquaintance
with  natural  phenomena  into  systematic  form.  The
bond  of  combination  in  the  making  of  systems,  whether
cosmologic,  mythic,  philosophic  or  scientific,  has  been
some  putative  human  trait  or  traits.  It  may  be  that  in
their  appreciation  of  facts  and  their  making  of  systems
the  American  races  have  by  some  peculiar  native  gift
been  inclined  to  an  interpretation  in  terms  of  fertility,
growth,  nurture  and  life-cycles.

Any  predisposition  freely  to  accept  and  use  the  de-
liverances of  sensible  perception  on  their  own  recog-
nisances simply,  in  the  terms  in  which  they  come,  and

1  Cf.,  e.  g.,  J.  W.  Powell,  "Mythology  of  the  North  American  Indians,"
Report,  Bureau  of  Eth.,  1879-1880  (vol.  i);  F.  H.  Gushing,  "Outlines  of
Zuni  Creation  Myths,"  ibid,  i89];-i892;  J.  O.  Dorsey,  "A  Study  of
Siouan  Cults,"  ibid,  1 889-1 890.


74  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

to  connect  them  up  in  a  system  of  knowledge  in  their
own  terms,  without  imputation  of  a  spiritual  (anthropo-
morphic) substratum, — for  the  purposes  of  workmanship
such  a  predisposition  should  be  of  the  first  importance
for  effective  work  in  the  mechanic  arts;  and  a  strong  in-
stinctive bias  to  the  contrary  should  be  correspondingly
pernicious.  Any  instinctive  bias  to  colour,  distort  and
derange  the  facts  by  imputing  elements  of  human  nature
will  unavoidably  act  to  hinder  and  deflect  the  agent  from
an  effectual  pursuit  of  mechanical  design.  But  the  Hke
is  not  true  in  the  same  degree  as  regards  men's  dealings
with  animate  nature.  Anthropomorphic  interpretation
is  more  at  home  and  less  disserviceable  here.  With  less
serious  derangement  in  the  objective  results,  plants  and
animals  may  be  construed  to  have  a  conscious  purpose
in  life  and  to  pursue  their  ends  somewhat  after  the  human
fashion;  witness  the  facility  with  which  the  story-tellers
recount  plausible  episodes  (feigned  or  real)  from  the  life
of  animals  and  plants,  and  the  readiness  with  which  such
tales  get  a  hearing.  Readers  and  hearers  find  no  great
difficulty,  if  any,  in  giving  make-believe  credence  to  the
tales  so  long  as  they  recount  only  such  adventures  as
are  physically  possible  to  the  animals  of  which  (whom?)
they  are  told;  the  hearers  are  always  ready  to  go  with
the  story-teller  down  this  highway  of  make-beheve  into
the  subhuman  fairy  land.  Mechanical  phenomena,  hap-
penings in  the  mechanic  arts,  characteristics  of  the  exist-
ence of  inanimate  objects  and  the  changes  which  they
undergo,  lend  themselves  with  much  less  happy  effect  to
the  anthropomorphic  story-teller's  make-believe.  Epi-
sodes from  the  feigned  life-history  of  tools,  machines  and
raw  materials  are  not  drawn  on  with  anything  like  the


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 75

same  frequency,  nor  do  the  tales  that  recount  them  meet
with  the  same  untiring  attention.  There  is  always  an
unreality  about  them  which  even  the  most  robust  make-
believe  can  overcome  only  for  a  short  and  doubtful
interval.  Witness  the  relative  barrenness  of  primitive
folk-tales  on  this  inanimate  side,  as  compared  with  the
exuberance  of  the  myths  and  legends  that  interpret  the
life  of  plants  and  animals;  and  where  inanimate  phenom-
ena are  drawn  into  the  net  of  personation  it  happens
almost  unavoidably  that  a  feigned  person  is  thrown  into
the  foreground  of  the  tale  plausibly  to  take  the  part  of
bearer,  controller  or  intrigant  in  the  episodes  related.^

Even  more  to  the  same  purpose,  as  showing  the  same
insidious  facility  of  anthropomorphic  interpretation,  are
the  bona-fide  constructions  of  scientists  and  pseudo-
scientists  running  on  the  imputation  of  purpose  and  de-
liberation to  explain  the  behaviour  of  animals.  Indeed,
at  the  worst,  and  still  in  good  faith,  it  may  go  so  far  as
to  impute  some  sort  of  quasi-conscious  striving  on  the
part  of  plants.^  As  good  and  temperate  an  instance  as
may  be  had  of  such  anthropomorphic  imputation  of
workmanlike  gifts  is  afforded,  for  instance,  by  the  work
of  Romanes  on  the  behaviour  of  animals.^  It  goes  to
show  how  very  plausibly  some  of  the  lower  animals  may
be  credited  with  these  spiritual  aptitudes  and  how  far
and  well  the  imputation  may  be  made  to  serve  the  sden-

^  Witness,  again,  the  tales  collected  under  the  caption  of  The  Day's
Work,  where  the  anthropomorphic  romance  of  mechanics  is  made  the
most  of  by  the  same  master  who  told  the  tales  of  the  Jungle  Book  and  of
"The  Cat  that  Walked."

2  Cf .  Presidential  Address  by  Francis  Darwin  at  the  Dublin  meeting
of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science;  cf.  also  H.
Bergson,  Evolution  creatrice,  and  particularly  passages  that  deal  with  the
elan  de  la  vie.

^  Cf.  G.  J.  Romanes,  Animal  Intelligence,  especially  the  Introduction.


76  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

list's  end.  So  plausible,  indeed,  is  this  anthropomor-
phism as  to  disarm  even  the  scepticism  of  the  trained
sceptic.  It  will  also  appear  in  the  later  course  of  this
inquiry  that  anthropomorphism,  and  especially  the
imputation  of  workmanship,  has  borne  a  much  greater
part  in  the  work  of  the  scientists  than  the  members  of
that  craft  would  Hke  to  avow;  so  that  the  scientific  use  of
the  anthropomorphic  fancy  is  by  no  means  a  unique
distinction  of  Romanes  and  the  large  group  or  school  of
biologists  of  which  his  work  is  typical;  nor  does  the
presence  of  this  bias  in  their  work  by  any  means  strip  it
of  scientific  value.  In  point  of  fact,  it  seems  to  touch
the  substance  of  their  objective  results  much  less  seri-
ously than  might  be  apprehended.

The  modern  scientist's  watchward  is  scepticism  and
caution;  and  what  he  may  be  led  to  do  concessively,  in
spite  of  himself,  by  too  broad  a  consciousness  of  kind,
the  savage  does  joyously  and  with  conviction.  His
measure  of  what  he  sees  about  him  is  himself,  and  his
apprehension  of  what  takes  place  is  a  comprehension  of
how  such  things  would  be  done  in  the  course  of  human
conduct  if  they  were  physically  possible  to  man.  The
man  (more  often  perhaps  the  woman)  who  busies  himself
with  the  beginnings  of  plant  and  animal-breeding  will
sympathetically  put  himself  in  touch  with  their  inclina-
tions and  aptitudes  with  a  degree  of  intimacy  and  as-
surance never  approached  by  the  followers  of  Romanes.
It  is  for  him  to  use  common  sense  and  fall  in  with  the
drift  and  idiosyncracies  of  these  others  who  are,  mys-
teriously, denied  the  gift  of  speech.  By  the  imambiguous
leading  of  the  anthropomorphic  fancy  he  puts  himself
in  the  place  of  his  ward,  his  animal  or  vegetable  friend


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 77

and  cousin,  and  can  so  learn  something  of  what  is  going
on  in  the  putative  vegetable  or  animal  mind,  through
patient  observation  of  what  comes  to  light  in  response
to  his  attentions  in  the  course  of  his  joint  life  with  them.
The  plant  or  animal  manifestly  does  things,  and  the  ques-
tion follows,  Why  do  these  speechless  others  do  those
things  which  they  are  seen  to  do? — things  which  often
do  not  He  within  the  range  of  things  desirable  to  be  ac-
compHshed,  humanly  speaking.  Manifestly  these  non-
human  others  seek  other  ends  and  seek  them  in  other
ways  than  man.  Some  of  the  objective  results  which  it
lies  in  their  nature  to  accomplish  in  so  working  out  their
scheme  of  Hfe  are  useful  to  their  human  cousins;  and  it
stands  to  reason  that  when  they  are  dealt  kindly  with,
when  man  takes  pains  to  further  their  ends  in  Hfe,  they
will  take  thought  and  respond  somewhat  in  kind.  To
turn  the  proposition  about,  those  things  which  men
find,  by  trial  and  error,  to  bring  a  good  and  kindly  re-
turn from  the  speechless  others  are  manifestly  well  re-
ceived by  them  and  must  obviously  be  of  a  kind  to  fall
in  with  their  bent  and  minister  to  their  inclinations;  and
prudence  and  fellow-feeling  combine  to  lead  men  farther
along  the  way  so  indicated  at  each  move  in  the  propitious
direction.

To  the  unsophisticated — and  even  to  the  sophisticated
sceptic — it  is  manifest  that  animate  objects  do  things.
What  they  aim  to  do,  as  well  as  the  logic  of  their  conduct
in  carrying  out  their  designs,  are  not  precisely  the  same
as  in  the  case  of  man.  But  by  staying  by  and  learning
what  they  are  bent  on  doing,  and  observing  how  they
go  about  it,  any  peculiarity  in  the  nature  of  their  needs,
spiritual  and  physical,  and  in  their  manner  of  approach-


78  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

ing  their  ends,  may  be  learned  and  assimilated;  and  their
life-work  can  be  furthered  and  amphfied  by  judiciously
ministering  to  their  ascertained  needs  and  making  the
way  smooth  for  them  in  what  they  undertake,  so  long
as  their  undertakings  are  such  as  man  is  interested  in
bringing  to  a  successful  issue.  Of  course  they  work
toward  ends  that  are  good  in  their  sight,  though  not
always  such  as  men  would  seek;  but  that  is  their  affair
and  is  not  to  be  pried  into  beyond  the  bounds  of  a  decent
neighbourly  interest.  And  they  work  by  methods  in  some
degree  other,  often  wiser,  than  those  of  men,  and  these
it  is  man's  place  to  learn  if  he  would  profit  by  their  com-
panionship.

Much  of  the  scheme  of  life  of  these  speechless  others
is  a  scheme  of  fecundity,  growth  and  nurture,  and  all
these  matters  are  natural  to  women  rather  than  to  men;
and  so  in  the  early  stages  of  culture  the  consciousness  of
kind  and  congruity  has  made  it  plain  to  all  the  parties  in
interest  that  the  care  of  crops  and  animals  belongs  in  the
fitness  of  things  to  women.  Indeed  there  is  such  a  spirit-
ual (magical)  community  between  women  and  the  fecun-
dity of  animate  things  that  any  intrusion  of  the  men  in  the
affairs  of  growth  and  fertility  may  by  force  of  contrast
come  to  be  viewed  with  the  liveHest  apprehension.  Since
the  life  of  plants  and  animals  is  primarily  of  a  spiritual
nature,  since  the  initiative  and  trend  of  vegetable  and
animal  fife  is  of  this  character,  it  follows  that  some  sort
of  propitious  spiritual  contact  and  communion  should
be  maintained  between  mankind  and  that  world  of  fer-
tility and  growth  in  which  these  animate  things  Hve  and
move.  So  a  line  of  communication,  of  a  spiritual  kind,
is  kept  open  with  the  realm  of  the  speechless  ones  by


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 79

means  of  a  sign-language  systematised  into  ritual,  and
by  a  symbolism  of  amity  reenforced  with  gifts  and  pro-
fessions of  good-will.  Hence  a  growth  of  occult  meanings
and  ceremonial  procedure,  to  which  the  argument  will
have  to  return  presently.^

By  this  indirect,  animistic  and  magical,  line  of  ap-
proach the  matter-of-fact  requirements  of  tillage  and
cattle-breeding  can  be  determined  and  fulfilled  in  a  very
passable  fashion,  given  only  the  necessary  time  and
tranquillity.  Time  is  by  common  consent  allowed  the
stone-age  culture  in  abundant  measure;  and  common
consent  is  coming,  through  one  consideration  and  an-
other, to  admit  that  the  requisite  conditions  of  peace
and  quiet  industry  are  also  a  characteristic  feature  of
that  early  time.  The  fact,  broad  and  profound,  that  the
known  crop  plants  and  animals  were  for  the  most  part
domesticated  in  that  time  is  perhaps  in  itself  the  most
persuasive  argument  for  the  prevalence  of  peaceful  con-
ditions among  those  peoples,  whoever  they  may  have
been,  to  whose  efforts,  or  rather  to  whose  routine  of
genial  superstition,  this  domestication  is  to  be  credited.
This  domestication  and  use  of  plants  and  animals  was
of  course  not  a  mere  blindfold  diversion.  Here  as  ever
the  instinct  of  workmanship  was  present  with  its  prompt-
ing to  make  the  most  of  what  comes  to  hand;  and  the
technology  of  husbandry,  Hke  the  technology  of  any  other
industrial  enterprise,  has  been  the  outcome  of  men's
abiding  penchant  for  making  things  useful.

The  pecuhar  advantage  of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding

1  Cf.  Jane  E.  Harrison,  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,  es-
pecially ch.  iv;  The  same,  Themis,  especially  ch.  i,  ii,  iii  and  ix;  with
which  compare  the  Pueblo  cults  referred  to  above.


— \


8o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

over  the  primary  mechanic  arts,  that  by  which  the  former
arts  gained  and  kept  their  lead,  seems  to  have  been  the
simple  circumstance  that  the  propensity  of  workmanlike
men  to  impute  a  workmanlike  (teleological)  nature  to
phenomena  does  not  leave  the  resulting  knowledge  of
these  phenomena  so  wide  of  the  mark  in  the  case  of
animate  nature  as  in  that  of  brute  matter.  It  will  prob-
ably not  do  to  say  that  the  anthropomorphic  imputa-
tion has  been  directly  serviceable  to  the  technological
end  in  the  case  of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding;  it  is
rather  that  the  disadvantage  or  disserviceabihty  of  such
an  interpretation  of  facts  has  been  greater  in  the  me-
chanic arts  in  early  times.  The  instinct  of  workmanship,
through  the  sentimental  propensity  to  impute  workman-
like quahties  and  conduct  to  external  facts,  has  defeated
itself  more  effectually  in  the  mechanic  arts.  And  as  in
the  course  of  time,  under  favourable  local  conditions,  the
habitual  imputation  of  teleological  capacities  has  in
some  measure  fallen  into  disuse,  the  mechanic  arts  have
gained;  and  every  such  gain  has  in  its  turn,  as  conditions
permitted,  acted  cumulatively  toward  the  discredit  and
disuse  of  the  teleological  method  of  knowledge,  and
therefore  toward  an  acceleration  of  technological  gain
in  this  field.

The  inanimate  factors  which  early  man  has  to  turn  to
account  as  a  condition  precedent  to  any  appreciable
advance  in  the  industrial  arts,  outside  of  husbandry  and
of  the  use  of  fruits  and  fibres  associated  with  it,  do  not
lend  themselves  to  an  effectual  approximation  from  the
anthropomorphic  side.  Flint  and  similar  minerals  are
refractory,  they  have  no  spiritual  nature  and  no  scheme
or  cycle  of  life  that  can  be  interpreted  in  some  passable


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 8i

fashion  as  the  outcome  of  instinctive  propensities  and
workmanHke  management.  Anthropomorphic  insight
does  not  penetrate  into  the  secret  ways  of  brute  matter,
for  all  the  reasonable  concession  to  idiosyncracies,  to
recondite  conceits,  occult  means  and  devious  methods,
with  which  unsophisticated  man  stands  ready  to  meet
them.  He  can  see  as  far  into  a  millstone  as  anyone
along  that  line;  but  that  is  not  far  enough  to  be  of  any
use,  and  he  is  debarred  by  his  workmanlike  common
sense  from  systematically  looking  into  the  matter  along
any  other  Hne.  It  is  only  the  blindfold,  unsystematic
accretions  of  opaque  fact  coming  in,  disjointed  and  un-
sympathetic, from  the  inhuman  side  of  his  technological
experience  that  can  help  him  out  here.  And  experience
of  that  kind  can  come  upon  him  only  inadvertently,
for  he  has  no  basis  on  which  to  systematise  these  facts
as  they  come,  and  so  he  has  no  means  of  intelligently
seeking  them.  His  intelKgent  endeavours  to  get  at  the
nature  of  things  will  perforce  go  on  the  mass  of  knowl-
edge which  his  intelligence  has  already  comprehended,
which  is  a  knowledge  of  human  conduct.  Anthropo-
morphism is  almost  wholly  obstructive  in  this  field  of
brute  matter,  and  in  early  times,  before  much  in  the
v/ay  of  accumulated  matter-of-fact  knowledge  had
forced  itself  upon  men,  the  propensity  to  a  teleological
interpretation  seems  to  have  b-een  nearly  decisive  against
technological  progress  in  the  primary  and  indispensable
mechanic  arts.  And  in  later  phases  of  culture,  where
anthropomorphic  interpretations  of  v/orkmanship  have
been  worked  out  into  a  rounded  system  of  magic  and
rehgion,  they  have  at  times  brought  the  technological
advance  to  a  full  stop,  particularly  on  the  mechanical


'^74(i?>


82  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

side,  and  have  even  led  to  the  cancehnent  of  gains  that
should  have  seemed  secure.

It  is  likewise  a  notable  fact  that,  as  already  intimated
above,  myth  and  legend  have  found  this  brute  matter
as  refractory  in  their  service  as  the  instinct  of  workman-
ship has  found  it  in  the  genesis  of  technology;  and  for
the  good  reason  that  the  same  human  penchant  for  teleo-
logical  insight  and  elaboration  has  ruled  in  the  one  as
in  the  other.  Inanimate  matter  and  the  phenomena  in
which  inanimate  matter  manifests  its  nature  and  force
have,  of  course,  taken  a  large  place  in  folk-lore;  but  the
folk-lore,  whether  myth,  legend  or  magic,  in  which  in-
animate matter  is  conceived  as  speaking  in  its  own  right
and  working  out  its  own  spiritual  content  is  relatively
very  scant.  In  magic  it  commonly  plays  a  part  as  an
instrumentahty  only,  and  indeed  as  an  instrument  which
owes  its  magical  efficacy  to  some  efficacious  circumstance
external  to  it.  It  has  most  frequently  an  induced  rather
than  intrinsic  efficacy,  being  the  veliicle  whereby  the
worker  of  magic  materialises  and  conveys  his  design  to
its  execution.  It  is  susceptible  of  magical  use,  rather
than  creative  of  magical  effects.^  No  doubt  this  charac-
terisation of  the  magical  offices  of  inert  matter  applies
to  early  and  primitive  times  and  situations  rather  than
to  the  high-wrought  later  systems  of  occult  science  and
alchemical  lore  that  are  built  on  some  appreciable  knowl-
edge of  metallurgy  and  chemical  reactions.  So  likewise
early  myth  and  legend  have  had  to  take  recourse  to  the
intervention  of  personal,  or  at  least  animate  agents,  to
make  headway  in  the  domain  of  brute  matter,  which

^  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  perhaps  especially  ch.  v,  section  on  the
cultivation  of  rice.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 83

figures  commonly  as  means  in  the  hands  of  manhke
agents  of  some  sort,  rather  than  as  a  self-directing  agent
with  initiative  and  a  natural  bent  of  its  own.  The
phenomena  of  inanimate  nature  are  likely  to  be  thrown
into  the  hands  of  such  putative  agents,  who  are  then
conceived  to  control  them  and  turn  them  to  account  for
ulterior  ends  not  given  in  the  native  character  of  the
inanimate  objects  themselves.^  Even  so  exceptionally
available  a  range  of  phenomena  as  those  of  fire  have
not  escaped  this  inglorious  eventuahty.  In  the  mythical
legends  of  fire  it  will  be  found  that  the  fire  and  all  its
works  come  into  the  plot  of  the  story  only  as  secondary
elements,  and  the  interest  centres  about  the  fortunes  of
some  manhke  agency  to  whose  initiative  and  exploits
all  the  phenomena  of  fire  are  referred  as  their  cause  or
occasion. 2  The  legends  of  fire  have  commonly  become
legends  of  a  fire-bringer,  etc.,^  and  have  come  to  turn
about  the  plots  and  counterplots  of  anthropomorphic
beasts  and  divinities  who  are  conceived  to  have  wrestled
for,  with  and  about  the  use  of  fire.

*  Hence  animism,  which  applies  its  conceptions  to  inanimate  rather
than  animate  objects.

2  The  Uke  applies  in  the  case  of  the  seasonal  and  meteorological  myths;
where  it  happens  rarely  if  at  all  that  the  phenomena  of  the  seasons  or  the
forces  that  come  in  evidence  in  meteorological  changes  are  personified
directly  or  unambiguously.  It  is  always  some  god  or  daemon  that  con-
trols or  uses  the  wind  and  the  weather,  some  indwelling  sprite  or  manlike
giant  that  inhabits  and  watches  over  the  hill  or  spring  or  river,  and  it
is  always  the  interests  of  the  indwelling  personality  rather  than  that  of
the  tangible  objects  in  the  case  that  are  to  be  safeguarded  by  the  super-
stitious practices  with  which  the  myth  surrounds  men's  intercourse  with
these  features  of  the  landscape.

'  As  in  the  legends  of  Prometheus;  compare  legends  and  ritual  of  fire
from  various  cultures  in  L,  Frobenius,  The  Childhood  of  Man,  ch.  xxv-
xxvii.


84  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

So,  on  the  other  hand,  as  an  illustration  from  the  side
of  technology,  to  show  how  matters  stood  in  this  connec-
tion through  the  best  days  of  anthropomorphism,  fire
had  been  in  daily  and  indispensable  use  through  an  in-
definite series  of  millennia  before  men,  in  the  early  mod-
ern times  of  Occidental  civilisation,  learned  the  use  of  a
chimney.  And  all  that  hindered  the  discovery  of  this
simple  mechanical  expedient  seems  to  have  been  the
fatal  propensity  of  men  to  impute  a  teleological  nature
and  workmanKke  design  to  this  phenomenon  with  which
no  truce  or  working  arrangement  can  be  negotiated  in
spiritual  terms.^

A  doubt  may  plausibly  suggest  itself  as  to  the  com-
petency of  such  an  explanation  of  these  phenomena.  It
would  seem  scarcely  to  lie  in  the  nature  of  an  instinct  of
workmanship  to  enHst  the  workman  in  the  acquisition
of  knowledge  which  he  cannot  use,  and  guide  him  in
elaborating  it  into  a  system  which  will  defeat  his  own
ends;  to  build  up  obstructions  to  its  own  working,  and
yet  in  the  long  run  to  overcome  them.  In  part  this
discrepancy  in  the  outcome  arises  from  the  fact  that  the
sense  of  workmanship  affords  a  norm  of  systematisation
for  the  facts  that  come  into  knowledge.  This  leads  to
something  Hke  a  dramatisation  of  the  facts,  whereby  they
fall  into  some  sort  of  a  sequence  of  conduct  among  them-

*  For  an  interesting  illustration  of  this  point  see  a  paper  by  Duncan
Mackenzie  on  "Cretan  Palaces"  in  the  Annual  of  the  British  School  at
Athens  for  1907-1908,  where  the  whole  discussion  hangs  on  the  fact,  un-
questioned by  any  one  of  the  disputants  in  a  wide  and  warm  controversy,
that  during  some  centuries  of  unwholesome  nuisance  from  smoky  fires
in  draughty  rooms  the  great  civilisation  of  the  Mediterranean  seaboard
never  hit  on  the  ready  solution  of  the  difficulty  by  putting  in  a  chimney.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 85

selves,  become  personalised,  are  conceived  as  gifted  with
discrimination,  inclinations,  preferences  and  initiative;
and  in  so  far  as  the  facts  are  conceived  to  be  involved  in
immaterial  or  hyperphysical  relations  of  this  character
they  cannot  effectually  be  made  use  of  for  the  purposes
of  technology.  All  conceptions  that  exceed  the  scope  of
material  fact  are  useless  for  technology,  and  in  so  far  as
such  conceptions  are  intruded  into  the  body  of  informa-
tion drawn  on  by  the  workman  they  become  obstructive.
But  in  good  part  the  discrepancies  of  the  outcome  are
due  to  complications  with  an  instinctive  curiosity,  the
presence  of  which  has  tacitly  been  assumed  throughout
the  argument, — an  ''idle''  curiosity  by  force  of  which
men,  more  or  less  insistently,  want  to  know  things,  when
graver  interests  do  not  engross  their  attention.  Com-
paratively Httle  has  been  made  of  this  instinctive  pro-
pensity by  the  students  of  culture,  though  the  fact  of
its  presence  in  human  nature  is  broadly  recognised  by
psychologists,^  and  the  like  penchant  comes  in  evidence
among  the  lower  animals,  as  appears  in  many  investiga-
tions of  animal  behaviour.  ^  Indeed,  it  has  been  taken
somewhat  lightly,  in  a  general  way,  as  being  a  genial
infirmity  of  human  nature  rather  than  a  creative  factor
in  dvihsation.  And  the  reason  of  its  being  dealt  with
in  so  sHght  a  manner  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  nature
of  the  instinct  itself.  With  the  instinct  of  workmanship
it  shares  that  character  of  pliancy  and  tractability  com-
mon in  some  degree  to  the  whole  range  of  instincts,  and
especially  characteristic  of  those  instinctive  predisposi-

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  W.  James,  Principles  of  PsycJiology,  ch.  xxiv;  McDougall,
Social  Psychology,  ch.  iii.

2  Cf.,  e.  g.,  M.  F.  Washburn,  The  Animal  Mindy  ch.  xii,  xiii.


86  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tions  that  distinguish  human  nature  from  the  simpler
and  more  refractory  spiritual  endowment  of  the  lower
animals.

Like  the  other  instinctive  propensities,  it  is  to  be  pre-
sumed, the  idle  curiosity  takes  effect  only  within  the
bounds  of  that  metabolic  margin  of  surplus  energy  that
comes  in  evidence  in  all  animal  life,  but  that  appears  in
larger  proportions  in  the  ^'higher"  animals  and  in  a
peculiarly  obtrusive  manner  in  the  life  of  man.  It  seems
to  be  only  after  the  demands  of  the  simpler,  more  imme-
diately organic  functions,  such  as  nutrition,  growth  and
reproduction,  have  been  met  in  some  passably  sufficient
measure  that  this  vaguer  range  of  instincts  which  con-
stitutes the  spiritual  predispositions  of  man  can  effec-
tually draw  on  the  energies  of  the  organism  and  so  can
go  into  effect  in  what  is  recognised  as  human  conduct.
The  wider  the  margin  of  disposable  energy,  therefore,  the
more  freely  should  the  characteristically  human  predis-
positions assert  their  sway,  and  the  more  nearly  this
metabolic  margin  is  drained  by  the  elemental  needs  of
the  organism  the  less  chance  should  there  be  that  conduct
will  be  guided  by  what  may  properly  be  called  the  spirit-
ual needs  of  man.  It  is  accordingly  characteristic  of
this  whole  range  of  vaguer  and  less  automatically  deter-
minate predispositions  that  they  transiently  yield  some-
what easily  to  the  pressure  of  circumstances.  This  is
eminently  true  of  the  idle  curiosity,  as  it  is  also  true  in  a
somewhat  comparable  degree  of  the  sense  of  workman-
ship. But  these  instincts  at  the  same  time,  and  perhaps
by  the  same  fact,  have  also  the  other  concomitant  and
characteristically  human  trait  of  a  ubiquitous  resiliency
whenever  and  in  so  far  as  there  is  nothing  to  hinder.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 87

Their  staying  power  is,  in  a  way,  very  great,  though
their  driving  force  is  neither  massive  nor  intractable.
So  that  even  though  the  idle  curiosity,  hke  the  sense  of
workmanship,  may  be  momentarily  thrust  aside  by  more
urgent  interests,  yet  its  long-term  effects  in  human  cul-
ture are  very  considerable.  Men  will  commonly  make
easy  terms  with  their  curiosity  when  there  is  a  call  to
action  under  the  spur  of  a  more  elemental  need,  and
even  when  circumstances  appear  to  be  favourable  to  its
untroubled  functioning  a  sustained  and  consistent  re-
sponse to  its  incitement  is  by  no  means  an  assured  con-
sequence. The  common  man  does  not  eagerly  pursue  the
quest  of  the  idle  curiosity,  and  neither  its  guidance  nor
its  award  of  fact  is  mandatory  on  him.^  Sporadic  indi-
viduals who  are  endowed  with  this  supererogatory  gift
largely  in  excess  of  the  common  run,  or  who  yield  to
its  enticements  with  very  exceptional  abandon,  are  ac-
counted dreamers,  or  in  extreme  cases  their  more  sensible
neighbours  may  even  rate  them  as  of  unsound  mind.  But
the  long-term  consequences  of  the  common  run  of  curios-
ity, helped  out  by  such  sporadic  individuals  in  whom  the
idle  curiosity  runs  at  a  higher  tension,  counts  up  finally,
because  cumulatively,  into  the  most  substantial  cultural
achievement  of  the  race, — its  systematised  knowledge
and  quasi-knowledge  of  things.

This  instinctive  curiosity,  then,  comes  in  now  and
again  serviceably  to  accelerate  the  gain  in  technological
insight  by  bringing  in  material  information  that  may  be
turned  to  account,  as  well  as  by  persistently  disturbing
the  habitual  body  of  knowledge  on  which  workmanship

^For  illustrations  see  Dudley  Kidd,  The  Essential  Kafirs  especially
ch.  ii,  on  "Native  Beliefs."


88  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

draws.  Human  curiosity  is  doubtless  an  "idle"  pro-
pensity, in  the  sense  that  no  utilitarian  aim  enters  in  its
habitual  exercise;  but  the  material  information  which
is  by  this  means  drawn  into  the  agent's  available  knowl-
edge may  none  the  less  come  to  serve  the  ends  of  work-
manship. A  good  share  of  the  facts  taken  cognisance  of
under  the  spur  of  curiosity  is  of  no  effect  for  workman-
ship or  for  technological  insight,  and  that  any  of  it  should
be  found  serviceable  is  substantially  a  fortuitous  cir-
cumstance. This  character  of  "idleness,"  the  absence
of  a  utiKtarian  aim  or  utiHtarian  sentiment  in  the  im-
pulse of  curiosity,  is  doubtless  a  great  part  of  the  reason
for  its  having  received  such  scant  and  rather  shghting
treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  psychologists  and  of  the
students  of  civiHsation  alike.

Of  the  material  so  offered  as  knowledge,  or  fact,  work-
manship makes  use  of  whatever  is  available.  In  ways
already  indicated  this  utiHsation  of  ascertained  "facts"
is  both  furthered  and  hindered  by  the  fact  that  the  in-
formation which  comes  to  hand  through  the  restless
curiosity  of  man  is  reduced  to  systematic  shape,  for  the
most  part  or  wholly,  imder  canons  of  workmanship.  For
the  large  generaHty  of  human  knowledge  this  will  mean
that  the  raw  material  of  observed  fact  is  selectively
worked  over,  connected  up  and  accumulated  on  lines
of  a  putative  teleological  order  of  things,  cast  in  some-
thing like  a  dramatic  form.  From  which  it  follows  that
the  knowledge  so  gained  is  held  and  carried  over  from
generation  to  generation  in  a  form  which  lends  itself
with  facility  to  a  workmanHke  manipulation;  it  is  already
digested  for  assimilation  in  a  scheme  of  teleology  that
instinctively  commends  itself  to  the  workmanHke  sense


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 89

of  fitness.  But  it  also  follows  that  in  so  far  as  the  per-
sonalised, teleological,  or  dramatic  order  so  imputed  to
the  facts  does  not,  by  chance,  faithfully  reflect  the  causal
relations  subsisting  among  these  facts,  the  utilisation  of
them  as  teclmological  elements  will  amount  to  a  bor-
rowing of  trouble.  So  that  the  concurrence  of  curiosity
and  workmansliip  in  the  assimilation  of  facts  in  this
way  may,  and  in  early  culture  must,  result  in  a  retarda-
tion of  the  technological  advance,  as  contrasted  with
what  might  conceivably  have  been  the  outcome  of  this
work  of  the  idle  curiosity  if  it  had  not  been  congenitally
contaminated  with  the  sense  of  workmanship  and  thereby
lent  itself  to  conceptions  of  magical  efficacy  rather  than
to  mechanical  efficiency.^

The  further  bearing  of  the  parental  bent  on  the  early
growth  of  technology  also  merits  attention  in  this  con-
nection. This  instinct  and  the  sentiments  that  arise  out
of  its  promptings  will  have  had  wide  and  free  play  in
early  times,  when  the  common  good  of  the  group  was
still  perforce  the  chief  economic  interest  in  the  habitual
view  of  all  its  members.  It  will  have  had  an  immediate
effect  on  the  routine  of  Hfe  and  work,  presumably  far
beyond  what  is  to  be  looked  for  at  any  later  stage.  In
the  time  when  pecuniary  competition  had  not  yet  be-
come an  institution,  grounded  in  the  ownership  of  goods
in  severalty  and  on  their  competitive  consumption,  the
promptings  of  this  instinct  will  have  been  more  insistent
and  will  have  met  with  a  more  unguarded  response  than

^Cf.  "The  Place  of  Science  in  Modem  Civilisation,"  Journal  oj
Sociology,  March,  1906,  pp.  585-609;  "The  Evolution  of  the  Scientific
Point  of  View,"  University  of  California  Chronicle,  vol.  x,  pp.  396-415.


go  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

later  on,  after  these  institutional  changes  have  taken
effect.  A  manifest  and  inveterate  distaste  of  waste,  in
great  part  traceable  on  analysis  to  this  instinct,  still  per-
sistently comes  in  evidence  in  all  communities,  although
it  is  greatly  disguised  and  distorted  by  the  principles  of
conspicuous  waste  ^  among  all  those  peoples  that  have
adopted  private  ownership  of  goods;  and  serviceability
to  the  common  good  likewise  never  ceases  to  command
at  least  a  genial,  speculative  approval  from  the  common
run  of  men,  though  this,  too,  may  often  take  some  gro-
tesque or  nugatory  form  due  to  preconceptions  of  a
pecuniary  kind.  This  bias  for  serviceabiHty  and  against
waste  falls  in  directly  with  the  promptings  of  the  instinct
of  workmanship,  so  that  these  two  instinctive  predisposi-
tions will  reenforce  one  another  in  conducing  to  an  im-
personally economical  use  of  materials  and  resources  as
well  as  to  the  full  use  of  workmanlike  capacities,  and  to
an  endless  taking  of  pains.

Some  reference  has  also  been  made  already  to  the
technological  value  of  those  kindly,  ''humane"  senti-
ments that  are  bound  up  with  the  parental  bent, — if
they  may  not  rather  be  said  substantially  to  constitute
the  parental  bent.  It  is  of  course  in  the  non-mechanical
arts  of  plant  and  animal  breeding  that  these  humane
extensions  of  the  parental  instinct  have  their  chief  if  not
their  only  industrial  value,  both  in  furthering  the  day's
work  and  in  contributing  to  the  advance  of  technology.
In  the  primary  mechanic  arts,  e.  g.,  an  affectionate  dis-
position of  this  kind  toward  the  inanimate  appliances
with  which  their  work  is  occupied  does  no  doubt  still,
as  ever,  to  some  extent  animate  the  workmen  as  well
^  Cf .  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class,  ch.  iv,  v.


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 91

as  those  who  may  have  the  remoter  oversight  of  the
work.  But  the  part  played  by  such  humane  sentiments
IS  after  all  relatively  sHght  in  men's  dealings  with  brute
matter,  nor  do  they  invariably  conduce  to  expeditious
work  or  to  a  hard-headed  insight  into  the  mechanics  of
those  things  with  which  this  work  has  to  do.  In  fact
such  tender  emotions  so  placed  may  somewhat  easily
become  a  source  of  mischief,  in  a  manner  similar  to  the
mischievous  technological  consequences  of  anthropo-
morphism already  spoken  of.

It  is  otherwise  with  the  bearing  of  the  parental  bent  on
the  arts  of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding.  Here  its  prompt-
ings are  almost  wholly  serviceable  to  technological  gain
as  well  as  to  assiduous  workmanship.  The  kindly  senti-
ments intrinsic  to  the  parental  bent  are  admirably  in
place  in  the  care  of  plants  and  animals,  and  their  good
effects  in  so  giving  a  propitious  turn  to  the  technology
of  early  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  are  only  re-enforced
by  the  parental  and  workmanHke  inclination  to  husband
resources  and  make  the  most  of  what  comes  to  hand.
The  particular  turn  given  to  the  anthropomorphic  bias
by  this  Hne  of  preconceptions  also  is  rather  favourable
than  otherwise  to  a  working  insight  into  the  requirements
of  the  art.  And  it  has  had  certain  specific  consequences
for  the  early  technology  of  husbandry,  as  well  as  for
the  early  culture  in  which  husbandry  was  the  chief  ma-
terial factor,  such  as  to  call  for  a  more  circumstantial
account.

Under  the  canons  of  workmanship  a  teleological  ani-
mus— an  instinctive  or  "spiritual"  nature — is  imputed
to  the  plants  and  animals  brought  into  domestication.
The  art  of  husbandry  proceeds  on  the  apprehended


92  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

needs  and  proclivities  so  imputed,  and  the  technology
of  the  craft  therefore  takes  the  form  of  a  '^  tendance  "
designed  to  further  these  quasi-animistically  conceived
beings  in  whatever  ends  they  have  at  heart  by  virtue  of
their  natural  bent,  and  to  so  direct  this  tendance  upon
them  as  will  conduce  to  shaping  their  scheme  of  life  in
ways  advantageous  to  man.  Like  other  sentient  beings,
as  is  known  to  shrewd  and  unsophisticated  man,  they
have  spiritual  needs  as  well  as  material  needs,  and  they
are  putatively  to  be  influenced  by  the  attitude  of  their
human  cousins  towards  them  and  their  conduct,  in-
terests, and  adventures.  Further,  their  life  and  comfort
are  manifestly  conditioned  by  the  run  of  the  seasons
and  of  the  weather;  various  inclemencies  are  discouraging
and  discomforting  to  them,  as  to  mankind,  and  other
vicissitudes  of  rain  and  shine  and  tempest  are  of  the
gravest  consequence  to  them  for  good  or  ill.  Under  these
delicate  circumstances  it  is  incumbent  on  the  keepers
of  crops  and  flocks  to  walk  circumspectly  and  cultivate
the  good-will  not  only  of  their  crops  and  flocks  but  also
of  the  natural  phenomena  that  count  for  so  much  in  the
life  of  the  crops  and  flocks.  These  natural  phenomena
are  of  course  also  conceived  anthropomorphically,  in  the
sense  that  they  too  are  seen  to  follow  their  natural  bent
and  do  what  they  will, — or  perhaps  more  commonly
v/hat  the  personal  agents  will,  in  whose  keeping  these
natural  phenomena  are  conceived  to  lie;  for  unsophis-
ticated man  has  no  other  available  terms  in  which  to
conceive  them  and  their  behaviour  than  the  terms  of
initiative,  design  and  endeavour  immediately  given  in
his  own  conscious  action.
Now,  as  has  already  been  said,  the  scheme  of  life  of  the


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 93

crops  and  flocks  is,  at  least  in  the  main,  and  particularly
in  so  far  as  it  vitally  and  always  interests  their  keepers,  a
scheme  of  fecundity,  fertility  and  growth.  But  these
matters,  visibly  and  by  conscious  sentiment,  pertain  in  a
peculiarly  intimate  sense  to  the  women.  They  are  mat-
ters in  which  the  sympathetic  insight  and  fellow-feeling
of  womankind  should  in  the  nature  of  things  come  very
feHcitously  to  further  the  propitious  course  of  things.
Besides  which  the  life  of  the  women  falls  in  these  same
lines  of  fecundity,  nurture  and  growth,  so  that  their
association  and  attendance  on  the  flocks  and  crops  should
further  the  propitious  course  of  things  also  by  the  subtler
means  of  sympathetic  suggestion.  There  is  a  magical
congruity  of  great  force  as  between  womankind  and  the
propagation  of  growing  things.  And  these  subtler  ways
of  influencing  events  are  especially  to  the  point  in  all
contact  with  these  non-human  sentient  beings,  since
they  are  speechless  and  must  therefore  in  the  main  be
led  by  living  example  rather  than  by  precept  and  expostu-
lation. And,  again,  being  sentient,  somewhat  after  the
fashion  of  mankind,  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  they
have  not  the  gift  visibly  common  to  mankind  and  many
animals,  of  following  their  leader  by  force  of  sympathetic
imitation.  It  may  not  be  easy  to  say  how  far  this  in-
stinctive impulse  of  imitation,  necessarily  credited  to  all
phenomena  to  which  anthropomorphic  traits  are  im-
puted, is  to  be  accounted  the  ground  of  all  sympathetic
magic;  but  it  is  at  least  to  be  accepted  as  sufficient  to
account  for  much  of  what  is  done  to  induce  fertility  in
flocks  and  crops.

So  that  on  many  accounts  it  is  evident  that  in  the
nature  of  things,  the  care  of  flocks  and  crops  is  the


94  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

women's  affair,  and  it  follows  that  all  intercourse  with
the  flocks  and  crops  in  the  early  days  had  best  be  con-
ducted by  the  women,  who  alone  may  be  presumed  in-
tuitively to  apprehend  what  is  timely,  due  and  permis-
sible in  these  premises.  It  is  all  the  more  evident  that
communion  with  these  wordless  others  should  fall  to  the
women,  since  the  like  wordless  communion  with  their
own  young  is  perhaps  the  most  notable  and  engaging
trait  of  their  own  motherhood.  The  parental  bent  also
throws  a  stress  of  sentiment  on  this  simple  and  obvious
phase  of  motherhood,  such  as  has  made  it  in  all  men's
apprehension  the  type  of  all  kindly  and  unselfish  tend-
ance; at  the  same  time  this  ubiquitous  parental  instinct
tends  constantly  to  place  motherhood  in  the  foreground
in  all  that  concerns  the  common  good,  in  as  much  as  all
that  is  worth  while,  humanly  speaking,  has  its  beginning
here.  In  that  early  phase  of  culture  in  which  the  begin-
nings of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  were  made  and  in
which  the  common  good  of  the  group  was  still  the  chief
daily  interest  about  which  men's  solicitude  and  fore-
thought are  habitually  engaged,  motherhood  will  always
have  been  the  central  fact  in  the  scheme  of  human
things.  So  that  in  this  cultural  phase  the  parental  bent
and  the  sense  of  workmanship  will  have  worked  together
to  bring  the  women  into  the  chief  place  in  the  technologi-
cal scheme;  and  the  sense  of  imitative  propriety,  as  well
as  the  recognised  constraining  force  exercised  by  ex-
ample and  mimetic  representation  through  the  impulse
of  imitation,  will  have  guided  workmanship  shrewdly  to
play  up  womankind  and  motherhood  in  an  ever-growing
scheme  of  magical  observances  designed  to  further  the
natural  increase  of  flocks  and  crops. Where  anthropo-


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 95

morphic  imputation  runs  free  and  with  conviction,  such
observances,  designed  to  act  sympathetically  on  the
natural  course  of  phenomena,  unavoidably  become  an
integral  feature  of  the  technological  scheme,  no  less  in-
dispensable and  putatively  no  less  efficacious  to  this  end
than  the  mechanical  operations  with  which  these  ob-
servances are  associated.  There  is  no  practicable  line  of
division  to  be  drawn  between  sympathetic  magic  and
anthropomorphic  technology;  and  in  the  known  cul-
tures of  this  early  type  it  is  for  the  most  part  an  open
question  whether  the  magical  observances  are  to  be
accounted  an  adjunct  to  what  we  would  recognise  as
the  technological  routine  of  the  art,  or  conversely.  The
two  are  not  commonly  held  apart  as  distinct  categories,
and  both  are  efficacious  and  indispensable;  and  in  both
the  felt  efficacy  runs  on  much  the  same  grounds  of  im-
puted anthropomorphic  traits.^

On  grounds  of  magical-technological  expediency,  then,
as  well  as  by  force  of  the  sense  of  intrinsic  propriety,
women  come  to  take  the  leading  role  in  the  industrial
community  of  the  early  time,  and  the  community's
material  interests  come  to  centre  about  them  and  their
relation  to  the  natural  products  of  the  fields;  and  since
this  interest  bears  immediately  on  the  fecundity  of  the
flocks  and  crops,  it  is  particularly  in  their  character  of
motherhood  that  the  women  come  most  vitally  into  the
case.  The  natural  produce  on  which  the  life  of  the  group
depends,  therefore,  will  appertain  to  the  women,  in  some

^  This  technological  blend  of  manual  labour  with  magical  practice  is  well
seen,  for  instance,  in  the  Malay  ritual  of  rice  culture. — W.  W.  Skeat,
Malay  Magic,  various  passages  dealing  with  the  ceremonial  of  the  plant-
ing, growth  and  harvesting  of  the  rice-crop.


96  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

intimate  sense  of  congmity,  so  that  in  the  fitness  of
things  this  produce  will  properly  come  to  the  good  of  the
community  through  their  hands  and  will  logically  be
dispensed  somewhat  at  their  discretion.  So  great  is  the
reach  of  this  logic  of  congruity  that  in  the  known  cul-
tures which  show  much  reminiscence  of  this  early  tech-
nological phase  it  is  commonly  possible  to  detect  some
remnant  of  such  discretionary  control  of  the  natural
produce  by  the  women.  And  modern  students,  imbued
with  modern  preconceptions  of  ownership  and  preda-
ceous  mastery,  have  even  found  themselves  constrained
by  this  evidence  to  discover  a  system  of  matriarchy  and
maternal  ownership  in  these  usages  that  antedate  the
institution  of  ownership.  Conceivably,  the  usages  grow-
ing out  of  this  preferential  position  of  women  in  the
technology  and  ritual  of  early  husbandry  will,  now  and
again,  by  the  uniform  drift  of  habituation  have  attained
such  a  degree  of  consistency,  been  wrought  into  so  rigid
a  form  of  institutions,  as  to  have  been  carried  over  into
a  later  phase  of  culture  in  which  the  ownership  of  goods
is  of  the  essence  of  the  scheme;  and  in  such  case  these
usages  may  then  have  come  to  be  reconstrued  in  terms
of  ownership,  to  the  effect  that  the  ownership  of  agri-
cultural products  vests  of  right  in  the  woman,  the  mother
of  the  household.

But  if  the  magical- technological  fitness  and  efficacy
of  women  has  led  to  the  growth  of  institutions  vesting
the  disposal  of  the  produce  in  the  women,  in  a  more  or
less  discretionary  way,  the  like  effect  has  been  even
more  pronounced,  comprehensive  and  lasting  as  regards
the  immaterial  developments  of  the  case.  With  great
uniformity  the  evidence  from  the  earlier  peaceable  agri-


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 97

cultural  civilisations  runs  to  the  effect  that  the  primitive
ritual  of  husbandry,  chiefly  of  a  magical  character,  is  in
the  hands  of  the  women  and  is  made  up  of  observances
presumed  to  be  particularly  consonant  with  the  phenom-
ena of  motherhood.^  And  presently,  when  the  more
elaborate  phases  of  these  magical  rites  of  husbandry
come,  by  further  superinduction  of  anthropomorphism,
to  grow  into  religious  observances  and  mythological
tenets,  the  greater  daimones  and  divinities  that  emerge
in  the  shuffle  are  women,  and  again  it  is  the  motherhood
of  women  that  is  in  evidence.  The  deities,  great  and
small,  are  prevaiHngly  females;  and  the  great  ones  among
them  seem  invariably  to  have  set  out  with  being  mothers.
In  the  creation  of  female  and  maternal  divinities  the
parental  instinct  has  doubtless  greatly  re-enforced  the
drift  of  the  instinct  of  workmanship  in  the  same  direc-
tion. The  female  deities  have  two  main  attributes  or
characteristics  because  of  which  they  came  to  hold  their
high  place;  they  are  goddesses  of  fertiHty  in  one  way  or
another,  and  they  are  mothers  of  the  people.  It  is
perhaps  unnecessary  to  hold  these  two  concomitant  at-
tributions apart,  as  many  if  not  most  of  the  great  deities
claim  precedence  on  both  grounds.  But  the  lower  orders
of  female  divinities  in  the  matriarchal  scheme  of  things
divine  will  much  more  commonly  specialise  in  fertility
of  crops  than  in  maternity  of  the  people.  The  number
of  divinities  that  have  mainly  or  solely  to  do  with  fer-
tiHty is  greater  than  that  of  those  which  figure  as  mothers
of  the  people,  either  locally  or  generally.  And  perhaps
in  the  majority  of  cases  there  is  some  suggestive  evidence

*  Cf.  J.  E.  Harrison,  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,  es-
pecially ch.  iv;  J.  G.  Frazer,  Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris,  bk.  i,  ch.  iii.


gS  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

that  the  great  female  deities  have  primarily  been  god-
desses of  fertility  having  to  do  with  the  growth  of  crops—
and,  usually  in  the  second  place,  of  animals — rather  than
primarily  mothers  of  the  tribe;  ^  which  would  suggest
that  their  genesis  and  character  is  due  to  the  canons  of
the  sense  of  workmanship  more  than  to  the  parental
bent,  although  the  latter  seems  to  have  had  its  part  in
shaping  many  of  them  if  not  all.

The  female  divinities  belong  characteristically  to  the
early  or  simpler  agricultural  civilisation,  and  what  has
been  said  goes  to  argue  that  they  rest  on  technological
grounds  in  the  main;  indeed,  in  their  genesis  and  early
growth,  they  are  in  good  part  of  the  nature  of  tech-
nological expedients.  They  are  at  home  with  the  female
technology  of  early  tillage  especially,  and  perhaps  only
in  the  second  place  do  they  serve  the  magical  and  reli-
gious needs  of  peoples  given  mainly  to  breeding  flocks
and  herds;  although  it  is  to  be  noted  that  most  of  the
greater  known  goddesses  of  the  ancient  Western  world,
as  well  as  many  of  the  minor  ones,  are  also  found  to  be
closely  related  to  various  of  the  domestic  animals.  In
America  and  the  Far  East,  of  course,  any  connection

*Such  seems  to  be  the  evidence,  for  instance,  for  Cybele,  Astarte
(Aphrodite,  Ishtar),  Mylitta,  Isis,  Demeter  (Ceres),  Artemis,  and  for
such  doubtfully  late  characters  as  Hera  (Juno),— see  Harrison,  Pro-
legomena to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion;  Frazer,  Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris,
and  The  Golden  Bough.  Quanon  may  be  a  doubtful  case,  as  possibly  also
Amaterazu.  The  evidence  from  such  American  instances  as  the  great
mother  goddesses  of  the  Pueblos  and  other  Indian  tribes  runs  perhaps
the  other  way,  or  at  the  best  it  may  leave  the  point  in  doubt.  See,  for
instance,  Matilda  C.  Stevenson,  "The  Zufii  Indians,"  Report  Bureau  oj
American  Ethnology,  1901-1902,  section  on  "Mythology;"  The  same,
ihid,  1889-1890,  "The  Sia;"  Frank  H.  Gushing,  ibid,  1891-1892,  "Zuni
Creation  Myths."


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology 99

with  the  domestication  of  animals  would  appear  im-
probable.

With  a  change  of  base,  from  this  early  husbandry  to  a
civilisation  in  which  the  main  habitual  interest  is  of  an-
other kind,  and  in  which  the  habitual  outlook  of  men  is
less  closely  limited  by  the  same  anthropomorphic  con-
ceptions of  nurture  and  growth,  the  goddesses  begin  to
lose  their  preferential  claim  on  men's  regard  and  fall
into  place  as  adjuncts  or  consorts  of  male  divinities  de-
signed on  other  Hues  and  built  out  of  different  materials
and  serving  new  ends.^  But  the  hegemony  of  the  mother
goddesses  has  unquestionably  been  very  wide-reaching
and  very  enduring,  as  it  should  be  to  answer  to  the  ex-
tent in  time  and  space  of  the  civilisation  of  tillage  as
well  as  to  its  paramount  importance  in  the  hfe  of  man-
kind, and  as  it  is  shown  to  have  been  by  the  archaeologi-
cal and  ethnological  evidence.

A  further  concomitant  variation  in  the  cultural  scheme,
associated  with  and  presumably  traceable  to  the  same
technological  ground,  is  maternal  descent,  the  counting
of  relationship  primarily  or  solely  in  the  female  line.  In
the  present  state  of  the  evidence  on  this  head  it  would
probably  be  too  broad  a  proposition  to  say  that  the
coimting  of  relationship  by  the  mother's  side  is  due
wholly  to  preconceptions  arising  out  of  the  technology
of  fertihty  and  growth  and  that  it  so  is  remotely  a  crea-
ture of  the  instinct  of  workmanship;  but  it  is  at  least
equally  probable  that  that  ancient  conceit  must  be  aban-
doned according  to  which  the  system  of  maternal  descent
arises  out  of  an  habitual  doubt  of  paternity. The  mere

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Frazer,  Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris,  bk.  ii,  ch.  iii,  bk.  iii,  ch.  vi
and^.


lOO  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

obvious  congruity  of  the  cognatic  system  as  contrasted
with  the  agnatic,  has  presumably  had  as  much  to  do
with  the  matter  as  anything,  and  under  the  rule  of  the
primitive  technology  of  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  this
obvious  congruity  of  the  cognate  relationship  will  have
been  very  materially  re-enforced  by  the  current  precon-
ceptions regarding  the  preferential  importance  of  the
female  line  for  the  welfare  of  the  household  and  the
community.  And  so  long  as  that  technological  era  lasted,
and  until  the  more  strenuous  culture  of  predation  and
coercion  came  on  and  threw  the  male  element  in  the  com-
munity into  the  place  of  first  consequence,  maternal
descent  as  well  as  the  mother  goddess  appear  to  have
held  their  own.

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  through  all  this  argu-
ment runs  the  presumption  that  the  culture  which  in-
cluded the  beginnings  and  early  growth  of  tillage  and
cattle-breeding  was  substantially  a  peaceable  culture.
This  presumption  is  somewhat  at  variance  with  the  tra-
ditional view,  particularly  with  the  position  taken  as  a
matter  of  course  by  earlier  students  of  ethnology  in  the
nineteenth  century.  Still  it  is  probably  not  subject  to
very  serious  question  today.  As  the  evidence  has  ac-
cumulated it  has  grown  increasingly  manifest  that  the
ancient  assumption  of  a  primitive  state  of  nature  after
the  school  of  Hobbes  cannot  be  accepted.  The  evidence
from  contemporary  sources,  as  to  the  state  of  things  in
this  respect  among  savages  and  many  of  the  lower  bar-
barians, points  rather  to  peace  than  to  war  as  the  habit-
ual situation,  although  this  evidence  is  by  no  means
unequivocal;  besides  which,  the  evidence  from  these


Contamination  of  Instincts  in  Primitive  Technology loi

contemporary  lower  cultures  bears  only  equivocally  on
the  point  of  first  interest  here, — viz.,  the  antecedents  of
the  Western  civilisation.  What  is  more  to  the  point,
though  harder  to  get  at  in  any  definitive  way,  is  the  pre-
history of  this  civilisation.  Here  the  inquiry  will  perforce
go  on  survivals  and  reminiscences  and  on  the  implications
of  known  facts  of  antiquity  as  well  as  of  certain  features
still  extant  in  the  current  cultural  scheme.

It  seems  antecedently  improbable  that  the  domestica-
tion of  the  crop  plants  and  animals  could  have  been
effected  at  all  except  among  peoples  leading  a  passably
peaceable,  and  presently  a  sedentary  life.  And  the
length  of  time  required  for  what  was  achieved  in  remote
antiquity  in  this  respect  speaks  for  the  prevalence  of
(passably)  peaceable  conditions  over  intervals  of  time
and  space  that  overpass  all  convenient  bounds  of  chro-
nology and  localisation.  Evidence  of  maternal  descent,
maternal  religious  practices  and  maternal  discretion  in
the  disposal  of  goods  meet  the  inquiry  in  ever  increasing
force  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  penetrate  back  of  the  con-
ventionally accepted  dawn  of  history;  and  survivals  and
reminiscences  of  such  institutions  appear  here  and  there
within  the  historical  period  with  increasing  frequency
the  more  painstaking  the  inquiry  becomes.  And  that
institutions  of  this  character  require  a  peaceable  situa-
tion for  their  genesis  as  well  as  for  their  survival  is  not
only  antecedently  probable  on  grounds  of  congruity,
but  it  is  evidenced  by  the  way  in  which  they  inconti-
nently decay  and  presently  disappear  wherever  the  cul-
tural situation  takes  on  a  predatory  character  or  develops
a  large-scale  civilisation,  with  a  coercive  government,
differentiation  of  classes — especially  in  the  pecuniary


I02


The  Instinct  of  Workmanship


respect — warlike  ideals  and  ambitions,  and  a  considerable
accumulation  of  wealth.

Some  further  discussion  of  this  early  peaceable  situa-
tion will  necessarily  come  up  in  connection  with  the
technological  grounds  of  its  disappearance  at  the  tran-
sition to  that  predatory  culture  which  has  displaced  it
in  all  cases  where  an  appreciably  advanced  phase  of
civilisation  has  been  reached.


CHAPTER  III

The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts

Technological  knowledge  is  of  the  nature  of  a  com-
mon stock,  held  and  carried  forward  collectively  by  the
community,  which  is  in  this  relation  to  be  conceived  as
a  going  concern.  The  state  of  the  industrial  arts  is  a
fact  of  group  life,  not  of  individual  or  private  initiative
or  innovation.  It  is  an  affair  of  the  collectivity,  not  a
creative  achievement  of  individuals  working  self-suffi-
ciently  in  severalty  or  in  isolation.  In  the  main,  the  state  y
of  the  industrial  arts  is  always  a  heritage  out  of  the  past;
it  is  always  in  process  of  change,  perhaps,  but  the  sub-
stantial body  of  it  is  knowledge  that  has  come  down  from
earlier  generations.  New  elements  of  insight  and  pro-
ficiency are  continually  being  added  and  worked  into
this  common  stock  by  the  experience  and  initiative  of
the  current  generation,  but  such  novel  elements  are
always  and  everywhere  sHght  and  inconsequential  in
comparison  with  the  body  of  technology  that  has  been
carried  over  from  the  past.

Each  successive  move  in  advance,  every  new  wrinkle
of  novelty,  improvement,  invention,  adaptation,  every
further  detail  of  workmanlike  innovation,  is  of  course
made  by  individuals  and  comes  out  of  individual  expe-
rience and  initiative,  since  the  generations  of  mankind
live  only  in  individuals.  But  each  move  so  made  is
necessarily  made  by  individuals  immersed  in  the  com-

103


I04  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

munity  and  exposed  to  the  discipline  of  group  life  as  it
runs  in  the  community,  since  all  life  is  necessarily  group
life.  The  phenomena  of  human  life  occur  only  in  this
form.  It  is  only  as  an  outcome  of  this  disciphne  that
comes  with  the  routine  of  group  life,  and  by  help  of
the  commonplace  knowledge  diffused  through  the  com-
munity, that  any  of  its  members  are  enabled  to  make
any  new  move  that  may  in  this  way  be  traceable  to  their
individual  initiative.  Any  new  technological  departure
necessarily  takes  its  rise  in  the  workmanlike  endeavours
of  given  individuals,  but  it  can  do  so  only  by  force  of
their  famiHarity  with  the  body  of  knowledge  which  the
group  already  has  in  hand.  A  new  departure  is  always
and  necessarily  an  improvement  on  or  alteration  in  that
state  of  the  industrial  arts  that  is  already  in  the  keeping
of  the  group  at  large;  and  every  expedient  or  innovation,
great  or  small,  that  so  is  hit  upon  goes  into  effect  by
going  into  the  common  stock  of  technological  resources
carried  by  the  group.  It  can  take  effect  only  in  this
way.  Such  group  solidarity  is  a  necessity  of  the  case,
both  for  the  acquirement  and  use  of  this  immaterial
equipment  that  is  spoken  of  as  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  and  for  its  custody  and  transmission  from  genera-
tion to  generation.

Within  this  common  stock  of  technology  some  special
branch  or  line  of  proficiency,  bearing  on  some  special
craft  or  trade,  may  be  held  in  a  degree  of  isolation  by
some  caste-Hke  group  within  the  community,  limited
by  consanguinity,  initiation,  and  the  Hke,  and  so  it  may
be  held  somewhat  out  of  the  common  stock  and  trans-
mitted in  some  degree  of  segregation.  In  the  lower  cul-
tures the  elements  of  technology  that  are  so  engrossed


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  105

by  a  fraction  of  the  community  and  held  out  of  the
common  stock  are  most  commonly  of  a  magical  or  cere-
monial nature,  rather  than  effective  elements  of  work-
manship; since  any  such  matters  of  ritual  observance
lend  themselves  with  greater  facility  to  exclusive  use
and  transmission  within  Hnes  of  class  limitation  than  do
the  matter-of-fact  devices  of  actual  workmanship.  In
the  lower  cultures  the  exclusive  training  and  informa-
tion so  held  and  transmitted  in  segregation  by  various
secret  organisations  appear  in  the  main  to  be  of  this
magical  or  ceremonial  character;^  although  there  is  no
reason  to  doubt  that  this  technological  make-believe  is
taken  quite  seriously  and  counts  as  a  substantial  asset  in
the  apprehension  of  its  possessors.  In  a  more  advanced
state  of  the  industrial  arts,  where  ownership  and  the
speciaKsation  of  industry  have  had  their  effect,  trade
secrets,  patent  and  copyrights  are  often  of  substantial
value,  and  these  are  held  in  segregation  from  the  common
stock  of  technology.  But  it  is  evident  without  argu-
ment that  facts  of  this  class  are  after  all  of  no  grave  or
enduring  consequence  in  comparison  with  the  great
commonplace  body  of  knowledge  and  skill  current  in  the
community.  At  the  same  time,  any  such  segregated
Hne  of  technological  gain  and  transmission,  if  it  has  any
appreciable  significance  for  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  and  is  not  wholly  made  up  of  ritual  observances,
leans  so  greatly  on  the  technological  equipment  at  large
that  its  isolation  is  at  the  most  partial  and  one-sided;  it
takes  effect  only  by  the  free  use  of  the  general  body  of

1  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Hutton  Webster,  Primitive  Secret  Societies,  especially  ch.
iii,  iv,  v;  Spencer  and  Gillen^  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  ch.  vii,
viii,  ix,  xvi.


io6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

knowledge  which  is  not  so  engrossed,  and  it  has  also  in
all  cases  been  acquired  and  elaborated  only  by  the  free
use  of  that  commonplace  knowledge  that  is  held  in  no
man's  exclusive  possession.  Such  is  more  particularly  the
case  in  all  but  those  latest  phases  of  the  industrial  de-
velopment in  which  the  volume  of  the  technology  and
the  consequent  specialisation  of  occupations  have  been
carried  very  far.

In  the  earlier,  or  rather  in  all  but  the  late  phases  of
culture  and  technology,  this  immaterial  equipment  at
large  is  accessible  to  all  members  of  the  community  as  a
matter  of  course  through  the  unavoidable  discipline  that
comes  with  the  workday  routine  of  getting  along.  Few,
if  any,  can  avoid  acquiring  the  essential  elements  of  the
industrial  scheme  by  use  of  which  the  community  lives,
although  they  need  not  each  gain  any  degree  of  profi-
ciency in  all  the  manual  operations  or  industrial  processes
in  which  this  technological  scheme  goes  into  effect,  and
few  can  avoid  being  so  trained  into  the  logic  of  the  cur-
rent scheme  that  their  habitual  thinking  will  in  all  these
bearings  run  within  the  bounds  of  experience  embodied
in  this  general  scheme.

All  have  free  access  to  this  common  stock  of  imma-
terial equipment,  but  in  all  known  cultures  there  is  also
found  some  degree  of  special  training  and  some  ap-
preciable specialisation  of  knowledge  and  occupations;
which  is  carried  forward  by  expert  workmen  whose  pe-
culiar and  exceptional  proficiency  is  confined  to  some
one  or  a  few  distinct  lines  of  craft.  And  in  all,  or  at  least
in  all  but  the  lowest  known  cultures,  the  available  evi-
dence goes  to  say  that  this  joint  stock  of  technological
mastery  can  be  maintained  and  carried  forward  only


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  107

by  way  of  some  such  specialisation  of  training  and  dif-
ferentiation of  employments.  No  one  is  competent  to
acquire  such  mastery  of  all  the  lines  of  industry  included
in  the  general  scheme  as  would  enable  him  (or  her)  to
transmit  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  to  succeeding
generations  unimpaired  at  all  points.

Some  degree  of  specialisation  there  always  is,  even
where  there  appears  to  be  no  urgent  technological  need '
of  it.  The  circumstances  of  their  life  differ  sufficiently
for  different  individuals,  so  that  a  certain  individuation  in
workmanship  will  result  from  commonplace  experience,
even  apart  from  any  deHberate  specialisation  of  occupa-
tions. And  with  any  considerable  increase  in  the  size
of  the  group  a  more  or  less  deliberate  specialisation  of
occupations  will  also  set  in.  Individuals  who  are  in  this
way  occupied  wholly  or  mainly  with  some  one  particular
line  of  work  will  carry  proficiency  in  this  Hne  to  a  higher
pitch  than  the  generality  of  workmen  and  will  bring  out
details  of  technological  procedure  that  may  never  fully
become  the  common  possession  of  the  group  at  large,
that  may  not  in  all  details  become  part  of  the  common-
place technological  information  current  in  the  com-
munity. There  seems,  in  fact,  never  to  have  been  a  time
when  the  industrial  scheme  was  so  slight  and  narrow
that  all  members  of  the  community  could  master  it  in
the  greatest  feasible  degree  of  proficiency  at  every  point.
But  at  the  same  time  it  holds  true  for  all  the  more  archaic
phases  of  the  development  that  all  members  of  the  com-
munity appear  always  to  have  had  a  comprehensive  and
passably  exhaustive  acquaintance  with  the  technique  of
all  industries  practised  in  their  time.

This  necessary  speciaHsation  and  detail  training  has


v^


io8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

large  consequences  for  the  growth  of  technology  as  well
as  for  its  custody  and  transmission.  It  follows  that  a
large  and  widely  diversified  industrial  scheme  is  impos-
sible except  in  a  community  of  some  size, — large  enough
to  support  a  number  and  variety  of  special  occupations.
In  effect,  substantial  gains  in  industrial  insight  and
proficiency  can  apparently  be  worked  out  only  through
such  close  and  sustained  attention  to  a  given  line  of
work  as  can  be  given  only  within  the  lines  of  a  specialised
occupation.  At  the  same  time  the  industrial  community
must  comprise  a  full  complement  of  such  specialised  oc-
cupations, and  must  also  be  bound  together  in  a  system
of  communication  sufficiently  close  and  facile  to  allow
the  technological  contents  of  all  these  occupations  to
be  readily  assimilated  into  a  systematic  whole.  The
industrial  system  so  worked  out  need  not  be  of  the  same
extent  as  any  one  local  group  of  the  people  who  get  their
living  by  its  use;  but  it  seems  to  be  required  that  if
several  local  groups  are  effectively  to  be  comprised  in  a
single  industrial  system  conditions  of  peace  must  prevail
among  them.  Community  of  language  seems  also  to  be
nearly  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  such  a  system.
Where  the  various  local  groups  are  on  hostile  terms,  each
will  tend  to  have  an  industrial  system  of  its  own,  with  a
technological  character  somewhat  distinct  from  its
neighbours.^  If  the  degree  of  isolation  is  pronounced,  so
that  traffic  and  communication  do  not  run  freely  be-
tween groups,  the  size  of  the  local  group  will  Hmit  the
state  of  the  industrial  arts  somewhat  rigidly;  and  on  the
other  hand  a  marked  advance  in  the  industrial  arts,  such

*  Cf.  for  instance,  Codrington,  The  Melanesians;  Seligmann,  The  Mel-
anesians  of  British  New  Guinea.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  109

as  the  domestication  of  crop  plants  or  animals  or  the
introduction  of  metals,  is  likely  to  bring  about  such  a
redistribution  of  population  and  industry  as  to  increase
the  effective  size  of  the  community.^

Among  the  peoples  on  the  lower  levels  of  culture  there
prevails  commonly  a  considerable  degree  of  isolation,  or
even  of  estrangement.  In  a  great  degree  each  com-
munity is  thrown  on  its  own  resources,  and  under  these
circumstances  the  size  of  the  community  may  become
a  matter  of  decisive  importance  for  the  industrial  arts.
Where  a  serious  decline  in  the  numbers  of  any  of  these
savage  or  barbarous  peoples  is  recorded  it  is  also  com-
monly noted  that  they  have  suffered  a  concomitant  decay

*  These  considerations  may  of  course  imply  nothing,  directly,  as  to  the
size  of  the  political  organisation  or  of  the  national  territory  or  population;
though  national  boundaries  are  likely  both  to  affect  and  to  be  affected
by  such  changes  in  the  industrial  system.  A  community  may  be  small,
relatively  to  the  industrial  system  in  and  by  which  it  lives,  and  may  yet,
if  conditions  of  peace  permit  it,  stand  in  such  a  relation  of  complement  or
supplement  to  a  larger  complex  of  industrial  groups  as  to  make  it  in  ef-
fect an  integral  part  of  a  larger  community,  so  far  as  regards  its  tech-
nology. So,  for  instance,  Switzerland  and  Denmark  are  an  integral
part  of  the  cultural  and  industrial  community  of  the  Western  civilisation
as  effectually  as  they  might  be  with  an  area  and  population  equal  to  those
of  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  German  Empire,  and  they  are  doubtless
each  a  more  essential  part  in  this  community  than  Russia.  At  the  same
time,  as  things  go  within  this  Western  culture,  national  boundaries  have
a  very  considerable  obstructive  effect  in  industrial  affairs  and  in  the
growth  of  technology.  It  will  probably  be  conceded  on  the  one  hand  that
any  appreciable  decline  in  the  aggregate  population  of  Christendom  would
result  in  some  curtailment  or  retardation  of  the  technological  advance
in  which  these  peoples  are  jointly  and  severally  engaged;  and  it  is  like-
wise to  be  conceded  on  the  other  hand  that  the  like  effect  would  follow
on  any  marked  degree  of  success  from  the  efforts  of  those  patriotic  and
dynastic  statesmen  who  are  endeavouring  to  set  these  peoples  asunder  in
an  armed  estrangement  and  neutrality.


no  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

in  their  technological  knowledge  and  workmanship.*  In
view  of  these  considerations  it  is  probably  safe  to  say
that  under  settled  conditions  any  community  is,  com-
y  monly,  no  larger  than  is  required  to  keep  up  and  carry
forward  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  as  it  runs.  The
known  evidence  appears  to  warrant  the  generaHsation
that  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  is  hmited  by  the  size
of  the  industrial  community,  and  that  whenever  a  given
community  is  broken  up  or  suffers  a  serious  diminution
of  numbers  its  technological  heritage  will  deteriorate  and
dwindle  even  though  it  may  apparently  have  been
meagre  enough  before.

The  considerations  recited  above  are  matters  of  com-
monplace observation  and  might  fairly  be  taken  for
granted  without  argument.  But  so  much  of  current  and
recent  theoretical  speculation  proceeds  on  tacit  assump-
tions at  variance  with  these  commonplaces  that  it  seems
pertinent  to  recall  them,  particularly  since  they  will
come  in  as  premises  in  later  passages  of  the  inquiry.


r


Given  the  material  environment,  the  rate  and  charac-
ter of  the  technological  gains  made  in  any  community
will  depend  on  the  initiative  and  appKcation  of  its  mem-
bers, in  so  far  as  the  growth  of  institutions  has  not  seri-
ously diverted  the  genius  of  the  race  from  its  natural
bent;  it  will  depend  immediately  and  obviously  on  in-
dividual talent  for  workmanship — on  the  workmanlike

*  Cf.,  as  an  extreme  case,  Matilda  C.  Stevenson,  "The  Sia,"  Report
Bur.Etk,xi  (1889-1890).

The  hke  decline  is  known  to  have  occurred  in  many  parts  of  Europe
consequent  on  the  decline  of  population  due  to  the  Black  Death  and
the  Plague.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  ui

bent  and  capacity  of  the  individual  members  of  the
community.  Therefore  any  difference  of  native  endow-
ment in  this  respect  between  the  several  races  will  show
itself  in  the  character  of  their  technological  achieve-
ments as  well  as  in  the  rate  of  gain.  Races  differ  among
themselves  in  this  matter,  both  as  to  the  kind  and  as  to
the  degree  of  technological  proficiency  of  which  they  are
capable.^  It  is  perhaps  as  needless  to  insist  on  this
spiritual  difference  between  the  various  racial  stocks  as
it  would  be  difi&cult  to  determine  the  specific  differences
that  are  known  to  exist,  or  to  exhibit  them  convincingly
in  detail.  To  some  such  ground  much  of  the  distinctive
character  of  different  peoples  is  no  doubt  to  be  assigned,
though  much  also  may  as  wxll  be  traceable  to  local
pecuharities  of  environment  and  of  institutional  circum-
stances. Something  of  the  kind,  a  specific  difference  in
the  genius  of  the  people,  is  by  common  consent  assigned,
for  instance,  in  explanation  of  the  pervasive  difference  in
technology  and  workmanship  between  the  Western  cul-
ture and  the  Far  East.  The  like  difference  in  "genius'^
is  still  more  convincingly  shown  where  different  races
have  long  been  living  near  one  another  under  settled
cultural  conditions.^

It  should  be  noted  in  the  same  connection  that  hybrid  /yQ
peoples,  such  as  those  of  Europe  or  of  Japan,  where
somewhat  widely  distinct racial stocks are mingled,
should  afford  a  great  variety  and  wide  individual  varia-

*  On  such  native  differences  betvv-een  the  leading  races  of  Europe,  cf.,
e.  g.,  G.  V.  de  Lapouge,  Les  Selections  Sociales;  and  VAryen;  0.  Ammon,
Die  Gesellschaftsordnung;  G.  Sergi,  Arii  e  Italici.

^  For  instance,  the  Japanese  and  the  Ainu,  the  Polynesians  and  the
Melanesians,  the  Cinghalese  and  the  Veddas.  On  the  last  named,  cf.
Seligmann,  The  Veddas.


112  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tion  of  native  gifts,  in  workmanship  as  in  other  respects.
Hybrid  stocks,  indeed,  have  a  wider  range  of  usual  varia-
bility than  the  combined  extreme  limits  of  the  racial
types  that  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  hybrid.  So
that  a  great  variety,  even  aberration  and  eccentricity,
of  native  gifts  is  to  be  looked  for  in  such  cases,  and  this
wide  range  of  variation  in  workmanlike  initiative  should
show  itself  in  the  technology  of  any  such  peoples.  Yet
there  may  still  prevail  a  strikingly  determinate  difference
between  any  two  such  hybrid  populations,  both  in  the
characteristic  features  of  their  technology  and  in  their
routine  workmanship;  as  is  illustrated  in  the  contrast
between  Japan  and  the  Western  nations.  These  racial
differences  in  point  of  endowment  may  be  slight  in  the
first  instance,  but  as  they  work  cumulatively  their  ul-
terior effect  may  still  be  very  marked;  and  they  may
result  in  marked  differences  not  only  in  respect  of  the
character  of  the  technological  situation  at  a  given  point
of  time  but  also  in  the  rate  of  advance  and  the  direction
taken  by  the  technological  advance.  So  in  the  case  of
the  Far  East,  as  contrasted  with  the  Occidental  peoples,
the  genius  of  the  races  engaged  has  prevailingly  taken
the  direction  of  proficiency  in  handicraft,  rather  than
that  somewhat  crude  but  efficient  recourse  to  mechanical
expedients  which  chiefly  distinguishes  the  technology  of
the  West.

The  stability  of  racial  types  makes  it  possible  to  study
the  innate  characters  of  the  existing  population  under  less
complex  and  confusing  circumstances  than  those  of  the
cultural  situation  in  which  this  population  is  now  found.
By  going  back  into  the  earlier  phases  of  the  Western


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  113

culture  the  scrutiny  of  the  living  population  of  Europe
and  its  colonies  can,  in  effect,  be  pushed  back  in  a  frag-
mentary way  over  an  interval  of  some  thousands  of
years.  Such  acquaintance  as  may  in  this  way  be  gained
with  the  spiritual  makeup  of  the  peoples  of  the  Western
culture  at  any  point  in  its  past  history  and  prehistory
should  bear  immediately  and  without  serious  abatement
on  the  native  character  of  the  generation  in  whose  hands
the  fortunes  of  that  culture  now  rest;  provided  only  that
the  inquiry  assures  itself  of  the  racial  continuity,  racial
identity,  of  these  peoples  through  this  period  of  time.
This  question  of  race  identity  is  no  longer  a  matter  of
serious  debate  so  far  as  concerns  the  peoples  of  northern
and  western  Europe,  within  the  effective  bounds  of  the
Occidental  civilisation  and  as  far  back  as  the  beginning
of  the  neoHthic  period.  Assuredly  there  is  debate  and
uncertainty  as  to  local  details  of  racial  mixture  in  nearly
all  parts  of  this  cultural  area  at  some  point  in  past  time,
but  these  uncertainties  of  detail  are  not  of  such  a  nature
or  such  magnitude  as  to  vitiate  the  data  for  an  inquiry
into  the  general  characteristics  of  the  races  concerned.
By  and  large,  the  mixture  of  races  in  north  Europe  has
apparently  not  varied  greatly  since  early  neolithic  times,
and  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  are  known  with
some  confidence,  in  the  main.  Much  the  same  holds
true  for  the  Mediterranean  seaboard,  although  the
changes  in  that  region  appear  to  have  been  more  con-
siderable and  are  perhaps  less  readily  traceable.  For
northern  and  western  Europe  taken  together,  in  spite  of
considerable  local  fluctuations,  the  variations  in  the
general  racial  composition  of  the  peoples  has,  on  the
whole,  not  been  extensive  or  extremely  serious  since  the


114  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

latter  part  of  the  stone  age.  The  three  great  racial  stocks*
of  Western  civilisation  have  apparently  shared  their
joint  dominance  in  this  culture  among  themselves  since
about  the  time  when  the  use  of  bronze  first  came  into
Europe,  which  should  be  before  the  close  of  the  stone
age.  And  these  three  stocks  are  not  greatly  alien  to
one  another;  two  of  them,  the  Mediterranean  and  the
blond,  being  apparently  somewhat  closely  related  in
point  of  descent  and  therefore  presumably  in  point  of
spiritual  makeup.

It  is  with  less  confidence  that  any  student  of  these
modern  cultures  can  test  his  case  by  evidence  drawn
from  existing  or  historical  communities  living  on  the
savage  or  lower  barbarian  plane  and  not  closely  related,
racially,  to  the  peoples  of  Western  Europe.  The  dis-
crepancies in  such  a  case  are  of  two  kinds :  {a)  The  racial
type,  and  therefore  the  spiritual  (instinctive)  make-up
of  these  aHen  savages  or  barbarians,  is  not  the  same  as
that  of  the  modern  Europeans;  hence  the  culture  worked
out  under  the  control  of  their  somewhat  different  en-
dowment of  instincts  should  come  to  a  different  result,
particularly  since  any  such  racial  discrepancy  in  the
matter  of  instincts  should  be  expected  to  work  cumula-
tively to  a  different  cultural  outcome.  These  alien  com-
munities of  the  lower  cultures  can  therefore  not  be  ac-
cepted off-hand  as  representing  an  earlier  phase  of  Occi-
dental civiHsation.  This  infirmity  attaches  to  any  re-
course to  an  existing  savage  or  barbarian  community

1  Cf.  W.  Z.  Ripley,  The  Races  of  Europe;  G.  Sergi,  The  Mediterranean
Race;  V.  de  Lapouge,  UAryen;  cf.  also,  J.  Deniker,  Les races  europeennes ,
and  "Les  six  races  composant  la  population  de  I'Europe,"  Journal  Ati-
thropological  Institute,  vol.  34.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  115

for  object-lessons  to  illustrate  the  working  of  European
human  nature  in  similarly  primitive  circumstances,  in
the  degree  in  which  the  community  in  question  may  be
remote  from  the  Europeans  in  point  of  racial  type;  which
reduces  itself  to  a  difficult  question  as  to  the  point  in  the
family-tree  of  the  races  of  man  from  which  the  two
contrasted  races  have  diverged,  and  of  the  number,
character,  and  magnitude  of  the  racial  mutations  that
may  have  intervened  between  the  presumed  point  of
divergence  and  the  existing  racial  types  so  contrasted.
(h)  It  is  commonly  said,  and  it  is  presumably  true
enough,  that  all  known  communities  on  the  lower  levels
of  culture  are  far  from  a  state  of  primitive  savagery;  that
they  are  not  to  be  taken  as  genuinely  archaic,  but  are  the
result  either  of  a  comparatively  late  reversion,  under
special  circumstances,  from  a  past  higher  stage,  or  they
are  peoples  which  have  undergone  so  protracted  an  ex-
perience in  savagery  that  their  present  state  is  one  of
extreme  sophistification  in  all  "the  beastly  devices  of  the
heathen',"  rather  than  substantially  an  early  or  archaic
type  of  culture,  such  as  would  have  marked  a  transient
stage  in  the  development  of  those  peoples  that  have
attained  civilised  hfe.

No  doubt  there  is  some  substance  to  these  objections,
but  they  contain  rather  a  modicum  of  truth  than  an
inclusive  presentation  of  the  facts  relevant  to  the  case.
As  to  (a),  the  races  of  man  are,  after  all,  more  alike  than
unlike,  and  the  evidence  drawn  from  the  experience  of
any  one  racial  stock  or  mixture  is  not  to  be  disregarded
as  having  no  significance  for  the  probable  course  of  things
experienced  by  any  other  racial  stock  during  a  corre-
sponding interval  in  its  life-history. Yet  there  is  doubt-


ii6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

less  a  wide  and  debatable  margin  of  error  to  be  allowed
for  in  the  use  of  all  evidence  of  this  class.  As  to  (5),  by
virtue  of  the  stability  of  racial  types  the  populations  of
existing  communities  of  the  lower  cultures  should  be
today  what  they  were  at  the  outset,  in  respect  of  the
most  substantial  factor  in  their  present  situation,  their
spiritual  (instinctive)  make-up;  and  this  unaltered  com-
plement of  instincts  should,  under  similar  circumstances
and  with  a  moderate  allowance  of  time,  work  out  sub-
stantially the  same  general  run  of  cultural  results  whether
the  resulting  phase  of  culture  were  reached  by  approach
from  a  near  and  untroubled  beginning  or  by  regression
from  a  ''higher  plane.''  So  that  the  existing  communi-
ties of  savages  or  lower  barbarians  should  present  a  pass-
ably competent  object  lesson  in  archaic  savagery  and
barbarism  whether  their  past  has  been  higher,  lower,  or
simply  more  of  the  same.

All  this,  of  course,  assumes  the  stability  of  racial
types.  But  since,  tacitly,  that  assumption  is  habitually
made  by  ethnologists,  all  that  calls  for  apology  or  ex-
planation here  is  the  avowal  of  it.  The  greater  propor-
tion of  ethnological  generahsations  on  this  range  of  ques-
tions would  be  quite  impotent  without  that  assumption
as  their  major  premise.  What  has  not  commonly  been
assumed  or  admitted,  except  by  subconscious  implica-
tion, is  the  necessary  corollary  that  these  stable  types
with  which  ethnologists  and  anthropologists  busy  them-
selves must  have  arisen  by  mutation  from  previously
existing  types,  rather  than  by  a  long  continued  and  di-
vergent accumulation  of  insensible  variations.  A  result
of  avowing  such  a  view  of  the  genesis  of  races  will  be
that  the  various  races  cannot  be  regarded  as  being  all  of


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  117

the  same  date  and  racial  maturity,  or  of  the  same  signifi-
cance for  any  discussion  bearing  on  the  higher  cultures.
The  races  engaged  in  the  Western  culture  will  presum-
ably be  found  to  be  of  relatively  late  date,  as  having
arisen  out  of  relatively  late  mutational  departures,  as
rated  in  terms  of  the  aggregate  hfe-history  of  mankind.
Presumably  also  many  of -the  other  races  will  be  found  to
be  somewhat  widely  out  of  touch  with  the  members  of
this  Occidental  aggregation  of  racial  stocks;  some  more,
others  less  remotely  related  to  them,  according  as  their
mutational  pedigree  may  be  found  to  indicate.

An  advantage  derivable  from  such  an  avowal  of  the
stabihty  of  types,  as  against  its  covert  assumption  and
overt  disavowal,  is  that  it  enables  the  student  to  look
for  the  beginning,  in  time  and  space,  of  any  given  racial
stock  with  which  his  inquiry  is  concerned,  and  to  handle
it  as  a  unit  throughout  its  Hfe-history.

In  all  probability  each  of  the  leading  racial  stocks  of
Europe  began  its  hfe-history  on  what  would  currently  \
be  accounted  a  low  level  of  savagery.  And  yet  this
phase  of  savagery,  whatever  it  may  have  been  like,  will
have  been  removed  from  the  first  beginnings  of  human
culture  by  a  long  series  of  thousands  of  years.  That
such  was  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  European  blond
is  scarcely  to  be  questioned;^  and  it  is  at  least  highly

1  The  available  evidence  indicates  that  the  dolicho-blond  race  of
northern  Europe  probably  originated  in  a  mutation  (from  the  JNIediter-
ranean  as  its  parent  stock?)  during  the  early  neolithic  period,  that  is  to
say  about  at  the  beginning  of  the  neohthic  in  western  Europe.  There  is
less  secure  ground  for  conjecture  as  to  the  date  and  circumstances  under
which  any  one  of  the  other  European  races  originated,  but  the  date  and
place  of  their  origin  seems  to  lie  outside  of  Europe  and  earlier  than  the


ii8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

probable  that  the  other  stocks  now  associated  with  the
blond,  though  probably  older,  must  also  have  come  into
being  relatively  late  in  the  hfe-history  of  the  species.

Vague  as  this  dating  may  be,  it  signifies  that  the  initial
phase  in  the  life-history  of  at  least  one,  and  presumably
of  all,  of  the  leading  races  of  Europe  falls  in  a  savage
culture  of  a  relatively  advanced  kind  as  compared  with
the  rudest  human  beginnings.  Therefore  when  these
stocks  began  life,  and  so  were  required  to  make  good
their  survival,  the  selective  conditions  imposed  on  them,
and  to  which  they  were  required  to  conform  on  pain  of
extinction,  were  the  conditions  of  a  savage  culture  which
had  already  made  some  appreciable  advance  in  the  arts
of  Kfe.  They  had  not  to  meet  brute  nature  in  the  help-
less nakedness  of  those  remote  ancestors  in  whom  hu-
manity first  began.  Mutationally  speaking,  the  stock
y  was  born  to  the  use  of  tools  and  to  the  facile  mastery  of  a
relatively  advanced  technology.  And  conversely  it  is  a
fair  inference  that  these  stocks  that  have  peopled  Europe
would  have  been  unfit  to  survive  if  they  had  come  into
the  world  before  some  appreciable  advance  in  technology
had  been  made.  That  is  to  say,  these  stocks  could  not
by  native  gift  have  been  fit  for  a  wild  life,  in  the  unquali-
fied sense  of  the  term;  nor  have  they  ever  lived  a  life  of
nature  in  any  such  sense.  They  came  into  the  savage
world  after  the  race  had  lived  through  many  thousand
years  of  technological  experience  and  (presumably)
many  successive  mutational  alterations  of  racial  type,

European  neolithic  period.  Unfortunately  there  has  been  little  direct  or
succinct  discussion  of  this  matter  among  anthropologists  hitherto. — •
Cf.  "The  Mutation  Theory  and  the  Blond  Race,"  Journal  of  Race
Development i  April,  19 13.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  119

and  they  were  fitted  to  the  exigencies  of  the  savage  world
into  which  they  came  rather  than  those  of  any  earlier
phase  of  savagery.  The  youngest  of  them,  the  latest
mutant,  emerged  in  early  neolithic  times,  and  since  he
eminently  made  good  his  fitness  to  survive  under  those
conditions  he  presumably  emerged  with  such  an  endow-
ment of  traits,  physical  and  spiritual,  as  those  conditions
called  for;  and  also  presumably  with  no  appreciable
burden  of  aptitudes,  propensities,  instincts,  capacities
that  would  be  disserviceable,  or  perhaps  even  that  would
be  wholly  unserviceable,  in  the  circumstances  in  which
he  was  placed.  And  since  the  other  racial  elements  of
the  European  population,  at  least  the  two  main  ones,
do  not  differ  at  all  radically  from  the  blond  in  their  native
capacities,  it  is  likewise  to  be  presumed  that  they  also
emerged  from  a  mutation  under  circumstances  of  culture,
and  especially  of  technology,  not  radically  different  in
degree  from  those  that  first  surrounded  the  blond.

The  difference  between  these  three  racial  stocks  is
much  more  evident  in  their  physical  traits  than  in  their
instinctive  gifts  or  their  intellectual  capacity;  and  yet
the  similarity  of  the  three  is  so  great  and  distinctive
even  on  the  physical  side  that  anthropologists  are  in-
clined to  class  the  three  together  as  all  and  several  dis-
tinctively typical  of  a  "white"  or  "caucasic"  race,  to
which  they  are  held  collectively  to  belong.  Something
to  the  hke  effect  seems  to  hold  true  for  the  distinctive
groups  of  racial  stocks  that  have  made  the  characteristic
civilisations  of  the  Far  East  on  the  one  hand  and  of
southern  Asia  on  the  other  hand;  and  something  similar
might,  again,  be  said  for  the  group  of  stocks  that  were
concerned  in  the  ancient  civilisations  of  America.


120  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

It  may  be  pertinent  to  add  that,  except  for  a  long  ante-
cedent growth  of  technology,  that  is  to  say  a  long  con-
tinued cumulative  experience  in  workmanship,  with  the
resultant  accumulated  knowledge  of  the  ways  and  means
of  life',  none  of  the  characteristic  races  of  Europe  could
have  survived.  In  the  absence  of  these  antecedent
technological  gains,  together  with  the  associated  growth
of  institutions,  such  mutants,  with  their  characteristic
gifts  and  limitations,  must  have  perished.

On  that  level  of  savagery  on  which  these  European
stocks  began,  and  to  which  the  several  European  racial
types  with  their  typical  endowment  of  instincts  are  pre-
sumably adapted,  men  appear  to  have  lived  a  fairly
V  peaceable,  though  by  no  means  an  indolent  Hfe;  in  rela-
tively small  groups  or  communities;  without  any  of  the
more  useful  domestic  animals,  though  probably  with
some  domestic  plants;  and  busied  with  getting  their
living  by  daily  work.  Since  they  survived  under  the
conditions  offered  them  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  these
men  and  women,  say  of  the  early  neolithic  time,  took
instinctively  and  kindly  to  those  activities  and  mutual
relations  that  would  further  the  Hfe  of  the  group;  and
that,  on  the  whole,  they  took  less  kindly  and  instinctively
to  such  activities  as  would  bring  damage  and  discomfort
on  their  neighbours  and  themselves.^ Any  racial  type  of

^  The  Melanesians  may  be  contrasted  with  the  Baltic  peoples  in  this
respect,  though  the  comparison  is  perhaps  rather  suggestive  than  con-
vincing. The  Melanesians  are  apparently  endowed  with  a  very  respect-
able capacity  for  workmanship,  as  regards  both  insight  and  application,
and  with  a  relatively  high  sense  of  economic  expediency.  They  are  also
possessed  of  an  alert  and  enduring  group  solidarity.  But  they  apparently
lack  that  reasonable  degree  of  "  humanity  "  and  congenital  tolerance  that


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  121

which  this  had  not  been  true,  under  the  conditions  known
then  to  have  prevailed  in  their  habitat,  must  have  pres-
ently disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  land,  and  the
later  advance  of  the  Western  culture  would  not  have
known  their  breed.  Some  other  racial  t^^^e,  tempera-
mentally so  constituted  as  better  to  meet  these  require-
ments of  survival  under  neolithic  conditions,  would  have
taken  their  place  and  would  have  left  their  own  offspring
to  populate  the  region.^

What  is  known  of  the  conditions  of  life  in  early  neo-
lithic times  2  indicates  that  the  first  requisite  of  competi-
tive survival  was  a  more  or  less  close  attention  to  the

has  on  the  whole  kept  the  peoples  of  the  Baltic  region  from  fatal  extrava-
gances of  cruelty  and  sustained  hatred  between  groups.  Not  that  any-
excess  of  humanity  has  marked  the  course  of  culture  in  North  Europe.
But  it  seems  at  least  admissible  to  say  that  mutual  hatred,  distrust  and
disparagement  falls  more  readily  into  abeyance  among  these  peoples
than  among  the  Melanesians;  particularly  when  and  in  so  far  as  the  ma-
terial interest  of  the  several  groups  visibly  suffers  from  a  continued  free
run  of  extravagant  animosity.  The  difference  in  point  of  native  propen-
sity may  not  be  very  marked,  but  such  degree  of  it  as  there  is  has  ap-
parently thrown  the  balance  in  such  a  way  that  the  Baltic  peoples  have,
technologically,  had  the  advantage  of  a  wide  and  relatively  easy  contact
and  communication;  whereas  the  Melanesians  have  during  an  equally
protracted  experience  spent  themselves  largely  on  interstitial  animosi-
ties.— Cf.  Codrington,  The  Melanesians;  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  oj
British  New  Guinea.

^  These  considerations  apparently  apply  with  peculiar  force  to  the
blond  race,  in  that  the  evidence  of  early  times  goes  to  argue  that  this
stock  never  lived  in  isolation  from  other,  rival  stocks.  It  began  pre-
sumably as  a  small  minority  in  a  community  made  up  chiefly  of  a  dif-
ferent racial  type,  its  parent  stock,  and  in  an  environment  at  large  in
which  at  least  one  rival  stock  was  present  in  force  from  near  the  outset;
so  that  race  competition,  that  is  to  say  competition  in  terms  of  births  and
deaths,  was  instant  and  unremitting.  And  this  competition  the  given
conditions  enforced  in  terms  of  group  subsistence.

2Cf.,  e.  g.,  Sophus  Miiller,  Vor  Oldtid,  "  Stenalderen."


122  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

y  business  in  hand,  the  providing  of  subsistence  for  the
group  and  the  rearing  of  offspring — a  closer  attention,
for  instance,  than  was  given  to  this  business  by  those
other  rival  stocks  whom  the  successful  ones  displaced;
all  of  which  throws  into  the  foreground  as  indispensable
native  traits  of  the  successful  race  the  parental  bent  and
the  sense  of  workmanship,  rather  than  those  instinctive
traits  that  make  for  disturbance  of  the  peace. ^
^  But  through  it  all  the  suggestion  insinuates  itself  that
the  latest,  or  youngest,  of  the  three  main  European  stocks,
Kjg,  ^  the  blond,  has  more  rather  than  less  of  the  pugnacious
and  predatory  temper  than  the  other  two,  and  that  this
stock  made  its  way  to  the  front  in  spite  of,  if  not  by  force
of  these  traits.  The  advantage  of  the  blond  as  a  fighter
seems  to  have  been  due  in  part  to  an  adventurous  and
pugnacious  temper,  but  also  in  part  to  a  superior  phy-
sique,— superior  for  the  purpose  of  fighting  hand  to  hand
or  with  the  implements  chiefly  used  in  warfare  and
piracy  down  to  a  date  within  the  nineteenth  century.
The  same  physical  traits  of  mass,  stature  and  katabohsm
will  Hkewise  have  been  of  great  advantage  in  the  quest
of  a  liveHhood  under  the  conditions  that  prevailed  in  the
North-sea  region,  the  habitat  of  the  doHcho-blond,  in
the  stone  age.  Something  to  the  same  effect  is  true  of
the  spiritual  traits  which  are  said  to  characterise  the
blond, — a  certain  canny  temerity  and  unrest.^ So  that

*  It  has  not  commonly  been  noted,  though  it  will  scarcely  be  questioned,
that  fighting  capacity  and  the  propensity  to  fight  have  rarely,  if  ever,
been  successful  in  the  struggle  between  races  and  peoples  when  brought
into  competition  with  a  diligent  growing  of  crops  and  children,  if  success
be  counted  in  terms  of  race  survival.

2  It  is  apparently  an  open  question  whether  these  spiritual  traits  are
properly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  dolicho-blond  as  traits  of  that  type  taken


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  123

the  point  is  left  somewhat  in  doubt;  the  traits  which
presently  made  the  northern  blond  the  most  formidable
disturber  of  the  peace  of  Europe  and  kept  him  so  for
many  centuries  may  at  the  outset  have  been  chiefly
conducive  to  the  survival  of  the  type  by  their  servicea-
bility for  industrial  purposes  under  the  peculiar  cir-
cumstances of  climate  and  topography  in  which  the  race
first  came  up  and  made  good  its  survival.

In  modern  speculations  on  the  origins  of  culture  and
the  early  history  of  mankind  it  has  until  recently  been
usual  to  assume,  uncritically,  that  human  communities
have  from  the  outset  of  the  race  been  entangled  in  an
inextricable  web  of  mutual  hostilities  and  beset  with  an
all-pervading  sentiment  of  fear;  that  the  *' state  of  na-
ture" was  a  state  of  blood  and  wounds,  expressing  itself
in  universal  malevolence  and  suspicion.  Latterly,  stu-
dents of  primitive  culture,  and  more  especially  those
engaged  at  first  hand  in  field  work,  who  come  in  contact
with  peoples  of  the  lower  culture,  have  been  coming  to
realise  that  the  facts  do  not  greatly  support  such  a  pre-
sumption, and  that  a  community  which  has  to  make  its
own  living  by  the  help  of  a  rudimentary  technological
equipment  can  not  afford  to  be  habitually  occupied  with
annoying  its  neighbours,  particularly  so  long  as  its  neigh-
bours have  not  accumulated  a  store  of  portable  wealth
which  will  make  raiding  worth  while.  No  doubt,  many
savage  and  barbarian  peoples  live  in  a  state  of  conven-

by  itself,  rather  than  traits  characteristic  of  the  hybrid  offspring  of  the
blond  stock  crossed  on  one  or  other  of  the  racial  stocks  associated  with
it  in  the  populations  of  Europe. The  evidence  at  large  seems  rather  to  >^^
bear  out  the  view  that  any  hybrid  population  is  likely  to  be  endowed |
with  an  exceptional  degree  of  that  restlessness  and  discontent  that  go  to
make  up  what  is  spoken  of  as  a  "spirit  of  enterprise"  in  the  race.


124  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tional  feud  or  habitual,  even  if  intermittent,  war  and
predation,  without  substantial  inducement  in  the  way  of
booty.  But  such  communities  commonly  are  either  so
placed  that  an  easy  livelihood  affords  them  a  material
basis  for  following  after  these  higher  things  out  of  mere
fancy;  ^  or  they  are  peoples  living  precariously  hand-to-
mouth  and  fighting  for  their  lives,  in  great  part  from  a
fancied  impossibihty  of  coming  to  terms  with  their  alien
and  unnaturally  cruel  neighbours.^  Communities  of  the
latter  class  are  often  living  in  a  state  of  squalor  and  dis-
comfort, with  a  population  far  short  of  what  their  en-
vironment would  best  support  even  with  their  inefficient
industrial  organisation  and  equipment,  and  their  tech-
nology is  usually  ill-suited  to  a  settled  Hfe  and  unpromis-
ing for  any  possible  advance  to  a  higher  culture.  There
is  no  urgent  reason  for  assuming  that  the  races  which
have  made  their  way  to  a  greater  technological  efficiency,
with  settled  life  and  a  large  population,  must  have  come
up  from  this  particular  phase  of  civilisation  as  their
starting  point,  or  that  such  a  culture  should  have  been
favourable  to  the  survival  and  increase  of  the  leading
racial  stocks  of  Europe,  since  it  does  not  appear  to  be
especially  favourable  to  the  success  of  the  communities
known  to  be  now  Hving  after  that  fashion.^

The  preconception  that  early  culture  must  have  been
warlike  has  not  yet  disappeared  even  among  students
of  these  phenomena,  though  it  is  losing  their  respect;  but
a  derivative  of  it  still  has  much  currency,  to  the  effect

^  As,  e.  g.,  the  inhabitants  of  many  Polynesian  islands  at  the  time  of
their  discovery. See,  also,  Codrington,  The  Melanesians.

2  Not  an  unusual  state  of  things  among  the  Melanesians  and  Microne-
sians,  and  in  a  degree  among  the  Australians.

3  See  note,  p.  120.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  125

that  all  savage  peoples,  as  also  the  peoples  of  the  lower
barbarism,  live  in  a  state  of  universal  and  unremitting
fear,  particularly  fear  of  the  unknown.  This  chronic
fear  is  presumed  to  show  itself  chiefly  in  religion  and  other
superstitious  practices,  where  it  is  held  to  explain  many
things  that  are  otherwise  obscure.  There  is  not  a  little
evidence  from  extant  savage  communities  looking  in
this  direction,  and  more  from  the  lower  barbarian  cul-
tures that  are  characteristically  warhke.^  Wherever
this  animus  is  found  its  effect  is  to  waste  effort  and  divert
it  to  religious  and  magical  practices  and  so  to  hinder  the
free  unfolding  of  workmanship  by  enjoining  a  cumber-
some routine  of  ritual  and  by  warning  the  technologist
off  forbidden  ground.  But  it  is  doubtless  a  hasty  general-
isation to  carry  all  this  over  uncritically  and  make  it
apply  to  all  peoples  of  the  lower  culture,  past  and  present.
It  is  known  not  to  be  true  of  many  existing  communities,^
and  the  evidence  of  it  in  some  ancient  cultures  is  very
dubious.  Such  a  characterisation  of  the  neolithic  culture
of  Europe,  whether  north-European  or  ^Egean,  finds
no  appreciable  support  in  the  archaeological  evidence.
These  two  regions  are  the  most  significant  for  the  neo-
lithic period  in  Europe,  and  the  material  from  both  is
relatively  very  poor  in  weapons,  as  contrasted  with
tools,  on  the  one  hand,  and  there  is  at  the  same  time  little
or  nothing  to  indicate  the  prevalence  of  superstitious
practices  based  on  fear.  Indeed,  the  material  is  surpris-
ingly poor  in  elements  of  any  kind  that  can  safely  be
set  down  to  the  account  of  religion  or  magic,  whether  as
inspired  by  fear  or  by  more  genial  sentiments. It  is  one

^  E.  g.,  some  Australian  natives  and  some  of  the  lower  Malay  cultures.
*E.  g.,  the  Pueblo  and  the  Eskimo.


126  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  the  puzzles  that  beset  any  student  who  insists  on
finding  everywhere  a  certain  normal  course  of  cultural
sequence,  which  should  in  the  early  times  include,  among
other  things,  a  fearsome  religion,  a  wide  fabric  of  magical
practices,  and  an  irrepressible  craving  for  manslaughter.
And  when,  presently,  something  of  a  symboHsm  and
apparatus  of  superstition  comes  into  view,  in  the  late
neoKthic  and  bronze  ages,  the  common  run  of  it  is  by  no
means  suggestive  of  superstitious  fear  and  religious
atrocities.  The  most  common  and  characteristic  objects
of  this  class  are  certain  figurines  and  certain  symboHcal
y  elements  suggestive  of  fecundity,  such  as  might  be  looked
^ for  in  a  peaceable,  sedentary,  agricultural  culture  on  a

\  small  scale. ^ A  culture  virtually  without  weapons,  whose

gods  are  mothers  and  whose  reHgious  observances  are  a
ritual  of  fecundity,  can  scarcely  be  a  culture  of  dread
and  of  derring-do.  With  the  fighting  barbarians,  on  the
other  hand,  male  deities  commonly  take  the  first  rank,
and  their  ritual  symboKses  the  mastery  of  the  god  and  the

^  servitude  of  the  worshipper.

It  is  true,  of  course,  that  both  of  weapons  and  of  cult
objects  far  the  greater  number  that  were  once  in  use
will  have  disappeared,  since  most  of  the  implements  and
utensils  of  stone-age  cultures  are,  notoriously,  made  of
wood  or  similar  perishable  materials.^ So  that  the  finds

^  Indeed,  such  as  very  suggestively  to  recall  the  ritual  objects  and  ob-
servances of  the  Pueblo  Indians.

^  For  an  extreme  case  of  this  among  living  communities,  see  Skeat  and
Blagden,  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  vol.  i,  pp.  242-250,  where
the  generalisation  is  set  down  (p.  248)  that  "the  rudimentary  stage  of
culture  through  which  these  tribes  have  passed,  and  in  some  cases  are  still
passing,  may  perhaps  be  more  accurately  described  as  a  wood  and  bone
age  than  as  an  age  of  stone,"  in  as  much  as  the  evidence  goes  to  show  that


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  127

give  no  complete  series  of  the  appliances  in  use  in  their
time;  whole  series  of  objects  that  were  of  first-rate  im-
portance in  that  culture  having  probably  disappeared
without  leaving  a  trace.  But  what  is  true  in  this  respect
of  weapons  and  cult  objects  should  be  equally  true  of
tools,  or  nearly  so.  So  that  the  inference  to  be  drawn
from  the  available  material  would  be  that  the  early
neolithic  culture  of  north  Europe,  the  ^gean,  and  other
explored  localities  presimied  to  belong  in  the  same  racial
and  cultural  complex,  must  have  been  of  a  prevailingly
peaceable  complexion.  With  the  advance  in  technology
and  in  the  elaboration  and  abundance  of  objects  that
comes  into  sight  progressively  through  the  later  neolithic
period,  down  to  its  close,  this  disproportion  between
tools  and  weapons  (and  cult  objects)  grows  more  impres-
sive and  more  surprising.  Hitherto  this  disproportion
has  been  more  in  evidence  in  the  Scandinavian  finds
than  in  the  other  related  fields  of  stone-age  culture,
unless  an  exception  should  be  made  in  favour  of  the  late
neolithic  sites  explored  at  Anau.^  But  this  archaeological
outcome,  setting  off  the  Baltic  stone  age  as  pecuKarly
scant  of  weapons  and  peculiarly  rich  in  tools,  may  be
provisional  only,  and  may  be  due  to  the  more  exhaustive
exploration  of  the  Scandinavian  countries  and  the  un-
commonly abundant  material  from  that  region.  In  the
later  (mainly  Scandinavian)  neolithic  material,  where

before  they  began  to  get  metals  from  the  Malays  their  only  implements  of
a  more  durable  material  were  "the  anvil  and  hammer  (unwrought)  .  .  .,
the  whetstone,  chips  or  flakes  used  as  knives,  and  cooking  stones."
From  the  different  character  of  their  environment  this  recourse  to  wood
and  bone  could  scarcely  have  been  carried  to  such  an  extreme  by  the
savages  of  the  Baltic  region.

1  Cf .  Pumpelly,  Explorations  in  Turkestan,  . ...  , .


128  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  weapons  are  to  be  counted  by  dozens  the  tools  are
to  be  counted  by  hundreds,  according  to  a  scheme  of
classification  in  which  everything  that  can  be  construed
as  a  weapon  is  so  classed,  and  there  are  many  more
hundreds  of  the  one  class  than  there  are  dozens  of  the
other.  ^  As  near  as  can  be  made  out,  cult  objects  are
similarly  infrequent  among  these  materials  even  after
some  appreciable  work  in  pottery  comes  in  evidence.

What  has  just  been  said  is  after  all  of  a  negative  charac-
ter. It  says  that  nothing  Hke  a  warlike,  predatory,  or
fearsome  origin  can  be  proven  from  the  archaeological
material  for  the  neolithic  culture  of  those  racial  stocks
that  have  counted  for  most  in  the  early  periods  of  Europe.
The  presumption  raised  by  this  evidence,  however,  is
fairly  strong.  And  considerations  of  the  material  cir-
cumstances in  which  this  early  culture  was  placed,  as
well  as  of  the  spiritual  traits  characteristically  required
by  these  circumstances  and  shown  by  the  races  in  ques-
/  tion,  point  to  a  similar  conclusion.  The  proclivity  to
I  unreasoning  fear  that  is  visible  in  the  superstitious  prac-
I  tices  of  so  many  savage  communities  and  counts  for  so
much  in  the  routine  of  their  daily  life,^  is  to  all  appear-
ance not  so  considerable  an  element  in  the  make-up  of
the  chief  European  stocks.  Perhaps  it  enters  in  a  less
degree  in  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  European  blond

*A  casual  visit  to  the  Scandinavian  museums  will  scarcely  convey
this  impression.  To  meet  the  prepossessions  of  the  public,  and  perhaps
of  the  experts,  the  weapons  are  made  much  of  in  the  showcases,  as  is
to  be  expected;  but  they  are  relatively  scarce  in  the  store-rooms,  where
the  tools  on  the  other  hand  are  rather  to  be  estimated  by  the  cubic  yard
than  counted  by  the  piece.

2  Seen,  e.  g.,  in  the  observance  and  sanction  of  tabu  in  many  of  the
lower  cultures.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  129

than  in  that  of  any  other  race;  that  race — or  its  hybrid
offspring — has  at  any  rate  proved  less  amenable  to  reli-
gious control  than  any  other,  and  has  also  shown  less
hesitation  in  the  face  of  unknown  contingencies.  And
the  circumstances  of  the  presumed  initial  phase  of  the
life-history  of  this  race  would  appear  not  to  have  favoured
a  spiritual  (instinctive)  type  largely  biassed  by  an  alert
and  powerful  sentiment  of  unreasoning  fear.  So  also
an  aggressive  humanitarian  sentiment  is  as  well  at  home
in  the  habits  of  thought  of  the  north-European  peoples
as  in  any  other,  such  as  sorts  ill  with  a  native  predatory
animus.  If  it  be  assumed,  as  seems  probable,  that  the
situation  which  selectively  tested  the  fitness  of  this
stock  to  survive  was  that  of  the  early  post-glacial  time,
when  its  habitat  in  Europe  was  slowly  being  cleared  of
the  ice-sheet,  it  would  appear  antecedently  probable
that  the  new  (mutant)  type, which  made  good  its  survival
in  following  up  the  retreating  fringe  of  the  ice-sheet  and
populating  the  land  so  made  available,  will  not  have  been
a  people  peculiarly  given  to  fear  or  to  predation.  A
great  facility  of  this  kind,  with  its  concomitants  of  cau-
tion, conservatism,  suspicion  and  cruelty,  would  not
be  serviceable  for  a  race  so  placed.^

Even  if  it  were  a  possible  undertaking  it  would  not  be
much  to  the  present  purpose  to  trace  out  in  detail  the

^  The  Eskimo  are  placed  in  circumstances  that  are  in  some  respects
similar  to  those  presumed  to  have  conditioned  the  life  of  the  blond  race
and  its  hybrids  during  the  early  phases  of  its  life-history,  and  among
the  traits  that  have  made  for  the  survival  of  the  Eskimo  is  undoubtedly
to  be  counted  the  somewhat  genial  good-fellowship  of  that  race,  coupled
as  it  is  with  a  notable  disinclination  to  hostilities.  So  also  the  Indians  of
the  North-West  Coast,  whose  situation  perhaps  parallels  that  of  the


130  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship  _

many  slow  and  fumbling  moves  by  which  any  given  race
or  people,  in  Europe  or  elsewhere,  have  worked  out  the
technological  particulars  that  have  led  from  the  begin-
nings down  through  the  primitive  and  later  growth  of
culture.  Such  a  work  belongs  to  the  ethnologists  and
archaeologists;  and  it  is  summed  up  in  the  proposition
that  men  have  applied  common  sense,  more  or  less
hesitatingly  and  with  more  or  less  refractory  limitations,
to  the  facts  with  which  they  have  had  to  deal;  that  they
have  accumulated  a  knowledge  of  technological  expedi-
ents and  processes  from  generation  to  generation,  always
going  on  what  had  already  been  achieved  in  ways  and
means,  and  gradually  discarding  or  losing  such  elements
of  the  growing  technological  scheme  as  seemed  no  longer
to  be  worth  while,  ^  and  carrying  along  a  good  many

neolithic  Baltic  culture  more  closely  even  than  the  Eskimo,  are  not  among
the  notably  warlike  peoples  of  the  earth,  although  they  undoubtedly
show  more  of  a  predatory  animus  than  their  northern  neighbours.  In  this
case  it  is  probably  safe  to  say  that  their  technological  achievements  have
in  no  degree  been  furthered  by  such  warlike  enterprise  as  they  have
shown,  and  that  their  comfort  and  success  as  a  race  would  have  been
even  more  marked  if  they  had  been  gifted  with  less  of  the  warlike  spirit
and  had  kept  the  peace  more  consistently  throughout  their  habitat
than  they  have  done. — Cf.  Franz  Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo,"  Bureau
of  American  Ethnology,  Report,  1884-1885;  The  same,  "The  Secret  So-
cieties and  Social  Organisation  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians,"  Report,  Na-
tional Museum,  1895;  A.  P.  Niblack,  "Coast  Indians  of  Southern  Alaska
and  Northern  British  Columbia,"  ibid,  1888,

^  Such  loss  by  neglect  of  technological  elements  that  have  been  super-
seded may  have  serious  consequences  in  case  a  people  of  somewhat  ad-
vanced attainments  suffers  a  material  set-back  either  in  its  industrial
circumstances  or  in  its  cultural  situation  more  at  large, — as  happened,
e.  g.,  in  the  Dark  Ages  of  Europe.  In  such  case  it  is  likely  to  result  that
the  community  will  be  unable  to  fall  back  on  a  state  of  the  industrial
arts  suited  to  the  reduced  circumstances  into  which  it  finds  itself  thrown,
having  lost  the  use  of  many  of  the  technological  elements  familiar  to


The  Salvage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  131

elements  that  were  of  no  material  effect  but  were  im-
posed by  the  logic  of  the  scheme  or  of  its  underlying
principles  (habits  of  thought).

Of  the  early  technological  development  in  Europe,  so
far  as  it  is  genetically  connected  with  the  later  Western
civiHsation,  the  culture  of  the  Baltic  region  affords  as
good  and  illustrative  an  object  lesson  as  may  be  had;  its
course  is  relatively  well  known,  simple  and  unbroken.
PalaeoHthic  times  do  not  count  in  this  development,  as
the  neoHthic  culture  begins  with  a  new  break  in  Europe.

It  is  known,  then,  that  by  early  neohthic  times  on  the
narrow  Scandinavian  waters  men  had  learned  to  make
and  use  certain  rude  stone  and  bone  implements  found
in  the  kitchen-middens  (refuse  heaps,  shell-mounds  of
Denmark),  that  they  had  ways  and  appliances  (the
nature  of  which  is  not  known)  for  collecting  certain  shell-
fish and  for  catching  such  game  and  fish  as  their  habitat
afforded,  and  that  they  presently,  if  not  from  the  outset,
had  acquired  the  use  of  certain  crop  plants  and  had
learned  to  make  pottery  of  a  crude  kind.  From  this  as
a  point  of  departure  in  the  period  of  the  kitchen-middens
the  stone  implements  were  presently  improved  and  mul-
tiplied, the  methods  of  working  the  material  (flint)  and
of  using  the  products  of  the  flint  industry  were  gradually
improved  and  extended,  until  in  the  long  course  of  time

earlier  generations  that  lived  under  similar  circumstances,  and  so  the
industrial  community  finds  itself  in  many  respects  driven  to  make  a
virtually  new  beginning,  from  a  more  rudimentary  starting  point  than  the
situation  might  otherwise  call  for.  This  in  turn  acts  to  throw  the  people
back  to  a  more  archaic  phase  of  technology  and  of  institutions  than  the
initial  cultural  loss  sustained  by  the  community  would  of  itself  appear
to  warrant.


H


132  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  utmost  that  has  anywhere  been  achieved  in  that
class  of  industry  was  reached.  Domestic  animals  began
to  be  added  to  the  equipment  relatively  early,^  though
at  a  long  interval  from  the  neolithic  beginnings  as  counted
in  absolute  time.  Improvement  and  extension  in  all
lines  of  stone-working  and  wood-working  industry  went
forward:  except  that  stone-dressing  and  masonry  are
typically  absent,  owing,  no  doubt,  to  the  extensive  use
of  woodwork  instead.^  Along  with  this  advance  in  the
mechanic  arts  goes  a  growing  density  of  population  and
a  wide  extension  of  tillage;  until,  at  the  coming  of  bronze,
the  evidence  shows  that  these  communities  were  popu-
lous, prosperous,  and  highly  skilled  in  those  industrial
arts  that  lay  within  their  technological  range.

Apart  from  the  pottery,  which  may  have  some  merit
as  an  art  product,  there  is  very  Httle  left  to  show  what
may  have  been  their  proficiency  in  the  decorative  arts,
or  what  was  their  social  organisation  or  their  religious
life.  The  evidences  of  warlike  enterprise  and  religious
practices  are  surprisingly  scanty,  being  chiefly  the  doubt-
ful evidence  of  many  and  somewhat  elaborate  tombs.
From  the  tombs  (mounds  and  barrows)  and  their  dis-
tribution something  may  be  inferred  as  to  the  social
organisation;  and  the  evidence  on  this  head  seems  to
indicate  a  widespread  agricultural  population,  living
(probably)  in  small  communities,  without  much  cen-
tralised or  authoritative  control,  but  with  some  appre-

1  Sophus  Miiller,  Vor  Oldtid,  "  Stenalderen,"  sec.  iii,  "Tidsforhold  i  den
seldre  Stenalder;"  O.  Montelius,  Les  temps  prehistoriques  en  Suede,  ch.  i,
p.  20.

2  Compare  the  case  of  the  Indians  of  the  North- West  Coast,  who  have
occupied  a  region  comparable  to  the  neolithic  Baltic  area  in  the  distribu-
tion of  land  and  water  as  well  as  in  the  abundance  of  good  timber.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  133

dable  class  differences  in  the  distribution  of  wealth  in
the  later  phases  of  the  period.

With  interruptions,  more  or  less  serious,  from  time
to  time,  and  with  increasing  evidence  of  a  penchant  for
warHke  or  predatory  enterprise  on  the  one  hand  and  of
class  distinctions  on  the  other  hand,  much  the  same  story
runs  on  through  the  ages  of  bronze  and  early  iron.  Evi-
dences of  borrowing  from  outside,  mainly  the  borrowing
of  decorative  technique  and  technological  elements,  are
scattered  through  the  course  of  this  development  from
very  early  times,  showing  that  there  was  always  some
intercourse,  perhaps  constant  intercourse,  with  other
peoples  more  or  less  distant.  So  that  in  time,  by  the
beginning  of  the  bronze  age,  there  is  evidence  of  settled
trade  relations  with  peoples  as  remote  as  the  Mediter-
ranean seaboard.

In  many  of  its  details  this  prehistoric  culture  shows
something  of  the  same  facility  in  the  use  of  mechanical
expedients  as  has  come  so  notably  forward  again  in  the
late  development  of  the  industrial  arts  of  western  Europe.
It  is  in  its  mechanical  efficiency  that  the  technology  of
the  latterday  Western  culture  stands  out  preeminent,
and  it  is  similarly  its  easy  command  of  the  mechanical
factors  with  which  it  deals  that  chiefly  distinguishes  the
prehistoric  technology  of  North  Europe.  In  other  re-
spects the  prehistoric  material  from  this  region  does  not
argue  a  high  level  of  civilisation.  There  are  no  ornate
or  stupendous  structures;  what  there  is  of  the  kind  is
mounds  and  barrows  of  moderately  great  size  and  using
only  undressed  stone  where  any  is  used,  but  making  a
mechanically  effective  use  of  this.  There  is,  indeed,
nothing  from  the  stone  age  in  the  way  of  edifices,  fabrics


134  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

or  decorative  work  that  is  to  be  classed,  in  point  of  ex-
cellence in  design  or  execution,  with  the  polished-flint
woodworking  axe  or  chisel  of  that  time.  From  the
bronze  age  at  its  best  there  is  much  excellent  bronze
work  of  great  merit  both  in  workmanship  and  in  decora-
tive effect;  but  the  artistic  merit  of  this  work  (from  the
middle  and  early  half  of  the  bronze  age)  lies  almost
wholly  in  its  workmanHke  execution  and  in  the  freedom
and  adequacy  with  which  very  simple  mechanical  ele-
ments of  decoration  are  employed.  It  is  an  art  which
appeals  to  the  sense  of  beauty  chiefly  through  the  sense
of  workmanship,  shown  both  in  the  choice  of  materials
and  decorative  elements  and  in  the  use  made  of  them.
When  this  art  aspires  to  more  ambitious  decorative
effects  or  to  representation  of  life  forms,  or  indeed  to
any  representation  that  has  not  been  conventionalised
almost  past  recognition,  as  it  does  in  the  later  periods  of
of  the  bronze  age,  the  result  is  that  it  can  be  commended
for  its  workmanship  alone,  and  so  far  as  regards  artistic
effect  it  is  mainly  misspent  workmanship.^

The  same  workmanlike  insight  and  facihty  comes  in
evidence  in  the  matter  of  borrowing,  already  spoken  of.
Borrowing  goes  on  throughout  this  prehistoric  culture,
and  the  borrowed  elements  are  assimilated  with  such
despatch  and  effect  as  to  make  them  seem  home-bred
.  almost  from  the  start.  It  is  a  borrowing  of  technological
V  elements,  which  are  rarely  employed  except  in  full  and
competent  adaptation  to  the  uses  to  which  they  are
turned;  so  much  so  that  the  archaeologists  find  it  excep-
tionally difficult  to  trace  the  borrowed  elements  to  specific

^  Sophus  Miiller,  Vor  Oldtid,  "Bronzealderen,"  sees,  xiii,  xiv;  Monte-
Uus,  Les  temps  prehistoriques  en  SuidCj  ch.  ii.


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  135

sources,  in  spite  of  the  great  volume  and  frequency  of
this  borrowing.

There  is  a  further  and  obscurer  aspect  to  this  facile
borrowing.  In  the  cultures  where  the  technological  and
decorative  elements  are  first  invented,  or  acquired  at
first-hand  by  slow  habituation,  there  will  in  the  nature
of  the  case  come  in  with  them  into  the  scheme  of  tech-
nology or  of  art  more  or  less,  but  presumably  a  good
deal,  of  extraneous  or  extrinsic  by-products  of  their
acquirement,  in  the  way  of  magical  or  symbolic  efficacy
imputed  and  adhering  to  them  in  the  habits  of  thought
of  their  makers  and  users.  Something  of  this  kind  has
already  been  set  out  in  some  detail  as  regards  the  domes-
tication and  early  use  of  the  crop  plants  and  animals;
and  the  like  is  currently  held  to  be  true,  perhaps  in  a
higher  degree,  for  the  beginnings  of  art,  both  representa-
tive and  decorative,  by  the  latterday  students  of  that
subject;  the  beginnings  of  art  being  held  to  have  been
magical  and  symboKc  in  the  main,  so  far  as  regards  the
prime  motives  to  its  inception  and  its  initial  principles.*

In  the  origination  and  indigenous  working-out  of  any
given  technological  factor,  e.  g.,  such  as  the  use  of  the
crop  plants  or  the  domestic  animals,  elements  of  imputed
anthropomorphism  are  likely  to  be  comprised  in  the
habitual  apprehension  of  the  nature  of  these  factors,
and  so  find  lodgment  in  the  technological  routine  that
has  to  do  with  them;  the  result  being,  chiefly,  a  limitation
on  their  uses  and  on  the  ways  and  means  by  which  they
are  utiHsed,  together  with  a  margin  of  lost  motion  in  the
way  of  magical  and  religious  observances  presumed  to

^Cf.,  e.  g.,  C.  A.  Haddon,  Evolution  in  Art,  section  on  "Magic  and
Religion."


136  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

be  intrinsic  to  the  due  working  of  such  factors.  The
ritual  connected  with  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  shows
this  magical  side  of  a  home-bred  technology  perhaps
as  felicitously  as  anything;  but  similar  phenomena  are
by  no  means  infrequent  in  the  mechanic  arts,  and  in
the  fine  arts  these  principles  of  symbolism  and  the  hke
are  commonly  present  in  such  force  as  to  afford  ground
for  distinguishing  one  school  or  epoch  of  art  from  another.

Now,  when  any  given  technological  or  decorative
element  crosses  the  frontier  between  one  culture  and
another,  in  the  course  of  borrowing,  it  is  likely  to  hap-
pen that  it  will  come  into  the  new  culture  stripped  of
most  or  all  of  its  anthropomorphic  or  spiritual  virtues
and  limitations,  more  particularly,  of  course,  if  the  cul-
tural frontier  in  question  is  at  the  same  time  a  linguistic
frontier;  since  the  borrowing  is  likely  to  be  made  from
motives  of  workmanlike  expediency,  and  the  putative
spiritual  attributes  of  the  facts  involved  are  not  obvious
to  men  who  have  not  been  trained  to  impute  them.  The
chief  exception  to  such  a  rule  would  be  any  borrowing
that  takes  effect  on  rehgious  grounds,  in  which  case,  of
course,  the  magical  or  symbolic  efficacy  of  the  borrowed
elements  are  the  substance  that  is  sought  in  the  borrow-
ing. Herein,  presumably,  Hes  much  of  the  distinctive
character  of  the  north-European  prehistoric  culture,
which  was  in  an  eminent  degree  built  up  out  of  borrowed
elements,  so  far  as  concerns  both  its  technology  and  its
art.  And  to  this  free  and  voluminous  borrowing  may
Hkewise  be  due  the  apparent  poverty  of  this  early  cul-
ture in  religious  or  magical  elements.

A  further  effect  follows.  The  borrowing  being  (rela-
tively) unencumbered  with  ritual  restrictions  and  mag-


The  Savage  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts  137

ical  exactions  attached  to  their  employment,  they  would
fall  into  the  scheme  of  things  as  mere  matter-of-fact,  to
be  handled  with  the  same  freedom  and  unhindered  sa-
gacity with  which  a  workman  makes  use  of  his  own
hands,  and  could,  without  reservation,  be  turned  to  any
use  for  which  they  were  mechanically  suited.  Some-
thing of  symboHsm  and  superstition  might,  of  course,
be  carried  over  in  the  borrowing,  and  something  more
would  unavoidably  be  bred  into  the  borrowed  elements
in  the  course  of  their  use;  but  the  free  start  would  always
count  for  something  in  the  outcome,  both  as  regards  the
rate  of  progress  made  in  the  exploitation  of  the  expedients
acquired  by  borrowing  and  in  the  character  of  the  tech-
nological system  at  large  into  which  they  had  been  in-
troduced. Both  the  relative  freedom  from  magical  re-
straint and  the  growth  of  home-made  anthropomorphic
imputations  may  easily  be  detected  in  the  course  of
this  northern  culture  and  in  its  outcome  in  modern  times.
Cattle,  for  instance,  are  a  borrowed  technological  fact
in  the  Baltic  and  North-Sea  region,  but  superstitious
practices  seem  never  to  have  attached  to  cattle-breeding
in  that  region  in  such  volume  and  rigorous  exaction  as
may  be  found  nearer  the  original  home  of  the  domesti-
cated species;  and  yet  the  volume  of  folk-lore,  mostly  of
a  genial  and  relatively  unobstructive  character,  that  has
in  later  times  grown  up  about  the  care  of  cattle  in  the
Scandinavian  countries  is  by  no  means  inconsiderable.


CHAPTER  IV

The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture

The  scheme  of  technological  insight  and  proficiency
current  in  any  given  culture  is  manifestly  a  product  of
group  life  and  is  held  as  a  common  stock,  and  as  mani-
festly the  individual  workman  is  helpless  without  access
to  it.  It  is  none  too  broad  to  say  that  he  is  a  workman
only  because  and  so  far  as  he  effectually  shares  in  this
common  stock  of  technological  equipment.  He  may
be  gifted  in  a  special  degree  with  workmanHke  aptitudes,
may  by  nature  be  stout  or  dextrous  or  keen-sighted  or
quick-witted  or  sagacious  or  industrious  beyond  his
fellows;  but  with  all  these  gifts,  so  long  as  he  has
assimilated  none  of  this  common  stock  of  workmanlike
knowledge  he  remains  simply  an  admirable  parcel  of
human  raw  material;  he  is  of  no  effect  in  industry.  With
such  special  gifts  or  with  special  training  based  on  this
common  stock  an  individual  may  stand  out  among  his
fellows  as  a  workman  of  exceptional  merit  and  value,
and  without  the  common  run  of  workmanHke  aptitudes
he  may  come  to  nothing  worth  while  as  a  workman  even
with  the  largest  opportunities  and  most  sedulous  training.
It  is  the  two  together  that  make  the  working  force  of
the  community;  and  in  both  respects,  both  in  his  in-
herited and  in  his  acquired  traits,  the  individual  is  a
product  of  group  life.

Using  the  term  in  a  sufficiently  free  sense,  pedigree  is

138


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 139

no  less  and  no  more  requisite  to  the  workman's  effectual
equipment  than  the  common  stock  of  technological  mas-
tery which  the  community  offers  him.  But  his  pedigree
is  a  group  pedigree,  just  as  his  technology  is  a  group
technology.  As  is  sometimes  said  to  the  same  effect,
the  individual  is  a  creature  of  heredity  and  circumstances.
And  heredity  is  always  group  heredity,^  perhaps  pecu-
liarly so  in  the  human  species.

The  promptings  of  invidious  self-respect  commonly
lead  men  to  evade  or  deny  something  of  the  breadth  of
their  inheritance  in  respect  of  human  nature.  ''I  am
not  as  the  publican  yonder,"  whether  I  have  the  grace
to  thank  God  for  this  invidious  distinction  or  more
simply  charge  it  to  the  account  of  my  reputable  ancestors
in  the  male  line.  With  a  change  of  venue  by  which  the
cause  is  taken  out  of  the  jurisdiction  of  interested  parties,
its  complexion  changes.  So  evident  is  the  fact  of  group
heredity  in  the  lower  animals,  for  instance,  that  biologists
have  no  inclination  to  deny  its  pervading  force,  apart
from  any  conceivably  parthenogenetic  lines  of  descent, —
and,  to  the  inconvenience  of  the  eugenic  pharisee,  parthe-
nogenetic descent  never  runs  in  the  male  Kne,  besides
being  of  extremely  rare  occurrence  in  the  human  species.
As  a  matter  of  course  the  Darwinian  biologists  have
the  habit  of  appeaHng  to  group  heredity  as  the  main
factor  in  the  stabihty  of  species,  and  they  are  very
curious  about  the  special  circumstances  of  any  given
case  in  which  it  may  appear  not  to  be  fully  operative:
and  they  have,  on  the  other  hand,  even  looked  hopefully
to  fortuitous  isolation  of  particular  lines  of  descent  as
a  possible  factor  in  the  differentiation  and  fixation  of
^  Except  for  species  that  habitually  breed  by  parthenogenesis.


I40  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

specific  types,  being  at  a  loss  to  account  for  such  differ-
entiation or  fixation  so  long  as  no  insuperable  mechanical
obstacle  stands  in  the  way  of  persistent  crossing.  The
like  force  of  group  heredity  is  visible  in  the  characteristic
differences  of  race.  The  heredity  of  any  given  race  of
mankind  is  always  sufficiently  homogeneous  to  allow
all  its  individuals  to  be  classed  under  the  race.  And
when  an  individual  comes  to  light  in  a  fairly  pure-bred
community  who  shows  physical  traits  that  vary  ob-
viously from  the  common  racial  type  of  the  community,
the  question  which  suggests  itself  to  the  anthropologists
is  not,  How  does  this  individual  differ  from  others  of  the
same  breed?  but,  What  is  the  alien  strain,  and  how  has
it  come  in?  And  what  is  true  of  the  physical  characters
of  the  race  in  this  respect  is  only  less  obviously  true  of
its  spiritual  traits.

In  a  culture  where  all  individuals  are  hybrids,  in  point
of  pedigree,  as  is  the  case  with  all  the  leading  peoples  of
Christendom,  the  ways  of  this  group  heredity  are  par-
ticularly devious,  and  the  fortunes  of  the  individual  in
this  respect  are  in  a  peculiar  degree  exposed  to  the  caprice
of  Mendehan  contingencies;  so  that  his  make-up,  physical
and  spiritual,  is,  humanly  speaking,  in  the  main  a  chapter
of  accidents.  Where  each  individual  draws  for  his
hereditary  traits  on  a  wide  ancestry  of  unstable  hybrids,
as  all  civilised  men  do,  his  chances  are  always  those  of
the  common  lot,  with  some  slight  antecedent  probability
of  his  resembhng  the  nearer  ones  among  his  variegated
ancestry.  But  he  has  also  and  everywhere  in  this  hybrid
panmixis  an  excellent  chance  of  being  allotted  something
more  accentuated,  for  good  or  ill,  in  the  way  of  hereditary
traits  than  anything  shown  by  his  varied  assortment  of


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture  141

ancestors.  It  commonly  happens  in  such  a  hybrid  com-
munity that  in  the  new  crossing  of  hybrids  that  takes
place  at  every  marriage,  some  new  idiosyncracy,  slight
or  considerable,  comes  to  light  in  the  offspring,  beyond
anything  visible  in  the  parents  or  the  remoter  pedigree ;
for  in  the  crossing  of  what  may  be  called  multiple-hybrid
parents,  complementary  characters  that  may  have  been
dormant  or  recessive  in  the  parents  will  come  in  from
both  sides,  combine,  re-enforce  one  another,  and  cumula-
tively give  an  unlooked-for  result.  So  that  in  a  hybrid
community  the  fortunes  of  all  individuals  are  somewhat
precarious  in  respect  of  heredity.

Such  are  the  conditions  which  have  prevailed  among
the  peoples  of  Europe  since  the  first  beginnings  of  that
culture  that  has  led  up  to  the  Western  civilisation  as
known  to  history.  In  these  circumstances  any  indi-
vidual, therefore,  owes  to  the  group  not  only  his  share
of  that  certain  t}^ical  complement  of  traits  that  charac-
terise the  common  run,  but  usually  something  more
than  is  coming  to  him  in  the  way  of  individual  quahties
and  infirmities  if  he  is  in  any  way  distinguishable  from
the  common  run,  as  well  as  a  blind  chance  of  transmitting
almost  any  traits  that  he  is  not  possessed  of.^

In  the  lower  cultures,  where  the  division  of  labour  is
sKght  and  the  diversity  of  occupations  is  mainly  such
as  marks  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  the  common  stock
of  technological  knowledge  and  proficiency  is  not  so
extensive  or  so  recondite  but  that  the  common  man  may

^  The  caution  is  perhaps  unnecessary  that  it  is  not  hereby  intended  to
suggest  a  doubt  of  Mr.  Galton's  researches  or  to  question  the  proposals  of
the  Eugenicals,  whose  labours  are  no  doubt  to  be  taken  for  all  they  are
worth.


142  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

compass  it  in  some  fashion,  and  in  its  essentials  it  is  ac-
cessible to  all  members  of  the  community  by  common
notoriety,  and  the  training  required  by  the  state  of  the
industrial  arts  comes  to  everyone  as  a  matter  of  course
in  the  routine  of  daily  life.  The  necessary  material
equipment  of  tools  and  appliances  is  shght  and  the
acquisition  of  it  is  a  simple  matter  that  also  arranges
itself  as  an  incident  in  the  routine  of  daily  life.  Given
the  common  run  of  aptitude  for  the  industrial  pursuits
incumbent  on  the  members  of  such  a  community,  the
material  equipment  needful  to  find  a  livehhood  or  to  put
forth  the  ordinary  productive  effort  and  turn  out  the
ordinary  industrial  output  can  be  compassed  without
strain  by  any  individual  in  the  course  of  his  work  as  he
goes  along.  The  material  equipment,  the  tools,  imple-
ments, contrivances  necessary  and  conducive  to  produc-
tive industry,  is  incidental  to  the  day's  work;  in  much  the
same  way  but  in  a  more  unqualified  degree  than  the  like
is  true  as  to  the  technological  knowledge  and  skill  re-
quired to  make  use  of  this  equipment.^
Y  As  determined  by  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  in
such  a  culture,  the  members  of  the  community  co-operate
in  much  of  their  work,  to  the  common  gain  and  to  no
one's  detriment,  since  there  is  substantially  no  individual,
or  private,  gain  to  be  sought.  There  is  substantially
no  bartering  or  hiring,  though  there  is  a  recognised  obK-
gation  in  all  members  to  lend  a  hand;  and  there  is  of
course  no  price,  as  there  is  no  property  and  no  ownership,
for  the  sufficient  reason  that  the  habits  of  Hfe  under  these

^  See,  e.  g.,  Skeat  and  Blagden,  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,
vol.  ii,  part  ii;  Report,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  1884-1885,
F.  Boas,  "The  Central  Eskimo."


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 143

circumstances  do  not  provoke  such  a  habit  of  thought.
Doubtless,  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  articles  of  use
and  adornment  pertain  to  their  makers  or  users  in  an
intimate  and  personal  way;  which  will  come  to  be  con-
strued into  ownership  when  in  the  experience  of  the  com-
munity an  occasion  for  such  a  concept  as  ownership  arises
and  persists  in  sufficient  force  to  shape  the  current  habits
of  thought  to  that  effect.  There  is  also  more  or  less  of
reciprocal  service  and  assistance,  with  a  sufficient  sense
of  mutuality  to  establish  a  customary  scheme  of  claims
and  obligations  in  that  respect.  So  also  it  is  true  that
such  a  community  holds  certain  lands  and  customary
usufructs  and  that  any  trespass  on  these  customary  hold-
ings is  resented.  But  it  would  be  a  vicious  misapprehen-
sion to  read  ideas  and  rights  of  ownership  into  these
practices,  although  where  civihsed  men  have  come  to
deal  with  instances  of  the  kind  they  have  commonly  been
unable  to  put  any  other  construction  on  the  customs
governing  the  case;  for  the  reason  that  civilised  men's
relations  with  these  peoples  of  the  lower  culture  have
been  of  a  pecuniary  kind  and  for  a  pecuniary  purpose,
and  they  have  brought  no  other  than  pecuniary  concep-
tions from  home.^  There  being  little  in  hand  worth  \/
owning  and  little  purpose  to  be  served  by  its  ownership,
the  habits  of  thought  which  go  to  make  the  institution
of  ownership  and  property  rights  have  not  taken  shape.
The  slight  facts  which  would  lend  themselves  to  owner-
ship are  not  of  sufficient  magnitude  or  urgency  to  call
the  institution  into  effect  and  are  better  handled  under
customs  which  do  not  yet  take  cognisance  of  property

*  C£.  Basil  Thomson,  The  Diversions  of  a  Prime  Minister,  and  The
Figians.


v


144  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

rights.  Naturally,  in  such  a  cultural  situation  there  is
no  appreciable  accumulation  of  wealth  and  no  induce-
ment to  it;  the  nearest  approach  being  an  accumulation
of  trinkets  and  personal  belongings,  among  which  should,
at  least  in  some  cases,  be  included  certain  weapons  and
perhaps  tools.  ^  These  things  belong  to  their  owner  or
bearer  in  much  the  same  sense  as  his  name,  which  was
not  held  on  tenure  of  ownership  or  as  a  pecuniary  asset
before  the  use  of  trade-marks  and  merchantable  good-
will.

The  workman — more  typically  perhaps  the  work-
woman— in  such  a  culture,  as  indeed  in  any  other,  is  a
^'productive  agent '^  in  the  manner  and  degree  deter-
mined by  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts.  What  is  ob-
vious in  this  respect  here  holds  only  less  visibly  for  any
other,  more  compHcated  and  technologically  full-charged
cultural  situation,  such  as  has  come  on  with  the  growth
of  population  and  wealth  among  the  more  advanced
peoples.  He  or  she,  or  rather  they — for  there  is  sub-
stantially no  industry  carried  on  in  strict  severalty  in
these  communities — are  productive  factors  or  industrial
agents,  in  the  sense  that  they  will  on  occasion  turn  out  a
surplus  above  their  necessary  current  consumption,  only
because  and  so  far  as  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  en-
ables them  to  do  so.  As  workman,  labourer,  producer,
breadwinner,  the  individual  is  a  creature  of  the  techno-
logical scheme;  which  in  turn  is  a  creation  of  the  group
life  of  the  community. Apart  from  the  common  stock

^  The  extent  of  this  "quasi-personal  fringe"  of  objects  of  intimate  use
varies  considerably  from  one  culture  to  another.  It  may  often  be  in-
ferred from  the  range  of  articles  buried  or  destroyed  with  the  dead  among
peoples  on  this  level  of  culture.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 145

of  knowledge  and  training  the  individual  members  of
the  community  have  no  industrial  effect.  Indeed,  except
by  grace  of  this  common  technological  equipment  no
individual  and  no  family  group  in  any  of  the  known  com-
munities of  mankind  could  support  their  own  Hfe;  for
in  the  long  course  of  mankind's  hfe-history,  since  the
human  plane  was  first  reached,  the  early  mutants  which
were  fit  to  survive  in  a  ferine  state  without  tools  and  with-
out technology  have  selectively  disappeared,  as  being
unfit  to  survive  under  the  conditions  of  domesticity
imposed  by  so  highly  developed  a  state  of  the  industrial
arts  as  any  of  the  savage  cultures  now  extant.^  The
Homo  Javensis  and  his  Hke  are  gone,  because  there  is
technologically  no  place  for  them  between  the  anthro-
poids to  the  one  side  and  the  extant  types  of  man  on  the
other.  And  never  since  the  brave  days  when  Homo
Javensis  took  up  the  ''white  man's  burden"  for  the  better
regulation  of  his  anthropoid  neighbours  has  the  techno-
logical scheme  admitted  of  any  individual's  carrying  on
his  Kfe  in  severalty.  So  that  industrial  efficiency,  whether
of  an  individual  workman  or  of  the  community  at  large,
is  a  function  of  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts.^

*  A  doubt  may  suggest  itself  in  this  connection  touching  such  cultures
and  peoples  as  the  pagan  races  of  the  Malay  peninsula,  the  Mincopies  of
the  Andaman  Islands,  or  (possibly)  the  Negritos  of  Luzon,  but  these  con-
ceivable exceptions  to  the  rule  evidently  do  not  lessen  its  force.

2  It  may  be  pertinent  to  take  note  of  the  bearing  of  these  considerations
on  certain  dogmatic  concepts  that  have  played  a  part  in  the  theoretical
and  controversial  speculations  of  the  last  century.  Much  importance  has
been  given  by  economists  of  one  school  and  another  to  the  "productivity
of  labour,"  particularly  as  affording  a  basis  for  a  just  and  equitable  dis-
tribution of  the  product;  one  school  of  controversialists  having  gone  so
far  against  the  current  of  received  economic  doctrine  as  to  allege  that
labour  is  the  sole  productive  factor  in  industry  and  that  the  Labourer  is  on


146  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

The  simple  and  obvious  industrial  system  of  this
archaic  plan  leaves  the  individuals,  or  rather  the  domestic
groups,  that  make  up  the  community,  economically
independent  of  one  another  and  of  the  community  at
large,  except  that  they  depend  on  the  common  techno-
logical stock  for  the  immaterial  equipment  by  means  of
which  to  get  their  living.  This  is  of  course  not  felt  by
them  as  a  relation  of  dependence;  though  there  seems
commonly  to  be  some  sense  of  indebtedness  on  part  of
the  young,  and  of  responsibihty  on  part  of  the  older
generation,  for  the  proper  transmission  of  the  recognised
elements  of  technological  proficiency.  It  is  impossible
to  say  just  at  what  point  in  the  growth  and  complication
of  technology  this  simple  industrial  scheme  will  begin  to
give  way  to  new  exigencies  and  give  occasion  to  a  new
scheme  of  institutions  governing  the  economic  relations
of  men;  such  that  the  men's  powers  and  functions  in  the
industrial  community  come  to  be  decided  on  other
grounds  than  workmanlike  aptitude  and  special  training.
In  the  nature  of  things  there  can  be  no  hard  and  fast
limit  to  this  phase  of  industrial  organisation. Its  dis-

this  ground  entitled,  in  equity,  to  "  the  full  product  of  his  labor."  It  is  of
course  not  conceived  that  the  considerations  here  set  forth  will  dispose
of  these  doctrinal  contentions;  but  they  make  it  at  least  appear  that  the
productivity  of  labor,  or  of  any  other  conceivable  factor  in  industry,  is
an  imputed  productivity — imputed  on  grounds  of  convention  afforded
by  institutions  that  have  grown  up  in  the  course  of  technological  develop-
ment and  that  have  consequently  only  such  validity  as  attaches  to  habits
of  thought  induced  by  any  given  phase  of  collective  life.  These  habits  of
thought  (institutions  and  principles)  are  themselves  the  indirect  product
of  the  technological  scheme.  The  controversy  as  to  the  productivity  of
labor  should  accordingly  shift  its  ground  from  "the  nature  of  things"  to
the  exigencies  of  ingrained  preconceptions,  principles  and  expediencies  as
seen  in  the  light  of  current  technological  requirements  and  the  current
drift  of  habituation.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 147

appearance  or  supersession  in  any  culture  appears  always
to  have  been  brought  on  by  the  growth  of  property,  but
the  institution  of  property  need  by  no  means  come  in
abruptly  at  any  determinate  juncture  in  the  sequence  of
technological  development.  So  that  this  archaic  phase  \/^
of  culture  in  which  industry  is  organised  on  the  ground
of  workmanship  alone  may  come  very  extensively  to
overlap  and  blend  with  the  succeeding  phase  in  which
property  relations  chiefly  decide  the  details  of  the  indus-
trial organisation, — as  is  shown  in  varying  detail  by  the
known  lower  cultures.

The  forces  which  may  bring  about  such  a  transition
are  often  complex  and  recondite,  and  they  are  seldom
just  the  same  in  any  given  two  instances.  Neither  the
material  situation  nor  the  human  raw  material  involved
are  precisely  the  same  in  all  or  several  instances,  and
there  is  no  coercively  normal  course  of  things  that  will
constrain  the  growth  of  institutions  to  take  a  particular
t3^ical  form  or  to  follow  a  particular  typical  sequence  in
all  cases.  Yet,  in  a  general  way  such  a  supersession  of
free  workmanship  by  a  pecuniary  control  of  industry
appears  to  have  been  necessarily  involved  in  any  con-
siderable growth  of  culture.  Indeed,  at  least  in  the
economic  respect,  it  appears  to  have  been  the  most  uni-
versal and  most  radical  mutation  which  human  culture
has  undergone  in  its  advance  from  savagery  to  civilisa-
tion; and  the  causes  of  it  should  be  of  a  similarly  universal
and  intrinsic  character.

It  may  be  taken  as  a  generahsation  grounded  in  the
instinctive  endowment  of  mankind  that  the  human  sense
of  workmanship  will  unavoidably  go  on  turning  to  ac-
count what  there  is  in  hand  of  technological  knowledge,


148  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  so  will  in  the  course  of  time,  by  insensible  gains
perhaps,  gradually  change  the  technological  scheme,
and  therefore  also  the  scheme  of  customary  canons  of
conduct  answering  to  it;  and  in  the  absence  of  over-
mastering circumstances  this  sequence  of  change  must,
in  a  general  way,  set  in  the  direction  of  great  techno-
logical mastery.  Something  in  the  way  of  an  "advance "
in  workmanhke  mastery  is  to  be  looked  for,  in  the  absence
of  inexorable  limitations  of  environment.  The  limita-
tions may  be  set  by  the  material  circumstances  or  by
circumstances  of  the  institutional  situation,  but  on  the
lower  levels  of  culture  the  insurmountable  obstacles  to
such  an  advance  appear  to  have  been  those  imposed  by
the  material  circumstances;  although  institutional  fac-
tors have  doubtless  greatly  retarded  the  advance  in  most
cases,  and  may  well  have  defeated  it  in  many.  In  some
of  the  known  lower  cultures  such  an  impassable  con-
juncture in  the  affairs  of  technology  has  apparently
been  reached  now  and  again,  resulting  in  a  "stationary
state"  of  the  industrial  arts  and  of  social  arrangements,
economic  and  otherwise.  Such  an  instance  of  "arrested
V  development"  is  afforded  by  the  Eskimo,  who  have  to
all  appearance  reached  the  bounds  of  technological  mas-
tery possible  in  the  material  circumstances  in  which  they
have  been  placed  and  with  the  technological  antecedents
which  they  have  had  to  go  on.  At  the  other  extreme  of
the  American  continent  the  Fuegians  and  Patagonians
may  similarly  have  reached  at  least  a  provisional  limit
of  the  same  nature;  though  such  a  statement  is  less  secure
in  their  case,  owing  to  the  scant  and  fragmentary  charac-
ter of  the  available  evidence.  So  also  the  Bushmen,  the
Ainu,  various  representative  communities  of  the  Negrito


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 149

and  perhaps  of  the  Dra vidian  stocks,  appear  to  have
reached  a  provisional  Hmit — barring  intervention  from
without.  In  these  latter  instances  the  decisive  obstacles,
if  they  are  to  be  accepted  as  such,  seem  to  lie  in  the
human-nature  of  the  case  rather  than  in  the  material
circumstances.  In  these  latter  instances  the  sense  of
workmanship,  though  visibly  alert  and  active,  appears
to  have  been  inadequate  to  carry  out  the  technological
scheme  into  further  new  ramifications  for  want  of  the
requisite  intellectual  aptitudes, — a  failure  of  aptitudes
not  in  degree  but  in  kind.

The  manner  in  which  increasing  technological  mastery  ^
has  led  over  from  the  savage  plan  of  free  workmanship
to  the  barbarian  system  of  industry  under  pecuniary  con-
trol is  perhaps  a  hazardous  topic  of  speculation;  but  the
known  facts  of  primitive  culture  appear  to  admit  at
least  a  few  general  propositions  of  a  broad  and  provi-
sional character.  It  seems  reasonably  safe  to  say  that
the  archaic  savage  plan  of  free  workmanship  will  com-  ^
monly  have  persisted  through  the  palaeolithic  period  of
technology,  and  indeed  somewhat  beyond  the  transition
to  the  neolithic.  This  is  fairly  borne  out  by  the  contem-
porary evidence  from  savage  cultures.  In  the  prehistory
of  the  north-European  culture  there  is  also  reason  to
assume  that  the  beginnings  of  a  pecuniary  control  fall
in  the  early  half  of  the  neoHthic  period.^  There  seems
to  be  no  sharply  definable  point  in  the  technological
advance  that  can  be  said  of  itself  to  bring  on  this  revolu-
tionary change  in  the  institutions  governing  economic
life. It  appears  to  be  loosely  correlated  with  techno-  ^

»  See  Sophus  Miiller,  Vor  Oldtid,  " Stenalderen,"  and  Aarhoger  for  jwr-
disk  Oldkyndighedy  1906.


H


150  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

logical  improvement,  so  that  it  sets  in  when  a  sufficient
ground  for  it  is  afforded  by  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts,  but  what  constitutes  a  sufficient  ground  can  ap-
parently not  be  stated  in  terms  of  the  industrial  arts
alone.  Among  the  early  consequences  of  an  advance  in
technology  beyond  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  sche-
matically indicated  above,  and  coinciding  roughly  with
the  palaeolithic  stage,  is  on  the  one  hand  an  appreciable
resort  to  "indirect  methods  of  production ", involving  a
systematic  cultivation  of  the  soil,  domestication  of
plants  and  animals;  or  an  appreciable  equipment  of
industrial  appliances,  such  as  will  in  either  case  require  a
deliberate  expenditure  of  labour  and  will  give  the  holders
of  the  equipment  something  more  than  a  momentary
advantage  in  the  quest  of  a  livelihood.  On  the  other
hand  it  leads  also  to  an  accumulation  of  wealth  beyond
the  current  necessaries  of  subsistence  and  beyond  that
slight  parcel  of  personal  effects  that  have  no  value  to
anyone  but  their  savage  bearer.

Hereby  the  technological  basis  for  a  pecuniary  control
of  industry  is  given,  in  that  the  "roundabout  process
of  production"  yields  an  income  above  the  subsistence
of  the  workmen  engaged  in  it,  and  the  material  equip-
ment of  appliances  (crops,  fruit-trees,  live  stock,  mechan-
ical contrivances)  binds  this  roundabout  process  of  in-
dustry to  a  more  or  less  determinate  place  and  routine,
such  as  to  make  surveillance  and  control  possible.  So
far  as  the  workman  under  the  new  phase  of  technology
is  dependent  for  his  hving  on  the  apparatus  and  the
orderly  sequence  of  the  "roundabout  process"  his  work
may  be  controlled  and  the  surplus  yielded  by  his  indus-
try may  be  turned  to  account;  it  becomes  worth  while


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 151

to  own  the  material  means  of  industry,  and  ownership
of  the  material  means  in  such  a  situation  carries  with  it
the  usufruct  of  the  community's  immaterial  equipment
of  technological  proficiency.

The  substantial  fact  upon  which  the  strategy  of  owner-
ship converges  is  this  usufruct  of  the  industrial  arts,  and
the  tangible  items  of  property  to  which  the  claims  of
ownership  come  to  attach  will  accordingly  vary  from
time  to  time,  according  as  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  will  best  afford  an  effectual  exploitation  of  this
usufruct  through  the  tenure  of  one  or  another  of  the
material  items  requisite  to  the  pursuit  of  industry.  The
chief  subject  of  ownership  may  accordingly  be  the  cul-
tivated trees,  as  in  some  of  the  South  Sea  islands;  or  the
tillable  land,  as  happens  in  many  of  the  agricultural
communities;  or  fish  weirs  and  their  location,  as  on  some
of  the  salmon  streams  of  the  American  north-west  coast;
or  domestic  animals,  as  is  typical  of  the  pastoral  culture;
or  it  may  be  the  persons  of  the  workmen,  as  happens
under  divers  circumstances  both  in  pastoral  and  in  agri-
cultural communities;  or,  with  an  advance  in  technology
of  such  a  nature  as  to  place  the  mechanical  appliances  of
industry  in  a  peculiarly  advantageous  position  for  en-
grossing the  roundabout  processes  of  production,  as  in  the
latterday  machine  industry,  these  mechanical  appliances
may  become  the  typical  category  of  industrial  wealth
and  so  come  to  be  accounted  ''productive  goods"  in
some  eminent  sense.

The  institutional  change  by  which  a  pecuniary  regula-
tion of  industry  comes  into  effect  may  take  one  form  or  ^^
another,  but  its  outcome  has  commonly  been  some  form
of  ownership  of  tangible  goods. Particularly  has  that


152  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

been  the  outcome  in  the  course  of  development  that  has
led  on  to  those  great  pecuniary  cultures  of  which  Occi-
dental civilisation  is  the  most  perfect  example.  But
just  in  what  form  the  move  will  be  made,  if  at  all,  from
free  workmanship  to  pecuniary  industry  and  ownership,
is  in  good  part  a  question  of  what  the  material  situation
of  the  community  will  permit.  In  some  instances  the
circumstances  have  apparently  not  permitted  the  move
to  be  made  at  all.  The  Eskimo  culture  is  perhaps  an
extreme  case  of  this  kind.  The  state  of  the  industrial
arts  among  them  has  apparently  gone  appreciably  be-
yond the  technological  juncture  indicated  above  as
critical  in  this  respect.  It  involves  a  considerable  special-
isation and  accumulation  of  appliances,  such  as  boats,
sleds,  dogs,  harness,  various  special  forms  of  nets  har-
poons and  spears,  and  an  elaborate  Hne  of  minor  appara-
tus necessary  to  the  day's  work  and  embodying  a  mi-
nutely standardised  technique.  At  the  same  time  these
articles  of  use,  together  with  their  household  and  per-
sonal effects,  represent  something  appreciable  in  the
way  of  portable  wealth.  Yet  in  their  economic  (pecuni-
ary and  industrial),  domestic,  social,  or  religious  institu-
y  tions  the  Eskimo  have  substantially  not  gone  beyond
the  point  of  customary  regulation  commonly  associated
with  the  simpler,  hand-to-mouth  state  of  the  industrial
arts  typical  of  the  palaeoHthic  savage  culture.  And  this
archaic  Eskimo  culture,  with  its  highly  elaborated
technology,  is  apparently  of  untold  antiquity;  it  is  even
believed  by  competent  students  of  antiquity  to  have
stood  over  without  serious  advance  or  decHne  since  Euro-
pean palaeoHthic  times — a  period  of  not  less  than  ten


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 153

thousand  years.^  The  causes  conditioning  this  "back-
ward" type  of  culture  among  the  Eskimo,  coupled  with
a  relatively  advanced  and  extremely  complete  techno-
logical system,  are  presumed  to  lie  in  their  material
surroundings;  which  on  the  one  hand  do  not  permit  a
congestion  of  people  within  a  small  area  or  enable  the  or-
ganisation and  control  of  a  compact  community  of  any
considerable  size;  while  on  the  other  hand  they  exact
a  large  degree  of  co-operation  and  common  interest,  on
pain  of  extreme  hardship  if  not  of  extinction.

More  perplexing  at  first  sight  is  the  case  of  such  seden-
tary agricultural  communities  as  the  Pueblo  Indians,  who  t^
have  also  not  advanced  very  materially  beyond  the  simpler
cultural  scheme  of  savage  life,  and  have  not  taken  seri-
ously to  a  system  of  property  and  a  pecuniary  control  of
industry,  in  spite  of  their  having  achieved  a  very  con-
siderable advance  in  the  industrial  arts,  particularly
in  agriculture,  such  as  would  appear  to  entitle  them  to
something  "higher"  than  that  state  of  peaceable,  non-
coercive social  organisation,  in  which  they  were  found
on  their  first  contact  with  civilised  men,  with  maternal
descent  and  mother-goddesses,  and  without  much  prop-
erty rights,  accumulated  wealth  or  pecuniary  distinc-
tion of  classes.  Again  an  explanation  is  probably  to  be
sought  in  special  circumstances  of  environment,  perhaps
re-enforced  by  pecuharities  of  the  racial  endowment;
though  the  latter  point  seems  doubtful,  since  both  Kn-
guistically  and  anthropometrically  the  Pueblos  are
found  to  belong  to  two  or  three  distinct  stocks,  at  the
same  time  that  their  culture  is  notably  uniform  through-
out the  Pueblo  region,  both  on  the  technological  and  on
^  Cf.  W.  G.  Sollas,  Ancient  Hunters,


154  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  institutional  side.  The  peculiar  material  circum-
stances that  appear  to  have  conditioned  the  Pueblo
culture  are  {a)  a  habitat  which  favours  agricultural  settle-
ment only  at  isolated  and  widely  separated  spots,  {h)
sites  for  habitation  (on  detached  mesas  or  on  other  diffi-
cult hills  or  in  isolated  valleys  or  canyons)  easily  secured
against  aggression  from  without  and  not  affording  notable
differential  advantages  or  admitting  segregation  of  the
population  within  the  pueblo,  (c)  the  absence  of  beasts
of  burden,  such  as  have  enabled  the  inhabitants  of  anal-
ogous regions  of  the  old  world  effectually  to  cover  long
distances  and  make  raiding  a  lucrative,  or  at  least  an
attractive  enterprise.

These,  and  other  peculiar  instances  of  what  may  per-
haps be  called  cultural  retardation,  indicate  by  way  of
exception  what  may  have  been  the  ruling  causes  that
have  governed  in  the  advance  to  a  higher  culture  under
more  ordinary  circumstances, — by  "ordinary'^  being
intended  such  circumstances  as  have  apparently  led  to  a
different  and,  it  would  be  held,  a  more  normal  result  in
the  old  world,  and  particularly  in  the  region  of  the  West-
ern civilisation.

In  the  ordinary  course,  it  should  seem,  such  an  ad-
vance in  the  industrial  arts  as  will  result  in  an  accumula-
tion of  wealth,  a  considerable  and  efficient  industrial
equipment,  or  in  a  systematic  and  permanent  cultivation
of  the  soil  or  an  extensive  breeding  of  herds  or  flocks,
will  also  bring  on  ownership  and  property  rights  bearing
on  these  valuable  goods,  or  on  the  workmen,  or  on  the
land  employed  in  their  production.  What  has  seemed
the  most  natural  and  obvious  beginnings  of  property
rights,  in  the  view  of  those  economists  who  have  taken


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 155

an  interest  in  the  matter,  is  the  storing  up  of  valuables
by  such  of  the  ancient  workmen  as  were  enabled,  by
efficiency,  diligence  or  fortuitous  gains,  to  produce  some-
what more  than  their  current  consumption.  There  are
difficulties,  though  perhaps  not  insuperable,  in  the  way
of  such  a  genesis  of  property  rights  and  pecuniary  dif-
ferentiation within  any  given  community.  The  temper
of  the  people  bred  in  the  ways  of  the  simpler  plan  of
hand-to-mouth  and  common  interest  does  not  readily
bend  itself  to  such  an  institutional  innovation,  even
though  the  self -regarding  impulses  of  particular  members
of  the  community  may  set  in  such  a  direction  as  would
give  the  alleged  result.-^

There  are  other  and  more  natural  ways  of  reaching^
the  same  results,  ways  more  consonant  with  that  archaic
scheme  of  usages  on  which  the  new  institution  of  prop-
erty is  to  be  grafted,  {a)  In  the  known  cultures  of  this
simpler  plan  there  are  usually,  or  at  least  frequently,
present  a  class  of  magicians  (shamans,  medicine  men,  ^
angekut),  an  inchoate  priestly  class,  who  get  their  living
in  part  "by  their  wits,"  half  parasitically,  by  some  sort
of  tithe  levied  on  their  fellow  members  for  supernatural
ministrations  and  exploits  of  faith  that  are  worth  as
much  as  they  will  bring. ^  As  the  industrial  efficiency
of  the  community  increases  with  the  technological  gain,
and  an  increasing  disposable  output  is  at  hand,  it  should

1  See,  e.  g.,  Basil  Thomson,  The  Figians,  especially  ch.  iv,  xiv,  xxviii,
xxxi.

2  The  Pueblos  offer  a  curious  exception  to  this  common  rule  of  a  par-
asitic priesthood.  While  they  are  much  given  to  religious  observances
and  have  an  extensive  priestly  organisation,  comprising  divers  orders  and
sub-orders,  this  priesthood  appears  commonly  to  derive  no  income,  or
even  appreciable  perquisites,  from  their  office.


V


156  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

naturally  follow,  human  nature  being  what  it  is,  that  the
services  of  the  priests  or  magicians  should  suffer  an  ad-
vance in  value  and  so  enable  the  priests  to  lay  something
by,  to  acquire  a  special  claim  to  certain  parcels  of  land
or  cultivated  trees  or  crops  or  first-fruits  or  labour  to  be
performed  by  their  parishioners.  There  is  no  Hmit  to
the  value  of  such  ministrations  except  the  limit  of  toler-
ance, "what  the  traffic  will  bear."  And  much  may  be
done  in  this  way,  which  is  in  close  touch  with  the  accus-
tomed ways  of  life  among  known  savages  and  lower
barbarians.  To  the  extent  to  which  such  a  move  is  suc-
cessful it  will  alter  the  economic  situation  of  the  com-
munity by  making  the  lay  members,  in  so  far,  subject  to
the  priestly  class,  and  will  gather  wealth  and  power  in
the  hands  of  the  priests;  so  introducing  a  relation  of
master  and  servant,  together  with  class  differences  in
wealth,  the  practice  of  exclusive  ownership,  and  pecuni-
ary obligations.  (5)  With  an  accumulation  of  wealth,
whether  in  portable  form  or  in  the  form  of  plantations
and  tillage,  there  comes  the  inducement  to  aggression,
predation,  by  whatever  name  it  may  be  known.  Such
aggression  is  an  easy  matter  in  the  common  run  of  lower
cultures,  since  relations  are  habitually  strained  between
these  savage  and  barbarian  communities.  There  is  com-
monly a  state  of  estrangement  between  them  amounting
to  constructive  feud,  though  the  feud  is  apt  to  lie  dormant
under  a  modus  vivendi  so  long  as  there  is  no  adequate
inducement  to  open  hostilities,  in  the  way  of  booty.
Given  a  sufficiently  wealthy  enemy  who  is  sufficiently
ill  prepared  for  hostilities  to  afford  a  fighting  chance  of
taking  over  this  wealth  by  way  of  booty  or  tribute,  with
no  obvious  chance  of  due  reprisals,  and  the  opening  of


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 157

hostilities  will  commonly  arrange  itself.  The  communi-
ties mutually  concerned  so  pass  from  the  more  or  less
precarious  peaceful  customs  and  animus  common  to  the
indigent  lower  cultures,  to  a  more  or  less  habitual  attitude
of  predatory  exploit.  With  the  advent  of  warfare  comes
the  war  chief,  into  whose  hands  authority  and  pecuniary
emoluments  gather  somewhat  in  proportion  as  warlike
exploits  and  ideals  become  habitual  in  the  community.^  ^
More  or  less  of  loot  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  victors  in
any  raid.  The  loot  may  be  goods,  cattle  if  any,  or  men,
women  and  children;  any  or  all  of  which  may  become
(private)  property  and  be  accumulated  in  sufficient  mass
to  make  a  difference  between  rich  and  poor.  Captives  ^
may  fall  into  some  form  of  servitude,  and  in  an  agri-
cultural community  may  easily  become  the  chief  item
of  wealth.  At  the  same  time  an  entire  community  may
be  reduced  to  servitude,  so  falhng  into  the  possession  of
an  absentee  owner  (master),  or  under  resident  masters
coming  in  from  the  victorious  enemy.

In  any  or  all  of  these  ways  the  institution  of  ownership  y
is  likely  to  arise  so  soon  as  there  is  provocation  for  it,
and  in  all  cases  it  is  a  consequence  of  an  appreciable
advance  in  the  industrial  arts.  Yet  in  a  number  of  re-
corded cases  a  sufficient  advance  in  technology  does  not
appear  to  have  been  followed  by  so  prompt  an  introduc-
tion of  ownership,  at  least  not  in  the  fully  developed

^  The  difference  in  importance  and  powers  between  the  war  chief  of  the
peaceable  Pueblos  on  the  one  hand  and  of  the  predatory  Aztecs  on  the
other  hand  shows  how  such  an  official's  status  may  change  de  facto  with-
out a  notable  change  de  jure. — Cf.  also  Basil  Thomson,  The  FigianSy
ch.  iv,  xxxi,  on  "Constitution  of  Society,"  and  "The  Tenure  of  Land,"
where  the  growth  of  custom  is  shown  to  throw  pecuniary  prerogative
and  control  into  the  hands  of  the  successful  war  chief.


158  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

form,  as  the  surface  facts  would  seem  to  have  called  for.
Custom  in  the  lower  cultures  is  extremely  tenacious,  and
what  might  seem  an  excessive  allowance  of  time  appears
to  be  needed  for  so  radical  an  innovation  in  the  habitual
scheme  of  things  as  is  involved  in  the  installation  of
rights  of  ownership.  There  are  cases  of  a  fairly  advanced
barbarian  culture,  with  sufficiently  coercive  government
control,  an  authoritative  priesthood,  and  well-marked
class  distinctions  which  hold  good  both  in  economic  and
social  relations,  and  yet  where  the  line  of  demarkation
between  ownership  and  mastery  is  not  drawn  in  any
unambiguous  fashion — where  it  is  perhaps  as  accurate
a  statement  as  the  case  permits,  to  say  that  this  distinc-
tion has  not  yet  been  made,  and  so  would,  if  appHed,
mark  a  difference  that  does  not  yet  exist.  ^

So  long  as  overt  predatory  conditions  continue  to  rule
the  case, — e.  g.,  so  long  as  the  community  in  question
continues,  in  a  sense,  under  martial  law,  "in  a  state  of
seige,"  where  the  holders  of  the  economic  advantage
hold  it  on  a  tenure  of  prowess  or  by  way  of  delegated
power  and  prerogative  from  a  superior  of  warlike  ante-
cedents and  dynastic  right, — so  long  the  rights  of  owner-
ship are  not  likely  to  be  well  differentiated  from  those  of
mastery. Much  the  same  characterisation  of  such  a

^  For  instance,  somewhat  generally  in  the  island  states  of  Polynesia.
Something  suggestively  reminiscent  of  such  a  condition  of  things  is  visible
in  early  feudal  Europe,  where  feudal  holdings  changed  hands  with  a
change  in  the  status  of  their  holders  in  a  way  that  suggests  that  ownership
was  in  great  measure  a  corollary  following  from  the  tenure  of  certain  civil
powers.  So,  also,  in  ecclesiastical  holdings  of  the  same  period  and  later.
And,  again,  in  the  doubtful  and  changing  status  of  the  servile  classes  of
feudal  Europe,  where  the  distinction  between  mastery  and  ownership
often  seems  something  of  a  legal  fiction  or  a  distinction  without  a  dif-
ference. Feudal  Japan  affords  evidence  to  much  the  same  effect.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 159

state  of  things  is  conveyed  in  the  current  phrase  that
"the  rights  of  person  and  property  are  not  secure."  The
very  wide  prevalence  in  the  barbarian  cultures  of  some
such  state  of  things  argues  that  the  genesis  of  property
rights  is  likely  to  have  been  something  of  this  kind  in  the
common  run,  though  it  does  not  in  other  cases  preclude  a
different  and  more  peaceable  development  out  of  work-
manlike or  priestly  economies.

But  even  if  it  should  be  found,  when  the  matter  has
been  sifted,  that  the  genesis  of  ownership  is  of  the  latter
kind,  it  would  also  in  all  probability  be  found  that  among
the  peoples  whose  institutional  growth  has  a  serious
genetic  bearing  on  the  Western  culture  the  holding  of
property  has,  late  or  early,  passed  through  a  phase  of
predatory  tenure  in  which  the  distinction  between  owner- ^
ship  and  mastery  has  so  far  fallen  into  abeyance  as  to
have  had  but  a  slight  effect  on  the  further  development.
Where,  as  appears  frequently  to  have  been  the  case  both
in  Europe  and  elsewhere,  the  kingship  and  temporal
power  has  arisen  out  of  the  priestly  office  and  spiritual
power — or  perhaps  better  where  the  inchoate  kingship
was  in  its  origins  chiefly  of  a  priestly  complexion,  with  a
gradual  shifting  of  kingly  power  and  prerogative  to  a  X
temporal  basis, ^ — there  the  transition  from  a  creation  of
property  and  mastery  rights  by  priestly  economies
(fraud?)  to  a  tenure  of  wealth  and  authority  by  royal
prerogative  (force?)  will  have  so  blended  the  two  methods

^  Cf .  J.  G.  Frazer,  Lectures  on  the  Early  History  of  the  Kingship.  The
drift  of  evidence  for  the  North-European  cultures  of  pagan  antiquity
appears  to  set  strongly  in  this  direction,  though  the  term  "priestly,"
as  applied  to  these  pagan  kings,  is  likely  to  convey  too  broad  an  implica-
tion of  solemnity  and  vicariously  divine  power.


\/


1 60  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  genesis  as  to  leave  the  attempt  at  a  hard  fast  dis-
crimination between  them  somewhat  idle.

But  whatever  may  be  conceived  to  have  been  the
genesis  of  ownership,  the  institution  is  commonly  found,
in  the  barbarian  culture,  to  be  tempered  with  a  large
infusion  of  predatory  concepts,  of  status,  prerogative,
differential  respect  of  persons  and  economic  classes,  and
a  corresponding  differential  respect  of  occupations.
Whether  property  provokes  to  predation  or  predation
initiates  ownership,  the  situation  that  results  in  early
phases  of  the  pecuniary  culture  is  much  the  same;  and
the  causal  relation  in  which  this  situation  stands  to  the
advance  in  workmanship  is  also  much  the  same.  This
relation  between  workmanship  and  the  pecuniary  cul-
ture brought  on  with  the  advent  of  ownership  is  a  two-
fold one,  or,  perhaps  better,  it  is  a  relation  of  mutual  give
and  take.  The  increase  in  industrial  efficiency  due  to  a
sufficient  advance  in  the  industrial  arts  gives  rise  to  the
ownership  of  property  and  to  pecuniary  appreciations
of  men  and  things,  occupations  and  products,  habits,
customs,  usages,  observances,  services  and  goods.  At  the
same  time,  since  predation  and  warlike  exploit  are  in-
timately associated  with  the  facts  of  ownership  through
its  early  history  (perhaps  throughout  its  history),  there
results  a  marked  accentuation  of  the  self-regarding  senti-
ments; with  the  economically  important  consequence
that  self-interest  displaces  the  common  good  in  men's
ideals  and  aspirations.  The  animus  entailed  by  preda-
tory exploit  is  one  of  self-interest,  a  seeking  of  one's  own
advantage  at  the  cost  of  the  enemy,  which  frequently,
in  the  poetically  ideal  case,  takes  such  an  extreme  form
as  to  prefer  the  enemy's  loss  to  one's  own  gain. And  in


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture i6i

the  emulation  which  the  predatory  life  and  its  distinction?
of  wealth  introduce  into  the  community,  the  end  of  en-
deavour is  Hkely  to  become  the  differential  advantage  of
the  individual  as  against  his  neighbours  rather  than  the
undifferentiated  advantage  of  the  group  as  a  whole,  in
contrast  with  alien  or  hostile  groups.  The  members  of
the  community  come  to  work  each  for  his  own  interest
in  severalty,  rather  than  for  an  undivided  interest  in
the  common  lot.  Such  sentiment  of  group  soHdarity
as  there  may  remain  falls  also  into  the  invidious  and
emulative  form;  whereby  the  fighting  patriot  becomes
the  type  and  exemplar  of  the  public  spirited  citizen,
whose  ideal  then  is  to  follow  his  leader  and  humble  the
pride  of  those  whom  the  chances  of  contention  have
thrown  in  with  the  other  side  of  the  game.  The  senti-
ment of  common  interest,  itself  in  good  part  a  diffuse
working-out  of  the  parental  instinct,  comes  at  the  best
to  converge  on  the  glory  of  the  flag  instead  of  the  fulness
of  Hfe  of  the  community  at  large,  or  more  commonly  it
comes  to  be  centred  in  loyalty,  that  is  to  say  in  sub-
servience, to  the  common  war-chief  and  his  dynastic
successors.

In  the  shifting  of  activities,  ideals  and  aims  so  brought
in  with  the  advent  of  wealth  and  ownership,  the  part  of
the  priests  and  their  divinities  is  not  to  be  overlooked,
for  herein  lies  one  of  the  greater  cultural  gains  brought
on  by  the  technological  advance  at  this  juncture.  The
margin  of  service  and  produce  available  for  consumption
in  the  cult  increases,  and  by  easy  consequence  the  spirit-
ual prestige  and  the  temporal  power  and  prerogatives
of  the  priesthood  grow  greater.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  ^
gods  of  the  victors  is  extended,  through  the  vicarious


1 62  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

power  of  the  priests,  over  the  subject  peoples,  and  as
the  temporal  dominion  is  enlarged  and  an  increasing
measure  of  coercion  is  employed  in  controlling  these
dominions,  so  also  in  the  affairs  of  the  gods  and  their
priests  there  is  an  accession  of  power  and  dignity.  It
commonly  happens  where  predatory  enterprise  comes
to  be  habitual  and  successful  that  the  temporal  power

, tends  to  centre  in  an  autocratic  and  arbitrary  ruler;

^  and  in  this  as  in  so  much  else,  spiritual  affairs  are  likely
to  take  their  complexion  from  the  temporal,  resulting
in  a  strong  drift  toward  an  autocratic  monotheism,  which
in  the  finished  case  comes  to  a  climax  in  an  omnipotent,
omniscient  deity  of  very  exalted  dignity  and  very  exact-
ing temper.  For  the  habits  of  thought  enforced  in  the
affairs  of  daily  life  are  carried  over  into  men's  sense  of
what  is  right  and  good  in  the  life  of  the  gods  as  well.  If
there  is  any  choice  among  the  gods  imder  whose  auspices
a  people  has  successfully  entered  on  a  career  of  predation,
so  that  some  of  the  gods  have  more  of  a  reputation  for
rapacity  and  inhumanity  than  others,  the  most  atrocious
among  them  is  likely,  other  things  being  equal,  to  become
the  war-god  of  the  conquering  host,  and  so  eventually  to
be  exalted  to  the  suzerainty  among  the  gods,  and  even
in  time  to  become  the  one  and  only  incumbent  of  the
divine  czardom.

Should  it  happen  that  a  relatively  humane,  tolerant
and  tractable  deity  comes  in  for  exaltation  to  the
divine  suzerainty,  as  well  may  be  if  such  a  one  has
already  a  good  prior  claim  standing  over  from  the
more  peaceable  past,  he  will  readily  acquire  the  due
princely  arrogance  and  irresponsibility  that  vests  the
typical  heavenly  king. It  may  be  added  that  as  a  matter


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 163

of  course  no  degree  of  imputed  inhumanity  in  the  most
high  God  will  stand  in  the  way  of  a  god-fearing  and
astute  priesthood  volubly  ascribing  to  him  all  the  good
qualities  that  should  grace  an  elderly  patriarchal  gentle-
man of  the  old  school;  so  that  even  his  most  infamous
atrocities  become  ineffably  meritorious  and  are  dispensed  ^
of  his  mercy. -^

With  the  terrors  of  a  jealous  and  almighty  God  behind  ^
them,  and  with  faith  in  their  own  mission  and  sagacity
in  its  administration,  the  priesthood  are  in  a  position
to  make  the  affairs  of  the  heavenly  king  count  for  much
in  the  affairs  of  men;  more  particularly  since  this  spiritual
power  enters  into  working  arrangements  with  the  tem-
poral power;  so  that  in  the  outcome  these  institutions
which  in  their  origins  have  grown  out  of  a  precarious
margin  of  product  above  subsistence  come  to  possess
themselves  of  the  output  at  large  and  leave  a  precarious
margin  of  subsistence  to  the  community  at  large.  ^

These  further  matters  of  "natural  law  in  the  spiritual
world"  are  not  in  themselves  of  direct  interest  to  the
present  inquiry,  and  they  are  also  matters  of  somewhat
tedious  commonplace.  Yet  this  run  of  things  has  grave
consequences  in  the  further  working-out  of  the  tech-
nological situation  as  well  as  in  the  course  of  material
welfare  for  the  community  on  whom  it  is  incumbent  to
turn  the  technological  knowledge  to  account,  to  conserve
or  improve  and  transmit  it,  and  for  this  reason  it  has

^  Witness  the  alleged  dealings  of  Jahve  with  his  chosen  people  and  the
laudation  bestowed  on  Him  by  His  priests  for  "conduct  unbecoming  a
gentleman."

2  As  witness  Pharaonic  Egypt,  Ancient  Peru,  Babylon,  Assyria,  Israel
imdpr  Solomon  and  his  nearer  successors.


164  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

seemed  necessary  summarily  to  recall  those  general
features  of  the  cultural  scheme  that  are  inherently  asso-
ciated with  the  earlier  pecuniary  culture, — the  full-blown
barbarian  culture.  And  it  seems  pertinent  also  to  add
something  further  in  the  same  connection  before  leaving
this  aspect  of  the  case.

It  is  necessary  to  hark  back  to  what  was  said  in  an
earlier  chapter,  of  the  relations  of  tillage  and  cattle-breed-
ing to  the  instinct  of  workmanship  and  the  course  of
technological  advance.  Both  the  technological  and  the
institutional  bearing  of  cattle-breeding  is  particularly
notable  in  this  connection.  As  already  spoken  of  in
what  has  gone  before,  cattle-breeding  has  the  techno-
logical peculiarity  that  it  may  be  successfully  entered
on  and  carried  forward  with  a  larger  admixture  of  an-
thropomorphic concepts  than  the  mechanic  arts,  or
even  than  the  domestication  and  care  of  the  crop  plants.
It  is  perhaps  not  to  be  admitted  that  the  penchant  of
early  man  to  take  an  anthropomorphic  view  of  the  lower
animals  and  impute  to  them  the  common  traits  of  human
nature  has  directly  conduced  to  their  successful  domesti-
cation, but  it  should  be  within  the  mark  to  say  that  this
penchant  may  have  been  primarily  responsible  for  the
course  of  conduct  that  led  to  the  domestication  of  ani-
mals,^ and  that  it  has  apparently  never  been  a  serious
drawback  to  any  pastoral  culture.  Now,  wealth  in  flocks
and  herds  is  pecuHar  not  only  in  being  eminently  portable,
even  to  the  extent  that  in  the  usual  course  of  this  in-
dustry it  is  necessary  for  a  pastoral  community  to  mi-
grate, or  to  go  over  an  extended  itinerary  with  the  chang-
ing seasons,  but  it  has  also  the  peculiar  quality  of  mul-
1  See  F.  B.  Jevons,  Introduction  lo  the  History  oj  Religion^  ch.  x.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 165

tiplying  spontaneously,  given  only  a  degree  of  surveil-
lance and  a  sufficient  range  of  pasture  lands.  It  follows
that  cattle  are  easy  and  tempting  to  acquire  by  preda-
tion,  will  accumulate  through  natural  increase  without
notable  exertion  on  the  part  of  their  owners,  and  will
multiply  beyond  the  bearing  capacity  of  any  disposable
range.  Hence  a  pastoral  people,  or  a  people  given  in
great  part  to  pastoral~pursuits,  will  somewhat  readily
take  to  a  predatory  Hfe;  will  have  to  be  organised  for
defence  (and  offence)  against  raids  or  encroachments
from  its  neighbours  engaged  in  the  same  pursuits;  will
find  itself  short  of  range  lands  through  the  natural  in-
crease of  its  flocks  or  herds,  and  so  will  even  involuntarily
be  brought  into  feud  with  neighbouring  herdsmen  through
mutual  trespass.  Further,  the  work  of  herding,  on  the
scale  imposed  by  the  open  continental  cattle  and  sheep  ]^^'
ranges,  is  man's  work,  as  is  also  the  incidental  fighting,
raiding,  and  cattle-lifting.

The  effects  of  these  technological  conditions  on  the
general  culture  of  a  pastoral  people  are  such  as  are  set
forth  in  their  most  favourable  light  in  the  early  historical
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  or  such  conditions  as  may
be  found  today  on  the  great  cattle  ranges  of  west  and
north- central  Asia.  The  community  falls  necessarily
into  a  patriarchal  regime;  wath  considerable  concentra-
tion of  wealth  in  individual  hands;  great  disparity  in
wealth  and  social  standing,  commonly  involving  both
chattel  slavery  and  serfdom;  a  fighting  organisation
under  patriarchal-despotic  leadership,  which  serves  both
for  civil,  pohtical  and  religious  purposes;  domestic  in-
stitutions of  the  same  cast,  involving  a  degree  of  subjec-
tion of  women  and  children  and  commonly  polygamy


1 66  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

for  the  patriarchal  upper  or  ruling  class;  a  religious  sys-
tem of  a  monotheistic  or  monarchical  complexion  and
drawn  on  lines  of  patriarchal  despotism;  with  the  priestly
office  vested  in  the  patriarchal  head  of  the  community
(the  eldest  male  of  the  eldest  male  line)  if  the  group  is
small  enough  to  admit  the  administration  of  both  the
temporal  and  spiritual  power  at  the  hands  of  one  man —
V'as  Israel  at  the  time  of  the  earlier  sojourn  in  Canaan — or
vested  in  a  specialised  priesthood  if  the  group  is  of  great
size — as  Israel  on  their  return  to  Palestine.

Such  a  culture  is  manifestly  fit  to  succeed  both  in
avowedly  predatory  enterprise  and  in  pecuniary  enter-
prise of  a  more  peaceable  sort,  so  long  as  range  lands  are
at  its  disposal  or  so  long  as  it  can  find  a  sufficiently  large
and  compact  agricultural  community  to  reduce  to  servi-
tude, or  so  long  as  it  can  find  ways  and  means  of  com-
mercial enterprise  while  still  occupying  a  position  defen-
I  sible  against  all  comers.  Its  population  is  organised
\  for  offence  and  defence  and  trained  in  the  habits  of  subor-
dination necessary  to  any  successful  war,  and  the  pa-
triarchal authority  and  pecuniary  ideals  inbred  in  them
give  them  facility  in  co-operation  against  aliens,  as  well
as  the  due  temper  for  successful  bargaining.  Such  a
culture  has  the  elements  of  national  strength  and  solid-
arity, given  only  some  adequate  means  of  subsistence
while  still  retaining  its  militant  patriarchal  organisation.
Not  least  among  its  elements  of  national  strength  is  its
religion,  which  fosters  the  national  pride  of  a  people
chosen  by  the  Most  High,  at  the  same  time  that  it  trains
the  population  in  habits  of  subordination  and  loyalty,
as  well  as  in  patient  submission  to  exactions.  But  it  is
'' essentially  a  parasitic  culture,  despotic,  and,  with  due


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 167

training,  highly  superstitious  or  religious.  What  a  people
of  these  antecedents  is  capable  of  is  shown  by  the  As-
syrians, Babylonians,  Medes,  Persians,  the  Hindu  in-
vaders of  India,  the  Hyksos  invaders  of  Egypt,  and  in
another  line  by  Israel  and  the  Phoenicians,  and  in  a
lesser  degree  by  the  Huns,  Mongols,  Tatars,  Arabs  and
Turks.

It  is  from  peoples  of  this  culture  that  the  great  reH-
gions  of  the  old  world  have  come,  near  or  remote,  but  it
is  not  easy  to  find  any  substantial  contribution  to  human
culture  drawn  indubitably  from  this  source  apart  from
religious  creed,  cult  and  poetry.  The  domestication  of
animals,  for  instance,  is  not  due  to  them;  with  the  possible
exception  of  the  horse  and  the  dog,  that  work  had  to  be
done  in  peaceable,  sedentary  communities,  from  whom
the  pastoral  nomads  will  have  taken  over  the  stock
and  the  industry  and  carried  it  out  on  a  scale  and  with
cultural  consequences  which  do  not  follow  from  cattle-
breeding  under  sedentary  conditions.  Their  religion,
on  the  other  hand,  seems  in  no  case  to  have  been  carried
up  to  the  consummate  stage  of  despotic  monotheism
during  the  nomadic-pastoral  phase  of  their  experience,
but  to  have  been  worked  out  to  a  finished  product  pres-
ently after  they  had  engaged  on  a  career  of  conquest
and  had  some  protracted  experience  of  warfare  and
despotism  on  a  relatively  large  scale.  The  history  of
these  great  civilisations  with  pastoral  antecedents  ap-
pears to  run  somewhat  uniformly  to  the  effect  that  they
collapsed  as  soon  as  they  had  eaten  their  host  into  a
collapse.  The  incidents  along  the  way  between  their
beginning  in  conquest  and  their  collapse  in  exhaustion
are  commonly  no  more  edifying  and  of  no  more  lasting


\\


1 68  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

significance  to  human  culture  than  those  which  have
similarly  marked  the  course  of  the  Turk.  These  great
monarchies  were  organised  by  and  for  an  intrusive  dy-
nasty and  ruKng  class,  of  pastoral  antecedents,  and  they
drew  their  subsistence  and  their  means  of  oppression
from  a  subjugated  agricultural  population.  In  the  course
of  this  further  elaboration  of  a  predatory  civilisation,  the
institutions  proper  to  a  large  scale  and  to  a  powerful  des-
potism and  nobility  resting  on  a  servile  people,  were
developed  into  a  finished  system;  in  which  the  final
arbiter  is  always  irresponsible  force  and  in  which  the
all-pervading  social  relation  is  personal  subservience  and
personal  authority.  The  mechanic  arts  make  little  if
any  progress  under  such  a  discipline  of  personaKties,
even  the  arts  of  war,  and  there  is  little  if  any  evidence  of
sensible  gain  in  any  branch  of  husbandry.  There  were
great  palaces  and  cities  built  by  slave  labour  and  corvee,
embodying  untold  misery  in  conspicuously  wasteful  and
tasteless  show,  and  great  monarchs  whose  boast  it  was
that  they  were  each  and  several  the  best  friend  or  nearest
relative  of  some  irresponsible  and  supreme  god,  and
whose  dearest  claim  to  pre-eminence  was  that  they
"walked  on  the  faces  of  the  black-head  race.''  Seen  in
perspective  and  rated  in  any  terms  that  have  a  work-
manlike significance,  these  stupendous  dynastic  fabrics
are  as  insignificant  as  they  are  large,  and  none  of  them  is
worth  the  least  of  the  fussy  little  communities  that  came
in  time  to  make  up  the  Hellenic  world  and  its  petty
squabbles.

In  their  general  traits  these  various  civilisations
founded  (in  conquest)  by  the  pastoral  peoples  are  of  the
same  character  as  is  the  pecuniary  culture  as  found


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 169

elsewhere,  but  they  have  certain  special  features  which
set  them  off  somewhat  in  a  class  by  themselves.  They
are  predatory  in  a  peculiarly  overt  and  accentuated  J..
degree,  so  that  their  institutions  foster  the  invidious
sentiments,  the  self-regarding  animus  of  servihty  and  of
arrogance,  beyond  what  commonly  happens  in  the
pecuniary  culture  at  large;  and  they  carry  a  large  content
of  pecuharly  high-wrought  religious  superstitions  and  ^
fear  of  the  supernatural,  whiclTTikewise  works  out  from
and  into  an  animus  of  servihty  and  arrogance.  In  these
cultures  it  is  true,  even  beyond  the  great  significance
which  the  proposition  has  in  the  barbarian  culture  else-
where, that  the  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.
The  discipHne  of  hfe  in  such  a  culture,  therefore,  is  con-
sistently unfavourable  to  any  technological  gain;  the  in-  /
stinct  of  workm~anship  is  constantly  dominated  by  prev-
alent habits  of  thought  that  are  worse  than  useless  for
any  technological  purpose.

Much  the  same,  of  course,  is  true  for  any  civiKsation
founded  on  personal  government  of  the  coercive  kind,
whatever  may  be  the  remoter  antecedents  of  the  dynastic
and  ruling  classes;  but  these  other  cultures  have  not  the
same  secure  and  ancient  patriarchal  foundation,  ready
to  hand,  and  so  they  are  constrained  to  build  their  insti-
tutions of  coercion,  domestic,  civil,  political  and  mihtary,
more  slowly  and  with  a  more  doubtful  outcom.e;  nor
does  their  rehgious  system  so  readily  work  out  in  a
monarchical  theology  with  an  omnipotent  sovereign  and
in  all-pervading  fear  of  God.  A  home-bred  despotism
in  an  agricultural  community  that  has  set  out  with  ma-
ternal descent,  a  matriarchal  clan  system,  and  mother
goddesses,  is  hampered  both  on  the  tem.poral  and  the


1 70  The  Instinct  oi  Workmanship

spiritual  side  by  ancient  and  inbred  usage  and  preconcep-
tions that  can  be  effectually  overcome  only  in  the  long
course  of  time.  The  civilisations  of  Asia-Minor  and  the
iEgean  region,  and  even  of  Eg3^t  and  Rome,  however
much  of  pastoral  and  patriarchal  elements  may  have
been  infused  into  them  in  the  course  of  time,  show  their
shortcomings  in  this  respect  to  the  last;  perhaps  in  their
religions  more  than  in  any  other  one  cultural  trait,  since
religion  is  after  all  an  epigenetic  feature  and  follows
rather  than  leads  in  the  unfolding  of  the  cultural  scheme.

But  these  great  civilisations  dominated  by  pastoral
antecedents  have  no  grave  significance  for  the  modern
culture,  except  as  drawbacks,  and  none  at  all  for  modern
technology  or  for  that  matter-of-fact  knowledge  on  which
/  modern  technology  runs.  The  Western  peoples,  whose
cultural  past  is  of  more  immediate  interest,  have  also
had  their  warHke  experience,  late  and  early,  but  it  seems
never  to  have  reached  the  consummate  outcome  to  be
seen  in  the  East.  Neither  as  regards  the  scale  on  which
d3niastic  organisation  has  been  carried  out  nor  as  regards
the  thoroughness  with  which  their  institutions  have  been
permeated  by  predatory  preconceptions  have  the  West-
ern peoples  in  their  earlier  history  approached  the  stand-
ard of  the  oriental  despotisms.  Even  now,  it  may  be
remarked,  advocates  of  war  and  armaments  commonly
speak  (doubtless  disingenuously)  for  the  predatory  re-
gime as  being  a  necessity  of  defence  rather  than  some-
thing to  be  desired  on  its  own  merits.  Not  that  the
predatory  regime  has  not  been  a  sufficiently  grave  fact
in  the  history  of  occidental  civilisation;  to  take  such  a
view  of  history  one  would  have  to  overlook  the  Roman


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 171

Empire,  the  barbarian  invasions,  the  feudal  system,  the
Catholic  church,  the  Era  of  state-making,  and  the  exist-
ing armed  neutrahty  of  the  powers;  but  these  have,  all
but  the  last,  proved  to  be  episodes  on  a  grand  scale
rather  than  such  an  historical  finahty  as  any  one  of  the
successive  monarchies  in  the  Mesopotamian-Chaldasan
country, — the  test  being  that  occidental  civilisation  has
not  died  of  any  one  of  these  maladies,  though  it  has
come  through  more  than  one  critical  period.

Western  civilisation  has  gone  through  these  eras  of
accentuated  predation  and  has  at  all  times  shown  an
appreciable  admixture  of  predatory  conceptions  in  its
scheme  of  institutions  and  ideals,  in  its  domestic  institu-
tions and  its  public  affairs,  in  its  art  and  rehgion,  but  it  is
after  all  within  the  mark  to  say  that,  at  least  since  the
close  of  the  Dark  Ages,  a  distinctive  characteristic  that
sets  off  this  civihsation  in  contradistinction  from  any
definitively  predatory  phase  of  the  pecuniary  culture,
has  been  a  pertinacious  pursuit  of  the  arts  of  peace,  to
which  those  peoples  that  have  led  in  this  civiHsation
have  ever  returned  at  every  respite.  For  an  apprecia-
tion of  the  relations  subsisting  between  the  sense  of
workmanship  and  the  discipline  of  habituation  in  the
modern  culture,  therefore,  the  phenomena  of  peaceful
ownership  are  of  greater,  or  at  least  of  more  vivid  interest
than  those  of  the  predatory  phase  of  the  pecuniary  cul-
ture.

Modem  civiHsation,  and  indeed  all  history  for  that|vB
matter,  lies  within  the  pecuniary  culture  as  a  whole;  but
the  Western  culture  of  modern  times  belongs,  perhaps
somewhat  precariously,  to  the  secondary  or  peaceable
phase  of  this  pecuniary  culture,  rather  than  to  that  preda-


172  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tory  phase  with  which  the  pecuniary  scheme  of  life  began
somewhere  in  the  lower  barbarism,  and  that  has  re-
peatedly closed  its  life  cycle  in  the  collapse  of  one  and
another  of  the  great  dynastic  empires  of  the  old  world.
As  in  the  predatory  phase,  so  also  in  the  peaceable

(pecuniary  culture,  the  dominant  note  is  given  by  the
self -regarding  impulses;  and  the  sense  of  workmanship
is  therefore  characteristically  hedged  about  and  guided
by  the  institutional  exigencies  and  preconceptions  inci-
dent to  Hfe  under  the  circumstances  imposed  by  owner-
ship,— in  a  situation  where  the  economic  interest,  the
interest  in  those  material  means  of  life  with  which  work-
manship has  to  deal,  converges  on  property  rights.
Ownership  is  self-regarding,  of  course,  and  the  rights  of
ownership  are  of  a  personal,  invidious,  differential,  emu-
lative nature;  although  in  the  peaceable  phase  of  the
civilisation  of  ownership,  force  and  fraud  are,  in  theory,
barred  out  of  the  game  of  acquisition, — wherein  this
differs  from  the  predatory  phase  proper.
/  An  obvious  consequence  following  immediately  on  the
/  emergence  of  ownership  in  any  community  is  an  increased
application  to  work.  This  has  been  taken  as  a  matter
of  course  in  theoretical  speculations  and  is  borne  out
by  the  observation  of  peoples  among  whom  trade  rela-
tions have  been  introduced  in  recent  times.  An  im-
mediate result  is  greater  diKgence,  accompanied  ap-
parently in  all  cases,  if  the  reports  of  observers  are  to  be
accepted,  by  an  increase  in  contention,  distrust  and
chicanery  ^  and  an  increasingly  wasteful  consumption  of
goods.  The  diligence  so  fostered  by  emulative  self-
interest  is  directed  to  the  acquisition  of  property,  in
*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Basil  Thomson,  The  Figians,  ch.  iv.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 173

great  part  to  the  acquisition  of  more  than  is  possessed
by  those  others  with  whom  the  invidious  comparison  in
ownership  is  made;  and  under  the  spur  of  ownership
simply,  it  is  only  secondarily,  as  a  means  to  the  emulative
end  of  acquisition,  that  productive  work,  and  therefore
workmanship  in  its  naive  sense,  comes  into  the  case  at
all.  Ownership  conduces  to  diligence  in  acquisition
and  therefore  indirectly  to  diligence  in  work,  if  no  more
expeditious  means  of  acquiring  wealth  can  be  devised.
In  its  first  incidence  the  incentive  to  diHgence  afforded
by  ownership  is  a  proposition  in  business  not  in  work-
manship. Its  effects  on  workmanship,  industry  and
technology,  therefore,  are  necessarily  somewhat  uncer-
tain and  uneven.  Apparently  from  the  start  there  is
some  appreciable  resort  to  fraudulent  thrift,  to  the  pro-
duction of  spurious  or  inferior  goods. ^  This  of  course
very  presently  is  corrected  in  the  increased  astuteness
and  vigilance  exercised  in  men's  dealings  with  one  an-
other, whereby  an  appreciable  portion  of  energy  goes  to
defeat  these  artifices  of  disingenuous  worldly  wisdom.

It  should  be  added  that  the  pecuniary  incentive  to
work  takes  the  direction  of  making  the  most  of  the  means
at  hand,  considered  as  means  of  pecuniary  gain  rather
than  as  means  of  serviceability,  and  that  it  conduces
therefore  to  the  fullest  (pecuniary)  exploitation  of  the
standard  accepted  ways  and  means  of  industry  rather
than  to  the  improvement  of  these  ways  and  means  be-
yond the  conjuncture  at  hand.  Further,  though  this  is
also  somewhat  of  a  tedious  commonplace,  since  the

^  As  shown,  for  instance,  by  the  pottery  and  baskets  made  for  trade
by  the  American  Indians  where  they  come  in  trade  contact  with  civilised
men.


^


174  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

nJ3  only  authentic  end  of  work  under  the  pecuniary  dispensa-
tion is  the  acquisition  of  wealth;  since  the  possession  of
wealth  in  so  far  exempts  its  possessor  from  productive
work;  and  since  such  exemption  is  a  mark  of  wealth  and
therefore  of  superiority  over  those  who  have  nothing  and
L  therefore  must  work;  it  follows  that  addiction  to  work
becomes  a  mark  of  inferiority  and  therefore  discreditable.
Whereby  work  becomes  distasteful  to  all  men  instructed
in  the  proprieties  of  the  pecuniary  culture;  and  it  has
even  become  so  irksome  to  men  trained  in  the  punctilios
of  the  servile,  predatory,  phase  of  this  culture  that  it
was  once  credibly  proclaimed  by  a  shrewd  priesthood  as
the  most  calamitous  curse  laid  on  mankind  by  a  vindic-
tive God.  Also,  since  wealth  affords  means  for  a  free
consumption  of  goods,  the  conspicuous  consumption  of
goods  becomes  a  mark  of  pecuniary  excellence,  and  so  it
becomes  an  element  of  respectability  in  any  pecuniary
culture,  and  presently  becomes  a  meritorious  act  and
even  a  requirement  of  pecuniary  decency. The  outcome

^  is  conspicuous  wastefulness  of  consumption,  the  Hmits
of  which,  if  any,  have  apparently  not  been  approached
hitherto.^

The  bearings  of  this  pecuniary  culture  on  workman-
ship and  technology  are  wide  and  diverse.  Most  im-
mediate and  perhaps  most  notable  is  the  conventional
disesteem  of  labour  spoken  of  above,  which  seems  to  follow
as  a  necessary  consequence  from  the  institution  of  owner-
ship in  all  cases  where  distinctions  of  wealth  are  at  all

^  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  these  secondary  consequences  of  the
institution  of  ownership,  the  irksomeness  of  labour  and  the  conspicuous
waste  of  goods,  which  cannot  be  pursued  here,  see  The  Theory  oj  th$
Leisure  Class,  ch.  ii-vi.


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 175

considerable  or  where  property  rights  are  associated  with
facts  of  mastery  and  prestige.  The  pecuniary  disrepute
of  labour  acts  to  discourage  industry,  but  this  may  be
offset,  at  least  in  part,  by  the  incentive  given  to  emulation
by  the  good  repute  attaching  to  acquisition.  The  waste-
ful expenditure  of  goods  and  services  enjoined  by  the
pecuniary  canons  of  conspicuous  consumption  gives  an
economically  untoward  direction  to  industry,  at  the
same  time  that  it  greatly  increases  the  hardsliips  and
curtails  the  amenities  of  Hfe.  So  also,  estrangement  and
distrust  between  persons,  classes  and  nations  necessarily
pervades  this  cultural  era,  due  to  the  incessant  gnawing  of
incompatible  pecuniary  interests;  and  this  state  of  affairs
appreciably  lowers  the  aggregate  efficiency  of  human
industry  and  sets  up  bootless  obstacles  to  be  overcome
and  irrelevant  asperities  to  be  put  up  with.

These  and  the  like  consequences  of  pecuniary  emula-
tion are  simple,  direct  and  obvious;  but  the  disciphne
of  the  pecuniary  culture  bears  on  workmanship  also  in
a  more  subtle  way,  indirect  and  less  evident  at  first  sight.
The  discipline  of  daily  Hfe  imparts  its  own  bent  to  the  ^
sense  of  workmanship  through  habituation  of  the  work-
man to  that  scheme  and  logic  of  things  that  rules  this
pecuniary  culture.  The  outcome  as  concerns  industry
is  somewhat  equivocal;  the  discipline  of  self-seeking  at
some  points  favours  workmanship  and  at  others  not.
At  one  period  or  phase  of  the  pecuniary  culture,  generally
speaking  an  early  or  crude  phase,  the  bent  so  given  to
workmanship  and  technology  seems  necessarily  to  be
conducive  to  inefficiency;  at  another  (later  or  maturer)
phase  the  contrary  is  Hkely  to  be  true.

The  pecuniary  discipline  of  invidious  emulation  takes


176  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

effect  on  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  chiefly  and  most
y  pervasively  through  the  bias  which  it  gives  to  the  knowl-
^  edge  on  which  workmanship  proceeds.  It  may  be  called
to  mind  that  the  body  of  knowledge  (facts)  turned  to
account  in  workmanship,  the  facts  made  use  of  in  devising
technological  processes  and  appliances,  are  of  the  nature
of  habits  of  thought.  This  is  particularly  apphcable  to
those  (tactical)  principles  under  whose  control  the  in-
formation in  hand  is  construed  and  connected  up  into  a
system  of  uses,  agencies  and  instrumentalities.  These
habits  of  thought,  elements  of  knowledge,  items  of  in-
formation, accepted  facts,  principles  of  reality,  in  part
represent  the  mechanical  behaviour  of  objects,  the  brute
nature  of  brute  matter,  and  in  part  they  stand  for  quali-
ties, aptitudes  and  proclivities  imputed  to  external  ob-
jects and  their  behaviour  and  so  infused  into  the  facts
and  the  generalisations  based  on  them.  The  sense  of
workmanship  has  much  to  do  with  this  imputation  of
traits  to  the  phenomena  of  observation,  perhaps  more
than  any  other  of  the  proclivities  native  to  man.  The
traits  so  imputed  to  the  facts  are  in  the  main  such  as
will  be  consonant  with  the  sense  of  workmanship  and
will  lend  themselves  to  a  concatenation  in  its  terms.  But
this  infusion  of  traits  into  the  facts  of  observation,
whether  it  takes  effect  at  the  instance  of  the  sense  of
workmanship,  or  conceivably  on  impulse  not  to  be  iden-
tified with  this  instinct,  is  a  logical  process  and  is  carried
out  by  an  intelligence  whose  logical  processes  have  in  all
cases  been  profoundly  biassed  by  habituation.  So  that
the  habits  of  life  of  the  individual,  and  therefore  of  the
community  made  up  of  such  individuals,  will  pervasively
and  unremittingly  bend  this  work  of  imputation  with  the


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 177

set  of  their  own  current,  and  will  accordingly  involve
incoming  elements  of  knowledge  in  a  putative  system  of
relations  consistent  with  these  habits  of  Hfe.  This  com-
prehensive scheme  of  habitual  apprehensions  and  ap-
preciations is  what  is  called  the  "genius,"  spirit,  or
character  of  any  given  culture.  In  all  this  range  of
habitual  preconceptions  touching  the  nature  of  things
there  prevails  a  degree  of  solidarity,  of  mutual  support
and  re-enforcement  among  the  several  lines  of  habitual
activity  comprised  in  the  current  scheme  of  Hfe;  so  that
a  certain  characteristic  tone  or  bias  runs  through  the
whole, — in  so  far  as  the  cultural  situation  has  attained
that  degree  of  maturity  or  assimilation  that  will  allow
it  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  distinctive  whole,  standing  out
as  a  determinate  and  coherent  phase  in  the  Hfe-history
of  the  race.  To  this  bias  of  scope  and  method  in  the
current  scheme  of  hfe,  intellectual  and  sentimental,  any
new  element  or  item  must  be  assimilated  if  it  is  not  to  be
rejected  as  ahen  and  unreal  or  to  fall  through  by  neglect.
All  this  bears  on  the  scope  and  method  of  knowledge,
and  therefore  on  the  facts  made  use  of  in  the  industrial
arts,  just  as  it  bears  on  any  other  feature  of  human  life
that  is  of  the  nature  of  habit.  And  the  immediate  ques-
tion is  as  to  the  bias  or  drift  of  the  pecuniary  culture  as
it  affects  the  apprehension  of  facts  serviceable  for  tech-
nological ends.  This  pecuniary  bias  or  bent  may  be
described  as  invidious,  personal,  emulative,  looking  to
differential  values  in  respect  of  personal  force  or  compet-
itive success,  looking  to  gradations  in  respect  of  com-
parative potency,  validity,  authenticity,  propriety,  rep-
utability,  decency.  The  canons  of  pecuniary  repute
preclude  the  well-to-do,  who  have  leisure  for  such  things,


V


1 78  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

from  inquiring  narrowly  into  the  facts  of  technology,
since  these  things  are  beneath  their  dignity,  conven-
tionally distasteful;  familiarity  with  such  matters  can
not  with  propriety  be  avowed,  nor  can  they  without
offence  and  humiHation  be  canvassed  at  all  intimately
among  the  better  class.  At  the  same  time  pecuniary
competition,  when  carried  to  its  ideal  pitch,  works  the
lower  industrial  classes  to  exhaustion  and  allows  them
no  appreciable  leisure  or  energy  for  indulging  any  possible
curiosity  of  this  kind  on  their  part.  The  habitual  (ideal)
frame  of  mind  is  that  of  invidious  self-interest  on  the
one  hand,  due  to  the  imperative  and  ubiquitous  need
of  gain  in  wealth  or  in  rank,  and  on  the  other  hand  class
discrimination  due  to  the  ubiquitous  prevalence  of  dis-
tinctions in  prerogatives  and  authentic  standing.  The
discipline  of  the  pecuniary  religions,  or  of  the  religious
tenets  and  observances  proper  to  the  pecuniary  culture,
runs  to  a  similar  effect;  more  decisively  so  in  the  earlier,
or  distinctively  predatory,  phases  of  this  culture  than
in  the  peaceable  or  commercial  phase.  The  vulgar  facts
of  industry  are  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  feudahstic  deity
or  of  his  priesthood;  at  the  same  time  that  the  over-
mastering need  of  standing  well  in  the  graces  of  an  all-
powerful,  exacting  and  irresponsible  God  throws  a  deeper
shadow  of  ignobihty  over  the  material  side  of  hfe,  and
makes  any  workmanlike  preoccupation  with  industrial
efficiency  presumptively  sinful  as  well  as  indecorous.

The  pecuniary  culture  is  not  singular  in  this  matter.
Always  and  everywhere  the  acquirement  of  knowledge
is  a  matter  of  observation  guided  and  filled  out  by  the
imputation  of  quaHties,  relations  and  aptitudes  to  the
observed  phenomena. Without  this  putative  content


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 179

of  active  presence  and  potency  the  phenomena  would
lack  reality;  they  could  not  be  assimilated  in  the  scheme
of  things  human.  It  is  only  a  commonplace  of  the  logic
of  apperception  that  the  substantial  traits  of  objective
facts  are  a  figment  of  the  brain.  Under  the  discipline  of
this  pecuniary  phase  of  culture  the  requisite  imputation
of  character  to  facts  runs,  as  ever,  in  anthropomorphic '^
terms;  but  it  is  an  anthropomorphism  which  by  habit
conforms  to  the  predatory-pecuniary  scheme  of  precon-
ceptions, such  as  the  routine  of  Hfe  has  made  ready  and
convincing  to  men  Hving  under  the  discipHne  of  emu-
lation, invidious  distinctions  and  authentic  pecuniary
decorum.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  in  the
anthropomorphism  of  naive  workmanship  that  the  puta-
tive reality  of  facts  is  to  be  sought,  but  in  their  con-
formity to  the  conventionally  definitive  preconceptions
of  invidious  merit,  authentic  excellence,  force  of  charac-
ter, mastery,  complaisance,  congruity  with  the  run  of
the  established  institutional  values  and  the  ordinances
of  the  Most  High.  The  canons  of  reality,  under  which
sense  impressions  are  reduced  to  objective  fact  and  so
become  available  for  use,  and  under  which,  again,  facts
are  put  in  practice  and  turned  to  technological  account,
are  the  same  canons  of  invidious  distinction  that  rule
in  the  world  of  property  and  among  men  occupied  with
predatory  and  pecuniary  precedence.  In  effect  men  and  I
things  come  to  be  rated  in  terms  of  what  they  (putatively)  '
are — their  intrinsic  character — rather  than  in  terms  of
what  they  (empirically)  will  do.

Without  pursuing  the  question  farther  at  this  point,
it  should  be  evident  that  the  bias  of  the  pecuniary  cul-
ture must  on  the  whole  act  with  pervasive  force  so  to


i8o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

y  bend  men's  knowledge  of  the  things  with  which  they  have
to  do  as  to  lessen  its  serviceability  for  technological  ends.
The  result  is  a  deflection  from  matter-of-fact  to  matter
of  imputation,  and  the  imputation  is  of  the  personal
character  here  spoken  of.  The  dominant  note  appears
to  be  a  differential  rating  in  respect  of  aggressive  self-
assertion, whether in human or non-human agents.

J  Theological  preconceptions  are  commonly  strong  in  the
pecuniary  culture,  and  under  their  rule  this  differential
rating  developes  into  a  scheme  of  graded  powers  and
efficacies  vested  in  the  phenomena  of  external  nature  by
delegation  from  an  overruling  personal  authority.  Such
a  bent  is  necessarily  prejudicial  to  workmanship,  and  it
may  seem  that  the  ubiquitous  repressive  force  of  this
metaphysics  of  authority  and  authenticity  should  serve
the  same  disserviceable  end  for  workmanship  as  the  more
genial  and  diffuse  anthropomorphism  of  the  lower  cul-
tures, but  with  more  decisive  effect  since  it  runs  in  a
more  competently  organised,  compact  and  prescriptive
fashion.

Where  the  pecuniary  culture  has  been  carried  through
consistently  on  the  predatory  plan,  without  being  di-
verted to  that  commercial  phase  current  in  the  latterday
Western  civilisation,  the  conclusion  of  the  matter  has
been  decay  of  the  industrial  arts  and  effectual  dissipation
of  that  system  of  matter-of-fact  knowledge  on  which
technological  efficiency  rests.  In  the  West,  where  the
predatory  phase  proper  has  eventually  given  place  to  a
commercial  phase  of  the  same  pecuniary  culture,  the
general  run  of  events  in  this  bearing  has  been  a  decline
of  knowledge,  technology  and  workmanship,  running  on
so  long  as  the  predatory  (coercive)  rule  prevailed  un-


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture i8i

broken,  but  followed  presently  by  a  slow  recovery  and
advance  in  technological  efficiency  and  scientific  insight;
somewhat  in  proportion  as  the  commercialisation  of  this
culture  has  gained  ground,  and  therefore  correlated  also
in  a  general  way  with  the  decHne  of  religious  fear.

This  run  of  events  may  tempt  to  the  inference  that
while  the  predatory  phase  proper  of  this  pecuniary
civiKsation  is  inimical  to  matter-of-fact  knowledge  and
to  technological  insight,  the  rule  of  commercial  ideas
and  ideals  characteristic  of  its  subsequent  peaceable
phase  acts  to  propagate  these  material  elements  of  cul-
ture. But  what  has  already  appeared  in  the  course  of
the  inquiry  into  that  still  earHer  cultural  phase  that
went  before  the  coercive  and  invidious  regime  of  preda-
tion  suggests  that  the  case  is  not  so  simple  nor  so  flatter-
ing to  our  latterday  self-complacency.  The  self-regarding
sentiments  of  arrogance  and  abasement,  out  of  whose
free  habitual  exercise  the  pecuniary  culture,  with  its
institutions  of  prerogative  and  differential  advantage,
has  been  built  up,  are  not  the  spiritual  source  from  which
such  an  outcome  is  to  be  looked  for.  These  sentiments
and  the  instinctive  procKvities  of  which  these  sentiments
are  the  emotional  expression  are  presumed  to  have  re-
mained unchanged  in  force  and  character  through  that
long  course  of  cumulative  habituation  that  has  given
them  their  ascendency  in  the  institutions  of  the  pecuniary
culture,  and  of  their  own  motion  they  will  yield  now  re-
sults of  the  same  kind  as  ever.  But  the  Hke  is  true  also
for  those  other  instincts  out  of  whose  working  came  the
earlier  gains  made  in  knowledge  and  workmanship  under
the  savage  culture,  before  the  self-regarding  sentiments
underlying  the  pecuniary  culture  took  the  upper  hand.


V


1 82  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

The  parental  bent  and  the  instincts  of  workmanship  and
of  curiosity  will  have  been  overborne  by  cumulative
habituation  to  the  rule  of  the  self-regarding  proclivities
that  triumphed  in  the  culture  of  predation,  and  whose
dominion  has  subsequently  suffered  some  impairment
in  the  later  substitution  of  property  rights  for  tenure  by
prowess,  but  these  instincts  that  make  for  workmanship
remain  as  intrinsic  to  human  nature  as  the  others.  What
is  to  be  said  for  the  current  commercial  scheme  of  Hfe,
therefore,  appears  to  be  that  it  is  only  less  inimical  to
the  functioning  of  those  instinctive  propensities  that
serve  the  common  interest.  Hence,  gradually,  these
instincts  and  the  non-invidious  interests  which  they
engender  have  been  coming  effectually  into  bearing  again
as  fast  as  the  stern  repression  of  them  exercised  by  the
full-charged  predatory  scheme  of  life  has  weakened  into
a  less  and  less  effectual  inhibition,  under  the  discipline
of  compromise  and  mitigated  self-aggrandisement  em-
bodied in  the  rights  of  property.

That  authentication  of  ownership  out  of  which  the
sacred  rights  of  property  have  apparently  grown  may
well  have  arisen  as  a  sort  of  mutual  insurance  among
owners  as  against  the  disaffection  of  the  dispossessed;
which  would  presently  give  rise  to  a  sentiment  of  solid-
arity within  the  class  of  owners,  would  acquire  prescrip-
tive force  through  habitual  enforcement,  become  a  matter
of  customary  right  to  be  consistently  respected  under
the  institutional  forms  of  property,  and  eventuate  in
that  highly  moralised  expression  of  self-aggrandisement
which  it  is  today.  But  with  the  putting-away  of  fancy-
free  predation,  as  being  a  conventionally  disallowed
means  of  self-aggrandisement,  sentiments  of  equity  and


'  The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 183

solidarity  would  presently  come  in — perhaps  at  the  out-
set by  way  of  disingenuous  make-believe — and  so  the
way  would  be  made  easier  under  the  shelter  of  this  range
of  conceptions  for  a  rehabilitation  of  the  primordial
parental  instinct  and  its  penchant  for  the  common  good.
And  when  ownership  has  once  been  institutionaKsed  in
this  impersonal  and  quasi-dispassionate  form  it  will  lend
but  a  decreasingly  urgent  bias  to  the  cultural  scheme
in  the  direction  of  differential  respect  of  persons  and  a
differential  rating  of  natural  phenomena  in  respect  of
the  occult  potencies  and  efficacies  imputed  to  them.

As  the  institutional  ground  has  shifted  from  free-swung
predation  to  a  progressively  more  covert  regime  of  self-
aggrandisement  and  differential  gain,  the  instinct  of
workmanship  has  progressively  found  freer  range  and
readier  access  to  its  raw  material.  The  differential  good
repute  of  wealth  and  rank  has  of  course  continued  to
be  of  much  the  same  nature  in  the  later  (commercial)
stages  of  the  pecuniary  culture  as  in  the  earher  (preda-
tory) stages.  An  aristocratic  (or  servile)  scheme  of  Hfe
must  necessarily  run  in  invidious  terms,  since  that  is  the
whole  meaning  of  the  phenomenon;  and  resting  as  any
such  scheme  does  on  pecuniary  distinctions,  whether
direct  or  through  the  intermediary  term  of  predatory
exploit,  it  will  necessarily  involve  the  corollary  that
wealth  and  exemption  from  work  {otium  cum  dignitate)  is
honourable  and  that  poverty  and  work  is  dishonourable.
But  with  the  progressive  commerciaHsation  of  gain  and
ownership  it  also  comes  to  pass  that  peaceable  applica-
tion to  the  business  in  hand  may  have  much  to  do  with
the  acquirement  of  a  reputable  standing;  and  so  long
as  work  is  of  a  visibly  pecuniary  kind  and  is  sagaciously


184  "  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  visibly  directed  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  the
disrepute  intrinsically  attaching  to  it  is  greatly  offset
by  its  meritorious  purpose.  So  much  so,  indeed,  that
there  has  even  grown  up  something  of  a  class  feeling,
among  the  class  who  have  come  by  their  wealth  through
industry  and  shrewd  dealing,  to  the  effect  that  peaceable
diligence  and  thrift  are  meritorious  traits.

This  is  "middle-class"  sentiment  of  course.  The
aristocratic  contempt  for  the  tradesman  and  all  his
works  has  not  suffered  serious  mitigation  through  all
this  growth  of  new  methods  of  reputability.  The  three
conventionally  recognised  classes,  upper,  middle,  and
lower,  are  all  and  several  pecuniary  categories;  the  upper
being  typically  that  (aristocratic)  class  which  is  pos-
sessed of  wealth  without  having  worked  or  bargained
for  it;  while  the  middle  class  have  come  by  their  holdings
through  some  form  of  commercial  (business)  traffic;  and
the  lower  class  gets  what  it  has  by  workmanship.  It
is  a  gradation  of  {a)  predation,  (J))  business,  (c)  industry;
the  former  being  disserviceable  and  gainful,  the  second
gainful,  and  the  third  serviceable.  And  no  modern
civilised  man  is  so  innocent  of  the  canons  of  reputabiKty
as  not  to  recognise  off-hand  that  the  first  category  is
meritorious  and  the  last  discreditable,  whatever  his
individual  prejudices  may  lead  him  to  think  of  the  second.
Aristocracy  without  unearned  wealth,  or  without  preda-
tory antecedents,  is  a  misnomer.  When  an  aristocratic
class  loses  its  pecuniary  advantage  it  becomes  ques-
tionable. A  poverty-stricken  aristocrat  is  a  "decayed
gentleman;"  and  "the  nobility  of  labour"  is  a  disin-
genuous figure  of  speech.

The  transition  from  the  original  predatory  phase  of


The  Technology  of  the  Predatory  Culture 1S5

the  pecuniary  culture  to  the  succeeding  commercial  phase
signifies  the  emergence  of  a  middle  class  in  such  force  as
presently  to  recast  the  working  arrangements  of  the
cultural  scheme  and  make  peaceable  business  (gainful
traffic)  the  ruling  interest  of  the  community.  With  the
same  movement  emerges  a  situation  which  is  progres-
sively more  favourable  to  the  intellectual  animus  required
for  workmanship  and  an  advance  in  technology.  The
state  of  the  industrial  arts  advances,  and  with  its  ad-
vance the  accumulation  of  wealth  is  accelerated,  the
gainfulness  of  business  traffic  increases,  and  the  middle
(business)  class  grows  along  with  it.  It  is  in  the  conscious
interest  of  this  class  to  further  the  gainfulness  of  indus-
try, and  as  this  end  is  correlated  with  the  productive-
ness of  industry  it  is  also,  though  less  directly,  correlated
with  improvements  in  technology.

With  the  transition  from  a  naively  predatory  scheme
to  a  commercial  one,  the  "competitive  system"  takes
the  place  of  the  coercive  methods  previously  employed,
and  pecuniary  gain  becomes  the  incentive  to  industry.
At  least  superficially,  or  ephemerally,  the  workman's
income  under  this  pecuniary  regime  is  in  some  propor-
tion to  his  product.  Hence  there  results  a  voluntary
appHcation  to  steady  work  and  an  incHnation  to  find
and  to  employ  improvements  in  the  methods  and  ap-
pliances of  industry.  At  the  same  time  commercial
conceptions  come  progressively  to  supplant  conceptions
of  status  and  personal  consequence  as  the  primary  and
most  familiar  among  the  habits  of  thought  entailed  by
the  routine  of  daily  life.  This  will  be  true  especially
for  the  common  man,  as  contrasted  with  the  aristocratic
classes,  although  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  the


1 86  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

standards  of  propriety  imposed  on  the  community  by
the  better  classes  will  have  a  considerably  corrective
effect  on  the  frame  of  mind  of  the  common  man  in  this
respect  as  in  others,  and  so  will  act  to  maintain  an  effec-
tive currency  of  predatory  ideals  and  preconceptions
after  the  economic  situation  at  large  has  taken  on  a  good
deal  of  a  commercial  complexion.  The  accountancy  of
price  and  ownership  throws  personal  prestige  and  conse-
quence notably  less  into  the  foreground  than  does  the
rating  in  terms  of  prowess  and  gentle  birth  that  charac-
terises the  predatory  scheme  of  life.  And  in  proportion
as  such  pecuniary  accountancy  comes  to  pervade  men's
relations,  correspondingly  impersonal  terms  of  rating
and  appreciation  will  make  their  way  also  throughout
men's  habitual  apprehension  of  external  facts,  giving
the  whole  an  increasingly  impersonal  complexion.  So
far  as  this  effect  is  had,  the  facts  of  observation  will  lend
themselves  with  correspondingly  increased  facility  and
effect  to  the  purposes  of  technology.  So  that  the  com-
mercial phase  of  culture  should  be  favourable  to  advance
in  the  industrial  arts,  at  least  as  regards  the  immediate
incidence  of  its  discipline.


CHAPTER  V

Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System

/. Peaceable  Ownership

The  pecuniary  system  of  social  organisation  that  so
results  has  grave  and  lasting  consequences  for  the  welfare
of  society.  It  brings  class  divergence  of  material  in-
terests, class  prerogative  and  differential  hardship,  and
an  accentuated  class  disparity  in  the  consumption  of
goods,  involving  a  very  extensive  resort  to  the  conspic-
uous waste  of  goods  and  services  as  an  evidence  of  wealth.
These  consequences  of  the  pecuniary  economy  may  be
interesting  enough  in  themselves,  even  to  the  theore-
tician, but  they  need  not  be  pursued  here  except  in  so
far  as  they  have  an  appreciable  bearing  on  the  com-
munity's workmanlike  efficiency  and  the  further  develop-
ment of  technology.^  But  the  more  direct  and  immediate
technological  consequences  of  this  move  from  a  predatory
to  a  peaceable  or  quasi-peaceable  economic  system  are
also  sufficiently  grave — ^partly  favourable  to  workman-
ship and  partly  otherwise — and  these  it  is  necessary  for
the  purposes  of  this  inquiry  to  follow  up  in  some  detail.

The  interest  and  attention  of  the  two  typical  pecuniary

^  For  some  further  analysis  of  the  relation  between  ownership,  earnings
and  the  material  equipment  see  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,
1908,  "On  the  Nature  of  Capital;"  as  also  a  paper  by  H.  J.  Davenport
in  the  same  Journal  for  November,  1910,  on  "Social  Productivity  versus
Private  Acquisition."

/187


1 88  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

classes  between  whom  the  affairs  of  industry  now  come
to  lie,  presently  part  company  and  enter  on  a  course  of
progressive  differentiation along  two  divergent  lines.

V  The  workmen,  labourers,  operatives,  technologists, —
whatever  term  may  best  designate  that  general  category
of  human  material  through  which  the  community's
technological  proficiency  functions  directly  to  an  indus-
trial effect, — these  have  to  do  with  the  work,  whereby
they  get  their  liveHhood,  and  their  interest  as  well  as
the  discipline  of  their  workday  life  converges,  in  effect
on a  technologically  competent apprehension  of  ma-

v/  terial  facts.  In  this  respect  the  free  workmen  under
this  peaceable  regime  of  property  are  very  differently
placed  from  the  servile  worlanan  of  the  predatory  regime

^/  of  mastery  and  servitude.  The  latter  has  httle  if  any
interest  in  the  efficiency  of  the  industrial  processes  in
which  he  is  engaged,  less  so  the  more  widely  his  status
differs  from  that  of  the  free  workman.  His  case  is  anal-
ogous to  that  of  the  tenant  at  will,  who  has  nothing  to
gain  from  permanent  improvement  of  the  land  which
he  cultivates.  Whereas  the  free  workman  is,  at  least
immediately  and  transiently,  and  particularly  in  his
own  current  apprehension  of  the  matter,  quite  intimately
dependent  on  his  own  technological  proficiency  and
vitally  interested  in  any  available  technological  ex-
pedient that  promises  to  heighten  his  efficiency.  Such
is  particularly  the  case  during  the  earHer  phases  of  the
regime  of  peaceable  ownership,  so  long  as  the  free  work-
man is  in  the  typical  case  working  at  his  own  discretion
and  disposes  of  his  own  product  in  a  limited  market.
And  such  continues  to  be  the  case,  on  the  whole,  under
the  wage  system  so  long  as  the  large-scale  production


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  189

and  investment  have  not  put  an  end  to  the  employer's
intimate  supervision  of  his  employes.  Indeed,  under
the  driving  exigencies  of  the  competitive  wage  system
the  workmen  are  somewhat  strenuously  held  to  such  a
workmanlike  apprehension  of  things,  even  though  they
may  no  longer  have  the  same  intimate  concern  in  their
own  current  efficiency  as  in  the  earHer  days  of  handicraft.
The  severe  pressure  of  competitive  wages  and  large  or-
ganisation, it  might  well  be  thought,  should  logically
offset  the  slighter  attraction  which  work  as  such  has
for  the  hired  workman  as  contrasted  with  the  man
occupied  with  his  own  work.  The  effect  of  this  regime
of  free  labour  should  logically  be,  as  it  apparently  has  in
great  part  been,  a  close  and  progressively  searching  re-
course to  the  logic  of  matter-of-fact  in  all  the  workmen's
habitual  thinking,  and  in  all  their  outlook  on  matters
of  interest,  whether  in  industry  or  in  the  other  concerns
of  life  that  may  conceivably  be  of  more  capital  interest.

On  the  other  hand  the  owners  under  this  regime  of  ^
peaceable  ownership  have  to  do  with  the  pecuniary
management,  the  gainful  manipulation  of  property. In

the  transitional  beginnings  of  this  system  of  peaceable

ownership  and  free  workmen  the  owners  are  in  the
typical  case  owners  of  land  or  similar  natural  resources;
but  in  due  course  of  time  there  arises  a  class  of  owners
holding  property  in  the  material  equipment  of  industry
and  deriving  their  gains  and  livelihood  from  a  business-
like management  of  this  property,  at  the  same  time  that
the  landlords  also  fall  into  more  businesslike  relations
with  their  tenants  on  the  one  hand  and  with  the  indus-
trial community  that  supplies  their  wants  on  the  other
hand. These  owners, investors, masters, employers,


iQo  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

undertakers,  businessmen,  have  to  do  with  the  negotia-
tion of  advantageous  bargains;  it  is  by  bargaining  that
their  discretionary  control  of  property  takes  effect,  and
in  one  way  or  another  their  attention  centres  on  the
quest  of  profits.  The  training  afforded  by  these  occupa-
tions and  requisite  to  their  effectual  pursuit  runs  in
terms  of  pecuniary  management  and  insight,  pecuniary
gain,  price,  price-cost,  price-profit  and  price-loss;  and
these  men  are  held  to  an  ever  more  exacting  recourse  to
the  logic  of  the  price  system,  and  so  are  trained  to  the
apprehension  of  men  and  things  in  terms  which  count
toward  a  gainful  margin  on  investments  and  business
undertakings;  that  is  to  say  in  terms  of  the  self -regarding
propensities  and  sentiments  comprised  in  human  nature,
and  perhaps  especially  in  terms  of  human  infirmity.

This  last  point  in  the  characterisation  may  seem  un-
warranted, and  may  even  strike  unreflecting  persons  as
derogatory.  It  is,  of  course,  not  so  intended;  and  any
degree  of  reflection  will  bring  out  its  simple  bearing  on
/  the  facts  of  business.  As  is  well  and  obviously  known,
V  the  sole  end  of  business  as  such  is  pecuniary  gain,  gain
in  terms  of  price.  It  need  not  be  held,  as  has  sometimes
been  argued,  that  one  businessman's  gain  is  necessarily
another's  loss;  although  that  principle  was  once  taken
for  granted,  as  the  foundation  of  the  MercantiHst  policies
of  Europe,  and  is  still  acted  on  uncritically  by  the  gen-
erality of  statesmen.  But  it  is  at  any  rate  true,  because
it  is  contained  in  the  terms  employed,  that  a  successful
business  negotiation  is  more  successful  in  proportion  as
the  party  of  the  second  part  is  less  competent  to  take
care  of  his  own  pecuniary  interest,  whether  through
native  or  acquired  incapacity  for  pecuniary  discretion


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  191

or  from  pecuniary  inability  to  stand  out  for  such  terms
as  he  otherwise  might  conceivably  exact.  A  shrewd
businessman  can,  notoriously,  negotiate  advantageous
terms  with  an  inexperienced  minor  or  a  necessitous  cus-
tomer or  employe.  Pecuniary  gain  is  a  differential
gain  and  business  is  a  negotiation  of  such  differential
gains;  not  necessarily  a  differential  of  one  businessman
as  against  or  at  the  cost  of  another;  but  more  commonly,
and  more  typical  of  the  competitive  system,  it  is  a  dif-
ferential as  between  the  businessman's  outlay  and  his
returns, — that  is  to  say,  as  between  the  businessman  and
the  unbusinesslike  generaHty  of  persons  with  whom
directly  or  indirectly  he  deals  as  customers,  employes,
and  the  hke.  For  the  purposes  of  such  a  negotiation  of
differentials  the  weakness  of  one  party  (in  the  pecuniary
respect)  is  as  much  to  the  point  as  the  strength  of  the
other, — the  two  being  substantially  the  same  fact.  The
discipline  of  the  business  occupations  should  accordingly
run  to  the  habitual  rating  of  men,  things  and  affairs  in
terms  of  emulative  human  nature  and  of  precautionary
wisdom  in  respect  of  pecuniary  expediency.  Instead  of
workmanlike  or  technological  insight,  this  discipline  con-
duces to  worldly  wisdom.^

But  the  disparity  between  the  discipHne  of  the
business  occupations  and  that  of  industry  is  by  no
means  so  sheer  as  this  contrast  in  their  main  char-
acteristics would  imply,  nor  do  the  men  engaged  in
these  two  divergent  lines  of  work  differ  so  widely  in
their  habitual  outlook  on  affairs  or  their  insight  into

*  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  this  disciplinary  disparity  between
business  and  industrial  occupations,  cf.  The  Theory  of  Business  Enter"
prise,  ch.  iv,  viii  and  ix.


192  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

facts.  Such  is  particularly  the  case  in  the  earlier  and
simpler  phases  of  the  regime,  before  the  specialisation
of  occupations  had  gone  so  far  as  to  divide  the  working
community  in  any  consistent  fashion  into  the  two  con-
trasted classes  of  businessmen  on  the  one  side  and  work-
men on  the  other.  As  this  modern  regime  of  peaceable
ownership  and  pecuniary  organisation  has  advanced
and  its  pecuhar  features  of  organisation  and  workman-
ship have  reached  a  sharper  definition,  the  division  be-
tween the  two  contrasted  kinds  of  endeavour — business
and  workmanship — has  grown  wider  and  the  disparity
in  the  distinctive  range  of  habits  engendered  by  each
has  grown  more  marked.  So  that  something  of  a  marked
and  pervading  contrast  should  logically  be  found  be-
tween the  habitual  attitude  taken  by  members  of  the
business  community  on  the  one  hand  and  that  of  the
body  of  workmen  on  the  other  hand;  and  this  contrast
should,  logically,  go  on  increasing  with  each  successive
move  in  advance  along  this  line  of  specialisation  of  oc-
cupations and  ^'division  of  labour."  Some  such  result
has  apparently  followed;  but  neither  has  the  speciaHsa-
tion  been  complete  and  consistent,  nor  has  the  resulting
differentiation  in  respect  of  their  intellectual  and  spir-
itual attitude  set  the  two  contrasted  classes  of  persons
apart  in  so  definitive  a  fashion  as  a  first  and  elementary
consideration  of  the  causes  at  work  might  lead  one  to
infer.

Businessmen  have  to  do  with  industry;  more  or
less  remotely  perhaps,  but  often  at  near  hand,  for  it  is
out  of  industry  that  their  business  gains  come;  and  they
are  also  subject  to  the  routine  of  living  imposed  by  the
use  of  the  particular  range  of  industrial  appliances  and


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  193

processes  available  for  that  use.  The  workmen  on  the
other  hand  have  also  to  do  with  pecuniary  matters,  for
they  are  forever  in  contact  with  the  market  in  one  way
and  another,  and  it  is  in  pecuniary  terms  that  the  liveli-
hood comes  to  them  for  which  they  are  set  to  work.  And
both  businessmen  and  workmen  enter  on  their  two  di-
vergent lines  of  training  with  much  the  same  endow-
ment of  propensities  and  aptitudes.  Yet  it  appears  that
the  training  in  pecuniary  wisdom  that  makes  up  the
career  of  the  typical  businessman  is  after  all  of  little
avail  in  the  way  of  technological  insight  or  efficiency,
as  witness  the  ubiquitous  mismanagement  of  industry
at  the  hands  of  businessmen  who  are,  presimiably,  doing
their  best  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  industries
under  their  control  with  a  view  to  the  largest  net  gain
from  the  output.^  If  the  "efficiency  engineers"  are  to
be  credited,  it  is  probably  within  the  mark  to  say  that
the  net  aggregate  gains  from  industry  fall  short  of  what
they  might  be  by  some  fifty  per  cent,  owning  to  the  trained
inability  of  the  businessmen  in  control  to  appreciate
and  give  effect  to  the  visible  technological  requirements
of  the  industries  from  which  they  draw  their  gains.  To
appreciate  the  kind  and  degree  of  this  commonplace
mismanagement  of  industry  it  is  only  necessary  to  con-
trast the  facihty,  circumspection,  shrewd  strategy  and
close  economy  shown  by  these  same  businessmen  in  the
organisation  and  management  of  their  pecuniary,  fiscal
and  monetary  operations,  as  against  the  waste  of  time,
labour  and  materials  that  abounds  in  the  industries  under
their  control. But  for  the  workmen  likewise,  their  daily

^  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Harrington  Emerson,  Eficiency  as  a  Basis  for  Operation  and
Wages,  ch.  i,  iv.


194  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

work  and  their  insight  into  its  requirements  and  possi-
bilities are,  by  more  than  half,  a  ''business  proposition,"
a  proposition  in  the  pecuniary  calculus  of  how  to  get  the
most  in  price  for  the  least  return  in  weight  and  tale.

These  various  considerations,  taken  crudely  in  their
first  incidence,  would  seem  to  preclude  any  technological
advance  under  this  quasi-peaceable  regime  of  business.
Business  principles  and  pecuniary  distinctions  rule  the
famihar  routine  of  life,  and  even  the  common  welfare  is
conceived  in  terms  of  price,  and  so  of  differential  ad-
vantage; and  under  such  a  system  there  should  appar-
ently be  little  chance  of  the  dispassionate  pursuit  of
such  a  non-invidious  interest  as  that  of  workmanship.
}/  The  prime  mover  in  this  cultural  scheme  appears  to  be  in-
vidious self -aggrandisement,  without  fear  or  favour;  and
its  goal  appears  to  be  the  conspicuous  waste  of  goods  and
services.  Yet  in  point  of  fact  the  technological  advance
under  these  modern  conditions  has  been  larger  and  more
rapid  than  in  any  other  cultural  situation.  Therefore
the  circumstances  under  which  these  modern  gains  in
technology  have  been  made  will  merit  somewhat  more
detailed  attention;  as  also  the  cultural  consequences
that  have  followed  from  this  technological  advance  or
been  conditioned  by  it.  And  at  the  risk  of  some  tedious
repetition  it  seems  pertinent  summarily  to  recall  these
peculiar  circumstances  that  have  conditioned  the  modern
culture  and  have  presumably  shaped  its  technological
output.

By  and  large  this  modern  technological  era  runs  its
course  v/ithin  the  frontiers  of  Occidental  civiKsation,
and  in  the  period  subsequent  to  the  feudal  age.  Roughly,
its  centre  of  diffusion  is  the  region  of  the  North  Sea,  and


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  195

its  placement  in  point  of  time  is  in  that  period  of  com-
parative peace  spoken  of  as  "modem  times."  Such  of
the  peoples  comprised  within  this  Western  culture  as
have  continued  to  be  actively  occupied  with  fighting
during  this  modern  period  have  had  no  creative  share  in
this  technological  era,  and  indeed  they  have  had  Httle
share  of  any  kind.  The  broad  centre  of  diffusion  of  this
technology  coincides  in  a  curious  way  with  that  of  the
singularly  competent  and  singularly  matter-of-fact  neo-
lithic culture  of  northern  Europe;  and  the  racial  elements
that  have  been  engaged  in  this  modern  technological
advance  are  still  substantially  the  same,  and  mixed  in
substantially  the  same  proportions,  as  during  that  pre-
historic technological  era  of  the  lower  barbarism  or  the
higher  savagery.  This  implies,  of  course,  that  the  spir-
itual (instinctive)  endowment  of  the  peoples  that  have
made  the  modern  technological  era  is  still  substantially
the  same  as  was  that  of  their  forebears  of  the  Danish
stone  age.

The  peoples  that  have  taken  the  lead  in  this  cultural
growth,  and  more  particularly  in  the  technological  ad-
vance, have  never  lived  under  a  full  grown  and  consist-
ently worked  out  patriarchal  system,  nor  have  they,
therefore,  ever  fully  assimilated  that  pecuHarly  personal
and  arbitrarily  authoritative  scheme  of  anthropomorphic
behefs  that  commonly  goes  with  the  patriarchal  system.
In  the  earher  phases  of  their  cultural  experience,  and
until  recently,  they  have  lived  in  small  communities,
under  more  or  less  of  local  self-government,  and  have  in
great  part  shown  some  degree  of  religious  scepticism
and  insubordination.  They  have  had  some  experience
of  the  sea  and  of  that  impersonal  run  of  phenomena


196  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

which  the  sea  offers;  which  call  on  those  who  have
to  do  with  the  sea  for  patient  observation  of  how  such
impersonal  forces  work,  and  which  constrain  them  to
learn  by  trial  and  error  how  these  forces  may  be  turned
to  account.  Latterly,  in  the  days  of  their  most  pro-
nounced technological  advance,  these  peoples  have  had
experience  of  an  economic  and  industrial  system  or-
ganised on  an  unexampled  scale,  such  as  to  constitute  a
very  wide  and  inclusive  industrial  community  within
which  intercourse  has  been  increasingly  easy  and  effect-
ive.

These  circumstances  have  determined  the  range  of
their  habituation  in  its  larger  features;  and  these  peoples
have  come  under  the  discipline  of  this  situation  with  a
spiritual  endowment  apparently  differing  in  some  degree
from  what  any  other  group  of  peoples  has  ever  brought
to  a  similar  task.  How  much  of  the  outcome,  cultural
and  technological,  is  to  be  set  down  naively  and  directly
to  a  peculiar  temperamental  bent  in  this  human  raw  ma-
terial would  be  hazardous  to  conjecture.  Something
seems  fairly  to  be  credited  to  that  score.  The  particular
mixture  of  hybrids  that  goes  to  make  up  these  peoples,
and  in  which  the  dolicho-blond  enters  more  or  less
ubiquitously,  appears  to  lack  a  certain  degree  of  subtlety,
such  as  seems  native  to  many  other  peoples  that  have
created  civilisations  of  a  different  complexion, — a  sub-
tlety that  shows  itself  in  a  readiness  for  intrigue  and  far-
sighted  appreciation  of  the  springs  of  human  nature,
and  which  often  shows  itself  also  in  high-wrought  and
stupendous  constructions  of  anthropomorphic  myth  and
theology,  religion  and  magic,  as  well  as  in  such  large
and  fertile  systems  of  creative  art  as  will  commonly


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  197

accompany  these  anthropomorphic  creations.  Those
peoples  that  are  infused  with  an  appreciable  blond  ad-
mixture have  on  the  other  hand,  not  commonly  excelled
in  the  farther  reaches  of  the  spiritual  Kfe,  particularly
not  in  the  refinements  of  a  sustained  and  finished  anthro-
pomorphism. Their  best  efficiency  has  rather  run  to
those  bull-headed  deeds  of  force  and  those  mechanic
arts -that  touch  closely  on  the  domain  of  the  inorganic
forces.

Of  such  a  character  is  also  this  modern  technological
era.  It  is  in  the  mechanic  arts  deahng  with  brute  matter  7
that  the  modern  technology  holds  over  all  else,  in  matter-
of-fact  insight,  in  the  naivete  of  the  questions  with  which
its  adepts  search  the  facts  of  observation,  and  in  the
crudity  (anthropomorphically  speaking)  of  the  answers
with  which  they  are  content  to  go  back  to  their  work.
Outside  of  the  mechanic  arts  tliis  technology  must  be
rated  lower  than  second  best.  In  subtlety  of  craftsman-  H
like  insight  and  contrivance  or  in  dehcacy  of  manipula-
tion and  adroit  use  of  man's  physical  aptitudes  the  peo-
ples of  this  Western  culture  are  not  now  and  never  have
been  equal  to  the  best.

Such  a  characterisation  of  the  modern  technology  m.ay
seem  too  broad  and  too  schematic, — that  it  overlooks
features  of  the  case  that  are  sufficiently  large  and  distinc-
tive to  call  for  their  recognition  even  in  the  most  general
characterisation.  So,  e.  g.,  in  the  light  of  what  has  been
noted  above  in  speaking  of  the  domestication  of  the
crop  plants  and  animals,  the  question  may  well  suggest
itself:  Is  not  the  patent  success  of  these  modern  indus-
trial peoples  in  the  use  and  improvement  of  crops  and
cattle  to  be  accepted  as  evidence  of  a  genial  anthropo-


igS  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

morphic  bent,  of  the  same  kind  and  degree  as  took  effect
in  the  original  domestication  of  plants  and  animals?
For  some  two  hundred  years  past,  it  is  true,  very  sub-
stantial advances  have  been  made  in  tillage  and  breeding,
and  this  is  at  the  same  time  the  peculiar  domain  in  which
the  anthropomorphic  savages  of  the  stone  age  once
achieved  those  things  which  have  made  civilisation
physically  possible;  but  the  modern  gains  made  in  these
lines  have,  in  the  main  if  not  altogether,  been  techno-
logically of  the  same  mechanistic  character  as  the  rest
of  the  modern  advance  in  the  industrial  arts,  with  httle
help  or  hindrance  due  to  any  such  anthropomorphic  bias
as  guided  the  savage  ancients.  It  is  rather  by  virtue  of
their  having  come  competently  to  apprehend  these  facts
of  animate  nature  in  substantially  inanimate  terms,
mechanistic  and  chemical  terms,  that  the  modern  techno-
logical adepts  in  tillage  and  cattle-breeding  have  success-
fully carried  this  line  of  workmanship  forward  at  a  rate
and  with  an  effect  not  approached  before.  The  live-
stock expert  is  soberly  learning  by  trial  and  error  what
to  attempt  and  how  to  go  about  it  in  his  breeding  experi-
ments, and  he  deals  as  callously  as  any  mechanical  en-
gineer with  the  chemistry  of  stock  foods  and  the  use
and  abuse  of  ferments,  germs  and  enzymes.  The  soil
specialist  talks,  thinks  and  acts  in  terms  of  salts,  acids,
alkahes,  stratifications,  200-mesh  siftings,  and  nitrogen-
fixing  organisms.  The  crop-plant  expert  looks  to  hand-
made cross-fertilisation  and  to  the  Mendelian  calculus
of  hybridisation,  with  no  more  imputation  of  anthropo-
morphic traits  than  the  metallurgist  who  analyses  fuels
and  fluxes,  mixes  ores,  and  with  goggled  eye  scrutinises
the  shifting  tints  of  the  incandescent  gases  in  the  open


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  199

hearth.  It  is  from  such  facts  so  construed  that  modem
technology  is  made  up,  and  it  is  by  such  channels  that
the  sense  of  workmanship  has  gone  to  the  making  of  it.

So  the  question  recurs,  How  has  it  come  about  that
tliis  pecuniary  culture — with  its  institutions  drawn  in
terms  of  differential  advantage  and  moved  by  senti-
ments that  converge  on  emulative  gain  and  the  invi-
diously conspicuous  waste  of  goods — has  yet  furthered
the  growth  of  such  a  technology,  even  permissively?  In
its  direct  incidence,  the  discipline  of  this  pecuniary  cul-
ture is  doubtless  inimical  to  any  advance  in  workman-
like insight  or  any  matter-of-fact  apprehension  and  use
of  objective  phenomena.  It  is  a  civiHsation  whose  sub-
stantial core  is  of  a  subjective  kind,  in  the  narrowly  sub-
jective, personal,  individuahstic  sense  given  by  the  self-
regarding  sentiments  of  emulous  rivalry.^  But  when  all
is  said  it  is  after  all  a  peaceable  culture,  on  the  whole;
and  indeed  the  rules  of  the  business  game  of  profit  and
loss,  forfeit  and  sequestration,  require  it  to  be  so.  It
has  at  least  that  much,  and  perhaps  much  else,  in  com-
mon with  the  great  technological  era  of  the  north-
European  neolithic  age.  The  discipline  to  which  its
peoples  are  subject  may  be  exacting  enough,  and  its
exactions  may  run  to  worldly  wisdom  rather  than  to
matter-of-fact;  but  its  invidious  distinctions  run  in
terms  of  price,  that  is  to  say  in  terms  of  an  objective,
impersonal  money  unit,  in  the  last  resort  a  metallic

^  Such  is  tacitly  assumed  to  be  the  nature  of  modern  economic  life  in
the  current  theoretical  formulations  of  the  economists,  who  make  the
theory  of  exchange  value  the  central  and  controlling  doctrine  in  their
theoretical  systems,  and  who  with  easy  conviction  trace  this  value  back
to  an  individualistic  ground  in  the  doctrines  of  diSerential  utility —
"marginal  utility."


t


\


^6o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

weight;  and  the  traffic  of  daily  life  under  this  price  system
^''  affords  an  unremitting  exercise  in  the  exact  science  of
making  change,  large  and  small.  Even  the  daydreams
of  the  pecuniary  day-dreamer  take  shape  as  a  calculus  of
profit  and  loss  computed  in  standard  units  of  an  im-
personal magnitude,  even  though  the  magnitude  of  these
standard  units  may  on  analysis  prove  to  be  of  a  largely
putative  character.  The  imputation  under  the  price
system  is  of  an  impersonal  kind.  In  the  current  appre-
hension of  the  pecuniary  devotee  these  magnitudes  are
wholly  objective,  so  that  in  effect  the  training  that  comes
of  busying  himself  with  them  is  after  all  a  training  in  the
accurate  appreciation  of  brute  fact.
At  the  same  time,  the  instinct  of  workmanship,  being
^  not  an  acquired  trait,  has  not  been  got  rid  of  by  disuse;
and  when  the  occasion  offers,  under  the  relatively  tran-
quil conditions  of  this  peaceable  or  quasi-peaceable  pe-
cuniary regime,  the  ancient  proclivity  asserts  itself  in
its  ancient  force,  uneager  and  asthenic  perhaps,  but
pervasive  and  resihent.  And  when  this  instinct  works
out  through  the  Boeotic  genius  of  the  north-European
hybrid  there  is  a  good  chance  that  the  outcome  of  such
observation  and  reflection  will  fall  into  terms  of  matter-
of-fact,  of  such  close-shorn  naivete,  indeed,  as  to  afford
very  passable  material  for  the  material  sciences  and  the
machine  technology.

So  also,  the  ancient  and  time-worn  civil  institutions
of  the  north-European  peoples  have  apparently  not  been
of  the  high-wrought  invidious  character  that  comes  of
long  and  strenuous  training  in  the  practices  and  ideals
of  the  patriarchal  system;  nor  are  their  prevailing  reli-
gious  conceits extremely drastic, theatrical or cere-


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  201

monious,  as  compared  with  what  is  to  be  found  in  the
cults  of  the  great  dynastic  civilisations  of  the  East.  On
the  whole,  it  is  only  through  the  Middle  Ages  that  these
peoples  have  been  subject  to  the  rigorous  servile  dis-
cipline that  characterises  a  dynastic  despotism,  secular
or  religious;  and  much  of  the  ancient,  pagan  and  pre-
historic preconceptions  on  civil  and  religious  matters
appear  to  have  stood  over  in  the  habits  of  thought  of
the  common  people  even  through  that  interval  of  sub-
mergence under  aristocratic  and  patriarchal  rule.  In
the  same  connection  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  blond-
hybrid  peoples  of  Christendom  were  the  last  to  accept
the  patriarchal  mythology  of  the  Semites  and  have  also
been  the  first  and  readiest  to  shuffle  out  of  it  in  the  sequel;
which  suggests  the  inference  that  they  have  never  fully
assimilated  its  spirit;  perhaps  for  lack  of  a  sufficiently
strict  and  protracted  discipHne  in  its  ways  and  ideals,
perhaps  for  lack  of  a  suitable  temperamental  ground.

There  is,  indeed,  a  curiously  pervasive  concomitance,
in  point  of  time,  place,  and  race,  between  the  modern
machine  technology,  the  material  sciences,  reHgious
scepticism,  and  that  spirit  of  insubordination  that  makes
the  substance  of  what  are  called  free  or  popular  institu-
tions. On  none  of  these  heads  is  the  concomitance  so
close  or  consistent  as  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that  race
and  topography  alone  have  made  this  modern  cultural
outcome.  The  exceptions  and  side  issues  are  too  broad
and  too  numerous  for  that;  but  it  is  after  all  a  con-
comitance of  such  breadth  and  scope  that  it  can  also  not
be  overlooked.

The  course  of  mutations  that  has  brought  on  this


202  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship  \

modern  technological  episode  may  be  conceived  to  have
run  somewhat  in  the  following  manner.  For  lack  of
sufficient  training  in  predatory  habits  of  thought  (as
shown,  e.  g.,  in  the  incomplete  patriarchalism  of  the
north-Europeans)  the  predatory  culture  failed  to  reach
what  may  be  called  a  normal  maturity  in  the  feudal  sys-
tem of  Europe,  particularly  in  the  North  and  West,
where  the  blond  admixture  is  stronger;  by  "normal"
being  here  intended  that  sequence  of  growth,  institution-
aHsation,  and  decay  shown  typically  by  the  great  dynas-
tic civiKsations  erected  by  Semitic  invaders  in  the  East.
In  the  full-charged  predatory  culture,  in  its  earlier  phases,
there  appear  typically  to  be  present  two  somewhat
divergent  economic  principles  (habits  of  thought)  both
of  which  have  something  of  an  institutional  force:  {a)  The
warrant  of  seizure  by  prowess,^  which  commonly  comes
to  vest  in  the  dynastic  head  in  case  a  despotic  state  is
estabHshed;  and  {h)  the  prescriptive  tenure  of  whatever
one  has  acquired.  These  two  institutional  factors  are
at  variance,  and  according  as  one  or  the  other  of  the  two
finally  takes  precedence  and  rules  out  or  masters  its
rival  postulate,  the  predatory  culture  continues  on  Hnes
of  coercive  exploitation,  as  in  these  Asiatic  monarchies;
or  it  passes  into  the  quasi-peaceable  phase  marked  by
secure  prescriptive  tenure  of  property  and  a  settled  no-
biHty,  and  presently  into  a  commercialised  industrial
situation. Either  line  of  development  may,  of  course,

^  Apart  from  scattered  and  progressively  inconsequential  manifesta-
tions of  this  canon  of  pecuniary  equity  in  the  European  community  at
large,  there  occurs  a  quaint  and  well-defined  application  of  it  in  the  prac-
tice of  "  holmgangr"  in  late  pagan  and  early  Christian  times  among  the
Scandinavian  peoples.  The  "wager  of  battle"  is  probably  of  the  same
derivation,  at  least  in  part.


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  203

be  broken  off  without  having  reached  a  consumma-
tion.

Within  the  region  of  the  Western  Civilisation,  both
in  north  Europe  and  repeatedly  in  the  ^gean,  the
course  of  events  has  fallen  out  in  the  line  of  the  latter
alternative;  the  growth  of  institutions  has  shifted  from
the  footing  of  prowess  to  that  of  prescriptive  ownership.
So  soon  as  this  shift  has  securely  been  made,  the  develop-
ment of  trade,  industry  and  a  technological  system  has
come  into  the  foreground,  and  these  habitual  interests
have  then  reacted  on  the  character  of  the  institutions  in
force,  thereby  accelerating  the  growth  of  conditions
favourable  to  their  own  further  advance.  There  is,  of
course,  no  marked  point  of  conjuncture  in  the  cultural  se-
quence at  which  this  transition  may  definitely  be  said  to
have  been  effected,  but  in  a  general  way  it  may  be  held
that  the  point  of  transition  has  been  passed  so  soon  as
the  current  poHtical  and  economic  speculations  uncriti-
cally give  precedence  to  the  "commonweal"  as  against
the  fiscal  interests  of  the  crown  or  the  "state,"  whereby
the  crown  and  its  officers  come,  in  theory  and  pubHc  pro-
nouncement, to  be  rated  as  guardians  of  the  community's
material  welfare  rather  than  autocratic  exploiters  of
the  community's  productive  capacity.  Roughly  from
the  same  period  there  will  duly  set  in  something  of  an
acceleration  in  rate  of  improvement  in  the  state  of  the
mechanic  arts.  This  movement  seems  plainly  to  come
on  the  initiative  of  the  lower  or  industrial  classes  and  to
be  carried  by  their  genius,  rather  than  by  that  of  the
ruHng  classes,  whether  secular  or  spiritual.  It  shows
itself,  typically,  in  a  growth  of  handicraft  and  petty
trade.


204  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

/  So  the  sense  of  workmanship  and  its  associated  senti-
f  ments  again  come,  by  insensible  degrees,  to  take  the  first
place  among  the  factors  that  determine  the  run  of  habitu-
ation and  therefore  the  character  of  the  resulting  cul-
ture,— so  making  the  transition  from  barbarism  to
civiHsation,  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  term;  which  is
accordingly  to  be  characterised,  in  contrast  with  the
predatory  barbarian  culture,  as  a  qualified  or  mitigated
(sophisticated)  return  to  the  spirit  of  savagery,  or  at
least  as  a  spiritual  reversion  looking  in  that  direction,
though  by  no  means  abruptly  reaching  the  savage  plane.
The  new  phase  has  this  in  common  with  the  typical  sav-
age culture  that  workmanship  rather  than  prowess  again
becomes  the  chief  or  primary  norm  of  habituation,  and
therefore  of  the  growth  of  institutions;  and  that  there
results,  therefore,  a  peaceable  bent  in  the  ideals  and  en-

<deavours  of  the  community.  But  it  is  workmanship  com-
bined and  compounded  with  ownership;  that  is  to  say
workmanship  coupled  with  an  invidious  emulation  and
consequently  with  a  system  of  institutions  embodying  a
range  of  prescriptive  differential  benefits.

//.  The  Competitive  System

Dominated  by  the  tradition  handed  down  from  the
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  current  economic
y  theory  has  habitually  made  much  of  accumulated  goods
as  the  prime  requisite  of  industry.  In  industrial  en-
terprise as  it  was  then  carried  on  the  prevailing  unit  of
organisation  was  the  private  firm,  with  partnership  con-
cerns making  up  a  secondary  and  less  commonplace  ele-
ment in  the  business  community. Ordinarily  and  typic-


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  205

ally  these  private  firms  and  partnerships  owned  a  certain
material  equipment  employed  in  industry^  and  they  took
the  initiative  in  industrial  enterprise  on  the  ground  of
this  ownership;  hiring  the  workmen,  buying  materials
and  supplies,  and  selHng  the  products  of  the  establish-
ment. Credit  relations,  such  as  go  to  the  creation  and
conduct  of  a  modern  corporation,  were  still  of  secondary
consequence,  being  resorted  to  rather  as  an  expedient
in  emergencies  than  as  the  initial  move  and  the  substan-
tial ground  of  business  organisation;  the  measure  of  the
concern's  magnitude  and  consequence  was  still  (typic-
ally) its  unencumbered  ownership  of  the  material  equip-
ment, the  size  of  the  plant  and  the  numbers  of  its  hired
workmen.  It  follows  by  easy  consequence  that  in  ihe^
practical  business  conceptions  of  that  time  the  equip-
ment of  material  means,  which  embodies  the  concern's
assets  and  affords  the  ground  of  its  initiative  and  its
rating  in  the  business  community,  should  commonly  be
rated  as  the  prime  mover  in  industry  and  the  chief  pro-
ductive factor.  So,  also,  the  theoretical  speculation
that  drew  on  that  business  traffic  for  its  working  con-
cepts came  unavoidably  to  accept  these  tangible  assets,
the  community's  material  equipment, — implements,  live-
stock, raw  materials,  means  of  subsistence, — as  the  prime
agency  in  the  community's  economic  Hfe.  As  is  true
for  the  working  conceptions  and  principles  of  industrial
business,  so  also  in  the  theoretical  formulations  of  the
economists,  the  community's  immaterial  equipment  of
technological  proficiency  is  taken  for  granted  as  a  cir-
cumstance of  the  environment  conditioning  the  com-
munity's economic  Hfe, — the  state  of  the  industrial  arts
and  the  current  workmanlike  aptitudes  and  efficiency.


2o6  The  Instinct  oj  Workmanship

As  the  phrase  runs,  "given  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts."

This  is  good,  homely,  traditional  common  sense;  it
reflects  the  habitual  practical  run  of  affairs  in  the  indus-
trial community  of  that  recent  past.  Such  was  the
attitude  of  practical  men  toward  industrial  matters  at
the  time  when  the  current  economic  situation  took  its
rise.  But  such  a  conception  is  no  longer  so  true  to  the
practical  exigencies  of  the  immediate  present,  nor  do  the
men  of  affairs  to-day  habitually  see  these  matters  in
just  this  hght;  although  the  principles  of  the  law  that
govern  industrial  enterprise  still  continue  to  embody
these  time-worn  conceptions,  to  which  the  economists
also  continue  to  yield  allegiance.  Like  other  elements
of  habitual  knowledge  this  conception  of  things  is  drawn
from  past  experience — chiefly  from  a  past  not  too  remote
for  ready  comprehension — and  it  carries  over  the  frame
of  mind  out  of  which  it  arose.

In  the  earlier  days  of  the  machine  industry,  then, —
say,  in  the  closing  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century, —
the  conduct  of  industrial  affairs  was  in  the  hands  of
business  men  who  owned  the  material  equipment  and
who  directed  the  use  of  this  equipment  and  turned  it  to
account  for  their  own  gain,  on  the  prescriptive  ground
of  such  ownership.  Discretion  and  initiative  vested  in
the  capitalist-employer,  who  at  that  time,  (t>^ically)
combined  ownership  of  the  plant  with  a  somewhat  im-
mediate supervision  and  control  of  the  industrial  pro-
cesses. The  directive  control  of  industry,  covering  both
the  volume  and  the  character  of  the  procesess  and  out-
put, was  in  the  typical  case  directly  bound  up  with
the  ownership  of  the  material  equipment  as  such, — as


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  207

tangible  assets,  not  as  corporation  stock-holdings.  Since  •-
then  changes  have  come  over  the  business  situation,
particularly  through  an  extensive  recourse  to  credit,
such  that  this  time-worn  conception  will  no  longer  answer
the  run  of  current  business  practice,  particularly  not  as
touches  that  large-scale  enterprise  that  now  rules  indus-
trial affairs  and  that  is  currently  accepted  as  the  type
of  modern  business  enterprise.

Among  the  assumptions  of  a  hundred  years  ago  was
the  premise,  self-evident  to  that  generation  of  thought-
ful men,  that  the  phase  of  commercialised  economic
life  then  prevaiHng  was  the  immutably  normal  order  of
things.  And  the  assumptions  surrounding  that  precon-
ception were  good  and  competent  for  a  formulation  of
economic  theory  that  takes  such  an  institutional  situa-
tion for  granted  and  assumes  it  to  be  unchanging,  or  to
be  a  terminus  ad  quem.  But  for  anything  like  a  genetic
account  of  economic  Hfe,  early  or  late,  capitalistic  or
otherwise,  such  assumptions  and  the  theoretical  proposi-
tions and  analyses  that  follow  from  them  are  defective
in  that  they  take  for  granted  what  requires  to  be  ac-
counted for.  Theoretical  speculation  that  presupposes
the  (somewhat  old-fashioned)  institutions  formerly  gov-
erning ownership  and  business  traffic,  and  assumes  them
to  have  the  immutable  character  and  indefeasible  force
de  facto  which  is  assigned  them  dejure,  and  that  likewise
assumes  as  immutable  a  passing  phase  in  the  "state  of
the  industrial  arts,"  may  serve  passably  for  a  theory  of
how  business  affairs  should  properly  arrange  themselves
to  fit  the  conditions  so  assumed;  and  such,  indeed,  has
commonly  been  the  character  of  theoretical  formulations
touching  industry  and  business. And  as  should  fairly


2o8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

be  expected,  in  the  speculations  of  the  economists,
these  theoretical  formulations  have  also  commonly  been
accompanied  by  a  parallel  line  of  remedial  advice
^/'  designed  to  show  what  preventive  measures  should
be  applied  to  prevent  the  run  of  business  practice
from  doing  violence  to  these  assumed  conditions  that
are  held  to  be  immutably  normal  and  indefeasibly
right.

Now,  since  in  the  received  theories  the  accumulated
** productive  goods"  are  conceived  to  be  the  most  con-
sequential factor  in  industry,  and  therefore  in  the
community's  material  welfare  and  in  the  fortunes  of
individuals,  it  logically  follows  that  the  discretionary
ownership  of  them  has  come  to  be  accounted  the  most
important  relation  in  which  men  may  stand  to  the  pro-
duction of  wealth  and  to  the  community's  KveHhood;
and  the  pecuniary  transactions  whereby  this  ownership
is  arranged,  manipulated  and  redistributed  are  held  to  be
industrially  the  most  productive  of  all  human  activities.
It  is  only  during  the  nineteenth  century  that  this  doc-
trine of  pecuniary  productivity  has  been  worked  out
into  finished  shape  and  has  found  secure  lodgment  in
the  systematic  structure  of  economic  theory — in  the
current  theory  of  "the  Function  of  the  Entrepreneur;"^
but  it  is  also  only  during  this  period  that  business  enter-
prise (pecuniary  management)  has  come  to  dominate  the
economic  situation  in  a  substantially  unmitigated  degree,
so  that  the  material  fortunes  of  the  community  have
come  to  depend  on  these  pecuniary  negotiations  into
which  its  "captains  of  industry"  enter  for  their  own

*  Cf.  Frederic  Barnard  Hawley,  Enterprise  and  the  Productive  Process,
for  an  extreme,  mature  and  consistent  development  of  this  tenet.


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  209

gain.^ In  the  sense  that  no  other  line  of  activity  stands
in  anything  Hke  an  equally  decisive  relation  of  initiative
or  discretion  to  the  industrial  process,  or  bears  with  a
like  weight  on  the  material  welfare  of  the  community,
these  business  negotiations  in  ownership  are  unques-v^
tionably  the  prime  factor  in  modern  industry. But  that \
such  is  the  case  is  due  to  the  peculiar  institutions  of
modern  times  and  to  the  pecuHar  current  state  of  the /
industrial  arts ;  and  the  former  of  these  peculiar  circum-
stances is  conditioned  by  the  latter.

It  is  not  practicable  to  assign  a  hard  and  fast  date
from  which  this  modern  era  began,  with  its  peculiar
scheme  of  economic  Hfe  and  the  economic  conceptions
that  characterise  it.  The  date  will  vary  from  one  coun-
try to  another,  and  even  from  one  industrial  class  to
another  within  the  same  country.  But  it  can  be  said
that  historically  the  modern  era  begins  with  the  rise  of  \/^
handicraft;  it  is  along  the  line  of  growth  marked  out  by
the  development  of  handicraft  that  the  modern  tech-
nology has  emerged,  together  with  that  industrial  or-
ganisation and  those  pecuniary  conceptions  of  economic
efficiency  and  serviceability  that  have  gradually  come
to  their  current  state  of  maturity  on  the  ground  afforded
by  this  technology.  What  historically  Hes  back  of  the
era  of  handicraft  is  not  of  a  piece  with  the  economic  situa-
tion of  modern  times;  nor  is  it  characteristic  of  the
Western  civihsation,  as  contrasted  with  the  agricultural
and  predatory  civilisations  of  antiquity.

^  See  The  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  ch.  iv,  vi,  vii,  for  a  more  de-
tailed discussion  of  this  business  traffic  and  the  working  principles  which
go\-ern  it.  Sec  also  H.  J.  Davenport,  The  Economics  of  Enterprise  (New
York,  1913).  ~


2IO  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

As  indicated  in  an  earlier  chapter,  in  speaking  of  the
decay  of  the  predatory  (feudalistic)  regime  and  its  servile
agricultural  organisation  of  industry,  when  peace  and
order  supervene  the  instinct  of  workmanship  by  insen-
sible degrees  and  in  an  uncertain  measure  supplants  the
invidious  self-regarding  sentiments  that  actuate  the  life
of  prowess  and  servility  characteristic  of  that  culture;
so  that  workmanship  comes  again  into  the  foreground
among  the  instinctive  propensities  that  shape  the  com-
munity's habitual  interest  and  so  bend  the  course  of  its
institutional  growth  and  determine  the  bias  of  its  com-
mon sense.

The  habitual  outlook  and  the  bias  given  by  the  handi-
craft system  are  of  a  twofold  character — technological
and  pecuniary.  The  craftsman  was  an  artificer  engaged
in  mechanical  operations,  working  with  tools  of  which
he  had  the  mastery,  and  employing  mechanical  processes
the  mysteries  of  which  were  famiHar  to  his  everyday
habits  of  thought;  but  from  the  beginning  of  the  era  of
handicraft  and  throughout  his  industrial  hfe  he  was
also  more  or  less  of  a  trader.  He  stood  in  close  relation
with  some  form  of  market,  and  his  proficiency  as  a  crafts-
man was  brought  to  a  daily  practical  test  in  the  sale  of
his  wares  or  services,  no  less  than  in  the  workmanHke
fashioning  of  them.  Also,  the  price  as  well  as  the  work-
manlike quality  of  the  goods  presently  became  subject
of  regulation  under  the  rules  of  the  crafts;  and  the  petty
trade  which  grew  up  as  an  occupation  accessory  to  the
handicraft  industry  was  itself  organised  on  lines  analo-
gous to  the  crafts  proper  and  was  regulated  by  similar
principles;  the  trader's  work  being  accounted  serviceable,
or  productive,  in  the  same  general  sense  as  that  of  any


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  211

other  craftsman  and  being  recognised  as  equitably  en-
titling those  who  pursued  it  to  a  fair  liveHhood.

The  handicraft  system  was  an  organised  and  regulated
system  of  workmanship  and  self-help;  and  under  the
conditions  imposed  by  its  technology  proficiency  in  the
latter  respect  was  no  less  indispensable  and  no  less  to  the
purpose  than  in  the  former.  Both  counted  equally  and
in  combination  toward  the  successful  working  of  the
system,  which  is  a  practicable  plan  of  economic  Hfe  only
so  long  as  the  craftsmen  combine  both  of  these  capacities
in  good  force  and  only  so  long  as  the  technological  exi-
gencies admit  the  exercise  of  both  in  conjunction.  The
system  broke  down  so  soon  as  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  no  longer  enabled  the  workmen  to  acquire  the  neces-
sary technological  proficiency  and  do  the  required  work
at  the  same  time  that  they  each  and  several  were  able
to  oversee  and  pursue  their  individual  pecuniary  in-  •
terests.  With  the  coming  on  of  a  wider  and  more  exten- v
sively  differentiated  technological  scheme,  and  with
wider  and  remoter  market  relations,  due  in  the  main  to
increased  faciHties  of  transportation,  these  necessary
conditions  of  a  practicable  handicraft  economy  gradually
failed,  and  the  practice  of  industrial  investments  and
the  larger  commerce  then  gradually  supplanted  it.

The  discipline  of  everyday  Hfe  under  the  handicraft
economy  was  a  disciphne  in  pecuniary  self-help  as  well
as  in  workmanship.  In  the  popular  ideal  as  well  as  in
point  of  practical  fact  the  complete  craftsman  stood
shrewdly  on  his  individual  proficiency  in  maintaining
his  own  pecuniary  advantage,  as  well  as  on  his  trained
workmanship;  and  the  gilds  were  organised  to  maintain
the  craft's  advantages  in  the  market,  as  well  as  to  regu-


212  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

late  the  quality  of  the  output.  The  craft  rules  govern-
ing the  quahty  of  the  output  of  goods  were  in  the  main
enforced  with  a  view  to  the  maintenance  of  price,  and
so  with  a  view  to  securing  an  adequate  Hvelihood  for  the
craftsmen.  Efficiency  in  the  crafts  came  in  tliis  way
presently  to  be  counted  very  much  as  the  modern  "effi-
ciency engineers"  would  count  it, — proximately  in  terms
of  mechanical  performance,  ultimately  in  terms  of  price,
and  more  particularly  in  terms  of  net  gain. So  that  the

/  habits  of  life  ingrained  in  the  gildsman,  and  in  the  com-
munity at  large  where  the  gild  system  prevailed,  com.-
prised  as  a  main  fact  a  meticulous  regard  for  details  of
ownership  and  for  pecuniary  claims  and  obHgations.  It
is  out  of  this  insistent,  pervasive,  and  minutely  concrete
discipKne  in  the  practice  and  logic  of  pecuniary  detail
that  there  have  arisen  those  "natural  rights"  of  property
and  those  "business  principles"  that  have  been  taken
over  by  the  later  era  of  the  machine  industry  and  capital-
istic investment.

The  rules  of  the  gild,  as  well  as  the  larger  legislative
provisions  that  had  to  do  with  gild  regulations,  were
avowedly  drawn  with  a  view  to  securing  the  gildsman  in
a  fair  customary  livelihood,  and  the  measures  logically
adopted  to  this  end  were  designed  to  secure  him  in  the
enjoyment  and  disposal  of  the  returns  of  his  work  as
well  as  in  his  right  to  pursue  his  trade  within  the  rules
laid  down  for  the  collective  welfare  by  the  gild.  With
due  training  in  this  logic  of  the  handicraft  system  it  be-
came a  plain  matter  of  common  sense  that  the  crafts-
man should  equitably  be  entitled  to  whatever  he  can

^  get  for  his  work  under  the  conventionally  settled  rules
of  the  trade,  and  should  be  free  to  make  the  most  of  his


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  Sytem  213

capacities  in  all  that  pertains  to  his  pursuit  of  a  liveli-
hood; and  the  hke  principles  (habits  of  thought)  apply
to  the  traffic  of  the  petty  trade;  which,  being  presently
interpreted  in  terms  of  contract  and  investment,  has
come  to  mean  the  right  to  do  business  and  to  enjoy  and
dispose  of  the  returns  from  all  bargains  made  in  due
form.

Presently,  as  the  technological  situation  gradually  v^
changed  its  character  through  extensions  and  specialisa-
tion in  appliances  and  processes — perhaps  especially
through  changes  in  the  means  of  communication  and
in  the  density  of  population — the  handicraft  system  with'\
its  petty  trade  outgrew  itself  and  broke  down  in  a  new ;
phase  of  the  pecuniary  culture.  The  increasingly  wide
differentiation  between  workmanship  and  salesmanship
grew  into  a  ^ division  of  labour"  between  industry  and
business,  between  industrial  and  pecuniary  occupations,-^
a  disjunction  of  ownership  and  its  peculiar  cares,  privi-
leges and  proficiency  from  workmanship.  By  this  divi-
sion of  labour,  or  divergence  of  function,  a  fraction  of  the
community  came  to  specialise  in  ownership  and  pecun-
iary traffic,  and  so  came  to  constitute  a  business  com-
munity occupied  with  pecuniary  affairs,  running  along
beside  the  industrial  community  proper,  with  a  develop-
ment of  practices  and  usages  peculiar  to  its  own  needs
and  bearing  only  indirectly  on  the  further  development
of  the  industrial  system  or  on  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts.

Master-workmen  with  means  would employ  other
workmen  without  means,  and  might  or  might  not  them-  v^
selves  continue  to  work  at  the  trade. Petty  traders  or
hucksters,  nominally  members  of  some  craft  gild,  would


214  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

grow  wealthy  with  the  increasing  volume  of  traffic  and
would  organise  a  more  and  more  extensive  household
(sweatshop)  industry  to  meet  the  increasing  demands
of  their  market;  or  they  might  become  jobbers,  carry
on  more  far-reaching  trade  operations  over  a  longer  term,
withdraw  more  distantly  from  the  actual  work  of  the
craft,  and  in  the  course  of  a  generation  or  two  (as,  e.  g.,
the  Fuggers)  would  grow  into  merchant  princes  and
financiers  who  maintained  but  a  remote  and  impersonal
relation  to  the  crafts.  Or,  again,  the  associated  merch-
ants (as,  e.  g.,  those  of  the  Hansa)  would  establish  depots
and  agents,  ''factories,"  that  would  gradually  assemble
something  of  a  working  force  of  craftsmen  to  sort,  ware-
house and  finish  the  products  which  they  handled,  at
the  same  time  that  they  would  exercise  an  increasingly
close  and  extensive  oversight  of  the  industries  from
which  these  products  were  derived;  until  these  depots,
under  the  management  of  the  factors,  in  some  cases
grew  into  factories  in  somewhat  the  modern  acceptance
of  the  term.  In  one  v/ay  and  another  this  trading  or
huckstering  traffic,  which  had  been  intimately  associated
with  the  handicraft  industry  and  gild  life,  branched  off
in  the  course  of  time  as  the  industries  advanced  to  a
larger  scale  and  a  more  extensive  specialisation;  and  this
increasing  "division  of  labour"  between  workmanship
V  and  salesmanship  led  presently  to  such  a  segregation  of
the  traders  out  of  the  body  of  craftsmen  as  to  give  rise
to  a  business  community  devoted  to  pecuniary  manage-
ment alone.

But  the  principles  on  which  the  new  and  larger  business
was  conducted  were  the  same  as  those  on  which  the
earlier  petty  trade  had  been  carried  on,  and  therefore  the


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  215

same  in  point  of  derivation  and  tenor  as  had  been  worked
out  by  long  experience  within  the  handicraft  system
proper.  Business  traffic  was  an  outgrowth  of  the  handi-
craft system,  and  it  was  in  as  secure  a  position  in  respect
of  legitimacy  and  legal  and  customary  guaranty  as  the
industrial  system  from  which  its  principles  were  derived
and  from  which  its  gains  were  drawn.

The  source  from  which  the  new  Hne  of  businessmen
drew  the  accumulations  of  wealth  by  force  of  which
they  were  enabled  to  do  business  is  somewhat  in  dis-
pute; but  however  interesting  a  question  that  may
be  in  its  own  right,  it  does  not  particularly  concern
the  present  inquiry,  and  the  Hke  is  true  for  the  still
more  interesting  and  spectacular  phenomena  that  marked
the  growth  and  decline  of  that  early  business  era  that
ran  its  course  within  the  life-history  of  the  handicraft
system.^  Throughout  that  great  period  of  business
activity  on  the  continent  of  Europe  that  gathered  head
in  the  sixteenth  century  and  that  closed  in  decay  and
collapse  in  the  seventeenth,  the  principles  (habits  of
thought)  which  underlay,  authenticated  and  animated
the  business  community  and  its  pecuniary  traffic  con-
tinued to  be  much  the  same  as  animated  the  body  of
craftsmen  in  their  pecuniary  relations  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  era  of  handicraft  to  its  close.  Such,  in  its
turn,  was  also  the  case  with  the  later  business  era  that
set  in  with  the  great  industrial  advance  of  England  in
the  Eighteenth  Century,  and  such  continued  to  be  the
case  through  the  greater  part  of  its  life-history  in  the
Nineteenth  Century. Of  the  latterday  and  latest  de-

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Ehrenberg,  Das  Zeitalter  dcr  Ftigger;  Sombart,  Der  Moderne
Kapitdismus,  bk.  i.


2i6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

velopments  in  business  practice  and  principles  the  like
cannot  unhesitatingly  be  said,  but  this  too  is  a  matter
that  does  not  immediately  concern  the  inquiry  at  this
point.  But  the  principles  of  the  new  and  larger  business
were  the  same  as  had  been  slowly  worked  out  under  the
.  system  of  petty  trade.  These  business  principles  have
^  proved  to  be  very  tenacious  and  stable,  even  in  the  face
of  apparently  adverse  technological  circumstances,  com-
ing as  they  do  out  of  a  long  and  rigorous  habituation  of
very  wide  sweep  and  having  acquired  the  authenticity
due  to  formal  recognition  in  legal  decisions  and  to  the
painstaking  definition  given  them  in  the  course  of  a
protracted  and  exacting  struggle  against  the  institu-
tional remnants  of  the  feudal  system.  These  circum-
stances attending  the  genesis  and  growth  of  modern
business  principles  have  led  to  their  being  formulated
in  a  well-defined  conceptual  scheme  of  customary  right
and  also  to  their  embodiment  in  statutory  form.  To
this,  perhaps,  they  owe  much  of  their  tenacious  resistance
to  latterday  exigencies  that  have  tended  to  modify  or
abrogate  them.  In  their  elements,  of  course,  these
business  principles  are  even  older  than  the  era  of  handi-
craft, being  substantially  of  the  same  nature  as  that
sentimental  impulse  to  self-aggrandisement  that  lies  at
the  root  of  the  predatory  culture  and  so  makes  the  sub-
stantial core  of  all  pecuniary  civiHsations.

The  distinguishing  mark  of  any  business  era,  as  con-
trasted with  the  handicraft  economy,  is  the  supreme
dominance  of  pecuniary  principles,  both  as  standards
of  efficiency  and  as  canons  of  conduct.  In  such  a  busi-
nesslike community  efficiency  is  rated  in  terms  of  pe-
cuniary gain;  and  in  so  far  as  business  principles  rule,


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  217

efficiency  in  any  other  direction  than  business  traffic
can  claim  recognition  only  in  the  measure  in  which  it
may  be  reduced  to  terms  of  pecuniary  gain.  Workman-  \
ship,  therefore,  comes  to  be  rated  in  terms  of  salesman-
ship. And  the  canons  of  workmanship,  and  even  of
technological  efficiency,  fall  more  and  more  into  pe-
cuniary lines  and  allow  pecuniary  tests  to  decide  on
points  of  serviceability.

The  instinct  of  workmanship  is  accordingly  contami-i^
nated  with  ideals  of  self-aggrandisement  and  the  canons
of  invidious  emulation,  so  that  even  the  serviceability
of  any  given  action  or  policy  for  the  common  good  comes
to  be  rated  in  terms  of  the  pecuniary  gain  which  such
conduct  will  bring  to  its  author.  Any  pecuniary  strate-*^"
gist — "captain  of  industry" — who  manages  to  engross
appreciably  more  than  an  even  share  of  the  community's
wealth  is  therefore  likely  to  be  rated  as  a  benefactor  of
the  conrnnmity  at  large  and  an  exemplar  of  the  social
virtues;  whereas  the  man  who  works  and  does  not  man-
age to  divert  something  more  from  the  aggregate  product
to  his  own  use  than  what  one  man's  work  may  contribute
to  it  is  visited  not  only  with  dispraise  for  having  fallen
short  of  a  decent  measure  of  efficiency  but  also  with
moral  reprobation  for  shiftlessness  and  wasted  oppor-
tunities. So  also,  to  the  current  common  sense  in  a
community  trained  to  pecuniary  rather  than  to  work-
manlike discrimination  between  articles  of  use,  those
articles  which  serve  their  material  use  in  a  conspicuously
wasteful  manner  commend  themselves  as  more  service-
able, nobler  and  more  beautiful  than  such  goods  as  do
not  embody  such  a  margin  of  waste.  ^

1  Cf.  The  Theory  oj  the  Leisure  Class,  ch.  iv,  v,  vi.


2i8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

Under  this  system  of  business  principles^  in  one  way
and  another,  the  sense  of  workmanship  is  contaminated
in  all  its  ramifications  by  preconceptions  of  pecuniary
merit  and  invidious  distinction. But  what  is  here  im-
j  mediately  in  question  is  its  deflection  into  the  channels
\  of  gainful  business,  together  with  the  more  obvious
consequences  that  follow  directly  from  the  substitution
\X^ of  differential  gain  in  the  place  of  material  serviceabihty
as  the  end  to  which  the  instinctive  propensity  of  work-
manship so  comes  to  drive  men's  ideals  and  efforts  under
the  discipKne  of  the  pecuniary  culture.

For  the  purposes  of  a  genetic  inquiry  into  this  modern
business  situation  and  its  bearing  on  the  sense  of  work-
manship and  on  the  technological  phenomena  in  which
that  instinct  comes  to  an  expression,  it  is  necessary  sum-
marily to  recall  certain  current  facts  pertinent  to  the
case:  (a)  It  is  a  competitive  system;  that  is  to  say  it  is  a
system  of  pecuniary  rivalry  and  contention  which  pro-
ceeds on  stable  institutions  of  property  and  contract,
under  conditions  of  peace  and  order,  {h)  It  is  a  price
system,  i.  e.,  the  competition  runs  in  terms  of  money,
and  the  money  unit  is  the  standard  measure  of  efficiency
and  achievement;  hence  competition  and  efficiency  are
subject  to  a  rigorous  accountancy  in  terms  of  a  (puta-
tively)  stable  money  unit,  which  is  in  all  business  traffic
assumed  to  be  invariable,  {c)  Technologically  this  situa-
tion is  dominated  by  the  mechanical  industries;  so  much
so  that  even  the  arts  of  husbandry  have  latterly  taken
on  much  of  the  character  of  the  mechanic  arts.  Hence  a
somewhat  thoroughgoing  standardisation  of  processes
and  products  in  mechanical  terms;  which  for  business


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  219

purposes  has  with  a  fair  degree  of  success  been  made
convertible  into  terms  of  price,  and  so  made  subject  to
accountancy  in  terms  of  price,  {d)  Hence  consumption
is  also  standardised,  proximately  in  mechanical  terms
of  consumable  products  but  finally,  through  the  mech-
anism of  the  market,  in  terms  of  price,  and  like  other
price  phenomena  consumption  also  is  competitively
subject  to  and  enforced  by  the  Hke  accountancy  in  term.s
of  the  money  unit,  (e)  The  typical  industries,  which
set  the  pace  for  productive  work,  for  competitive  gains,
and  through  the  standard  rates  of  gain  ultimately  also
for  competitive  consumption,  are  industries  carried  on
on  a  large  scale;  that  is  to  say  they  are  such  as  to  require
a  large  material  equipment,  a  wide  recourse  to  tech-
nological insight  and  proficiency,  and  a  large  draught
on  the  material  resources  of  the  community.  (/)  This
material  equipment — industrial  plant  and  natural  re-
sources— it  held  in  private  ownership,  with  negligible
exceptions;  the  noteworthy  exceptions  to  this  rule,  as
e.  g.,  harbours,  highways,  and  the  like,  serving  cliiefly  as
accessory  means  of  industry  and  so  come  in  chiefly  as  a
gratuitous  supplement  to  the  industrial  equipment  held
in  private  ownership  and  used  for  competitive  gain.
{g)  Technological  knowledge  and  proficiency  is  in  the
main  held  and  transmitted  pervasively  by  the  com-
munity at  large,  but  it  is  also  held  in  part — more  ob-
viously because  exceptionally — by  specially  trained
classes  and  indixddual  workmen.  Relatively  Httle,  in
effect  a  negligible  proportion,  of  this  technological  knowl-
edge and  skill  is  in  any  special  sense  held  by  the  owners
of  the  industrial  equipment,  more  particularly  not  by  the
owners  of  the  typical  large-scale  industries. That  is  to


V


220  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

say,  the  technologically  proficient  workmen  do  not  in
the  typical  case  own  or  control  any  appreciable  propor-
tion of  the  material  equipment  or  of  the  natural  resources
to  which  this  technological  knowledge  and  skill  applies
and  in  the  use  of  which  it  takes  effect.  Qi)  It  results
that  the  owners  of  this  large  material  equipment,  in-
cluding the  natural  resources,  have  a  discretionary  con-
trol of  the  technological  proficiency  of  the  community
at  large,  as  well  as  of  those  special  lines  of  insight  and
skill  that  are  vested  in  these  specially  trained  expert
men  in  whom  a  specialised  proficiency  is  added  to  the
general  proficiency  that  is  diffused  through  the  com-
munity at  large,  {i)  In  effect,  therefore,  the  owners  of
the  necessary  material  equipment  own  also  the  working
capacity  of  the  community  and  the  usufruct  of  the  state
of  the  industrial  arts.  Except  for  their  effective  owner-
sliip  of  these  elements  of  productive  efficiency  their
ownership  of  the  material  equipment  of  industry  would
be  of  no  effect.  But  the  usufruct  of  this  productive
capacity  of  the  community  and  its  trained  workmen
vests  in  the  owners  of  the  material  equipment  only  with
the  contingent  qualification  that  if  the  community
does  this  work  it  must  be  allowed  a  livelihood,  whereby
the  gross  returns  that  go  in  the  first  instance  to  these
owners  suffer  abatement  by  that  m^uch.  This  required
liveHhood  is  adjusted  to  a  conventional  standard  of  liv-
ing which,  under  the  current  circumstances  of  pecun-
iary emulation,  is  in  great  part — perhaps  chiefly — a
standardised  schedule  of  conspicuous  waste.

In  what  has  just  been  said  above,  the  view  is  implied
that  the  owners  of  the  material  means,  who  are  in  great
part  also  the  employers  of  workmen  and  are  sentimentally


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  221

spoken  of  as  "captains  of  industry,"  have,  in  effect  and
commonly,  but  a  relatively  loose  grasp  of  the  technologi-
cal facts,  possibilities,  and  requirements  of  modern  in-
dustry, and  that  by  virtue  of  their  business  training
they  are  able  to  make  but  a  scant  and  uncertain  use  of
such  loose  ideas  as  they  have  on  these  heads.  To  anyone
imbued  with  the  commonplaces  of  current  economic
theory  it  may  seem  that  exception  should  dutifully  be
taken  to  this  view,  as  being  an  understatement  of  the
businessmen's  technological  merits.  In  current  theoret-
ical formulations  the  businessman  is  discussed  under
the  caption  of  '^entrepreneur,"  "undertaker,"  etc.,  and
his  gains  are  spoken  of  as  "wages  of  superintendence,"
"wages  of  management,"  and  the  like.  He  is  conceived  v^
as  an  expert  workman  in  charge  of  the  works,  a  superior
foreman  of  the  shop,  and  his  gains  are  accounted  a  re-
muneration for  his  creative  contribution  to  the  process
of  production,  due  to  his  superior  insight  and  initiative  in
technological  matters.  This  conception  of  the  business-
man and  his  relation  to  industry  has  stood  over  from  an
earher  period,  the  period  of  the  small-scale  industry
of  handicraft  and  petty  trade,  when  it  still  was  true  that
the  owner-employer,  in  the  typical  case,  kept  a  personal
oversight  of  his  workmen  and  their  work,  and  so  filled
the  place  of  master-workman  as  well  as  that  of  buyer
and  seller  of  materials  and  finished  goods.  And  such  a
characterisation  of  the  businessman  and  his  work  will
still  hold  true  in  the  modern  situation  in  so  far  as  he
still  is  occupied  with  industry  conducted  on  the  same
small  scale  and  continues  to  fill  the  place  of  a  foreman  of
the  shop.  But  under  current  conditions — the  conditions
of  the  past  half  century — and  more  particularly  under


222  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  conditions  of  that  large-scale  industry  that  is  cur-
rently accounted  the  type  of  modern  industry,  the  busi-
nessman has  ceased  to  be  foreman  of  the  shop,  and  his
surveillance  of  industry  has  ceased  effectually  to  com-
prise a  technological  management  of  its  details;  and  in
corresponding  measure  this  traditional  theoretical  con-
ception of  the  businessman  has  ceased  to  apply.

The  view  here  spoken  for,  that  the  modern  business-
man is  necessarily  out  of  effectual  touch  with  the  affairs
of  technology  as  such  and  incompetent  to  exercise  an
effectual  surveillance  of  the  processes  of  industry,  is  not
a  matter  of  bias  or  of  vague  opinion;  it  has  in  fact  be-
come a  matter  of  statistical  demonstration.  Even  a
cursory  survey  of  the  current  achievements  of  these
great  modern  industries  as  managed  by  businessmen,
taken  in  contrast  with  the  opportunities  offered  them,
should  convince  anyone  of  the  technological  unfitness  of
this  business  management  of  industry.  Indeed,  the
captains  of  industry  have  themselves  latterly  begun  to
recognise  their  own  inefl&ciency  in  this  respect,  and  even
to  appreciate  that  a  businessman's  management  of  in-
dustrial processes  is  not  good  even  for  the  business  pur-
pose— the  net  pecuniary  gain.  And  it  is  all  the  more
ineffectual  for  the  purposes  of  workmanship  as  distinct
from  the  businessmen's  gains.  So,  a  professional  class
of  "ef&ciency  engineers"  is  coming  into  action,  whose
duty  it  is  to  take  invoice  of  the  preventable  wastes  and
inefl&ciencies  due  to  the  business  management  of  in-
dustry and  to  present  the  case  in  such  concrete  and  ob-
vious terms  of  price  and  percentage  as  the  businessmen
in  charge  will  be  able  to  comprehend.  These  men,  in  a
way,  take  over  the  functions  assigned  in  economic  theory


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  223

to  the  "entrepreneur;"  in  that  they  are  men  of  general
technological  training  and  insight,  who  go  into  their
inquiry  on  the  ground  of  workmanship,  take  their  data
in  terms  of  workmanship  and  convert  them  into  terms
of  business  expediency,  somewhat  to  the  same  purpose
as  the  hke  work  of  conversion  was  done  by  the  owner-
employers  under  that  small-scale  system  of  industrial
enterprise  from  which  the  current  theoretical  concept  of
the  "entrepreneur"  was  derived.  It  is  then  the  duty  of
these  efficiency  engineers  to  present  the  results  so  ob-
tained, for  the  conviction  and  guidance  of  the  business-
men in  charge,  who  thereupon,  if  their  business  training
has  left  them  enough  of  a  sense  of  workmanship,  will  give
permissive  instructions  to  the  expert  workmen  in  direct
charge  of  the  industrial  processes  to  put  these  statisti-
cally indicated  changes  into  effect.  It  is  the  testimony
of  these  efficiency  engineers  that  relatively  few  pecuniary
captains  in  command  of  industrial  enterprises  have  a
sufficient  comprehension  of  the  technological  facts  to
understand  and  accept  the  findings  of  the  technological
experts  who  so  argue  for  the  ehmination  of  preventable
wastes,  even  when  the  issue  is  presented  statistically
in  terms  of  price.  These  men  go  about  their  work  of
ascertaining  the  efficiency,  actual  and  potential,  of  any
given  plant,  process,  working  force,  or  parcel  of  material
resources,  by  the  methods  of  precise  physical  measure-
ment familiar  to  mechanical  engineers,  and  as  an  out-
come they  have  no  hesitation  in  speaking  of  preventable
wastes  amounting  to  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  or  even  ninety
per-cent,  in  the  common  run  of  American  industries.^

^  Cf.  Harrington  Emerson,  Efficiency  as  a  Basis  for  Operation  and
Wages.


224  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

The  work  of  the  efficiency  engineers  being  always  done
in  the  service  of  business  and  with  a  view  to  business
expediency,  their  findings  bear  directly  on  the  business
exigencies  of  the  case  alone,  and  give  definitive  results
only  in  terms  of  price  and  profits.  How  much  greater
the  ascertained  discrepancies  in  the  case  would  appear  if
these  findings  could  be  reduced  to  terms  of  serviceability
to  the  community  at  large,  there  is  no  means  of  forming
a  secure  conjecture.  That  the  discrepancy  would  in
such  case  prove  to  be  appreciably  greater  than  that
shown  by  the  price  rating  is  not  doubtful.  Under  such
an  appraisal,  where  the  given  industrial  enterprises
would  be  brought  to  the  test  of  net  serviceability  to  the
community  instead  of  the  net  gain  of  the  interested
businessmen,  many  industrial  enterprises  would  doubtless
show  a  waste  of  appreciably  more  than  one  hundred
per  cent  of  their  current  output,  being  rather  disservice-
able  to  the  community's  material  welfare  than  otherwise.

That  the  business  community  is  so  permeated  with
incapacity  and  lack  of  insight  in  technological  matters
is  doubtless  due  proximately  to  the  fact  that  their  atten-
tion is  habitually  directed  to  the  pecuniary  issue  of  in-
dustrial enterprise;  but  more  fundamentally  and  un-
avoidably it  is  due  to  the  large  volume  and  intricate
complications  of  the  current  technological  scheme,  which
will  not  permit  any  man  to  become  a  competent  speciahst
in  an  alien  and  exacting  field  of  endeavour,  such  as  busi-
ness enterprise,  and  still  acquire  and  maintain  an  effectual
working  acquaintance  with  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts.  The  current  technological  scheme  cannot  be
mastered  as  a  matter  of  commonplace  information  or
a  by-occupation  Incidental  to  another  pursuit. The


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  225

same  advance  to  a  large  and  exhaustive  technological
system,  in  the  machine  industry,  that  has  thrown  the
direction  of  industrial  affairs  into  the  hands  of  men  pri-
marily occupied  with  pecuniary  management  has  also
made  it  impossible  for  men  so  circumstanced  at  all
adequately  to  exercise  the  oversight  and  direction  of
industry  thereby  required  at  their  hands.  And  the  an-
cient principles  of  self-help  and  pecuniary  gain  by  vir-
tue of  which  these  men  are  held  to  their  work  of  business
enterprise  make  it  also  impossible  for  them  adequately
to  surrender  the  discretionary  care  of  the  industrial
processes  to  other  hands  or  to  permit  the  management
of  industry  to  proceed  on  other  than  these  same  business
principles.

This  technological  infirmity  of  the  businessmen  as-
suredly does  not  arise  from  a  lack  of  interest  in  indus-
try, since  it  is  only  out  of  the  net  product  of  industry
that  the  business  community's  gains  are  drawn — except
so  far  as  they  are  substantially  gains  of  account-
ancy merely,  due  to  an  inflation  of  values.  Perhaps  no
class  of  men  have  ever  been  more  keenly  alert  in  their
interest  in  industrial  matters  than  the  modern  business-
men; and  this  interest  extends  not  only  to  the  industrial
ventures  in  which  they  may  for  the  time  be  pecuniarily
'^ interested,"  but  also  and  necessarily  to  other  lines  of
industry  that  are  more  or  less  closely  correlated  with
the  one  in  which  the  given  businessman's  fortunes  are
embarked;  for  under  modern  market  conditions  any
given  line  of  industrial  enterprise  is  boimd  in  endless
relations  of  give  and  take  with  all  the  rest.  But  this
unremitting  attention  of  businessmen  to  the  affairs
of  industry  is  a  business  attention,  and,  so  far  as  may  be,


226  Tlie  Instinct  of  Workmanship

it  touches  nothing  but  the  pecuniary  phenomena  con-
nected with  the  ownership  of  industry;  so  that  it  comes
rather  to  a  training  in  the  art  of  keeping  in  touch  with
the  pecuniary  run  of  business  affairs  while  avoiding  all
undue  intimacy  with  the  technological  facts  of  industry,
— undue  in  the  sense  of  being  in  excess  of  what  may  serve
the  needs  of  a  comprehensive  short-term  outlook  over
market  relations,  and  which  would  therefore  divert
attention  from  this  main  interest  and  befog  the  pecuniary
logic  by  which  businessmen  are  governed.

Probably,  also,  no  class  of  men  have  ever  bent  more
unremittingly  to  their  work  than  the  modern  business
community.  Within  the  business  community  there  is
properly  speaking  no  leisure  class,  or  at  least  no  idle
class.  In  this  respect  there  is  a  notable  contrast  between
the  business  community  and  the  landed  interest.  What
there  is  to  be  found  in  this  modern  culture  in  the  way  of
an  idle  class,  considered  as  an  institution,  runs  back  for
its  origins  and  its  specific  traits  to  a  more  archaic  cultural
scheme;  it  is  a  survival  from  an  earlier  (predatory)
phase  of  the  pecuniary  culture.  In  the  nature  of  things
an  idle  Hfe  of  fashion  is  an  affair  of  the  nobility  (gentry),
of  predatory  antecedents  and,  under  current  condi-
tions, of  predatory-parasitic  habits;  and  as  regards  those
modern  rich  men  who  withdraw  from  the  business  com-
munity and  fall  into  a  state  of  otium  cum  dignitate^  it  is
commonly  their  fortune  to  be  assimilated  by  a  more  or
less  ceremonial  induction  into  the  body  of  this  quasi-
predatory  gentry  or  nobility  and  so  assume  an  imitative
colouring  of  archaism.

The  business  community  is  hard  at  work,  and  there  is
no  place  in  it  for  anyone  who  is  unable  or  unwilling  to


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  227

work  at  the  high  tension  of  the  average;  and  since  this
close  application  to  pecuniary  work  is  of  a  competitive
nature  it  leaves  no  chance  for  any  of  the  competitors  to
apply  himself  at  all  effectually  to  other  than  pecuniary
work.  This  high  tension  of  work  is  felt  to  be  very  meri-
torious in  all  modern  communities,  somewhat  in  pro-
portion as  they  are  modern;  as  is  necessarily  the  case
in  any  work  that  is  substantially  of  an  emulative  char-
acter. It  spends  itself  on  salesmanship,  not  on  workman-
ship in  the  naive  sense;  although  the  all-pervading  pre-
occupation with  pecuniary  matters  in  modern  times  has
led  to  its  being  accounted  the  type  of  workmanlike
endeavour.  It  concerns  itself  ultimately  with  the  pe-
cuniary manipulation  of  the  material  equipment  of  in-
dustry, though  there  is  much  of  it  that  does  not  bear
immediately  on  that  point.  The  exceptions  under  this
broad  proposition  are  more  apparent  than  real,  although
there  doubtless  are  exceptions  actual  as  well  as  apparent.
In  such  a  case  the  business  transactions  in  question  are
likely  to  bear  on  the  ownership  of  certain  specific  ele-
ments of  the  immaterial  technological  equipment,  as
e.  g.,  habits  of  thought  covered  by  parent-right  or  me-
chanical expedients  covered  by  franchise.  Beyond  these
there  are  elements  of  "good-will"  that  are  subject  of
traffic  and  that  consist  in  preferential  advantages  in
respect  of  purely  pecuniary  transactions  having  to  do
not  with  the  material  equipment  but  with  the  right
to  deal  with  it  and  its  management,  as  e.  g.,  in  banking,
underwriting,  insurance,  and  the  phenomena  of  the
money  market  at  large.

But  the  mature  business  situation  as  it  nms  today  is  a


228  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

complex  affair,  large  and  intricate,  wherein  the  effective
relations  in  which  business  traffic  stands  to  workmanship
and  to  the  community's  immaterial  equipment  of  tech-
nological knowledge  at  large  are  greatly  obscured  by
their  own  convolutions  and  by  the  institutional  arrange-
ments and  convictions  to  which  this  traffic  has  given
rise.  So  that  the  matter  is  best  approached  by  way  of  a
genetic  exposition  that  shall  take  as  its  point  of  departure
that  simpler  business  enterprise  of  early  modern  times
out  of  which  the  larger  development  of  the  present  has
grown  by  insensible  accretions  and  displacements.

Business  enterprise  came  in  the  course  of  time  to  take
over  the  affairs  of  industry  and  so  to  withdraw  these
affairs  from  the  tutelage  of  the  gilds.  This  shifting  of
the  effectual  discretion  in  the  management  of  industrial
affairs  came  on  gradually  and  in  varying  fashion  and
degree  over  a  considerable  interval  of  time.  But  the
decisive  general  circumstance  that  enforced  this  move
into  the  modern  way  of  doing  was  an  advance  in  the
scope  and  method  of  workmanship.^  What  threw  the
fortunes  of  the  industrial  community  into  the  hands  of
the  owners  of  accumulated  wealth  was  essentially  a
technological  change,  or  rather  a  complex  of  technological
changes,  which  so  enlarged  the  requirements  in  respect
of  material  equipment  that  the  impecunious  workmen
could  no  longer  carry  on  their  trade  except  by  a  working
arrangement  with  the  owners  of  this  equipment;  whereby

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Karl  Bucher,  Die  Entstekung  der  Volkswirtschaft,  (3d  ed.),
ch.  iv,  "Die  gewerblichen  Betriebssysteme,"  ch.  v.  "Der  Niedergarg
des  Handwerks;"  W.  J.  Ashley,  English  Economic  History  and  Theory^
part  ii,  ch.  i,  sec.  25,  ch.  iii,  especially  sec.  44;  W.  Cunningham,  The
Growth  of  English  Industry  a?id  Commerce,  vol.  ii,  Introduction;  Werner
Sombart,  Der  Moderne  Kapitalismus,  bk.  i,  especially  ch.  iv-xii.


Ownership  and  the  Competitive  System  229

the  discretionary  control  of  industry  was  shifted  from  the
craftsmen's  technological  mastery  of  the  ways  of  industry
to  the  owner's  pecuniary  mastery  of  the  material  means.
In  the  change  that  so  took  place  to  a  larger  technological
scale  much  was  doubtless  due  to  the  extension  of  trade,
itself  in  great  part  an  outcome  of  technological  changes,
directly  and  indirectly.  For  the  craftsmen  and  their
work  the  outcome  was  that  recourse  must  be  had  to  the
material  equipment  owned  by  those  who  owned  it,  and  on
such  terms  as  would  content  the  owners;  whereby  the
usufruct  of  the  workmen's  proficiency  and  of  the  state  of
the  industrial  arts  fell  to  the  owners  of  the  material
equipment,  on  such  terms  as  might  be  had.^  So  it  fell
to  these  owners  of  the  material  means  and  of  the  products

^  To  complete  the  sketch  at  this  point,  even  in  outline,  it  would  be  nec-
essary to  go  extensively  into  the  relations  of  ownership  and  control
(largely  indirect)  in  which  the  owners  of  land  and  naKiral  resources,  the
Landed  Interest,  had  stood  to  the  industrial  community  of  craftsmen
before  this  transition  to  the  business  era  got  under  way,  as  also  into  the
further  mutual  relations  subsisting  between  the  landed  interest,  the
craftsmen  and  the  business  community  during  this  transition  to  a  busi-
ness regime.  In  the  most  simimary  terms  the  pertinent  circumstances
appear  to  have  been  that  from  the  beginning  of  its  technological  era  the
handicraft  community,  with  its  workmanship  and  its  technological  at-
tainments, was  in  an  uncertain  measure  at  the  discretionary  call  of  the
landed  interest,  largely  in  an  impersonal  way  through  channels  of  trade
and  on  the  whole  with  decreasingly  exacting  effect  as  time  went  on;  and
the  industrial  community  at  large  had  by  no  means  emancipated  them-
selves from  this  control  when  the  era  of  business  enterprise  set  in;  for  the
landed  interest  continued  to  draw  its  livelihood  from  the  mixed  agri-
cultural and  handicraft  community,  and  the  products  of  handicraft  stilJ
continued  to  go  chiefly  as  supplies  to  the  landed  interest  in  return  for  the
means  of  subsistence  controlled  by  the  latter;  and  long  after  the  business-
men had  taken  over  the  direction  of  industry  the  claims  of  the  landed
interest  still  continued  paramount  in  the  economic  situation,  and  indus-
try still  continued  to  be  carried  on  largely  with  a  view  to  meeting  the
requirements  of  the  landed  interest.


230  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  industry  to  turn  this  technological  situation  to  ac-
count for  their  own  gain,  with  as  little  abatement  as
might  be,  and  at  the  same  time  it  became  incumbent  on
them  each  and  several  competitively  to  divert  as  large
a  share  of  the  community's  productive  efficiency  to  his
own  profit  as  the  circumstances  would  permit.


CHAPTER  VI

The  Era  of  Handicraft'

Owing,  probably,  to  the  peculiar  topography  of  Eu-
rope, small-scale  and  broken,  the  pastoral-predatory  cul-
ture has  never  been  fully  developed  or  naturalised  in  this
region;  nor  has  a  monarchy  of  the  great  type  character-
istic of  western  Asia  ever  run  its  course  in  Europe.  The
nearest  approach  to  such  a  despotic  state  would  be  the
Roman  Empire;  which  was  after  all  essentially  Med-
iterranean, largely  Levantine,  rather  than  peculiarly
European.  And  owing  probably  to  the  same  condition-
ing hmitations  of  topography  the  subsequent  sequence  of
institutional  phenomena  have  also  been  characteristically
different  in  this  European  region  from  that  in  the  large
and  fertile  lands  of  the  near  East.  It  is  necessarily  this
run  of  events  in  the  Western  culture  that  is  of  chief
interest  to  the  present  inquiry;  which  will  therefore
most  conveniently  follow  the  historical  outlines  of  this
culture  in  its  later  phases,  in  so  far  as  these  outlines  are
to  be  drawn  in  economic  terms  of  a  large  generahty.

In  a  passably  successful  fashion  the  peoples  of  Chris-
tendom made  the  transition  from  a  frankly  predatory

^"Handwerk  (im  engeren  Sinne)  ist  diejenige  Wirtschaftsform,  die
hervorwachst  aus  dem  streben  eines  gewerblichen  Arbeiters  seine  zwischen
Kunst  und  gewohnlicher  Handarbeit  die  Mitte  haltende  Fertigkeit  zur
Herrichtung  oder  Bearbeitung  gewerblicher  Gebrauchsgegenstande  in
der  Weise  zu  vertreten,  dass  er  sich  durch  Austausch  seiner  Leistungen
oder  Erzeugnisse  gegen  entsprechende  Aquivalente  seinen  Lebensunter-
halt  verschafft." — Sombart,  Moderne  Kapitalismus,  bk.  i,  ch.  iv.

231


232  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  servile  establishment,  in  the  Dark  Ages,  to  a  settled,
quasi-peaceable  situation  resting  on  fairly  secure  prop-
erty rights,  chiefly  in  land,  by  the  close  of  the  Middle
Ages.  This  transition  was  accompanied  by  a  growth
of  handicraft,  itinerant  merchandising  and  industrial
towns,  so  massive  as  to  outlive  and  displace  the  feudal
system  under  whose  tutelage  it  took  its  rise,  and  of  so
marked  a  technological  character  as  to  have  passed  into
history  as  the  ''era  of  handicraft."  Technologically,
this  era  is  marked  by  an  ever  advancing  growth  of
craftsmanship;  until  it  passes  over  into  the  regime  of
the  machine  industry  when  its  technology  had  finally
outgrown  those  Kmitations  of  handicraft  and  petty
trade  that  gave  it  its  character  as  a  distinct  phase  of
economic  history.  In  its  beginning  the  handicraft
system  was  made  up  of  impecunious  craftsmen,  working
in  severalty  and  working  for  a  livelihood,  and  the  rules
of  the  craft-gilds  that  presently  took  shape  and  exercised
control  were  drawn  on  that  principle.^  The  petty  trade
which  characteristically  runs  along  with  the  develop-
ment of  handicraft  was  carried  on  after  the  same  detail
fashion  and  was  presently  organised  on  lines  afforded  by
the  same  principle  of  work  for  a  livelihood.

Presently,  however,  in  early  modern  times,  larger  hold-
ings of  property  came  to  be  employed  in  the  itinerant
trade,  and  investment  for  a  profit  found  its  way  into  this
trade  as  also  into  the  handicraft  system  proper.  The
processes  of  industry  grew  more  extensive  and  round-
about, the  specialisation  of  occupations  ("division  of

1  Cf.  Sombart,  Der  Moderne  Kapitalismus,  bk.  i;  W.  J.  Ashley,  English
Economic  History  and  Theory,  bk.  i,  especially  ch.  iii;  Karl  Bvicher,  die
Entstehuug  der  Volkswirtschaft,  ch.  iv,  v.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  233

labour")  increased,  the  scale  of  organisation  grew  larger,
and  the  practice  of  employing  impecunious  workmen  in
organised  bodies  under  the  direction  of  wealthier  masters
came  to  be  the  prevailing  form  taken  by  the  industry  of
the  time.

From  near  the  beginnings  of  the  handicraft  system,
and  throughout  the  period  of  its  flourishing,  the  output  of
the  industry  was  habitually  sold  at  a  price,  in  terms  of
money.  In  the  earher  days  the  price  was  regulated  on  the
basis  of  labour  cost,  on  the  principle  that  a  competent
craftsman  must  be  allowed  a  fair  livelihood,  and  much
thought  and  management  was  spent  on  the  determination
and  maintenance  of  such  a  "just  price."  But  in  the
course  of  generations,  with  further  development  of  trade
and  markets,  this  conception  of  price  by  degrees  gave
way  to  or  passed  over  into  the  modern  presumption  that
any  article  of  value  is  worth  what  it  will  bring;  until,
when  the  era  of  handicraft  and  petty  trade  merges  in
the  late-modern  regime  of  investment  and  machine
industry,  it  has  become  the  central  principle  of  pecuniary
relations  that  price  is  a  matter  to  be  arranged  freely
between  buyer  and  seller  on  the  basis  of  bargain  and  sale.

The  characteristic  traits  of  this  era  are  the  handicraft
industry  and  the  petty  trade  which  handled  the  output
of  that  industry,  with  the  trade  gradually  coming  into  a
position  of  discretionary  management,  and  even  domina-
ting the  industry  of  the  craftsmen  to  such  an  extent  that
by  the  date  when  the  technology  of  handicraft  begins
to  give  way  to  the  factory  organisation  and  the  machine
industry  the  workmen  are  already  somewhat  fully  under
the  control  of  the  businessmen.  Visibly,  the  ruKng  cause
of  thi§  change  hx  the  relations  between  the  craftsmen


234  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

on  the  one  hand  and  the  traders  and  master-employers
on  the  other  hand  was  the  increasing  magnitude  of  the
material  means  necessary  to  the  pursuit  of  industry,
due  to  such  a  growth  of  technology  as  required  an  ever
larger,  more  finished  and  more  costly  complement  of
appliances.  So  that  in  the  course  of  the  era  of  handicraft
the  ancient  relation  between  owners  and  workmen
gradually  re-established  itself  within  the  framework  of
the  new  technology;  with  the  difference  that  the  owners
in  whose  hands  the  discretion  now  lay,  and  to  whose
gain  the  net  output  of  industry  now  inured,  were  the
businessmen,  investors,  the  owners  of  the  industrial
plant  and  of  the  apparatus  of  trade,  instead  of  as  for-
merly the  owners  of  the  soil.

Under  the  handicraft  system,  and  to  the  extent  to
which  that  system  shaped  the  situation,  the  instinct  of
workmanship  again  came  into  a  dominant  position
among  the  factors  that  made  up  the  discipline  of  daily
life  and  so  gave  their  characteristic  bent  to  men's  habits
of  thought.  In  the  technology  of  handicraft  the  central
fact  is  always  the  individual  workman,  whether  in  the
crafts  proper  or  in  the  petty  trade.  In  that  era  industry
is  conceived  in  terms  of  the  skill,  initiative  and  applica-
tion of  the  trained  individual,  and  human  relations  out-
side of  the  workshop  tend  also  by  force  of  habit  to  be
conceived  in  similar  terms  of  self-sufficient  individuals,
each  working  out  his  own  ends  in  severalty.

The  position  of  the  craftsman  in  the  economy  of  that
time  is  peculiarly  suited  to  induce  a  conception  of  the
individual  workman  as  a  creative  agent  standing  on  his
own  bottom,  and  as  an  ultimate,  irreducible  factor  in  the


The  Era  of  Handicraft  235

community's  make-up.  He  draws  on  the  resources  of  his
own  person  alone;  neither  his  ancestry  nor  the  favour  of
his  neighbours  have  visibly  yielded  him  anything  beyond
an  equivalent  for  work  done;  he  owes  nothing  to  in-
herited wealth  or  prerogative,  and  he  is  bound  in  no
relation  of  landlord  or  tenant  to  the  soil.  With  his
slight  outfit  of  tools  he  is  ready  and  competent  of  his  own
motion  to  do  the  work  that  lies  before  him,  and  he  asks
nothing  but  an  even  chance  to  do  what  he  is  fit  to  do.
Even  the  training  which  has  given  him  his  finished  skill
he  has  come  by  through  no  special  favour  or  advantage,
having  given  an  equivalent  for  it  all  in  the  work  done
during  his  apprenticeship  and  so  having  to  all  appear-
ance acquired  it  by  his  own  force  and  diligence.  The
common  stock  of  technological  knowledge  underlying
all  special  training  was  at  that  time  still  a  sufficiently
simple  and  obvious  matter,  so  that  it  was  readily  ac-
quired in  the  routine  of  work,  without  formal  application
to  the  learning  of  it;  and  any  indebtedness  to  the  com-
munity at  large  or  to  past  generations  for  such  common
stock  of  information  would  therefore  not  be  sufficiently
apparent  to  admit  of  its  disturbing  the  craftsman's
naive  appraisal  of  his  productive  capacity  in  the  simple
and  complacent  terms  of  his  own  person.

The  man  who  does  things,  who  is  creatively  occupied
with  fashioning  things  for  use,  is  the  central  fact  in  the
scheme  of  things  under  the  handicraft  system,  and  the
range  of  concepts  by  use  of  which  the  technological
problems  of  that  era  are  worked  out  is  limited  by  the
habit  of  mind  so  induced  in  those  who  have  the  work  in
hand  and  in  those  who  see  it  done.  The  discipline  of  the
crafts  inculcates  the  apprehension  of  mechanical  facts


236  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  processes  in  terms  of  workmanlike  endeavour  and
achievement;  so  that  questions  as  to  what  forces  are
available  for  use,  and  of  how  to  turn  them  to  account,
present  themselves  in  terms  of  muscular  force  and  manual
dexterity.  Mechanical  appliances  for  use  in  industry
are  designed  and  worked  out  as  contrivances  to  faciHtate
or  to  abridge  manual  labour,  and  it  is  in  terms  of  labour
that  the  whole  industrial  system  is  conceived  and  its
incidence,  value  and  output  rated.

Such  a  fashion  of  conceiving  the  operations  and  appli-
ances of  industry  seems  at  the  same  time  to  fall  in  closely
with  men's  natural  bent  as  given  by  the  native  instinct
of  workmanship;  and  fostered  by  the  consistent  drift
of  daily  routine  under  the  handicraft  system  this  attitude
grew  into  matter  of  course,  and  has  continued  to  direct
men's  thinking  on  industrial  matters  even  long  after
the  era  of  handicraft  has  passed  and  given  place  to  the
factory  system  and  the  large  machine  industry.  So
much  so  that  throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  in
economic  speculations  as  well  as  in  popular  speech,  the
mechanical  plant  employed  in  industry  has  habitually
been  spoken  of  as  ^^ labour  saving  devices;"  even  such
palpable  departures  from  the  manual  workmanship  of
handicraft  as  the  power  loom,  the  smelting  furnace,
artificial  waterways  and  highways,  the  steam  engine
and  telegraphic  apparatus,  have  been  so  classed.

There  need  be  no  question  but  that  these  phenomena
of  the  machine  era  will  bear  such  an  interpretation;
the  point  of  interest  here  is  that  such  an  interpretation
should  have  been  resorted  to  and  should  have  commended
itself  as  adequate  and  satisfactory  when  apph'ed  to  these
mechanical  facts  whose  effective  place  in  technology


The  Era  of  Handicraft  237

and  in  its  bearing  on  the  economy  of  human  life  has
turned  out  to  be  so  widely  different  from  that  range  of
manual  operations  with  which  it  is  so  sought  to  assimilate
them.^

The  discipline  of  the  handicraft  industry  enforces  an
habitual  apprehension  of  mechanical  forces  and  processes
in  terms  of  manual  workmanship, — ^muscular  force  and
craftsmanlike manipulation. This discipline touches

^  A  classic  passage  of  Adam  Smith  shows  this  handicraft  conception  of
the  mechanics  of  industry:  "The  annual  labour  of  every  nation  is  the
fund  which  originally  supplies  it  with  all  the  necessaries  and  conveniencies
of  life  which  it  annually  consumes.  ..."  "But  this  proportion  [of  the
produce  to  the  consumers]  must  in  every  nation  be  regulated  by  two  dif-
ferent circumstances;  first,  by  the  skill,  dexterity,  and  judgment  with
which  its  labour  is  generally  applied;  and,  secondly,  by  the  proportion
between  the  number  of  those  who  are  employed  in  useful  labour,  and
that  of  those  who  are  not  so  employed." — Wealth  of  Nations,  Introduc-
tion, p.  I.

Adam  Smith  consistently  speaks  of  industry  in  terms  of  manual  work-
manship, as  the  traditions  and  the  continued  habitual  outlook  of  that
generation  unavoidably  led  him  to  do;  and  the  sweeping  way  in  which
his  interpretation  of  economic  life  finds  acceptance  with  his  contempo-
raries shows  that  in  so  doing  he  is  speaking  in  full  consonance  with  the
prevailing  conceptions  of  his  time.  He  writes  during  the  opening  pas-
sages of  the  machine  era,  but  he  speaks  in  terms  of  the  past  industrial
era,  from  which  his  outlook  on  the  economic  situation  and  his  conception
of  normal  economic  relations  had  been  derived.  It  may  be  added  that
his  conception  of  natural  liberty  in  economic  matters  is  similarly  derived
from  the  traditional  situation,  whose  disciphne  during  the  later  phases
of  the  handicraft  era  inculcated  freedom  of  ownership  as  applied  to  the
workman's  product  and  freedom  of  bargain  and  sale  as  touches  the  traffic
of  the  typical  petty  trader.  And  so  thoroughly  had  this  maimer  of  con-
ceiving industry  and  the  economic  situation  been  worked  into  the  texture
of  men's  thinking,  that  the  same  line  of  interpretation  continues  to  satisfy
economic  theory  for  a  hundred  years  after  Adam  Smith  had  formulated
this  canon  of  economic  doctrine,  and  after  the  situation  to  which  it  would
apply  had  been  put  out  by  the  machine  industry  and  large  business
management.


238  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

first,  and  most  intimately  and  coercively,  the  classes
engaged  in  the  manual  work  of  industry,  but  it  also
necessarily  pervades  the  community  at  large  and  gathers
in  its  net  all  individuals  and  classes  who  have  to  do  with
the  facts  of  industry,  near  or  remote.  It  gives  its  specific
character  to  the  habits  of  fife  of  the  community  that
lives  under  its  dispensation  and  by  its  means,  and  so  it
acts  as  an  overruHng  formative  guide  in  shaping  the
current  habits  of  thought.

The  consequences  of  this  habitual  attitude,  for  the
technology  of  the  machine  era  that  presently  follows,
are  worth  noting.  The  mechanical  inventions  and  expe-
dients that  lead  over  from  the  era  of  handicraft,  through
what  has  been  called  the  industrial  revolution,  to  the
later  system  of  large  industry,  bear  the  marks  of  their
handicraft  origin.  The  early  devices  of  the  machine
industry  are  uniformly  contrivances  for  performing  by
mechanical  means  the  same  motions  which  the  crafts-
men in  the  given  industries  performed  by  hand  and  by
man  power;  in  great  part,  indeed,  they  set  out  with  being
contrivances  to  enable  the  workmen  to  perform  the  same
manual  operation  in  duphcate  or  multiple — (as  in  the
early  spinning  and  weaving  machinery)  or  to  perform  a
given  operation  with  larger  effect  than  was  possible  to
the  unaided  muscular  work  (as  in  the  beginnings  of
steam  power).  In  their  beginnings  the  new  mechanical
appliances  are  conceived  as  improved  tools,  which  extend
the  reach  and  pov/er  of  the  workman  or  which  faciHtate
or  lighten  the  manual  operations  in  which  he  spends
himself.  They  are,  as  they  aim  to  be,  labour  saving
devices,  designed  to  further  the  workmanlike  eflSiciency
of  the  men  in  whose  hands  they  are  placed.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  239

The  early  history  of  steam  power  shows  how  closely  this
workmanlike  conception  limited  the  range  of  invention.
It  was  first  employed  to  pump  water  out  of  mines.  In
this  use  the  pressure  of  the  air  on  a  piston,  in  a  low-
pressure  cylinder,  was  brought  to  bear  on  a  lever  so
suspended  as  to  yield  formally  the  same  motion  as  a
like  lever  previously  moved  by  human  muscle.  After  a
long  interval,  sufficiently  long  to  make  the  use  of  this
intermittent  pressure  and  the  resulting  reciprocating
motion  familiar  and  impersonal  in  men's  habitual  appre-
hension, the  reciprocating  motion  was  turned  to  use  to
produce  a  rotary  motion, — after  the  fashion  suggested
by  the  treadle  of  a  lathe  or  spinning  wheel,  which  was
already  famiHar  enough  to  have  been  divested  of  some-
thing of  that  fog  of  personaHty  that  had  doubtless  sur-
rounded it  at  its  first  invention.^ The  next  serious

^  The  case  of  the  treadle  applied  to  the  production  of  rotary  motion  is
typical  of  what  happens  to  a  technological  element  of  the  general  class
here  under  discussion.  Such  a  new  technological  expedient  appears  at
the  outset  to  be  apprehended  in  terms  of  manual  workmanship;  but
presently  it  comes,  through  habitual  use,  to  take  its  place  as  a  mechanical
functioning  of  the  tools  in  Vv'hose  use  it  takes  effect, — to  be  associated  in
current  apprehension  with  the  mechanical  appliances  employed  in  its
production  and,  by  so  much,  dissociated  from  the  person  of  the  workman.
In  a  measure,  therefore,  it  falls  into  the  category  of  impersonal  facts  that
are  available  as  technological  raw  material  with  which  to  go  about  the
work  in  hand.  With  further  use,  and  particularly  with  the  interjection
of  further  mechanical  expedients  between  the  workman  and  this  given
technological  element,  it  will  be  conceived  in  progressively  more  objective
fashion,  as  a  fact  of  the  mechanics  of  brute  matter  rather  than  an  exten-
sion of  the  workman's  manual  reach;  until  it  passes  finally  into  the  cate-
gory of  mechanical  fact  simply,  obvious  and  commonplace  through
routine  use;  in  which  there  remains  but  a  vanishing  residue  of  imputed
personality,  such  as  attaches  to  all  conceptions  of  action.  The  given
technological  element  in  this  way  may  be  said  to  pass  by  degrees  out  of
tlie  workman's  "quasi-personal  fringe"  of  manual  effects,  into  the  do-


240  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

move  in  the  development  of  the  steam  engine  is  the  in-
vention of  the  automatic  valves,  for  admission  and  escape
of  steam  from  the  cylinder.  According  to  the  ancient
myth,  a  boy  whose  work  it  was  to  shift  the  valves  by
hand,  contrived  to  connect  them  by  cords  with  the  mov-
ing parts  of  the  machine  in  such  a  way  as  to  Hft  them  at
the  proper  moment  by  the  motion  of  the  machine  it-
self; so  making  the  machine  perform  vv^hat  had  in  the
original  concept  of  the  valve  mechanism  been  a  manual
operation.  Later  still,  after  the  due  interval  for  ex-
ternalisation  and  assimilation  of  this  mechanical  valve
movement  as  an  impersonal  fact  of  the  machine  process,
further  improvement  and  elaboration  of  the  elements
so  gained  has  worked  out  in  the  highly  finished  mechan-
ism familiar  to  later  times.

Detail  scrutiny  of  any  one  of  the  greater  mechanical
inventions,  or  series  of  inventions,  will  bring  out  some-
thing of  the  same  character  as  is  seen  in  the  sequence
of  successive  gains  that  make  up  the  history  of  the  steam
engine.  It  is  to  be  noted  in  this  connection  that  time
appears  to  be  of  the  essence  of  the  process  of  mechanical

main  of  raw  material  available  for  use  in  workmanship;  where  it  will,  in
apprehension,  be  possessed  of  only  such  imputed  quasi-personal  or  an-
thropomorphic characteristics  as  are  necessarily  imputed  to  external
facts  at  large.

Concretely,  the  concept  of  the  treadle  seems  in  its  beginnings  to  be  a
variant  of  the  same  conception  that  leads  to  the  use  of  the  bow-drill.
Both  inventions  comprise  at  least  two  distinct  forms.  In  each  the  simpler
and  presumably  more  primitive  form  converts  a  reciprocating  longitud-
inal motion  into  a  reciprocating  rotary  motion;  and  it  is  apparently  only
after  an  interval  of  familiarity  and  externalisation  of  this  mechanical
achievement  that  the  next  move  takes  place  in  the  direction  of  the  per-
fected treadle,  which  converts  a  reciprocating  longitudinal  into  a  con-
tinuous rotary  motion.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  241

invention  in  any  field;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  it  will
commonly  be  found  that  any  single  inventor  contrib-
utes but  one  radical  innovation  in  any  one  particular
connection;  which  may  then  presently  be  taken  up  again
as  a  securely  objective  element  by  a  later  inventor  and
pushed  forward  by  a  new  move  as  radical  as  that  to
which  this  original  invention  owed  its  origin.  This  time
interval  which  plays  such  a  part  in  mechanical  inventions
appears  necessary  only  as  an  interval  of  habituation,  for
the  due  externalisation  of  the  element,  to  reheve  it,  by
neglect,  of  the  personal  equation  with  which  it  is  contami-
nated as  it  first  comes  into  use,  and  so  to  leave  it  such  an
objective  concept  as  may  be  turned  to  account  as  mere
technological  raw  material.

It  appears,  then,  that  the  accumulation  of  technologi-
cal experience  is  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  bring  out  a
consecutive  improvement  of  the  industrial  arts,  particu-
larly not  such  an  advance  in  the  industrial  arts  as  is
embodied  in  the  machine  technology  of  late-modern
times.  In  this  modern  machine  technology  the  ruHng
norm  is  the  highly  impersonal,  not  to  say  brutal,  concept
of  mechanical  process,  blind  and  irresponsible.  The  logic
of  this  technology,  accordingly,  is  the  logic  of  the  ma-
chine process, — a  logic  of  masses,  velocities,  strains  and
thrusts,  not  of  personal  dexterity,  tact,  training,  and
routine.  In  the  degree  in  which  the  information  that
comes  to  hand  comes  encumbered  with  a  teleological
bias,  a  connotation  of  personal  bent,  it  is  unavailable  or
refractory  under  this  logic.  But  all  new  information
is  infused  with  such  an  anthropomorphic  colouring  of
personaHty;  which  may  presently  decay  and  give  place
to  a  more  objective  habitual  apprehension  of  the  facts


242  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

in  case  use  and  wont  play  up  the  mechanical  character
and  bearing  of  these  facts  in  subsequent  experience  of
them;  or  which  may  on  the  other  hand  end  by  giving
its  definitive  character  and  value  to  the  acquired  informa-
tion in  case  it  should  happen  that  the  facts  of  experience
are  by  use  and  wont  bent  to  an  habitual  anthropomorphic
rating  and  employment.  To  serve  the  needs  of  this
machine  technology,  therefore,  the  information  which
accumulates  must  in  some  measure  be  divested  of  its
naive  personal  colouring  by  use  and  wont;  and  the  degree
in  which  this  effect  is  had  is  a  measure  of  the  degree  of
availabihty  of  the  resulting  facts  for  the  uses  of  the
machine  technology.  The  larger  the  available  body
of  information  of  this  character,  and  the  more  compre-
hensive and  unremitting  the  share  taken  by  the  dis-
cipline of  the  machine  process  in  the  routine  of  daily
life,  therefore,  the  greater,  other  things  equal,  will  be
the  rate  of  advance  in  the  technological  mastery  of
mechanical  facts.

But  much  else  goes  to  the  makeup  of  use  and  wont
besides  the  routine  of  industry  and  the  ultilisation  of
those  mechanical  processes  and  that  output  of  goods
which  the  modern  machine  industry  places  at  men's  dis-
posal. To  put  the  same  thing  in  terms  already  employed
in  another  connection,  the  sense  of  workmanship  is  still
subject  to  contamination  with  other  impulsive  elements
of  human  nature  working  under  the  constraining  Hmita-
tions  imposed  by  divers  conventional  canons  and  prin-
ciples of  conduct;  besides  being  constantly  subject  to
self-contamination  in  the  way  of  an  anthropomorphic
interpretation  that  construes  the  facts  of  experience  in
terms  of  a  craftsmanlike  bent.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  243

As  bearing  on  the  effectual  reach  of  this  self-contami-
nation of  the  sense  of  workmanship  it  is  pertinent  to  re-
call that  craftsmanship  ran  within  a  class,  and  so  had  the
benefit  of  that  accentuated  sentiment  of  self-compla-
cency that  comes  of  class  consciousness.  From  its  be-
ginnings down  to  the  period  of  its  dissolution  the  handi-
craft industry  is  an  affair  of  the  lower  classes;  and,  as  is
well  known,  class  feeling  runs  strong  throughout  the  era,
particularly  through  the  centuries  of  its  best  develop-
ment. Whether  their  conceit  is  wholly  a  naive  self-
complacency  or  partly  a  product  of  affectation,  the
sentiment  is  well  in  evidence  and  marks  the  attitude  of
the  handicraft  community  with  a  characteristic  bias.
The  craftsmen  habitually  rate  themselves  as  service-
able members  of  the  community  and  contrast  themselves
in  this  respect  with  the  other  orders  of  society  who  are
not  occupied  with  the  production  of  things  serviceable
for  human  use.  To  the  creative  workman  who  makes
things  with  his  hands  belongs  an  efi&ciency  and  a  merit
of  a  peculiarly  substantial  and  definitive  kind,  he  is  the
type  and  embodiment  of  efficiency  and  serviceability.
The  other  orders  of  society  and  other  employments  of
time  and  effort  may  of  course  be  well  enough  in  their
way,  but  they  lack  that  substantial  ground  of  finality
which  the  craftsman  in  his  genial  conceit  arrogates  to
himself  and  his  work.  And  so  good  a  case  does  the  crafts-
man make  out  on  this  head,  and  so  convincingly  evident
is  the  efiiciency  of  the  skilled  workman,  and  so  patent  is
his  primacy  in  the  industrial  community,  that  by  the
close  of  the  era  much  the  same  view  has  been  accepted
by  all  orders  of  society.

Such  a  bias  pervading  the  industrial  community  must


244  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

greatly  fortify  the  native  bent  to  construe  all  facts  of
observation  in  anthropomorphic  terms.  But  the  training
given  by  the  petty  trade  of  the  handicraft  era,  on  the
other  hand,  is  not  altogether  of  this  character.  The
itinerant  merchant's  huckstering,  as  well  as  the  buying
and  selhng  in  which  all  members  of  the  community  were
concerned,  would  doubtless  throw  the  personal  strain
into  the  foreground  and  would  act  to  keep  the  self-regard-
ing sentiments  alert  and  active  and  accentuate  an  in-
dividuaHstic  appreciation  of  men  and  things.  But  the
habit  of  rating  things  in  terms  of  price  has  no  such  tend-
ency, and  the  price  concept  gains  ground  throughout
the  period.  Wherever  the  handicraft  system  reaches  a
fair  degree  of  development  the  daily  hfe  of  the  community
comes  to  centre  about  the  market  and  to  take  on  the
character  given  by  market  relations.  The  volume
of  trade  grows  greater,  and  purchase  and  sale  enter  more
thoroughly  into  the  details  of  the  work  to  be  done  and  of
the  livelihood  to  be  got  by  this  work.  The  price  system
comes  into  the  foreground.  With  the  increase  of  traffic,
book-keeping  comes  into  use  among  the  merchants;  and
as  fast  as  the  practice  of  habitual  recourse  to  the  market
grows  general,  the  uncommercial  classes  also  become
famihar  with  the  rudimentary  conceptions  of  book-
keeping, even  if  they  do  not  make  much  use  of  formal
accounts  in  their  own  daily  affairs.^

The  logic  and  concepts  of  accountancy  are  wholly
impersonal  and  dispassionate;  and  whether  men's  use
of  its  logic  and  concepts  takes  the  elaborate  form  of  a
set  of  books  or  the  looser  fashion  of  an  habitual  rating

*  Cf.  Sombart,  Moderne  KapUalismus,  bk.  i,  Exkurs  zu  KapJtel  7,
bk.  ii,  ch.  XV.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  245

of  gains,  losses,  income,  and  outgo  in  terms  of  price,  its
effect  is  unavoidably  in  some  degree  to  induce  a  statistical
habit  of  mind.  It  makes  immediately  for  an  exact  quan-
titative apprehension  of  all  things  and  relations  that
have  a  pecuniary  bearing;  and  more  remotely,  by  force
of  the  pervasive  effect  of  habituation,  it  makes  for  a
greater  readiness  to  apprehend  all  facts  in  a  similarly
objective  and  statistical  fashion,  in  so  far  as  the  facts
admit  of  a  quantitative  rating.  Accountancy  is  the  be-
ginning of  statistics,  and  the  price  concept  is  a  type  of
the  objective  impersonal,  quantitative  apprehension  of
things.  Coincidently,  because  they  do  not  lend  them-
selves to  this  facile  rating,  facts  that  will  not  admit  of  a
quantitative  statement  and  statistical  handling  decline
in  men's  esteem,  considered  as  facts,  and  tend  in  some
degree  to  lose  the  cogency  which  belongs  to  empirical
reality.  They  may  even  come  to  be  discounted  as
being  of  a  lov/er  order  of  reality,  or  may  even  be  denied
factual  value.

Doubtless,  the  price  system  had  much  to  do  with  the
rise  of  the  machine  technology  in  modern  times;  not  only
in  that  the  accountancy  of  price  offered  a  practical  form
and  method  of  statistical  computation,  such  as  is  in-
dispensable to  anything  that  may  fairly  be  classed  as
engineering,  but  also  and  immediately  and  substan-
tially in  that  its  discipline  has  greatly  conduced  to  the
apprehension  of  mechanical  facts  in  term.s  not  coloured
by  an  imputed  anthropomorphic  bent.  It  has  probably
been  the  most  powerful  factor  acting  positively  in  early
modem  times  to  divest  mechanical  facts  of  that  imputed
workmanlike  bent  given  them  by  habits  of  thought  in-
duced by  the  handicrafts.


246  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

This  reduction  of  the  facts  of  observation  to  quantita-
tive and  objective  terms  is  perhaps  most  visible  not  in
the  changes  that  come  over  the  technology  of  industry
directly,  in  early  modern  times,  but  rather  in  that  growth
of  material  science  that  runs  along  as  a  concomitant  of
the  expansion  of  the  mechanical  industry  during  the
later  era  of  handicraft.  The  material  sciences,  partic-
ularly those  occupied  with  mechanical  phenomena,
are  closely  related  to  the  technology  of  the  mechanical
industries,  both  in  their  subject  matter  and  in  the  scope
and  method  of  the  systematisation  of  knowledge  at
which  they  aim;  and  it  is  in  these  material  sciences  that
the  concomitance  is  best  seen,  at  the  same  time  that  it  is
the  advance  achieved  in  these  sciences  that  most  un-
equivocally marks  the  transition  from  mediaeval  to
modern  habits  of  thought.  This  modern  interest  in
matter-of-fact  knowledge  and  the  consequent  achieve-
ments in  material  science,  comes  to  an  effectual  head
wherever  and  so  soon,  as  the  handicraft  industry  has
made  a  considerable  advance,  in  volume  and  in  tech-
nological mastery,  sufficient  to  support  a  fair  volume  of
trade  and  make  thoughtful  men  passably  familiar  with
the  statistical  conceptions  of  the  price  system.

It  is  accordingly  in  the  commercial  repubhcs  of  Italy
that  the  modern  growth  of  material  science  takes  its
first  start,  about  the  point  of  time  when  industry  and
commerce  had  reached  their  most  flourishing  state  on  the
Mediterranean  seaboard  and  when  the  attention  of  these
communities  was  already  swinging  off  from  these  material
interests  to  high-handed  poHtics  and  religious  reaction.
The  higher  interests  of  church  and  state  came  to  the  front,
and  science,  industry,  and  presently  commerce  dwindled


The  Era  of  Handicraft  247

and  decayed  in  the  land  that  had  promised  so  handsomely
to  lead  Western  civilisation  out  of  the  underbrush  of
piety  and  princely  intrigue.

Next  followed  the  Low  Countries,  with  the  south  Ger-
man industrial  centres,  where  again  industry  of  the  hand-
icraft order  grew  great,  gave  rise  to  trade  on  a  rapidly
increasing  scale,  and  presently  to  an  era  of  business  enter-
prise of  unprecedented  spirit  and  scope.  But  the  age  of
the  Fuggers  closed  in  bankruptcy  and  industrial  collapse
when  the  princely  wrangles  of  the  era  of  statemaking
had  used  up  the  resources  of  the  industrial  community
and  exhausted  the  credit  of  that  generation  of  captains
of  industry.  Here  too  religious  contention  came  in  for
its  share  in  the  set-back  of  industry  and  commerce.  In
their  economic  outlines  the  two  cases  are  very  much  of
the  same  kind.  Central  Europe  ran  through  much  the
same  cycle  of  industrial  growth,  commercial  enterprise,
princely  ambitions,  dynastic  wars,  religious  fanaticism,
exhaustion  and  insecurity,  and  industrial  collapse  and
decay, — substantially  repeating,  on  an  enlarged  scale
and  with  much  added  detail,  the  sequence  that  had
brought  South  Europe  into  arrears.  Meantime  the
material  sciences  had  come  forward  again  in  the  West,
and  flourished  at  the  hands  of  the  Netherlanders,  South
Germans  and  French  scholars,  who  under  the  favouring
discipline  of  this  new  advance  in  industry  and  commerce
had  slowly  come  abreast  of  the  same  matter-of-fact
conceptions  that  had  once  made  Italy  the  home  of  modern
science.  And  here  again,  as  before,  princely  poHtics,
with  the  attendant  war,  exactions  and  insecurity,  fol-
lowed presently  by  religious  controversies  and  perse-
cutions, not  only  put  an  end  to  the  advance  of  industry


248  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  business  but  also  checked  the  attendant  develop-
ment of  science  nearly  to  a  standstill.

So  that  when  a  further  move  of  the  kind  is  presently
made  it  is  the  British  community  that  takes  the  lead.
Great  Britain  had  been  in  arrears  in  all  those  respects
that  make  up  civiHsation  of  the  Occidental  kind,  and  not
least  in  the  material  respect;  until  the  time  when  the
peoples  of  the  Continent  by  their  own  act  fell  into  the
rear  in  respect  of  those  material  interests — technology
and  business  enterprise — which  afford  the  material
ground  out  of  which  the  Occidental  type  of  civiHsation
has  grown.  In  Great  Britain  the  sequence  of  these
cultural  phenomena  has  not  been  substantially  different,
taken  by  and  large,  from  that  which  had  previously
been  run  through  by  the  Continental  communities;
except  that  the  same  outcome  was  not  reached,  ap-
parently because  the  sequence  was  not  interrupted  by
collapse  at  the  same  critical  point  in  the  development.

The  run  of  events  under  the  handicraft  system  in
England  differs  in  certain  consequential  features  from
that  among  the  Continental  peoples, — consequential
for  the  purposes  of  this  inquiry,  v/hether  of  similarly
grave  consequence  from  the  point  of  view  given  by  any
other  and  larger  interest.  These  pecuHar  traits  of  the
British  era  of  handicraft  yield  a  side  light  on  the  methods
and  reach  of  the  handicraft  discipline  as  a  factor  in
civilisation  at  large,  at  the  same  time  that  a  consideration
of  them  should  go  to  show  how  slender  an  initial  differ-
ence may  come  to  be  decisive  of  the  outcome  in  case  cir-
cumstances give  this  initial  difference  a  cumulative  effect.

As  regards  the  ultimately  substantial  grounds  of
the  British  situation,  in  the  way  of  racial  make-up,


The  Era  of  Handicraft  249

natural  resources,  and  cultural  antecedents,  the  British
community  has  no  singular  advantage  or  disadvantage
as  against  its  Continental  competitors.  What  is  true
of  England  in  respect  of  peculiarly  favourable  natural
resources  later  on,  about  and  after  the  close  of  the  er-a
of  handicraft,  does  not  hold  for  the  beginnings  or  the
best  days  of  that  era.  Racially  there  is  no  appreciable
difference  between  the  EngHsh  population  of  that  time
and  the  population  of  the  Low  Countries,  of  the  Scan-
dinavian peninsulas,  or  even  of  the  nearer  lying  German
territories;  and  no  markedly  characteristic  national  type
of  temperament  had  at  that  time  been  developed  in  Great
Britain,  as  against  the  temperamental  make-up  of  its
Continental  neighbours, — whatever  may  be  conceived
to  have  become  the  case  in  the  nearer  past.

The  characteristic,  and  apparently  decisive,  peculiari-
ties of  the  British  situation  may  all  confidently  be  traced
to  the  insular  position  of  the  country.  Owing  to  the
isolation  so  given  to  the  Island  the  British  community
was  notably  in  arrears  in  early  modern  times,  as  con-
trasted with  the  more  cultured,  populous  and  wealthier
peoples  of  the  Continent;  and  this  backward  state  of
England  in  the  earlier  period  of  the  era  of  handicraft
is  no  less  marked  in  respect  of  technology  than  in  any
other.  As  is  well  known,  England  borrowed  extensively
and  persistently  from  its  Continental  neighbours  through-
out the  era,  and  it  was  only  by  help  of  these  borrowed
elements  that  the  Enghsh  were  able  to  overtake  and  fi-
nally to  take  the  lead  of  their  competitors.  Similarly,  the
British  commercial  development  also  comes  on  late  as
compared  with  the  Continent;  so  much  so  that  the  British
had  substantially  no  share  in  the  great  expansion  of


250  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

business  enterprise  that  has  been  called  the  Age  of  the
Fuggers.  This  late  start  of  the  English,  coupled  with
their  peculiar  advantage  in  being  able  to  borrow  what
their  neighbours  had  worked  out,  conduced  to  a  more
rapid  rate  and  shorter  run  of  industrial  advance  and
expansion  in  the  Island,  and  so,  among  other  conse-
quences, hindered  the  rounded  system  of  handicraft,  in-
dustrial towns,  and  gild  organisation  from  attaining  the
same  degree  of  finahty,  and  ultimately  of  obstructive  in-
ertia, that  resulted  in  many  of  the  Continental  countries.
Again,  owing  to  the  same  geographic  isolation  that
long  held  England  culturally  in  arrears,  the  Enghsh
community  lay,  in  great  measure,  outside  of  that  poKtical
"concert  of  nations"  that  worked  out  the  exhaustion
and  collapse  of  industry  and  business  on  the  Continent.
Not  that  the  English  took  no  interest  in  the  grand  whirl
of  pontics  and  princely  war  that  occupied  the  main  body
of  Christendom  in  that  time.  The  English  crown,  or
to  use  a  foreign  expression,  the  Enghsh  State,  was  deeply
enough  impHcated  in  the  poHtical  intrigues  of  late
mediaeval  and  early  modern  Europe;  but  as  modern
time  has  advanced  the  English  community  has  visibly
hung  back  with  an  ever  growing  reluctance.  And  what-
ever may  be  conceived  to  be  the  share  of  the  English
crown  in  the  political  complications  of  the  Continent,
it  remains  true  that  the  English  community  at  large,
during  the  mature  and  concluding  phases  of  the  era  of
handicraft,  stood  mainly  and  habitually  outside  of  these
princely  concerns.^ In  effect,  after  the  handicraft  era

*  The  adventures  of  Charles  I  and  James  II  sufficiently  illustrate  this
insular  temper  of  the  industrial  and  commercial  community  as  con^
trasted  with  the  crown  and  the  court  party.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  251

was  well  under  way,  England  is  never  for  long  or  pri-
marily engaged  in  international  war,  nor,  except  for  the
civil  war  of  the  Commonwealth  period,  in  destructive
war  of  any  kind.  Hence  the  era  runs  to  a  different  out-
come in  England  from  what  it  does  elsewhere.  It  ends
not  in  the  exhaustion  of  politics,  but  in  the  industrial
revolution.  The  close  of  the  handicraft  system  in  Eng-
land comes  by  way  of  a  technological  revolution,  not  by
collapse.

To  this  attempted  explanation  of  the  English  case,
as  due  to  its  geographic  isolation,  the  objection  may  well
suggest  itself  that  other  cases  which  parallel  the  British
in  this  respect  do  not  show  like  results.  So,  for  instance,
the  Scandinavian  countries  enjoyed  an  isolation  nearly
if  not  quite  as  effective  as  that  of  Great  Britain  during
this  period  of  history;  whereas  the  outcome  in  these
countries  is  notoriously  not  the  same.  The  Scandinavian
case,  however,  differs  in  at  least  one  essential  respect,
which  seems  decisive  even  apart  from  secondary  cir-
cumstances. These  countries  were  too  small  to  make
up  a  self-supporting  community  under  the  conditions
required  by  the  system  of  handicraft.  They  had  neither
the  population  nor  the  natural  resources  on  such  a  scale
as  a  passably  full  development  of  the  handicraft  system
required.  At  any  advanced  stage  of  its  growth  the  sys-
tem can  work  out  into  a  self-balanced  technological
organisation,  with  full  specialisation  of  labour  and  local
differentiation  of  industry,  only  in  a  community  of  a
certain  (considerable)  size.  This  condition  was  not  met
by  the  Scandinavian  countries.  Hence  they  remained
in  a  relatively  backward  state,  on  the  whole,  through
the  handicraft  era,  and  never  reached  anything  like  an


252  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

independent  position  in  the  industrial  world  of  that  time,
either  technologically  or  in  point  of  commercial  develop-
ment; hence  also  they  failed  to  achieve  or  maintain
that  degree  of  independence,  or  isolation,  in  their  political
relations  that  left  England  free  to  pursue  a  self-directed
course  of  material  development.

At  an  earlier  period,  as,  for  instance,  from  neoKthic
times  down  to  the  close  of  paganism,  under  the  slighter,
less  differentiated,  less  complex  technological  conditions
of  a  more  primitive  state  of  the  industrial  arts,  the
Scandinavian  countries  had,  each  and  several,  proved
large  enough  for  a  very  efficient  industrial  organisation;
and,  again,  during  the  early  historical  period  they  had
also  proved  to  be  of  a  sufficient  and  suitable  size  to  make
up  national  units  of  a  thoroughly  competent  sort,  auton-
omous politically  as  well  as  industrially  and  working
out  their  own  fortunes  in  severalty, — very  much  as  the
British  community  does  later  on,  in  the  days  of  the  later
handicraft  era  and  the  early  growth  of  the  machine  in-
dustry. But  during  the  era  of  handicraft,  and  indeed
somewhat  in  a  progressive  fashion  as  the  technology  of
that  era  grew  to  a  fuller  development  and  required
larger  territorial  dimensions,  the  Scandinavian  countries
lost  ground,  relatively  to  the  larger  communities  of  Great
Britain  and  the  Continent;  in  a  degree  they  progressively
lost  autonomy  both  in  the  political  and  the  industrial
respect,  and  much  the  same  is  to  be  said  for  their  position
in  point  of  general  culture.  This  falling  into  arrears  and
dependence  is  least  marked  in  the  case  of  Sweden,  the
largest  and  still  passably  isolated  community  among
them;  and  it  is  most  marked  in  the  case  of  Norway  and
Iceland,  the  most  isolated  but  at  the  same  time  the  least


The  Era  of  Handicraft  253

sizable  units  of  the  Scandinavian  group.  In  material
sciences,  that  most  characteristic  trait  of  the  Western
culture,  the  case  of  these  peoples  is  much  the  same  as
in  the  matter  of  technology  and  cultural  autonomy  at
large;  the  largest  of  them  has  the  most  to  show.

Great  Britain,  on  the  other  hand,  fulfilled  the  condi-
tions of  size  and  isolation  demanded  in  order  to  a  free
development  of  the  industrial  arts  during  this  era,  when
the  traffic  in  dynastic  poKtics  stood  ready  to  absorb
all  accessible  resources  of  industry  and  sentiment.  And
England  accordingly  takes  the  lead  when  the  era  of  hand-
icraft goes  out  and  that  of  the  new  technology  comes  in.

Material  science  of  the  modern  sort  has  been  drawn
into  the  discussion  as  a  cultural  phenomenon  closely
bound  up  with  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  under  the
handicraft  system.  This  modern  science  may,  indeed,
be  taken  as  the  freest  manifestation  of  that  habit  of
mind  that  comes  to  its  more  concrete  expression  in  the
technology  of  the  time.  To  show  the  pertinency  of  such
a  recourse  to  the  state  of  science  as  an  outcome  of  the
discipline  exercised  by  the  routine  of  life  in  the  era  of
handicraft  some  further  detail  touching  the  state  and
progress  of  scientific  inquiry  during  that  period  will  be
in  place.

In  its  beginnings,  the  theoretical  postulates  and  pre-
conceptions of  modern  science  are  drawn  from  the  scho-
lastic speculations  of  the  late  Middle  Ages;  the  prob-
lems which  the  new  science  undertook  to  handle,  on  the
other  hand,  were,  by  and  large,  such  concrete  and  mate-
rial questions  as  the  current  difficulties  of  technology
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  investigators. These  tradi-


254  Tlie  Instinct  of  Workmanship

tional  postulates,  preconceptions,  canons,  and  logical
methods  that  stood  over  from  the  past  were  essentially  of
a  theological  complexion,  and  were  the  outcome  of  much
time,  attention  and  insight  spent  on  the  systematisa-
tion  of  knowledge  in  a  cultural  situation  whose  sub-
stantial core  was  the  relation  of  master  and  servant,
and  under  the  guidance  of  a  theological  bias  worked  out
on  the  same  ground.  The  postulates  of  this  speculative
body  of  knowledge  and  the  preconceptions  with  which
the  scholastic  speculators  went  to  their  work  of  systema-
tisation,  accordingly,  are  of  a  highly  anthropomorphic
character;  but  it  is  not  the  anthropomorphism  of  work-
manship, at  least  not  in  the  naive  form  which  the  sense
of  workmanship  gives  to  anthropomorphic  interpreta-
tion among  more  primitive  peoples.^  It  may  be  taken  as
a  matter  of  course  that  the  sense  of  workmanship  is
present  in  its  native,  direct  presentment  throughout  the
intellectual  Hfe  of  the  middle  ages,  as  it  necessarily  is
under  all  the  permutations  of  human  culture;  but  it  is
equally  a  matter  of  course  that  the  promptings  of  an
unsophisticated  sense  of  workmanship  do  not  afford
the  final  test  of  what  is  right  and  good  in  a  cultural
situation  drawn  on  rigid  lines  of  mastery  and  submission.
During  the  middle  ages  the  faith  had  taken  on  an
extremely  authoritative  and  coercive  character,  to  an-
swer to  the  similar  principles  of  organisation  and  control
that  ruled  in  secular  affairs;  so  that  at  the  transition
to  modern  times  the  religious  cult  of  Christendom  was
substantially  a  cult  of  fearsome  subjection  and  arbitrary
authority.  Much  else,  of  a  more  genial  character,  was
of  course  comprised  in  the  principles  of  the  faith  of  that
1  See  ch.  ii  and  iii,  above.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  255

timej  but  when  all  is  said  the  fact  remains  that  even  in
its  genial  traits  it  was  a  cult  of  irresponsible  authority
and  abject  submission, — a  cult  of  the  pastoral-predatory
type,  adapted  and  perfected  to  answer  the  circumstances
of  feudal  Europe,  and  so  embodying  the  principles  (habits
of  thought)  that  characterised  the  feudal  system.

Notoriously,  the  fashions  of  religious  faith  change  tar-
dily. Such  change  is  always  of  the  nature  of  concession.
And  since  the  conceptions  of  the  cult  are  of  no  material
consequence,  taken  by  themselves  and  in  their  direct
incidence,  they  are  subject,  as  such,  to  no  direct  or
dehberate  control  or  correction  in  behalf  of  the  com-
munity's material  interests  or  its  technological  require-
ments. It  is  almost  if  not  altogether  by  force  of  their
consonance  or  dissonance  with  the  prevailing  habits  of
thought  inculcated  by  the  routine  of  Hfe  that  any  given
run  of  rehgious  verities  find  acceptance,  command  gen-
eral adherence  to  their  teaching,  or  become  outworn  and
are  discarded;  and  such  lack  of  consonance  must  become
very  pronounced  before  a  radical  change  of  the  kind
in  question  will  take  effect.  Barring  conversion  to  a  new
faith,  it  is  commonly  by  insensible  shifts  of  adaptation
and  reconstruction  that  any  wide-reaching  change  is
worked  out  in  these  fundamental  conceptions.  Such
was  the  character  of  the  move  by  which  the  Mediaeval
cult  merged  in  the  modernised  theological  concepts  of  a
later  age.

Gradually,  by  force  of  unremitting  habituation  to  a
new  scheme  of  life,  and  marked  by  long-drawn  theologi-
cal polemics,  a  change  passed  over  the  spirit  of  theologi-
cal speculation,  whereby  the  fundamentals  of  the  faith
were  infused  with  the  spirit  of  the  handicraft  system,


256  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

and  the  preconceptions  of  workmanship  insensibly
supplanted  those  of  mastery  and  subservience  in  the
working  concepts  of  devout  Christendom.  Meantime,
w^hile  the  routine  of  the  era  of  handicraft  was  slowly  re-
constructing the  current  conceptions  of  divinity  on  lines
consonant  with  the  habit  of  mind  of  workmanship,  the
ancient  conceptions  continued  with  gradually  abating
force  to  assert  their  prescriptive  dominion  over  men's
habitual  thinking.  This  gradually  loosening  hold  of  the
ancient  conceptions  is  best  seen  in  the  speculations  of  the
philosophers  and  in  the  higher  generahsations  of  scientific
inquiry  in  early  modem  times.

In  the  mediaeval  speculations  whether  theological,
philosophical  or  scientific,  the  search  for  truth  runs  back
to  the  authentic  ground  of  the  religious  verities, — largely
to  revealed  truth;  and  these  religious  verities  run  back  to
the  question,  "  What  hath  God  ordained?  "  In  the  course
of  the  era  of  handicraft  this  ultimate  question  of  knowl-
edge came  to  take  the  form,  "What  hath  God  wrought? "
Not  that  the  creative  office  of  God  in  the  divine  economy
was  overlooked  or  in  any  degree  intentionally  made
light  of  by  the  earher  speculators;  nor  that  the  sov-
ereignty of  God  was  denied  or  in  any  degree  questioned  by
those  devout  inquirers  who  carried  forward  the  work  in
later  time.  But  in  that  earher  phase  of  faith  and  inquiry
it  is  distinctly  the  suzerainty  of  God,  and  His  ordinances,
that  afford  the  ground  of  finality  on  which  all  inquiry
touching  the  economy  of  this  world  ultimately  come  to
rest;  and  in  the  later  phase,  as  seen  at  the  close  of  the
era  of  handicraft,  it  is  as  distinctly  His  creative  office
and  the  logic  of  His  creative  design  that  fill  the  place
of  an  ultimate  term  in  human  inquiry — as  that  inquiry


The  Era  of  Handicraft  257

conventionally  runs  within  the  spiritual  frontiers  of
Christendom.  God  had  not  ceased  to  be  the  Heavenly
King,  and  had  not  ceased  to  be  glorified  with  the  tradi-
tional phrases  of  homage  as  the  Most  High,  the  Lord
of  Hosts  etc.,  but  somewhat  incongruously  He  had  also
come  to  be  exalted  as  the  Great  Artificer — the  preter-
natural craftsman.  (The  vulgar  habits  of  thought  bred
in  the  workday  populace  by  the  routine  of  the  workshop
and  the  market  place  had  stolen  their  way  into  the
sanctuary  and  the  counsels  of  divinity  J

Similarly,  in  the  best  days  of  scholastic  learning
scientific  inquiry  ran  back  for  a  secure  foundation  to  the
authentic  ordinances  of  the  Heavenly  King;  under  the
discipline  of  the  era  of  handicraft  it  learned  instead  to
push  its  inquiries  to  the  ground  of  efficient  cause,  ulti-
mately of  course,  in  the  philosophical  Hquidation  of
accounts  in  that  devout  age,  to  the  creative  efficiency  of
the  First  Cause.  In  the  scientific  inquiries  of  the  earlier
age  the  test  of  truth  was  the  test  of  authenticity,  and  the
logic  of  systematisation  by  use  of  which  knowledge  in
that  time  was  digested  and  stored  away  was  essentially
a  logic  of  subsumption  under  securely  authentic  cate-
gories that  could  be  run  back  at  need  to  the  ascertained
requirements  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  canon  of  truth
is  that  of  the  revealed  word,  reenforced  and  filled  out
with  the  quasi-divine  Aristotelian  scheme  of  things.  It
is  a  logic  of  hierarchical  congruity  in  respect  of  potencies
and  quaHties,  suggestively  resembling  the  devolution
of  powers  and  dignities  under  the  finished  scheme  of
feudahsm.  In  the  later  age  the  good  of  man  gradually,
insensibly  supplants  the  glory  of  God  as  the  ultimate
ground  of  systematisation. The  sentimental  ground  of


258  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

conviction  comes  to  be  the  recognised  serviceability  of
the  ascertained  facts  for  human  use,  rather  than  their
conformity  with  the  putative  exigencies  of  a  self-centred
divine  will.  The  Providential  Order  that  means  so  much
in  the  scheme  of  knowledge  in  the  mature  years  of  the
era  of  handicraft  is  an  order  imposed  by  a  providentially
beneficent  Creator  who  looks  to  the  good  of  man;  as
it  has  been  expressed,  it  is  a  scheme  of  ^^ humanism."

By  the  close  of  the  era  this  beneficent  providential
order  had  worked  out  in  an  Order  of  Nature,  indued
with  the  same  meliorative  trend;  and  in  the  sentimental
conviction  of  the  inquiring  spirits  of  that  age  it  lay  in
the  nature  of  this  beneficent  order  of  the  universe  that
in  the  end,  in  the  finished  product  of  its  working,  it  would
bring  about  the  highest  practicable  state  of  well-being
for  man, — very  much  as  any  skilled  workman  of  sound
sense  and  a  good  heart  would  turn  out  good  and  service-
able goods.  And  in  this  Order  of  Nature,  as  it  runs
in  the  matter-of-course  convictions  of  thoughtful  men
at  the  close  of  the  era,  the  person  of  the  deity,  even  as
a  workmanlike  creative  Providence,  had  fallen  into  the
background.  The  Order  of  Nature,  with  its  scheme  of
Natural  Law,  is  felt  as  the  work  of  a  consummately  skil-
ful and  ingenious  workmanlike  agency  that  looks  to  a
serviceable  end  to  be  accompHshed;  and  the  profoundly
thoughtful  scientific  inquiry  of  that  time  harbours  no
doubt  that  this  workmanlike  agency  of  Nature  at  large
rules  the  world  of  visible  fact  and  will  achieve  its  good
work  in  good  time.  But  this  quasi-personal  Nature  is
not  reverenced  for  anything  but  its  workmanlike  quali-
ties; the  awe  which  it  inspires  is  not  the  fear  of  God,
such  as  that  fear  has  played  its  part  under  the  feudalistic


The  Era  of  Handicraft  259

rule  of  the  church  and  sent  men  hunting  cover  from  the
imminent  wrath  to  come.  As  he  stands  in  the  presence
of  this  eighteenth-century  Nature,  man  is  not  primarily
a  sinner  seeking  a  remission  of  penalties  at  all  costs,  but
rather  a  focus  of  workmanlike  attention  upon  whose
welfare  all  the  forces  of  the  visible  universe  beneficently
converge.

How  this  workmanlike  Nature  goes  about  her  ^  work  is
no  more  plain  to  the  casual  spectator  than  are  the  re-
condite processes  of  high-wrought  handicraft  to  the  un-
instructed.  But  Nature  after  all  accompHshes  her  ends  in
a  workmanlike  fashion,  and  by  staying  by  and  patiently
watching  the  operations  of  Nature  and  construing  the
facts  of  observation  by  the  sympathetic  use  of  a  rational
common  sense  men  may  learn  much  of  the  methods  of
her  manipulation  as  well  as  of  the  rules  of  procedure
under  whose  guidance  the  works  of  Nature  are  accom-
plished. For  it  is  a  matter  of  course  to  that  generation
that  Nature  is  essentially  rational  in  her  aims  and  logic
as  well  as  in  the  technology  of  her  work;  very  much
after  the  fashion  of  the  master  craftsman,  who  goes  to
his  work  with  an  intelHgent  oversight  of  the  available

1  The  imputation  of  the  feminine  in  this  personification  of  Nature  is
probably  nothing  more  than  a  carrying  over  of  the  Latin  gender  of  the
word,  but  there  is  commonly  involved  in  this  quasi-personal  conception
of  Nature  a  notable  imputation  of  kindliness  and  gentle  solicitude  that
well  comports  with  her  putative  womanhood.  By  extraordinarily  easy
gradation  Nakira  natiirans  passes  over  into  Mother  Nature.  The  con-
trast in  this  respect,  simply  on  its  sentimental  side,  between  the  concep-
tion of  Nature,  say  in  the  eighteenth  century,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
patriarchal  Heavenly  King,  remote  and  austere,  of  the  Mediaeval  cult  on
the  other  hand  is  striking  enough.  In  point  of  sentimental  content  this
conception  of  Nature  is  more  nearly  in  touch  with  the  mediaeval  Llother
of  God  than  with  the  Heavenly  King.


26o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

means  and  the  purpose  to  be  wrought  out,  as  well  as  with
a  firm  and  facile  touch  on  all  that  passes  under  his  trained
hand.  Like  the  perfect  craftsman,  "  Nature  never  makes
mistakes,"  "never  makes  a  jump,"  "never  does  any-
thing in  vain,"  "never  turns  out  anything  but  perfect
work."

The  means  whereby  this  work  of  Nature  is  brought  to
its  consummate  issue  are  forces  of  Nature  working  under
her  Laws  by  the  method  of  cause  and  effect.  The  prin-
ciple, or  "law,"  of  causation  is  a  metaphysical  postulate;
in  the  sense  that  such  a  fact  as  causation  is  unproved
and  unprovable.  No  man  has  ever  observed  a  case  of
causation,  as  is  a  commonplace  with  the  latterday
psychologists.  But  such  a  doubt  does  not  present  itself
seriously  in  the  days  of  handicraft;  it  would  be  out  of
touch  with  the  spirit  of  the  time  and  the  discipline  of
that  craftsmanship  out  of  wliich  the  spirit  of  the  time
arises.  To  the  inquiring  minds  of  that  era  it  is  a  matter  of
course  and  of  common  sense  that  the  forces  of  Nature
are  seen  to  work  out  the  effects  which  emerge  before  their
eyes.  What  they  see  in  fact  may  be,  as  the  modern  psy-
chologists would  perhaps  say,  a  certain  concomitance
and  sequence  in  the  observed  phenomena;  but  what
those  observers  see  in  effect  is  always  a  certain  cause
working  out  a  certain  effect.  The  imputation  of  causal
efficiency  to  the  observed  phenomena  is  so  thoroughly
a  matter  of  course  that  there  is  no  sense  of  imputation
in  the  observer's  mind.

Observation  simply,  without  imputation  of  anthro-
pomorphic qualities  and  efficacies,  should  yield  nothing
more  to  the  purpose  than  idle  concomitance  and  se-
quence of  phenomena, but  there  is, in  effect,  none


The  Era  of  Handicraft  261

of  this  early  scientific  work  done  in  terms  of  sim-
ple concomitance  or  sequence  alone;  nor  for  that  mat-
ter, has  any  of  the  effective  (theoretical)  work  of
modern  science  been  carried  to  an  issue  by  the  use  of
such  objective  terms  of  concomitance  and  sequence
alone,  whether  in  that  or  in  a  later  age,  without  the  help
of  a  putative  causal  nexus.  Through  the  early  modern
scientific  period  there  runs  an  increasingly  free  and  fre-
quent recourse  to  statistical  argument, — in  the  material
sciences  a  recourse  to  punctiHous  measurement,  enumera-
tion and  instruments  of  precision;  but  it  is  of  the  essence
of  the  case  that  the  phenomenal  facts  which  so  are  sub-
jected to  measurement  and  statistical  computation  are
facts  selected  for  the  purpose  on  the  strength  of  their
(putatively)  known  causal  implication  in  the  problem
whose  solution  is  sought,  and  that  the  facts  which  emerge
from  these  measurements,  computations,  and  instru-
ments of  precision,  are  turned  to  account  in  an  argument
of  cause  and  effect;  they  have  served  their  purpose  only
when  and  in  so  far  as  they  enable  the  inquirer  to  deter-
mine the  course  of  efficient  transition  from  a  putative
cause  to  a  putative  effect,  or  conversely.

The  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  as  commonly  conceived
by  the  vulgar  and  as  commonly  employed  by  the  scientist,
is  a  putative  relation  between  phenomena  wliich  can
not  be  said  to  stand  in  any  observed  relation  of  efficiency
to  one  another.  Efficiency,  as  understood  in  this  con-
nection, is  not  a  fact  of  observation,  but  of  imputation;
and  efficiency,  performance  of  work,  is  the  substance
of  the  causal  relation  as  that  concept  is  universally  em-
ployed in  modern  science.  It  may  well  be  said  that  this
recourse  to  the  concept  of  efficient  cause — a  metaphysical


262  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

postulate  touching  a  putative  fact — is  the  distin-
guishing characteristic  of  modern  science  as  con-
trasted with  any  other  scheme  of  systematised  knowl-
edge.^

Not  only  does  the  development  of  modern  science  rest
on  this  postulate  of  causality,  but  the  concept  of  causa-
tion which  so  characterises  the  modern  sciences  is  of  a
particular  and  restricted  kind.  At  least  on  the  face  of
things  it  seems  unquestionable  that  the  peculiar  temper
and  limitations  of  this  modern  European  concept  of
causation  are  to  be  credited  to  the  habits  wrought  out
by  a  life  under  the  handicraft  system.  It  has  been  noted
already  that  the  ubiquitous  prevalence  of  trade  and  of
the  price  system  in  modern  times  has  given  to  the  modern
apprehension  of  facts  a  certain  objectivity,  a  degree  of

^This,  of  course,  does  not  overlook  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of
scientific  inquiry  there  has  been  an  increasing  use  of  statistical  methods
and  results,  and  that  this  recourse  to  statistics  has  been  of  an  increas-
ingly objective  character,  both  in  its  methods  and  in  the  items  handled.
It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  from  time  to  time  serious  and  consequential
attempts  have  been  made  to  reduce  scientific  argument  at  large  to  simi-
larly objective  terms  of  quantity,  quantivalence  and  concomitance.
Karl  Pearson's  Grammar  of  Science,  for  instance  is  a  shrewd  and  somewhat
popularly  known  endeavour  of  this  kind.  So,  again,  the  philosophical
views  associated  with  the  names  of  Leibnitz  and  of  Berkely  are  of  this
nature,  and  there  is  not  a  little  of  the  same  line  of  scepticism  in  the
speculations  of  Hume.  But  it  is  equally  to  be  noted  that  except  on  the
remote  plane  of  generality  that  belongs  to  philosophical  speculation,  and
except  in  the  works  of  pure  mathematics,  this  method  of  handling  facts
has  not  proved  available  for  scientific  ends.  The  "idle  curiosity"  which
finds  employment  in  scientific  inquiry  is  not  content  with  the  vacant  rela-
tion of  concomitance  alone  among  the  facts  which  it  seeks  and  system-
atises.  In  scientific  theory  no  headway  has  been  made  hitherto  without
the  use  of  this  indispensable  imputation  of  causality. — In  this  connection
cf.  a  paper  on  "The  Evolution  of  the  Scientific  Point  of  View,"  University
of  California  Chronicle ,  November,  1908,  especially  footnote,  p.  396,


The  Era  of  Handicraft  267^

impersonality,  which  is  at  least  a  characteristic  of  modern
knowledge,  whether  scientific  or  commonplace,  even  if  it
cannot  be  said  to  be  a  unique  distinction  of  modern
science  as  contrasted  with  other  dehberate  systems  of
knowledge.  But  it  is  the  unique  distinction  of  modern
science,  particularly  as  it  comes  into  view  in  its  early
phases,  that  its  concept  of  causality  is  drawn  not  simply
in  terms  of  workmanship  but  specifically  in  terms  of
craftsmanship.  There  need  probably  be  no  argument
spent  on  the  thesis  that  the  sense  of  causality  is,  by  and
large,  a  particular  manifestation  of  the  sense  of  work-
manship. But  the  sense  of  workmanship  in  its  native
scope  apparently  covers  something  more  than  the  manual
efficiency  of  the  skilled  workman  simply.  And  in  other
times  and  under  other  cultural  (technological)  circum-
stances the  sense  of  workmanship  has  apparently  given
rise  to  concepts  of  causation  of  a  wider,  or  at  least  of  a
looser,  scope.  In  the  naive  rating  of  savage  peoples  work-
manship appears  to  cover,  perhaps  uncertainly,  notions
of  generation,  nurture,  tendance,  and  the  Hke,  without
any  sharp  hne  being  drawn  between  these  various  lines
of  effective  endeavour  on  the  one  side  and  manual  effi-
ciency on  the  other.  And  so,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the
cosmological  knowledge  (or  quasi-knowledge)  current
among  these  peoples  explanation  in  terms  of  genera-
tion and  growth  are  accepted  as  final  along  with  ex-
planations in  terms  of  what  the  modern  man  would  con-
ceive to  be  the  stricter  sense  of  cause  and  effect.  Even
in  the  speculations  of  the  sages  of  classical  antiquity,
and  again  in  the  cosmologies  and  natural  history  of  the
far-Oriental  peoples,  many  questions  of  cause  and  effect
are  found  to  be  sufficiently  disposed  of  when  worked  out


264  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

in  the  like  terms  of  generation,  growth  and  quasi-physio-
logical mutation.

To  modern  inquiry  explanations  in  these  terms,  other
than  those  of  physically  effective  work,  are  provisional
at  the  best,  and  are  held  to  only  as  awaiting  a  final
solution  in  a  materially,  mechanistically  competent  way.
And  what  is  alone  materially  competent  in  the  modern
scientific  apprehension  is  such  an  explanation  as  will
make  things  plain  in  terms  of  matter  and  motion,  working
a  change  in  the  constitution  of  things  by  displacement
through  contact  and  pressure.  Causation  is  conceived
as  manual  work, — to  use  a  French  term,  it  is  a  remanie-
ment  of  raw  materials  at  hand.  Physiological  or  chemical
explanations  must  finally  be  recast  in  terms  of  physics,
to  satisfy  the  modern  scientist's  sense  of  finality,  and
physics  must  be  made  to  run  in  terms  of  impact,  pressure,
displacement  in  space,  regrouping  of  material  particles,
coordinated  movements  and  a  shifting  of  equilibrium.

Through  all  this  runs  the  concomitant  requirement  of
quantivalence,  statable  in  statistical  form.  The  scien-
tist's results  are  not  finally  merchantable,  on  the  scien-
tific exchange,  until  they  have  been  reduced  to  such  terms
of  accountancy  as  would  be  comprehensible  to  the  man
trained  in  the  merchandising  traffic  of  the  petty  trade,
for  whose  conviction  things  must  be  punctiHously  rated
in  exchange  value.  But,  as  has  been  noted  above,  it  is
only  as  an  expedient  of  scientific  accountancy  that  the
facts  under  inquiry  are  kept  account  of  in  an  itemised
bill  of  values.  This  meticulous  statistical  accountancy
is  necessary  to  safeguard  the  accuracy  of  the  work  done
and  its  conformity  with  the  facts  in  hand;  but  the  work
so  done  handles  these  facts  as  active  factors  which  go


The  Era  of  Handicraft  265

efficiently  to  the  production  of  the  results  observed.  The
cause  is  conceived  to  produce  the  effect,  somewhat  after
the  fashion  in  which  a  skilled  workman  produces  a  fin-
ished article  of  trade.  But  when  the  scientist  has  set
forth  the  operations  and  working  conditions  that  have
brought  forth  the  effects  which  he  is  engaged  in  explain-
ing, he  must  also,  in  order  to  the  conviction  of  his  fellow
craftsmen,  show  a  statistically  itemised  statement  of
receipts  and  expenditures  covering  the  facts  engaged, —
in  quantitative  values  he  must  show  that  the  costs  are
balanced  by  the  values  that  emerge  in  the  finished  pro-
duct of  that  workmanlike  process  of  causation  whose
recondite  nature  and  course  he  has  so  laid  bare  to  the
light  of  understanding.

This  attempted  characterisation  of  modern  scientific
inquiry  and  its  working  concepts  applies  immediately
to  the  earlier  phases  and  down  to  a  date  well  past  the
advent  of  the  machine  industry, — so  far  past  that  date
as  to  allow  time  and  experience  to  work  the  new  habits
of  thought  pecuKar  to  the  machine  technology  into  the
texture  of  men's  preconceptions.  In  time,  but  tardily,
as  is  the  case  with  the  pervasive  effects  of  any  new  line
of  habituation,  the  discipline  of  the  machine  has  wrought
a  further,  though,  hitherto  less  profound  and  decisive,
change  in  the  aims  and  methods  of  science;  a  discussion
of  which  is  deferred  until  it  comes  up  again  in  its  connec-
tion with  the  new  technology.  Less  cogently  and  with
qualifications,  however,  the  above  characterisation  will
apply  to  the  later  phases  of  modern  science,  as  well  as
to  that  initial  stage  that  marks  the  era  of  handicraft.

Something  further  is  due  to  be  said  of  the  cultural


266  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

consequences  of  this  discipline  in  workmanship  during
the  era  of  handicraft,  besides  its  guidance  in  the  growth
of  technology  and  the  related  field  of  material  science.  As
has  been  intimated  above,  habituation  to  the  working
conceptions  of  handicraft  had  much  to  do  with  that
revision  of  the  religious  cult  and  its  theological  tenets
that  has  shaped  the  spiritual  life  of  modern  times  in
contrast  with  the  mediaeval  life  of  faith.  But  it  is  an
ungrateful,  perhaps  ungraceful,  office  to  turn  the  dry
light  of  matter-of-fact  on  the  sacred  verities,  and  a  degree
of  parsimony  will  best  be  observed  in  any  layman's
discussion  of  these  intimate  movements  of  the  spirit.
Yet  it  seems  necessary  to  call  to  mind  at  least  one  point
of  singular  concomitance  between  the  state  of  the  in-
dustrial arts  and  fortunes  of  the  Christian  faith.

Characteristic  of  modern  times  has  been  the  Protestant
rehabilitation  of  the  cult  and  its  tenets.  In  this  rehabili-
tation, which  has  not  been  without  effect  even  within
the  Catholic  church,  much  of  the  ancient  spirit  of  sub-
jection has  been  lost,  replaced  in  part  with  a  certain  atti-
tude of  self-help  and  autonomy  on  the  part  of  the  laity.
There  is  a  degree  of  democratic  initiative  and  a  gild-like
spirit  of  lay  discretion  in  spiritual  affairs.  As  already
noted  above,  the  tenets  of  the  faith  have  also  in  some
degree  been  revised  and  reconstructed  in  terms  consonant
with  the  workmanhke  conceptions  of  the  handicraft
system.  Such  a  protestant  or  quasi-protestant  recon-
struction of  the  cult  and  its  tenets  set  in,  as  is  well  known,
successively  in  the  several  leading  countries  of  Europe,
somewhat  in  the  same  order  as  these  several  countries
successively  advanced  to  a  high  level  of  technological
and  commercial  enterprise. As  noted  above,  in  the  south


The  Era  of  Handicraft  267

in  the  so-called  Latin  countries,  this  era  of  industrial
and  commercial  enterprise  was  presently  checked;  the
like  being  true  in  a  less  pronounced  fashion  for  the  peoples
of  Central  Europe.  Wherever  the  advance  was  seriously
checked,  so  that  the  era  of  handicraft  closed  in  collapse
or  reaction  on  its  secular  side,  there  the  reconstruction
of  the  reHgious  cult  also  came  to  an  incomplete  issue  at
the  most.  So  that  by  the  definitive  close  of  the  era  of
handicraft  those  peoples  of  Christendom  that  had  main-
tained the  advance  achieved  in  this  secular  respect  were
also  the  ones  that  had  accepted  and  continued  to  hold
the  revised  form  of  the  faith.  Where  this  era  of  industrial
and  business  enterprise  closed  in  exhaustion  and  collapse,
there  the  ancient  form  of  the  faith  also  triumphed  over
the  heretics.  It  is,  indeed,  to  be  remarked  as  a  sufficiently
striking  coincidence  that  even  now  the  centre  of  diffusion
of  the  modern  industry  is  at  the  same  time  the  centre  of
diffusion  of  reHgious  protestantism  and  heresy.  And  the
antique  forms  and  fervour  of  the  faith  are  found  in  better
preservation  progressively  outward  from  this  centre  of
diffusion;  and  even  in  somewhat  minute  detail  it  appears
to  hold  true  not  only  that  the  more  advanced  industrial
peoples  are  the  less  amenable  to  religious  control  and  less
given  to  superstitious  observances  of  the  archaic  sort,
but  also  that  within  these  industrial  countries  the  in-
dustrial centres  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  word  are
less  devout,  or  devout  in  a  less  archaic  fashion,  than
the  non-industrial  population  at  large.  Something  of  the
kind,  indeed,  has  been  visibily  true  ever  since  a  relatively
early  phase  of  the  handicraft  system;  though  nothing  like
undevoutness  can  be  alleged  of  the  industrial  town
population  during  the  handicraft  era  proper. The  hand-


268  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

icraf t  population  was  devout,  but  not  consistently  ortho-
dox; and  the  industrial  towns  of  that  time  were  devout
enough  in  their  way,  but  it  was  in  a  way  obnoxious  to
the  received  dogmas  of  the  church.  They  were  centres
of  devout  heresy.  It  is  only  in  late  modern  times  that
the  malady  has  progressed  so  far  that  it  may  fairly  be
called  a  degree  of  apostacy.  This  concomitance  be-
tween technological  mastery  and  religious  dissent  is
doubtless  susceptible  of  a  good  and  serviceable  explana-
tion at  the  hands  of  the  religious  experts;  it  is  here
cited  without  prejudice  as  having  at  least  a  negative
bearing  on  the  question  of  how  the  discipKne  of  the
handicraft  industry  may  be  conceived  to  affect  men's
spiritual  attitude  in  a  field  so  remote  as  that  of  the  life
offaith.i

What  is  known  to  economic  history  as  the  era  of  handi-
craft is  for  the  purposes  of  the  political  historian  spoken
of  as  the  era  of  statemaking.  The  two  designations  may
not  cover  precisely  the  same  interval,  but  they  coincide
in  a  general  way  in  point  of  dates,  and  the  phenomena
which  have  given  rise  to  the  two  designations  have  much
more  than  an  accidental  connection.  It  is  not  simply
that  the  development  of  handicraft  happens  to  fall  in
the  same  general  period  of  history  that  is  characterised
by  the  dynastic  wars  that  went  to  the  making  of  the
larger  states. The  growth  of  handicraft  had  much  to

*  In  this  connection  it  is  worth  noting,  for  what  it  may  be  worth,  that
there  is  a  similarly  rough  concomitance  between  the  diffusion  of  the  blond
racial  stock  in  Europe  and  the  modem  forms  of  protestantism  and  re-
ligious heresy.  Whether  this  fact  strengthens  or  weakens  any  argument
that  may  be  drawn  from  the  concomitance  of  heresy  and  industry  cited
above  may  perhaps  best  be  left  an  open  question.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  269

do  with  making  the  large  states  practicable  and  with
supplying  the  material  means  of  large-scale  warfare;
while  the  traffic  of  dynastic  pohtics  in  that  time  had  in
its  turn  very  much  to  do  with  bringing  that  era  of  in-
dustrial and  commercial  enterprise  to  an  inglorious  close.
The  new  industry  supplied  the  sinews  of  war,  and  the
wars  ate  up  the  substance  of  the  industrial  community.

The  new  industry  gave  rise  to  a  growth  of  industrial
towns  and  commercial  centres,  primarily  occupied  by
the  traffic  of  the  itinerant  traders.  One  of  the  immediate
consequences  of  this  extension  of  merchandising  enter-
prise was  the  improvement  of  means  of  communication,
both  in  the  way  of  an  extension  and  improvement  of
shipping — itself  a  technological  fact — and  in  the  way  of
improved  routes  of  communication.  A  secondary  con-
sequence was  a  growth  of  population,  coupled  with  its
concentration  in  urban  centres,  together  with  a  growth  of
wealth,  in  good  part  drawn  together  in  the  same  centres.
These  changes  enabled  the  powers  in  control  to  extend
an  effectual  coercion  over  larger  distances  and  over
larger  aggregations  of  population  and  wealth;  it  became
practicable,  mechanically,  to  swing  a  larger  poHtical
aggregation  and  to  hold  it  together  in  closer  coordination
than  before.  The  physical  conditions  requisite  to  the
formation  and  enduring  maintenance  of  large  political
organisations  were  in  this  way  supplied  by  the  new  in-
dustrial era  as  an  incidental  result  of  its  technological
efficiency.

More  direct  and  obvious,  though  of  no  graver  impor-
tance, is  the  contribution  made  by  the  new  technology
to  the  means  of  coercion  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the
warlords,  in  the  way  of  improved  weapons  and  armour,


270  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

defences  and  warlike  appliances.  The  improvements
worked  out  in  the  means  of  warfare  during  the  early
half  of  the  era  of  handicraft  exceed  in  material  effect
and  in  boldness  of  conception  all  the  traceable  improve-
ments wrought  in  that  Hne  by  all  the  warlike  peoples  of
classical  antiquity  and  all  the  fighting  aggregations  of
Asia  and  Africa,  from  the  beginning  of  the  bronze  age
down  to  modern  times.  The  craftsmen  spent  their
best  endeavours  and  their  most  brilliant  ingenuity  on
this  production  of  arms  and  munitions,  with  the  result
that  these  articles  still  lie  over  in  the  modern  collections
as  the  most  finished  productions  of  workmanship  which
that  era  has  to  show.  The  (unintended)  result  at  large
was  that  these  improved  appliances  enabled  the  war-
lords and  their  fighting  men  to  control  the  industrial
classes  for  their  own  ends  and  to  levy  exactions  on  trade
and  industry  up  to  the  limit  of  what  the  traffic  would
bear,  or  perhaps  more  commonly  somewhat  over  that
limit.  It  was,  in  this  way,  their  own  technological  mas-
tery that  furnished  the  means  of  their  own  undoing,
directly  (mechanically  speaking)  and  indirectly  (in  the
resulting  growth  of  warlike  sentiment).

That  the  craftsmen  went  so  diligently  into  this  pro-
duction of  ways  and  means  for  their  own  discomfort  and
abiding  defeat  is  due  not  to  any  innately  perverse  bent
of  the  sense  of  workmanship  as  it  comes  to  expression
in  the  spirit  of  the  handicraft  community,  but  rather  to
the  exigencies  created  by  the  price  system,  with  its  prin-
ciples of  self-help, — a  secondary,  conventional  product
of  the  handicraft  industry.  As  has  been  noted  already,
with  perhaps  tedious  iteration,  there  runs  through  the
handicraft  community  a  highwrought  spirit  of  individual


The  Era  of  Handicraft  271

self-sufficiency.  So  soon  as  the  petty  trade  has  grown
to  effective  dimensions  the  individual  workman  comes
into  somewhat  direct  relations  with  the  market,  and
except  for  the  collective  interest  and  action  embodied  in
the  gild  organisations  the  craftsmen  stand  in  little  else
than  a  pecuniary  relation  to  one  another  and  bear  little
else  than  a  pecuniary  responsibility  to  their  fellow  crafts-
men or  to  the  community.  It  is  the  place  of  each  to
gain  a  livelihood  by  honest  work  through  his  own  in-
dividual skill  and  enterprise.  Notoriously,  the  crafts-
men were  in  effect  lacking  in  that  sense  of  soHdarity
that  makes  an  efficient  organisation  for  defence  or  of-
fence; concerted  action,  outside  the  regulative  activity
of  the  gild,  was  to  be  had  only  with  extreme  difficulty
on  any  other  basis  than  individual  pecuniary  advantage.
Each  worked  for  himself,  with  an  eye  steadily  to  the
main  chance.  And  the  main  chance,  from  an  early  date
in  this  era,  meant  gain  in  terms  of  price.  So  the  crafts-
man worked  for  such  customers  as  would  pay  his  price,
and  he  spent  his  skill  and  ingenuity  on  such  goods  as
were  in  demand.  The  trade  in  arms  and  weapons  was
good  at  that  time.  These  appliances  were  a  means  of
livelihood  to  the  men  at  arms  and  a  means  of  income
and  prestige  to  their  princely  employers.  So  the  traffic
went  busily  on,  and  the  individual  craftsmen  put  forth
their  best  efforts  toward  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the
ruling  and  fighting  classes,  whose  endeavours,  without
much  collusion  but  by  the  inevitable  drift  of  circumstance,
converged  on  the  subjection  of  the  community  of  crafts-
men at  large  and  on  the  exhaustion  of  the  community's
resources.
Through  its  side  issue  in  the  commercial  enterprise


^


272  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

which  it  fostered  the  handicraft  industry  brought  to
the  hands  of  the  poHticians  a  further  means  of  trouble.
The  trade  brought  on  the  price  system,  and  so  made  it
possible  for  ambitious  princes  to  buy  what  they  needed
in  their  warHke  negotiations;  with  funds  in  hand  stores
and  munitions  could  be  bought  where  they  were  needed,
so  enabling  warHke  operations  to  be  carried  on  with
greater  facility  at  a  greater  distance  than  was  feasible
under  the  earlier  rule  of  contributions  in  kind.  The
price  system  also  enabled  the  warlords  to  hire  merce-
naries, and  so  to  organise  and  maintain  a  standing  force
of  skilled  fighting  men,  mobile  and  irresponsible.  But
to  hold  one's  own  in  the  competitive  use  of  this  new  arm
the  prince  must  have  funds;  which  led  incontinently  to
all  available  manner  of  exactions  on  trade  and  com-
merce, since  it  was  from  these  sources  almost  solely
that  funds  could  be  had.  But  it  led  also  and  equally
to  an  increasing  trafSc  between  the  princes  and  the
captains  of  industry,  for  the  use  of  funds.  Funds  had
become  the  sinews  of  war,  since  the  handicraft  industry
had  come  to  turn  out  goods  for  sale  and  the  merchandis-
ing trade  had  made  funds  accessible  in  sufficient  volume
to  be  worth  while.  So  the  princes  dealt  with  the  captains
of  industry,  selling  what  they  could  and  h3^othecating
what  they  could  not  sell,  in  a  competitive  struggle  to
putdo  one  another  at  war  and  diplomacy.  The  game
■  was  then  as  always  an  emulative  one,  in  which  any  ad-
vantage was  a  differential  advantage  only.  Hence  the
princes  engaged,  each  and  several,  needed  all  the  funds
they  could  get  the  use  of,  and  their  need  was  ever  present,
not  to  be  deferred.  Hence  they  borrowed  what  they
could  and  where  they  could,  their  borrowings  being


The  Era  of  Handicraft  273

floated  by  the  help  of  all  manner  of  expedients.  Some
of  these  fiscal  expedients  brought  monopolistic  advan-
tage to  the  captains  of  industry,  and  so  contributed  to
their  further  gain  and  to  the  concentration  of  wealth  in
fewer  hands.  Meantime,  the  princely  chancelries,  being
in  debt  as  far  as  possible,  extorted  further  loans  from
the  captains  by  seizure  and  by  threats  of  bankruptcy;
and  whatever  was  borrowed  was  expeditiously  used  up
in  the  destruction  of  property,  population,  industrial
plant  and  international  commerce.  So,  when  all  avail-
able resources  of  revenue  and  credit,  present  and  prospec-
tive, had  been  exhausted,  and  all  the  accessible  material
had  been  consumed,  the  princely  fisc  went  into  bank-
ruptcy, followed  by  its  creditors,  the  captains  of  indus-
try, followed  by  the  business  community  at  large  v/ith
whose  funds  they  had  operated  and  by  the  industrial
community,  whose  stock  of  goods  and  appliances  was
exhausted,  whose  trade  connections  were  broken  and
whose  working  population  had  been  debauched,  scat-
tered and  reduced  to  poverty  and  subjection  by  the  wars,
revenue  collectors  and  forced  contributions.  Meantime,
too,  habituation  to  the  sentiments,  ideals,  standards
and  manner  of  life  suitable  to  a  state  of  predation  had
swamped  the  handicraft  spirit  and  put  abnegation  and
dependence  on  arbitrary  power  in  the  place  of  that
initiative  and  pertinacious  self-rehance  that  had  made
the  era  of  handicraft.  It  was  from  this  eventuahty  that
England  in  great  measure  escaped  by  favour  of  her  insu-
lar position  and  the  inabihty  of  her  princes  to  draw  a  re-
luctant industrial  community  into  the  traffic  of  dynastic
intrigue  that  filled  the  Continent.
It  will  have  been  remarked  that  one  of  the  essential


274  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

^^  —

moves  in  this  sequence  of  events,  from  the  beginnings  of
handicraft  in  impecunious  and  self-reliant  workman-
ship to  its  eventual  collapse  in  exhaustion,  is  the  gradual
accumulation  of  commercial  and  industrial  wealth  in
relatively  few  hands.  This  accumulation  of  wealth,  or
rather  its  segregation  in  few  hands,  appears,  as  already
indicated,  to  have  entered  as  a  potent  factor  in  the  course
of  things  that  lead  the  system  of  handicraft  through
maturity  to  collapse,  as  on  the  Continent,  or  to  decay,
as  in  England.  It  will  accordingly  be  in  place  to  go
somewhat  more  narrowly  into  the  circumstances  of  its
beginnings  and  growth  and  the  manner  in  which  it
plays  its  part  in  the  organisation  of  the  handicraft
industry.

It  appears  that  this  uneven  distribution  of  wealth
arises  out  of  the  technological  exigencies  of  handicraft
and  of  the  petty  trade  which  characteristically  runs  along
with  the  handicraft  industry  in  its  early  stages.^  In  its
earliest,  impecunious  beginnings,  handicraft  as  known
in  medieval  Europe  was  Hke  its  congener,  the  manual
arts  of  the  savage  and  lower  barbarian  peoples,  in  that
the  whole  material  equipment  requisite  to  its  pursuit
consisted  of  a  skilled  workman  and  an  extremely  slender
kit  of  tools.  The  tradition  countenanced  by  historical
students  says  that  the  beginnings  of  the  handicraft  sys-
tem, with  its  speciaHsed  industry  and  trained  workman-
ship, is  due  to  such  workmen,  possessed  of  substantially
nothing  but  their  own  persons,  who  escaped  in  one  way
and  another  from  the  bonds  of  the  manorial  system,  or
its  equivalent,  and  found  shelter  on  sufferance  near  some

^  See  chapter  v,  above.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  275

feudal  protector  or  religious  corporation  that  found  some
advantage  in  this  novel  arrangement.^

On  looking  into  this  inchoate  working  arrangement
between  these  masterless  workmen  and  their  patrons,
and  generalising  the  run  of  facts  as  may  be  permitted
an  inquiry  that  aims  at  theoretical  presentation  rather
than  historical  description,  the  probable  causal  relation
running  through  these  obscure  events  will  appear  some-
what as  follows.  It  happened  in  Europe,  as  it  has  hap-
pened now  and  again  elsewhere,  that  the  ownership  of
the  soil  in  advanced  feudal  times  took  shape  as  a  Landed
Interest  Kving  at  peace  and  under  settled  relations  with
the  community  from  which  they  drew  their  Hvelihood
and  their  means  of  controlling  the  community.  Under
these  circumstances  there  grew  up  an  ever-widening
industrial  system,  under  manorial  auspices,  in  which  the
foremost  place  is  taken  by  the  mechanic  arts,  in  the  way
of  specialised  crafts  and  mechanical  processes  and  ap-
pliances. The  tranquil  conditions  that  prevail  under
such  a  settled,  pacific  or  sub-predatory  scheme  of  con-
trol bring  out  an  increased  volume  of  consumable  pro-
ducts, particularly  since  these  same  settled  conditions
admit  a  larger  and  more  economical  use  of  all  industrial
appliances.  The  immediate  consequence  is  that  an  in-
creased net  product  accrues  to  the  propertied  class;
which  calls  them  to  an  intensified  consumption  of  goods;
which  requires  increased  elaboration  and  diversity  of
products;  which  calls  for  an  increasing  diversity  and
volume  of  appliances  and  more  prolonged  and  elaborate
technological  processes. The  needs  of  the  propertied

1  Cf.  Ashley,  English  Economic  History  and  Theory,  bk.  i,  ch.  i;  Karl
Biicher,  Enisiehung  der  Volkswirtschajt,  ch.  iii.


276  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

class,  particularly  in  the  way  of  superfluities,  reach  such
a  degree  of  diversity  that  it  is  no  longer  practicable  to
supply  these  needs  by  specialised  work  within  the  in-
dustrial framework  of  the  manor  or  its  equivalent.  The
itinerant  trade  comes  in  to  help  out  in  this  difficult  pas-
sage by  bringing  exotic  luxuries,  curious  articles  of  great
price;  but  that  is  not  sufficient  to  cover  the  require-
ments of  the  case,  since  there  is  much  needed  work  of
elaboration  that  cannot  be  taken  care  of  by  way  of  an
importation  of  finished  goods.

Here  comes  the  opportunity  of  the  skilled  masterless
workman.  The  growth  of  wealth  has  provided  a  place
for  him  in  the  economy  of  the  time,  and  having  once
got  a  foothold  he  and  his  followers  congregate  in  indus-
trial towns  and  find  a  Hving  by  the  work  of  their  hands.

The  point  should  be  kept  in  mind  in  any  consideration
of  the  era  of  handicraft  that  its  beginnings  are  made  by
these  "masterless  men,''  who  broke  away  (or  were
broken  out)  from  the  bonds  of  that  organisation  in  which
the  arbitrary  power  of  the  landed  interest  held  dominion.
By  tenacious  assertion  of  the  personal  rights  which  they
so  arrogated  to  themselves,  and  at  great  cost  and  risk,
they  made  good  in  time  their  claim  to  stand  as  a  clasc
apart,  a  class  of  ungraded  free  men  among  whom  self-
help  and  individual  workmanhke  efficiency  were  the
accepted  grounds  of  repute  and  of  livelihood.  This
tradition  never  dies  out  among  the  organised  craftsmen
until  the  industrial  system  which  had  so  been  inaugu-
rated went  under  in  the  turmoil  of  politics  and  finance
or  was  supplanted  by  the  machine  era  that  grew  out  of
it.  With  this  class-tradition  of  initiative  and  democratic
autonomy  is  associated,  as  an  integral  fact  in  the  system,


The  Era  of  Handicraft  277

the  concomitant  tradition  that  work  is  a  means  of  liveli-
hood.

In  these  early  phases  of  the  system  the  individual
workman  is  (typically)  competent  to  work  out  his  Hveli-
hood  with  the  use  of  such  a  slight  equipment  of  tools  as
could  readily  be  acquired  in  the  course  of  his  employ-
ment. In  great  part,  indeed,  the  craftsman  of  the  early
days  made  his  tools  and  appliances  as  he  went  along.
But  it  follows  necessarily  that  further  training  in  the
skilled  manipulations  of  the  crafts  led  to  the  use  of  im-
proved and  specialised  tools  as  well  as  to  the  use  of  larger
appliances  useful  in  the  technological  processes  em-
ployed, such  as  could  scarcely  be  called  tools  in  the  sim-
pler sense  of  the  word  but  would  rather  be  classed  as
industrial  plant.  With  the  advance  of  technology  thei
material  equipment  so  requisite  to  the  pursuit  of  indus-^
try  in  the  crafts  increases  in  volume,  cost  and  elabora-
tion, and  the  processes  of  industry  grow  extensive  and
complex;  until  it  presently  becomes  a  matter  of  serious
difficulty  for  any  workman  single-handed  to  supply  the
complement  of  tools,  appKances  and  materials  with
which  his  work  is  to  be  done.  It  then  also  becomes  a
matter  of  some  moment  to  own  such  wealth.

As  under  any  earlier  and  simpler  industrial  regime,  so
in  this  early-advanced  phase  of  the  handicraft  system
the  workman  must  also  have  command  of  that  inmia-
terial  equipment  of  technological  information  at  large
that  is  current  in  the  community,  in  so  far  as  it  affects
his  particular  occupation;  and  he  must  in  addition  ac-
quire the  special  trained  skill  necessary  in  his  own  branch
of  craft.  The  former  he  will,  at  that  stage  of  technologi-
cal growth,  still  come  by  without  particular  deliberate


278  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

application,  in  the  ordinary  routine  of  life;  it  is  made  up
of  general  information  and  familiarity  with  current  ways
of  doing,  simply,  and  on  the  level  of  general  information
which  then  prevailed  no  special  training  or  schooling
seems  to  have  been  needed  to  place  the  young  man
abreast  of  his  time.  In  other  words,  the  common  stock
of  technological  knowledge  had  not  by  that  time  grown
so  unwieldy  as  to  require  special  pains  to  assimilate  it.
As  for  the  latter,  the  special  skill  which  would  make
him  a  craftsman,  that  was  also  accessible  at  the  cost  of
some  application;  but  under  the  rules  of  handicraft  the
early  apprentice  gained  this  trained  skill  at  no  cost
beyond  application  to  the  work  in  hand.  But  the  like
does  not  continue  to  hold  true  of  the  material  equip-
ment; which  presently  was  no  longer  to  be  compassed
as  a  matter  of  course  and  of  routine  appHcation  to  the
work  in  hand.  It  was  becoming  increasingly  important
and  increasingly  difficult  to  be  provided  with  these
means  with  which  to  go  to  work,  and  the  ownership  of
such  means  gave  an  increasingly  decisive  advantage  to
their  owner.

What  adds  further  force  to  this  position  of  affair  is
the  fact  that  in  many  of  the  crafts  the  work  could  no
longer  be  carried  on  to  full  advantage  in  strict  severalty;
the  best  approved  processes  required  a  gang  or  corps  of
workmen  in  cooperation,  and  required  also  something  in
the  way  of  a  "plant"  suitable  for  the  employment  of
such  a  corps  rather  than  of  a  single  individual.  Such  a
condition,  of  course,  came  on  earlier  and  more  urgently
in  some  crafts,  as,  e.  g.,  in  tanning,  or  brewing,  or  some
of  the  metal- working  trades,  than  in  others,  as,  e.  g.,
the  building  trades,  locksmithing,  cobbling,  etc. But


The  Era  of  Handicraft  279

an  advance  of  this  kind,  and  the  exigencies  which  such
an  advance  brings,  came  on  gradually  and  with  such  a
measure  of  general  prevalence  through  the  crafts  that
the  general  statement  made  above  may  fairly  stand  as
a  free  characterisation  of  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts
in  the  crafts  at  large  at  the  period  in  question.  The
growing  resort  to  working  methods  requiring  organised
groups  of  workmen  together  with  something  in  the  way
of  collective  industrial  plant  would  greatly  hasten  the
concentration  of  the  ownership  of  the  material  equip-
ment. Ownership  in  all  ages  is  individual  ownership;
and  then  as  ever  any  single  item  of  property,  such  as  a
workshop  and  its  appliances,  would  presently  fall  into
the  possession  of  an  individual  owner.  The  owners  of
the  plant  became  employers  of  their  impecunious  fellow
craftsmen  and  so  came  into  a  position  to  dispose  of  their
working  capacity  and  their  product.

When  and  in  so  far  as  the  advanced  state  of  the  in-
dustrial arts,  therefore,  made  it  impracticable  for  the
individual  craftsman  readily  to  acquire  the  material
means  for  work  in  his  craft,  any  proficiency  in  the  craft
would  be  of  no  effect  except  by  arrangement  with  some
one  who  could  supply  these  material  means.  The  pos-
session of  the  material  equipment,  therefore,  placed  in
the  discretion  of  its  owners  the  utilisation  of  such  tech-
nological knowledge  and  skill  as  the  members  of  the
given  crafts  might  possess.  The  usufruct  of  the  handi-
craft community's  technological  proficiency  in  this  way
came  to  vest  in  the  owners  of  the  plant,  in  the  same
measure  as  this  plant  was  necessary  to  the  pursuit  of
industry  under  the  technological  scheme  then  in  force.
This  effect  would  be  had  so  soon  and  in  such  measure  as


28o  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

it  became  a  matter  of  appreciable  difficulty  to  acquire
and  maintain  the  material  equipment  requisite  to  the
workmanlike  pursuit  of  industry;  and  it  would  become
generally  decisive  of  the  relation  between  master  and
workman  so  soon  as  the  outfit  of  material  means  required
for  effective  work  had  grown  larger  than  the  common
run  of  workmen  could  acquire  in  the  course  of  such
training  as  would  fit  them  to  do  the  work  in  the  par-
ticular branch  of  industry  in  which  they  engaged.

The  change  brought  on  in  this  way  by  the  growth  of
technology  was  neither  abrupt  nor  sharply  defined.  Like
other  changes  in  the  technological  scheme  it  was  an  out-
growth of  the  knowledge  and  methods  already  previously
current,  and  it  took  effect  in  detail  and  in  a  very  concrete
way,  leading  on  through  fluctuating  usage  to  a  gradually
settled  general  practice  which  came  at  length  to  differ
substantially  from  the  situation  out  of  which  it  had
grown.  By  insensible  gradations  it  came  into  such
general  prevalence  and  everyday  recognition,  and  estab-
lished such  stable  methods  of  procedure,  as  presently  left
it  standing  as  an  established  institutional  fact.  It  grew
into  the  prevalent  habits  of  thought  without  a  visible
break,  and  made  its  way  more  or  less  thoroughly  in  the
several  branches  of  industry  which  it  touched,  until  it
came  to  be  accepted  as  the  type  of  handicraft  organisa-
tion to  which  other,  outlying  branches  of  industry  would
then  also  tend  to  conform,  even  when  there  was  no  direct
provocation  for  these  outlying  members  of  the  industrial
system  to  take  on  the  typical  form  so  given.  But  given
the  tranquil  conditions  necessary  to  the  accumulation
of  such  industrial  appliances  and  to  the  invention  and
employment  of  long  and  roundabout  processes  in  indus-


TJie  Era  of  Handicraft  281

try,  and  the  resulting  change  that  sets  in  will  be  of  a
cumulative  character,  affecting  an  ever  increasing  pro-
portion of  the  industrial  arts,  and  permeating  the  indus-
trial system  at  large  in  a  progressive  fashion.

Under  these  circumstances,  and  in  proportion  as  these
technological  exigencies  take  effect  in  one  branch  of
industry  and  another,  the  usufruct  of  the  industrial
community's  current  productive  efficiency  comes  to  vest
effectually  in  those  who  own  the  material  means  of  in-
dustry. Their  effectual  exploitation  of  the  community's
industrial  efficiency  will  extend  to  such  industries,  and
with  such  a  degree  of  thoroughness  and  security,  as
the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  may  decide.  This  effec-
tual engrossing  of  the  technological  heritage  by  the
owners  will  extend  to  any  branch  of  the  industrial  arts
in  which  so  considerable  a  material  equipment  is  re-
quired, in  appliances  and  raw  materials,  that  the  work-
men who  go  into  this  given  line  of  employment  cannot
practically  create  or  acquire  it  as  they  go  along.  In  an
uncertain  measure,  therefore,  and  varying  in  degree
somewhat  from  one  industry  to  another,  the  owner  of
the  plant  becomes  in  effect  the  owner  of  the  community's
technological  knowledge  and  workmanHke  skill,  and
thereby  the  owner  of  the  workman's  productive  capacity.

In  the  small  beginnings  of  the  handicraft  industry  the
craftsman  typically  passed  by  a  simple  routine  from
the  status  of  apprentice  to  that  of  master,  picking  up
the  shght  necessary  outfit  as  he  went  along;  in  the  closing
phases  of  the  era  handicraft  methods  had  reached  a  high
degree  of  specialisation  and  made  use  of  extensive  pro-
cesses and  appliances,  and  it  was  then  only  by  exception
that  any craftsman could  pass  from apprenticeship


282  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

through  the  intervening  stages  to  the  position  of  a  work-
ing master,  without  the  help  of  inherited  means  or  special
favour.  Toward  the  close  of  the  era  the  masters  were,
typically,  employers  of  skilled  labour  and  foremen  in
their  own  shop,  except  in  the  frequent  case  where  they
altogether  ceased  to  work  at  the  trade  and  gave  their
whole  attention  to  the  business  side  of  the  industry.
Many  of  these  nominal  master  craftsmen  were  in  fact
mere  traders,  captains  of  industry,  businessmen,  who
never  came  in  manual  contact  with  the  work.^

So  capitalism  emerged  from  the  working  of  the  handi-
craft system,  through  the  increasing  scale  and  efficiency
of  technology.  And  on  the  ground  afforded  by  this
capitalistic  phase  of  the  system  arose  that  era  of  business
enterprise  that  ruled  the  economic  fortunes  of  Europe
in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  with  its  captains
of  industry  and  great  financial  houses.  Whether  the
large  means  with  which  these  captains  of  industry  oper-
ated were  primarily  drawn  from  the  gains  of  the  petty
trade  that  had  gone  before,  or  were  drawn  into  this  field
of  business  from  outside,  is  a  debated  question  which
need  not  detain  the  present  inquiry.  The  fact  remains
that,  by  whatever  means,  this  development  of  the  situa-
tion comes  out  of  that  growth  of  handicraft  whereby
the  ownership  and  control  of  the  industrial  plant  passed
out  of  the  hands  of  the  body  of  working  craftsmen.

When  this  business  situation  collapsed,  therefore,  as
already  spoken  of  above,  the  handicraft  industry  at  its
best  was  organised  on  capitalistic  lines  and  managed  for
capitalistic  ends, — with  a  view  to  profits  on  investment,
not  primarily  with  a  view  to  the  liveHhood  of  the  working
1  Cf .  R.  Ehrenberg,  Das  ZeitaUer  der  Fugger.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  283

craftsmen.  The  new  situation  which  then  presented  it-
self, as  a  consequence  of  the  collapse  of  the  business  com-
munity, was  industrially  and  commercially  better  suited
to  the  simpler  and  ruder  methods  of  handicraft  that  had
succeeded  in  the  early  days  of  the  system;  but  the  current
preconceptions  and  trade  relations  that  actually  ruled  at
the  time  were  of  a  capitalistic  kind,  and  the  current
state  of  the  industrial  arts,  even  where  industry  had
fallen  into  a  fragmentary  state,  was  such  as  technologic-
ally required  the  large-scale  organisation  in  order  to  its
due  working.  Between  the  impossibihty  of  going  for-
ward on  the  accustomed  lines  and  the  impracticability
of  an  effectual  rehabilitation  of  more  primitive  methods,
there  resulted  a  period  of  poverty  and  confusion,  helped
out  by  the  continued  mismanagement  of  the  dynastic
politicians;  so  that  the  industrial  situation  of  the  Con-
tinent never  recovered  until  it  was  overtaken  by  the  new
era  of  the  machine  industry  inaugurated  by  the  English.

The  circumstances  of  Hfe  for  the  common  man  under-
went more  than  one  substantial  change  during  the  era
of  handicraft,  and  these  changes  were  not  all  in  the
same  sense.  The  dominant  note  changes  from  work-
manship in  the  earlier  phases  of  the  era  to  pecuniary
competition  and  poHtical  anxiety  toward  the  close,  par-
ticularly as  regards  the  industrial  communities  of  the
Continent.  The  era  is  a  long  period  of  history,  all  told,
running  over  some  five  or  six  centuries,  from  an  advanced
stage  of  the  feudal  age  to  the  eighteenth  century,  or  to
various  earlier  dates  in  those  countries  where  the  handi-
craft system  came  to  a  provisional  close  in  the  era  of
statemaking;  and  the  discipline  of  life  does  not  run  to


284  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  same  effect  in  the  earlier  of  these  phases  of  the  de-
velopment as  in  the  later.  Not  that  handicraft  ceased
to  be  the  prevailing  method  in  the  mechanical  industries
of  these  countries  when  the  reaction  overtook  them,  but
the  technological  advance  had  been  seriously  checked,
and  such  handicraft  industry  as  still  went  on  had  ceased
to  dominate  the  economic  situation  and  no  longer  held
the  primacy  among  the  factors  that  shaped  the  Kfe  of
the  communities  in  question.  Its  place  as  a  dominant
force  was  taken  by  the  new  political  interests  and  by
such  commercial  enterprise  as  still  went  on.

But  through  the  centuries  of  its  earlier  growth  the
handicraft  industry,  simply  as  a  routine  of  workman-
ship, shaped  the  conditions  of  Hfe  for  the  common  people
more  pervasively  and  consistently  than  any  other  one
factor.  Its  discipline,  therefore,  was  of  protracted  dura-
tion and  touched  the  current  habits  of  thought  in  an
intimate  and  enduring  fashion;  so  as  to  leave  a  large
and  enduring  effect  on  the  institutions  of  the  peoples
among  whom  it  prevailed.  The  English-speaking  com-
munity shows  these  effects  in  a  larger  measure  and  a  more
evident  manner  than  any  other, — visible  only  in  a  less
degree  in  the  Low  Countries,  and  more  equivocally  in  the
Scandinavian  countries.  These  peoples  had  not  been
subjected  to  the  handicraft  discipline  for  a  longer  time
or  in  a  more  exacting  fashion  than  their  Continental
neighbours,  but  they  had  on  the  other  hand  escaped  the
full  measure  of  the  poHtical  activity  of  the  era  of  state-
making  that  did  so  much  to  neutralise  the  effects  of  the
handicraft  system  in  the  larger  Continental  countries.

Something  has  been  said  above  of  the  way  in  which  the


The  Era  of  Handicraft  285

discipline  of  life  under  the  rule  of  handicraft  shaped  and
coloured  men's  thinking  in  those  materiaHstic  sciences
whose  early  growth  runs  parallel  with  the  technological
advance  in  modern  times.  It  has  also  been  evident  that
this  training  in  the  manner  of  conceiving  things  for  the
purposes  of  technology  wrought  certain  broad  changes
in  the  theological  and  philosophical  conceptions  that
guided  the  inquiring  spirits  of  the  same  and  subsequent
generations.  This  effect  wrought  by  the  routine  of  Hfe
under  the  handicraft  system  on  scientific  and  philo-
sophical conceptions  is  of  a  very  pervasive  character,
being  of  the  nature  of  an  habitual  bent,  an  attitude  or
frame  of  mind,  whose  characteristic  mark  is  the  accept-
ance of  creative  workmanship  as  a  finality.  It  became
an  element  of  common  sense  in  the  apprehension  of
thoughtful  men  whose  frame  of  mind  was  formed  under
the  traditions  of  that  era  that  creative  workmanship  is
an  ultimate,  irreducible  factor  in  the  constitution  of
things,  accepted  as  a  matter  of  course  and  used  unspar-
ingly and  with  ever-growing  conviction  as  a  terminus  a
quo  and  ad  quem}

Creative  workmanship,  fortified  in  ever-growing  meas-
ure by  the  conception  of  serviceabiHty  to  human  use,
works  its  way  gradually  into  the  central  place  in  the
theoretical  speculations  of  the  time,  so  that  by  the  close
of  the  era  it  dominates  all  intellectual  enterprise  in  the
thoughtful  portions  of  Christendom.  Hence  it  becomes
not  only  the  instrument  of  inquiry  in  the  sciences,  but  a

^  Seen,  as  indicated  above,  in  the  matter-of-course  resort  of  the  scien-
tists to  the  conception  of  eflficient  cause  as  a  solvent  of  problems  touching
material  phenomena,  as  well  as  in  the  theologians'  and  philosophers*
resistless  drift  toward  creative  efficiency  as  the  ultimate  term  of  their
speculations.


286  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

major  premise  in  all  work  of  ionovation  and  reconstruc-
tion of  the  scheme  of  institutions.  In  that  extensive
revision  of  the  institutional  framework  that  charac-
terises modern  times  it  is  the  life  of  the  common  people,
their  rights  and  obligations,  that  is  forever  in  view,  and
their  life  is  conceived  in  terms  of  craftsmanlike  industry
and  the  petty  trade.  By  and  large,  the  outcome  of  this
revision  of  civil  and  legal  matters  under  handicraft  aus-
pices is  the  system  of  Natural  Rights,  including  the  con-
cept of  Natural  Liberty.  The  whole  scheme  so  worked
out  is  manifestly  of  the  same  piece  with  that  Order  of  Na-
ture and  Natural  Law  that  dominated  the  inquiries  of
the  scientists  and  the  speculations  of  the  philosophers.
It  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  case  that  the  EngHsh-speak-
ing  community  should  take  the  lead  in  the  final  advance
in  all  these  matters  and  should  work  out  the  most
finished,  secure  and  enduring  results  within  these  pre-
mises, both  in  the  field  of  scientific  inquiry  and  in  that
of  the  theory  of  institutions.  It  lies  in  the  nature  of  the
case  because  the  EngHsh-speaking  community  had  the
benefit  of  the  technological  gains  made  before  their
time,  because  they  had  a  long  and  passably  uneventful
experience  of  the  handicraft  routine  in  industry  and  in
the  workday  life  to  whose  wants  the  handicraft  industry
ministered,  and  because  the  discipHne  of  the  handicraft
era  was  not  in  their  case  neutralised  in  its  closing  phase
by  the  turmoil,  insecurity  and  civic  debaucheries  of  an
epoch  of  war  and  political  intrigue.  And  here  again  the
neighbouring  peoples  come  into  the  case  as  copartners  in
this  work  with  England  in  much  the  same  measure  in
which  their  experience  through  this  period  was  of  the
same  general  nature.


The  Era  of  Uandicrajt  287

The  scheme  of  Natural  Rights,  and  of  Natural  Liberty,
which  so  emerges  is  of  a  pronounced  individualistic
tenor,  as  it  should  be  to  answer  to  the  scheme  of  ex-
perience embodied  in  the  system  of  handicraft.  In  the
crafts,  particularly  during  the  protracted  early  phases
of  the  system,  it  is  the  individual  workman,  working
for  a  livelihood  by  use  of  his  own  personal  force,  dex-
terity and  diligence,  that  stands  out  as  the  main  fact;
so  much  so,  indeed,  that  he  appears  to  have  stood,  in  the
apprehension  of  his  time,  as  the  sole  substantial  factor
in  the  industrial  organisation.  Similarly  under  the  canon
of  Natural  Liberty  the  individual  is  thrown  on  his  own
devices  for  his  life,  liberty  and  pursuit  of  happiness.
The  craftsman  by  immemorial  custom  traditionally  dis-
posed of  his  work  and  its  product  as  he  chose,  under  the
rules  of  his  gild.  He  was  by  prescription  in  full  posses-
sion of  what  he  made,  subject  only  to  the  gild  regula-
tions imposed  for  the  good  of  his  neighbours  who  were
similarly  placed.  The  most  sacred  right  included  in  the
scheme  of  Natural  Rights  is  that  of  property  in  what-
ever wealth  has  been  honestly  acquired,  subject  only  to
the  qualification  that  it  must  not  be  turned  to  the  detri-
ment of  one's  fellows.  In  the  days  of  the  typical  handi-
craft system  the  petty  trade  runs  along  with  the  handi-
craft industry,  in  such  a  way  that  every  master  crafts-
man is  more  or  less  of  a  trader,  disposing  of  his  goods  or
services  in  plenary  discretion,  and  even  the  apprentices
and  journeymen  similarly  bargain  for  their  terms  of
work  and  at  times  for  the  disposal  of  their  product;  while
the  professional  itinerant  trader  is  a  member  of  this
industrial  community  on  much  the  same  footing  as  the
craftsmen  proper.^  So  it  is  a  secure  item  in  the  scheme


288  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  Natural  Rights  that  all  persons  not  under  tutelage
have  an  indefeasible  right  to  dispose  by  purchase  and
sale  not  only  of  products  of  their  own  hands  but  of  what-
ever items  they  have  come  by  through  alienation  by
its  producer  or  lawful  owner.  And  ownership  is  in  nat-
ural-rights theory  always  to  be  traced  back  to  the  crea-
tive workmanship  of  its  first  possessor.^

In  the  sequel  this  natural  right  freely  to  dispose  of
one's  person  and  work,  when  it  had  found  lodgment
among  the  principles  of  civil  rights  in  the  eighteenth
century,  contributed  substantially  to  the  dissolution  of
that  organ  of  surveillance  and  control  that  the  craftsmen
of  an  earlier  generation  had  instituted  in  the  gild  system.
The  case  is  but  an  instance  of  what  is  continually  hap-
pening and  bound  to  happen  in  the  field  of  institutional
growth.  Institutional  principles,  such  as  this  item  of
civil  rights,  emerge  from  use  and  wont,  resulting  as  a
settled  line  of  convention  from  usage  and  custom  that
grow  out  of  the  exigencies  of  life  at  the  time.  But  use
and  wont  is  a  matter  of  time.  It  takes  time  for  habitua-
tion to  attain  that  secure  degree  of  conventional  recog-
nition and  authenticity  that  will  enable  it  to  stand  as
an  indefeasible  principle  of  conduct,  and  by  the  time
this  consummation  is  achieved  it  commonly  happens
that  the  exigencies  which  enforced  the  given  Hne  of  use
and  wont  have  ceased  to  be  operative,  or  at  least  to

*  Cf.  Locke,  Of  Civil  Government y  ch.  v,  "Though  the  earth  and  all  in-
ferior creatures  be  common  to  all  men,  yet  every  man  has  a  property  in
his  own  person;  this  nobody  has  a  right  to  but  himself.  The  labour  of
his  body  and  the  work  of  his  hands  we  may  say  are  properly  his.  What-
soever, then,  he  removes  out  of  the  state  that  Nature  hath  provided  and
left  it  in,  he  hath  mixed  his  labour  with,  and  joined  to  it  something  that  is
his  own,  and  thereby  makes  it  his  property."


The  Era  of  Handicraft  289

M^:^  ■  -  •••■•■■■
be  so  imperative  as  in  their  earlier  incidence.  The  con-
trol which  the  gilds  were  initially  designed  to  exercise
was  a  control  that  should  leave  the  gildsmen  free  in  the
pursuit  of  their  work,  subject  only  to  a  salutary  surveil-
lance and  standardisation  of  the  output,  such  as  would
maintain  the  prestige  of  their  workmanship  and  facilitate
the  disposal  of  the  goods  produced.  The  initial  purpose
seems,  in  modern  phrase,  to  have  been  a  creation  of  in-
tangible assets  for  the  benefits  of  the  body  of  gildmen.
Under  the  new  conditions  that  came  to  prevail  when
capitalistic  management  took  over  the  direction  of  in-
dustry these  gild  regulations  no  longer  served  their  pur-
pose, but  they  seem  on  the  contrary  to  have  become  an
obstacle  to  the  free  employment  of  skilled  workmen.

A  similar  fortune  was  about  the  same  time  beginning
to  overtake  this  principle  of  Natural  Liberty  itself,  and
that  even  in  the  particular  bearing  which  seems  at  the
outset  to  have  been  its  primary  and  most  substantial
aim.  Initially,  it  seems,  the  point  of  interest,  and  indeed
of  contention,  was  the  freedom  of  the  masterless  work-
man to  dispose  of  his  person  and  workmanship  as  he  saw
fit  and  as  he  best  could  and  would, — to  take  care  of  his
life,  Hberty  and  pursuit  of  happiness  without  let  or
hindrance  from  persons  vested  with  authority  or  prerog-
ative. With  the  passage  of  time,  use  and  wont  erected
this  conventional  rule  into  an  inalienable  right.  But
included  with  it,  as  an  integral  extension  of  the  powers
which  this  inalienable  right  safeguarded,  was  the  right
of  purchase  and  sale,  touching  both  work  and  its  prod-
uct, the  right  freely  to  hold  and  dispose  of  property.
Presently,  toward  the  close  of  the  handicraft  era,  or
more  specifically  in  the  late  eighteenth  century  in  Eng-


sgo  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

land,  industry  fell  under  capitalistic  management.  When
this  change  had  taken  passably  full  effect  the  workman
was  already  secure  in  his  civil  (natural)  right  to  dispose
of  his  workmanship  as  he  thought  best,  but  the  circum-
stances of  employment  under  capitaHstic  management
made  it  impossible  for  him  in  fact  to  dispose  of  his  work
except  to  these  employers,  and  very  much  on  their  terms,
or  to  dispose  of  his  person  except  where  the  exigencies
of  their  business  might  require  him.  And  the  similarly
inalienable  right  of  ownership,  which  had  similarly
emerged  from  use  and  wont  under  the  handicraft  sys-
tem, but  which  now  in  effect  secured  the  capitaHst-
employer  in  his  control  of  the  material  means  of  indus-
try,— this  sacred  right  of  property  now  barred  out  any
move  that  might  be  designed  to  reinstate  the  workman
in  his  effective  freedom  to  work  as  he  chose  or  to  dispose
of  his  person  and  product  as  he  saw  fit.

The  connection  so  shown  between  the  growth  of  handi-
craft and  the  system  of  Natural  Rights  does  not  purport
to  be  a  complete  account  of  the  rise  of  that  system,  even
in  outline.  The  more  usual  account  traces  tliis  system
to  the  concept  oijus  naturale,  of  the  late  Roman  jurists.
There  is  assuredly  no  call  here  to  question  or  disparage
the  work  of  those  jurists  and  scholars  who  have  busied
themselves  with  authenticating  the  system  of  Natural
Rights  by  showing  it  to  be  founded  in  the  jus  gentium
and  the  jus  naturale  of  the  Latin  Codes.  Their  work  is
doubtless  historically  exact  and  competent.  But  as  is
commonly  the  case  with  such  work  at  the  hands  of
jurists  and  scholars,  especially  in  that  past  age,  it  con-
tents itself  with  tracing  an  authentic  pedigree,  rather
than  go  into  questions  of  the  causes  that  led  to  the  vogue


The  Era  of  Handicraft  291

of  these  concepts  at  the  time  of  their  acceptance  or  the
circumstances  which  gave  these  Natural  Rights  that  par-
ticular scope  and  content  which  they  have  assumed  in
modern  theory  of  law  and  civil  relations.  The  thesis
which  is  here  offered  is  to  the  effect  that  the  habituation
of  use  and  wont  under  the  handicraft  system  installed
these  rights,  in  an  inchoate  fashion,  in  the  current  pre-
conceptions of  the  community,  and  that  this  habituation
is  traceable,  causally  rather  than  by  process  of  ratiocina-
tion, to  the  sense  of  workmanship  as  it  took  form  and
went  into  action  under  the  particular  conventional  cir-
cumstances of  the  early  era  of  handicraft;  that  the  pre-
conceptions that  so  went  into  effect  determined  the
current  attitude  of  thoughtful  men  toward  questions  of
civil  rights  and  legal  principle;  and  that  the  Jurists  who
had  occasion  to  take  notice  of  these  current  preconcep-
tions touching  human  rights  found  themselves  con-
strained to  deal  with  them  as  elementary  facts  in  the
situation  as  it  lay  before  them,  and  therefore  to  find  a
ground  for  them  in  the  accepted  canons,  such  as  would
satisfy  the  legal  mind  of  their  authenticity  by  ancient
prescription,  or  such  as  should  determine  the  scope  of
their  appucation  in  conformity  with  legal  principles
having  a  prior  claim  and  authoritative  sanction.  The
thesis,  therefore,  is  not  that  the  jurists  founded  these
modern  principles  of  legal  theory  on  the  popular  pre-
judices current  in  their  time  and  due  in  point  of  habitua-
tion to  the  routine  of  handicraft,  nor  that  they  stretched
the  ancient  principles  oijus  naturale  to  meet  the  demands
of  popular  prej'udice,  but  that  on  prompting  of  legal
exigencies  to  which  the  practical  acceptance  of  these
principles  had  given  rise,  the  j'urists  found  in  the  capitu-


292  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

laries  of  the  code  what  was  necessary  to  authenticate
these  principles  of  legal  theory  and  give  them  the  sanc-
tion of  authority, — a  work  of  reasoning  all  the  more  con-
genial and  convincing  to  the  jurists  since  they  in  common
with  the  rest  of  their  generation  were  by  habit  and  tradi-
tion imbued  with  the  penchant  to  find  these  principles
right  and  good,  and  consequently  to  find  none  other  in
the  codes  that  might  fatally  traverse  those  whose  au-
thentication was  due.  But  these  are  matters  of  pedigree,
and  this  work  of  the  great  jurists  and  philosophers  is  in
great  part  of  the  nature  of  accessory  after  the  fact,  so  far
as  bears  on  that  sweeping  acceptance  of  these  principles
and  that  incontestable  efficiency  that  marks  the  course
of  their  Hfe-history  in  modern  times.  The  jurists  and
philosophers  have  sought  and  shown  the  sufficient  rea-
son for  accepting  this  scheme  of  principles,  as  well  as
for  the  particular  fashion  in  which  they  have  been  formu-
lated; but  the  insensible  growth  of  habits  of  thought
induced  by  the  conditions  of  life  in  (early)  modern  times
must  be  allowed  to  stand  as  the  efficient  cause  of  their
dominant  control  over  modern  practice,  speculation,  and
sentiment  touching  all  those  relations  that  have  been
standardised  in  their  terms.  By  use  and  wont  the  range
of  conventional  elements  included  in  the  scheme  had
become  eternal  and  indubitable  principles  of  right  reason,
ingrained  in  the  intellectual  texture  of  the  jurists  as  well
as  in  their  lay  contemporaries;  and  the  task  of  the  jurists
therefore  was  to  work  out  their  authentication  in  terms
of  sufficient  reason;  it  was  not  for  them  to  trouble  with
any  question  of  the  causes  to  which  these  principles
owed  their  eternal  fitness  in  the  scheme  of  Nature  at  that
particular  time.


The  Era  of  Handicraft  '  293

The  Natural  Eights  which  so  found  authentication
at  the  hands  of  the  jurists  were  of  the  individualistic
kind  which  the  discipHne  of  the  handicraft  system  had
inculcated,  and  the  authentication  found  in  the  jus
naturale  does  not  range  much  beyond  the  individualistic
bounds  so  prescribed,  nor  are  other  Hues  of  ancient  pre-
scription, at  variance  with  these  rights,  brought  at  all
prominently  into  the  light  by  the  legal  inquiries  of  the
jurists.  Whereas  it  is  no  matter  of  serious  question  that
the  chief  bearing  of  the  ancient  findings  embodied  in
the  code  is  not  of  tliis  individuaHstic  character.  The
causes  which  brought  on  the  modern  acceptance  of  this
scheme  of  Natural  Rights  are  a  matter  of  use  and  wont,
quite  distinct  from  that  line  of  argument  by  which  the
jurists  estabhshed  them  on  grounds  of  sufficient  reason
resting  on  ancient  prescription.

The  extreme  tenacity  of  Hfe  shown  by  the  system  of
Natural  Eights  may  raise  a  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the
adequacy  of  any  account  that  assigns  their  derivation
to  the  discipline  of  use  and  wont  peculiar  to  any  par-
ticular cultural  era,  even  when  the  era  in  question  is  of
so  consistent  a  character  and  such  protracted  duration
as  the  era  of  handicraft.  What  adds  force  to  such  a  ques-
tion is  the  fact  that  something  like  these  preconceptions
of  natural  right  is  not  uncommon  in  the  lower  cultures.
So  that  on  the  face  of  the  returns  there  appears  to  be
good  ground  in  the  nature  of  things  for  designating  these
conventional  rights  "natural."  Something  of  the  kind
is  current  in  an  obvious  fashion  among  the  peaceable
communities  on  the  lower  levels  of  culture,  among  whom
the  scheme  of  accepted  rights  and  obligations  bears
more  than  a  distant  resemblance  to  the  Natural  Rights


294  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  the  eighteenth  century.  But  something  of  the  kind
will  also  be  found  among  peoples  on  a  higher  level,  both
peaceable  and  predatory;  though  departing  more  notably
in  point  of  contents  from  the  eighteenth-century  system.
The  point  of  similarity,  or  of  identity,  among  all  these
systems  of  conventionally  fundamental  and  eternal
human  rights  is  to  be  found  in  their  intrinsic  sanction —
they  are  all  and  several  right  and  good  as  a  matter  of
course  and  of  common  sense;  the  point  of  divergence  or
dissimilarity  is  to  be  found  in  the  contents  of  the  code,
which  are  not  nearly  the  same  in  all  cases.  In  the  me-
diaeval natural  common-sense  scheme  of  rights,  prerog-
ative, personal  and  class  exemption,  is  of  the  essence  of
the  canon;  but  the  scheme  is  none  the  less  intrinsically
mandatory  on  those  who  had  been  bred  into  a  matter-of-
course  acceptance  of  it  by  the  routine  of  Hfe  in  that  age.
Differential  rights,  duties  and  privilege  give  the  point
of  departure  in  this  mediaeval  system  of  civil  relations;
whereas  in  the  system  worked  out  under  the  auspices  of
the  handicraft  industry  the  denial  of  differential  ad-
vantage, whether  class  or  individual,  is  the  beginning  of
wisdom  and  the  substance  of  common  sense  as  appHed
to  civil  relations.  The  one  of  these  schemes  comes  out
of  an  economic  situation  drawn  on  hues  of  predation,
ancient,  prescriptive  and  settled,  and  its  first  principle
is  that  of  master  and  servant;  the  other  comes  of  a  situa-
tion grounded  in  workmanlike  efficiency,  and  its  first
principle  is  that  of  an  equitable  livelihood  for  work  done.
That  some  of  the  working  systems  of  civil  rights  in
customary  force  among  the  peaceable  communities  of
the  lower  culture  have  more  in  common  with  modern
Natural  Rights  than  this  mediaeval  scheme,  should  logic-


The  Era  of  Handicraft  295

ally  be  due  to  a  similarity  in  the  conditions  of  life  out  of
which  they  have  arisen.  In  these  savage  or  lower  bar-
barian communities,  too,  the  principle  of  organization  is
work  for  a  livelihood,  and  the  conventional  ground  of
economic  relations  is  that  of  workmanship,  as  it  is  under
the  early  handicraft  system;  but  with  the  difference  that
whereas  the  technology  of  handicraft  throws  the  skilled
workman  into  perspective  as  a  self-sufficient  individual,
and  so  throws  self-help  into  the  foreground  as  the  prin-
ciple of  economic  equity,  among  these  savages  and  lower
barbarians  living  by  means  of  a  technology  of  a  less  highly
specialised  character,  with  a  material  situation  not  ad-
mitting of  the  same  degree  of  severalty  in  work  or  liveli-
hood, the  prime  requisite  in  the  relations  governing  the
rights  and  duties  of  the  members  of  the  group  is  not  the
individual  livelihood  of  the  skilled  workman  but  that  of
the  group  at  large.  The  individual's  personal  claims
come  in  only  as  secondary  and  subservient  to  the  needs  of
the  group  at  large;  rights  of  ownership  are  loose  and
vague,  and  they  lack  that  tenacity  of  life  that  char-
acterises the  like  rights  under  the  handicraft  system.  It
is  true,  the  product  of  industry  belongs  primarily  to  the
producer  of  it,  it  is  his  in  some  sense  that  might  pass  into
ownership  if  the  technological  situation  admitted  of  work
for  a  livelihood  in  strict  and  consistent  severalty;  but  in
the  actual  case  as  found  on  these  lower  levels  the  product
commonly  escapes  somewhat  easily  from  his  individual
possession  and  comes  to  inure  to  the  use  of  the  group.
Except  for  such  articles  as  continue  to  pertain  to  him  by
virtue  of  intimate  and  daily  use,  the  producer's  posses-
sive control  of  his  product  is  likely  at  the  best  to  be
transient  and  dubious,  readily  giving  way  before  any


296  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

urgent call for its  use by other members of the
group.  ^

A  fact  of  some  incisive  effect  in  this  connection  is
doubtless  the  characteristic  trait  of  handicraft  that,  in
its  early  phases  wholly  and  obviously  and  in  its  later
development  also  somewhat  evidently,  it  was  the  affair
of  a  class;  whereas  in  the  savage  communities  with  which
it  is  here  compared,  the  technology  and  the  liveHhood  in
question  are  those  of  the  community  at  large,  not  of  a
class  that  stands  in  contrast  and  in  some  degree  of  com-
petition with  the  community  at  large.  The  craftsmen
were  a  fraction  of  the  community  by  work  for  whose
needs  they  got  their  hvelihood,  even  though,  in  the
course  of  time,  they  became  the  dominant  element  within
the  local  community  (municipality)  whose  fortunes  they
shared.  And  as  between  this  fraction  of  the  population
and  outside  classes  with  whom  they  carried  on  their
traffic,  particularly  the  well-to-do  and  land-holding
classes,  there  could  be  no  constraining  sense  of  a  soli-
darity of  interest.  The  ancient  bond  of  master  and  serv-
ant had  been  broken  by  something  like  an  overt  act  of
class  secession  on  the  part  of  the  craftsmen,  and  nothing
like  a  bond  of  fellowship  had  taken  its  place.  The  fel-
lowship ran  within  the  lines  of  craftsmanship,  while  the
traffic  of  each  craftsman  typically  ran  across  the  line
that  divided  the  craftsman  from  the  old  order  and  popula-
tion outside  of  this  industrial  system.

1  Illustrative  instances  of  such  a  customary  code  of  "natural"  rights
and  obUgations  are  numerous  in  the  late  Uterature  of  ethnology.  Good
illustrations  are  afforded  by  various  papers  in  the  Reports  of  the  Am.
Bureau  of  Ethnology,  on  the  culture  of  the  Pueblos,  Eskimo,  and  the
Indians  of  the  North-West  Coast;  so  also  in  Skeat  and  Blagden,  Pagan
Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  or  in  Seligmann,  The  Veddas,


The  Era  of  Handicraft  297

That  the  eighteenth-century  system  of  Natural  Rights
shows  such  a  degree  of  approximation  to  the  scheme  of
rights  and  obUgations  observed  among  many  primitive
peoples  need  flutter  no  one's  sense  of  cultural  consistency.
Return  to  Nature  was  more  or  less  of  a  password  in  the
closing  period  of  the  era  of  handicraft  and  after,  and  in
respect  of  this  system  of  civil  relations  it  appears  that
the  popular  attitude  of  that  time  was  in  effect  something
of  a  reversion  to  primitive  habits  of  thought;  though  it
was  at  best  a  partial  return  to  a  "state  of  nature"  in
the  sense  of  a  state  of  peace  and  industry  rather  than  a
return  to  the  unsophisticated  beginnings  of  society.
That  such  a  partial  reversion  takes  effect  in  the  habits
of  thought  of  the  time  appears  to  be  due  to  a  similarly
partial  return  to  somewhat  analogous  habits  of  Hfe.
The  correspondence  in  the  habits  of  thought  is  no  greater
than  that  in  the  habits  of  Hfe  out  of  which  these  habits
of  thought  emerged.  The  primitive  peoples  that  show
this  suggestive  resemblance  to  the  system  of  Natural
Rights  typically  are  living  under  a  routine  of  workman-
ship and  in  a  state  of  habitual  peace, — in  these  respects
being  placed  somewhat  similarly  to  the  handicraft  com-
munity. The  handicraft  system  comes  true  to  the  same
characterisation  in  so  far  that  it  was  dominated  by  a
routine  of  workmanship  and  so  far  as,  in  effect,  its  Hfe-
history  falls  in  an  era  of  prevailingly  peaceable  condi-
tions; and  such  a  characterisation  holds  true  of  the  in-
dustrial community  proper  through  the  period  during
which  handicraft  is  the  ruling  factor  in  the  community's
habitual  range  of  interest.  It  is  not  that  the  era  of
handicraft  was  an  era  of  reversion  to  savagery,  but  only
that  the  tone-giving  factor  in  the  community  of  that


298  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

time  reverted,  by  force  of  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts,
to  habits  of  peace  and  industry,  in  which  direct  and  de-
tailed manual  work  takes  a  leading  place.  There  is  also
the  further  point  of  economic  contact  with  the  savage
state  that  in  the  handicraft  community  distinctions  of
wealth  are  neither  large  nor  of  decisive  consequence
during  the  long  period  of  habituation  that  brought  the
preconceptions  of  that  era  into  the  settled  shape  that
gave  them  the  character  of  a  finished  and  balanced  sys-
tem of  principles.

It  may  be  added,  at  the  risk  of  tedious  repetition,
that  the  habits  of  life  characteristic  of  the  era,  as  well  as
the  frame  of  mind  suited  to  this  characteristic  routine
of  life,  seem  peculiarly  suited  to  the  native  endowment
of  the  European  peoples, — perhaps  in  an  especial  degree
suited  to  the  native  bent  of  those  sections  of  the  popula-
tion in  which  there  is  an  appreciable  admixture  of  the
dolicho-blond  stock.  That  such  may  be  the  case  is  at
least  strongly  suggested  by  the  tenacious  hold  which
this  system  of  Rights  apparently  still  has  on  the  senti-
mental allegiance  of  these  Western  peoples,  after  the
conditions  to  which  these  Rights  owe  their  rise,  and  to
which  they  are  suited,  have  in  the  main  ceased  to  exist;
as  well  as  by  the  somewhat  blind  fervour  with  which  these
peoples,  and  more  especially  the  English-speaking  section
of  them,  go  about  the  idyllic  enterprise  of  rehabilitating
that  obsolescent  "competitive  system"  that  embodied
the  system  of  Natural  Rights,  and  that  came  up  with  the
era  of  handicraft  and  went  under  in  its  dissolution.


CHAPTER  VII
The  Machine  Industry

The  era  of  the  machine  industry  has  been  designated
variously,  to  answer  to  the  varying  point  of  view  from
which  it  has  been  considered  by  divers  writers.  As  an
historical  era  it  shows  divers  traits,  more  or  less  charac-
teristic, and  it  has  been  designated  by  one  or  another  of
these  traits  according  to  the  particular  line  of  interest
that  may  have  directed  the  attention  of  those  who  have
had  occasion  to  name  it.  It  is  spoken  of  as  the  era  of
the  factory  system,  of  large-scale  industry,  as  the  age
of  CapitaHsm  or  of  free  competition,  or  again  as  an  era
of  the  credit  economy.  But  as  seen  from  the  point  of
view  of  technology,  and  more  specifically  from  that  of
workmanship  as  it  underlies  the  technological  system,
it  is  best  characterised  as  the  era  of  the  machine  industry,
or  of  the  machine  process.  As  a  technological  period
it  is  commonly  conceived  to  take  its  rise  in  the  British
industrial  community  about  the  third  quarter  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  conventional  date  of  the  Indus-
trial Revolution, — those  who  have  a  taste  for  precise
dates  assigning  it  more  specifically  to  the  sixties  of  that
century,  to  coincide  with  the  earliest  practical  use  of
certain  large  mechanical  inventions  of  that  age.^

Such  a  precise  date  is  scarcely  serviceable  for  any  other

*  Cf.,  e.  g.,  C.  Beard,  The  Industrial  Revolution,  ch.  ii;  Spencer  Walpole,
History  of  England  from  1815,  vol.  i;  C.  W.  Taylor,  The  Modern  Factory
System,  ch.  i,  ii.

299


300  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

than  a  mnemonic  purpose.  If  the  matter  is  taken  in
historical  perspective  the  era  of  the  machine  process
will  be  seen  to  have  been  coming  on  in  England  through
the  earlier  years  of  the  century,  and  even  from  before
that  time;  whereas  notable  mechanical  inventions,  and
engineering  exploits  of  the  like  general  bearing  in  tech-
nology, had  begun  to  affect  the  industrial  situation  in
some  of  the  Continental  countries  at  an  appreciably
earlier  period.  So,  e,  g.,  practical  improvements  had
gone  into  effect  in  water-wheels,  pumps  and  wind  mills,
in  the  use  of  sails  and  the  designs  of  shipping,  in  wheeled
vehicles  (though  the  early  modern  improvements  in
this  particular  may  easily  be  over-rated)  and  in  such
appliances  as  chimneys;  and,  again,  there  is  the  pecuHar
but  highly  instructive  field  of  applied  mechanics  repre-
sented by  the  invention  and  improvement  of  firearms.
Such  engineering  enterprises  as  the  drainage  systems  of
Holland  also  belong  here  and  are  to  be  counted  among
the  notable  achievements  in  appHed  mechanics.

Even  the  most  casual  review  of  the  technological  situa-
tion in  Europe,  say  in  the  seventeenth  century,  will
bring  out  characteristic  features  that  cannot  be  denied
honourable  mention  as  applications  of  mechanical  science,
although  the  reserve  caution  is  immediately  to  be  entered
that  these  early  mechanical  expedients  and  their  em-
ployment stand  out  as  sporadic  facts  of  mechanical
contrivance  in  an  age  of  manual  work,  rather  than  as
characteristic  traits  of  the  industrial  system  in  which
they  are  found.  The  beginnings  of  the  machine  industry
are  of  this  sporadic  character.  They  come  up  as  an  out-
growth of  the  handicraft  technology,  particularly  at
conjunctures  where  that  technology  is  called  on  to  deal


The  Machine  Industry  301

with  such  large  mechanical  problems  as  exceed  the  force
of  manual  labour  or  that  elude  the  reach  of  the  crafts-
man's tools.

So,  e,  g.,  in  England,  say  from  the  sixteenth  century
onward,  there  are  improvements  in  highways  and  water-
ways and  in  the  drainage  of  agricultural  lands;  and,  as
an  instance  more  obviously  related  to  the  machine  in-
dustry as  commonly  apprehended,  there  comes  early
in  the  eighteenth  century  the  "horse-hoing  cultivation"
on  which  Jethro  Tull  spent  his  enthusiasm.  Along  with
this  obviously  mechanical  line  of  endeavour  and  innova-
tion is  also  to  be  noted  the  deliberate  efforts  to  improve
the  races  of  sheep  and  cattle  that  were  in  progress  about
the  same  time.  These  are  perhaps  not  to  be  rated  as
mechanical  inventions  in  the  simple  and  obvious  sense
of  the  phrase,  but  they  have  this  trait  in  common  with
the  inventions  of  the  machine  era  that  they  turn  ascer-
tained facts  of  brute  nature  to  account  for  htmian  use
by  a  logic  that  has  much  of  that  character  of  impersonal
incidence  that  marks  the  machine  technology.  The
machine  industry  comes  on  gradually;  its  initial  stages
are  visible  in  the  early  eighteenth  century,  but  it  is  only
toward  the  close  of  that  century  that  its  effects  on  the
industrial  system  become  so  pronounced  that  the  era
of  the  machine  technology  may  fairly  be  said  to  have
set  in;  and  it  is  only  in  Great  Britain  that  it  can  be  said
to  prevail  at  that  period.

Of  the  other  features  above  alluded  to  as  characteristic
of  this  period  of  history  none  are  of  so  substantial  a
character  or  so  distinctive  of  this  particular  period  as  its
technological  pecuHarities.  Free  competition,  e.  g.,  be-
longs as  much  to  the  era  of  handicraft  as  to  that  of  the


302  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

machine,  having  prevailed — more  extensively  in  theory
than  in  practice — under  the  former  regime  as  under
the  latter;  and  in  point  of  fact  it  gradually  falls  under
increasing  restrictions  as  the  machine  age  advances,  until
in  the  more  highly  developed  phases  of  the  current  situa-
tion it  has  largely  ceased  to  be  a  practicable  line  of  policy
in  industrial  business.  So,  also,  Capitalism  did  not  take
its  rise  coincident  with  the  industrial  revolution,  al-
though its  best  development  and  largest  expansion  may
lie  within  the  machine  age.  It  had  its  beginnings  in  the
prosperous  days  of  handicraft,  and  one  capitalistic  era
had  already  run  its  course,  on  the  Continent,  before  the
machine  industry  came  in.  The  ''credit  economy,"
associated  with  the  capitahstic  management  of  industry,
is  also  of  older  growth,  so  far  as  regards  the  days  of  its
early  vigour,  although  the  larger  and  more  far-reaching
developments  of  credit  come  effectually  into  play  only
in  the  later  decades  of  the  machine  age.  Much  the  same
is  true  of  the  so-called  large-scale  organisation  of  indus-
try and  the  factory  system.  Its  highest  development
comes  with  the  advanced  stages  of  the  machine  tech-
nology and  is  manifestly  conditioned  by  the  latter,  but
it  was  already  a  force  to  be  counted  with  at  the  time  of
the  industrial  revolution.  The  large-scale  industry  con-
templated, with  a  degree  of  apprehension,  by  Adam
Smith,  e.  g.,  was  not  based  on  the  machine  technology
but  on  handicraft  with  an  extensive  division  of  labour,
and  on  the  ''household  industry"  as  that  was  gaining
ground  in  has  time.  The  latter  was,  in  form,  what  has
since  come  to  be  known  as  the  "sweatshop"  industry.

In  this  new  era  technology  comes  into  close  touch  with


The  Machine  Industry  303

science;  both  the  science  and  the  technology  of  the  new
age  being  of  a  matter-of-fact  character,  beyond  all  pre-
cedent. So  much  so  that  by  contrast,  the  technology
of  handicraft  would  appear  to  have  stood  in  no  close  or
consistent  relation  with  the  avowed  science  of  its  time.
Not  that  anthropomorphic  imputation  is  altogether
wanting  or  inoperative  in  this  latter-day  scientific  in-
quiry, or  in  the  technological  utilisation  of  the  facts  in
hand;  but  in  the  later  conceptions  anthropomorphism
has  at  the  best  been  repressed  and  sterilised  in  an  un-
precedented degree.  And  it  holds  true  for  the  machine
technology  beyond  any  other  state  of  the  industrial  arts
that  the  facts  of  observation  can  effectually  be  turned
to  account  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  apprehended  in  a
matter-of-fact  way.  The  logic  of  this  technology,  by
which  its  problems  are  to  be  worked  out,  is  the  logic  of
a  mechanical  process  in  which  no  personal  or  teleological
factors  enter.  The  engineer  or  inventor  who  designs
processes,  appliances  and  expedients  within  these  prem-
ises is  required  to  apprehend  and  appreciate  the  working
facts  after  that  dispassionate,  opaque,  unteleological
fashion  in  which  the  phenomena  of  brute  matter  occur;
and  he  must  learn  to  work  out  their  uses  by  the  logic  of
brute  matter  instead  of  construing  them  by  imputation
and  by  analogy  with  the  manifestations  of  human  work-
manship. Less  imperatively,  but  still  in  a  marked  degree,
the  same  spirit  must  be  found  in  the  workmen  under
whose  tendance  these  processes  and  apphances  are  to
work  out  the  designed  results.

Under  the  simpler  technology  of  more  primitive  in-
dustrial systems  recourse  to  anthropomorphic  imputa-
tion has  also  always  been  a  hindrance  to  workmanlike


304  The  Instinct  oj  Workmanship

mastery,  more  particularly  in  the  mechanic  arts  proper,
and  only  less  pronounced  in  those  industrial  arts,  Hke
husbandry,  that  have  to  do  immediately  with  plants  and
animals.  Knowledge  of  brute  facts  as  interpreted  in
terms  of  human  nature  appears  never  to  have  been  ser-
viceable in  full  proportion  to  their  content.  But  in  these
more  primitive  industrial  systems — as  also  in  the  better
days  of  handicraft — the  workman  is  forever  in  instant
control  of  his  tools  and  materials;  the  movements  made
use  of  in  the  work  are  essentially  of  the  nature  of  manipu-
lation, in  which  the  workman  adroitly  coerces  the  ma-
terials into  shapes  and  relations  that  will  answer  his
purpose,  and  in  which  also  nothing  (typically)  takes
place  beyond  the  manual  reach  of  the  workman  as  ex-
tended by  the  tools  which  his  hands  make  use  of.  Under
these  conditions  it  is  a  matter  of  relatively  slight  effect
whether  the  workman  does  or  does  not  rate  the  objects
which  he  uses  as  tools  and  materials  in  quasi-personal
terms  or  imputes  to  them  a  degree  of  self -direction,  since
they  are  at  no  point  allowed  to  escape  his  manual  reach
and  are  by  direct  communication  of  his  force,  dexterity
and  judgment  coerced  into  the  forms,  motions  and
spatial  dispositions  aimed  at  by  him.  His  imputing
some  bias,  bent,  initiative  or  spiritual  force  or  infirmity
to  brute  matter  will  doubtless  incapacitate  him  by  so
much  for  efficiently  designing  processes  and  uses  for  the
available  material  facts;  his  creative  imagination  pro-
ceeds on  mistaken  premises  and  goes  wrong  in  so  far;
and  so  this  anthropomorphic  interpretation  must  always
count  as  a  material  drawback  to  technological  mastery
of  the  available  resources  and  in  some  degree  retard  the
possible  advance  in  the  industrial  arts. But  within  the


The  Machine  Industry  305

premises  given  by  the  industrial  arts  as  they  stand,  he
may  still  do  effective  work  as  a  mechanic  skilled  in  the
manual  operations  prescribed  by  the  given  state  of  the
arts.  For  in  the  mechanic  industries  of  all  these  other
and  more  archaic  industrial  systems  the  workman  does
the  work;  it  may  be  by  use  of  tools,  and  even  by  help  of
more  or  less  extended  processes  in  which  natural  forces
of  growth,  fermentation,  decay,  and  the  Uke,  play  a  ma-
terial part;  but  the  decisive  fact  remains  that  the  motions
and  operations  of  such  manual  industry  take  effect  at
his  hands  and  by  way  of  his  muscular  force  and  manual
reach.  Where  natural  processes,  as  those  of  growth,
fermentation  or  combustion,  are  drawn  into  the  routine
of  industry,  they  lie,  as  natural  processes,  beyond  his
discretionary  control;  at  the  most  he  puts  them  in  train
and  lets  them  run,  with  some  hedging  and  shifting  as
they  go  on,  to  bring  them  to  bear  in  such  a  way  as  shall
suit  his  ends;  he  takes  his  precautions  with  them  and
then  he  takes  the  chance  of  their  coming  to  the  desired
issue.  They  are  not,  and  as  he  sees  the  work  and  its
conditions  they  need  not  be,  within  his  control  in  any-
thing like  the  fashion  in  which  he  controls  his  tools  and
the  materials  employed  in  his  manual  operations;  they
work  well  or  ill,  and  what  comes  of  it  is  in  some  degree
a  matter  of  his  fortune  of  success  or  failure,  such  as  comes
to  the  man  who  has  done  his  best  under  Providence.
In  case  of  a  striking  outcome  for  good  or  ill  from  the
operation  of  such  natural  processes  the  devout  craftsman
is  inclined  to  rate  it  as  the  act  of  God;  very  much  as  does
the  devout  husbandman  who  depends  on  rain  rather
than  on  irrigation.  It  is  the  part  of  the  wise  workman  in
such  a  case  to  take  what  comes,  without  elation  or  re-


3o6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

pining,  in  so  far  as  these  factors  of  success  and  failure  are
not  comprised  in  his  presumed  workmanlike  proficiency.

The  matter  lies  differently  in  the  machine  industry.
The  mechanical  processes  here  engaged  are  calculable,
measurable,  and  contain  no  mysterious  element  of  provi-
dential ambiguity.  In  proportion  as  they  work  to  the
best  effect,  they  are  capable  of  theoretical  statement,
not  merely  approachable  by  rule  of  thumb.  The  design-
ing engineer  takes  his  measures  on  the  basis  of  ascer-
tained quantitative  fact.  He  knows  the  forces  employed,
and,  indeed,  he  can  employ  only  such  as  he  knows  and
only  so  far  as  he  knows  them;  and  he  arranges  for  the
processes  that  are  to  do  the  work,  with  only  such  cal-
culable margin  of  error  as  is  due  to  the  ascertained  aver-
age infirmity  of  the  available  materials.  He  deals  with
forces  and  effects  standardised  in  the  same  opaque  terms.
He  will  be  proficient  in  his  craft  in  much  the  same  degree
in  which  he  is  master  of  the  matter-of-fact  logic  involved
in  mechanical  processes  of  pressure,  velocity,  displace-
ment and  the  like;  not  in  proportion  as  he  can  adroitly
impart  to  the  available  materials  the  workmanlike  turn
of  his  own  manual  force  and  dexterity,  nor  in  the  degree
in  which  he  may  be  able  shrewdly  to  guess  the  run  of
the  season  or  the  variations  of  temperature  and  moisture
that  condition  the  effectual  serviceability  of  natural
processes  in  handicraft.

The  share  of  the  operative  workman  in  the  machine
industry  is  (typically)  that  of  an  attendant,  an  assistant,
whose  duty  it  is  to  keep  pace  with  the  machine  process
and  to  help  out  with  workmanlike  manipulation  at
points  where  the  machine  process  engaged  is  incomplete.'

*  In  a  general  way,  the  relation  in  which  the  skilled  workman  in  the


The  Machine  Industry  307

His  work  supplements  the  machine  process,  rather  than
makes  use  of  it.  On  the  contrary  the  machine  process
makes  use  of  the  workman.  The  ideal  mechanical  con-
trivance in  tliis  technological  system  is  the  automatic
machine.  Perfection  in  the  machine  technology  is  at-
tained in  the  degree  in  which  the  given  process  can  dis-
pense with  manual  labour;  whereas  perfection  in  the
handicraft  system  means  perfection  of  manual  work-
manship. It  is  the  part  of  the  workman  to  know  the
working  of  the  mechanism  with  which  he  is  associated
and  to  adapt  his  movements  with  mechanical  accuracy
to  its  requirement.  This  demands  a  degree  of  intelli-
gence, and  much  of  this  work  calls  for  a  good  deal  of
special  training  besides;  so  that  it  is  still  true  that  the
workman  is  useful  somewhat  in  proportion  as  he  is  skilled
in  the  occupation  to  which  the  machine  industry  calls
him.  In  the  new  era  the  stress  falls  rather  more  decidedly
on  general  intelHgence  and  information,  as  contrasted
with  detail  mastery  of  the  minutiae  of  a  trade;  so  that
familiarity  with  the  commonplace  technological  knowl-
edge of  the  time  is  rather  more  imperative  a  requirement
under  the  machine  technology  than  under  that  of  handi-
craft. At  the  same  time  this  common  stock  of  techno-
logical information  is  greatly  larger  in  the  current  state
of  the  industrial  arts;  so  much  larger  in  volume,  and  at
the  same  time  so  much  more  exacting  in  point  of  ac-
curacy and  detail,  that  this  commonplace  information
that  is  requisite  to  any  of  the  skilled  occupations  can  no

large  industries  stands  to  the  machine  process  is  analogous  to  that  in
which  the  primitive  herdsman,  shepherd  or  dairymaid  stand  to  the
domestic  animals  under  their  care,  rather  than  to  the  relation  of  the
craftsman  to  his  tools.  It  is  a  work  of  attendance,  furtherance  and  skilled
interference  rather  than  a  forceful  and  dexterous  use  of  an  implement.


3o8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

longer  be  acquired  in  the  mere  workday  routine  of  in-
dustry, but  is  to  be  had  only  at  the  cost  of  deliberate
application  and  with  the  help  of  schools.

On  this  head,  as  regards  the  requirements  of  industry
in  the  way  of  general  information  on  the  part  of  the
skilled  workmen,  the  contrast  is  sufficiently  marked,
e.  g.,  between  Elizabethan  times  and  the  Victorian  age.
At  the  earlier  period  illiteracy  was  no  obstacle  to  ade-
quate training  in  the  skilled  trades.  In  the  seventeenth
century  Thomas  Mun  includes  among  the  peculiar  and
extraordinary  acquirements  necessary  to  eminent  suc-
cess in  commerce,  matters  that  are  now  easily  comprised
in  the  ordinary  common-school  instruction;  and  in  so
doing  he  plainly  shows  that  these  acquirements  were
over  and  above  what  was  usual  or  would  be  thought
useful  for  the  common  man.  Even  Adam  Smith,  in  the
latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  shrewd  observer
as  he  was,  does  not  include  any  degree  of  schooKng  or  any
similar  pursuit  of  general  information  among  the  requi-
sites essential  to  the  efficiency  of  skilled  labour.  Even
at  that  date  it  appears  still  to  have  been  true  that  the
commonplace  information  and  the  general  training  neces-
sary to  a  mastery  of  any  one  of  the  crafts  lay  within  so
narrow  a  range  that  what  was  needful  could  all  be  ac-
quired by  hearsay  and  as  an  incident  to  the  discipline  of
apprenticeship.  Within  a  century  after  the  first  incep-
tion of  the  machine  industry  illiteracy  had  come  to  be  a
serious  handicap  to  any  skilled  mechanic;  the  range  of
commonplace  information  that  must  habitually  be  drawn
on  in  the  skilled  trades  had  widened  to  such  an  extent,
and  comprised  so  large  a  volume  of  recondite  facts,  that
the  ability  to  read  came  to  have  an  industrial  value;  the


The  Machine  Industry  309

higher  proficiency  in  any  branch  of  the  mechanic  arts
presumed  such  an  acquaintance  with  fact  and  theory
as  could  neither  be  gained  nor  maintained  without  habi-
tual recourse  to  printed  matter.  And  this  line  of  re-
quirements has  been  constantly  increasing  in  volume
and  urgency,  as  well  as  in  the  range  of  employments  to
which  the  demand  applies,  until  it  has  become  a  com-
monplace that  no  one  can  now  hope  to  compete  for  pro-
ficiency in  the  skilled  occupations  without  such  schooling
as  will  carry  him  very  appreciably  beyond  the  three  R's
that  made  up  the  complement  of  necessary  learning  for
the  common  man  half  a  century  ago.

It  follows  as  a  consequence  of  these  large  and  increasing
requirements  enforced  by  the  machine  technology  that
the  period  of  preliminary  training  is  necessarily  longer,
and  the  schooling  demanded  for  general  preparation
grows  unremittingly  more  exacting.  So  that,  apart
from  all  question  of  humanitarian  sentiment  or  of  popular
fitness  for  democratic  citizenship,  it  has  become  a  matter
of  economic  expediency,  simply  as  a  proposition  in  tech-
nological efficiency  at  large,  to  enforce  the  exemption
of  children  from  industrial  employment  until  a  later
date  and  to  extend  their  effective  school  age  appreciably
beyond  what  would  once  have  been  sufficient  to  meet  all
the  commonplace  requirements  of  skilled  workmanship.^

*  It  follows  also,  among  other  secondary  consequences,  that  the  effective
industrial  life  of  the  skilled  workman  will,  in  order  to  the  best  average
effect,  begin  at  an  appreciably  more  advanced  age,  and  will  therefore  be
shortened  by  that  much.  The  period  of  preparation  becomes  more  pro-
tracted, more  exacting  and  more  costly,  and  the  effective  life  cycle  of  the
workman  grows  shorter.  Although  it  does  not,  perhaps,  belong  in  pre-
cisely this  connection,  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  recall  that  the  in-
creasingly exacting  requirements  of  the  machine  industry,  particularly


310  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

'\.
The  knowledge  so  required  as  a  general  and  common-
place equipment  requisite  for  the  pursuit  of  these  modern
skilled  occupations  is  of  the  general  nature  of  appHed
mechanics,  in  which  the  essence  of  the  undertaking  is  a
ready  apprehension  of  opaque  facts,  in  passably  exact
quantitative  terms.  This  class  of  knowledge  presumes
a  certain  intellectual  or  spiritual  attitude  on  the  part  of
the  workman,  such  an  attitude  and  animus  as  will  readily
apprehend  and  appreciate  matter  of  fact  and  will  guard
against  the  suffusion  of  this  knowledge  with  putative
animistic  or  anthropomorphic  subtleties,  quasi-personal
interpretations  of  the  observed  phenomena  and  of  their
relations  to  one  another.  The  norm  of  systematisation
is  that  given  by  the  logic  of  the  machine  process,  and  the

in  the  way  of  accurate,  alert  and  facile  conformity  to  the  requirements  of
the  machine  process,  interrupt  the  industrial  life  of  the  skilled  workman
at  an  earlier  point  in  the  course  of  senile  decay.  So  that  the  industrial
life-cycle  of  the  workman  is  shortened  both  at  its  beginning  and  at  its
close,  at  the  same  time  that  the  commonplace  preparation  for  work  grows
more  costly  and  exacting.

Child  labour,  which  once  may,  industrially  speaking,  have  been  an
economical  method  of  consuming  the  available  human  material,  is  no
longer  compatible  with  the  highest  industrial  efficiency,  even  apart  from
any  question  of  hardship  or  deterioration  incident  to  an  excessive  or
abusive  recourse  to  child  labour;  it  is  incompatible  with  the  commtmity's
material  interests.  Therefore  the  business  community — the  body  of
businessmen  at  large — for  whose  behoof  the  industries  of  the  country  are
carried  on,  have  a  direct  interest  not  only  in  extending  the  age  of  exemp-
tion from  industrial  employment  but  also  in  procuring  an  adequate
schooling  of  the  incoming  generation  of  workmen.  The  business  com-
munity is  evidently  coming  to  appreciate  this  state  of  the  case,  at  least
in  some  degree,  as  is  evidenced  by  their  inclination  to  favour  instruction
in  the  "practical"  branches  in  the  public  schools,  at  the  public  expense,
as  well  as  by  the  wide-reaching  movement  that  aims  to  equip  private  and
state  schools  that  shall  prepare  the  youth  for  work  in  the  various  lines  of
industrial  employment.


The  Machine  Industry  311

scope  of  it  is  that  inculcated  by  statistical  computation
and  the  principle  of  material  cause  and  effect.

In  some  degree  the  routine  of  the  machine  industry
necessarily  induces  such  an  animus  in  its  employees,
since  such  is  the  scope  and  method  of  its  own  working;
and  the  closer  and  more  exacting  the  application  to
work  of  this  kind,  the  more  thorough-going  should  be  the
effects  of  its  discipline.  But  this  routine  and  its  disci-
pHne  extend  beyond  the  mechanical  occupations  as  such,
so  as  in  great  part  to  determine  the  habits  of  all  members
of  the  modern  community.  This  proposition  holds  true
more  broadly  for  the  current  state  of  the  industrial  arts
than  any  similar  statement  would  hold,  e.  g.,  for  the
handicraft  system.  The  ordinary  routine  of  life  is  more
widely  and  pervasively  determined  by  the  machine  in-
dustry and  by  machine-Kke  industrial  processes  today,
and  this  determination  is  at  the  same  time  more  rigorous,
than  any  analogous  effect  that  was  had  under  the  handi-
craft system.  Within  the  effective  bounds  of  modern
Christendom  no  one  can  wholly  escape  or  in  any  sensible
degree  deflect  the  sweep  of  the  machine's  routine.

Modern  life  goes  by  clockwork.  So  much  so  that  no
modem  household  can  dispense  with  a  mechanical  time-
piece; which  may  be  more  or  less  accurate,  it  is  true,  but
which  commonly  marks  the  passage  of  time  with  a  degree
of  exactness  that  would  have  seemed  divertingly  super-
erogatory to  the  common  man  of  the  high  tide  of  handi-
craft.^ Latterly  the  time  so  indicated,  it  should  be  called
to  mind,  is  ^^ standard  time,"  standardised  to  coincide
over  wide  areas  and  to  vary  only  by  large  and  standard

*  C/.,  e.  g.,  Adam  Smith's  reflections  on  the  uses  of  an  accurate  watch.
Theory  of  the  Moral  Sentiments,  part  iv,  ch.  2.


312  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship  \

units.  It  brings  the  routine  of  life  to  a  nicely  uniform
schedule  of  hours  throughout  a  population  which  exceeds
by  many  fold  the  size  of  those  communities  that  once
got  along  contentedly  enough  without  such  an  expedient
under  the  regime  of  handicraft.  In  this  matter  the  de-
mands of  the  machine  have  even  brought  on  a  revision
of  the  time  schedule  imposed  by  the  mechanism  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  so  that  not  only  "solar  time/'  but  even
the  "mean  solar  time''  that  once  was  considered  to  be  a
sufficient  improvement  on  the  ways  of  Nature,  has  been
superseded  by  the  schedule  imposed  by  the  railway
system.

The  discipline  of  the  timepiece  is  sufficiently  charac-
teristic of  the  discipHne  exercised  by  the  machine  process
at  large  in  modern  life,  and  as  a  cultural  factor,  as  a
factor  in  shaping  the  habits  of  thought  of  the  modern
peoples,  it  is  itself  moreover  a  fact  of  the  first  importance.
Of  the  standardisation  of  the  time  schedule  just  spoken
of,  the  earher,  the  adoption  of  "mean  solar  time,"  was
due  immediately  to  the  exigencies  of  the  machine  process
as  such,  which  would  not  tolerate  the  seasonal  fluctua-
tions of  "apparent "  solar  time.  This  epithet " apparent,"
by  the  way,  carries  a  suggestion  that  the  time  schedule
so  designated  is  less  true  to  the  actualities  of  the  case
than  the  one  which  superseded  it.  And  so  it  is  if  the
actuahties  to  which  regard  is  had  are  those  of  the  ma-
chine process;  whereas  the  contrary  is  true  if  the  ac-
tualities that  are  to  decide  are  those  of  the  seasons,  as
they  were  under  the  earher  dispensation.  "Standard
time"  has  gone  into  effect  primarily  through  the  neces-
sities of  railway  communication, — itself  a  dominant
item  in  the  mechanical  routine  of  life;  but  it  is  only  in  a


The  Machine  Industry  313

less  decree  a  requirement  of  the  other  activities  that  go
to  make  up  the  traffic  of  modern  life.  The  railway  is
one  of  the  larger  mechanical  contrivances  of  the  machine
age,  and  its  exigencies  in  this  respect  are  typical  of  what
holds  true  at  large.  Communication  of  whatever  kind,  as
well  as  the  supply  of  other  necessaries,  is  standardised
in  terms  of  time,  space,  quantity,  frequency,  and  indeed
in  all  measurable  dimensions;  and  the  ^'consumer,''  as
the  denizens  of  these  machine-made  communities  are
called,  is  required  to  conform  to  this  network  of  stand-
ardisations in  his  demand  and  uses  of  them,  on  pain  of
*^ getting  left."  To  "get  left"  is  a  colloquialism  of  the
machine  era  and  describes  the  commonest  form  of  priva-
tion under  the  regime  of  the  machine  process.  It  is
already  a  timeworn  colloquialism,  inasmuch  as  it  is
now  already  some  time  since  the  ubiquitous  routine  of
the  machine  process  first  impressed  on  the  common  man
the  sinister  eventuality  covered  by  the  phrase.

The  relation  in  which  the  consumer,  the  common  man,
stands  to  the  mechanical  routine  of  life  at  large  is  of
much  the  same  nature  as  that  in  which  the  modern
skilled  workman  stands  to  that  detail  machine  process
into  wliich  he  is  dovetailed  in  the  industrial  system.  To
take  effectual  advantage  of  what  is  offered  as  the  wheels
of  routine  go  round,  in  the  way  of  v/ork  and  play,  HveH-
hood  and  recreation,  he  must  know  by  facile  habitua-
tion what  is  going  on  and  how  and  in  what  quantities
and  at  what  price  and  where  and  when,  and  for  the  best
effect  he  must  adapt  his  movements  with  skilled  exacti-
tude and  a  cool  mechanical  insight  to  the  nicely  balanced
moving  equiHbrium  of  the  mechanical  processes  engaged.
To  live — not  to  say  at  ease — under  the  exigencies  of


314  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

this  machine-made  routine  requires  a  measure  of  con-
sistent training  in  the  mechanical  apprehension  of  things.
The  mere  mechanics  of  conformity  to  the  schedule  of
living  implies  a  degree  of  trained  insight  and  a  facile
strategy  in  all  manner  of  quantitive  adjustments  and
adaptations,  particularly  at  the  larger  centres  of  popula-
tion, where  the  routine  is  more  comprehensive  and
elaborate.

And  here  and  now,  as  always  and  everywhere,  inven-
tion is  the  mother  of  necessity.  The  complex  of  techno-
logical ways  and  means  grows  by  increments  that  come
into  the  scheme  by  way  of  improvements,  innovations,
expedients  designed  to  facilitate,  abridge  or  enhance  the
work  to  be  done.  Any  such  innovation  that  fits  workably
into  the  technological  scheme,  and  that  in  any  appreciable
degree  accelerates  the  pace  of  that  scheme  at  any  point,
will  presently  make  its  way  into  general  and  imperative
use,  regardless  of  whether  its  net  ulterior  effect  is  an
increase  or  a  diminution  of  material  comfort  or  industrial
efficiency.  Such  is  particularly  the  case  under  the  cur-
rent pecuniary  scheme  of  Hfe  if  the  new  expedient  lends
itself  to  the  service  of  competitive  gain  or  competitive
spending;  its  general  adoption  then  peremptorily  takes
effect  on  pain  of  damage  and  discomfort  to  all  those
who  fail  to  strike  the  new  pace.  Each  new  expedient
added  to  and  incorporated  in  the  system  offers  not  only
a  new  means  of  keeping  up  with  the  run  of  things  at  an
accelerated  pace,  but  also  a  new  chance  of  getting  left
out  of  the  running.  The  point  is  well  seen,  e.  g.,  in  the
current  competitive  armaments,  where  equipment  is
subject  to  constant  depreciation  and  obsolescence,  not
through  decline  or  decay,  but  by  virtue  of  new  improve-


The  Machine  Industry  315

ments.  So  also  in  the  increase  and  acceleration  of  ad-
vertising that  has  been  going  on  during  the  past  quarter
of  a  century,  due  to  increased  facilities  and  improved
methods  in  printing,  paper-making,  and  the  other  in-
dustrial arts  that  contribute  to  the  appliances  of  pub-
licity.

It  is  of  course  not  hereby  intended  to  imply  that  these
modern  inventions  meet  no  wants  but  such  as  they
themselves  create.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  such  me-
chanical contrivances,  for  instance,  as  the  telephone,  the
typewriter,  and  the  automobile  are  not  only  great  and
creditable  technological  achievements,  but  they  are  also
of  substantial  service.  At  the  same  time  it  is  at  least
doubtful  if  these  inventions  have  not  wasted  more  effort
and  substance  than  they  have  saved, — that  they  are  to
be  credited  with  an  appreciable  net  loss.  They  are  de-
signed to  facihtate  travel  and  communication,  and  such
is  doubtless  their  first  and  obvious  effect.  But  the  net
result  of  their  introduction  need  by  no  means  be  the
same.  Their  chief  use  is  in  the  service  of  business,  not
of  industry,  and  their  great  further  use  is  in  the  further-
ance, or  rather  the  acceleration,  of  obligatory  social
amenities.  As  contrivances  for  the  expedition  of  traffic
both  in  business  and  in  social  intercourse  their  use  is
cliiefly,  ahnost  wholly,  of  a  competitive  nature;  and  in
the  competitive  equipment  and  manoeuvres  of  business
and  of  gentility  the  same  broad  principle  will  be  found
to  apply  as  applies  to  competitive  armaments  and  im-
provements in  the  technology  of  warfare.  Any  techno-
logical advantage  gained  by  one  competitor  forthwith
becomes  a  necessity  to  all  the  rest,  on  pain  of  defeat.
The  typewriter  is,  no  doubt,  a  good  and  serviceable  con-


3i6  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

trivance  for  the  expedition  of  a  voluminous  correspond-
ence, but  there  is  also  no  reasonable  doubt  but  its  intro-
duction has  appreciably  more  than  doubled  the  volume
of  correspondence  necessary  to  carry  on  a  given  volumie
of  business,  or  that  it  has  quadrupled  the  necessary  cost
of  such  correspondence.  And  the  expedition  of  corre-
spondence by  stenographer  and  typewriter  has  at  the
same  time  become  obligatory  on  all  business  firms,  on
pain  of  losing  caste  and  so  of  losing  the  confidence  of
their  correspondents.  Of  the  telephone  much  the  same
is  to  be  said,  with  the  addition  that  its  use  involves  a  very
appreciable  nervous  strain  and  its  ubiquitous  presence
conduces  to  an  unremitting  nervous  tension  and  unrest
wherever  it  goes.  The  largest  secure  result  of  these
various  modern  contrivances  designed  to  facilitate  and
abridge  travel  and  communication  appears  to  be  an
increase  of  the  volume  of  traffic  per  unit  of  outcome,
acceleration  of  the  pace  and  heightening  of  the  tension
at  which  the  traffic  is  carried  on,  and  a  consequent  in-
crease of  nervous  disorders  and  shortening  of  the  effec-
tive working  life  of  those  engaged  in  this  traffic.  But
in  these  matters  invention  is  the  mother  of  necessity,
and  within  the  scope  of  these  contrivances  for  facili-
tating and  abridging  labour  there  is  no  alternative,  and
life  is  not  offered  on  any  other  terms.  ^

1  On  the  other  hand  the  aphorism  often  cited,  that  "Necessity  is  the
Mother  of  Invention, "  appears  to  be  nothing  better  than  a  fragment  of
uncritical  rationalism.  It  offers  a  rationalised,  ex  post  facto  account  of
changes  that  take  place,  and  reflects  that  ancient  preconception  by  help
of  which  the  spokesmen  of  edification  were  enabled  to  interpret  all
change  as  an  improvemxcnt  due  to  the  achievement  of  some  definitely
foreknown  end.  It  appears  also  to  be  consistently  untrue,  except  so  far
as  "invention"  is  to  be  taken  as  a  euphemistic  synonym  for  "prevarica-


The  Machine  Industry  317

Other  kinds  of  routine,  standardised  and  elaborate,
have  been  or  still  are  in  force,  besides  this  machine-like
process  of  living  as  carried  on  under  modern  technological
conditions;  and  one  and  another  of  these  will  at  times
rise  to  a  degree  of  exigence  quite  comparable  with  that
of  the  machine  process.  But  these  others  are  of  a  dif-
ferent character  in  that  their  demands  are  not  enforced
by  sanctions  of  an  unmediated  mechanical  kind;  they
do  not  fall  on  the  delinquent  with  a  direct  mechanical
impact,  and  the  penalties  of  non-conformity  are  of  a  con-
ventional nature.  So,  e.  g.,  the  punctiHos  of  religious
observance  may  come  to  a  very  rigid  routine,  to  be
observed  on  pain  of  sufl&ciently  grave  consequences;  but
in  so  far  as  these  eventual  (eschatological)  consequences
are  statable  in  terms  of  material  incidence  (of  fire,  sul-
phur, or  the  Hke)  the  mechanically  trained  modern
consiuner  will  incline  to  hold  that  they  are  of  a  putative
character  only.  So,  again,  in  the  matter  of  fashion  and  de-
corum the  schedule  of  observances  may  be  sufficiently  rig-
orous, but  here  too  failure  to  articulate  with  the  sweep
of  a  punctiHous  routine  with  all  the  sure  and  firm  touch
of  the  expert  is  not  checked  with  an  immediate  disas-
trous impact  of  mechanical  shock.  Conformity  in  the
technological  respect  with  the  routine  of  living  under
other  technological  systems  than  that  of  the  machine
process  had  also  something  of  this  character  of  conven-
tional prescription;  and  the  discipline  exercised  by  the

tion."  Doubtless,  the  felt  need  of  ways  and  means  has  brought  on  many-
changes  in  technology,  but  doubtless  also  the  ulterior  consequences  of
any  one  of  the  greater  mechanical  inventions  have  in  the  main  been
neither  foreseen  nor  intended  in  the  designing  of  them.  The  more  serious
consequences,  especially  such  as  have  an  institutional  bearing,  have  been
enforced  by  the  inventions  rather  than  designed  by  the  inventors.


3i8  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

routine  of  living  in  these  more  archaic  technological
eras  was  also  something  more  in  the  nature  of  a  training
in  conventional  expedients.  The  resulting  growth  of
habits  of  thought  in  such  a  community  should  then
also  differ  in  a  similar  way  from  what  comes  in  sight  in
the  present.

Both  in  its  incidence  on  the  workman  and  on  the
members  of  the  community  at  large,  therefore,  the  train-
ing given  by  this  current  state  of  the  industrial  arts  is  a
training  in  the  impersonal,  quantitative  apprehension
and  appreciation  of  things,  and  it  tends  strongly  to
inhibit  and  discredit  all  imputation  of  spiritual  traits
to  the  facts  of  observation.  It  is  a  training  in  matter-of-
fact;  more  specifically  it  is  a  training  in  the  logic  of  the
machine  process.  Its  outcome  should  obviously  be  an
unqualified  materialistic  and  mechanical  animus  in  all
orders  of  society,  most  pronounced  in  the  working  classes,
since  they  are  most  immediately  and  consistently  ex-
posed to  the  discipline  of  the  machine  process.  But
such  an  animus  as  best  comports  with  the  logic  of  the
machine  process  does  not,  it  appears,  for  good  or  ill,
best  comport  with  the  native  strain  of  human  nature  in
those  peoples  that  are  subject  to  its  discipline.  In  all
the  various  peoples  of  Christendom  there  is  a  visible
straining  against  the  drift  of  the  machine's  teaching,
rising  at  time  and  in  given  classes  of  the  population  to
the  pitch  of  revulsion.

It  is  apparently  among  the  moderately  well-to-do,  the
half-idle  classes,  that  such  a  revulsion  chiefly  has  its
way;  leading  now  and  again  to  fantastic,  archaising
cults  and  beliefs  and  to  make-believe  credence  in  occult


The  Machine  Industry  319

insights  and  powers.  At  the  same  time,  and  with  the
like  tincture  of  affectation  and  make-believe,  there  runs
through  much  of  the  community  a  feehng  of  maladjust-
ment and  discomfort,  that  seeks  a  remedy  in  a  "return
to  Nature"  in  one  way  or  another;  some  sort  of  a  return
to  ''the  simple  Hfe,'^  which  shall  in  some  fashion  afford
an  escape  from  the  unending  "grind''  of  living  from  day
to  day  by  the  machine  method  and  shall  so  put  behind
us  for  a  season  the  burdensome  futilities  by  help  of  which
alone  life  can  be  carried  on  under  the  routine  of  the
machine  process.

All  this  uneasy  revulsion  may  not  be  taken  at  its  face
value;  there  is  doubtless  a  variable  but  fairly  large  ele-
ment of  affectation  that  comes  to  expression  in  all  this
talk  about  the  simple  life;  but  when  all  due  abatement
has  been  allowed  there  remains  a  substantial  residue  of
unaffected  protest.  The  pitch  and  volume  of  this  pro-
test against  "artificial"  and  "futile"  ways  of  Hfe  is
greatest  in  the  advanced  industrial  countries,  and  it
has  been  growing  greater  concomitantly  with  the  ad-
vance of  the  machine  era.  What  is  perhaps  more  signif-
icant of  actuahties  than  these  well-bred  professions  of
discomfort  and  discontent  is  the  "vacation,"  being  a
more  tangible  phenomenon  and  statable  in  quantitative
terms.  The  custom  of  "taking  a  vacation"  has  been  on
the  increase  for  some  time,  and  the  avowed  need  of  a
yearly  or  seasonal  holiday  greatly  exceeds  the  practice
of  it  in  nearly  all  callings.  This  growing  recourse  to
vacations  should  be  passably  conclusive  evidence  to  the
effect  that  neither  the  manner  of  life  enforced  by  the
machine  system,  nor  the  occupations  of  those  who  are
in  close  contact  with  this  technology  and  its  due  habits


320  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

of  thought,  can  be  '^ natural"  to  the  common  run  of  civil-
ised mankind.

According  to  accepted  theories  of  heredity/  civilised
mankind  should  by  native  endowment  be  best  fit  to
live  under  conditions  of  a  moderately  advanced  savagery,
such  as  the  machine  technology  will  not  permit.^  Neither
in  the  physical  conditions  which  it  imposes,  therefore,
nor  in  the  habitual  ways  of  observation  and  reasoning
which  it  requires  in  the  work  to  be  done,  is  the  machine
age  adapted  to  the  current  native  endowment  of  the
race.  And  these  various  movements  of  unrest  and  revul-
sion are  evidence,  for  as  much  as  they  are  worth,  that
such  is  the  case.

Not  least  convincing  is  the  fact  that  a  considerable
proportion  of  those  who  are  held  unremittingly  to  the
service  of  the  machine  process  ''break  down,"  fall  into
premature  decay.  Physically  and  spiritually  these  mod-
ern peoples  are  better  adapted  to  Hfe  under  conditions
radically  different  from  those  imposed  by  this  modern
technology.^ All  of  which  goes  to  show,  what  is  the

1  See  pp.  18-21,  above.

2Cf.,  however,  what  has  been  said  above  (pp.  21-23)  of  the  varia-
bility and  adaptability  of  a  hybrid  population  and  the  possible  selective
establishment  of  a  hybrid  type  more  suitable  to  current  conditions  of  life
than  any  one  of  the  racial  stocks  out  of  which  the  hybrid  population  is
made  up.

2  So,  e.  g.,  the  modern  technology  has,  directly  and  indirectly,  brought
on  the  growth  of  large  cities  and  industrial  towns,  as  well  as  an  increas-
ing density  of  population  at  large.  This  modern  state  of  the  industrial
arts  is  a  creation  of  the  European  community  of  nations,  with  the  blond-
hybrid  populations  leading.  The  population  of  these  count-ries  is  drifting
into  these  machine-made  cities  and  towns,  and  this  drift  affects  the  blond-
hybrids  in  a  more  pronounced  degree  than  any  other  similarly  distin-
guishable element  in  the  population.  At  the  same  time  the  birth-rate  is
lower  and  the  death-rate  higher  in  these  modern  urban  communities  than


The  Machine  Industry  321

point  here  in  question,  that  however  exacting  and  how-
ever pervasive  the  discipline  of  the  machine  process  may
be,  it  can  not,  after  all,  achieve  its  perfect  work  in  the
way  of  habituation  in  the  population  of  Christendom
as  it  stands.  The  limit  of  tolerance  native  to  the  race,
physically  and  spiritually,  is  short  of  that  unmitigated
materialism  and  unremitting  mechanical  routine  to  which
the  machine  technology  incontinently  drives.

For  anything  Hke  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  effects
which  the  machine  technology  has  had  on  the  scope  and
method  of  knowledge  in  modern  times  it  is  necessary
to  turn  back  to  its  beginnings.  Historically  the  machine
age  succeeds  the  era  of  handicraft,  but  the  two  overlap
very  extensively.  So  much  so  that  while  the  era  of  the
machine  technology  is  commonly  held  to  have  set  in
something  Hke  a  century  and  a  half  ago  it  is  still  too
early  to  assert  that  the  industrial  system  has  cleared

in  the  open  country,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  more  attention  is  given  to
preventive  sanitation  in  the  urban  than  in  the  rural  communities,  and
it  is  in  the  urban  communities  that  medical  attendance  is  most  available
at  the  same  time  that  its  most  efficient  practitioners  congregate  there.
This  accelerated  death-rate  strikes  the  blond-hybrids  of  the  towns  in  an
eminent  degree;  and  infant  mortahty  in  the  towns,  particularly,  runs  at
such  a  figure  as  to  be  viewed  with  the  liveliest  apprehension.  In  its
summary  effects  on  the  viability  of  the  modern  peoples  this  modern
technology  appears  to  be  as  untoward  as  would  their  removal  to  an  un-
suitable climate.  Indeed  the  hygienic  measures  that  are  taken  or  ad-
vocated as  a  remedy  for  these  machine-made  conditions  of  urban  life
are  of  much  the  same  character  and  require  much  the  same  degree  of
meticulous  attention  to  details  that  are  required  to  preserve  the  life  of
Europeans  under  the  precarious  climatic  conditions  of  the  low  latitudes.
So  that,  for  these  Europeans  at  least,  the  hygienic  situation  created
by  their  own  technology  has  much  of  that  character  of  a  comprehensive
clinic  that  attaches  to  the  British  occupation  of  India  or  the  later  Euro-
pean occupation  of  West  Africa  or  the  Philippines.


322  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

itself  of  the  remnants  of  handicraft  or  that  the  habits
of  thought  suitable  to  the  days  of  handicraft  are  no
longer  decisive  in  the  current  legal  and  popular  appre-
hension of  industrial  relations.  The  discipline  of  the
machine  process  has  not  yet  had  time,  nor  has  it  had  a
clear  field.  The  best  that  can  be  looked  for,  therefore,
in  the  way  of  habits  of  thought  conforming  to  the  ways
and  means  of  the  machine  process  should  be  something
of  a  progressive  approximation;  and  the  considerations
recited  in  the  last  few  paragraphs  should  leave  it  doubt-
ful whether  anything  more  than  an  imperfect  approxima-
tion to  the  logic  of  the  machine  process  can  be  achieved,
through  any  length  of  training,  by  the  peoples  among
whom  the  greatest  advance  in  that  direction  has  already
been  made.

The  material  sciences  early  show  the  bias  of  the  ma-
chine technology,  as  is  fairly  to  be  expected,  since  these
sciences  stand  in  a  peculiarly  close  relation  to  the  tech-
nological side  of  industry, — almost  a  relation  of  affilia-
tion. At  no  earher  period  has  the  correlation  between
science  and  technology  been  so  close.  And  the  response
in  respect  of  the  scope  and  method  of  these  sciences  to
any  notable  advance  in  technology  has  been  sufficiently
striking.  As  has  already  been  indicated  above,  modern
science  at  large  takes  to  the  use  of  statistical  methods
and  precise  mechanical  measurements,  and  in  this  matter
scientific  inquiry  has  grown  continually  more  confident
and  more  meticulous  at  the  same  time  that  this  me-
chanistic procedure  is  continually  being  applied  more
extensively  as  the  technological  advance  goes  forward.
How  far  this  statistical-mechanistic  bias  of  modern  in-
quiry is  to  be  set  down  to  the  account  of  the  drift  of


The  Machine  Industry  323

technology  toward  mechanical  engineering,  and  how  far
it  may  be  due  to  an  ever  increasing  famiharity  with
conceptions  of  accountancy  enforced  by  the  price  system
and  the  time  schedule  in  daily  life,  may  be  left  an  open
question.  The  main  fact  remains,  that  in  much  the  same
degree  as  niceties  of  calculation  have  come  to  dominate
current  technological  methods  and  devices  the  like  in-
sistence on  extreme  niceties  of  mechanical  measurement
and  statistical  accuracy  has  also  become  imperative
in  scientific  inquiry;  until  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  such
meticulous  scrutiny  of  quantitative  relations  as  would
have  seemed  foolish  in  the  early  days  of  the  machine
era  has  become  the  chief  characteristic  of  scientific  in-
quiry today.  ^  It  is  of  course  not  overlooked  that  in  this
matter  of  quantitative  scruple  the  relation  between  cur-
rent technology  and  the  sciences  is  a  relation  of  mutual
give  and  take;  but  this  fact  can  scarcely  be  urged  as  an
objection  to  the  view  that  these  two  lines  of  expression
of  the  modern  habit  of  mind  are  closely  bound  together,
since  it  is  precisely  such  a  bond  of  continuity  between
the  two  that  is  here  spoken  for.

As  shown  in  the  foregoing  chapter,  in  the  course  of
the  transition  to  modern  times  and  modern  ways  of
thinking  the  principle  of  efficient  cause  gradually  re-
placed that  of  sufficient  reason  as  the  final  ground  of
certitude  in  conclusions  of  a  theoretical  nature.  This
shifting  of  the  metaphysical  footing  of  knowledge  from
a  subjective  ground  to  an  objective  one  first  and  most
unreservedly  affects  the  material  sciences,  as  it  should

*  The  statisticians  of  a  hundred  years  ago,  c.  g.,  were  content  to  work
in  round  percentages  where  their  latterday  successors  are  doubtfully
content  with  three-place  decimals.


324  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

if  it  is  at  all  to  be  construed  as  an  outcome  of  the  dis-
cipline exercised  by  the  then  current  technology  of
handicraft.  But  the  like  effect  is  presently,  though
tardily,  had  in  other  lines  of  systematic  knowledge  that
lie  farther  from  the  immediate  incidence  of  technology
and  secular  traffic.  So  that  by  the  time  of  the  industrial
revolution  the  like  mechanistic  animus  had  come  to
pervade  even  the  philosophical  and  theological  specula-
tions current  in  those  communities  that  were  most  inti-
mately and  unreservedly  touched  by  the  discipHne  of
craftsmanship  and  the  petty  trade. ^

By  this  time, — the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury,— the  material  sciences  (overtly)  admit  no  principle
of  systematisation  within  their  own  jurisdiction  other
than  that  of  efficient  cause.  But  at  that  date  the  concept
of  causation  still  has  much  of  the  content  given  it  by
the  technology  of  handicraft.  The  efficient  cause  is  still
conceived  after  an  individualistic  fashion;  without  grave
exaggeration  it  might  even  be  said  that  the  concept  of
cause  as  currently  employed  in  the  scientific  speculations
of  that  time  had  something  of  a  quasi-personal  com-
plexion. The  inquiry  habitually  looked  to  some  one
efficient  cause,  engaged  as  creatively  dominant  in  the
case  and  working  to  its  end  under  conditioning  circum-

*  An  eminently  illustrative  instance  of  the  mechanistic  bias  in  the  moral
sciences  is  afforded  by  the  hedonistic  conceptions  of  the  early  nineteenth
century;  and  the  deistic  theology  of  that  period  and  earlier  is  no  less
characteristic  a  symptom  of  the  same  animus.

Cf.  also,  for  a  view  running  to  a  conclusion  opposed  to  that  spoken
for  above,  H.  Bergson,  Creative  Evolution  (translation  by  Arthur  Mitchell,
New  York,  191 1),  ch.  i,  especially  pp.  16-23;  where  the  mechanistic  con-
ception is  construed  as  an  instinctive  metaphysical  norm  and  contrasted
with  the  deliverances  of  reason  and  experience,  which  are  then  held  to
inculcate  an  anthropomorphic  interpretation  of  the  same  facts.


The  Machine  Industry  325.

stances  that  might  greatly  affect  the  outcome  but  that
were  not  felt  (or  avowed)  to  enter  into  the  case  with  the
same  aggressive  thrust  of  causality  that  belonged  to  the
efficient  cause  proper.  The  *' contributory  circum-
stances" were  conceived  rather  extrinsically  as  accessory
to  the  event;  ^'accessory  before  the  fact,"  perhaps,  but
none  the  less  accessory.  And  scientific  research  took  the
form  of  an  inquiry  into  the  causal  nexus  between  an  ante-
cedent (a  cause  or  complex  of  causes)  and  its  outcome  in
an  event.  The  inquiry  looked  to  the  beginning  and  end
of  an  episode  of  activity,  the  outcome  of  which  would
be  a  finished  product,  somewhat  after  the  fashion  in
which  a  finished  piece  of  work  leaves  the  craftsman's
hands.  The  craftsman  is  the  agency  productively  en-
gaged in  the  case,  while  his  tools  and  materials  are  acces-
sories to  his  force  and  skill,  and  the  finished  goods  leave
his  hands  as  an  end  achieved;  and  so  an  episode  of  crea-
tive efficiency  is  rounded  off.

From  an  early  period  in  the  machine  era  a  new  attitude
toward  questions  of  causation  comes  in  evidence  in  scien-
tific inquiry.  The  obvious  change  is  perhaps  the  larger
scale  on  which  the  sequence  of  cause  and  effect  is  con-
ceived. It  is  no  longer  predominantly  a  question  of
episodes  of  causal  efficiency,  detached  and  rounded  off.
Such  detail  episodes  still  continue  to  occupy  the  routine
of  investigation;  necessarily  so,  since  these  empirical
sciences  proceed  step  by  step  in  the  determination  of
the  phenomena  with  which  they  are  occupied.  But  in
an  increasing  degree  these  detached  phenomena  are
sought  to  be  worked  into  a  theoretical  structure  of  larger
scope,  and  this  larger  structure  of  theory  falls  into  shape
as  a  self -determining  sequence  of  cumulative  change.


326  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

The  same  concept  of  process  that  rules  in  the  machine
technology  invades  the  speculations  of  the  scientists  and
results  in  theories  of  cumulative  sequence,  in  which  the
point  of  departure  as  well  as  the  objective  end  of  the
sequence  of  causation  gradually  come  to  have  less  and
less  of  a  determinative  significance  for  the  course  of
the  inquiry  and  for  its  results.  In  theoretical  specula-
tions based  on  the  data  of  the  empirical  sciences,  interest
and  attention  come  progressively  to  centre  on  this
process  of  cumulative  causation,  so  that  the  interest  in
the  productive  efficiency  of  consummation  ceases  gradu-
ally to  be  of  decisive  moment  in  the  formulations  of
theory;  which  comes  in  this  way  to  be  an  account  of  an
unfolding  process  rather  than  a  checking  up  of  individual
effects  against  individual  causes.  What  once  were  ulti-
mate questions  have  in  modern  science  become  ulterior
questions  and  have  lost  their  preferential  place  in  the
inquiry.  Neither  the  seat  of  efficient  initiative,  that
would  be  presumed  to  give  this  unfolding  process  of
cumulative  change  its  content  and  direction,  nor  its
eventual  goal,  wherein  it  would  be  presumed  to  come  to
rest  when  the  initial  impulse  has  spent  itself  and  its  end
has  been  compassed, — neither  of  these  ultimates  holds
the  attention  or  guides  the  inquiry  of  modern  science.

It  is  only  gradually,  concomitant  with  the  gradual
maturing  of  the  machine  technology,  that  the  systematis-
ation  of  knowledge  in  scientific  theory  has  come  by  com-
mon consent  to  converge  on  formulations  of  a  genetic
process  of  cumulative  change.  This  science  of  the  ma-
chine age  is  "evolutionary"  in  a  pecuHarly  impersonal,
indeed  in  a  mechanistic  sense  of  the  term.  In  the  con-
summate form,  as  it  stands  at  the  transition  to  the  twen-


The  Machine  Industry  327

tieth  century,  this  evolutionary  conception  of  genetic
process  is,  at  least  ideally,  void  of  all  teleological  ele-
ments and  of  all  personality — except  as  personality  may
be  concessively  admitted  as  a  by-product  of  the  me-
chanistic sweep  of  the  bhnd  motions  of  brute  matter.
Neither  the  name  nor  the  notion  of  a  genetic  evolution
is  peculiar  to  the  machine  age;  but  this  current,  imper-
sonal, unteleological,  mechanistic  conception  of  an  evolu-
tionary process  is  peculiar  to  the  late  modern  fashion  of
apprehending  things.

It  goes  without  saying  that  this  mechanistic  concep-
tion of  process  has  worked  clear  of  personation  and
teleological  bias  only  gradually,  by  insensible  decay
and  progressive  elimination  of  those  preconceptions  of
personal  force  and  teleological  fitness  that  ruled  all
theoretical  knowledge  in  the  days  when  the  principle  of
sufficient  reason  held  over  that  of  efficient  cause;  and
it  should  Hkewise  be  a  matter  of  course  that  this  shift  to
the  mechanistic  footing  is  by  no  means  yet  complete,
that  scientific  inquiry  is  not  yet  clear  of  all  contamina-
tion with  animistic,  anthropomorphic,  or  teleological
elements;  since  the  change  is  of  the  nature  of  habit,
which  takes  time,  and  since  the  discipline  of  modern
life  to  which  the  mechanistic  habit  of  mind  is  traceable
is  by  no  means  wholly  consistent  or  unqualified  in  its
mechanistic  drift.  Yet  so  far  has  the  habituation  to
mechanistic  ways  of  thinking  taken  effect,  and  so  com-
prehensive and  thorough  has  the  discipline  of  the  ma-
chine process  been,  that  a  mechanistic,  unteleological  no-
tion of  evolution  is  today  a  commonplace  preconception
both  with  scientists  and  laymen;  whereas  a  hundred
years  ago  such  a  conceit  had  intimately  touched  the


328  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

imagination  of  but  very  few,  if  any,  among  the  scientific
adepts  of  the  new  era.

To  what  effect  Lucretius  and  his  like  in  classical  an-
tiquity, e.  g.,  may  have  speculated  and  tried  to  speak
in  these  premises  is  by  no  means  easy  to  make  out;  nor
does  it  concern  the  present  inquiry,  since  no  vital  con-
nection or  continuity  of  habit  is  traceable  between  their
achievements  in  this  respect  and  the  theoretical  precon-
ceptions of  modern  science  or  of  the  machine  technology.
In  the  course  of  modern  times  conceptions  of  an  evolu-
tionary sequence  of  creation  or  of  genesis  come  up  with
increasing  frequency,  and  from  an  early  period  in  the
machine  age  these  conceptions  take  on  more  and  more
of  a  mechanistic  character,*  but  it  is  not  until  Darwin
that  such  a  genetic  process  of  evolution  is  conceived  in
terms  of  blind  mechanical  forces  alone,  without  the  help
of  imputed  teleological  bias  or  personalised  initiative.
It  may  perhaps  be  an  open  question  whether  the  Dar-
winian conception  of  evolution  is  in  no  degree  contami-
nated with  teleological  fancies,  but  however  that  may
be  it  remains  true  that  a  purely  mechanistic  conception
of  a  genetic  process  in  nature  had  found  no  lodgment  in
scientific  theory  up  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury. With  varying  success  this  conception  has  since
been  assimilated  by  the  adepts  of  all  the  material  sciences,
and  it  may  even  be  said  to  stand  as  a  tacitly  postulated
commonplace  underlying  all  modern  scientific  theory,
whether  in  the  material  or  the  social  sciences.  It  is
accepted  by  common  consent  as  a  matter  of  course,  al-
though doubtless  much  antique  detail  at  variance  with
it  stands  over  both  in  the  theoretical  formulations  of
the  adepts  and  in  popular  thought,  and  must  continue


The  Machine  Industry  329

to  stand  over  until  the  course  of  habituation  may  con-
ceivably in  time  enforce  the  sole  competency  of  this
mechanistic  conception  as  the  definitive  norm  of  sys-
tematic knowledge.  Whether  such  an  eventuality  is  to
overtake  the  scope  and  method  of  knowledge  in  Western
civilisation  should  apparently  be  a  question  of  how  pro-
tracted, consistent,  unmitigated,  and  how  far  congruous
with  their  native  bent  the  discipline  of  the  machine
process  may  prove  in  the  further  history  of  these  peoples.

As  has  been  shown  above,  in  its  beginnings  the  machine
technology  took  over  the  working  concepts  of  handicraft,
and  it  has  gradually  shifted  from  the  ground  of  manual
operation  so  afforded  to  the  ground  of  impersonal  me-
chanical process;  but  this  shifting  of  base  in  respect  of
the  elementary  technological  preconceptions  has  not
hitherto  been  complete,  much  of  the  personal  attitude
of  craftsmanship  toward  mechanical  forces  and  struc-
tures being  still  visible  in  the  work  of  modern  technolo-
gists. In  Kke  manner,  and  concomitant  with  the  transi-
tion to  the  machine  industry,  there  has  gone  forward  a
like  shifting  in  respect  of  the  point  of  view  and  the  ele-
mentary preconceptions  of  science.  This  has  taken
effect  most  largely  and  gone  farthest  in  the  material
sciences,  as  should  be  expected  from  the  close  connection
that  subsists  between  these  sciences  and  the  technology
of  the  machine  industry;  but  here  again  the  elimination
of  craftsmanlike  conceptions  has  hitherto  not  been  com-
plete. And,  what  is  more  instructive  as  to  the  part
played  by  technological  discipline  in  the  growth  of  science,
the  character  of  this  change  in  scientific  scope,  method
and  preconceptions  is  somewhat  obviously  such  as  would


330  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

be  given  by  habituation  to  the  working  of  the  machine
process.  Where  later  scientific  inquiry  has  departed
from  or  overpassed  the  limitations  imposed  by  the  habits
of  thought  pecuHar  to  craftsmanship  the  movement  has
taken  the  direction  enforced  by  the  machine  technology.
So,  e,  g.,  while  the  elements  made  use  of  by  the  ma-
chine technology,  and  characteristic  of  its  v/ork,  are  con-
ceptions of  mass,  velocity,  pressure,  stress,  vibration,
displacement,  and  the  Hke,  these  elements  are  made  use
of  only  under  the  rule  that  action  in  any  of  these  bearings
takes  effect  only  by  impact,  by  contact  directly  or
through  a  continuum.  The  mathematical  computations
and  elucidations  that  are  one  main  instrumentality
employed  by  the  technologist  do  not  and  can  not  include
this  underlying  postulate  of  contact,  since  it  is  an  assiunp-
tion  extraneous  to  those  magnitudes  of  quantity  in  terms
of  which  this  technology  does  its  work.  How  far  this
preconception  that  action  can  take  place  only  by  con-
tact is  to  be  rated  as  an  elementary  concept  carried  over
from  handicraft,  where  it  is  obviously  at  home  and  funda-
mental in  all  work  of  manipulation,  may  perhaps  be  an
idle  question.  In  any  case  the  machine  technology  is
at  one  with  craftsmanship  on  this  head,  even  though
there  are  many  features  in  modern  industrial  processes
that  do  not  involve  action  by  contact  in  any  such  ob-
vious fashion  as  to  suggest  its  necessary  assumption,  as,
e.  g.,  in  processes  involving  the  use  of  Hght,  heat  or  elec-
tricity. Yet  it  remains  true  that,  by  and  large,  the
technology  of  the  machine  process  is  a  technology  of
action  by  contact;  and,  apparently  under  stress  of  this
wide  though  not  necessarily  universal  application  of
the  principle,  the  trained  technologist  does  not  rest  con-


The  Machine  Industry  331

tent  until  he  has  in  some  tenable  fashion  construed  any
apparent  exception  as  a  special  instance  under  the  rule.
So  also  in  modern  scientific  inquiry.  The  conceptual
elements  with  which  the  scientist  is  content  to  work  are
precisely  those  that  have  commended  themselves  as
competent  in  their  technological  use.  Since  action  by
contact  is,  on  the  whole,  the  working  principle  in  the  ma-
chine process,  it  is  also  accepted  as  the  prime  postulate
in  the  formulation  of  all  exact  knowledge  of  impersonal
facts.  There  is,  of  course,  no  incKnation  here  to  criticise
or  take  exception  to  this  characteristic  habit  of  thought
that  pervades  modern  scientific  inquiry.  It  has  done
good  service,  and  to  this  generation,  trained  in  the  en-
exorably  efficient  ways  of  the  machine  process,  the  fact
that  it  works  is  conclusive  of  its  truth.  ^  Yet  the  further
fact  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  adherence  to  this  prin-
ciple is  not  due  to  unsophisticated  observation  simply.
It  is  a  principle,  a  habit  of  thought,  not  a  fact  of  simple
observation.  Doubtless  it  is  a  fact  of  observation,  direct
and  unambiguous,  in  respect  of  our  own  manual  opera-
tions; and  doubtless  also  it  is  a  matter  of  such  ready
inference  in  respect  of  many  external  phenomena  as  to
do  duty  as  a  fact  of  observation  in  good  faith;  but  doubt-
less also  there  are  many  of  these  external  phenomena
that  have  to  be  somewhat  painstakingly  construed  to
bring  them  under  the  rule.  Conceivably,  even  if  such  a
habit  of  thought  had  not  been  handed  down  from  the
experience  of  handicraft  it  might  have  been  induced
by  the  disciphne  of  the  machine  process,  and  might
even  have  been  ingrained  in  men  exposed  to  this  disci-

1  "Pragmatism"  is  the  term  that  has  been  elected  to  cover  this  meta-
physical postulate  of  efficiency  conceived  as  the  bench  mark  of  actuality.


u


332  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

pline  in  sufficiently  rigorous  fashion  to  serve  as  a  prime
postulate  of  scientific  inquiry;  the  machine  process
doubtless  bears  out  such  a  principle  in  the  main,  and
very  rigorously.  But  in  point  of  historical  fact  it  is
quite  unnecessary  to  suppose  this  principle  of  action
by  contact  to  be  a  product  de  novo  of  the  discipline  of  the
machine,  since  it  is  older  than  the  advent  of  the  machine
industry  and  is  also  quite  consonant  with  the  habits  of
work  enforced  by  the  technology  of  handicraft,  more  so
indeed  than  with  the  technology  of  the  machine  indus-
try. It  appears  fairly  indubitable  that  this  principle  is
a  legacy  taken  over  from  the  experience  of  Hfe  in  the
days  of  craftsmanship.  And  it  m.ay  even  be  an  open
question  whether  the  machine  technology  would  not
today  be  of  an  appreciably  different  complexion  if  it  had,
as  it  conceivably  might  have,  developed  without  the
hard  and  fast  limitations  imposed  by  this  postulate.
Doubtless,  scientific  inquiry,  and  the  theoretical  formu-
lations reached  by  such  inquiry,  would  differ  somewhat
notably  from  what  they  currently  are  if  the  scientists
had  gone  to  their  work  without  such  a  postulate,  or  hold-
ing it  in  a  qualified  sense,  as  a  principle  of  limited  scope,
as  applying  only  within  a  limited  range  of  phenomena,
only  so  far  as  empirical  evidence  might  enforce  it  in
detail.

If,  as  seems  at  least  presumably  true,  this  principle
of  action  by  contact  owes  its  origin  to  habits  induced  by
manipulation,  it  will  be  seen  to  be  of  an  anthropomorphic
derivation.  And  if  it  further  owes  its  acceptance  as  a
principle  universally  applicable  to  material  phenomena
to  the  protracted  discipline  of  Hfe  under  the  technology
of  handicraft,  its  universality  must  also  take  rank  as  an


The  MtM^kiM  Industry  333

anthropomorphic  imputation  enforced  by  long  habit.
It  is  of  the  nature  of  habit,  and  moreover  of  workman-
like habit.  Casting  back  into  the  past  history  of  civili-
sation and  into  the  contemporary  lower  cultures,  it  will
appear  that  the  principle  (habit  of  thought)  in  question
is  prevalent  everywhere  and  presumably  through  all
human  time;  as  it  should  be  if  it  is  traceable  to  so  ubiq-
uitous an  experience  as  manipulation.  But  it  will  also
appear  that,  except  within  the  bounds,  in  time  and
space,  of  the  high  tide  of  craftsmanship  and  the  machine
technology,  this  principle  does  not  arrogate  to  itself
universal  mandatory  authority  in  the  domain  of  external
phenomena.  Not  only  are  the  tenets  of  magic  and
theology  at  variance  with  the  proposition  that  action
can  take  place  only  by  mechanical  contact;  but  in  the
naive  thinking  of  commonplace  humanity  outside  this
machine-made  Western  civilisation,  action  at  a  distance
is  patently  neither  imbecile  nor  incomprehensible  as  a
famiUar  trait  of  external  objects  in  their  everyday  be-
haviour.

Nor  is  it  by  any  means  a  grateful  work  of  spontaneous
predilection,  all  this  mechanistic  mutilation  of  objective
reality  into  mere  inert  dimensions  and  resistance  to
pressure;  as  witness  the  widely  prevalent  revulsion,
chronic  or  intermittent,  against  its  acceptance  as  a  final
term  of  knowledge.  Laymen  seek  respite  in  the  fog  of
occult  and  esoteric  faiths  and  cults,  and  so  fall  back  on
the  will  to  beheve  things  of  which  the  senses  transmit
no  evidence;  while  the  learned  and  studious  are,  by
stress  of  the  same  "aching  void,"  drawn  into  speculative
tenets  of  ostensible  knowledge  that  purport  to  go  nearer
to  the  heart  of  reality,  and  that  elude  all  mechanistic


334  ^^^  Instinct  of  Workmanship

proof  or  disproof.  This  revulsion  against  thinking  in
uncoloured  mechanistic  terms  alone  runs  suggestively
parallel  with  that  other  revulsion,  already  spoken  of,
against  the  geometrically  adjusted  routine  of  conduct
imposed  on  modern  Hfe  by  the  machine  process;  the  two
are  in  great  part  coincident,  or  concomitant,  both  in
point  of  the  class  of  persons  affected  by  each  and  in
point  of  the  uncertain  measure  of  finahty  attending  the
move  so  made  in  either  case.  Neither  the  manner  of
life  imposed  by  the  machine  process,  nor  the  manner
of  thought  inculcated  by  habituation  to  its  logic,  will
fall  in  with  the  free  movement  of  the  human  spirit,
born,  as  it  is,  to  fit  the  conditions  of  savage  life.  So
there  comes  an  irrepressible — in  a  sense,  congenital — ■
recrudescence  of  magic,  occult  science,  telepathy,  spirit-
uaHsm,  vitalism,  pragmatism.^

^Of  all  these  latterday  revulsionary  schemes  of  surcease  from  the
void  and  irritation  of  the  mechanistic  conception,  that  spoken  for  by
M.  H.  Bergson  is  doubtless  the  most  felicitous,  at  the  same  time  that  it
is,  in  its  elements,  the  most  engagingly  naive.  Apart  from,  and  without
prejudice  to,  the  (doubtless  very  substantial)  merits  of  this  system  of
speculative  tenets,  the  vogue  which  it  has  achieved  appears  to  be  due
in  good  part  to  its  consonance  with  this  archaic  bent  of  civihsed  human
nature,  already  spoken  of.  The  immanent,  or  rather  intrinsically  domi-
nant, creative  bent  inherent  in  matter  and  not  objectively  distinguishable
from  it,  is  sufl&ciently  suggestive  of  that  praeter-mechanical  efi&cacy
that  seems  so  easy  of  comprehension  to  many  of  the  peoples  on  the
lower  levels  of  culture,  and  that  affords  the  substantial  ground  of  magical
practices  and  finds  untroubled  expression  in  the  more  naive  of  their
theoretical  speculations.  It  would  be  a  work  of  extreme  difficulty,  e.  g,,
to  set  up  a  consistently  tenable  distinction  between  M.  Bergson's  elan
de  la  vie,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  mana  of  the  Melanesians  (C/.  Codring-
ton.  The  Melanesians,  esp.  ch.  vii  and  xii),  the  wakonda  of  the  Sioux
(C/.  A.  C.  Fletcher  and  F.  la  Flesche,  "The  Omaha  Tribe,"  Bureau  of
Ethnology,  Report  xxvii  (1905-1906),  esp.  pp.  597-599),  or  even  the
hamingia  of  Scandinavian  paganism,  on  the  other  hand.


The  Machine  Industry  335

It  was  noted  above  that  action  by  contact  is  not  in-
cluded, except  by  subsumption,  in  the  mathematical
formulations  of  technology  or  science. It  should  now

In  fact,  the  point  of  departure  and  support  for  M.  Bergson's  specula-
tions appears  to  be  nothing  else  than  a  projection,  into  objective  reality,
of  the  same  human  trait  that  has  here  been  spoken  of  as  the  instinct  of
workmanship;  this  norm  of  initiative  and  eflaciency  which  so  is  imposed
on  objective  facts  being  then  worked  out  with  great  subtlety  and  sym-
pathetic insight,  to  make  a  comprehensive,  cosmological  scheme.  The
like  projection  of  workmanhke  initiative  and  efl&ciency,  and  its  imputa-
tion to  objective  reahty,  both  at  large — as  with  M.  Bergson — and  in
concrete  detail,  with  more  or  less  of  personalisation,  is  one  of  the  main,
though  frequently  misunderstood,  factors  in  the  cosmologies  that  do
duty  as  a  body  of  science  and  philosophy  among  savages  and  the  lower
barbarians.

That  the  roots  of  this  speculative  scheme  of  "creative  evolution"
should  reach  so  far  into  the  background  of  human  culture  and  draw  on
sources  so  close  to  the  undisciplined  prime-movers  of  human  nature  is,
of  course,  in  no  degree  derogatory  to  this  system  of  theory;  nor  does  it
raise  any  presumption  of  unsoundness  in  the  tenets  that  so  are,  in
the  course  of  elaboration,  built  up  out  of  this  metaphysical  postulate.  In
point  of  fact,  the  characterisation  here  offered  places  M.  Bergson's  thesis,
and  therefore  his  system,  precisely  where  he  has  been  at  pains  to  explain
that  he  wishes  to  take  his  initial  position  in  advocating  his  view, — at  an
even  break  with  the  mechanistic  conception;  the  merits  of  which,  as
contrasted  with  his  own  thesis,  will  then  be  made  to  appear  in  the  course
of  the  further  argument  that  is  to  decide  between  their  rival  claims  to
primacy.  In  point  of  formal  and  provisional  legitimation,  such  an  im-
putation of  workmanlike  eflQcacy  at  large  rests  on  ground  precisely  even
with  that  on  which  the  mechanistic  conception  also  rests, — viz.  imputa-
tion by  force  of  metaphysical  necessity,  that  is  to  say  by  force  of  an  in-
stinctive impulse.  The  main  theorem  of  causation,  as  well  as  its  several
mechanistic  corollaries,  are,  in  the  last  resort,  putative  traits  of  matter
only,  not  facts  of  observation;  and  the  Hke  is  true — in  M.  Bergson's
argument  admittedly  so — of  the  elan  de  la  vie  as  well.  So  far,  therefore,
as  regards  the  formally  determinable  antecedent  probability  of  the  two
rival  conceptions,  the  one  is  as  good  as  the  other;  but  M.  Bergson's  argu-
ment, running  on  ground  of  circumstantial  evidence  in  the  main,  makes
out  at  least  a  cogently  attractive  likelihood  that  the  conception  for  which
he  speaks  is  to  be  accepted  as  the  more  fundamental,  underlying  the


336  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

be  added  that  in  all  the  concomitance  and  sequence  with
which  the  mathematical  formulations  of  mechanical  phe-
nomena are  occupied,  the  assumption  of  concomitance
or  sequence  at  a  distance  will  fill  the  requirements  of
the  formulae  quite  as  convincingly  and  commonly  more
simply  than  the  assumption  of  concomitance  by  contact
only.  To  reahse  the  difficulties  which  beset  this  postulate
of  action  by  mechanical  continuity  solely,  as  well  as  the
prima  facie  imbecihty  of  the  principle  itself,  it  is  only
necessary  to  call  to  mind  the  tortuous  theories  of  gravi-
tation designed  to  keep  it  intact,  and  the  prodigy  of  in-
congruous intangibihties  known  as  the  ether, — a  rigid
and  imponderable  fluid.

Associated  with  the  principle  of  action  by  mechanical
continuity  alone  is  a  second  metaphysical  postulate  of
science, — the  conservation  of  energy,  or  persistence  of
quantity.  Like  its  fellow  it  does  not  admit  of  empirical
proof;  yet  it  is  Hkewise  held  to  be  of  universal  applica-
tion. This  principle,  that  the  quantity  of  matter  or  of
energy  does  not  increase  or  diminish,  or,  perhaps  better,
that  the  quantity  of  mechanical  fact  at  large  is  invariable,
has  a  better  presumptive  claim  to  rank  as  a  by-product
of  the  machine  technology;  although  such  a  claim  could
doubtless  be  allowed  only  with  broad  qualifications.

mechanistic  conception,  conditioning  it  and  on  occasion  overruling  its
findings  in  matters  that  he  beyond  its  ascertained  competence.  Which
would  come,  in  a  different  phrasing,  to  saying  that  the  imputation  of
creatively  workmanlike  efficiency  rests  on  instinctive  ground  more  inde-
feasibly  intrinsic  to  human  nature;  presumably  in  virtue  of  its  embody-
ing the  functioning  of  an  instinctive  proclivity  less  sophisticated  and
narrowed  by  special  habituation,  such  special  habituation,  e.  g.,  as  that
exercised  by  the  technology  of  handicraft  and  the  machine  process  in
recent  times.


The  Machine  Industry  337

Not  that  the  principle  was  not  known  or  not  formally
accepted  prior  to  the  machine  age;  long  ago  the  Roman
scholar  and  the  scholastic  philosophers  after  him  de-
clared ex  nihilo  nihil ^  in  nihilum  nil  posse  reverti.  But
throughout  the  era  of  handicraft  there  continued  also
to  be  devoutly  held  the  postulate  that  the  material
universe  had  a  beginning  in  an  act  of  creation,  as  also
that  it  would  some  day  come  to  an  end,  a  quantitative
collapse.  As  the  era  of  handicraft  advanced  and,  ap-
parently, as  the  discipline  of  life  under  that  technology
enforced  the  habitual  acceptance  of  the  proposition  that
the  quantity  of  material  fact  is  constant,  much  ingenuity
and  much  ambiguous  speech  was  spent  in  an  endeavour
to  reconcile  the  mechanical  efEciency  of  the  creative
fiat  with  the  dictum,  ex  nihilo  nihil  Jit.  But  down  to  the
close  of  that  era  it  remains  true  that,  by  and  large,  the
peoples  of  Christendom  continued  to  beheve  in  the
mechanically  creative  efHciency  of  the  Great  Artificer;
although,  it  must  be  admitted,  with  an  ever  growing
apprehension  that  in  this  tenet  of  the  faith  they  were
face  to  face  with  a  divine  mystery.  The  eighteenth-
century  scientists,  and  many  even  in  the  nineteenth
century,  continued  to  profess  belief  in  a  creative  origin
of  material  things,  as  well  as  also  in  a  providential  guid-
ance of  material  events, — which  latter  must  have  been
conceived  to  be  exerted  by  some  other  means  than  action
through  mechanical  contact,  since  one  term  of  the  rela-
tion was  conceived  not  to  be  of  a  mechanical  nature.

It  is  not  until  the  machine  age  is  well  under  way  and
the  machine  technology  has  come  to  occupy  the  land,
that  faith  in  the  theorem  of  the  conservation  of  energy
has  grown  robust  enough  to  let  the  scientists  lose  interest


338  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

in  all  questions  of  creation.  The  tenet  has  died  by  neg-
lect, not  by  confutation.  That  it  has  done  so  among
the  adepts  of  the  material  sciences,  and  that  it  is  doing
so  among  the  lay  population  at  large  in  the  modern  in-
dustrial communities,  is  probably  to  be  credited  to  the
discipline  of  the  machine  process  and  the  technological
conceptions  to  which  that  discipline  conduces.  It  con-
duces to  this  outcome  in  more  than  one  way.  This
modern  technology  is  a  technology  of  mechanical  pro-
cess; it  looks  to  and  takes  care  of  a  sequence  of  me-
chanical action,  rather  than  to  the  conditions  of  its
inception  or  the  sequel  of  its  conclusion.  A  mind  im-
bued with  the  logic  of  this  machine  process  does  not
by  habitual  procKvity  or  with  incisive  effect  attend  to
these  alien  matters  that  have  no  meaning  within  the
horizon  of  that  logic.  The  creative  augmentation  of
material  objects  is  a  matter  lying  without  the  scope  of
the  machine's  logic.

As  has  already  been  remarked,  the  principle  (habit  of
thought)  that  the  quantity  of  material  fact  is  constant
is  necessarily  of  ancient  derivation  and  long  growth.
Taken  in  a  presumptive  sense,  and  held  loosely  as  a
commonplace  of  experience,  it  must  have  come  up  and
attained  some  force  very  early  in  the  workmanlike  ex-
perience of  the  race.  And  the  closer  the  appHcation  to
the  work  in  hand,  the  more  consistently  would  this
principle  of  common  sense  approve  itself;  so  that  it
should,  as  indeed  is  sufficiently  evident,  be  well  at  home
among  the  habitual  generalisations  current  in  the  days
of  handicraft;  although  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been
generally  accepted  at  that  time  as  a  principle  necessarily
having  a  universal  application, — as  witness  the  ready


The  Machine  Industry  339

credence  then  given  to  theological  dogmas  of  creation
and  the  like.  The  habits  of  accountancy  that  came  on
under  the  price  system,  as  the  scope  of  the  market  grew
larger  with  the  growth  and  diversification  of  handicraft,
seem  to  have  had  a  great  effect  in  extending  and  con-
firming the  habitual  acceptance  of  such  a  theorem.  A
strict  balance,  a  running  equihbrium  of  the  quantitative
items  involved,  is  the  central  fact  of  the  accountant's
occupation.  And  this  habit  of  scrutiny  and  balancing
of  quantities,  and  a  meticulous  tracing  out  and  account-
ing for  any  apparent  excess  or  deficiency  in  the  sums
handled,  pervades  the  community  at  large,  though  in  a  less
pronounced  f asliion,  as  well  as  that  fraction  of  the  popula-
tion employed  in  trade.  The  discipline  of  the  handicraft
system  in  this  respect  gains  incontinently  in  scope  and
vigour  as  the  growth  of  that  technological  system,  with
its  characteristic  business  management,  goes  forward.

When  presently  the  machine  technology  comes  for-
ward this  habitual  preconception  touching  the  invaria-
bility of  material  quantity  finds  new  applications  and
new  refinements  of  appKcation,  with  the  outcome  that
its  guidance  of  men's  thinking  grows  ever  more  inclusive
and  more  peremptory.  But  it  is  not  until  half  a  century
after  the  Industrial  Revolution  that  the  principle  may  be
said  finally  to  have  gained  unquestioning  acceptance  as
a  theorem  universally  binding  on  material  phenomena.
By  that  time — about  the  second  quarter  of  the  nine-
teenth century — the  unquahfied  validity  of  this  theorem
had  become  so  unmitigated  a  matter  of  course  as  to  have
fairly  shifted  from  the  ground  of  empirical  generalisation
to  that  of  metaphysical  thesis.  Men  of  science  then
quite  ingenuously  set  about  proving  the  law  of  the  Con-


340  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship  ^

servation  of  Energy  by  appeal  to  experiments  and  rea-
soning that  proceeded  with  absolute  naivete  on  the  tacit
assumption  of  the  theorem  to  be  proven.

In  its  bearing  on  the  growth  of  institutions  the  ma-
chine technology  has  yet  scarcely  had  time  to  make  its
mark.  Such  institutional  factors  as,  e.  g.,  the  common
law  are  necessarily  of  slow  growth.  A  system  of  civil
rights  is  not  only  a  balanced  scheme  of  habitual  responses
to  those  stimuli  at  whose  impact  they  take  effect;  it  is
at  the  same  time  a  scheme  which  has  the  sanction  of
avowed  common  consent,  such  as  will  express  itself  in
rating  these  institutional  elements  as  facts  of  imme-
morial usage  or  as  integrally  inherent  in  the  nature  of
things  from  the  beginning.  Such  civil  institutions  take
shape  as  prescriptive  custom,  and  matters  of  habit  which
so  are  supported  by  broad  grounds  of  authenticity  and
correlation  with  other  elements  of  a  prescriptive  scheme
of  things  will  adapt  themselves  only  tardily  to  any  change
in  the  situation  or  to  any  new  bias  in  the  drift  of  disci-
pHne.  What  happened  in  the  matter  of  civil  rights  imder
the  system  of  handicraft  is  an  illustration  in  point.
There  need  be  Httle  question  but  the  eighteenth  century
scheme  of  Natural  Rights  was  an  outcome  of  the  pro-
tracted discipline  characteristic  of  the  era  of  handicraft,
and  an  adaptation  to  the  exigencies  of  daily  life  under
that  system.

The  scheme  of  Natural  Rights,  with  its  principles  of
Natural  Liberty  and  its  insistence  on  individual  self-
help,  was  well  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  handicraft
and  the  petty  trade,  whose  spirit  it  reflects  with  admir-
able faithfulness. But  it  was  of  slow  growth,  as  any


The  Machine  Industry  341

scheme  of  institutions  must  be,  in  the  nature  of  things.
So  much  so  that  handicraft  and  the  petty  trade  had
been  in  effectual  operation  some  half-a-dozen  centuries,
in  ever  increasing  force,  before  the  corresponding  sys-
tem of  civil  rights  and  moral  obligations  made  good  its
pretensions  to  rule  the  economic  affairs  of  the  com-
munity. Indeed,  it  is  only  by  the  latter  half  of  the
eighteenth  century  that  the  system  of  Natural  Rights
came  to  passable  maturity  and  finally  took  rank  as  a
secure  principle  of  enlightened  common  sense;  and  by
that  time  the  handicraft  system  was  giving  way  to  the
machine  industry.  And  even  then  this  result  was  reached
only  in  the  most  advanced  industrial  community  of
Europe,  where  the  discipline  of  handicraft  and  trade  had
had  the  freest  scope  to  work  out  its  natural  bent,  with
the  least  hindrance  from  other  dominant  interests  at
variance  with  its  schooling.^

So  it  has  come  about  that  while  the  system  of  Natural
Rights  is  an  institutional  by-product  of  workmanship
under  the  handicraft  system  and  is  adapted  to  the  exi-
gencies of  craftsmanship  and  the  petty  trade,  it  never
fully  took  effect  in  the  shaping  of  institutions  until  that
phase  of  economic  life  was  substantially  past,  or  until

1  All  this,  of  course,  neither  ignores  nor  denies  the  substantial  part
which  the^M^  gentium  and  \hQJiis  nakirale  of  the  Roman  jurists  and  their
commentators  have  played  in  the  formulation  of  the  system  of  Natural
Rights.  In  point  of  pedigree  the  hne  of  derivation  of  these  legal  principles
is  doubtless  substantially  as  set  forth  authentically  by  the  jurists  who
have  spent  their  competent  endeavors  on  that  matter.  So  far  as  regards
the  English-speaking  communities  this  pedigree  runs  back  to  Locke,  and
through  Locke  to  the  line  of  jurists  and  philosophers  on  whom  that  great
scholar  has  drawn;  while  for  the  promulgation  of  the  like  system  of  prin-
ciples more  at  large  the  names  of  Grotius,  Pufendorf,  Althusius  doubtless
have  all  the  significance  commonly  assigned  them.  See  pp.  290-293  above.


342  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  new  era,  of  the  machine  industry  and  the  large
business  brought  on  by  the  new  technology,  had  come
to  rule  the  economic  situation.  So  that  hitherto  the
work  of  the  machine  industry  has  been  organised  and
conducted  under  a  code  of  legal  rights  and  business
principles  adapted  to  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts
which  the  machine  industry  has  displaced.  Latterly,  it
is  true,  the  requirements  of  the  machine  technology,  in
the  way  of  large-scale  organisation,  continuity  of  opera-
tion, and  interstitial  balance  of  the  industrial  system,
have  begun  to  show  themselves  so  patently  at  variance
with  these  business  principles  engendered  by  the  era  of
handicraft  as  to  throw  a  shadow  of  doubt  on  the  ade-
quacy of  these  "Natural"  metaphysics  of  natural  Hberty,
self-help,  free  competition,  individual  initiative,  and  the
like.  But,  harsh  as  has  been  the  discrepancy  between
the  received  system  of  economic  institutions  on  the  one
side  and  the  working  of  the  machine  technology  on  the
other,  its  effect  in  reshaping  current  habits  of  thought
in  these  premises  has  hitherto  come  to  nothing  more
definitive  than  an  uneasy  conviction  that  "Something
will  have  to  be  done  about  it."  Indeed,  so  far  is  the
machine  process  from  having  yet  recast  the  principles
of  industrial  management,  as  distinct  from  technological
procedure,  that  the  efforts  inspired  in  responsible  pubUc
officials  and  pubHc-spirited  citizens  by  this  patent  dis-
crepancy have  hitherto  been  directed  wholly  to  regulat-
ing industry  into  consonance  with  the  antiquated  scheme
of  business  principles,  rather  than  to  take  thought  of
how  best  to  conduct  industrial  affairs  and  the  distribution
of  livelihood  in  consonance  with  the  technological  re-
quirements of  the  machine  industry.


The  Machine  Industry .  343

It  is  true,  among  the  workmen,  and  particularly  among
those  skilled  workmen  who  have  been  trained  in  the
machine  technology  and  are  exposed  to  the  full  impact
of  the  machine's  discipline,  uncritical  habitual  faith  in
this  institutional  scheme  is  beginning  to  crumble,  so  far
as  regards  that  principle  of  Natural  Rights  that  vests
unlimited  discretion  in  the  owner  of  property,  and  so
far  as  regards  property  in  the  material  equipment  of
industry.  But  this  is  about  as  broad  a  proposition  of
such  a  kind  as  current  facts  of  opinion  and  agitation
will  bear  out,  and  this  inchoate  break  with  the  received
habitual  views  touching  the  dues  and  obhgations  of
discretion  in  industrial  matters  is  extremely  vague  and
almost  wholly  negative.  Even  in  those  members  of  the
community  who  are  most  directly  and  rigorously  ex-
posed to  its  discipline  the  machine  process  has  hitherto
wrought  no  such  definite  bias,  no  such  positive  habitual
attitude  of  workmanhke  initiative  towards  the  conven-
tions of  industrial  management  as  to  result  in  a  con-
structive deviation  from  the  received  principles.^

On  the  other  hand  the  business  principles  engendered
by  the  habit  of  mind  that  gave  rise  to  the  system  of  Na-
tural Rights  has  had  grave  consequences  for  workman-
ship under  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  machine  in-
dustry. As  has  been  shown  in  some  detail  in  the  fore-
going chapter,  the  individualistic  organisation  of  the
work,  coupled  with  the  personal  incidence  of  the  handi-
craft technology,  and  the  stress  thrown  on  price  rating
and  self-help  by  the  ever  increasing  recourse  to  bargain
and  sale  ("free  contract")  under  that  system,  led  in

*  Unless  the  "Syndicalist"  movement  is  to  be  taken  as  something
sufficiently  definite  in  its  principles  to  make  it  an  exception  to  the  rule.


344  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

the  end  to  the  habitual  rating  of  workmanship  in  terms
of  the  price  it  would  bring.  Then  as  always  workmanlike
efficiency  commanded  the  approval  of  thoughtful  men,
as  being  serviceable  to  the  common  good  and  as  a  sub-
stantial manifestation  of  human  excellence;  and  at  the
same  time,  then  as  ever,  efficient  work  was  a  source  of
comfort  and  complacency  to  the  workman.  But  under
the  teaching  of  the  price  system  efficiency  came  to  be
rated  in  terms  of  the  pecuniary  gain.

With  the  advent  of  the  machine  industry  this  pe-
cuniary rating  of  efficiency  gained  a  new  impetus  and
brought  new  consequences  for  technology  as  well  as  for
business  enterprise.  Typically,  the  machine  industry
runs  on  a  large  scale,  as  contrasted  with  handicraft,  and
it  involves  a  relatively  wide  and  exacting  division  of
labour  between  workmanship  and  salesmanship.  Under
the  conditions  of  large  ownership  implied  in  this  modern
industrial  system  the  workmen  no  longer  have,  or  can
have,  the  responsibiHty  of  the  pecuniary  management  of
the  industrial  concern;  on  the  other  hand  the  same  con-
ditions of  large  ownership  and  extensive  business  con-
nections require  the  businessmen  in  charge  to  delegate
the  immediate  oversight  of  the  plant  and  its  techno-
logical processes  to  other  hands,  and  to  devote  their  own
energies  to  the  pecuniary  management  of  the  concern
and  its  transactions.  Hence  it  follows  that  as  the  ma-
chine system  and  the  highly  specialised  business  enter-
prise that  goes  with  it  reach  a  larger  scale  and  a  higher
degree  of  elaboration  the  businessmen  in  charge  are,
by  training  and  by  progressive  limitation  of  interest,
j  less  and  less  competent  to  take  care  of  the  technological
/ exigencies  of  the  machine  system. But  at  the  same


The  Machine  Industry  345

time  the  discretion  in  technological  matters  still  rests
in  their  hands  by  force  of  their  ownership.  So  that,
wliile  the  responsibility  of  technological  discretion  still
rests  on  them,  and  cannot  be  fully  delegated  to  other
hands,  the  exigencies  of  business  enterprise  and  of
the  training  which  it  involves  will  no  longer  permit
them  to  meet  this  responsibility  in  a  competent  fash-
ion.

The  businessmen  in  control  of  large  industrial  enter-
prises are  beginning  to  appreciate  something  of  their
own  unfitness  to  direct  or  oversee,  or  even  to  control,
technological  matters,  and  so  they  have,  in  a  tentative
way,  taken  to  employing  experts  to  do  the  work  for  them.
Such  experts  are  known  colloquially  as  ^'efficiency  en-
gineers" and  are  presumed  to  combine  the  qualifica-
tions of  technologist  and  accountant.  In  point  of  fact
it  is  as  accountants,  capable  of  applying  the  tests  of  ac-
countancy in  a  new  field,  that  these  experts  commend
themselves  to  the  businessmen  in  control,  and  the  "effi-
ciency" which  they  look  to  is  an  efficiency  counted  in
terms  of  net  pecuniary  gain.  "Efficiency"  in  these
premises  means  pecuniary  efficiency,  and  only  inciden-
tally or  in  a  subsidiary  sense  does  it  mean  industrial
efficiency, — only  in  so  far  as  industrial  efficiency  con-
duces to  the  largest  net  pecuniary  gain.  All  the  while
the  businessmen  retain  the  decisive  superior  discretion
in  their  own  incompetent  hands,  since  all  the  while  the
whole  matter  remains  a  business  proposition.  The
"staff  organisation,"  in  which  vests  the  superior  control
of  these  technological  affairs,  consistently  remains  an
organisation  of  worldly  wisdom,  business  enterprise—
not  of  technological  proficiency, — a  state  of  things  not


346  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship^

to  be  remedied  so  long  as  industry  is  carried  on  for  busi-
ness profits.

Meantime  the  workmen  of  all  kinds  and  grades —
labourers,  mechanics,  operatives,  engineers,  experts — all
imbued  with  the  same  pecuniary  principles  of  efficiency,
go  about  their  work  with  more  than  half  an  eye  to  the
pecuniary  advantage  of  what  they  have  in  hand.  The
attitude  of  the  trades-unions  towards  their  work  and
towards  the  industrial  concerns  in  whose  employ  their
work  is  done  illustrates  something  of  the  habitual  frame
of  mind  of  these  men,  who  are  avowed  experts  in  the
matter  of  workmanship.

Latterly  many  inconveniences  have  beset  the  com-
munity at  large  as  well  as  particular  sections  and  classes
of  the  industrial  community,  due  in  the  main  to  a  con-
sistent adherence  to  these  business  principles  in  the
management  of  industrial  affairs.  The  capitalist-em-
ployers, on  the  one  hand,  have  gone  on  the  full  powers
with  which  the  modern  institution  of  ownership  and  its
broad  implications  has  vested  them;  with  the  result  that
the  pubHc  at  large,  investors,  consumers  of  industrial
products,  users  of  "public  utility"  agencies  serving  such
needs  as  Hght,  fuel,  transportation,  communication,
amusement,  etc.,  feel  very  much  aggrieved;  as  do
also  and  more  particularly  the  workmen  with  whom
the  capitalist-employers  do  business  on  the  Hues  laid
down  by  the  authentic  business  principles  involved  in
the  discretionary  ownership  of  the  industrial  plant  and
resources.  On  the  other  hand  the  workmen,  resting  their
case  on  the  same  common-sense  view  that  the  individual
is  a  self-sufficient  economic  unit  who  owes  nothing  to  the
community  at  large  beyond  what  he  may  freely  under-


The  Machine  Industry  347

take  "for  a  good  and  valuable  consideration  in  hand
paid," — the  workmen  stand  likewise  on  the  full  powers
given  them  by  the  current  institutions  of  ownership  and
contractual  discretion,  and  so  work  what  mischief  they
can  to  their  employers  and  to  the  public  at  large,  always
blamelessly  within  the  rules  of  the  game  as  laid  down
of  old  on  the  pecuniary  principles  of  business  discretion,
and  in  the  Hght  of  such  sense  as  their  training  has  given
them  with  regard  to  efficiency  in  the  industries  that  have
fallen  into  their  hands.  And  then  the  ^^ money  power"
comes  in  as  a  third  pecuniarily  trained  factor,  with  ever
increasing  force  and  incisiveness,  to  muddle  the  whole
situation  mysteriously  and  irretrievably  by  looking  after
their  own  pecuniary  interests  in  a  fashion  even  more
soberly  legitimate  and  authentic,  if  possible,  than  the
workmen's  management  of  their  own  affairs.

Of  course,  all  this  working  at  cross  purposes  is  not
altogether  due  to  trained  incapacity  on  the  part  of  the
several  contestants  to  appreciate  the  large  and  general
requirements  of  the  industrial  situation;  perhaps  it  is
not  even  chiefly  due  to  such  inabiHty,  but  rather  to  an
habitual,  and  conventionally  rightful,  disregard  of  other
than  pecuniary  considerations.  It  would  doubtless  ap-
pear that  a  trained  inability  to  apprehend  any  other  than
the  immediate  pecuniary  bearing  of  their  manoeuvres
accounts  for  a  larger  share  in  the  conduct  of  the  business-
men who  control  industrial  affairs  than  it  does  in  that
of  their  workmen,  since  the  habitual  employment  of
the  former  holds  them  more  rigorously  and  consistently
to  the  pecuniary  valuation  of  whatever  passes  under
their  hands;  and  the  Hke  should  be  true  only  in  a  higher
degree  of  those  who  have  to  do  exclusively  with  the


348  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

financial  side  of  business.  The  state  of  tHe  industrial
arts  requires  that  these  several  factors  should  cooperate
intelligently  and  without  reservation,  with  an  eye  single
to  the  exigencies  of  this  modern  wide-sweeping  tech-
nological system;  but  their  habitual  addiction  to  pe-
cuniary rather  than  technological  standards  and  con-
siderations leaves  them  working  at  cross  purposes.  So
also  their  (pecuniary)  interests  are  at  cross  purposes;
and  since  these  interests  necessarily  rule  in  any  pecuniary
culture,  they  must  decide  the  Hne  of  conduct  for  each
of  the  several  factors  engaged.

These  discrepancies,  obstructive  tactics  and  disser-
viceable  practices  are  commonly  deplored  and  are  pre-
sumably deplorable,  and  they  doubtless  merit  extensive
discussion  on  these  groimds,  but  their  merits  in  this
bearing  do  not  properly  come  into  consideration  here.
The  matter  has  been  brought  in  here  not  with  any  view
of  defence,  denunciation  or  remedy,  but  because  it  is  a
matter  of  grave  consequence  as  regards  the  training  given
by  business  experience  to  these  men  in  whose  hands  the
current  scheme  of  institutions  has  placed  the  techno-
logical fortunes  of  the  community.  And  whether  these
pecuniary  tactics  and  practices  that  fill  so  large  a  place
in  the  attention  and  sentiments  of  this  generation  come
chiefly  of  a  lack  of  insight  into  current  technological
exigencies,  or  of  a  dehberate  choice  of  evils  enforced  by
the  pecuniary  necessities  of  the  case,  still  their  disci-
plinary value  as  bearing  on  the  sense  of  workmanship
taken  in  its  larger  scope  will  be  much  the  same  in  either
case.  Habituation  to  bargaining  and  to  the  competitive
principles  of  business  necessarily  brings  it  about  that
pecuniary  standards  of  efficiency  invade  (contaminate)


The  Machine  inhtistry  349

the  sense  of  workmanship;  so  that  work,  workmen,  equip-
ment and  products  come  to  be  rated  on  a  scale  of  money
values,  which  has  only  a  circuitous  and  often  only  a  puta-
tive relation  to  their  workmanHke  efficiency  or  their
serviceability.  Those  occupations  and  those  aptitudes
that  yield  good  returns  in  terms  of  price  are  reputed
valuable  and  commendable, — the  accepted  test  of  suc-
cess, and  even  of  serviceability,  being  the  gains  acquired.
Workmanship  comes  to  be  confused  with  salesmanship,
until  tact,  effrontery  and  prevarication  have  come  to
serve  as  a  standard  of  efficiency,  and  unearned  gain  is
accepted  as  the  measure  of  productiveness.

Efficiency  conduces  to  the  common  good,  and  is  also
a  meritorious  and  commendable  trait  in  the  person  who
exercises  it.  But  under  the  canons  of  self-help  and  pe-
cuniary valuation  the  test  of  efficiency  in  economic
matters  has  come  to  be,  not  technological  mastery  and
productive  effect,  but  proficiency  in  pecuniary  manage-
ment and  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  Both  in  his  own
estimation  and  in  the  eyes  of  his  fellows,  the  man  who
gains  much  does  well;  he  is  conceived  to  do  well  both  as
a  matter  of  personal  efficiency  and  in  point  of  servicea-
bility to  the  common  good.  To  "do  well"  in  modern
phrase  means  to  engross  something  appreciably  more  of
the  community's  wealth  than  falls  to  the  common  run.
But  since  gains,  and  hence  efficiency,  are  conceived  in
terms  of  price,  it  follows  that  the  man,  workman  or
businessman,  who  can  induce  his  fellows  to  pay  him  well
for  his  services  or  his  goods  is  accounted  efficient  and
serviceable;  from  which  it  follows  that  under  this  canon
of  pecuniary  efficiency  men  are  conceived  to  serve  the
common  good  somewhat  in  proportion  as  they  are  able


350  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

to  induce  the  community  to  pay  more  for  their  services
than  they  are  worth.

The  businessman  who  gains  much  at  little  cost,  who
gets  something  for  nothing,  is  rated,  in  his  own  as  well
as  in  his  neighbours'  esteem,  as  a  public  benefactor  indis-
pensable to  the  community's  welfare,  and  as  contribut-
ing to  the  common  good  in  direct  proportion  to  the
amount  which  he  has  been  able  to  draw  out  of  the  aggre-
gate product.  It  is  perhaps  needless  to  call  to  mind  that
of  this  character  are  the  main  facts  in  the  history  of  all
the  great  fortunes;  ^  although  the  current  accounts  of
their  accumulation,  being  governed  by  pecuniary  stand-
ards of  efficiency  and  serviceabiHty,  dwell  mainly  on  the
services  that  have  inured  to  the  community  from  the
traffic  with  which  the  great  captains  have  interfered  in
their  quest  of  gain.  The  prevalence  of  salesmanship,  that
is  to  say  of  business  enterprise,  and  the  consequent  high
repute  of  the  salesmanlike  activities  and  aptitudes  in
any  community  that  is  organised  on  a  price  system,  is
perhaps  the  most  serious  obstacle  which  the  pecuniary
culture  opposes  to  the  advance  in  workmanship.  It
intrudes  into  the  most  intimate  and  secret  workings
of  the  human  spirit  and  contaminates  the  sense  of  work-
manship in  its  initial  move,  and  sets  both  the  proclivity
to  efficient  work  and  the  penchant  for  serviceability  at
cross  purposes  with  the  common  good.

But  under  the  conditions  engendered  by  the  machine
technology  the  scope  of  this  pecuniary  standard  of  work-
manship has  been  greatly  enlarged. On  the  whole  the

^  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Anna  Yoiingman,  The  Economic  Causes  of  Great  Fortunes y
especially  ch.  vi;  R.  Ehrenburg,  Grosse  Vcrmogen;  Ida  Tarbell,  History
of  the  Standard  Oil  Company.


The  Machine  Industry  351

machine  industry  calls  for  a  large-scale  organisation,
increasingly  so  as  time  has  passed  and  the  machine  pro-
cess has  come  more  fully  to  dominate  the  industrial
situation.  By  the  same  move  initiative  and  discretion
have  come  to  vest  in  those  who  can  claim  ownership  of
the  large  material  equipment  so  required,  and  the  exer-
cise of  such  initiative  and  discretion  by  these  owners  is
loosely  proportioned  to  the  magnitude  of  their  holdings.
Smaller  owners  have  the  same  freedom  of  initiative  and
discretion,  in  point  of  legal  and  conventional  compe-
tency,— such  freedom  and  equality  between  persons
being  of  the  essence  of  Natural  Rights;  but  in  point  of
practical  fact,  as  determined  by  technological  and  busi-
ness exigencies,  there  is  but  small  discretion  left  such
smaller  holders.  Initiative  and  discretion  in  modern
industrial  matters  vest  in  the  owners  of  the  industrial
plant,  or  in  such  moneyed  concerns  as  may  stand  in  an
underwriting  relation  to  the  owners  of  the  plant;  such
discretion  is  exercised  through  pecuniary  transactions;
and  these  pecuniary  transactions  whereby  the  conduct
of  industry  is  guided  and  controlled  are  entered  into
with  a  view  to  gain  in  terms  of  price.  It  is  but  a  shght
exaggeration  to  say  that  such  transactions,  which  govern
the  course  of  industry,  are  carried  out  with  an  eye  single
to  pecuniary  gain, — the  industrial  consequences,  and
their  bearing  on  the  community's  welfare,  being  matters
incidental  to  the  transaction  of  business.  In  every-day
phrase,  under  the  rule  of  the  current  technology  and
business  principles,  industry  is  managed  by  businessmen
for  business  ends,  not  by  technological  experts  or  for
the  material  advantage  of  the  community.  And  in  this
control  of  industrial  affairs  the  smaller  businessmen


352  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship

are  in  great  part  subject  to  the  discretion  of  the
larger.^

By  ancient  habit,  handed  down  from  the  days  of
handicraft  and  petty  trade,  this  pecuniary  management
is  conventionally  conceived  to  be  directed  to  the  produc-
tion of  goods  and  services,  and  the  businessman  is  still
conventionally  rated  as  a  producer  and  his  gains  ac-
cepted as  a  measure  of  his  productive  efficiency.  In
conventional  speech  "producer"  means  the  owner  of
industrial  plant,  not  the  workmen  employed  nor  the
mechanical  apparatus  about  which  they  are  employed. ^
The  "producers,"  "manufacturers,"  "captains  of  in-
dustry," whose  interests  are  safeguarded  by  current
legislation  and  by  the  guardians  of  law  and  order  are  the
businessmen  who  have  a  pecuniary  interest  in  industrial
affairs;  and  it  is  their  pecuniary  interests  that  are  so
safeguarded,  in  the  naive  faith  that  the  material  interests
of  the  community  at  large  coincide  with  the  opportuni-
ties for  gain  so  secured  to  the  businessmen.

It  has  already  been  spoken  of  above  that  the  processes
of  industry  are  bound  in  a  comprehensive  S3^stem  of  give
and  take,  in  such  a  manner  that  no  considerable  fraction
of  this  industrial  system  functions  independently  of  the
rest. The  industrial  system  at  large  may  be  conceived

*  Cf.  a  paper  "On  the  Nature  of  Capital"  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics,  November,  1908.

2 As  late  as  Adam  Smith's  time  "manufacturer"  still  retained  its
etymological  value  and  designated  the  workman  who  made  the  goods.
But  from  about  that  time,  that  is  to  say  since  the  machine  process  and
the  business  control  of  industry  have  thoroughly  taken  effect,  the  term
no  longer  has  a  technological  connotation  but  has  taken  on  a  pecuniary
(business)  signification  wholly;  so  that  the  term  now  designates  a  business-
man who  stands  in  none  but  a  pecuniary  relation  to  the  processes  of  in-
dustry.


The  Machine  Industry  353

as  a  comprehensive  machine  process,  the  several  sub-
processes  of  which  technologically  inosculate  and  ramify
in  what  may  be  conceived  as  a  network  of  elements  work-
ing in  a  moving  equilibrium,  none  of  which  can  go  on
at  its  full  productive  efficiency  except  in  duly  balanced
correlation  with  all  the  rest.  This  characterisation  will
strictly  apply  only  so  far  as  the  machine  technology  has
taken  over  the  various  branches  of  industry,  but  it  ap-
plies in  a  loose  though  by  no  means  idle  fashion  also  as
regards  those  elements  of  the  industrial  system  in  which
the  machine  technology  has  not  yet  become  dominant.
In  so  far  as  the  industrial  system  is  of  this  character
it  will  also  hold  that  the  business  management  of  any
one  branch  or  line  or  parcel  of  industries  will  have  its
effect  on  the  rest,  primarily  and  proximately  on  those
other  branches  or  Hnes  with  which  the  given  parcel  stands
in  immediate  relations  of  give  and  take,  through  the
market  or  more  directly  through  technological  correla-
tion,— as,  e.  g.,  in  the  transportation  system.  Business
management  which  affects  a  large  section  of  this  bal-
anced system  will  necessarily  have  a  wide-reaching  effect
on  the  working  of  the  system  at  large.  Such  business
control  of  industry,  as  has  just  been  remarked  above,
is  exercised  with  a  view  to  pecuniary  gain;  but  pecuniary
gain  in  these  premises  comes  from  changes,  and  appre-
hended changes,  in  the  efficiency  of  the  various  industrial
processes  that  are  touched  by  such  control,  rather  than
from  the  work-day  functioning  of  the  several  items  of
equipment  involved.  The  changes  which  so  bring  gain
to  these  larger  businessmen  may  be  favourable  to  the
effective  working  of  industry,  but  they  may  also  be  un-
favourable; and  the  opportunities  for  gain  which  they


354  ^^^  Instinct  of  Workmanship

afford  the  larger  businessmen  may  be  equally  profitable
whether  the  disturbance  in  question  is  favourable  or  un-
favourable to  industrial  efficiency.  The  gains  to  be  de-
rived from  such  disturbance  are  proportioned  to  the
magnitude  of  the  disturbance  rather  than  to  its  industrial
productiveness.  It  should  follow,  of  course,  that  if  the
machine  technology  should  come  so  to  dominate  the
industrial  situation  as  to  bind  all  industry  in  a  rigor-
ously comprehensive  balanced  process,  the  material
fortunes  of  the  community  would  come  to  rest  un-
reservedly and  in  all  details  in  the  hands  of  those
larger  businessmen  who  hold  the  final  pecuniary  dis-
cretion.

In  qualification  of  this  broad  proposition  it  is  to  be
noted  that,  while  the  gains  of  the  superior  rank  of  busi-
nessmen accrue  in  the  manner  indicated, — by  means  of
disturbances  which  may  indifferently  be  favourable  or
unfavourable  to  industry, — yet  in  the  long  run  it  is  neces-
sarily true  that  the  gains  which  so  inure  to  the  pecuniary
magnates  must  be  derived  from  the  net  product  of  in-
dustry and  will  in  the  long  run  be  larger  in  the  aggregate
the  more  productive  the  community's  industry  is.  What
makes  business  profitable  to  the  businessmen  is,  after
all,  their  usufruct  of  the  community's  industrial  effi-
ciency. In  the  long  run  nothing  can  accrue  as  income
to  the  pecuniary  magnates  more  than  the  surplus  product
of  industry  above  the  subsistence  of  the  industrial  com-
munity at  large.  But  so  long  as  the  magnates  have  not
come  to  a  working  arrangement  on  this  basis  and  ''pooled
their  interests"  the  proposition  as  formulated  above
appears  to  be  adequate  to  the  facts, — that  the  gains  of
these  larger  businessmen  are  a  function  of  the  magni-


The  Machine  Industry  355

tude  of  the  disturbances  which  they  create  rather  than
of  their  productive  effect.

It  should  also  follow,  and  so  far  as  the  above  charac-
terisation holds  it  does  follow,  that  the  current  pecuniary
organisation  of  industry  vests  the  usufruct  of  the  com-
munity's industrial  proficiency  in  the  owners  of  the
industrial  equipment.  Proximately  this  usufruct  of  the
industrial  community's  technological  knowledge  and
working  capacity  vests  in  the  detail  owners  of  the  equip-
ment, but  only  proximately.  At  the  further  remove  it
vests  only  in  the  businessmen  whose  command  of  large
means  enables  them  to  create  and  control  those  pecuniary
conjunctures  of  industry  that  bring  about  changes  in
the  market  value  and  ownership  of  the  equipment.


