The Theory of Business Enterprise (Thorstein Veblen, 1904)
==========================================================
The captain of industry vs. the engineer; institutional economics' founding critique. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (theorybusinesse03veblgoog).


Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


GIFT OF



Fi-om the Library of ProfasBor
Yamato Ichlhashi



THE THEORY OF
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



THE THEORY OF (I'
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



BT



THORSTEIN ,yEBLEN

ABBUT^irr rSOFB880m OF POLITICAL BCONOMT IN THB
UHIYSSBITT OF CHICAGO



CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
NEW YORK .... 1904


33^
. 3



CHARLES SCRIBNKR'S SONS

PuUithcd September, 1904



PREFACE

In respect of its point of departure^ the follow-
ing inquiiy into the nature^ causes, utility, and
further drift of business enterprise differs from
other discussions of the same general range of
facts. Any unfamiliar conclusions are due to
this choice of a point of view, rather than to
any peculiarity in the facts, articles of theory, or
method of argument employed. The point of view
is that given by the business man's work, — the
aims, motives, and means that condition current
business traffic. This choice of a point of view
is itself given by the current economic situation, in
that the situation plainly is primarily a business
situation.

A much more extended and detailed examina-
tion of the ramifications and consequences of busi-
ness enterprise and business principles would be
feasible, and should give interesting results. It
might conceivably lead to something of a revision
(modernization) of more than one point in the
current body of economic doctrines. But it should



■v!



PREFACE



apparently prove more particularly interesting if it
were followed up at large in the bearing of tbia
modem force upon cultural growtli, apart from
what is of immediate economic interest. This cul-
tural bearing of business enterprise, however, be-
longs rather in the field of the sociologist than in
that of the professed economist ; so that the pres-
ent inquiry, in its later chapters, sins rather by
exceeding the legitimate bounds of economic dis-
cussion on this head than by falling short of them.
In extenuation of this fault it is to be said that
the features of general culture touched upon in
these chapters bear too intimately on the economic
situation proper to admit their being left entirely
on one side.

Of the chapters included in the volume, the fifth,
on Loan Credit, is taken, without substantial
change, from Volume IV of the Decennial Publi-
cations of the University of Chicago, where it
appears as a monograph.



CONTENTS

OKAFTIB TAQM

I. Intboductort 1

IL Ths Machine Process 5

IIL Business Enterprise 20

IV. Business Principles 66

y. The Use of Loan Credit 92

VL Modern Business Capital 133

yjL The Theory or Modern Welfare ... 177

VUL Business Principles in Law and Politics . 268
IX The Cultural Incidence of the Machine^

Process 302

X. The Natural Decay of Business Enterprise . 374



▼il



THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



CHAPTER I



INTRODUCTORY

The material framework of modem civilization
ia the industrial system, and the directing force
which animates this framework is business enter-
prise. To a greater extent than any other known
phase of culture, modem Christendom takes its
complexion from its economic organization. This
modern economic organization is the "Capitalistic
System" or "Modern Industrial System," so called.
Its characteristic features, and at the same time
the forces by virtue of which it dominates modern
culture, are the machine process and investment for
a profit.

The scope and method of modem industry are
given by the machine. This may not seem to
hold true for all industries, perhaps not for the
greater part of industry as rated by the bulk of
the output or by the aggregate volume of labor
expended. But it holds true to such an extent
and in such a pervasive manner that a modem
industrial community cannot go on except by
the help of the accepted mechanical appliances



2 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

and processes. The machine industries — those
portions of the industrial system in which the
machine process is paramount — are in a dominant
position ; they set the pace for the rest of the
industrial system. In this sense the present is the
age of the machine process. This dominance of
the machine process in industry marks off the
present industrial situation from all else of its kind.
In a like sense the present is the age of business
enterprise. Not that all industrial activity is car-
ried on by the rule of investment for profits, but
an effective majority of the industrial forces are
organized on that basis. There are many items
of great volume and consequence that do not fall
within the immediate scope of these business prin-
ciples. The housewife's work, e.g., as well aa
some appreciable portion of tlie work on farms
and in some handicrafts, can scarcely be classed as
business enterprise. But those elements in the
industrial world that take the initiative and exert
a far-reaching coercive guidance in matters of in-
dustry go to their work with a view to profits on
investment, and are guided by the principles and
exigencies of business. The business man, espe-
cially the business man of wide and authoritative
discretion, has become a controlling force in indus-
try, because, through the mechanism of invest-
ments and markets, he controls the plants and
processes, and these set the pace and determine


»



INTEODUCTOKY 3

the direction of movement for the rest. His con-
trol in those portions of the field that are not
immediately under his hand is, no doubt, Bome-
what loose and uncertain; but in the long nm his
discretion is in great measm:e decisive even for
these outlying portions of the field, for he is the
only large self-directing economic factor. His con-
trol of the motions of other men is not strict, for
they are not under coercion from him except
through the coercion exercised by the exigencies
of the situation in which their lives are cast; but
as near as it may be said of any human power in
modem times, the large business man controls the
exigencies of life under which the community
lives. Hence, upon him and his fortunes centres
the abiding interest of civilized mankind.

For a theoretical inquiry into the coiu*se of
civilized life as it runs in the immediate present,
tlierefore, and as it is running into the proximate
future, no single factor in the cultural situation
has an importance equal to that of the business
man and his work.^

1 " nem iinbeteiligten Beobachler drangt sich die ErkentDlu auf,
Ham In dem Fhttuompn des HsudeU [here equif alent lo " builccM "J
•In enueheldender altgemeiQer QMsDke enthalien und elne der mttch-
tigsten Tbalsacben der Geschlchte gegeben i«t, mlt der jede Zeit g»-
Eimngen wird, slch Kob loder Ubel abzuflnden. . . . Der Hftodel Ut in
tolgericli tiger >Dd uaaufh&ttaamer EntwlckluDg dts tllbraDde Gewerbe
genorden, Es ist tlli die anderen Oewerbe ein vSUig aussichuloser
VerBUch, Ibn za bemnien and durch Zwangamittel In seine ' dlenende
Stellung' Eunickzudriuigeii." — K. Tb. Reiubold, Arbeit und Werk-
itug, pp. ix, K.



I



4 THK THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

This of courae applies with peculiar force to
an inquiry into the economic life of a modem
community. In so far as the theorist aims to
explain the specifically modem economic phenom-
ena, his Une of approach must be from the business
man's standpoint, since it is from that standpoint
that the course of these phenomena is directed.
A theory of the modem economic situation must
be primarily a theory of business traffic, with its
motives, aims, methods, and effects.



CHAPTER II



THE MACHINE PROCESS

In its bearing on modern life and modern busi-
ness, the "machine procesa" means something
more comprehensive and less external than a
mere aggregate of mechanical appliances for the
mediation of human labor. It means that, but
it means something more than that. The civil
engineer, the mechanical engineer, the navigator,
the mining expert, the industrial chemist and
mineralogist, the electrician, — the work of all
these falls within the lines of the modem machine
process, as well as the work of the inventor who
devises the appliances of the process and that of
the mechanician who puts the inventions into
effect and oversees their working. The scope of
the process is larger than the machine.' In those
branches of industry in which machine methods
have been introduced, many agencies which are
not to be classed as mechanical appliances, simply,
have been drawn into the process, and have be-
come integral factors in it. Chemical properties
of minerals, e.g., are counted on in the carrying
out of metallurgical processes with much the same

> C(. Cooke Taylor, Modtm Factory SyMem, pp. 74-77.


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE

certainty and calculable effect aa are the motiona
of those mechanical appliances by whose use the
minerals are handled. The sequence of the pro-
cess involves both the one and the other, both
the apparatus and the materials, in such intimate
interaction that the process cannot be spoken of
simply aa an action of the apparatus upon the
materials. It is not simply that the apparatus
reshapes the materials ; the materials reshape
themselves by the help of the apparatus. Simi-
larly in such other processes as the refining of
petroleum, oil, or sugar; in the work of the Indus-
trial chemical laboratories ; in the use of wind,
water, or electricity, etc.

Wherever manual dexterity, the rule of thumb,
and the fortuitous conjunctures of the seasons
have been supplanted by a reasoned procedure
on the basis of a systematic knowledge of the
forces employed, there the mechanical industry is
to be found, even in the absence of intricate me-
chanical contrivances. It is a question of the char-
acter of the process rather than a question of the
complexity o£ the contrivances employed. Chem-
ical, agricultural, and animal industries, as carried
on by the characteristically modern methods and
in due touch with the market, are to be included
in the modem complex of mechanical industry.'

■ Even In nork that lies so near the fortulUes of animate n&tura
M daiiring, Btock-breeding, and tbe lioproveraent of crop plaiiU,



i



THE MACHINE PROCESS 7

No one of the mechanical processes carried on
by the use o£ a given out6t of appliances is inde*
pendent of other processes going on elsewhere.
Each draws upon and presupposes the proper work-
ing of many other processes of a similarly me-
chanical character. None of the processes in the
mechanical industries is self-sufficing. Each follows
some and precedes other processes in an endleaa
sequence, into which each fits and to the require-
ments of which each must adapt its own working.
The whole concert of industrial operations is to be
taken as a machine process, made up of interlock-
ing detail processes, rather than as a multiplicity
of mechanical appliances each doing its particular
work in severalty. This comprehensive industrial
process draws into its scope and turns to account
all branches of knowledge that have to do with the

a deUniiliiate, reasoned routine replace* the rule of thomb. By
mechanic^ control of his mateiialH the dairyman, e.g., aelectively
deCermiDes the rate and kind of tlie biological proceues that change
his raw material into finished product. The stock-breeder's aim la to
roduce the details of the laws of heredity, as they apply wltbin his
field, to such definite terms as will aSord him a technologically accu-
rate routine of breeding, and then to apply this technological breeding
process to the production of such varieties of stock as will, wltti the
nearest approach to mechanicnl exactness and expedition, turn the
raw materials of field and meadow into certain speciBcd kinds and
grades of finished product. The like is true of the plant-breed ere.
Agrlcaltural experiment stations and bureaus, in all civilized eouti-
triea, aie laboratories worldng toward an effective technological con-
trol of biological factors, with a view to eliminating fortultona,
dlsserviceable, and useless elements from ttie processes of agrlculinral
production, and so reducing these prooeaiea to a calculable, expedl-
Uooi, and wasteless routine.



I


8 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

material sciences, and the whole makes a more or
less delicately balanced complex of sub-processes.'

Looked at in this way the industrial process
shows two well-marked general characteristics:
(a) the running maintenance of interstitial ad-
justments between the several sub-proceases or
branches of industry, wherever in their working
they touch one another in the sequence of industrial
elaboration; and (6) an unremitting requirement
of quantitative precision, accuracy in point of time
and sequence, in the proper inclusion and exclusion
of forces affecting the outcome, in the magnitude
of the various physical characteristics (weight, size,
density, hardn&^s, tensile strength, elasticity, tem-
perature, chemical reaction, actinic sensitiveness,
etc.) of the materials handled as well as of the
appliances employed. This requirement of me-
chanical accuracy and nice adaptation to specitic
uses has led to a gradual pervading enforcement of
uniformity, to a reduction to staple grades and sta-
ple character in the materials handled, and to a
thorough standardizing of tools and units of meas-
urement. Standard physical measurements are of
the essence of the machine's regime.'

The modem industrial communities show an
unprecedented uniformity and precise equivalence
in legally adopted weights and measures. Some-

■ Cf. SomtwTt, Xoderne KapUalUmiis, vol. TL cb. IIL

• Cf. TSeelfth Ceaiui CU.8.) : " UaourBCtUTU," pt. I. p. xxxvi



J



THE MACHINE PROCESS 9

thing of this kind would be brought about by the
needs of commerce, even without the urgency
given to the movement for uniformity by the re-
quirements of the machine industry. But within
the jndxistrial field the movement for standardizar
tion has outrun the urging of commercial needs,
and has penetrated every comer of the mechanical
industries. The specifically commercial need of
uniformity in weights and measures of merchant-
able goods and in monetary units has not carried
Htandardization in these items to the extent to
which the mechanical need of the industrial process
has carried out a sweeping standardization in the
means by which the machine process works, as well
as in the products which it turns out.

As a matter of course, tools and the various
Btmctural materials used are made of standard
sizes, shapes, and gauges. When the dimensions,
in fractions of an inch or in millimetres, and the
weight, in fractions of a pound or in grammes, are
given, the expert foreman or workman, confidently
and without reflection, infers the rest of what need
be known of the uses to which any given item that
passes under his hand may be turned. The adjust-
ment and adaptation of part to part and of process
to process has passed out of the category of crafts-
manlike skill into the category of mechanical
standardization. Hence, perhaps, the greatest,
most wide-reaching gain in productive celerity and



I

I



10 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE



efficiency through modern methods, and hence the
largest saving of labor in modern industry.

Tools, mechanical appliances and movements,
and structural materials are scheduled by certain
conventional scales and gauges ; and modem
industry has little use for, and can make little use
of, what does not conform to the standard. What
is not competently standardized calls for too much
of craftsmanlike skill, reflection, and individual
elaboration, and is therefore not available for
economical use in the processes. Irregularity,
departure from standard measurements in any of
the measurable facts, is of itself a fault in any
item that is to find a use in the industrial process,
for it brings delay, it detracts from its ready
usabiUty in the nicely adjusted process into which
it is to go ; and a delay at any point means a more
or less far-reaching and intolerable retardation of
the comprehensive industrial process at lai^.
Irregularity in products intended for industrial
use carries a penalty to the nonconforming pro-
ducer which urges him to fall into line and submit
to the required standardization.

The materials and moving forces of industry are
undergoing a like reduction to staple kinds, styles,
grades, and gauge.' Even such forces as would



■ l&cn

■ deQi



< E.g. lumber, coal, Bt«el, paper, wool and cotton, grain, leather,
CBtUe (or the packing hoosea. All these and many other* are to an
l&creaalng extent spoken far, delivered, and disposed of under well-
deQDed staple grades ea to quality and dlmeosloDs, weight and efBciencj.


THE MACHINE PBOCE83

seem at first sight not to lend themselves to
standardization, either in their production or their
use, are subjected to uniform scales of measure-
ment ; as, e.g., water-power, steam, electricity, and
human labor. The latter is perhaps the least
amenable to standardization, but, for all that, it is
bargained lor, delivered, and turned to account on
schedules of time, speed, and intensity which are
continually sought to be reduced to a more precise
measiu^ment and a more sweeping uniformity.

The like is true of the finished products. Mod-
em consumers in great part supply their wants
with commodities that conform to certain staple
specifications of size, weight, and grade. The
consumer (that is to say the vulgar consumer) U
furnishes his house, his table, and his person with
supplies of standard weight and measure, and he
can to an appreciable degree specify his needs and
his consumption in the notation of the standard
gauge. As regards the mass of civilized mankind,
the idiosyncrasies of the individual consumers are
required to conform to the uniform gradations
imposed upon consumable goods by the compre-
hensive mechanical processes of industry. " Local
color," it is said, is falling into abeyance in modern
life, and where it is still found it tends to assert
itself in units of the standard gauge.

From this mechanical standardization of con-
sumable goods it follows, on the one hand, that the


12 THE THEORY OF BTI8INES8 ENTERPRISE

demand for goods settles upon certain defined Imee
of production which handle certain materials of
definite grade, in certain, somewhat invariable forms
and proportions ; which leads to well-defined meth-
ods and measurements in the processes of production,
shortening the average period of " ripening " that
intervenes between the first raw stage of the product
and its finished shape, and reducing the aggregate
stock of goods necessary to be carried for the supply
of current wants, whether in the raw or in the
finished form.* Standardization means economy at
nearly all points of the process of supplying goods,
and at the same time it means certainty and
expedition at nearly all points in the business
operations involved in meeting current wants.
Besides this, the sUndardization of goods means
that the interdependence of industrial processes is
reduced to more definite terms than before the
mechanical standardization came to its present
degree of elaborateness and rigor. The margin of
admissible variation, in time, place, form, and
amount, is narrowed. Materials, to answer the
needs of standardized industry, must be drawn
from certain standard soiu'ces at a definite rate of
supply. Hence any given detail industry depends
closely on receiving its supplies from certain.



1 Well Hhown in the ease of vheit and floor ; bat the like is true
u Tegarda the stocks oE oLiiei commodiliea carried by producers,
}t)bbers, retailere, and coDsumera.


THE MACHINE PROCESS

relatively few, industrial establishments whose
work belongs earlier in the process of elaboration.
And it may similarly depend on certain other,
closely de&ned, industrial establishments for a
vent of ita own specialized and standardized prod-
uct.' It may likewise depend in a strict manner
on special means of transportation.*

Machine production leads to a standardization of
services as well as of goods. So, for instance,
the modem means of communication and the
system into which these means are organized are
also of the nature of a mechanical process, and in
this mechanical process of service and intercourse
the life of all civilized men is more or less inti-
mately involved. To make effective use of the
modern system of communication in any or all of
its ramifications (streets, railways, steamship lines,
telephone, telegraph, postal service, etc.), men are
required to adapt their needs and their motions to
the exigencies of the process whereby tliis civilized
method of intercourse is carried into effect. The
service is standardized, and therefore the use of it
is standardized also. Schedules of time, place, and
circumstance rule throughout. The scheme of
everyday life must be arranged with a strict

I Well illustraLed by Uie interdependence of Uie Tatious bnnchei
ol iron and itee\ production.

' Aa omn, e.g.. In llie dependence at oil prodacUon or oil refining
on the pipe tinea and their maDagFuient, or in liie dependence of the
pndrie facmera on Clie railway lines, etc.


14 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE

regard to the exigencies of the process whereby
this range of human needs is served, if full advan-
tage is to be taken of this system of intercourse,
which means tliat, in bo far, one's plans and proj-
ects must be conceived and worked out io terms
of those standard units which the system imposes.

For the population of the towns and cities, at
least, much the same rule holds true of the dis-
tribution of consumable goods. So, also, amuse-
ments and diversions, much of the current amenities
of life, are organized into a more or less sweeping
process to which those who would benefit by the
advantages offered must adapt their schedule of
wants and the disposition of their time and effort.
The frequency, duration, intensity, grade, and
sequence are not, in the main, matters for the free
discretion of the individuals who participate.
Throughout the scheme of life of that portion of
mankind that clusters about the centres of modem
culture the industrial process makes itself felt and
enforces a degree of conformity to the canon of
accurate quantitative measurement. There comes
to prevail a degree of standardization and precise
mechanical adjustment of the details of everyday
life, which presumes a facile and unbroken work*
ing of all those processes that minister to these
standardized human wants.

As a result of this superinduced mechanical
regularity of life, the livelihood of individuals is,



THE MACHINE I'KOCESS



15



over large areas, affected in aa approximately
uniform manner by any incident which at all
seriously affects the industrial process at any point.'
As was noted above, each industrial unit, repre-
sented by a given industrial " plant," stands in
close relations of interdependence with other in-
dustrial processes going forward elsewhere, near or
far away, from which it receives supplies — mate-
rials, apparatus, and the like — and to which it
turns over its output of products and waste, or on
which it depends for auxiliary work, such as trans-
portation. The resulting concatenation of indus-
tries has been noticed by most modem writers. It
is commonly discussed under the head of the divi-
sion of labor. Evidently the prevalent standardi-
zation of industrial means, methods, and products
greatly increases the reach of this concatenation of
industries, at the same time that it enforces a

* ft may be noted In thU conDectlou, on the one band, that »
popnistion which is in no degree tuliituated to the modem InduBtiial
process Is unable to adapt its mode of life to the requirements of tbEa
method of supplying buman wants, and bo can derife bat little benefit,
and possibly great discomfort, from a forcible iiilrusioD ot the
machine industry ; as, for instance, many of the outlying barbarian
peoples wiih irhom the Western Industrial cultore la now enforcing
a close contact. On the other hand, It Is also true that even the most
adeqaately trained modern community, among whom the machine
Indostry Is best at home, does not respond with faultless alacrity U>
the demands and opportunities which this system holds ouL The
adaptation of habits ot life and of ideals and anpirationa to the exi-
genclea of tbe machine process is not nearly complete, nor does tha
untrained man instinctively fall Into line with It, Even tbe best-
trained, severely disciplined man of tbe industrial towns bu Ui
seasons ol recalcitrancy.



16 THE THEORY OF BDaiNESS ENTEEPEISE



I



I



close conformity in point of time, volume, and cliar-
acter of the product, whether the product is goods
or services.'

By virtue of this concatenation of processes the
modern industrial system at large bears the char-
acter of a comprehensive, balanced mechanical
process. In order to an efficient working of this
industrial process at large, the various constituent
sub-processes must work in due coordination
throughout the whole. Any degree of maladjust-
ment in the interstitial coordinations of this
industrial process at large in some degree hinders
its working. Similarly, any given detail process or
any industrial plant will do its work to full advan-
tage only when due adjustment is had between its
work and the work done by the rest. The higher
the degree of development reached by a given
industrial community, the more comprehensive and
urgent becomes this requirement of interstitial
adjustment. And the more fully a given industry
has taken on the character of a mechanical process,
and the more extensively and closely it is corre-
lated jn its work with other industries that precede
or follow it in the sequence of elaboration, the more

1 The dependence ot one process upon the working of the othera
U wmetimes very Btrict, m, tor luslaoce, in the varioos industries
occupied wilb iron, including the extraction and handling of the ore
ftnd Other nw m»teTi>U. In other eaaas the coml&tion Is leu strict,
or even very slight, u, e.ff., that between the newspaper industry
snd InmberinEi Chrongh the wood-pulp industry, the chief compooeut
of the modern newspaper beiug wood-pulp.



THE MACHINE PROCESS



urgent, other things equal, is the need of maintaiii*
mg the proper working relations with these other
industries, the greater is the industrial detriment
suffered from any derangement of the accustomed
working relations, and the greater is the industrial
gain to be derived from a closer adaptation
and a more facile method of readjustment in
the event of a disturbance, — the greater is
also the chance for an effectual disturbance of
industry at the particular point. This mechanical
concatenation of industrial processes makes for
solidarity in the administration of any group of
related industries, and more remotely it makes for
solidarity in the management of the entire indus-
trial traffic of the community.

A disturbance at any point, whereby any given
branch of industry fails to do its share in the work
of the system at large, immediately affects the
neighboring or related branches which come before
or after it in the sequence, and is transmitted
through their derangement to the remoter portions
of the system. The disturbance is rarely confiued
to the single plant or the single line of production
first affected, but spreads in some measure to the
rest. A disturbance at any point brings more or
less derangement to the industrial process at large.
So that any maladjustment of the system involves
a larger waste than simply the disabling of one or
two members in the complex industrial structure.



I



18 THE THEORY OP BUSINESa ENTERPRISE

So much is clear, that the keeping of the balance
in the comprehensive machine process of industry
is a matter of the gravest urgency if the productive
mechanism is to proceed with ita work in an effi-
cient manner, so as to avoid idleness, waste, and
hardship. The management of the various indus-
trial plants and processes in due correlation with
all the rest, and the supervision of the interstitial
adjustments of the system, are commonly conceived
to be a work of greater consequence to the com-
munity's well-being than any of the detail work
involved in carrying on a given process of produc-
tion. This work of interstitial adjustment, and in
great part also the more immediate supervision
of the various industrial processes, have become
urgent only since the advent of the machine indus-
try and in proportion as the machine industry has
advanced in compass and consistency.

It is by business transactions that the balance
of working relations between the several industrial
units is maintained or restored, adjusted and read-
justed, and it is on the same basis and by the same
method that the affairs of each industrial unit are
regulated. The relations in which any indepen-
dent industrial concern stands to its employees, as
well as to other concerns, are always reducible to
pecuniary terms. It is at this point that the
business man comes into the industrial process as a
decisive factor. The organization of the several



THE MACHINE PB0CBS3 19

indastries as well as the interstitial adjustments
and discrepancies of the industrial process at latge
are of the nature of pecuniary transactions and
obligations. It therefore rests vith the buaineas
men to make or mar the running adjustments of
industry. The larger uid more close-knit and more
delicately balanced the industrial system, and the
latter the constituent units, the larger and more
far-reaching will be the effect of each business
move in this field.



CHAPTER III

BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

The motive of business is pecuniary gain, the
method is essentially purchase and sale. The aim
and usual outcome is an accumulation of wealth.'
Men whose aim is not increase of possessions do
not go into business, particularly not on an inde-
pendent footing.

How these motives aud methods of business
work out in the traffic of commercial enterprise
proper — in mercantile and banking business — •
does not concern the present inquiry, except so
far as these branches of business affect the course
of industrial business in the stricter sense of the
term. Nor is it necessary here to describe the
details of business routine, whether in the mer-


> The nltsrior ground of efforts diret^fed to the accmnulation of
wealth ia discussed U Home length Id the Theory of the Ltimire Clou,
ch. II. and V., and the econoinic bearing of the buaineas man's
work is tTef(l«d In a paper on "Industrial and Pecuniar; Employ-
ments," in the Proetedingt ol the thirteenth annual meeting ot llie
American Economic Association. Cf. also Marshall, PrineipUt nf
Etonomia (3d ed.). bk. I. oh. III., bk. IV. ch. XII.. bk. V. eh. IV.,
bk. VII. ch. VIL and VIII. ; Bagchot, Economte SCHdies, especially pp.
63 el leq. ; Walker, Wagm QiifgUon, ch. XIV. ; and more especial]]'
Bombart, Modtrne KqpitaUimni, vol. I. ch. I., VIII.. XIV., XV. ;
Marx, K'ipilal, bk. I. ch. IV. ; SchmoUer, Grundriii, bk, II. ch. VII.
20



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

cantile pursuits or in the conduct of an industrial
concern. The point of the inquiry is that char-
acteristically modem business that is coextensive
with the machine process described above and is
occupied with the large mechanical industry. The
aim is a theory of such business enterprise in out-
line sulBciently full to show in what manner busi-
ness methods and business principles, in conjunction
with the mechanical industry, inQuence the modem
cultural situation. To save space and tedium,
therefore, features of business traffic that are not
of a broad character and not peculiar to this
modem situation are left on one side, as being
already sufficiently familiar for the purpose in hand.



In early modern times, before the regime of the
machine industry set in, business enterprise on any
appreciable scale commonly took the form of com-
mercial business — some form of merchandising
or banking. Shipping was the only considerable
line of business which involved an investment in
or management of extensive mechanical appliances
and processes, comparable with the facts of the
modem mechanical industry.* And shipping was

> It U Bignlflcant tliAt joiaMtock methods of orgftubaUon uid
rauiageineut — that is to uy, impersonally cftpit«ligtic meiliodi —
are traceable, for their origin uiil early lormulation, to the shipping
compnules of eftrly modem times. Cr. K. Lehmana, Die gtichtchttich»
Snheiekeliing de» Aktienreckti bi> turn Code de Commerce. The Ilka
view la spoken for by Ehrenboig, Zeitiilter der Fugger; see vol. IL
pp. 326 tt jeq.



I


22 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



I



commonly combined with merchandising. But
even the shipping trade of earlier times had much
of a fortuitous character, in this respect resembling
agriculture or any other industry in which wind
and weather greatly affect the outcome. The for-
tunes of men in shipping were on a more pre-
carious footing than to-day, and the successful
outcome of their ventures was less a matter of
shrewd foresight and daily pecuniary strategy
than are the affairs of the modern large business
concerns in transjxtrtation or the foreign trade.
Under these circumstances the work of the busi-
ness man was rather to take advantage of the
conjunctures offered by the course of the seasons
and the fluctuations of demand and supply than
to adapt the course of affairs to his own ends.
The large business man was more of a speculative
buyer and seller and less of a financiering strategist
than he has since become.

Since the advent of the machine age the situa-
tion has changed. The methods of business have,
of course, not changed fundamentally, whatever
may be true of the methods of industry; for they
are, as they had been, conditioned by the facts of
ownership. But instead of investing in the goods
as they pass between producer and consumer, as
the merchant does, the business man now invests
in the processes of industry ; and instead of stak-
ing bis values on the dimly foreseen conjunctures


BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

of the seasons and the act of God, he turns to
the conjunctures arising from the interplay of the
industrial processes, which are in great measure
under the control of business men.

So long as the machine processes were but
slightly developed, scattered, relatively isolated,
and independent of one another industrially, and
so long as they were carried on on a small scale
for a relatively narrow market, so long the man-
agement of them was conditioned by circumstances
in many respects similar to those which conditioned
the English domestic industry of the eigliteenth
century. It was under the conditions of this
inchoate phase of the machine age that the earlier
generation of economists worked out their theory
of the business man's part in industry. It was
then still true, in great measure, that the under-
taker was the owner of the industrial equipment,
and that he kept an immediate oversight of the
mechanical processes as well as of the pecuniary
transactions in which his enterprise was engaged ;
and it was also true, with relatively infrequent
exceptions, that an unsophisticated productive effi-
ciency was the prime element of business success.'
A further feature of that precapitalistic business
situation is that business, whether handicraft or

> Cf. CantiUon, Eitai tur le Commercf, !• partie, ch. III., VT., IX.,
XIT., XV. i Wraith of NatioM, bk. I. ; sacher, En»(eAun(j ((«• VoXk*-
wfrlKAi^ (3d ed.), ch. IV. and V. ; SombaK, KapilaUitayu, Vol I
bk.L



J



24 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE



trade, was customarily managed with a view to
earning a livelihood rather than with a view
to profits on investment.'

In proportion as the machine industry gained
ground, and as the modem concatenation of in-
dustrial processes and of markets developed, the
conjunctures of business grew more varied and
of larger scope at the same time that they became
more amenable to shrewd manipulation. The pe-
cuniary side of the enterprise came to require more
unremitting attention, as tlie chances for gain or
loss througli business relations simply, aside from
mere industrial efficiency, grew greater in number
and magnitude. The same circumstances also
provoked a spirit of business enterprise, and
brought on a systematic investment for gain.
With a fuller development of the modern close-
knit and comprehensive industrial system, the
point of chief attention for the business man has
shifted from the old-fashioned surveillance and
regulation of a given industrial process, with which
his livelihood was once bound up, to an alert redis-
tribution of investments from less to more gainful
ventures,' and to a strategic control of the conjunc-

I Sombart, Tol, I, ch. rV.-VIII. ; Ashley, Ecommic IlUtors ami
Theory, bk. II. ch. VI., especially pp. 380-397.

* C[. UukIiiUI, Frinciplei of Economics, on Ibe " Lan of Sabslitu-
tion," e.g. bk. VI, ch. I. The law of substitullon Implies freedom ot
iDveatment and Hppllea fully only in ho far as the ItiTentor In qucHtiou
is not pemuuiently iJeiitifled with a given industrial plant or even with
a given line ol industry. U requires great facility in sblftlDg from one



1



BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

turea of business through shrewd investments and
coalitions with other business men.



As shown above, the modem industrial system
is a concatenation of processes which has much
of the character of a single, comprehensive, bal-
anced mechanical process. A disturbance of the
balance at any point means a differential advan-
tage (or disadvantage) to one or more of the
owners of the sub-processes between which the
distm-bance falls ; and it may also frequently
mean gain or loss to many remoter meiubers in
the concatenation of processes, for the balance
throughout the sequence is a delicate one, and
the transmission of a disturbance often goes far.
It may even take on a cumulative character, and
may thereby seriously cripple or accelerate branches
of industry that are out of direct touch with those
members of the concatenation upon which the
initial distm-bance falls. Such is the case, for
instance, in an industrial crisis, when an appar-
ently slight initial disturbance may become the
occasion of a widespread derangement. And such,
on tlie other hand, is also the case when some
favorable condition abruptly supervenes in a given

to BDOtbcr point of inveBtment. It \a therefore only as tbe biulnesa
aitufttion bas approached the modem form that Uie Inw of subalituiion
bu come U> be of coiisiderablu importance Ui ecoiumilc tUcor; ; for a
theory of bualriesB, such as busiiieas was in medltevikl and early modeni
times, this law need scarceiy Lave beeii foroiulated.



I



26 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

industry ; as, e.g., when a sudden demand for war
Bfores starts a wave of prosperity by force of a
large and lucrative demand for the products of
certain industries, and these in turn draw on their
neighbors in the sequence, and so transmit a wave
of business activity.

The keeping of the industrial balance, therefore,
and adjusting the several industrial processes to
one another's work and needs, is a matter of grave
and far-reaching consequence in any modem com-
munity, as has already been shown. Now, the
means by which this balance is kept is business
transactions, and the men in whose keeping it
lies are the business men. The channel by which
disturbances are transmitted from member to
member of the comprehensive industrial system is
the business relations between the several members
of the system ; and, under the modem conditions
of ownership, disturbances, favorable or unfavor-
able, in the field of industry are transmitted by
nothing but these business relations. Hard times
or prosperity spread through the system by means
of business relations, and are in their primary
expression phenomena of the business situation
simply. It is only secondarily tliat the disturb-
ances in question show themselves as alterations
in the character or magnitude of the mechanical
proceBses involved. Industry is carried on for
^ the sake of business, and not conversely ; and the



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



27



progress and activity of industry are conditioned
by tbe outlook of the market, which nieana the
presumptive chance of business proBts.

All this is a matter of course which it may seem
simply tedious to recite.' But its consequences for
the theory of busmess make it necessary to keep
the nature of this connection between business and
industry in mind. The adjustments of industry
take place through the mediation of pecuniary
transactions, and these transactions take place at
the hands of the business men and are carried on
by them for business ends, not for industrial ends
in the narrower meaning of the phrase.

The economic welfare of the community at
large is best served by a facile and uninterrupted
interplay of the various processes which make up
the industrial system at large ; but the pecuniary
interests of the business men in whose hands lies
tbe discretion in the matter are not necessarily
best served by an unbroken maintenance of the
industrial balance. Especially is this true as
regards those greater business men whose interests
are very extensive. The pecuniary operations of
these latter are of large scope, and their fortunes
commonly are not permanently bound up witli the
smooth working of a given sub-process in the
industrial system. Their fortunes are rather
related to the larger conjunctures of the industrial

1 Bm Sombarl, KapUallmiui, vol. 1. ch, VIII.



W 28 THE 1

P system as s



I



28 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

system as a whole, the interstitial adjustments, or
to conjunctures affecting large ramifications of
the system. Nor is it at all miiforraly to their
interest to enhance the smooth working of the
industrial system at large in so far as they are
related to it. Gain may come to them from a
given disturbance of the system whether the dis-

' turbance makes for heightened facility or for wide-
spread hardship, very much as a speculator in
grain futures may be either a bull or a bear. To
the business man who aims at a differential gain
arising out of interstitial adjustments or disturb-
ances of the industrial system, it is not a material
question whether his operations have an immediate
furthering or hindering effect upon the system at
large. The end is pecuniary gain, the means U

^disturbance of the industrial system, — except so
far as the gain is sought by the old-fashioned
method of permanent investment in some one
industrial or commercial plant, a case which is for
the present left on one side as not bearing on the
point immediately in hand.' The point immedi-
ately in question is the part which the business
man plays in what are here called the interstitial
adjustments of the industrial system ; and so far
as touches his transactions in this field it is, by

> It ia chlefljr the pusive onner of stock and the tike tbst holda
permaneiitly to a, given enterprise, under llie fully developed modem
biuineaa condilions. The acllve busiiieaB man ot the larger sort la
not in thin way bouud to the glebe ot the given business concerD.



J



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



and large, a matter of indifference to him whether
his traffic affects the system advantageously or
disaatrously. His gains (or losses) are related to
the magnitude of the disturbances that take place,
rather tlian to their bearing upon the welfare of
the community.

The outcome of this management of industrial
affairs through pecuniary transactions, therefore,
has been to dissociate the interests of those men
who exercise the discretion from the interests of
the community. This is true in a peculiar degree
and increasingly since the fuller development of
the machine industry has brought about a close-
knit and wide-reaching articulation of industrial
procesfles, and has at the same time given rise to
a class of pecuniary experts whose business is the
strategic management of the interstitial relations
of the system. Broadly, this class of business men,
in so far as they have no ulterior strategic ends to
serve, have an interest in making the disturbances
of the system large and frequent, since it is in the
conjunctures of change that their gain emerges.
Qualifications of this proposition may be needed,
and it will be necessary to return to this point
presently.

It is, as a business proposition, a matter of
indifference to the man of large affairs whether
the disturbances which his transactions set up in
the industrial system help or hinder the system at



I



30 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

large, except in bo far as he has ulterior strategic
ends to serve. But most of the modem captains
of industry have such ulterior ends, and of the
greater ones among them this is peculiarly true.
Indeed, it is this work of far-reaching husiness
strategy that gives them full title to the designa-
tion, " Captains of Industry." This large business
strategy is the most admirable trait of the great
business men who with force and insight swing the
fortunes of civilized mankind. And due qualificar
tion is accordingly to be entered in the broad state-
ment made above. The captain's strategy is
commonly directed to gaining control of some
large portion of the industrial system. "When
such control has been achieved, it may be to his
interest to make and maintain business conditions
which shall facilitate the smooth and efficient
working of what has come under his control, in
case he continues to hold a large interest in it as
an investor ; for, other things equal, the gains
from what has come under his hands permanently
in the way of industrial plant are greater the
higher and more uninterrupted its industrial
efficiency.

An appreciable portion of the larger transactions
in railway and "industrial" properties, e.g., are
carried out with a view to the permanent owner-
ship of the properties by the business men into
whose hands they pass. But also in a large pro-



BUSINESS ENTEBPBISE 31

portion of these transactions the business men's
endeavors are directed to a temporary control of
the properties in order to close out at an advance
or to gain some indirect advantage ; that is to say,
the transactions have a strategic purpose. The
business man aims to gain control of a given block
of industrial equipment — as, e.g.j given railway
lines or iron mills that are strategically important
— as a basis for further transactions out of which
gain is expected. In such a case his efforts are
directed^ not to maintaining the permanent effi-
ciency of the industrial equipment, but to influ-
encing the tone of the market for the time being,
the apprehensions of other large operators, or the
transient faith of investors.^ His interest in the
particular block of industrial equipment is, then,
altogether transient, and while it lasts it is of a
factitious character.

The exigencies of this business of interstitial
disturbance decide that in the common run of
cases the proximate aim of the business man is to
upset or block the industrial process at some one or
more points. His strategy is commonly directed
against other business interests and his ends are



1 01 testimony of J. B. Dill, BepoH of the InduHridl Commiuion^
▼oL L pp. 1078, 1080-1066 ; ** Digest of Evidence,** p. 77 ; also testimony
of TArions witnesses on stock speculation and corporate management,
and particalarly the special report to the Commission, on ** Secaritiea
of Industrial Combinations and Railroads,** yoL XIII., especially pp.
920-933.



THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



commonly accomplished by the help of eome form
of pecuniary coercion. This is not uniformly true,
but it seema to be true in appreciably more tlian
half of the transactions in question. In general,
transactions which aim to bring a coalition of
industrial plants or processes xmder the control
of a given business man are directed to making it
difficult for the plants or processes in question to
be carried on in severalty by their previous owners
or managers.' It is commonly a struggle between
rival business men, and more often than not the
outcome of the struggle depends on which side can
inflict or endure the greater pecuniary damage.
And pecuniary damage in such a case not uncom-
monly involves a setrback to the industrial plants
concerned and a derangement, more or less exten-
sive, of the industrial system at large.

The work of the greater modem business men,
in BO far as they have to do with the ordering of
the scheme of industrial life, is of this strategic
character. The dispositions which they make are

1 The historj' of tbe farmation of anj one of the great [ndustriiil
ooalitions o( modem times will show how great and indispensable »
(Mtor Id tbe largo bUBine^B is the invention and organization of diffi-
culties deslpied to force rival enterprises to oorae to terms. E.g. the
mantBUvTGs preliminary to the Formation of the United States Steel
CorporatioD, particularly the movcmenU oC the Carnegie Company,
show how this works on a large scale. Cf. E. S. Meade, JVh*(
J/inanee, pp. 204-217 ; Beport o/ the Induttrinl Cninmi'iston, vol. Xlll.,
" Review of Evidence," pp. v-vii, with Iho testimony relating to
Uiis topic. The pressure which brings about a new atijiutincnt (coali-
tion) is commonly spoken of as " eKcessive compeliiion."



BUSINESS EHTEEPE18E



33



business transactions, " deals," as they are called
in the business jargon borrowed from gaming slang.
These do not always involve coercion of the oppos-
ing interests ; it is not always necessary to " put a
man in a hole " before he is willing to "come in
on" a "deal." It may often be that the several
parties whose business interests touch one another
will each see his interest in reaching an amicable
and speedy arrangement; but the interval that
elapses between the time when a given " deal " is
seen to be advantageous to one of the parties con-
cerned and the time when the terms are finally
arranged is commonly occupied with business mar
noeuvres on both or all sides, intended to " bring
the others to terms." In so playing for position
and endeavoring to secure the largest advantage
possible, the manager of such a campaign of reor-
ganization not infrequently aims to "freeze out"
a rival or to put a rival's industrial enterprise
under suspicion of insolvency and " unsound
methods," at the same time that he "puts up a
bluff " and manages his own concern with a view
to a transient effect on the opinions of the business
community. Where these endeavors occur, directed
to a transient derangement of a rival's business or
to a tran.slent, perhaps specious, exhibition of
industrial capacity and earning power on the part
of one's own concern, they are commonly detri-
mental to the industrial system at large ; they act



I
I



34 THE THEOKY OF BUSDTESS ENTERPRISE

temporarily to lower the aggregate eerviceability
of the comprehensive industrial process within
which their effects run, and to make the livelihood
and the peace of mind of those involved in these
industries more precarious than they would be in
the absence of such disturbances. If one is to
believe any appreciable proportion of what passea
current as information on this head, in print and
by word of mouth, business men whose work is not
simply routine constantly give some attention to
manoeuvring of this kind and to the discovery of
new opportunities for putting their competitors at
a disadvantage. This seems to apply in a peculiar
degree, if not chiefly, to those classes of business
men whose operations have to do with railways
and the class of securities called " industrials."
Taking the industrial process as a whole, it is safe
to say that at no time is it free from derangementa
of this character in any of the main branches of
modem industry. This chronic state of perturba-
tion is incident to the management of industry by
business methods and is unavoidable under exist-
iug conditions. So soon as the machine industry
had developed to large proportions, it became
unavoidable, in the nature of the case, that the
business men in whose hands lies the conduct of
affairs should play at cross-purposes and endeavor
to derange industry. But chronic perturbati
is so much a matter of course and prevails w



bation M
lith so J



BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE 35

rare interruptions, that, being the normal state of
aSaira, it does not attract particular notice.



I
I

I



In current discussion of business, indeed ever
since the relation of business men to the industrial
system has seriously engaged the attention of
economists, the point to which attention has chiefly
been directed is the business man's work as an
oi^anizer of comprehensive industrial processes.
During the later decades of the nineteenth century,
particularly, has much interest centred, as there
has been much provocation for its doing, on the
formation of large industrial consolidations; and
the evident good effects of this work in the way of
heightened serviceability and economies of produc-
tion are pointed to as the chief and characteristic
end of this work o£ reorganization. So obvious
are these good results and so well and widely has
the matter been expounded, theoretically, that it is
not only permissible, but it is a point of conscience,
to shorten this tale by passing over these good
effects as a matter of common notoriety. But there
are other features of the case, less obtrusiye and
less attractive to the theoreticians, which need more
detailedattention than they have coramonlyreceived.

The circumstances which condition the work of
consolidation in industry and which decide whether
a given move in the direction of a closer and wider
organization of industrial processes will be practi-



36 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

cable and will result in economies of production,
— these circumstances are of a mechanical nature.
They are facts of the comprehensive machine pro-
cess. The conditions favorable to industrial con-
solidation on these grounds are not created by the
business men. They are matters of " the state of
industrial arts," and are the outcome of the work
of those men who are engaged in the industrial
employments rather than of those who are occupied
with business affairs. The inventors, engineers,
experts, or whatever name be applied to the com-
prehensive class that does the intellectual work
involved in the modern machine industry, must
prepare the way for the man of pecuniary affairs
by making possible and putting in evidence the
economies and other advantages that will follow
from a prospective consolidation.

But it is not enough that the business man
should see a chance to effect economies of production
and to heighten the efficiency of industry by a new
combination. Conditions favorable to consolida-
tion on these grounds must he visible to him before
he can make the decisive business arrangements ;
but these conditions, taken by themselves, do not
move him. The motives of the business man are
J pecuniary motives, inducements in the way of
pecuniary gain to him or to the business enterprise

Lwitb which he is identified. The end of Ins h
7—i


BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



37



advantageous consolidation, but to effect it imder
such circumstances of ownership as will give him
control of large business forces or bring him the
largest possible gain. The ulterior end sought is
an increase of ownership, not industrial service-
abiUty. His aim is to contrive a consolidation in
which he will be at an advantage, and to effect it
on the terms most favorable to his own interest.

But it is not commonly evident at the outset
what are the most favorable terms that he can get
in his dealings with other business men whose
interests are touched by the proposed consolidation,
or who are ambitions to effect some similar con-
solidation of the same or of competing industrial
elements for their own profit. It rarely happens
that the interests of the business men whom the
prospective consolidation touches all converge to a
coalition on the same basis and under the same
Tnanagement. The consequence is negotiation and
delay. It commonly also happens that some of the
business men affected see their advantage in stav-
ing off the coalition until a time more propitioua
to their own interest, or until those who have the
work of consolidation in hand can be brought to
compound with them for the withdrawal of what-
ever obstruction they are able to offer.' Such a
coalition involves a loss of independent standing,

!?f., e.g., tlie ftccouiiiA of iLe formatian of the United Slates Steel
)niUoa or of tbe Sliipbutlding Compaay.


38 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESa ENTERPRISE

or even a loss of occupation, to many of the
business men interested in the deal. If a pros-
pective industrial consolidation is of such scope as
to require the concurrence or consent of many
business interests, among which no one is very
decidedly preponderant in pecuniary strength or in
strategic position, a long time will be consumed in
the negotiations and strategy necessary to define
the terms on which the several business interests
will consent to come in and the degree of solidarity
and central control to which they wUl submit.

It is notorious, beyond the need of specific cita^
tion, that the great business coalitions and indus-
trial combinations which have characterized the
situation of the last few years have commonly
been, the outcome of a long-drawn struggle, in
which the industrial ends, as contrasted with
business ends, have not been seriously considei:ed,
and in which great shrewdness and tenacity have
commonly been shown in the staving off of a set-
tlement for years in the hope of more advantageous
terms. The like is true as regards further coali-
tions, further consolidations of industrial processes
which have not been effected, but which are known
to be feasible and desirable so far as regards the
mechanical circumstances of the case. The difficul-
ties in the way are difficulties of ownership, of
L business interest, not of mechanical feasibility. _

These negotiations and much of the strategy ■



BUSIKESS ENTERPRISE 39

that leads up to a business consotidation are of
the nature of derangements of industry, after the
manner spoken of above. So that business inter-
ests and manoeuvres commonly delay consolida-
tions, combinations, correlations of the several
plants and processes, for some appreciable time
after such measures have become patently advis-
able on industrial grounds. In the meantime the
negotiators are working at cross-purposes and
endeavoring to put their rivals in as disadvan-
tageous a light as may be, with the result that
there is chronic derangement, duplication, and
misdirected growth of the industrial equipment
while the strategy is going forward, and expensive
maladjustment to be overcome when the negotia-
tions are brought to a close.'

Serviceability, industrial advisability, is not tlie
decisive point. The decisive point is business
expediency and business pressure. In the normal
course of business touching this matter of indus-
trial consolidation, therefore, the captain of indus-
try works against, as well as for, a new and more
efficient organization. He inhibits as well as fur^
thers the higher organization of industry.* Broadly,

> Wltneaa the rate wara and the dupllcatloiu of inetBclent tnck and
terminal equipmeot among the railnayH, and the aimtlar duplication a
In Ilie iron and steel Industry. The syatem at railway terminals in
Chicago, e.g., \a an illuminated object-lesson of syatematic ineptitude.

* The splendid reach of this inhibitory work of the captain of
Indostry, ae well as of bia aggressive work o( consolidation, is well
■faowtt, for instance, in the history and present position ot the railway



40 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

it may be said thai industrial consolidations and

the working an-angements made for the more

industry in Auierica. It is aad has for a long Urm of years been
obvious Ibat a very comprehensive uuification or consolidatiun, in
respect of llie inccliaiilcal work to be done by the railway system, is
eoiitienlly desirable and feasible, — consolidation of a scope not only
equalling, but far outreaching, the coalitions whioh hAVo lately beeo
cSucted or allempted. There is no hasard in Tenloring the assertion
that several hundreds of men who are engaged in the mechanical work
of railroading, in one capacity and another, are convenant with fea-
sible plans for economizing work sod improving the service by more
comprehensive and closer correlation of the work ; and it is equally
obvious that nothing but the divei^lng Interests of the busineaa men
concerned biudcrs these closer and larger feasible correlations from
being put into effect. It is easily within the mark to say that the
delay which railway consolidation has sufiered up to tlie present, from
business exigencies as distinct from tlie mechanical ciri:umBtJUices of
the case, amounts to an average of at least twenty years. Ever since
railroading began in this country there has been going od a process of
reluctant consolidation, in which the movements of the business man
In control have tardily followed up the opportunities for economy and
eiBcient service which the railroad industry has offered. And iJielT
latest and boldest acliievementsalong tills line, as seen from the stand-
point of mechanical advisability, have been foregone conclusions since
a dale so far in the past ss to be forgotten, and taken at their best
Ihey fall short lo-day by not less than some fifty per cent, of their
opportunities. Ct Report of the Indutlrial Commiision, vol. XIX.,
"Transportation," especially pp. 30i-318.

Like other competitive business, but more particularly such buai-
ness as has to do with the interstitial adjustment of the industrial
system, the business of railway consolidatioa is of the nature of a
gauic. In which the end sought by tlie players is their own pecuniary
gain and to which the Industrial serviceability of the outcome is inci-
dental only. Tliis is recognized by popular opinion and is made much
of by popular agitators, who take the view that when once the game
between the competing business interests has been played to a finish,
in the definitive coalition of Uie competitors under one management,
then the game will go on as a somewhat one-sided confiiet between the
resulting monopoly and the community at large.

So again, as a further lliustratioo, it Is and from the outset has
been evident that the iron-ore beds of northern Wisconsin, Michigan,
and Minnesota ought, industrially speaking, to have been worked as
collective enterprise, Thcra are also none but btisiuDss reasons


J


BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

economical utilization oi resources and mechanical
contrivances are allowed to go into effect only
after they are long overdue.

In current economic theory the business man is
spoken of under the name of " entrepreneur " or
'* undertaker," and his function is held to be the
coordinating of industrial processes with a view to
economics of production and heightened service-
ability. The soundness of this view need not be
questioned. It has a great sentimental value and is
useful in many ways. There is also a modicum of
truth in it as an account of facts. In common with
other men, the business man is moved by ideals of
serviceability and an aspiration to make the way of
life easier for his fellows. Like other men, he has
something of the instinct of workmanship. No doubt
such aspirations move the great business man less
urgently than many others, who are, on that account,
less successful in business affairs. Motives of this
kind detract from business efficiency, and an undue
yielding to them on the part of business men is to be
deprecated as an infirmity. Still, throughout men's

wh; practically all the ore becta and iron and Bteel norka in the coun-
try are not worked as one collective onterpriae. It 1b equally evident
that aoch correlations of work as are permtiied by the busiiieas coali-
tions already effecwd in tbis field have resulted in a great economy o(
production, and that the failure to carry these coalitions farther meani
an annual wimt^ running up into the millions. Both Uie economies so
effected and the nasl« so incurred are to be set down to the account
of tba buslneas manageis who have gone so far and have failed to go
farther. The like is obvious as regards many other branches of
Industry and gwups of industries.



42 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

dealings with one another and with the interests of
the community there runs a sense of equity, fair deal-
ing, and workmanlike integrity ; and in an uncertain
degree this bent discountenances gain that is got at
an undue cost to others, or without rendering some
colorable equivalent. Business men are also, in a
measure, guided by the ambition to effect a credit-
able improvement in the industrial processes which
their business traffic touches. These sentimental
factors in business exercise something of a con-
straint, varying greatly from one person to another,
but not measurable in its aggregate results. The
careers of most of the illustrious business men
show the presence of some salutary constraint of
this kind. Not infrequently an excessive sensi-
tiveness of this kind leads to a withdrawal from
business, or from certain forms of business which
may appeal to a vivid fancy as peculiarly dishonest
or peculiarly detrimental to the community.' Such

> niustrative iDsUnces will readtty iuggeat themselves. Mnny &
lnulneaa mui turns bj preference to someUUng less dubious tbtiD the
dUtllUng ot whiskey or the sale of deleterious houseboid remedies.
They prefer not to use deleterious nduiterants, eTen within the limits
of the law. They will nther use wool than shoddy at the same price.
The ofGciala of a railway commonly prefer to avoid wrecks and man-
slaughter, even if there is no pecuniary advantage In choosing the
■se. More than that, it will be found true that the
prosperous of the craft, especially, talce pride and pains to
make the service of their roads or the output of their mills as efficient,
not limply as the pecuniary advantage of the concern demands, but
as the best pecuniary results will admit. Instances are perhapa not
freqoent, but they are also not altogether exceptional, where a proe-
peroiu captain of industiy will go out of his way to heighten the


J


I
I
I



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

grounda oE action, and perhaps others equally
genial and equally unbusinesslike, would probably
be discovered by a detailed scrutiny of any large
business deal. Probably in many cases the business
strategist, infected with this human infirmity,
reaches an agreement with his rivals and his
neighbors in the industrial system without exact-
ing the last concession that a ruthless business
strategy might entitle him to. The result is,
probably, a speedier conclusion and a smoother
working of the large coalitions than would
follow from the unmitigated sway of business
principles.*

But the sentiment which in this way acta in
constraint of business traffic proceeds on such
grounds of equity and fair dealing as are afforded
by current business ethics ; it acts within the
range of business priociplea, not in contravention
of them ; it acts as a conventional resti-aint upon
pecuniary advantage, not in abrogation of it.
This code of business ethics consists, after all,
of mitigations of the maxim, Caveat emptor. It
touches primarily the dealings of man with man,

lerriceabllliy of hU todustry even W a degree thai l9 of doubtful
pecuDiory expedienc; for himBelf, Such abeiratlong axe, of course,
noL large ; and if they are peraigled In to any very appreciable extent
tbe reffiitt is, of course, disastroui to tbe enterprise. Tbe ealerprise
in such a case falls out of the category of business maoBgement and
falls under the imputation of philautbropy.

■ Tbe captains of the first class necessarily are relatirely exempt
from theoe unbusinesslike scruples.


44 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

and only less directly and less searchingly incul-
cates temperance and circumspection as regards
the ulterior interests of the community at large.
Where this moral need of a balance between the
services rendered the community and the gain
derived from a given busmess transaction asserts
itself at all, the balance is commonly sought to
be maintained in some sort of pecuniary terms;
but pecuniary terms afford only a very inadequate
measure of serviceability to the community.

Great and many are the items of service to be
set down to the business man's account in connec-
tion with the organization of the industrial system,
but when all is said, it is still to be kept in mind
that his work in the correlation of industrial pro-
cesses is chiefly of a permissive kind. His fmther-
ance of industry ia at the second remove, and is
chiefly of a negative character. In his capacity
as business man he does not go creatively into the
work of perfecting mechanical processes and turn-
ing the means at liand to new or larger uses. That
is the work of the men who have in hand the
devising and oversight of mechanical processes.
The men in industry must first create the mechani-
cal possibility of such new and more efficient
methods and correlations, before the business man
sees the chance, makes the necessary business
arrangements, and gives general directions that
the contemplated industrial advance shall go into



J


BUSINESS ENTERPKISE

effect. The period between the time of earliest
practicability and the effectual completion of a
given consolidation in industry marks the interval
by which the business man retards the advance
of industry. Against this are to be offset the cases,
comparatively slight and infrequent, wliere the
busineas men in control push the advance of
industry into new fields and prompt the men con-
cerned with the mechanics of the case to experi-
ment and exploration in new fields of mechanical
process.

When the recital is made, therefore, of how the
large consoHdations take place at the initiative
of the business men who are in control, it should
be added that the fact of their being in control
precludes industrial correlations from taking
place except by their advice and consent. The
industrial system is organized on business prin-
ciples and for pecuniary ends. The business man
is at the centre ; he holds the discretion and he
exercises it freely, and his choice falls out now
on one side, now on the other. The retardation
as well as the advance is to be set down to his
account.

As regards the economies in cost of production
effected by these consolidations, there is a fur-
ther characteristic feature to be noted, a feature
of some significance for any theory of modern
business. In great measure the saving effected



I



46 THE THEORY OF BCSDIESS ENTEEPKISE



i



ia a saving of the costs of business management
and of the competitive costs of marketing products
and services, rather than a saving in the prime
costs of production. The heightened facility and
efficiency of the new and larger business combina-
tions primarily affect the expenses of office work
and sales, and it is in great part only indirectly
that this curtailment and consolidation of business
management has an effect upon the methods and
aims of industry proper. It touches the pecuniary
processes immediately, and the mechanical pro-
cesses indirectly and in an uncertain degree. It is
of the nature of a partial neutralization of tlie
wastes due to the presence of pecuniary motives
and business management, — for the business man-
agement involves waste wherever a greater number
of men or transactions are involved than are
necessary to the effective direction of the mechani-
cal processes employed. The amount of " business "
that has to be transacted per unit of product is
much greater where the various related industrial
processes are managed in severalty than where
several of them are brought under one business
management. A pecuniary discretion has to be
exercised at every point of contact or transition,
where the process or its product touches or passes
the boundary between different spheres of owner-
ship. Business transactions have to do with
ownership and changes of ownership. The greatei



with ■

reater I



^ t.tlO T«



BnSIHESS ENTEBPKISE



47



I



the parcelment in point of ownership, the greater
the amount of business work that has to be done
in connection with a given output of goods or
services, and the slower, less facile, and less ac-
curate, on the whole, is the work. This applies
both to the work of bargain and contract, wherein
pecuniary initiative and discretion are chiefly ex-
ercised, and to the routine work of accounting,
and of gathering and applying information and
misinfonnation.

The standardization of industrial processes, prod-
ucts, services, and consumers, spoken of in an
earlier chapter, very materially facilitates the
business man's work in reorganizing business
enterprises on a larger scale ; particularly does
this standardization serve his ends by permitting
a uniform routine in accounting, invoices, con-
tracts, etc., and so admitting a large central ac-
counting system, with homogeneous ramifications,
such as will give a competent conspectus of the
pecuniary situation of the enterprise at any given
time.

The great, at the present stage of development
perhaps the greatest, opportunity for saving by
consolidation, in the common run of cases, is
afforded by the ubiquitous and in a sense excessive
presence of business enterprise in the economic
system. It is in doing away with unnecessary
business transactions and industrially futile ma-



48 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE


nceuvring on the part of independent firms that
the promoter of combinations finds his most tell-
ing opportunity. So that it is scarcely an over-
statement to say that probably the largest, assuredly
the securest and most unquestionable, service ren-
dered by the great modern captains of industry
is this curtailment of the business to be done, —
this sweeping retirement of business men as a
class from the service and the definitive canccl-
ment of opportunities for private enterprise.

So long as related industrial units are imder
different business managements, they are, by the
nature of the case, at cros.g-piirposes, and business
consolidation remedies this untoward feature of
the industrial system by eliminating the pecun-
iary element from the interstices of the system
as far as may be. The interstitial adjustments
of the industrial system at large are in this way
withdrawn from the discretion of rival business
men, and the work of pecimiary management pre-
viously involved is in large part dispensed with,
with the result that there is a saving of work
and an avoidance of that systematic mutual hin-
drance that characterizes the competitive manage-
ment of industry. To the community at large
the work of pecuniary management, it appears,
is less serviceable the more there is of it. The
heroic rSle of the captain of industry is that of
a deliverer from an excess of business manage-



J



' BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 49

mcnt. It is a casting out of business men by
the chief of business men.'

The theory of business enterprise sketched above
applies to such business as is occupied with the
interstitial adjustments of the system of industries.
This work of keeping and of disturbing the inter-
stitial adjustments does not look immediately to
the output of goods as its source of gain, but to
the alterations o£ values involved in disturbances
of the balance, and to the achievement of a more
favorable business situation for some of the enter-
prises engaged. This work lies iu the middle,
between commercial enterprise proper, on the one
hand, and industrial enterprise in the stricter
sense, on the other hand. It is directed to the
acquisition of gain through taking advantage of
those conjunctures of business that arise out of the
concatenation of processes in the industrial system.

In a similar manner commercial business may
be said to be occupied with conjunctures that
arise out of the circumstances of the industrial
system at large, but not originating in the mechan-
ical exigencies of the industrial processes. The
conjunctures of commercial business proper are
in the main fortuitous, in so far that they are

' See Beporl nf tht liidiiilri'it CommUsion, toI. I., Testimony of
J. W. Galea, pp. I021K1038 ; S. Dodd, pp. 1040-1060 ; N. B. Rogers, p.
1068 i vol. Xin., C. M. Schwab, pp. 451, *60 ; H. B, BuUcr, p. 400 ;
L. R, Hopkins, pp. 34Q, 347 ; A. 8. White, pp, 2M, 356.



I


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

commonly not initiated by the business men en-
gaged in these commercial pursuits. Commercial
business, simply as such, does not aim to guide
the course of industry.

On the other hand, the large business enter-
prise spoken of above initiates changes in indus-
trial organization and seeks ita gain in large part
through such alterations of value levels as take
place on its own initiative. These alterations of
the value levels, of course, have their effect upon
the output of goods and upon the material wel-
fare of the community ; but the effect which they
have in this way is only incidental to the quest of
profits.

But apart from this remoter and larger guidance
of the course of industry, the business men also,
and more persistently and pervasively, exercise
a guidance over the course of industry in detail.
The production of goods and services is carried
on for gain, and the output of goods is controlled
by busmess men with a view to gain. Commonly,
in ordinary routine business, the gains come
from this output of goods and services. By the
sale of the output the business man in industry
" realizes " his gains. To " realize " means to
convert salable goods into money values. The
sale is the last step in the process and the end
of the business man's endeavor.' When he has

' CI. Mari, Kapilal, bk. I. pt. IL



BUSINESS ENTERPKISE



disposed of the output, and so has converted his
holdings of consumable articles into money values,
his gains are as nearly secure and definitive as the
circumstances of modem life admit. It is in
terms of price that he keeps his accounts, and in
the same terms he computes his output of prod-
ucts. The vital point of production with him
is the vendibility of the output, its convertibility
into money values, not its serviceability for the
needs o£ mankind. A modicum of serviceability,
for some purpose or other, the output must have
if it is to be salable. But it does not follow
that the highest serviceability gives the largest
gains to the business man in terms of money, nor
does it follow that the output need in all cases
have other than a factitious serviceability. There
is, on the one hand, such a possibility as over^
stocking the market with any given line of goods,
to the detriment of the business man concerned,
but not necessarily to the immediate disadvan-
tage of the body of consumera. And there are,
on the other hand, certain lines of industry, such
as many advertising enterprises, the output of
which may be highly effective for its purpose
but of quite equivocal use to the community.
Many well-known and prosperous enterprises which
advertise and sell patent medicines and other
proprietary articles might be cited in proof.
In the older days, when handicraft was the rule



I



52 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



of the industrial system, the personal contact be-
tween the producer and his customer was some-
what close and lasting. Under these circumstances
the factor of personal esteem and disestecm had a
considerable play m controlling the purveyors of
goods and services. This factor of personal con-
tact counted in two divergent ways; (1) producers
were careful of their reputation for workmanship,
even apart from the gains which such a reputation
might bring; and (2) a degree of irritation and ill-
will would arise in many cases, leading to petty
trade quarrels and discriminations on other gi'ounds
than the gains to be got, at the same time that the
detail character of dealings between producer and
consumer admitted a degree of petty knavery and
huckstering that is no longer practicable in the
airrent large-scale business dealings. Of these two
divergent effects resulting from close personal re-
lations between producer and consumer the former
seems on the whole to have been of preponderant
consequence. Under the system of handicraft and
neighborhood industry, the adage that " Honesty is
the best policy" seems on the whole to have been
accepted and to have been true. This adage has
come down from the days before the machine's
regime and before modem business enterprise.

Under modern circumstances, where industry is
carried on on a large scale, the discretionary head
of an industrial enterprise is commonly removed


I



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

from all personal contact with the body of cus-
tomers for whom the industrial process under his
control purveys goods or services. The mitigating
effect which personal contact may have in dealings
between man and man is therefore in great meas-
ure eliminated. The whole takes on something of
an impersonal character. One can with an easier
conscience and with less of a sense of meanness
take advantage of the necessities of people whom
one knows of only as an indiscriminate aggregate
of consumers. Particularly is this true when, as
frequently happens in the modern situation, this
body of consumers belongs in the main to another,
inferior class, so that personal contact and cogni-
zance of them is not only not contemplated, but is
in a sense impossible. Equity, in excess of the
formal modicxmi specified by law, does not bo
readily assert its claims where the relations between
the parties are remote and impersonal as where
one is dealing with one's necessitous neighbors who
live on the same social plane. Under these cir-
cumstances the adage cited above loses much of its
axiomatic force. Business management has a
chance to proceed on a temperate and sagacious

I calculation of profit and loss, untroubled by senti-
mental considerations of human kindness or irrltar
tion or of honesty.
The broad principle which guides producers and
merchants, large and small, in fixing the prices at



I



M THK THTOKT OT BTSESXSS ESTEBPBISB



bwhat 18

koovm a tiie lupnge of tlie mOroads ms '^ dung-
ing wkal the teiffie will benr.** ^ Wliefe a given
cnlctprae kis a strict monc^pohr of the soffpty ol a
grreftaitide or of a given dasof aoriees this prin-
^lie ifipfies in the unqualified fonn in which it has
been undwstood among those who discuss railway
diaiges. Bat where the monopoly is less strict^
where there are competitors^ there the competition
that has to be met is one of the factors to be taken
accomit of in determining what the traffic wiU bear;
competition may eTon become the most serious &ctor
in the case if the enterjnse in question has litUe or
none of the charactv of a monopoly. But it is
Teiy doubtful if there are any successful business
venture within the range of the modem industries
from which the monopoly element is wholly absent.'
They are, at any rate^ few and not of great magni-
tude. And the endeavor of all such enterprises that
look to a permanent continuance of their business
is to establish as much of a monopoly as may be.

1 The eoonomio principle of ** cbArging what the tnffio will bear**
is diflciuBed with great care and elaboration by R. T. Ely, Monopoiift
and Truits^ ch. IIL, **The Law of Monopoly Price.** Cf^ for illus-
tration of the practical working of this principle, testimony of 0. M.
Schwab, Separt of the Industrial Commission, toL XIII. pp. 463-455.

t «i Monopoly ** is here used in that looser sense which it has col-
loqaially, not in the strict sense of an exclusive control of the supply,
af employed, e.g., by Mr. Ely in the volume cited above. This usage
h the mow excusable shice Mr. Ely finds that a "monopoly** in the

lot tenia of the definition practically does not occur in fact Cf.

itai Jh$ Trust Problem, ch. IV.



BUSINESS ENTEEPKISE



55



Such a monopoly position may be a legally estib-
lished one, or one due to location or the control of
natural resources, or it may be a monopoly of a
less definite character resting on custom and
prestige (good-will). This latter class of monopolieB
are not commonly classed as 6uch ; although in
character and degree the advantage which they
give is very much the same as that due to a differ-
ential advantage in location or in the command of
resources. The end sought by the systematic
advertising of the larger business concerns is such
a monopoly of custom and prestige. This form of
monopoly is sometimes of great value, and is fre-
quently sold under the name of good-will, trade-
marks, brands, etc. Instances are known where
such monopolies of custom, prestige, prejudice, have
been sold at prices running up into the millions.'

The great end of consistent advertising is to
establish such differential monopolies resting on
popular conviction. And the advertiser is success-
ful in this endeavor to establish a profitable
popular conviction, somewhat in proportion as he
correctly apprehends the manner in which a popu-
lar conviction on any given topic is built up." The

' E.g. the prestige value of Ivory Soap.

*Cl. W. D. Scott, The Thtory of AdvertUins ; 3. L. Mahin, The
Cimmenial Vnlvr. of Advrrtiging. pp. 4-8, 12-13, 16 ; E. Fugg-Meade,
" 'I'he Pla«e of Advenislag in Modem Busineefl," Jaumal of Folicieal
Bconomg, March 1901 ; Rombart, vol. II. oh, XX.-XXI,; 0. Tardo,
Pt^rhotoglt EcMioniique, vol. 1. pp. 187-100. The writing and do-
sigiiiug of advertiBeuieuu (letterprcos, display, and illiutrailons) liae


56 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

co3t, as well as the pecuniary value and the mag-
nitude, of this organized fabrication of popular

gronn into a distinct calling ; bo that Ibe work of a ekilled writer ot
MlTertisements comparea not unfavorably, in poiiit of lucratlveuees,
wltli tliat of Ihe STowed writers of popular llction.

Tlie psychological principles o( advertising may be formulated
somewhat as follows -. A declaration of fact, made in the form and with
the IncideiiUi of taal« and expression to which a person la occuatomed,
will be acctpled aa authentic and will be acted upon if occasion orUes,
in BO far as it does not conflict with opinions already accepted. The
acceptance of an opinion seems to be almost entirely a passive matter.
The prcsuinplion remains in favor of an opiuiun that has once beeu
accepted, atid an appreciable burden of proof falls ou the negative.
A competent formulation of opiniou on a giveo point is the chief
factor in gaining aUhercnta to that opinion, and a reiteration of the
ataleniout is the cliict factor in carrying conviction. The truth ol
such a formulation is a matter of secondary consequence, but a wide
and patent departure from known fact generally weakens lia per-
Buaaive effecL The aim ol the advertiser is to arreat attention and
then present hia statement In such a manner tliat It is easily assimi-
lated lulio tlio habita of thought of the person whose conviction Is to
be influenced. When this is effectually done a reversal of the con-
viction so established ia a matter of considerable diificult;. The
tenacity of a view once accepted in this way is evidenced, fur instance,
by the endless number and variety of testimonials to the meriw of well-
advertised but notoriously worthless household remedies and the like.

So acute an observer aa Mr. Sombnrt la BtlU able to hold the
opinion tliAt " aut Schwindel ist dauemd nocb nie ein Untemehmen
bcgrUndet worden" {Kapitalismua, vol. II. p. 370). Mr. Sombart
has not mnde acjualntance with the adventures of Elijah the R»
■torer, nor is be conversant with American patent-medicine enter-
prise. With Mr. 8onibart's view may be contrasted that of Mr.
Ii. F. Ward, an obsciver of equally large outlook and acumen : —

" The law of mind aa it operates In society aa an aid to competi-
tion and in the interest of the Individual is essentially immoral. It
rests primarily on the principle of deception. It is an extension to
other human beluga of the method applied to the animal world by
which the Utter was subjected to man. This method was that of the
ambush and the snare. Its mling principle wna cunning. Its object
WM to deceive, circumvent, ensnare, and capture. Low animal cun-
ning was succeeded by more refined kinds ot cunning. The more
Important of these go by the names of buslncsa shrewdness, strategy.



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



convictions is indicated by such statements as that
the proprietors of a certain well-known household
remedy, reputed among medical authorities to be
of entirely dubious value, have for a series of
years found their profits in spending several mill-
ion dollars annually in advertisements. This case is
by no means unique.

It haa been said,^ no doubt in good faith and
certainly with some reason, that advertising as
currently carried on gives the body of consumers
valuable information and guidance as to the ways
and means whereby their wants can be satisfied
and their purchasing power can be best utilized.
To the extent to which this holds true, advertising
is a service to the community. But there is a
large reservation to be made on this head. Adver-
tising is competitive ; the greater part of it aims
to divert purchases, etc., from one channel to
another channel of the same general class.* And
to the extent to which the efforts of advertising in
all its branches are spent on this competitive
disturbance of trade, they are, on the whole, of

Knil diplomacy, none of nliEcJi differ Irom ordinary cunning In any-
tblng but tlie degree of adroitnesa by whicb tbe victim Is oatwiiied.
lu tbia way social life is completely honpyconibed vrllh deception." —
"The raycliolnglc Biusis of Social Economics," Anu. of Am, Acad.,
Tol. III. pp. 83-81 [475-470].

'Fo^-Mcade, "I'luce of Adverlising In Modem BuainoaB," pp.
318, 224-330.

'Adroniaing and otbcr like eipedieiits for Ibe sale of goods aim at
cliangcain tbe"autiatilution values" ottbe goods in question, not al sn
enbauceueut of ihe aggregaXe uiUilies of tbe available output of goods.



I



68 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPKISE

■' slight if any immediate service to the community.
Such advertising, however, is indispensable to
most branches of modern industry; but the ne-
cessity of most of the advertising is not due to its
serving the needs of the community nor to any
aggregate advantage accruing to the concerns
whicli advertise, but to the fact that a business
concern which falls short in advertising fails to
get its share of trade. Each concern must adver-
tise, chiefly because the others do. The aggregate
expenditure that could advantageously be put into
advertising in the absence of competition would
undoubtedly be but an inconsiderable fraction of
wliat is actually incurred, and necessarily incurred
under existing circumstances.'

Not all advertising is wholly competitive, or at
least it is not always obviously so. In proportion
as an enterprise has secured a monopoly position,
its advertising loses the air of competitive selling
and takes on the character of information designed
to increase the use of its output independently.
But such an increase implies a redistribution of
consumption on the part of the customers." So
that the clement of competitive selling is after
all not absent in these cases, but takes the form
of competition between different classes of wares

'Cf. Jenka, The Truit Frobletn, pp. 21-26 ; BepoHo/ the Industrial
Commluion, vol. XIX. pp. 611-612.

»Ct Bohn-Bftwerk, Funtive Theory of Capital, bk. III., ch. V.,
TII.-IX., on llie value ol altemaUve and complemenl&ry goods.



BUSINESS EKTERPRISE



59



instead of competitive selling of different brands of
the same class of wares.

Attention is here called to this matter of adver-
tising and the necessity of it in modem competitive
business for the light which it throws on " cost of
production " in the modem system, where the pro-
cess of production is under the control of business
men and is carried on for business ends. Com-
petitive advertising is an unavoidable item in the
aggregate costs of industry. It does not add to
the serviceability of the output, except it be inci-
dentally and unintentionally. What it aims at is
the Bale of the output, and it is for this purpose
that it is useful. It gives vendibility, which is
useful to the seller, but has no utility to the last
buyer. Its ubiquitous presence in the coats of any
business enterprise that has to do with the produc-
tion of goods for the market enforces the statement
that the "cost of production" of commodities
under the modern business system is cost incurred
with a view to vendibility, not with a view to ser-
viceability of the goods for human use.

There is, of course, much else that goes into the
cost of competitive selling, besides the expenses of
advertising, although advertising may be the
largest and most unequivocal item to be set down
to that account. A great part of the work done
by merchants and their staff of employees, both
wholesale and retail, as well as by sales-agents not



J


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

exclusively connected with any one mercantile
house, belongs under the same head. Just how-
large a share of the costs of the distribution of
goods fairly belongs under the rubric of competi-
tive selling can of course not be made out. It is
largest, on the whole, iu the case of consumable
goods marketed in finished form for the consumer,
but there is more or less of it throughout. The
goods turned out on a large scale by the modern
industrial processes, on the whole, carry a larger
portion of such competitive costs than the goods
still produced by the old-fashioned detail methods
of handicraft and household industry ; although
this distinction does not hold hard and fast. In
some extreme cases the cost of competitive selling
may amount to more than ninety per cent, of the
total cost of the goods when they reach the con-
sumer. In other lines of business, commonly
occupied with the production of staple goods, this
constituent of cost may perhaps fall below ten per
cent, of the total. Where the average, for the
price of finished goods delivered to the consumers,
may lie would be a hazardous guess.'

It is evident that the gains which accrue from

this business of competitive selling and buying bear

' Where corapetUive selling makei up a Urge proporiion of the
Bg^regnte final cost of tlie marketed product, Ihia fact U likely to show
ItseU In an ezoeptlonally large propurtiun uf good-will In the caplLall-
ntUoii ol the concerns engaged in the given line of biwinesa ; aa, e.g.,
Ihe American Chicle Company.



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



nO determinable relation to the services which the
work in question may render the community. If a
comparison may be hazarded between two unknown
and indeterminate quantities, it may perhaps be
said that the gains from competitive selling bear
something more o£ a stable relation to the service
rendered than do the gains derived from specula-
tive transactions or from the financiering opera-
tions of the great captains of industry. It seema
at least safe to say that the converse will not hold
true. Gains and services seem more widely out of
touch in the case of the large-scale financiering
work. Not that the work of the large business
men in reorganizing and consolidating the indus-
trial process is of slight consequence ; but as a
general proposition, the amount of the business
man's gains from any given transaction of this
latter class bear no traceable relation to any bene-
fit which the community may derive from the
transaction.'

As to the wages paid to the men engaged in the
routine of competitive selling, as salesmen, buyers,
accountants, and the like, — much the same holds
true of them as of the income of the business men
who carry on the business on their own initiative.

1 Cf. EJ. nahD, me WirUchafl dcr WM am Avagany del XIX. Jahr-
hMndtrli. — " In anserem beutlgen WirtachafUleben Ut der Gcirinn
dnrch den Zumuhs der Froduktion, mit dcin frUhere JahrhunderU
nchneten, ganz und gar KnrUckgedrans't '^^ i^t UDneseotlicb gcwor-



I



62 THE THEORY OP BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

Their employers pay the wages of these persons,
not because their work is productive of benefit to
the community, but because it brings a gain to the
employers. The point to which the work is directed
is profitable sales, and the wages are in some pro-
portion to the efficiency of this work as counted in
terms of heightened vendibility.

The like holds true for the work and pay of the
force of workmen engaged in the industrial pro-
cesses under business management. It holds, in a
measure, of all modern industry that produces for
the market, but it holds true, in an eminent de-
gree, of those lines of industry that are more fully
under the guidance of modem business methods.
These are most closely in touch with the market
and are most consistently guided by considerations
of vendibility. They are also, on the whole, more
commonly carried on by hired labor, and the wages
paid are competitively adjusted on grounds of the
vendibility of the product. The brute serviceability
of the output of these industries may be a large
factor in its vendibility, perhaps the largest factor ;
but the fact remains that the end sought by the
business men in control is a profitable sale, and
the wages are paid as a means to that end, not
to the end that the way of life may be smoother
for the ultimate consumer of the goods produced.'

> It might, tbererore, be feasible to set up a tbeory to Uie effect
that *n>ges are competitiTel; proportioned to the vendibility of Uie



BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



The outcome of this recital, then, is that wher-
ever and in bo far as business ends and methods
dominate modern industry the relation between
the usefukiesa of the work (for other purposes than
pecuniary gain) and the remuneration of it ia
remote and uncertain to such a degree that no
attempt at formulating such a relation is worth
while. This ia eminently and obviously true of
the work and gains of business men, in whatever
lines of business they are engaged. This follows
as a necessary consequence of the nature of busi-
ness management.

Work that ia, on the whole, useless or detrimental
to the community at large may be as gainful to
the business man and to the workmen whom he
employs as work that contributes substantially to
the aggregate livelihood. This seems to be pecul-
iarly true of the bolder flights of business enter-
prise. In so far as its results are not detrimental
to human life at large, such unproductive work
directed to securing an income may seem to be

product ; but tbere is no cogent ground for saying that the wages in
any departmeut of induBtiy, nnder a buainess regime, are propor-
tioned to Uie ntilit; which the output has to any one else than the
employer nho sells it. When it is further taken into accouut itiat
the vendibility of the product In very many lines of production d«.
pends chiefly on the wastefulness of the goods (ct. Theory 0/ the
Leiture Clau, ch. V.), the dlTergence between the aaefiilneBs of the
work And tbe wages paid for It seems wide enough to throw the
whole question of an equivalence between work and pay out of theo-
reUcal consideratinn. Cf., however, Clark, The Distribution p/ Wealth,
especially ch. VII. and XXII.



J



64 THE THEOKY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

an idle matter in which the rest of the community
has no substantial interests. Such is not the case.
In 80 far as the gains of these unproductive occu-
pations are of a substantial character, they come
out of the aggregate product of the other occupa-
tions in which the various classes of the commu-
nity engage. The aggregate profits of the business,
whatever its character, are drawn from tlie aggre-
gate output of goods and services ; and whatever
goes to the maintenance of the profits of those
who contribute nothing substantial to the output
is, of course, deducted from the income of the
others, whose work tells substantially.

There are, therefore, limits to the growth of the
, industrially parasitic lines of business just spoken
of. A disproportionate growth of parasitic indus-
tries, such as most advertising and much of the
other efforts that go into competitive selling, as
well as warlike expenditure and other industries
directed to turning out goods for conspicuously
wasteful consumption, would lower the effective
vitality of the community to such a degree as to
jeopardize its chances of advance or even its life.
The limits which the circumstances of life impose
in this respect are of a selective character, in the last
resort. A persistent excess of parasitic and waste-
ful efforts over productive industry must bring on
a decline. But owing to the very high productive
efficiency of the modern mechanical industry, the



J


BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

margin available for waatefiil occupations and
wasteful expenditures is very great. The require-
ments of the aggregate livelihood are so far short
of the possible output of goods by modem methods
as to leave a very wide margin for waste and para-
sitic income. So that instances of such a decline,
due to industrial exhaustion, drawn from the his-
tory of any earlier phase of economic life, carry
no well-defined lesson as to what a modem indus-
trial community may allow itself in this respect.
While it is in the nature of things unavoidable
that the management of industry by modem busi-
ness methods should involve a large misdirection
of effort and a very large waste of goods and ser-
vices, it is also true that the aims and ideals to
which this manner of economic life gives effect
act forcibly to offset all this incidental futility.
These pecuniary aims and ideals have a very great
effect, for instance, in making men work hard and
unremittingly, so that on this ground alone the
business system probably compensates for any
wastes involved in its working. There seems,
therefore, to be no tenable ground for thinking
that the working of the modern business system
involves a curtailment of the community's liveli-
hood. It makes up for its wastefulness by the
added strain which it throws upon those engaged
in the productive work.


CHAPTER IV



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES



The physical basis of modem business traffic is
the machine proceaa, as described in Chapter II.
It is essentially a modern fact, — late and yet in
its early stages of growth, especially as regards its
wider sweep in the organization of the industrial
system. The spiritual ground of buainesa enter-
prise, on the other hand, is given by the institution
of ownership. "Business principles" are corolla-
ries under the main proposition of ownership ; they
are principles of property, — pecuniary principles.
These principles are of older date than the machine
industry, although their full development belongs
within the machine era. As the machine process
I conditions the growth and scope of industry, and
'^as its discipline inculcates habits of thought suit-
fl,ble to the industrial technology, so the exigencies
pf ownership condition the growth and aims of
business, and the discipline of ownership and its
■nanagement inculcates views and principles (habits
pt thought) suitable to the work of business traffic.
^ The discipline of the machine process enforces a
Btandardization of conduct and of knowledge in


BUSIHESS PRWCIPLEB



67



L



terms of quantitative precision, and inculcates a
habit of apprehending and explaining facts ia
terms of mat erial cause and effect. It involves a
valuation of facts, things, relations, and even/
personal capacity, in terms of force. Its meta^
physics is materialism and its point of view is thali
of causal sequence.' Such a habit of mind con-
duces to industrial efficiency, and the wide preva-
lence of such a habit is indispensable to a high
degree of industrial efficiency under modem con-
ditions. This habit of mind prevails most widely
and with least faltering in those communities that
have achieved great things in the machine industry,
being both a cause and an effect of the machine
process.

Other norms of standardization, more or lesa
alien to this one, and other grounds for the valua-
tion of facts, have prevailed elsewhere, as well as
in the earlier phases of the Western culture.
Much of this older standardization still stands
over, in varying degrees of vigor or decay, in that
current scheme of knowledge and conduct that
now characterizes the Western culture. Many of
these ancient norms of thought which have come
down from the discipline of remote and relatively
primitive phases of the cultural past are still
strong in the affections of men, although most of
them have lost greatly in their power of constraint.

1 See ch. IX.



1



68 THE THEORY OF BUSIHESS ENTERPRISE

They no longer bind men's convictions as they
once did. They are losing their axiomatic
character. They are no longer self-evident or
self-legitimating to modem common sense, as they
once were to the common sense of an earlier time.
, These ancient norms differ from the modern
J norms given by the machine in that they rest on
1 conventional, ultimately sentimental gromids; they
Sare of a putative nature. Such are, e.g., the
principles of (primitive) blood relationship, clan
solidarity, paternal descent, Levitical cleanness,
divine guidance, allegiance, nationality. In their
time and under the circumstances which favored
their growth these were, all and several, powerful
factors m controlling human conduct and shaping
the course of events. In their time each of these
institutional norms served as a definitive ground
of authentication for such facts as fell under its
particidar scope, and the scope of each was very
wide in the day of its best vigor. As time has
brought change of circumstances, the facts of life
have gradually escaped from the constraint of
these ancient principles ; so that the dominion
which tliey now holdover the life of civilized men
is relatively slight and shifty.

It is among these transmitted institutional
habits of thought that the ownership of property
belongs. It rests on the like general basis of use
and wont. The binding relation of property to ita



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES



^1



owner ia of a conventional, putative character.
But while these other conventional norms cited
above are in their decline, this younger one of the
inherited institutions stands forth without apology
and shows no apprehension of being crowded into
the background of sentimental reminiscence.

In absolute terms the institution of ownership
is ancient, no doubt ; but it is young compared with
blood-relationship, the state, or the immortal gods.
Especially is it tnie that its fuller development is
relatively late. Not until a comparatively late date
in West European history has ownership come to be
emancipated from all restrictions of a non-pecun-
iary character and to stand m a wholly impersonal
position, without admixture of personal responsi-
bility or class prerogative.' Freedom and inviolav (^Tt/i^i^
bility of contract has not until recently been the\
imbroken rule. Indeed, it has not even yet been i-
accepted without qualification and extended to all
items owned. There still are impediments in the
way of certain transfers and certain contracts, and
there are exemptions in favor of property held by
certain privileged persons, and especially by certain
sacred corporations. This applies particularly to
the more backward peoples; but nowhere is the
"cash nexus" free from all admixture of alien
elements. Ownership is not all-pervading and all-



' Cf.. e.g., E. Jenks, L-iw and FolUiet in the Middle Age*, ch. VI.
and VII.



I



70 THE IHEOBy OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



I



dominaDt, but it pervades and dominates the
affairs of civilized peoples more freely and widely
than any other single ground of action, and more
than it has ever done before. The range and
number of relations and duties that are habitually
disposed of on a pecuniary footing are greater
than in the past, and a pecuniary settlement is
final to a degree unknown in the past. The
pecimiary norm has invaded the domain of the
older institutions, such as blood-relationship,
citizenship, or the church, so that obligations be-
longing under the one or the other of these may
now be assessed and fulfilled in terms of a money
payment, although the notion of a pecuniary
liquidation seems to have been wholly remote from
the range of ideas — habits of thought — on which
these relations and duties were originally based.



This is not the place for research into the origin
and the primitive phases of ownership, nor even
for inquiry into the views of property current in
the early days of the Western culture. But the
views current on this head at present — the princi-
ples which guide men's thinking and roughly
define the right limits of discretion in pecuniary
matters — this common-sense apprehension of what
are the proper limits, rights, and responsibilities
of ownership, is an outgrowth of the traditions,
experiences, and sp^ulations of past generations.



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES



Therefore some notice of the character of these
traditional views and the circuniBtances out of
which they have arisen in the recent past is neces-
sary to an understanding of the part which they
play in modern life.' The theory of property pro-
fessed at a given time and in a given cultural region
shows what is the habitual attitude of men, for the
time being, on questions of ownership ; for any
theory that gains widespread and uncritical accept-
ance must carry a competent formulation of the
deliverances of common sense on the matter with
which it deals. Otlierwiae it will not be generally
accepted. And such a commonplace view is in its
turn an outcome of protracted experience on the
part of the community.

The modern theories of property run back to f-^-H^ 'I
Locke,* or to some source which for the present
purpose is equivalent to Locke ; who, on this as
on other institutional questions, has been proved
by the test of time to be a competent spokesman
for modern culture in these premises. A detailed
examination of how the matter stood in the theo-
retical respect before Locke, and whence, and by
what process of selection aud digestion, Locke de-

' " It bu been said tliat tbe science of one ngs la the comnion senm
ol tbe nert. It migbt with equal trnth be said Ihat the equltj ol one
ige becomes the law ol the next, It positive law la tbe basis of order,
ideal right Is the active factor In progreas,"— H. S. Foxwell, lutro-
dactlon to Menger'a Jllght to the Whole Produce o/ Labor, p. XI.
Cf. tbe entire passage.

* See the essay, Of Citil Oovernmeiit, ch, V.



(Vi^^mmS


72 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

rived his views, would lead too far afield. The
theory is sufficiently familiar, for in Eubstance it
is, and for the better part of two centuries has
been, held as an article of common sense by nearly
all men who have spoken for the inatitutiou of
property, with the exception of some few and
late doubters.'

This modern European, common-sense theory
jj^ says that ownership is a "Natural Right." What

••jjip- a man has made, whatsoever " he hath mixed
his labor with," that he has thereby made his
property. It is his to do with it as he will. He
has extended to tiie object of his labor that dis-
cretionary control which in the nature of things
he of right exercises over the motions of his own
person. It is his in the nature of things by virtue
of his having made it. *' Thus labor, in the
beginning, gave a right of property." The per-

1 Apart from tbe tamllUr blatorical materials for Uie study al the
growth ot national rights, lactuding the tight of property, there are a
niunberoflatewriUDgs that may be consulted; e.g.Je\\laak, Declaration
of t\e SIgkU of ifiin and of the Citizen; Ritchie, tfalural Slghu;
Bonar, chapters relaliog to Ibis Uiplc In mioiophf and FoUtleal
Seottomf; UilSdlug, Uittory of Modern Philoiophj, vol. I.; Albee,
UiMtory of Bagliiih Utilitarianimt ; e.nA, lately come to hand, Scherger,
Etolnlloa of Modern Liberty. These and other writers treat of natural
rights and the law of nature chiefly in other bearings than that of
ownership ; wbile tbe legal wril«rs treat the subject from the l^al
rather than tbe de facto standpoint. It is also not unusual to spend
attention chiefly on the pedigree of the doctrinea rather than on the
genesis and growth of the concepts. An endcavcir at a genetic account
ot the modem concepts of ownership is found In Jenks, Law and
FoUtlc* in the MidiUe Aget. so also in Cunningbam, Watern CivlUia-
tion In Ui SeoHomU Arpti-it,



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES

sonal force, the functional eflSciency of the work-
man, shaping material facts to human use, is in
this doctrine accepted aa the definitive, axiomatic
ground of ownership; behind this the argmnent
does not penetrate, except it be to trace the work-
man's creative efficiency back to ita ulterior source
in the creative efficiency of the Deity, the " Great ^
Artificer." With the early spokesmen of natural rf. . •
rights, whether they speak for ownership or for j&C(k*J- wJ
other natural rights, it is customary to rest the
case finally on the creator's discretionary disposi-
tions and workmanlike efficiency. But the refer-
ence of natural rights back to the choice and
creative work of the Deity has, even in Locke, an
air of being in some degree perfunctory ; and later
in the life-history of the natural-rights doctrine
it falls into abeyance ; whereas the central tenet,
that ownership is a natural right resting on the ^
productive work and the discretionary choice of J|*wAPa»», -j
the owner, gradually rises superior to criticism
and gathers axiomatic certitude. The Creator
presently, in the course of the eighteenth century,
drops out of the theory of ownership.

It may be worth while to indicate how this
ultimate ground of ownership, as conceived by
modem common sense, differs from the ground
on which rights of the like class were habitually
felt to rest in mediseval times. Customary au-
thority was the proximate gi-ound to which rights,



74 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



powers, and privileges were then habitually referred.
It was felt that if a clear case of devolution from
a superior could be made out, the right claimed
was thereby established; and any claim which
could not be brought to rest on such an act, or
constructive act, of devolution was felt to be in
a precarious case. The superior from whom
rights, whether of ownership or otherwise, de-
volved held his powers by a tenure of prowess
fortified by usage; the inferior upon whom given
rights and powers devolved held what fell to his
lot by a tenure of service and fealty sanctioned
by use and wont. The relation was essentially
a personal one, a relation of status, of authority
and subservience. 'Hereditary standing gave a
presumption of ownership, rather than conversely./
In the last resort the chain of devolution by virtue
of which all rights and powers of the common
man pertained to him was to be traced hack
through a sequence of superiors to the highest,
sovereign secular authority, through whom in turn
it ran back to God. But neither in the case of
the temporal sovereign nor in that of the divine
sovereign was it felt that their competence to
delegate or devolve powers and rights rested on
a workmanlike or creative efficiency. It waa not
so much by virtue of His office as creator aa it
was by virtue of His office as suzerain that the
Deity was felt to be the source and arbiter of



L



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES 75

human rights and duties. In the course of cul-
tural change, as the medieval range of ideas and
of circumstances begins to take on a more modern
complexion, God's creative relation to mundane
afEair8 is referred to with growing frequency and
insistence in discussions of all questions of this
class; but for the purpose in hand His creative
relation to human rights does not supersede His
relation of sovereignty imtil the modern era is
well begun. It may be said that God's tenure ys^, (*; 'r<
of office in the mediceval conception of thuigs was a ^Ts-^
a tenure by prowess, and men, of high and low
degree, held their rights and powers of Him by -
a servile tenure. Ownership in this scheme waa %"f.iitt^
gijtewardship. It was a stewardship proximately
under the discretion of a secular lord, more re- J

motely under the discretion of the divine Overlord. H

And the question then pressing for an answer when
a point of competency or legitimacy was raised in
respect of any given human arrangement or in-
stitution was not, What hath God wrought? but,
What hath God ordained ?

This mediffival range of conceptions first began /. . ^^^^^.^
to break down and give place to modem notions
in Italy, xu the Renaissance. But it was in the
English-speaking communities that the range of
ideas upon which rests the modern concept of f-.-cjL4t
natural rights first gathered form and reached
a competent expression. This holds true with



I



>^



76 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

respect to the modem doctrines of natural rights
as contrasted with the corresponding ancient doc-
I trineB. The characteristically modem traits of
I the doctrine of natural rights are of English deri-
' vation. This is peculiarly true as regards the
natural right of ownership. The material, histori-
cal basis of this English right of ownership, con-
sidered as a habit of thought, is given by the
modem economic factors of handicraft and trade,
in contrast with the mediaeval institutions of status
and prowess. England, as contrasted with the
Continent, during modern times rapidly substituted
the occupation of the merchant and the ubiqui-
tous free artisan as the tone^ving factors of her
everyday life, in place of the prince, the soldier,
and the priest. With this change in the dominant
interests of everyday life came a corresponding
change in the discipline given by the habits of
everyday life, which shows itself in the growth
of a new range of ideas as to the meaning of
human life and a new ground of finality for human
institutions. New axioms of right and truth
supplant the old as new habits of thought supers
sede the old.

This process of substitution, as a struggle be-
tween rival concepts of finality in political theory,
reached a dramatic climax in the revolution of
1688. As a battle of axioms the transition comes
to a head in the controversy between John Txjcke


BUSINESS PRINCIPLES



77



and Sir Robert Filmer. Filmer waa the last effec-
tive spokesman of the mediaeval axiom of devolu-
tion. Locke's tracing of natural rights, the right
of property among the rest, hack to the work-
manlike performance of the Creator, marks the
form in which, at the point of transition, the
modern view pays its respects to the superseded
axiom of devolution and takes leave of it.

The scope given to the right of ownership in
later modem times is an outgrowth of the exigen-
cies of mercantile traffic, of the prevalence of
purcliase and sale in a " money economy." The
habits of thought enforced by these exigencies
and by the ubiquitous and ever recurring resort
to purchase and sale decide that ownership must
naturally, normally, be absolute ownership, with
free and unqualified discretion in the use and
disposal of the things owned. Social expediency
may require particular lunitations of this full dis-
cretion, but such limitations are felt to be excep-
tional derogations from the "natural" scope of
the owner's discretion.

On the other hand, the metaphysical ground
of this right of ownership, the ultimate fact by
virtue of which such a discretionary right vests
in the owner, is his assumed creative efficiency
as a workman ; he embodies the work of his
brain and hand in a useful object, — primarily,
it is held, for his own personal use, and, by further



I



78 THE THEORY OF BDSINE38 ENIEKPKISE



^

^



derivation, for the use of any other person to
whose use he sees 6t to transfer it. The work-
man's force, ingenuity, and dexterity was the ulti-
mate economic factor, — ultimate in a manner
patent to the common sense of a generation habit-
uated to the system of handicraft, however doubt-
ful such a view may appear in the eyes of a
generation in whose apprehension the workman
is no longer the prime mover nor the sole, or even
^ chief, efficient factor in the industrial process.
. X, The free workman, master of his own motiouB
and with discretion as to what he would turn
his efforts to, if to anything, had by Locke's time
become an habitual fact in the life of the English
community to such a degree that free labor, of
the character of handicraft, was accepted uncriti-
cally as the fundamental factor in all human
economy, and as the presumptive original fact
in industry and in the struggle for wealth. So
settled did this habit of thought become that no
question was entertained as to the truth of the
assumption.
' It became a principle of the natural order of
\ things that free labor is the original source of
\ wealth and the basis of ownership. In point
of historical fact, no doubt, such was not the
pedigree of modern industry or modern owner-
ship ; but the serene, undoubting assumption of
Locke and his generation only stands out the



BUSINESS PRINCIPLB3



79



more strongly and unequivocally for this its dis-
crepancy with fact. It is all the more evidently
a competent expression of the trend which Eng-
lish common sense was following at this time,
since this doctrine of a " natural " right of prop-
erty based on productive labor carries all before
it, in the face of the facts. In this matter Eng-
lish thought, or rather English common sense, has.
led ; and the advanced Continental peoples have
followed the English lead as the form of economic
organization exemplified by the English-speaking
communities has come to prevail among these Con-
tinental peoples.

Such a concept belongs to the regime of handi-
craft and petty trade, and it is from, or through,
the era of handicraft that it has come down to
the present.' It fits into the scheme of handi-
craft, and it is less fully in consonance with the
facts of life in any other situation than that of
handicraft. Associated with the system of handi-



I What appeara to be necessary to the development of such a eentt-
meni is that neither elaverj nor the machine system nball be present
[n sufficient force to give a pronounced bias to Ibe commnnity's bablU
o( thought, at the same time that each member of the community, or
each minor gronp of persons, habitually carries on Els own work at Its
own discretion and fur Its otvu ends, Such a situation may or may
not involve handicraft as thai term is specifically understood. A pre-
■amptlon of similar import, but less pronounced and less defined,
seems to prevail In an uncertain degree among many peoples on a
low stage of culture. The tenet, accordingly, has some claim to stand
as an expressiOD of "natural" right, even vrbea "natural" is taken
in an evolutionary sense.



J



80 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPKISE

craft, as its correlate, was the system of petty
trade ; and as the differentiation of occupations
waa carried to a high degree, purcliase and sale
came to prevail very generally, and the community
acquired a commercial complexion and commercial
habits of thought. Under these circumstances
the natural right of ownership came to com-
prise an extreme freedom and facility in the
disposal of property. The whole sequence of
growth of this natural right is, of course, to be
taken in connection with the general growth
of individual rights that culminated in the eigh-
teentb-century system of Natural Liberty. How
far the English economic development is to be
accounted the chief or fundamental factor in the
general growth of natural rights is a question
that cannot be taken up here. The outcome, so
far as it immediately touches the present topic,
was that by the time of the industrial revolution
a fairly consistent standardization of economic
life had been reached in terms of workmanship
and price. The writings of Adam Smith and
his contemporaries bear witness to this. And
this eighteenth -century standardization stands over
as the dominant economic institulion of later
times.' Such, in outline, seem to be the histori-

' Taken by find l&rge, tlie atandatdlzatiDn of conduct, knowledge,
and Ide&ls current in the eighteenth century, and conson&nt with ths
eighteen th-centu 17 economic situation, Is In the last analysts reducible
s of irotkmanUke efflcieocy nlhei than terms



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES 81

cal antecedents and the spiritual basis of the
modem institution of property, and therefore of
business enterprise as it prevails in the present.^

This sketch of the genesis of the modern institu-
tion of property and of modern business principles
may seem dubious to those who are inclined to give
it a more substantial character than that of a habit
of thought, — that is to say, those who still adhere
to the doctrine of natural rights with something
of the eighteenth-century naivete. But whatever
may be accepted as the ulterior grounds of that
cultural movement which culminated in the system
of Natural Liberty, it is plain that the industrial
and commercial experience of western Europe^
and primarily of England, from the fifteenth to
the eighteenth century, had much to do with the
outcome of the movement in so far as natural
liberty touches economic matters. It is as an
outcome of this recently past phase of economic
development that we have incorporated in the law,

cause and effect This leaning to personal, workmanlike efficiency
as an ultimate term shows itself even in the science of that time, fi.g.
in the quasi-personal character imputed to the so-called **natund
laws** which then largely occupied scientific speculation ; similarly in
the Romantic literature and political philosophy.

1 As late as the close of the sixteenth century English law an4
usage in the matter of loans for interest and other contracts of a pecun-
iary character were in a less ad?anced state, admitted a less full and
free discretion, than the corresponding development on the Continent ;
but from about that time the English rapidly gains on the Continental
community in the habitual acceptance and application of tiiese '* busi-
ness principles,** and it has since then held the lead in this respect
Of. Ashley, Economic History^ vol. IL ch. VI.



83 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

equity, and common sense of to-day, these peculiarly
free and final property rights and obligations, that
is to say, those peculiar principles that control cur-
rent business and industry. We owe to the eigh-
teenth century a very full discretion and free swing
in all pecuniary matters. It has given freedom of
contract, together with security and ease of credit
engagements, whereby the competitive order of
business has been definitively installed.'



i^



^



The subject-matter about which this modern
pecuniary discretion turns, with all its freedom
and inviolabiUty of contract, is money values.
Accordingly there underlies all pecuniary contracts
Ian assumption that the unit of money value does
mot vary. Inviolability of contracts involves this
assumption. It is accepted unquestioningly as a
point of departure in all business transactions.
In the making and enforcement of contracts it is
a fundamental point of law and usage that money
does not vary.* Capitalization as well as contracts
are made in its terras, and the plans of the business
men who control industry look to the money unit
as the stable ground of all their transactions.
Notoriously, business men are jealous of any
attempt to change the value or lessen the stability



1 Cf. Sombort, Kapitaliim«t. vol. n. cb. II.
■ On Uie pulatlvo stability of tlie money unit, at. W. W. Curliie.
The Evolution of Modern Monty, pt. II. ch. IV.


BUSINESS PRINCIPLES

o£ the money unit, which goes to show how essen-
tial a principle in business traffic is the putative
invariability of the money unit.'

Usage fortified by law decides that when prices
vary the variation b held to occur in the value of
the vendible commodities, not in the value of the
money unit, since money is the standard of value.
There is, of course, no intention here to question
the position, familiar to all economists, that fluo-
tuationa in the course of prices may as well be due



I



< Economists are En tbe habit of speaking of money as a medium
of cicbange, a " great wheel " for the circulation of goods. In the
same connection business traillc ia tipoken of as a means of obtaining
goods suitable for consumption, tbe end of all purcliase and sale
being consumable goods, not money values. It may be true in soma
profound philosophical sense Uiat money values are not tlie de&nitiva
term of buaiaess endeavor, and that the business man socks through
the mediation of money to satisfy his craving for consumable goods.
Looking at tbe process of economic life as a whole and taking it in its
rationalized bearing as a collective endeavor to purvey goods and
services for the needs of collective humanity, the office of the money
unit — money transactions, eiccbango, credit, and all the rest that make
up the phenomena of business — is perhaps justly rated as something
subsidiary, serving to facilitate the distribution of consumable goods
to the consamers, the consumption of goods being tbe objective
point of all this trafTlc. Such ia the view of this matter given by the
rationalistic, normalizing speculations ot the eighleentb-centnry plil-
losnpheis ; and such is, in substance, the view spoken for by those
economists who still consistently remaiu at the standpoint of tbe
eighteenth century. The contention need neither be defended nor
refuted here, since it does not seriously touch tbe facts of modem
business. Within tbe range ot business transactions this ulterior end
does not necessarily come into view, at least not as a motive that
guides the transactions from day to day. The matter is not so con-
ceived in busineGB transactions, it does not so appear on the face ot
the negotiable InBtnimeuls, it is not in this manner that tbe money
unit enters into the ruling habits of thought of business men.


i



I

I



84 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPKISE

to variation on the part of the money metals as to
a variation on the part of the articles whose prices
fluctuate. In so far as the distinction so made
between variations in the one or the other member
of a value ratio has a meaning — which it is not
always clear that it has — it does not touch the
argument. It is a matter of common notoriety,
which has also had the benefit of reiterated statis-
tical proof, that, as measured, for instance, in
terms of livelihood or of labor, the value of money
has varied incontinently throughout the course of
history.

But in the routine of business throughout the
nineteenth century the assumed stabiUty of the
money unit has served as an axiomatic principle,
in spite of facta which have from time to time
shown the falsity of that assumption.'

(The all-dominating issue in business is the ques-
tion of gain and loss. Gain and loss is a question

1 still, latterly, in the traffic of iome of Uie more wide-awake
budneM men, account is practical); taken ol the vatiatlona of the
unit of value. Wbat may be the future effects ot habitual and incon-
tinent variations of the nnit. such as prevail in the present, Is of course
Impouible to foretell. These variations leom.due mainly to the exten-
sive prevalence of credit relations ; and the full development of credit
relations in buainess Is apparently a matter ot the future rather than
of the recent past, in apite of the great improvements that have been
made in the use of credit. The modem conventional imputation of
stability to the money unit dates back to the r^me of a "money
MODomy," such as prevailed under the circumstances of handicraft
and the earlier huckstering commerce, and it liolds its place In the
developed " credit economy " largely ai a survival of this more ele-
mentary past phase of economic life.


I

I



BUSINESS PEINCIPLES

of accounting, and the accounta are kept in tenmi
of the money unit, not in terms of livelihood, nor
in tenns of the serviceability of the goods, nor in
terms of the mechanical efficiency of the industrial
or commercial plant. For business purposes, and
80 far as the business man habitually looks into
the matter, the last term of all transactions is their
outcome in money values. The base line of every
enterprise is a line of capitalization in money
values. In current business practice, variations
from this base line are necessarily rated as variar
tions on the part of the other factors in the case,
not as variations of the base line. The business
man judges of events from the standpoint of
ownership, and ownership runs in terms of money.'

J. Investments are made for profit, and indus-
{trial plants and processes are capitalized on the
^basis of their profit-yielding capacity. In the ac-
cepted scheme of things among business men, profits
are included as intrinsic to the conduct of business.
So that, in place of the presumption in favor of a
simple pecuniary stability of wealth, such as pre-
vails in the rating of possessions outside of business
traffic, there prevails within the range of business

' The conventional acceptance of the money unit w &d Invariable
mewnre of value and standard of wealth ia of very ancient derivation.
(Ct. Carlile, Evolution of Modern Money, pt. II. cb. I ; Ridgewaj,
Origin of Melatlie Currency and WeiyM Slnndirdi. ch. I., H.) Ita
pre8eIl^d3y consequences ore also ot Srat-rate luiporUnce, aa will Iw
indicated In a later chapter.



J



86 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

traffic the presumption that there must in the
natural course of things be a stable and orderly
increase of the property invested. Under no eco-
nomic system earlier than the advent of the machine
industry does profit on investment seem to have
been accounted a normal or unquestionably legiti-
mate source of gain. Under the agrarian-manorial
regime of the Middle Ages it was not felt that the
wealth of the large owners must, as a matter of
course, increase by virtue of the continued employ-
ment of what they already had in hand — whatr
ever may be the historical fact as regards the
increase of wealth in their hands. Particularly,
it was not the sense of the men of that time that
wealth so employed must increase at any stated,
"ordinary" rate per time unit. Similarly as re-
gards other traffic in those days, even as regards
mercantile ventures. Gain from investment was
felt to be a fortuitous matter, not reducible to a
stated rate. This is reflected, e.g., in the tenacious
protests against the taking or paying of interest
and in the ingenious sophistries by which the
payment of interest was defended or explained
away. Only under more settled commercial rela-
tions during the era of handicraft did the pay-
ment of interest gradually come to be accepted
into full legitimacy. But even then gains from
other business employments than mercantile traffic
were apparently viewed as an increase due to



BUSINESS PKINCIPLES



87



productive labor ratber tban as a profit on invest-
ment.' In industrial pursuits, as distinct from mer-
cantile traffic proper, profits apparently come to
figure as a regular and ordinary incident only when
the industries come to be carried on on a mercantile
basis by relatively large employers working with
hired labor.

Tliis orderly increase is, of course, taken account
of in terms of the money unit. The " ordinary "
rate of profits in business is looked upon as a
matter of course by the body of business men. It
is part of their common-sense view of affairs, and is
therefore a normal pheuomenon.* Gain, they feel,
is normal, being tlie purpose of all their endeavors;
whereas a loss or a shrinkage in the values in-
vested is felt to be an untoward accident which
does not belong in the normal course of business,
and which requires particular explanation. The
normality, or matter-of-course character, of profits
in the modem view is well shown by the position
of those classical economists who are inclined to



L



• Cf., e.g., Mun, England'/ Trttaure, parUeulwly ch. 11, ; Ashley,
EcOHomle nintonj and Thtors, bk. H. eh. VI. pp. 301-M7. Tbia,
eaBentially handicraft, presamptioa Is reflected CTsn in the clamlcal
economlals, who feel a moral necessity of ezplaining profibi on some
bMlB of productivity, or even of worltmanHhip in aome sophlntictited
iense. The whole diBCuagion of the doctrine of Wages of Superintend-
ence wilt serve lo Illustrate the case ; the point ia well shown in Mr.
DaTidson's article on "Eamlnga of Management" in I'Blgrave'a
Dictionary of Politirat Econnmy.

* The *■ ordinary " rate, of course, diOera in detail from one line
of iHuineia to another, as well as from place to place.


•



88 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

include " ordinary profits " in the cost of produc-
tion of goods.

The precise meaning of *' ordinary profits " need
not detain the argument. It may mean net
average profits, or it may mean something else.
The phrase ia sufficiently intelligible to the busi-
ness community to permit the business men to use
it without definition and to rest their reasoning
about business affairs on it as a secure and stable
concept ; and it is this commonplace resort to the
term that is the point of interest here.

At any given time and place there is an accepted
ordinary rate of profits, more or less closely
defined, which, it is felt, should accrue to any
legitimate and ordinarily judicious business venture.
However shifty the definition of this rate of
profits may be, in concrete, objective terms, it is
felt by the men of affairs to be of so substantial
and consistent a character that they habitually
capitalize the property engaged in any given busi-
ness venture on the basis of this ordinary rate of
profits. Due regard bemg had to any special
advantages and drawbacks of the individual case,
any given business venture or plant is capitalized
at such a multiple of its eaming-capacity as the
current ordinary rate of profits will warrant.'

1 ThU sUtemetit applies with greater aptness lo Uie bnalnesa sltna-
tloD ol England during the earlier three-quartere ol the nineteenth
century, and U> the Americnu silualion of llie third quarter of the


I



BUSINESS PEINCIPLES

Proceeding on the common-sense view built up out
of this range of habits of thought with reapect to
normal profits and price phenomena, the business
community holds that times are ordinary or normal
80 long as the accepted or reasonable rate of profits
accrues on the accustomed capitalization ; whereas
times are good or brisk if the rate of gain is
accelerated, and hard or dull if profits decline.
This is the meaning of the phrases, " brisk times "
and " dull times," as currently used in any business
community.

Under tlie exigencies of the quest of profits, as
conditioned by the larger industry and the more
sweeping business organization of the last few
decades, the question of capital in business haa
increasingly become a question of capitalization on
the baais of eaming-capacity, rather than a question
of the magnitude of the industrial plant or the
coat of production of the appliances of industry.
From being a sporadic trait, of doubtful legitimacy,
in the old days of the " natural " and " money "
economy, the rate of profits or earnings on invest-
ment has in the nineteenth century come to take
the central and dominant place in the economic
system. Capitalization, credit extensions, and
even the productiveness and legitbnacy of any

centary, tbao It does to the fiitofitlon of the last decade. Qualiftet-
tiom re(|uir«l by Ibe later pbases of buiineu deTelopnienl nil) be
noted pTGKQlly.



A



I



90 THE THEOKY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

given employment of labor, are referred to the
rate of earnings as their final test and substantial
ground. At the same time the " ordinary rate of
profits" has become a more elusive idea. The
phenomenon of a uniform rate of profits deter-
mined by competition has fallen into the back-
ground and lost something of its matter-of-fact
character since competition in the large industry
baa begun to shift from the position of a stable
and continuous equilibration to that of an inter-
mittent, convulsive strain in the service of the
larger business men's strategy. The interest of
the business community centres upon profits and
upon the shifting fortunes of the profit-maker,
rather than upon accumulated and capitalized
goods. Therefore the ultimate conditioning force
in the conduct and aims of business is coming to
be the prospective profit-yielding capacity of any
given business move, rather tlian the aggregate
holdings or the recorded output of product.

But this latest development in the field of
industrial business has not yet come to control tlie
field. It is rather an inchoate growth of the
immediate present than an accomplished fact even
of the recent past, and it can be understood only
by reference to those conditions of the recent past
out of which it comes. Therefore it is necessary
to tuni back to a further consideration of the
old-fashioned business traffic as it used to go on



BUSINESS PBINCnaiES



01



by the competitive method before the competitive
order began seriously to be dislocated and take on
an intermittent character, aa well as to a consid-
eration of that resort to credit which has, in large
part, changed the competitive system of business
from what it was at the beginning of the nine-
teenth century to what it has become at its close.



h



CHAPTER V

THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



CfiEDiT serves two main uses in the regular
course of such business as is occupied with the con-
duct of industry : (a) that of deferred payments in
the purchase and sale of goods — book accounta,
bills, checks, and the like belong chiefly under
this head; and (&) loans or debt^ — notes, stock
shares, interest-bearing securities, deposits, call
loans, etc., belong chiefly here. These two cate-
gories of credit extension are by no means clearly
distinct. Forms of credit which commonly serve
the one purpose may be turned to the other use ;
but tlie two uses of credit are, after all, broadly
distinguishable. For many purposes of economic
theory such a distinction might not he serviceable,
or even practicable ; it is here made merely for pres-
ent use. It is chiefly with credit of the latter class,
or rather with credit in so far as it is turned to use
for the latter purpose, that this inquiry is concerned.

Suppose due credit arrangements have already
been made — in the way of investments in stocks,
interest-bearing securities and the like — such as to
place the management of the industrial equipment
in competent hands. This supposition is not a


L



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT 93

violent one, since a condition roughly approximat-
ing to this prevaik in any quiescent period of
industry, when there ie no appreciable depression.
Under these " normal " conditions, the capital in-
vested in any given industrial venture is turned
over within a certain, approximately definite, length
of time. The length of time occupied by the turn-
over may vary from one establishment to another,
but in any given case the length of the turnover is
one of the important factors that determine the
chances of gain for the business concern in ques-
tion. Indeed, if the general conditions of the
trade and of the market are given, the two factors
which determine the status and value of a given
sound concern, as seen from the business man's
standpoint, are the magnitude of the turnover and
the length of time it occupies.

The business man's object is to get the largest
aggregate gain from his business. It is manifestly
for his interest, as far as may be, to shorten the
process out of which his earnings are drawn,' or,
in other words, to shorten the period in which he
turns over his capital. If the turnover consumes
less than the time ordinarily allowed in the line of

1 Thl(, o[ course, has notbiog to t»y to BOhin-Bitwerh's theory of
the enhancement of production through lengthening the processes of
indmtry. HIb theory of the "roundabout method" applies to tbe
Uchnlcal, material efficiency of the mechanical process ; whereas the
point In qnestioD here Is the Interval occupied In the turning over of
tnulnen capital. B<ibm-Banerk'B position may be queatioD-
able, however, on other grounds.



I

I



d



I



y'



J-



94 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

industry in which he is engaged, he gains more
than the current rate of profits in that line of busi-
ness, other thiugs equal; whereas he loses if the
turnover Uikes more than the normal time. This
fact is forcibly expressed in the maxim, " Small
profits and quick returns." There are two chief

-^_means of^ shortening the int<>rval of the turnover,
currently resorted to in industrial business. ~" Xte
first is the adoption of more efficient, time-s avin g
industrial processes. Improvements of iudustrial
plant and industrial processes having this in view
are gaining in importance in the later develop-
ments of business, since a closer attention is now
given to the time element in investments, and
great advances have been made in this direction.'

5> A second expedient for accelerating the rate of
turnover is the competitive pushing of sales,
through lat^r and more urgent advertising and
the like. It is needless to say that this means of
accelerating business also receives due attention at
the hands of modern business men.

But the inagnitiide of the tiunover, " the vol-
ume of busint?8s," is of no less consequence than
iu-f rapidity. It is, of course, a trite commonplace
that tho earnings of any industrial business are
a V TT-it fT:r -'- -.n of the rate of turnover and the

< S)aiten, " DcT SUI Art luodemen Wirthacbafts-
>' ' J. StMttr. •>. StMi'tii, vol. XVII. pp. 1-20.

ittftrinlod M ch, IV. vul. U. of DtT mcleme
■ ■:. 11K»).



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



95



volume of business.' Tlie business man may reach
his end of increased earnings by either the one or
the other expedient, and he commonly has resource
to both if he can. His means of increasing the
magnitude of the turnover is a resort to credit and
a close husbanding of his assets. He is under a
constant incentive to increase his liabilities and to
discount h\a bills receivable. Indebtedness in this
way comes to serve much the same pm-pose, as
regards the rate of earnings, as does a time-saving
improvemsnt in the processes of industry.^ The
effect of the use of credit on the part of a business
man ao placed is much the same as if his capital
had been turned over a greater number of times
in the year. It is accordingly to his interest to
extend his credit as far as his standing and the
state of the market vaiU admit.*

1 C(., e.g., Mnrsliall, Friadplet of Eeonomiei (3d cd.), bk. VL
Ch. VIL sees. 3 and 4.

» C(. Laugblin, Prindpla o/ Jfoney, p. M.

* The tanioTcr will count for nioro in gross earnings at current
rates it insleod of his own capital alone tbe bualncsB uian also en-
gages whatever funds he can Irorrow b; using bis capital as ooUal«ral.
Tlie turnover (counted on capital (value of tbe industrial equipment)
plus credit, at cun'ent rates, will be greaWr than that counWd on the
capital alone used without credit eitension. The turnover ma; be
expresaed aa the prodacC of the tnasa of valaea employed multiplied
bj the Telocity. Hence, if credit be taken as au indeterminate frao-
Uon p^ 1 of the capital used aa collateral, ne may say that



TuMOvar =



1



>pital\.



' UJi'UyL lillai'ge. Ihis sets a soir
to tlie advantageous use of loai
In ordinary times, however,
management, theairrent_rate.
g5C_e.eds_ the rate of interest t
amoimt; and in times of
therefore, it is commonly advan
credit in the way indicated,
brisk times, when opportunities
many and promise to increase,
sition about, so as to show th<
motives in the case : whenever
ness manager sees an apprecial
tween the cost of a given credit
gross increase of gains to be got
seek to extend his credit. But '

Tt» iJssbnlc staMment terras to bring oot I
on acceleraiioa of the raM of turnover and u
of business capltkl. Cf- JeroDS, Thtorjf oj
240^68.

Sombarl Is mj atakeo it



^■> THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT 97

of competitive business whatever is generally ad-
vantageous becomes a necessity for all competitors.
Those who take advantage of the opportunities
afforded by credit are in a position to undersell
any others who are similarly placed in all but this
respect. Speaking broadly, recourse to credit be-
comes the general practice, the regular course of
competitive business management, and competition
goes on on the basis of such a use of credit as an
auxiliary to the capital in hand. So that the
competitive earning capacity of business enter-
prises comes currently to rest on the basis, not of
the initial capital alone, but of capital plus such
borrowed funds as this capital will support.

The competitive rate of earnings is brought to
correspond with this basis of operation ; the con-
sequence being that under such competitive em-
ployment of credit the aggregate earnings of an
enterprise resting on a given initial capital will
be but slightly larger than it might have been if
such a general recourse to credit to swell the
volume of business did not prevail. But since
such use of credit prevails generally, a further con-
sequence is that any concern involved in the open
business competition, which cannot or does not
take recourse to credit to swell its volume of busi-
ness, will be unable to earn a " reasonable " rate
of profits. So that the general practice drives
all competitors to the use of the same expedient;



I



THE THEOEY OB" BUSINESS ENTERPRISE


but since the advantage to be derived from this
expedient is a competitive advantage only, the
universality of the practice results in but a slight,
if any, increase of the aggregate earnings of the
business community. Borrowed funds afford any
given business concern a differential advantage as
against other competitors ; but it is, in the main,
a differential advantage only. The competitive
use of such funds in extending business operations
may, incidentally, throw the management of some
portion of the industrial process into more com-
petent or less competent hands. So far as this
happens, the credit operations in question and the
use of the borrowed funds may increase or dimin-
ish the output of industry at large, and so may
affect the aggregate earnings of the business com-
munity. But, apart from such incidental shifting
of the management of industry to more competent
(or less competent) hands, t bi^ rnmp <^t.itivf> nqp nf
borrowed funds has nq ag gre gate effect npnn fiarp -

The current or reasonable rate of profits is,
loughly, the rate of profits at which business men
are content to employ the actual capital which
they have in hand.' A general resort to credit
extension as an auxiliary to the capital in hand
results, on the whole, in a competitive lowering
of the rate of profits, computed on capital plus

1 See Manhsll, u above.



L



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT

credit, to such a point as would not be attractive
to a business man who must confine himself to the
employment of capital without credit extension.
Qn an average^ it may be sai d, the aggregate earn-
inqa of the apgregate capital with cr edit extension
are but slightly greater tha n the aggregate earn;
ings of the same capital with out credit^xtensioji
jyould be in the absence of a c ompet itivejuge of
credit extenajon. But under modern conditions
business cannot profitably be done by any one of
the competitors without the customary resort to
credit. Without the customary resort to credit a
" reasonable " return could not be obtained on the
investment.

To the extent to which the competitive recourse
to credit is of the character here indicated — to
the extent to which it is a competitive bidding
for funds between competent managers — it may
be said that, taken in the aggregate, the funds so
adde d to business capital represent no material
c apital or " prodnntion goods ." They are business
capital only; they swell the volume of business,
as counted in terms of price, etc., but they do not
directly swell the volume of industry, since they
do not add to the aggregate material apparatus of
industry, or alter the character of the processes
employed, or enhance the degree of efficiency with
which industry is managed.

The " buoyancy " which a speculative inflation



J



L



100 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

of values gives to industrial business may indi-
rectly increase the material output of industry by
enhancing the intensity with which the industrial
process ia carried on under the added stimulus;
but apart from this psychological effect the expan-
sion of business capital through credit extension
has no aggregate industrial effect. This secondary
effect of credit inflation may be very considerable
and is always present in brisk times. It is com-
monly obvious enough to be accounted the chief
characteristic of a period of "prosperity." For
a theory of industry this indirect effect of credit
inflation would be its main characteristic, but for
a theory of business it occupies the place of a
corollary only.

To the view set forth above, — that borrowed
funds do not increase the aggregate industrial
equipment, — the objection may present itself tliat
all funds borrowed represent property owned by
some one (the lender or his creditors), and trans-
ferred, in usufruct, by the loan transaction to the
borrower ; and that these funds can, therefore, be
converted to productive uses, like any other funds,
by drawing into the industrial process, directly or
indirectly, the material items of wealth whose
fluent form these funds are.' The objection fails
at two points : (a) while the loans may be covered
by property held by the lender, they are not fully

1 Cf. LaugbllD, Prineipla of Monty, ch. IV.



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



covered by property which is not already other-
wise engaged ; and even if such were the case, it
would (6) not follow that the use of these funds
would increase the technical (material) outfit of
industry.

As to the first point (a): Loans made by the
financial houses in the way of deposits or other
advances on collateral are only to a fractional
extent covered by liquid assets ; ' and anything but
liquid assets is evidently beside the point of the
present question. An inconsiderable fraction of
these loans is represented by liquid assets. The
greater part of the advances made by banking
houses, for instance, rest on the lender's presump-
tive ability to pay eventually, on demand or at
maturity, any claims that may in the course of
business be presented against the lender on ac-
count of the advances made by him. ItJs_gL-buai-
nes3 truism that do banking house could at a
momt-nt meet all its outstatidin f. ; ohitgations .' A
necessary source of banking profits, e.g., is a large
excess of the volume of business over reserves.

As to (6): Another great part of the basis of
such loans is made up of invested funds and col-
lateral held by the lender. These at the same
time are much of the basis on which rests the

' Property convertible into cash at will.

* The legally obligatory reaerv e for the Natlonni Banks, for Instance,
la 26 per cent, of combined note circulation and deposiu in central
cescrio bLiiiks, 1& per cent. In othere. — lltBimd SCatuUt, G191.



I



102 THE THEOKT OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

lender's presumptive ability to pay claims pre-
Bented. But these investments, in industry or
real estate, in interest-bearing securities and col-
lateral of whatever description, represent future
income of tlie lender's debtors (as, e.g., government
and municipal securities), or property wliicli is
already either engaged in the industrial process or
tied up in forms of wealth {as, e.^., real estate)
which do not lend themselves to industrial uses.
Ix)an3 obtained on property which has no present
industrial use, which cannot in its present form or
under existing circumstances be employed in the
processes of industry (as, e.g.y speculative real
estate), or loans on property which is already en-
gaged in the industrial process (as, e.g., stocks,
industrial plant, goods on hand, real estate in
use),^ represent, for the purpose in hand, nothing
more substantial than a fictitious duplication of
material items that cannot be drawn into the in-
dustrial process. Therefore such loans cannot,
at least not directly, swell the aggregate industrial
equipment or enhance the aggregate productivity
of industry; for the items which here serve as
collateral are already previously in use in industry
to the extent to which they can be used. Prop-

I This UkeB account of ftdviinceB made by other lenders thAn the
regular banldng houu-'s who exclode lIlo^^;ages on real estate from
Uielr collateral ; such, e-j?., a« the long lime advances (Investments in
securities) made b; lavings-banks, inauraace compaaiei, minor private
and mortgage banks, privnte lendcra, etc.


THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



103



erty of these kinds — what is already in use in
industry and what is not of use for industrial pur-
poses — may be " coined into means of payment,"
and so may be made to serve as additional pecun-
iary (business) capital, but such property is me-
chanically incapable of serving as additional
material (industrial) capital. To a very consid-
erable extent the funds involved in these loans,
therefore, have only a pecuniary (business) exist-
ence, not a material (industrial) one ; and, so
far aa that is true, they represent, in the aggre-
gate, only fictitious industrial equipment. Even
such inconsiderable portion of them, however, as
represents metallic reserves also adds nothing to
the effective material apparatus of industry ; since
money as such, whether metallic or promissoi-y, is
of no direct industrial effect ; as is evident from
the well-known fact that the absolute quantity of
the precious metals in use is a matter of no con-
sequence to the conduct of either business or in-
dustry, so long as the quantity neither increases
nor decreases by an appreciable amount. Nummus
mtmmum non parit.

So that all advances made by banking houses or
by other creditors in a like case, — whether the
advances are made on mortgage, collateral or
personal notes, in the form of deposits, note issues,
or what not ; whether they are taken to represent
the items of property covered by the collateral.



I



104 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPRISE
the cash reserves of the banks, or the general
solvency o£ the creditor or debtor,— all these
« advances " go to mcreaae tlie " capital " of which
business men have the disposal ; but for the ma-
terial purposes of industry, taken in the a^regate,
they are purely fictitious items.' Cash loans (such
aa savmgs-bank deposits* and the like) belong in
the same category. All these advances afford the
borrower a differential advantf^e in bidding against
other business men for the control and use of in-
dustrial processes and materials, they afford him
a differential advautage in the distribution of the
material means of industry ; but they constitute
no aggregate addition to the material means of
industry at large. Funds of whatever character
are a pecuniary fact, not an industrial one ; they
serve the distribution o! the control of industry
only, not its materially productive work.

Loan credit in excess of what may serve to
transfer the management of industrial materials
from the owner to a more competent user — that
is to say, in so far as it is not, in effect, of the
natiue of a lease of industrial plant — serves, on
the whole, not to increase the quantity of the

> Thia traism U frequently over)cM)ked Id theoretical diaciuaions ;
honce, m the present argumeDt requires lU recogniUoa, It ii here
stated Id ihU explicit vaj.

' The cash loaua made by depositors to UTings-baiibB la the form

Ot <)epiMlU,



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



105



material means of industry nor, directly, to en-
hance the effectiveness of their xise ; but, taken
in the aggregate, it serves only to widen the dis-
crepancy between business capital and industrial
equipment. So long as times are brisk this dis-
crepancy ordinarily goes on widening through a
progressive extension of credit. Funds obtained
on credit are applied to extend the business;
competing business men bid up the material items
of industrial equipment by the use of funds so
obtained ; the value of the material items em-
ployed in industry advances; the aggregate of
values employed in a given undertaking increases,
with or without a physical increase of the indus-
trial material engaged ; but since an advance of
credit rests on the collateral as expressed in terms
of value, an enhanced value of the property affords
a basis for a further extension of credit, and so



Now, the base line of business transactions is
the money value (market or exchange value, price)
of the items involved, not their material efficiency.
The value of the money unit is by conventional
usage held to be invariable, and the lenders per-
force proceed on this assumption, so long as they
proceed at all.' Consequently, any increase of

' Cf. TvxI/tk Ctntut 0/ the Uniird Slalti, vol. VII. p. o.

* Few, perhaps, would in set leruia mainUm an argument that the
Tslue at money does not vaiy, but still fewer would, In a credit Iraus-
Bction, proceed on a nuppoHiiion at variance with that position. Ah



J



106 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

the aggregate money values involved in the
current industrial business enterprises will afford
a basis for an extension of loans, indistinguishable
from any other block of capitalized values, even if
the increase of capitalized values is due to credit
advances previously made on the full cash value
of the property hypothecated, The extension of
loans on collateral, such as stock and similar values
involved in industrial business, has therefore in the
nature of things a cumulative character. This
cumulative extension of credit through the en-
hancement of prices goes on, if otherwise undis-
turbed, so long as no adverse price phenomenon
obtrudes itself with suflBcient force to convict
this cumulative enhancement of capitalized values
of imbecility. The extension of credit proceeds on
the putative stability of the money value of the
capitalized industrial material, whose money value
_ is cumulatively augmented by this extension itself.

■ But the money value of the collateral is at the

H same time the capitalized value of the property,

H computed on the basis of its presumptive eaming-

H capacity. These two methods of rating the value

H of collateral must approximately coincide, if the

I

I z

m



the economlau are accustomed to *&y, mone; la the standard of de-
terred payroento. It ia also, Iti the unreflecting apprebeuaion of Uioae
who hare practically to deal with wealth phenomena, telt to be the
■taudard and InBcxtble measure of wealth. The fad that thU coiiTen-
tional usage is embodied In law acta greatly to fortify the naive acoept-
anceof monej and price aa the deflnlilTe terms of wealtli. Seepp.B2-



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



107



capitalization is to afford a stable basis for credit ;
and when an obvious discrepancy arises between
the outcome given by the two ratings, then a re-
rating will be had in which the rating on the hasia
of eaming-capacity must be accepted as definitive,
since earnings are the ground fact about which
all business transactions turn and to which all
business enterprise converges, A manifest dift-
crepancy presently arises in this way between
the aggregate nominal capital (capital plus loans)
engaged in business, on the one hand, and the
actual rate of earning-capacity of this business
capital, on the other hand ; and when this dis-
crepancy has become patent a period of liquidation
begins.

To give a readier view of the part played by
loan credit in this discrepancy between the busi-
ness capital and the earning-capacity of industrial
concerns, it will be in place to indicate more
summarily what are the factors at play.

The earnings of the business community, taken
as a whole, are derived from the marketable output
of goods and services turned out by the industrial
process — disregarding such earnings as accrue to
one concern merely at the cost of another. The
effective industrial capital, from the use of which
this output, and therefore these earnings, arise,
is the aggregate of capitalized material items
actually engaged in industry. The business



I

A



I



108 THE THEOKY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPRI3E

capiUl, on the other hand, is made up of this
capitalized industrial material taken as a fund
of values, plus good-will, plus whatever funds are
obtained on credit by using this capitalized indus-
trial material as collateral, plus funds obtained on
other, non-industrial, property used as collateral.
Through the competitive use of funds obtained on
credit, as spoken of above, the nominal value of
the capitalized industrial material is cumulatively
augmented so aa to make it approximately equal
to its original capitalization plus whatever funds
are obtained on credit of all kinds. On this basis
of an expanded collateral a further extension of
credit takes place, and the funds so obtained are
incorporated in the business capital and turned
to the like competitive use, and so on.' Capital
and earnings are counted in terms of the money
unit. Counted in these terms, the eammgs (in-
dustrial output) are also increased by the process
of inflation through credit, since the competitive
use of funds spoken of acts to bid up prices of
whatever products are used in industry, and of
whatever speculative property is presumed to have
some eventual industrial use. (But the nominal
magnitude (value) of the earnings ia not increased
in as large a ratio as that of the business capital ;
since the demand whereby the values of the outr

' Cf. Knieg, Orld und Credit, vol. II. ch. VI. bm. C, oapeclilly



i


THE USE 0¥ LOAN CREDIT

put are regulated is not altogether a business de-
mand {for productive goods), but is in great part,
and indeed in the last resort mainly, reducible to
a consumptive demand for finished goods.' /

Looking at credit extension and its use for piu> -^
poses of capital as a whole, the outcome which pre-
sents itself most strikingly at a period of liquidation
is the redistribution of the ownership of industrial
property incident to the liquidation. The funds
obtained on credit are in great measure invested
competitively in the same aggregate of material
items that is already employed in industry apart
from the use of loan credit, with the result that
the same range of items of wealth are rated at a
larger number of money units. In these items of
wealth — which, apart from the use of credit, are
owned by their nominal owners — the creditors,
by virtue of the credit extension, come to own an
undivided interest proportioned to the advances

1 The eubftneement of Ibc market value of tbe output does not, In -^
tact, keep pace with the Inflation of buaineaa capitnl during a period
of speculBiive adv&nce. In order tbnt it should do so, and afford
nominnl earnings proportionate to the iuQated capital, it nou]<l be
necessary that incomoB should increase proportionately to the inBaUon
of capital ; but, even if Ihia happened, the expenses of production
would tliereby bo so increased (through the advance of wages and the
like) aa to oSset the entire inflation of values for all consumptive goods
and leave only the advance in the values of productive goods as a net
margin from which to draw an Increase of earnings. The discrepancy
under discussion, however, Is not due entirely to the presence of credit,
and a fully detailed analysis of the causes out of which it arises can,
therefore, not properly be presented in this place.



J



110 THE THEORY OF BDSINESa ENTERPIilSE

which they have made. The aggregate of these
items of property comes hereby to be potentially
owned by the creditors in approximately the pro-
portion which the loans bear to the collateral plus
the loans. The outcome of credit extension, in this
respect, is a situation in which the creditors have
become potential owners of such a fraction of the
industrial equipment as would be represented by the
formula:' , „



capitalization { = collateral + loans)

In a period of liquidation this potential owner-
ship on the part of the creditors takes effect to

■ Ro lung as the rating ot the eaplUItzed property remaina andis-
lurbed, tUe fonuula which expresses the creditors' clftim maintains the
fonn giron above. It then slgulfles nothing more than that the cred-
Itiirs hold a, claim on such a proportion of the aggregate capJUiliEed
property Involved as their advances bear to llie aggregate capitaliza-
tion. But BO soon as a rerating ot the capitalized property enters the
problem the formula becoinei

capitalization -f A capitalization

capitaUiation — Acapitalicatioa'
according M the rerating ot cjtpitalization is in the direction ot

enhancement or depreciation : ~ — or ■ During

cap + A cap cap — A cap
bridlt times, when capiialiiatlon advances, the claim represented by a
given loan covers a decreasing proportion of the aggr^ate capitali7.ed

properQr involved ( 1 ■ the denominator Increases and tbe

\.cap + a cap/
quotient conseqnenlly decreases. Wheteaa, in a period of liquidation
the ratio ot tbe creditors' claim to tbe Bggrcgat« capitalization in-
creases by force of the lowerod ntUug of the capitalized property

, - — \

\cap — A cap^



THE USE OF LOAK CREDIT



the extent to which the liquidation is carried
through.'

The precise measure and proportion in which the
industrial property of the business community
passes into the hands of the creditors in a period of
liquidation can, of course, not be specified ; it depends
on the degree of shrinkage in values, as well as on
the degree of thoroughness with which the liqui-
dation is carried out, and perhaps on other still leas
ascertainable causes, among which is the degree of
closeness of organization of the business community.
It is, however, through the shrinkage of market
values of the output and the industrial plant that
the transfer of ownership to the creditor class takes
place. In case no shrinkage of values took place,
no such general transfer of ownership to the cred-
itors as a class would become evident.

In point of fact, the shrinkage commonly super-
venes, in the coiu-se of modem business, when a
general liquidation comes ; although it is conceiv-
able that the period of acute liquidation and its
attendant shrinkage of values need not supervene.
Such would probably be the case in the absence of
competitive investment in industrial material on a
large scale. Secondary effects, such as perturbations
of the rate of interest, insolvency, forced sales, and
the like, need scarcely be taken up here, although

' All tfaose who. at a period ot liquid&lioii, sfA holders o! fluent
funds or of claima to fixed mims of money sre, for the present purpose.
In th« position ol creditors.



I



loan credit so far seems to b<
loan credit beyond that invol
of productive goods from tbei
petent users is unavoidable
competitive business — credi
mally in some degree " abnori
(b) such a use o£ credit d oes
gate of industrially productiJ
crease its material output of prJ
does not add materially to the |
ings obtained by the body of b
in industry, as counted in mat
or of permanent values ; ' (c) it
gate net profits obtained by t
ga ged i n industry, as counted ii
it requires them to pay interest
the industrial process proper , oi
as an aggregate, represent no ]
jiave no aggregate productive

suits an nvprrafi»cr nf tlifl-aaa»


THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



113



trial equipment at the starting-point, by approxi-
mately the amount of the aggregate deposits and
loans on collateral ; (e) the overrating swells the
business capital, thereby raises the valuation of
collateral, and gives rise to a fnrther extension
of credit, with further results of a like nature ;
{/) commonly beginning at some point where the
extension of credit ia exceptionally large in propor-
tion to the material substratum of productive goods,
or where the discrepancy between nominal capital
and earning-capacity is exceptionally wide, the
overrating is presently recognized by the creditor
and a settlement ensues; (g) on the consequent
withdrawal of credit a forced rerating of the ag-
gregate capital follows, bringing the nominal aggre-
gate into approximate accord with the facts of
earning-capacity ; (A) the shrinkage which takea
place in reducing the aggregate rating of business
capital from the basis of capital goods plus loans to
the basis of capital goods alone, takes place at the
expense of debtors and nominal owners of industrial
equipment, in so far as they are solvent ; (i) in the
period of liquidation the gain represented by the
credit inflation goes to the creditors and claimants
of funds outside the industrial process proper, ex-
cept that so much as is cancelled in bad debts is
written off ; (j) apart from secondary effects, such
as heightened efficiency of industry due to inflated
values, changes of the rate of interest, insolvency,


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



etc., the main final outcome is a redistribution of
the ownership of property whereby the creditor class,
including holders and claimants of funds, is bene-
fited.

Since the modem industrial situation began to
take form, there have been two principal forms of
credit transactions current in the usage of the
business community for the purpose of investment :
the old-fashioned loan, the usage of which has
come down from an earlier day; and the stock
share, whereby funds are invested in a joint stock
company or corporation. The latter is a credit
instrument, so far as touches the management of
the property represented, in that (in earlier usage
at least) it effects a transfer of a given body of
property from the hands of an owner who resigns
discretion in its control to a board of directors who
assume the management of it. In addition to
these two methods of credit relation there has,
during the late-modern industrial period, come
into extensive use a third class of expedients, viz.
debentures of one form and another — ^ bonds of
various tenor, preferred stock, preference shares,
etc., ranging, in point of technical character and
degree of liability, from something approaching the
nature of a bill of sale to something not readily
distinguishable in effect from a personal note.
The typical (latest and most highly specialized)


THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



instruiuent of thia class is the preferred stock .
This ia in form a deed of ownership and in
effect an evidence of debt. It is typical of a some-
what comprehensive class of securities in use in
the business community, in the respect that it
sets aside the distinction between capital and credit.
In this respect, indeed, preferred stock, more
adequately perhaps than any other instrument,
reflects the nature of the *' capital concept " cur-
rent among the up-to-date business men who are
engaged in the larger industrial affairs.

The part which debenture credit, nominal and
virtual, plays in the financing of modem industrial
corporations is very considerable, and the propor-
tion which it bears in the capitalization of these
corporations apparently grows larger as time passes
and shrewder methods of business gain ground. In
tbe field of the *' industrials " proper, debenture
credit has not until lately been employed with full
effect. It seems to be from the corporation finance
of American railway companies that business men
have learned the full use of an exhaustive deben-
ture credit as an expedient for expanding business
capital. It is not an expedient newly discovered,
but its free use, even in railway finance, is relatively
late. Wherever it prevails in an unmitigated
form, as with some railway companies, and lat-
terly in many other industrial enterprises, it
throws the capitalization of the business concerns



I



116 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

affected by it into a peculiar, charactenBtically
modern, position in relation to credit. When car-
ried out thoroughly it places virtually the entire
capital, comprising the whole of the material
equipment, on a credit basis. Stock being issued
by the use of such funds as will pay for printing
the instruments, a road will be built or an indus-
trial plant established by the use of funds drawn
from the sale of bonds ; preferred stock or similar
debentures will then be issued, commonly of
various denominations, to the full amount that the
property will bear, and not infrequently somewhat
in excess of what the property will bear. When
the latter case occurs, the market quotations of the
securities will, of course, roughly adjust the current
effective capitalization to the run of the facts, what-
ever the nominal capitalization may be. The
common stock in such a case represents " good-
will," and in the later development it usually
represents nothing but "good-will."' The mate-
rial equipment is covered by credit instruments —
debentures. Not infrequently the debentures cover
appreciably more than the value of the material
equipment, together with such property as useful
patent riglits or trade secrets ; in such a case the
good-will is also, to some extent, covered by de-
bentures, and so serves as virtual collateral for a
credit extension which is incorporated in the busi-

I See CtiajiWr VI.



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



117



neas capital of the company. In the ideal case,
where a corporation is financed with due perspi-
cacity, there will be but an inappreciable proportion
of the market value of the company's good-will
left uncovered by debentures. In the case of a
railway company, for instance, no more should be
left uncovered by debentures than the value of the
"franchise," and probably in most cases not that
much actually is uncovered.

Whether capitalized good-will (including " fran-
chise" if necessary) is to be rated as a credit
extension is a nice question that can apparently
be decided only on a legal technicality. In any
case BO much seems clear — that good-will is the
nucleus of capitalization in modem corporation
finance. In a well financed, flourishing corpora-
tion, good-will, indeed, constitutes the total remain-
ing assets after liabilities have been met, but the
total remaining assets may not nearly equal the
total market value of the company's good-will ;
that is to say, the material equipment (plant, etc.)
of a shrewdly managed concern is hypothecated at
least once, commonly more than once, and its im-
material properties (good-will), together with the
evidences of its indebtedness, may also to some
extent be drawn into the hypothecation.'

>The question of "stock watering," "overcapitalization," and
the like 1« scarcely pertinent in tLe case of a, large industrial corpora-
tion flaaoeed as the modem situatiou demands. Under modem clr-
k can scarcely (ail to be all " water,"



I



118 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

What haa just been said of the part borne by
good-will and debentures in the capitalization of
corporations should be taken in connection with
what was said above (pp. 100-104) as to the nature
of the securities offered as collateral in procuring a
credit extension. The greater part of the securities
used as collateral, and so " coined into means of pay-
ment," are evidences of debt, at the first remove or
farther from their physical basis, instruments of
credit recording a previous credit extension.

In the earlier period of growth of this debenture

nnleu Id a smBll concern or under incompetent m&nagement. Nothing
1)ut "water" — under the name of good-nill — belong! in thecooimon
■lock ; whereas the preferred stock, which represents material equip-
ment, is a debenture. " OvercapllAlizatlon," on the other hand, it it
means anything under modern buainesa conditions, must mean over-
oapitalization as compared with eaming.capacity, for there U nothing
else pertinent to compare it with ; and eaming-oapacity fluctaat<«,
while the basis (interest rates) on which the eaming-capacity is to be
capilatiied alao fluctuates Independently.

In effect, the adjosUnent of capitalization to earn in g-capa city Is
taken care of by the market quolaciouB of stock and other securities ;
and DO other method o( adjusttiicnt is of any avail, because capiializn-
tiun Is a question of value, and market quotations are the last resort
in questions of value. The value ol anj* stock listed on the exchange,
or otherwise subject to purchase and sale, fluctuates from time to titno ;
which comes to the same thing as saying that the effectual capitaliza-
tion of the concern, represented by the secaritles quoted, fluctuates
from time to time. It fluctuates more or less, Bometimes very slowly,
but always at least ao much as to compensate the long-period fluciiia-
tions of discount ralea in the money market ; which means thitt the
puichaie price of n given fiaclional interest in the corporation as a
going ooDcem fluctuates so as to equate It with the capitalized value
of its pntatlve camliig-capacity, computed at current rales of discount
and allowing for risks. Cf. Report of the Induitrial Commlmion,
vol. L p. 687 (TeBtioiony of Rogers) ; vol. XIIL pp. 108-107 (TesU-
mon; of E. R. Chapman). Bee also Chapter VI. below.



i



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT

financiering in industry, as, e.g., in the railroad
financiering of the third quarter of the nineteenth
centuryj the process of expansion by means of de-
benture credit, in any given case, was worked out
gradually, over a more or less extended period of
time. But as the possibilities of this expedient
have grown familiar to the business community,
the time consumed in perfecting the structure of
debentures in each case has been reduced ; until
it is now not unusual to perfect the whole organiza-
tion, with its load of debentures, at the inception
of a corporate enterprise. In such a case, when a
corporation starts with a fully organized capital
and debt, the owners of the concern are also its
creditors ; they are, at the start, the holders of
both common and preferred stock, and probably
also of the bonds of the company — so adding
Miother increment of confusion to the relation
between modem capital and credit, as seen from
the old-fashioned position as to what capitalization
and its basis should be.



This syncopated process of expanding capital by
the help of credit financiering, however, is seen at
its best in the latterKlay reorganizations and coali-
tions of industrial corporations ; and as this class
of transactions also illustrate another interesting
and characteristically modern feature of credit
financiering, the whole matter may best be set out



J



120 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

in the way of a sketch, of what takes place in a
case of coalition of industrial corporations on a
lai^e scale such as recent industrial history has
made familiar.

The avowed end of these latteinilay business
coalitions is economy of production and sale and
an amicable regulation of iatercorporate relations.
So far as bears on the functioning of credit in the
attendant business transactions, the presence or
absence of these purposes, of course, does not
affect the course of events or the outcome. These
avowed incentives do not touch the credit opera-
tions involved. On the other hand, the need of
large credit in consummating the deal, as well as
the presumptive gains to be drawn from the credit
relations involved, offer inducements of their own
to men who are in a position to effect such a coali-
tion. Inducements of this kind seem to have been
of notable effect in bringing on some of the recent
operations of this class.

Credit operations come into these transactions
mainly at two points: in the "financing" of the
deal, and in the augmentation of debentures ; and
at both of these points there is a chance of gain —
on the one hand to the promoter (organizer) and
the credit house which finances the operation, and
on the other hand to the stockholders. The gain
which accrues to tlie two former is the more un-
equivocal, and this seems in some cases to be the



I


THE USE OF LOAN CBEDIT



121



dominant incentive to effect the reorganization.
The whole operation of reorganization may, there-
fore, best be taken up from the point of view of
the promoter, who is tlie prime mover in the
matter.

A reorganization of industrial concerns on a
large scale, such as are not uncommon at the
present time, involves a campaign of business
strategy, engaging, it is said, abilities and rcspon-
flibiUties of a very high order. Such a campaign
of business strategy, as carried out by the modern
captains of industry, runs, in the main, on credit
relations, in the way of financial backing, options,
purchases, leases, and the issuance and transfer of
stock and debentm^a. In order to carry through
these large " deals," in the first place, a very
substantial basis of credit is required, either in
the hands of the promoter (organizer) himself or in
the hands of a credit house which " finances " the
organization for him.

The strategic use of credit here involved is, in
effect, very different from the old-time use of loan
credit in investments. In transactions of this class
the time element, the credit period, is an incon-
spicuous factor at the most; it plays a very subor-
dinate and uncertain part. The volume of credit
at the disposal of a given strategist is altogether
the decisive point, as contrasted with the lapse of
time over which the incident credit extension may



I



122 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTEBPRI8E



I



run. The uaefulness of the credit extension is not
measured in terms of time, nor are the gains which
accrue to the creditor in the case proportioned to
the length of time involved.

This follows from the peculiar nature of the
work which these great captains of industry have
in hand, and more remotely, therefore, from the
peculiar character of the earnings which induce
them to undertake the work. Their work, though
it is of the gravest consequence to industry, is not
industrial business, in that it is not occupied with
anytlmig like the conduct of a continuous indus-
trial process. Nor is it of the same class as com-
mercial business, or even banking business, in that
there is no investment in a continued sequence of
transactions. It differs also from stock and prod-
uce speculation, as that is currently conceived,' in
that it does not depend on the lapse of time to
bring a change of circumstances ; although it has
many points of similarity with stock speculation.
In its details this work resembles commercial busi-
H ness, in that it has to do with bargaining ; but so

H does all business, and this peculiar work of the

^M trust promoter differs from mercantile business in

H the absence of continuity. Perhaps its nearest

H business analogue is the work of the real estate

H / agent.

L



.g., Emerj, ^mlaUon on the Sloek and Product Exdiaitgtt
o/lkt Unltrd Slates, cb. IV ; Hadley, ScoaomSCM, oli. IV.



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



123



The volume of credit involved is commonly very
great ; whereas the credit period, the lapse of time,
u a negligible factor. Indeed, if an appreciable
credit period intervenes, that is a fortuitous circum-
stance. The time element in these credit operations
is in abeyance, or at the best, it is an indeterminate
magnitude. Hence the formula shown above (p. 95,
n. 3) is practically not applicable to business of
this class. So far as bears upon the credit opera-
tions involved in these transactions of the large
finance, the question about which interest turns is
almost exclusively the volume of the turnover ; its
velocity is a negligible quantity.

Such strategic use of credit is not confined to
the business of making or marring industrial coali-
tions. It is habitually to be met with in connec-
tion with stock (and produce) speculation, and
ramifications of the like use of credit run through
the dealings of the business community at laige in
many directions ; but it rarely attains the magni-
tude in the service of stock speculation whicli it
reaches in the campaign incident to a trust-making
deal. The form of credit extension employed in
these transactions with indeterminate time also
varies. The older and more familiar form is that
of the call loan, together with the stock exchange
transactions for which call loans are largely used.
Here the time element is present, especially in
form ; but the credit period is somewhat indeter-



d



I



124 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

minate, as is also the gain that accrues to the
creditor from the transaction ; although the cred-
itor's gain here continues to be counted at a (vari-
able) rate per cent, per time-unit. The strate^c
use of credit in the affairs of the large business
finance has much in common with the call loan.
Indeed, the call loan in set form is often resorted
to as a valuable auxiliary recourse, although the
larger arrangements for financing such a campaign
of business strategy are not usually put in the form
of a call loan. The arrangement between the pro-
moter and the financial agent is commonly based
on a less specific stipulation as to collateral, and
the payment for credit obtained takes even less, if
any, account of the length of the credit period.
In financing a campaign of coalition the credit
bouse that acts as financial agent assumes, in effect,
an even less determinate credit responsibility.
Here, too, the gains accruing to the creditor are
no longer, even nominally, counted per cent, per
time-unit, but rather in the form of a bonus based
mainly on the volume of the turnover, with some
variable degree of regard to other circumstances.
Answering to the essentially timeless character
of the gams accruing to the financial agent, the
earnings of the promoter engaged in transactions
of this class are also not of the nature of profits
per cent, per time-unit, but rather a bonus which
commonly falls immediately into the shape of a


THE USE OF LOAN CKEDIT



share in the capitalization of the newly organized
concern. Much of the increment of capital, or
capitalization, that goes to the promoter is scarcely
distinguishable from an increase of the liabilities of
the new corporation {e.g. preferred stock); and
the remainder {e.g. common stock) has also some
of the characteristics of a credit instrument. It is
worth noting that the cost of reorganization, includ-
ing the bonus of the promoter and the financial
agent, is, in the common run of cases, added to the
capitalization; that is to say, as near as this class
of transactions may be spoken of in terms borrowed
from the old-fashioned business terminology, what
answers to the "interest" due the creditor on the
credit extension involved is incorporated in the
" capital " of the debtor, without circumlocution or
faltering.'

The line between credit and capital, or between
debt and property, in the values handled through-
out these strategic operations of coalition, remains
somewhat uncertain. Indeed, the old-fashioned
concepts of "debt" and "property," or "liabili-
ties" and "assets," are not fairly applicable to the
facts of the case — except, of course, in the way of
a technical legal distinction. The old-fashioned law
and legal presumptions and the new-fashioned facta

• Stport of the Industrial Commi*slon, vol. I, (Teslimony of W. H.
Moore) pp. 960-063, (W. E. Boia) p. Wl), (Gates) p. 1032 ; vol. IX.
(T. L. Greene) p. ISl ; vol. Xlll. p. viU, irilb corresponding tesU-
mony. See tiao Chapter VI. below.



I


126 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRI8E

and usages are parting company, at this point as
well as at some others in the affairs of modem
business.

When such a large transaction in the reorganiza-
tion of industrial concerns has been completed, the
values left in the hands of the former owners of
the concerns merged in the new coalition are only
to a fractional and uncertain extent of the nature
of material goods. They are in large part deben-
tures, and much of the remainder is of a doubtful
character. A large proportion of the nominal
collective capital resulting in such cases is made
up of the capitalized good-will of the concerns
merged.' This good-will is chiefly a capitalization
of the differential advantages possessed by the
several concerns as competitors in business, and is
for the most part of no use for other than competi-
tive business ends. It has for the most part no
aggregate industrial effect. The differential advan-
tages possessed by business concerns as competitors
disappear when the competitors are merged, in the
degree in which they cease to compete with rival
bidders for the same range of business. To this
aggregate defunct good-will of the consolidated
concerns (which in the nature of things can make
only an imaginary aggregate) is added something

> Report of the Induttrlal Commistion, toL I. (Testimon; of Dodd)
pp. 1064-1066, 1067, 1068-1050, {Gates) pp. 1021-1022 ; vol. XUL
p. iz, vltb testimoDy.



i



THE USE OF LOAN CREDIT



127



in the way of an incretnent of good-will belonging
to the new corporation as sucli ; ' and the whole
is then represented, approximately, by the common
stock issued. The nominal capital of the concerns
merged (in good part based on capitalized good-
will) is aggregated, after an appraisement which
commonly equalizes the proportion of each by
increasing the nominal shares of all. This aggre-
gate is covered with common and preferred stock,
chieBy preferred, which is a class of debentures
issued under the form of capital. The stock, com-
mon and preferred, goes to the owners of the con-
cerns merged, and to the promoter and the financial
agent, as indicated above. In case bonds are
issued, these likewise go to the former owners, in
so far as they do not replace outstanding liabilities
of the concerns merged.

" Capital " in the enlightened modem business
usage means " capitalized presumptive earning-
capacity," and in this capitalization is comprised
the usufruct of whatever credit extension the
given business concern's industrial equipment and
good-will will support.' By consequence the ef-
fectual capitalization (shown by the market quota-
tions) as contrasted with the nominal capital
(shown by the par value of the stock of all de-

' K^ort of the Jnduitrial Cotnmiieton, vol. 1. (Testimony of Do«
Puatw) p. 1170 ; to). XIII. (C. B. Flint) p. 48. Testimony to Uie
nme eHeot reoure elsewhere in the Bepvrt. See p. 125, n. 1 above.

' See CluipUr VI. below.



128 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPKISE

Bcripttons) fluctuates with the fluctuations of the
prevalent presumption as to the solvency and
earning-capacity of the concern and the good faith
of its governing board.

When the modern captain of industry reorgan-
izes and consolidates a given range of industrial
business concerns, therefore, and gives them a
collective form and name as an up-to-date corpora-
tion, the completed operation presents, in synco-
pated form and within a negligible lapse of time,
all that intricate process of cumulative augmentar
tion of business capital through the use of credit
which otherwise may come gradually in the course
of business competition. At the same time it in-
volves a redistribution of the ownership of the
property engaged in industry, such as otherwise
occurs at a period of liquidation. The result is,
of course, not the same at all points, but the
equivalence between the two methods of expanding
business capital and distributing the gains is close
in some respects. The resemblances and the dif-
ferences between the two processes, so far as relates
to credit, are worth noticing. The trust-maker is
in some respects a surrogate for a commercial
crisis.

When credit extension is used competitively in
the old-fashioned way for increasing the business
of competing concerns, as spoken of above (pp. 94-
100, 109-114), the expansion of business capital


J


k



THE DSE OF LOAM CREDIT

through credit operations occupies a period of sorae
duration, commonly running over an interval recog-
nized as a period of speculative advance or " rising
prosperity." The expansion of capitalized values
then takes place more or less gradually through a
competitive enhancement of the prices of industrial
equipment and the like. The creditors then com-
monly come in for their resulting share in the
industrial equipment only at the period of liquida-
tion, with its attendant shrinkage of values. In
the timeless credit transactions involved in the
modem reorganizations of industrial business, on
the other hand, the creditora' claim takes effect
without an appreciable lapse of time, a liquidation,
or a shrinkage of values.

The whole process of credit extension, augmen-
tation of business capital, and distribution of pro-
ceeds is reduced to a very simple form. The credit
extension is effected in two main fonns : (a) the
" financing " undertaken by the credit house in
conjunction with the promoter, and (&) the issu-
ance of debentures. The bonus of the financing
house and promoter, as well as the debentures,
are all included in the recapitalization, together
with an increment of good-will and any other
incidental items of expense or presumptive gain.
The resulting collective capitalization (assets and
liabilities) is then distributed to the several parties
concerned in the transaction. The outcome, so far



I



I



130 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

as touches the present argument, being that when
the operation is completed the ownership of the
recapitalized industrial equipment, with whatever
other property is involved, appears distributed
between the former owners, the promoter, and the
credit house which financed the operation. But,
by virtue of the debentures distributed, the former
owners, together with the other parties named,
appear in the r51e of creditors of the new corpora-
tion as well as owners of it ; they commonly come
out of the transaction with large holdings of pre-
ferred stock or similar debentures at the same
time that they hold the common stock. The
preferred stock, of course, is presently disposed of
by the large holders to outside parties. The ma-
terial equipment is then practically the same as
it was before; the business capital has been aug-
mented to comprise such proportion of the good-
will of the several concerns incorporated as had
not previously been capitalized and hypothecated,
together with the good-will imputed to the new
corporation and such debentures as these items of
wealth will float.

The effective capitalization resulting is, of course,
indicated by the market quotations of the securi-
ties issued rather than by their face value. The
value of the corporation's business capital so indi-
cated need suffer no permanent shrinkage ; it will
auSer none if the monopoly advantage (good-will)


i



THE 0SE OF LOAN CREDIT



of the new corporation is sufficient to keep its
eaming-capacity up to the rate on which the
capitalization is based.

It appears, then, that in the affairs of latter-
day business, as shown by modern corporation
finance, capital and credit extension are not al-
ways distinguiahable in fact, nor does there appear
to be a decisive business reason why they should
be distinguished. " Capital " means " capitalized
putative eaming-capacity," expressed in terms of
value, and this capitalization comprises the use of
all feasible credit extension. The business capital
of a modem corporation is a magnitude that fluc-
tuates from day to day ; and in the quotations of
its debentures the magnitude of its credit extension
also fluctuates from day to day with the course of
the market. The precise pecmiiary magnitude of
the business community's invested wealth, as well
as the aggregate amount of the community's in-
debtedness, depends from hour to hour on the
quotations of the stock exchange ; and it rarely
happens that it remains nearly the same in tlie
aggregate from one week's end to the next. Both
capital and credit, therefore, vary from hour to
hour and, within narrow limits, from place to
place. The magnitude and fluctuations of business
capital, — "capital" in the sense in which that
term is used in business affairs, — of course, stand
in no hard and fast relation to the material magni-



J



132 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

tude of the industrial equipment ; nor do yariations
in the magnitude of the business capital reflect
variations in the magnitude or the efficiency of
the industrial equipment in any but the loosest
and most indecisive manner. So also, and for the
same reason, the magnitude and the variations of
the aggregate credit afloat at a given time bear,
at the most, but a remote, indirect, and shifty
relation to the aggregate of material wealth and
the material changes to which this wealth is subject.
All this applies with peculiar cogency wherever and
in so far as industry and business are carried on
by M0den> expert, and in due ««nt«i with
the market.



CHAPTER VI



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL

What has been said on the use of loan credit
has anticipated much of what is peculiar in modern
business capital. Such is necessarily the case,
since it is in the extensive use of credit that the
later phases o£ the management of capital contrast
most strikingly with the corresponding features of
earlier business traffic. To follow the terminologi-
cal precedents set by German writers, the latfr-
modem scheme of economic life is a " credit '
economy," as contrasted with the "money econ-
omy" that characterizes early-modem times. The
nature of business capital and its relations to the
industrial process under the later, more fully
developed, credit economy is in some degree
different from what it was before the full and free
use of credit came to occupy its present central
position in business traffic ; and more particularly
is it at variance with tlie theoretical expositions of
the economists of the past generation.

It has been the habit of economists and others
to speak of " capital " as a stock of the material
means by which industry is carried on, — industrial



134 THE THEOKY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

equipment, raw materials, and means of subsistence.
This view is carried over from the situation in
which business and industry stood at the time of
Adam Smltli and of the generation before Adam
Smith, from wliose scheme of life and of thought
be drew the commonplace materials and concep-
tions with which his speculations were occupied.
It further carries over the point of view occupied
by Adam Smith and the generation to whom he
addressed his speculations. That is to say, the
received theoretical formulations regarding business
capital and its relations to industry proceed
on the circumstances that prevailed in the days
of the " money economy," before credit and the
modern corporation methods became of firstclass
consequence in economic affairs. They canvass
these matters from the point of view of the
material welfare of the community at large, as
Been from the standpoint of the utilitarian philoso-
phy. In this system of social philosophy the
welfare of the community at large is accepted as
the central and tone-giving interest, about which a
comprehensive, harmonious order of nature circles
and gravitates. Tliese early speculations on busi-
ness traffic tiuTi about the bearing of this traffic
upon the wealth of nations, particularly as the
wealth of nations would stand in a " natural "
Bcheme of things, in which all things should work
together for the welfare of mankind.



i



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



135



The theory, or what there is in the way of a
theory, of business capital in the received body of
doctrines is worked out from the point of view and
for the theoretical purposes of the eighteenth-
century scheme of natural liberty, natural rights,
and natural law ; and the received theorems con-
cerning the part played by capital and by the
capitalist are substantially of the character of laws
of nature, as that term was understood during the
period to which these theorems owe their genesis.
What these received theorems declare concerning
the nature and normal function of capital and of
the capitalist need not be recited here; their
content is familiar enough to all readers, lay and
learned. Also the merits of such a point of view
for purposes of economic theory, and the adequacy
of the received concept of capital for the purposes
to which it was originally applied, need not detain
the inquiry. Modern business management does
not take that point of view, nor does "capital"
carry such a meaning to the modern business man ;
because the guiding circumstances under which
modem business is carried on are not those sup-
posed to be given by a beneficent order of nature,
nor do the controlling purposes of business traffic
include that general well-being which constituted
the final term of Adam Smith's social philosophy.

As a business proposition, "capital" means a
fund of money values; and since the credit econ-



I



I

I



13G THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

omy and corporation finance have come to be the
ruling factors In industrial businesa, this fund of
money values (taken as an aggregate) bears but a
remote and fluctuating relation to the industrial
equipment and the other items which may (perhaps
properly) be included under the old-fashioned
concept of industrial capital."

Capital has been spoken of as the capitalized
(aggregated) cost of industrial equipment, etc.," —
a view which had its significance for economic
theory a hundred yeara ago ; but since corporation
finance has come to pervade the management of

' The (lUtinction belneen bnalness capital and " ladustrial capi-
tal " or " capital goods " has been abown by Knles, Oeld uiid Credit,
vol. 1. ch. 11. pp. 40-00. DistinctloDB having a very similar effect ia
some bearings are W be found in Hodbertua ("privaCe capital" and
"natioQal capital"), in Biihm-Bawerk ("acquisitive capital" and
"productive capital," or "private capital" and "social capital"), In
Clark ("capital" and "capital goods"). Similar distinctions are
made by various nriters to lielp out the incompetency ol tlie received
deSniiJan of tiie term. Tbe merit of these dlatinctlons does not concern
tbe present inquiry, since they are made for otber purposes than that here
aimed at. The distinction made above is not an attempt to recast the
terminology of economic tlieory, but ia simply an expedient for present
use. It amounts to an unqualified acceptance of tbe concept (more or
leas nell defined) which biuiness men habitually attach to the term
"capital" Mr. F. A. Fetter baa latterly spolten tor the restriction
of "capital," as a technical tcnn, practically to nlint ia here called
" busiucBa capital." Mr, Feller's " capital concept," honever, should
probably not be taken to cover in langiblf assets. The practical dla-
linctiou is visible In tbe testimony of various witnesses before tlio
Industrial Commission, as also in tbe special report on "Securities,"
Bepurt, vol. XIII.

■ Even so la(« and competent a student of corporate capital as
J. von KiiriM is bound by llils antique preconception, and hia work
has snflercd in consequence. See FiaauUelle Ei-yebiiisst der ActUn-
geatllichit/ten, p. 'X



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL 137

buaiuess this view is no longer of particular use for
a theoretical handling of the facts. To avoid the
tedium of argument it may be conceded that under
the old dispensation, of partnerships and individual
management in business, the basis of capitalization
was the cost of the material equipment owned by
any given concern ; and so far as the methods of
partnership and private firms still prevails such
may still be the current method of capitalization,
especially dejure. But in so far as business pro-
cedure and business conceptions have been shaped
in the image of the modern corporation (or limited
liability company), the basis of capitalization has
gradually shifted, until the basis is now no longer
given by the cost of material equipment owned,
but by the earning-capacity of the corporation as a
going concern.'

A given corporation's capital is, of course, de
jure a magnitude fixed in the past by an act of
legislature chartering the company, or by an issu-
ance of stock by the company under the terms of
its charter or of the acts which enable it. But
this de jure capitalization is nominal only, and
there are few, if any, cases in which the effective
capital of a company coincides with its de jure

' Tills state o( iho case is brought out, in a Toiled mnnnrr, by the
well-kuoWD proposition, expounded In varying fomi by various
writers, that the cost of equipment on nhich wpitnliiallon mugt, in
theory, take place ia the cost of reproduction ol all Toluublo itema
included, tangible aud iutaugible.



I



I



138 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

capital. Such could be the case only so long as
all the securities which go to make up the com-
pany's capital were quoted at par on tlie market.
The effective capitalization of any modern com-
pany, that is to say, the capitalization which is
effective for current business pin-poses as distinct
from the formal requirements of the charter, is
given by the quotations of the company's securi-
ties, or by some similar but less overt market
valuation in case the company's capital is not
quotable on the market. The effective (business)
capitalization, as distinct from the dejure capitali-
zation, is not fixed permanently and inflexibly
by a past act of incorporation or stock issue. It
is fixed for the time being only, by an ever
recurring valuation of the company's properties,
tangible and intangible, on the basis of their
earning-capacity.'

In this capitalization of earning-capacity the
nucleus of the capitalization is not the cost of
the plant, but the concern's good-will, so called,
as has appeared in the last preceding chapter."

1 " Nothing iB more illusive ftuddeluaive than Uie Idea that if a cor-
porBlion'a stock be only paid in in money at tlie ouUet ft is Ihercfoie
better oFF tlian one that has issued lis stock for property that could
not be converted for one cent on the dollar. The question is what
ta the corporation has got at the time of the particular transaction,
and that can be ascertained only by present inquiry," — Teatiroony
of F. L. Stetson, Jteport of the Industrial CommtMnon, vol. 1. p. 870.
Cf. Mea-le. TVurt Finance, ch. XVI. and XVIU.

> Eaming-capaclty is practically accepted aa the effective baus of
capitalization (or coiponta bosinesa ooooems, paiticalaiir lot tboM



MODEEN BUSINESS CAPITAL



L



•' Good-will " is a somewhat extensible term, and
latterly it has a more comprehensive ineaning than
it once had. Its meaning has, in fact, been gradu-
ally extended to meet the requirements of modern
business methods. Various items, of very diverse
character, are to be included under the head of
" good-will " ; but the items included have this
much in common that they are " immaterial
wealth," " intangible assets " ; whicli, it may paren-
thetically be remarked, signifies among other
things that these assets are not serviceable to the
community, but only to their owners. Good-will „^<^-<*<''
taken in its wider meaning comprises such things
as established customary business relations, repu- H

tatton for upright dealing, franchises and privi- 1

leges, trade-marks, brands, patent rights, copyrights,
exclusive use of special processes guarded by
law or by secrecy, exclusive control of particu-
lar sources of materials. AU these items give a
differential advantage to their owners, but they

whose secoritles are quoted on the market. It Is Id the stock market

tliat tliU efleciJve capltAlizatioo takes place. But the law does not

recognize such a basia of capita I Izatiuu ; nor are buaincsa men generally

ready lo adopt it in set form, allhougli they conatanlly have recourao

to It, in effect, in operationa of inTeetmenL and of credit eiteoaion.

CI. Srport of the Indiutrial CommissioH, vol. 1. pp. 6, 17, 31

(Test. F. D. Thurljer) ; p. 907 (Teat, F. L. Slelaon) ; pp. 685-587 ■

(Test. H. H. Rogera) ; pp. 110-111, 124 (Teat H. O. Haicmeyer) ; ■

pp. 1D21, 1032 (Teat. J. W. Gntes) ; pp. 1054-1065 (Teat. S. Dodd) ; I

voL XIII. pp. 287-288 (TesL H. Bum) ; p. 388 (TeaL J. Morria) ; M

pp. 107-108 (Test. E. 11. Chapman). See QuaHerlv Journal of

Economiet, February 1903, pp. 3U-346, >'Tlie Holyohe Water

Cue," lor an Uluttmive decision.



140 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

are of no aggregate advantage to the commnuity.'
Thex are_J¥:ealth to the individuals concerned —
differen tial ■wealih ; but they^make no part of thp
wealth o f nations.*

It is in the industrial corporations that thi;^
capitalization of good-will is seen to the best ad-
vantage — including, under the term " industrial
corporations," railway companies, iron and steel
concerns, mines, etc., as well as what are known
in the stock market specifically as " industrials."
The corporation is, of course, not the only form of
business concern in the industrial field, but it is the
typical, charaeteristic form of business organization
for the management of industry in modem times,
and the peculiarities of modem capital are there-
fore best seen in these modern corporations.
Many of these corporations have grown out of
partnerships and firms previously existing, and
such is still the genesis of many of the corpora-
tions that come forward from time to time. In
such a case of conversion from partnership or
firm to coi^roration the rule is that the new cor-

< The adrantnges afforded their ownera bj these lotangible asseta
baTe latterly been diacuBsed by ccononilsU under such headings as
" Rent" or "Quaai-Rent." Tliene di»cu«aioiis, it U believed, are ol
great theoreticaJ neight. In businesg practice, however, the it<>nna in
qneation are treated as capital, nliich miut avail as an excuse for
including them hero In business capit&l.

■ Compare Biihm-Bawerk'g and Clark's distinctions belween " pri-
vate" and "Bocial" capital, and belween "capital" and "cainlol



MODEKN BUSINESS CAPITAL



i



poration takes over a body of good-will, under one
form and name or another, previously pertaining
to the partnership which it displaces. Conversely,
when a flourishing partnership or similar private
firm has gained an assured footing of good-will,
in the way of any or all of the items enumerated
under that term above, its lot, as prescribed liy
modern business exigencies, is to go up into a cor-
poration, either by simple conversion into the cor-
porate form or through coalition with other firma
into a larger corporate whole. There is in this
matter no hard and fast rule, of course. On the
one hand, the approved methods of corporation
finance may in some measure be resorted to by a
private firm, without formal conversion of the con-
cern into the corporate form ; and on the other
hand, an incorporated company may continue to
carry on its business after the manner usual with
privately owned concerns. But taken by and
large, it will be found that with the assumption
of the corporate form is associated a more modern
method of capitahzation and a freer use of credit.
The advantages which the corporate form offers in
these respects are commonly not neglected. The
more archaic forma of organization and business
management, in which recourse is commonly not
had to the characteristic methods of corporation
finance, prevail chiefly in those " backward " lines
of industry iu which monopoly or other differential



142 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

advantages of an intangible nature are not readily
attainable; such, e.g., as farming, fishing, local
merchandisiBg, and the minor mechanical trades
and occupationa. In this range of industries
large (corporate) organization has hitherto been
virtually impracticable, and here at the same time
differential advantages, of the nature of good-will
(as indicated above), are relatively scant and pre-
carious. Where extensive difEerential advantages
of this kind come in, the corporate form of organi-
zation is also likely to come in.

The cases are also frequent where a corporation
starts out full-fledged from tlie beginning, without
derivation from a previously existing private lirm.
Where this happens, the start is commonly made
with some substantial body of immaterial goods on
which to build up the capitalization ; it may be
a franchise, as in the case of a railway, telegraph,

I telephone, street-car, gas, or water company; or it

may be the control of peculiar sources of material,
as in the case of an oil or natural gas company, or
a salt, coal, iron, or lumber company; or it may be
a special industrial process, patented or secret ; or
. it may be several of these. When a corporation
/^^^p begins its life h istory with o ut such a body of im-
3t/Tr . material di fferentia l advanta aea, the endeavors of
its manag ement are early directed to working up a
basis of good-will in the way of trade-marks, clien -
t&le, and trade connection s whic h will place it in



L



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



L



s omething of a moDopoly position^ locally or gener-
ally.' Should the management not succeed irt
t h ese ende avora to gain an assured footing on some
such "immaterial" groiind, its chances of siiQcess
among r ival corporations are precariouSi its stand.-^
ing is inseciu-e, and its managers have not acconi-
plished what is looked for at their hands. The
substantial foundati on of the industrial corporation
is its im material assets.

The typical modem industrial corporation is a
concern of sufficient magnitude to be of something
more than barely local consequence, and extends its
trade relations beyond the range of the personal
contact of its directive officials. Its properties
and its debts are also commonly owned, in part at
least, by persona who stand in no direct personal
relation to the board of managers. In an up-to-
date corporation of this character the typical make-
up of the corporate capital, or capitalization, is
somewhat as follows : The common stock approx-
imately covers the immaterial properties of the
concern, unless these immaterial properties are dis-
proportionately large and valuable ; in case of a
relatively small and local corporation the common
stock will ordinarily somewhat more than cover the
value of the immaterial property and comprise
something of the plant ; in case of the larger con-
cerns the converse is likely to be true, so that here

' S«e Chapter III. aUive.



-V^

O^-****



I



I



I



144 TIIE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

the immaterial property, intangible aasets, is made
to serve in some measure aa a basis for other secur-
ities as well as for the common stock. ( The com-
mon stock, typically, represents intangible assets
and is accounted for by valuable trade-marks,
patents, processes, frdnchises, etc.l Whatever
material properties, tangible assets, are in hand or
to be acquired are covered by preferred sto ck or
other debentures. The various forms of deben-
tures account for the material equipment and the
working capital (the latter item corresponding
roughly to the economists' categories of raw mate-
rials, wages fund, and the like). Of these deben-
tures the preferred stock is the most characteristic
modern development. It is, de jure, counted as a
constituent of the concern's capital and the prin-
cipal is not repayable ; in this (l^g^^) respect it is
not an evidence of debt or a credit instrument.'
I But it has little voice in the direction of the con-
J corn's business pohcy.* In practice the manage-
ment rests chiefly on the holdings of common stock.
This is due in part to the fact that the preferred
bears a stated rate of dividends and is therefore
taken up by scattered purchasers as an investment
security to a greater extent than the common, In

' On the books of the corpoiation it is, of course, curried as an item
ol liability) as is the common stooli ; bat that la a technical expedient
of accDUDtancy, and does not touch the substantial questioa.

'See tesUmon; of varioiu witnesses on "Capitalisation" before
the Indiuthal CommlseloD, vols. I., IX., XIIL


1


MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



this (practical) respect it amounts to a debenture.
Its practical character as a debenture is shown by
the stated rate of dividends, and where it is
*' cumulative " that feature adds a further step of
assimilation to the ordinary class of debentures.
Indeed, in point of practical effect preferred stock
is in some respects commonly a more pronounced
credit instrument than the ordinary mortgage ; it
alienates the control of the property which it rep-
resents more effectually than the ordinary bond or
mortgage loan, m that it may practically be a debt
which, by its own terras, cannot be collected, so
that by its own terms it may convey a credit exten-
sion from the holder to the issuing corporation in
perpetuity. Its effect is to convey the discretion-
ary control of the material properties which it is
held to represent into the hands of the holders of
the common stock of the concern. The discretion-
ary management of the corporate capital is, by this
device, quite as effectually as by the use of ordinary
credit instnunents, vested in the common stock,
which is held to represent the corporation's good-
will. The discretionary disposal of the entire
capital vests in securities representing the intan-
gible assets. In this sense, then, the nucleus of the
modern corporate capitalization is the immaterial
goods covered by the common stock.'

I A» one o[ man; illuBtratlTe caaes, the Rubber Goode Manufactur-
ing Company ma; be Uhen as a typical instance of a corpoTaiion



146 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

This method of capitalization, therefore, effects a
somewhat thoroughgoing separation between the
management and the ownership of the industrial
equipment. Roughly speaking, under corporate
organization the owners of the industrial material
have no voice in its management, and where pre-
ferred stock is a large constituent of the capital
this alienation of control on the parts of the owTiers
may be, by so much, irrevocable. Preferred stock
is, practically, a device for placing the property it
represents in perpetual trust with the holders of
the common stock, and, with certain qualifications,
these trustees are not answerable for the adminis-
tration of the property to their trustors. The
property relation of the owners to their property is
at this point attenuated to an extreme degree.
K For most business purposes, it should be added, the

H capital covered by other forms of debentures is in

I -

I ■

L



organiud In a conaervalETS but np-to-date m&nner for permaneDt mc*
ceta and stable value, Ita authorized issue of stock is 9^6,000,000
cumutatiTO preferred, and $25,000,000 cominon. The actual
Isnue ia IDOl was about $8,000,000 preferred and $17,000,000 comraon,
of nliicli the preferred waa prosutned to cover the value of the tangible
Another coallUoD organized by the same promoter (Mr, C. R.
Flint), Uie American Chicle Company, Illuatratca tbo same general
feature. The preferred stock of this company ($3,000,000) "in round
numbers was three times the amount of tangible assets," vrliile the
stock ($0,000,000) represents no tangible assets. The aggre-
gate capiiali£Blioii is about nine times the tangible assets. The wit-
ess says that this corporation has been proved by events to be " on
conservative basis from the fact thai the company has paid 8 per cent,
nils common stock," nbicb has been selllag at SO. — Report of tlU
IndtiUrial ComtniMloH, vol. XIII. pp. JT, 60.


MODERN BUSDIESS CAPITAL



147



much tbe same position as that covered by the
preferred stock.'

' It may be argued that this identification of tbe common stock
with the intangible aaseU bolda truo in theory only, in the sense that
this ia the view held by the busineas men wlio occupy themaelvea with
Buch matters ; vhile in point of fact no distinction of this nature be-
tween common and preferred stock ia or can practically be maintained
after the stock has once found ils way into the market. It might
Bcem, in other vords, that when the stock has once passed the stage
of organization and gone into the hands of the purchasers, each share
represents nothing but an undivided interest in the aggregate capital-
iiation of the concern, so that the particular Item of wealth repre-
sented by a given share or given form of security can no longer be
identined.

Un the face of the situation such appears to be the case, but there
arc facts which argue for the view set out above. It is, e.g., well
kuowu that whenever circumstances arise which immediately affect
tlie value of the good-will of a corporation, it is the quotations of tbe
common stock that Arst and most decidedly are affected. If the good-
will of the concern makes a great and rapid gain, e.g. through maiioeu-
vrea which put it hi s positioii ot monopoly or through changes in the
goods market which greatly increase the demand for the concern's
product, and the tike, it is the quotation ot the common slock that
measures and registers the advantage which thereby accrues to tbe
concern, and the market fluctuation of the common stock is likewise
the instrument by means of whicli manipulations are carried through
that affect tliese intangible assets. At the same time this nUe does
not hold hard and fast, as is seen in cose of a liquidation when tlie
capital of the concern may have shrunk to such dimensions that the
entire capital, including the intangible assets, will no more than satisfy
the claims represented by the debentures. Still, in point of practical
fact, the (theoretical) preconception of business men that the com-
mon stock in some intelligible sense covers the Intangible assets is
fairly borne out by everyday experience, taken by and large.

A curious parallel might bo traced between the current endeavors
of the business community to oi^aniie and manage the Industrial
equipment on the basis of immaterial asseU and the medieval business
perplexities and fictions relative to loans on Interest. In both casefl
the business community has had to face untried exigencies together
with a popular, traditional prejudice that discountenances the expe-
dients by which these exigencies are to be met. The medieval pre-
sumption was that the m&Dagement of productive goods and the



J



I



148 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

The various descriptions of securities which in
this way represent corporate capital are quotable
on the market and are aubject to market fluctuar
tions ; whereby it comes about that the aggregate
effective magnitude of the corporate capital varies
with the tone of the market, with the manceuvres
of the business men to whom is delegated the
management of the companies, and with the acci-
dents of the seasons and the chances of peace and
war. Accordingly, the amount of the business
capital of a given concern, or of the business com-
munity as a whole, varies in magnitude in great
measure independently of the mechanical facts of
industry, as was noted above in speaking of loan
credit.' The market fluctuations in the amount

prollu accruing from tbelr uae must go lo their users. (Cf. Aahleir.
ScoHomic Biitojy, vol. I. ch. III., vol, II. ch. VI.; EndamaDD, Die
nalionalokonomlithe GrundiaUe der kanonMitchen Ii^re.') The
modem presumptioa U that Ibe managcmeDt of the equipment and
the gikins from soch management most test in tlie owners. Tha
modern exlgenclea decide that the equipment must be managed b7
othora than the owners and that profits must largely accrue to tbow
who flnandally manage the concern. The expedient bj which this
resull is aonght to be reached is the fiction of Intangible aaaete and tbe
impeiBona!, irrevocable credit exlension covered b; the preferred
Slock. The effect is to dissociate ownership from management This
• li the necessary outcome of a " credit economy " conaisiently and
fully carried through. Tbe management of the material equipment nf
Industry is thrown Into the hands of those who own the Immaterial
wealth ; that la to say, those who own the claim to manage the equip-
metit. The carrent prejudice which inaiats on management by the
owners is set aside by feigning that this elUrn has an industrial value,
and BO capitalizing it on the basis of the differential sdvanUge which
Kcruea to Its holders.

1 See also a discussion by E. B. Meade, Quarterly Journal of
fcoiwmics, February 1002. pp. 217 et leg., of how "good-will" may



i



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL

of capital proceed on variations of confidence on
the part of the investors, on current belief as
to the probable policy or tactics of the business
men in control, on forecasts as to the seasons and
the tactics of the guild of politicians, and on the
indeterminable, largely instinctive, shifting move-
ments of public sentiment and apprehension. So
that imder modem conditions the magnitude of
the business capital and its mutations from day
to day are in great measure a question of folk
psychology rather than of material fact.

But in tliis uncertain and shifting relation of
the business capital to the material equipment
there are one or two points which may be set
down as fairly secure. Since the credit instru-
ments involved in modem capitalization may be
used as collateral for a further credit extension,
as noted in the chapter on loan credit,' the aggre-
gate nominal capital in hand at a ^ven time
is, normally, larger by an appreciable amoimt
than the aggregate value of the material proper
ties involved ;* and at the same time the current
value of these material properties is also greater
than it would be in the absence of that credit

Tw; in m&gnitude, or even disappear, wbeo a concern entera a larger
coalition ; also, on the same general bead, W. F. Wltloughby, " Inte-
gration of Indtutiy la Uia United States," ibid., November 1902.

' p. 113 above.

*cap' = cap + — ^>cap,ln which cap' U tbe nominal capital, as
increased by the credit element — -.



M



I



150 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS EHTEBPRISE

financiering for 'which corporate capitalization
affords a basis.'



German writers have familiarized economic read*
era with the terms "credit economy," "money
economy " (Geldwirtschaft), and " natural econ-
omy " {Naturalwirtachaft), the later-modem
scheme of economic life being characterized as
a " credit economy." What characterizes the
early-modern scheme, the " money economy," and
sets it ofE in contrast with the natural economy
(distribution in kind) that went before it in
West-European culture, is the ubiquitous resort
to the market as a vent for products aud a
^ source of supply of goods. The characteristic
"^ ""^"T f eature of this money economy is the goods mar-



I



1 mat's mat +-( — }> mat, in which mat' is the cuirent viklue of
the mftterUl equipment, u increased (over mat) by the competitive
demand (or equipment due to the credit element — . One of the mb-
Btantial lecondary benefits to be noted as flowing from these modem
business expedimta la the eRect of corporation flnaoce upon the aggre-
gate nominal wealth of the cotnuonity. A given community, posseesed
of a given complement of material wealth, is riclier in capital if a large
proportion of iU induatiiol equipment Si capitalized and managed by
corporation methods, quite apart from any Increase in the material
items of which the community is possessed. (CI. T\l:tXf^l^ Cen»M» qf
the United States, " Manufactures," pt. I. p. icvi.) Wealth may In
this way be increased (about twofold on an average), Ineipensivel]',
by Ihe simple expedient of incorporating the community's bu^nesa
conocma in tlie form of joiat-stocli companies. The more highly in-
volved and the more widely extended the corporation financiering is,
the richer, in Btatiatlcal terms ofcapitat, laUiecntumnnity, other things
equal. Among these oilier things arc lUe material facta of the a


MODEBN BUSINESS CAPITAL



ket. About the goods market business and in-
dustrial interesta tura in early modem times ;
and to this early-modem system of industrial
life the current doctrines of political economy are
adapted, as indicated above.

The credit economy — the scheme of economic
life of the immediate past and the present — has
made an advance over the money economy in
the respect which chiefly distinguishes the latter.
The goods market, of course, in absolute terms
is still as powerful an economic factor as ever,
but it is no longer the dominant factor in busi-
ness and industrial traffic, as it once was. Tlie
capital market has taken the first place in this re-
spect. The capital market is the modern economic C/^^it'
feature w hich makes and identifies the higher *^*»*^
"credit economy" as su ch. In this credit econ-
omy resort is liabitually had to the market as
a vent for accumulated money values and a source
of supply of capital.'

Trading under the old regime was a traffic

' in goods; und er the new regim e there is added,

' as the dominant and characteristic trait, trading

in ca pital. Both in the capital and in the goods

market there are professional traders, aa well as

1 The oammoditiei bought and sold in the goods market are Uie 1

L outoome of a prooeu of production and are useful for a maKrlal pur- I

I pOM ; thaw bought and sold ia the cnpllal market are the outcome I

I -of A procen of raluation and are useful tor purpoaes of pecuolarj I



I



p



'■'T'^'



152 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

b uyers and sellers who resort to the market to
dispose of their holdings and to supply their n eeds
of whal the market affords. (^In either class of
trading the ends sought by those engaged in the
business are generically the same.) The endeavors
of those who are in the business of trading, who
buy in order to sell and sell in order to buy, are
directed to the pecuniary gain that is to be got
through an advantageous discrepancy between
the price paid and the price obtained; but on
the part of those who resort to the market to
supply their needs the end sought is not the same
in the two cases. ^ The last buyer of goods buys
for consumption, but the last negotiator of capiUil
buys for the sake of the ulterior profit ; in sub-
stance he buys in order to sell again at an
advance." The advance which he has in view
is to come out of the prospective earnings of the
capital for which he negotiates. What he has
in view as his ulterior end in the transaction
is the conversion of the values for which he
negotiates into a larger outcome of money values,
— whatever process of production and the like
may intervene between the inception and the
goal of his traffic'
^fl. The value o f a ny g ive n block of capital, therefore,
''J^ turns on its eamin g-capacity ; o r, as the mathemat-
i cal exj j ffession has it. the value of capital is a func-

1 Cf. Marx, Kapltal (401 ed.), bk. I. ch. TV.


MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



tionjif jt,a ftaming-f-apanit y/ not of its prime cost oi
of ite mechanical efficiency. It is only more re-
motely, and through the mediation of the eaming-
capacity, that these last-named factors sensibly affect
the value of the capital. This earning-capacity of
capital depends in its turn, not so much on the me-
chanical efficiency of the valuable items bought and
sold in the capital market, as on the tension of the
market for goods. To recur to an expression already
employed in a similar connection, the question of
earning-capacity of capital relates primarily to its
effectiveness for purposes of vendibility, and only
at the second remove to its effectiveness in the way
of material serviceability. But the earning-capac-
ity which in this way affords ground for the valua-
tion of marketable capital (or for the market
capitalization of the securities bought and sold) ia
not its past or actual earning-capacity, but i^
p resumptive future earning -ca pacity ; so that the



lEflecUre capital = current market value of nominal capitals
prenuuptiTe earning capacity x purchase period, neglecting fortuitous
and incalculable iteius wbicb may affect any given case.

If nominal capital = cap, effective capital = cap', presumed annual
eatniogs = ea', and the purciiase period of capitalized property
(years' paroliaHe) =



Interest rs


le have cap Jcap'



""'m



This equation between cap' and ea' is disturbed by the p
any given case of variable factors which cannot be included In the
equation, bnt it remaina true after all qualification has been made



I

i



I



154 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

fluctuations in the capital market — the varying
market capitalization of securities — turn about
imagined future events. The forecast in the case
may be more or less sagacious, but, however sagar
cious, it retains the character of a forecast based
on other grounds besides the computation of past
results.

All capital which is put on the market ia in this
way subjected to an interminable process of valua-
tion and revaluation — i.e. a capitalization and
recapitalization — on the basis of its presumptive
eaming-capacity, whereby it all assumes more or
less of a. character of intangibility .1 But the most
elusive and intangible items of this marketable
capital are, of course, those items which consist of
capitalized good-will, since these are intangible
goods from start to finish. It is upon this factor
of good-will in capital that a change in presumptive
earning-<^pacity falls most immediately, and this
factor shows the widest and freest market fluctua-
tions. The variations in the capitalized value of
merchantable good-will are relatively wide and
imstable, as ia shown by the quotations of common
stock.

In the capital market the commodity in which
trading ia done, then, is the capitalized putative
eaming-capacity of the property covered by the
securities bought and sold. This property is in part
tangible, in part intangible, the two categories



i



MODEEN BUSINESS CAPITAL 155

being seldom clearly distinguiahable. The items
bought and sold are put into merchantable form
by being standardized in terms of money and sub-
divided into convenient imaginary shares, which
greatly facilitates the traffic. The earning-capac-
ity on which the market capitaUzation riiua and
about which the traffic in merchantable capital
turns is a putative earning-capacity. It follows
that this putative earning-capacity of a given
block of capital, as it takes shape in the surmises
of outside investors, may differ appreciably from
the actual earning-capacity of the capital as known
to ita managers ; and it may readily be to the
latter's interest that such a discrepancy between
actual and imputed earning-capacity should arise.'
When, t.g., the putative earning-capacity of the
capital covered by a given line of securities, as
shown by the market quotations, rises appreciably
above what is known to its managers to be its
actual earning-capacity, the latter may find their
advantage in selling out, or even in selling short ;
while in the converse case they will be inclined to
buy. Moreover, putative earning-capacity is the
outcome of many surmises with respect to pros-
pective earnings and the like ; and these surmises

1 Something of this kind la the osaal ground of tbe obetioate resist-
ance which most business men oppose to publicity of Mconnta. In
lines of business, as, e.g., milroading, in which occounu are readily
fend eSectuali; BOphiBticated ("doctored"), the objections to publicity
*n commouly iesa al



I

I



I



156 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

will vary from one man to the next, since they
proceed on an imperfect, largely conjectural, knowl-
edge of present earning-capacity and on the still
more imperfectly known future course of the goods
market and of corporate policy. Hence sales of
securities are frequent, both because outsiders vary
in their estimates and forecasts, and because the
information of the outsiders does not coincide with
that of the insiders. The consequence is that a
given block of capital, representing, e.g., a con-
trolling interest in a given industrial enterprise,
may, and in practice it commonly will, change
owners much more frequently than a given indus-
trial plant was wont to change owners under the
old regime, before the fully developed corporation
finance came to occupy the field of industrial
business.'

kit follows, further, that imder these circum-
stances the men who have the management of such
an industrial enterprise, capitalized and quotable
on the market, will be able to in dimp. a ^di screpancy
betsceen the putative and the actual eamin g-capao-
ity. by expedients well known and approved for
the purpose. Partial information, as well as mis-
information, sagaciously given out at a critical
juncture, will go far toward producing a favorable
temporary discrepancy of this kind, and so enabling
the managers to buy or sell the secmities of the

> Ct., t.g., Eborstadt, Dtutithe Eapifalimarlcf.



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL


r concern with advantage to themselves. If they
are shrewd buBiness men, as they commonly are,
the y will a im to mq.na ge the afEaira of th e ftoncer n
with a view to an advantageous purchase an d sale
of its capital rather than with a view to the future
prosperity of the concern, or to the continued ad-
vantageous sale of the output of goods or services
produced by the industrial use of this capital.

I That is to say, the interest of the managers of a
modern corporation need not coincide with the
permanent interest of the corporation as a going
concern ; neither does it coincide with the interest
which the community at large has in the efficient
management of the concern as an industrial enter-
priseJ It is to the interest of the community at
large that the enterprise should be so managed as
to give the best and largest possible output of
goods or services ; whereas the interest of the cor^
poration as a going conceiTi is that it be managed
w ith a view to maintaining it s efficiency and selling

■*<vt ■<-^^<^ as large an output as may be at the best prices

obtainable in t he long r un ; but the interest of the

it'managers, and of the ownera^for the time being, is

to 80 manage the enterprise aa_ to enable them to

■i(5„0(WfAjb_uy it up or to sell out as expeditiously and as
advantageously as may be. The interest of the
community at large demands industrial efficie ncy

Land serviceability of the product ; while the busi-
ness interest of the concern as such demands yen-_


lU/'^



ween tne material cost h
rial serviceability of the output ; thel
interest demands a favorable pecunil
between expenses and receipts, cost m
of the output ; the corporation directOM
is that there should be a discrepancy, I
purchase or for sale as the case may be,!
actual and the putative eaniing-capaciti
poration'a capital. 1

It has been noted in an earlier q
I there unavoidably results a discrepancy,

" monly a divergence, between the indu
o£ the community and the business m
corporations. Under th e re gime of tl
i oned " m oney economy," with parineia)
and pri vate ownership of industrial ent;
discretionary^ control of the industrial^
in_the hands o f men whose inter est i^
is removed by one degree from the inte
comm unity at larg p. Rn^jjuj^y^j^


MODBBN BUSINESS CAPITAL

who hold the discretion in industrial affairs ia
remov ed by on e degree fro m that of the concema
under their management, and by two degreeaLirom
th e intfireata of the commnnity at large.

The business interest of the managers demands,
not serviceability of the output, nor even vendi-
bility of the output, but an advantageous discrep-
ancy in the price of the capital which they manage.
The ready vendibility of corporate capital has in
great measure dis.sociated the business interest of
the directorate from that of the corporation whose
affairs they direct and whose business policy they
dictate, and has led them to centre their endeavors
upon the discrepancy between the actual and the
putative eaming-capacity rather than upon the per-
manent efficiency of the concern. Their connection
with the concern is essentially transient ; it can be
terminated speedily and silently whenever their
private fortune demands its severance. Instances
are abundant, more particularly in railway man-
agement, where this discrepancy between the busi-
ness interest of the concern and the private
business interest o£ the managers for the time
being has led to very picturesque developments,
such as could not occur if the interests of the man-



the readier vcndlbilltj of modem corporate capiUI ii so characteristio
and conseqiientliJ a factor in businen and contraeU so broailly with
the old-fashioned boiiioeafi methods that it may fatriy be spoken of aa
veiidibillty pnr excellence. The "holding company" Is the mature
developmcut of this traffic in vendible capital in indusLrial busincBs.



J



160 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEI8E

agement were bound up with those of the corpora-
tion in the manner and degree that once prevailed.
The fact is significant that the more frequent and
striking inatances of such management of corpo-
rate affairs for private ends have hitherto occurred
in railroading, at the same time that the methods
and expedients of modem corporation finance have
also first and most widely reached a fair degree of
maturity in raihoading. It holds out a suggestion
as to what may fairly be looked for when corpora-
tiou finance shall have made itself more thoroughly
at home in the " industrials " proper. Indeed, the
field of tlie " industrials " is by no means barren of
instances comparable with the maturer and more
sagacious railroad financiering.'

The stock market interest of those men who
have the management of industrial corporations
is a wide and multifarious one. It is not confined

1 It may be noted, bj the way, that the question of the tomoTer
(spoken of on p. 95 above) becomes, under the circomRtances of the
modern corporation finance. In great part n qneatlon of the Interval
between the purchase and sale of the capital engaged in industry oi
the one band, and of the magnitude of the discrepancy between actual
and pntatlvB earning-capncity on the other hand, rather than a quea-
Uon of the period of the industrial proceas and the magnitude of the
OOQint and its price. The formula there shown becomes ; —
turnover = "^-^^^ /actnal earnlng-capaeity
time V t

= putntice eaming-capacily — actual eaming-capacity ],
In which capitiil is the amount of Uie operator's inveBlment in the
'a securities, the Ume is tbe inlervat between purchase and sale
of the securities, and the putative eaming-capacity is taken to exceed
the actual eaming-capacity by an indeterminate fraction of the latter.


MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL 161

to the profitable purchase and sale of properties
whose management they may have in hand. They
are also interested in making or marring various
movements of coalition or reorganization, and to
this ulterior end it is incumbent on them to ^^ ma-
nipulate " securities with a view to buying and sell-
ing in such a manner as to gain control of certain
lines of securities.^ Hence it is a rule of this class
of business traffic to cultivate appearance, — to
avoid, or sometimes to court, the appearance of sin.
So that under this leadership the course of indus-
trial affairs is, in great measure, if not altogether,
guided with a view to a plausible appearance of
prosperity or of adversity, as the case may be.
Under given circumstances it may as well become
the aim of men in control to make an adverse
showing as a favorable one. The higher exigencies
of the captain of industry's personal fortimes, as
distinct from those of the corporation controlled by
him, may from time to time be best served by
an apparent, if not an actual, mismanagement of
industrial affairs. A convincing appearance of de-
cline or disaster will lower the putative eaming-
capacity of the concern below its real eaming-capao-
ity and so will afford an advantageous opportunity
for buying with a view to future advance or witl^
a view to strategic control. Various other expedi-
ents looking to the like outcome are well known to

1 Cf. Chapter m. aboye.



162 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

the craft, besides bona fide mismanagement. A
given line of securities may be temporarily de-
pressed by less heioic tactics ; but the point in
question here is the fact that under this system of
corporation finance the afiaira of the corporation
are In good part managed for tactical ends which
are of interest to the manager rather than to the
corporation as a going concern.

What was said in speaking of credit extension
without a determinate time interval ' applies to
this class of business, with a slight change of
phrase. In this higher development of corporation
finance, in the manipulations of vendible capital,
the interval of the turnover spoken of above be-
comes an indeterminate factor. The gains of the
business come to have but an uncertain and shifty
relation to the lapse of time and cannot well be
calculated per cent, per time-uuit. There is, there-
fore, on these higher levels of business management,
properly speaking no ascertainable ordinary rate of
earnings. The capital which may be distinctively
regarded as operative in the business of manipular
tion, the valuable items specifically employed in the
traffic in vendible corporate capital, is made up of
the operator's good-will and his financial solvency.
Solvency on a large scale is requisite to carrying
on traffic of this class, but the collateral on which
this extensive solvency constructively rests is to

I Cf. Chaplsr


MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



but a partial extent drawn into the business as a
basis for an actual credit extension. What counts
in the case is the solvency of the operator rather
than an outright resort to the credit extension
which this solvency might afford. The working
capital involved in these transactions is accord-
ingly of a peculiarly elusive character, and the
time element in the use of this capital is hard to
determine, if such a time element can properly be
said to enter into the case at all.

More in detail, the business man in pursuit of
gain along this line must, in the ordinary case, be
possessed of large holdings of property, this being
the basis of the solvency necessary to the business.
These holdings are commonly in the form of securi-
ties in the concern whose vendible capital is the
subject of his traffic, as well as in other corpora-
tions. These securities represent capital, tangible
and intangible, which is already employed in the
ordinary business of the concern by which they
have been issued ; the capital, therefore, is already
in use to the full extent and is presumably yielding
the ordinary rate of earnings. But the solvency
for which the ownership of this capital affords a
basis may further be useful in enabling the owner
to carry on a traffic in vendible corporate capital
without withdrawing any appreciable portion of
his holdings from the lucrative investments in
which they have been placed. In other words, he



I



164 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERI'RISE

is able, under modem circumBtances, to make a
secondary use of hU investmenta for the purpose of
trading in vendible corporate capital ; but this
secondary use of investments bears no hard and
fast quantitative relation to the investments in
question, nor does it in any determinate way inter-
fere with the ordinary employment of this invested
capital in the commonplace conduct of the corpordr
tiona' business traffic. The capital employed, as
well as the potential credit extension which it
affords for the purposes of this higher business
traffic, is therefore in a peculiar degree intangible,
and, in respect of its amount, highly elusive.

Much the same is true of the good-will employed
in this traffic. It is also in good part good-will
which already serves the purposes of the common-
place business traffic of the corporations on whose
securities the business man in question rests his
solvency. So that in this higher business traffic
the good-will engaged is also here turned to a
secondary use. The business economies which are
in this way made practicable by a reduplication of
uses and made to inure to the greater business
men's profit are of great magnitude ; but the mag-
nificent additions which are in this way made to
the busmess community's capitalizable forces need
scarcely be dwelt on here.

Tlio elusive and llexuous character of the ele-
meuts of wealth engaged, as well as the absence of



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL

an ascertainable ordinary rate of earnings in this
line of business, lias led economists to speak of
this traffic in vendible capital as a " speculative "
business.' The mere buying and selling of stocks
by outsiders for a rise or a decline is of course a
speculative business ; it is a typical form of specu-
lative business. But in so far as such buying and
selling is carried on by the managers of the corpo-
rations whose securities are the subject of the traffic,
and especially where the securities are bought and
sold with a view to the control of the corporations
in question and their management for private,
tactical ends, a characterization of the business as
" speculative " is inadequate and beside the point.
Tills higher reach of corporation financiering has
little if any more of a speculative character than
what belongs to the commonplace business man-
agement of any industrial enterprise. In all busi-
ness enterprise that stands in relations with the
market and depends on vendibility of its output
there is more or less imcertainty as to the out-
come.' In this sense all industrial business, as well
as commercial business, has something of a specu-
lative character. But it is little to tlie purpose on
that account to lump industrial enterprises and

' Cf. Emery, " Placo of the Speculator ia ihe Theory of Distribu-
tion," Proctfdings of llie tweKtli annual meeting of llie American
EcoDoniic Aasociation ; also " Dlsciusloii," following Mr. Emery's
paper.

* Well shown in Ur. Emery's paper citad above.



J



166 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

corporation financiering together as " speculative
business" and deal with them as if this were their
most salient and consequential bearing- What
speculative risk tliere is in these lines of business
is incidental, and it neither affords the incentive to
engaging in these pursuits nor does it bound the
scope of their bearing upon economic affairs. The
speculative risk involved is no greater, relatively to
the magnitude of the interests involved, in this
larger traffic that deals in vendible capital than it
is in the ordinary lines of business traffic that deal
in vendible products. In both cases there may be
speculation, but in both cases it is a side issue.
Indeed, as near as one may confidently hold an
opinion on so dark a question, the certainty of
gain, though perhaps not the relative amount of it,
seems rather more assured in tlie large-scale ma-
nipulation of vendible capital than in business
management with a view to a vendible product.

What may obscure tlie question is the fact that
the manipulations involved in this traffic in vend-
ible capital commonly impose increased risks upon
the business concerns engaged in industry — the
corporations whose capital is involved, as well as
other firms. The everyday business of the corpo-
rations whose secui'ities are involved, as well as of
other business concerns engaged in rival or related
lines of industry, is rendered more hazardous than
it might be in the absence of this financiering



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



traffic in vendible capital. The manipulations carry
risk, not so much to the manipulators as such,
as to the corporations whose properties are the
subject of manipulation ; but since the manipula-
tors commonly own but a relatively small propor-
tion of the properties involved or touched by their
manipulations, the risks which arise do not fall
chiefly on them. To this is to be added, as of
prime importance for the whole question, that the
manipulators have the advantage of being able, in
great part, to foresee the nature, magnitude, and
incidence of the risks which they create. Eightly
seen, this, of coiuiBe, goes to say that the increased
speculative risk due to the traffic in vendible capital
does not fall on that traffic, but on the business
enterprise engaged about the output of vendible
goods. The traffic in vendible capital is not with-
out its speculative risks, but the risks which it
creates fall with relatively greater weight upon tlie
business men who are not immediately concerned
in this traffic. Indeed, so secure and lucrative is
this class of business, that it is chiefly out of gains
accruing, directly and indirectly, from such traffic
in vendible capital that the great modem fortunes
are being accumulated ; and both the rate and the
magnitude of these accumulations, whether taken
absolutely or relatively to the total increase of
wealth, surpass all recorded phenomena of their
kind. Nothing so effective for the accumulation



168 THE THEORY OF BUSDreSS ENTERPRISE

of private wealth U known to the history of
human culture.

The aim and substantial significance of the
"manipulations" of vendible capital here spoken
of is an ever recurring recapitalization of the prop-
erties involved, whereby the effective capitaliza-
tion of the corporations whose securities are the
subject of the traffic is increased and decreased
from time to time. The fluctuations, or pulsations,
of this effective capitalization are shown by the
market quotations of the securities, as noted above.*
It is out of these variations in capitalization that the
gains of the traffic arise, and it is also through
the means of these variations of capitalization that
the business men engaged in this higher finance
are enabled to control the fortunes of the corpora-
tions and to effect their strategic work of coali-
tion and reorganization of business enterprises.
Hence this traffic in vendible capital is the pivotal
and dominant factor in the modem situation of
business and industry.'

' p. 154.

* As is true of good-will uid credit extensions generally, so with
respect to the good-will and credit atrength of theae greater bust-
Qcas uen ; it sflurds ft differential advantage and gives a differential
gain. In tbe traffic of carporatlon finance this differculial gain is
thrown immediately into the fonn of capital and so is added to tlie
nominal capitalized wealth of the community. What it gives to Its
holders in tliis capiialiied form Is a claim to a proportionate share In
the existing wealth. If other things are supposed to remain the same
(which may not be the case), the claim so enforced by tbe great fiiian-
cien on the basis of good-will and credit extension deduou that much
from tbe weullli held by the rest, the previous holders, as counted in



1



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL



It has been noted above that what may be called
the working capital on which this higher corpora-

ternu of material wealth ; aa counted in l«rms of money tbIud, of
course, the holdings of previous holders do (or ueed} not Buffer, t
the Dew claims lake the form of &q addliEon to the uumber of cspitnl-
Itad value uiiitfl, although the lucroased aggregate number of value
units constilutua a claim on the same aggregate mass of wealth aa
before. The pro rata reduction of the material magnitude of the
■everal shares of wealih ia not felt aa an impoverishment, because It
does not take the form of a redueUon of the nominal value of the shares.

This capitalization of the gains arising from a diflerential advantage
results in a large "saving" and increase of capital. The wealth so
drawn in by the financiers (entrepreneurs) is nearly all held as capital,
very little of it being con>iumed in current expenses of living, ft
baa been cogently argued that the profits of the undcrtakeia Is the
chief and normal source of capilaliied savinga in the modern situation,
and the uiotliod here indicated seems to be the method by which such
saving la cUiefiy effected. An extremely suggestive discussion of the
undertaker's gains in this connection occurs in a paper by h. V. Blrck
{" Driftsberrena Gevinst"), read before the Danish Economic Asso-
ciation, December lt)Oi. More immediately to the point still is V.
Schou's discussion of Mr. Birck's paper. (See NallonalBkonontiak
TIdukrI/C, January-February 1902, pp. 76, 78-80.) J. B, Chirk, in
lectures hitherto unprlnted, follawa a line of anaiyaia aomewhat closely
parallel with Schou, Uiough not carried to quite the same lengtb.

Tbia process of combined recapitalization and saving may be stated
formally as follows : The Initial value of the properties submitted for
coalition and recapitalization, cap, is In the normal case augmented by
the Increment X making the effective value of the properties s cap + A,
in effective units, U,. This augmented effective value of Uie properties
= f.(cap + 4) Is capitalized at a nominal value of cap'= l''.<cap + A),
In nominal units, 17., nominally equivalent to U,. In the recapllaii-
aatloo the number of units of capital I zutlon Is Increased by an elemvnt
of intangible assetA asaigned the owners on account of a preautiied
increaae of eandng-capacity due to the coatltinn. This clement of
good-will due to coalition may be called oo. Further there is added
the bonus of tbe promoter, taken as a bioclc ol stock in tlie new capi-
talization, pro. Hence y,,(cap')c-f/.(cap-f i)^C.(oap + co 4- pro),
OliCpro) ">£/■. (cap'— cap — co)=-P',(4 — co) Is evidently a secure gain
to the promoter of [?^(A -• co), which Is a traction of the effective value
ir,(cap -H A). This is saved by bim in the capitalized form. The ac-
oount of Uw former owners of the properties will then stand as follows :



170 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

tion finance proceeda is made up, chiefly, of two
elements : the solvency (and consequent potential
credit) of the men engaged, and the " good-will "
of these men. Both of these elements are of a
somewhat intangible and elusive character, resting,
as they do, somewhat indirectly and shiftily on
elements already elsewhere engaged in business
enterprise. The solvency in question rests in large
part on the capital of the corporations whose capi-
talization is subject to the fluctuations induced by
the trafiie in vendible capital. It is therefore
necessarily a somewhat indetenninate and unstable
magnitude. To this is to be added the " floating

P,(cnp + A — pro)^ir/cap) according is [r,A^P(i)ro). The nomi-
nal gain of tlie owners, co, may or ma; not be a real gain according
as the event may prore Uiat the proiiioter'a bonus has not or has
absorbed the entire effective augmentation of value, A, due to the
coalition ; it \» therefore a problematical gain, which may or may not,
in [he event, prove to be an edccLlve element of capitalized savings.

The constitution of A will decide nhat is the oltlmate loarce of the
■Bvingse fleeted by this transaction. If A consists eitUrely of economies
of production, the capitalized savings held by the promoter and former
owners as a result of the transaction represent new values added to, or
saved to, the aggregate wealth of the community. If A consists entirely
of good.will in the shape of monopoly advantage, the saving Is effected
at the oost of the community and for the benefit of the promoter and
owners ; it is then an liiToluntary or aubctinscious saving on the part of
the community, whereby a part of the community's wealth at larga
pasfles into the hands ot*he recapiialiied corporation. Where A la
made up of these two constituents together, the result, as reparda the
present point, should bu plain without discussion. If, on the other
hand, A = 0, so that cap' = cap, then the promoter's savings, pro, are
secured at the cost of the former owners ; f,(cap' — pro)= tr,(cnp
-I- (A = 0) - pro) ■=■ tr,(eap - pro). Wliereas if y.(pro) = D.CA),
F.(co) = 0, leaving the owners without etteclive profit or loss in apile
of any nominal increase of the capitalization.



J



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL

capital" and banking capital at the disposal of
these men. If a common-sense view be taken of
the business, the good-will engaged must also be
added to the assets. There is involved a very con-
siderable and very valuable body of good-will,
appertaining to the financiers engaged and to the
financing firms associated with them.' This good-
will and this solvency is capital, for the purpose in
hand, as effectually as the good-will and securities
incorporated in the capitalization of any corpora-
tion engaged in industrial business.

But hitherto this particular category of good-
will has not been formally capitalized. There
may be peculiar dilficulties in the way of reducing
this good-will to the form of a fund, expressing it
in terms of a standard unit, and eo converting it
into quotable common stock, as has been done with
the corresponding good-will of incorporated indus-
trial enterprises. So also as regards the body of
solvency engaged, — the potential credit, or credit
capacity, of the promoters and financiers. Perhaps
this latter had best also be treated as an element



1 " Good-will " In this field ot enterprise most frequentl; takes the
form of a liirge ability to help or hlDiier oUier HiianclerB and financing
boiuea In ftny Bluiil&r manceuvrea in nliich they nifiy be engaged, or
an ability to put them in the way of lucrative financing transactions.
The guild of financiers is comoionly split up into more or leas well-
de&ned factions, each coinprialng an extensive ramiflcation of financing
houses and financiers furtbering one another's endeavors under more
or less settled working arrangements. Tbese working arrangements
Are a large part ol the fiouicien' *' good-wilL"



J



I



172 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

of good-will; it is difficult to handle under any
other, more tangible, conception. It may be dif-
ficult to standardize, fimd, and capitalize these
unstable but highly efficient factors of business
enterprise; but the successful capitalization of
good-will and credit extensioua in tlie case of the
modern industrial corporations argues that this
difficulty sliould not be insurmountable in case an
urgent need, — that is to say, the prospect of a
profitably vendible result, — should press for a
formal -capitalization of these peculiar elements of
business wealth. There can be no question, e.g.,
but that the good-will and large solvency belong-
ing to such a firm as J. P. Morgan and Company
for the purposes of tliia class of business enterprise
are an extremely valuable and substantial asset, as
is also, and more unequivocally, the good-will of the
head of that firm. These intangible assets, imma^
terial goods, should, in all consistency, be reduced
to standard units, funded, issued aa common stock,
and so added to the statistical aggregate of the
country's capitalized wealth.

It is safe to affirm that this good-will of the
great reorganizer has in some measure entered in
capitalized form into the common stock of the
United States Steel Corporation, as also into that
of some of the other great combinations that have
latterly been effected. The "good-will" of Mr.
Carnegie and his lieutenants, as well as of many


I



MODERN BUSINESS CAPITAL

other large business men connected with the steel
industry, has also no doubt gone to swell the cap-
italization of the great corporation. But good-will
on this higher level of business enterprise has a
certain character of inexhaustibility, so that its use
and capitalization in one corporation need not, and
indeed does not, hinder or diminish the extent
to which it may be used and capitalized in any
other corporation.' The case is analogous, though
scarcely similar, to that of the workmanlike or
artistic skill of a handicraftsman, or an artist^
which may be embodied in a given product with-
out abating the degree of skill possessed by the
workman. Like other good-will, though perhaps
in a higher degree of sublimation, it is of a spiritr
ual nature, such that, by virtue of the ubiquity
proper to spiritual bodies, the whole of it may
undividedly be present in every part of the various
structures which it has created. Indeed, the fact
of such good-will having been incorporated in
capitalized form in the stock of any given corpora-
tion seems rather to augment than to diminish the
amount at which it may advantageously be cap-
italized in the stock of the next corporation into
which it enters. It has also the correlative spirit-
ual attribute that it may imperceptibly and inscru-



' This caUgorjr of good-will stands !□ a relalEon to the creation of
vendible cnpitat elmlUr to that which the corporate good-will of an
Induftrlal busiiiess cooccrn beara to the creation of vendible products.


174 THE THEOBY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

iably withdraw its animating force from any one
of its creatures without thereby altering the
material circutiiatances of the corporation which
suffers such an intangible shrinkage of its forces.
There can be no question but that the good-will
of the various great organizers and their financier-
ing houses has repeatedly been capitalized, prob-
ably to its full amount, in the common stock of
the various corporations which they have created ;
but taken in the sense of an asset belonging to
the financing house as a corporation, it is not
known that this item of immaterial wealth has yet
been formally capitalized and offered in quotable
shares on the market or included in the schedules
of personal property.'

The sublimation of business capital that has
been going fonvard in recent times has grave
consequences for the owners of property as well
as for the conduct of industry. In so far as
invested property ia managed by the methods of
modem corporation finance, it is evident that the
management is separated from the ownership of

' Parenlhctioally it maj be remarked that the failure to capitalize
sncb Items of good-will ia likely to Involve a virtual eviulon of the tax
on personal property, and may, therefore, be que«lionable on moral
grounds.

The case of J. P. Morgan and Company ia, of coane, not here cited u
being a unique or peculiar instance, but simply ad a typical and strik-
ing illustration of what happens and of what migbl be accomplished
iu a number of targe and very consequential cases of the same cloi's.



I



MODEBN BUSINESS CAPITAL 175

the property, more and more widely as the scope
of corporation finance widens. The discretion, the
management, lies in the hands of the holders of
the intangible forms of property; and with the
extension of corporation methods it is increasingly
true that this management, again, centres in the
hands of those greater business men who hold
large blocks of these intangible assets. The reach
of a buBineas man's discretionary control, under
corporation methods, is not proportioned simply to
the amount of his holdmgs. If his holdings are
relatively small, they give him virtually no discre-
tion. Whereas if they are relatively large, they
may give him a business discretion of much more
than a proportionate reach. The effective reach
of a business man's discretion might be said to
increase as the square of his holdings; although
this is to be taken as a suggestive characterization
rather than as an exact formula.

Among the holdings of industrial property that
count in this way toward control of the business
situation, the intangible assets (represented by
common stock, good-will, and the like) are chiefly
of consequence. Hence follow these two results:
the fortunes of property owners are in large
measure dependent on the discretion of others —
the owners of intangible property; and the man-
agement of the industrial equipment tends strongly
to centre in the hands of men who do not own the



...u-wiiai processes of industry are
of men whose interest centres (
value of the immaterial assets."

) This diHociatioD ol Uie boaineBS control (
cfency and troin immediate contact with or own*
piknl givet tbe ezialiag sitaation a auperficial reai
s^Btem, in so far m touches the imiuaieriality of
tiona with the eveiyday life and interesia ot the
afltdn he Is muter. It gIVes a certain plansibi
iDterpretalioQ of latter-day economic deTelopmeni
—See Ghent, Our Stntvottat Feudalitm.


CHAPTER VII



THE THEORY OF IIODERN WELFARE

Before business principles came to
everyday life the common welfare, when it was not
a question of peace and war, turned on the ease
and certainty with which enough of the means of
life could be supplied. Since business has become
the central and controlling interest, the question of
welfare has become a question of price. Under the
old regime of handicraft and petty trade, dearth
(high prices) meant privation and might mean
famine and pestilence ; under the new regime low
prices commonly mean privation and may on
occasion mean famine. Under the old regime the
question was whether the community's work was
adequate to supply the community's needs ; under
the new regime that question is not seriously
enterUiined.

But the common welfare is in no less precarious
a case. The productive efficiency of modern in-
dustry has not done away with the recurrence of
hard times, or of privation for those classes whose
assured pecuniary position does not place them
above the chances of hard times. Distress may



IE ■

dominate |



178 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

not be so extreme in modem industrial commu-
nities, it does not readily reach the famine mark ;
but such a degree of privation as is implied in the
term " hard times " recurs quite as freely in
modern civilized countries as among the indus-
trially less efficient peoples on a lower level of
culture. The oscillation between good times and
bad is as wide and aa frequent as ever, although
the average level of material well-being nms at a
higher mark than was the case before the machine
industry came in.

This visible difference between the old order and
the new is closely dependent on the difference
between the purposes that guide the older scheme
of economic life and those of the new. Under the
old order, industry, and even such trade as there
was, was a quest of livelihood; under the new order
industry is directed by the quest of profits. For-
merly, therefore, times were good or bad according
as the industrial processes yielded a sufficient or
an insufficient output of the means of life. Lat^
terly times are good or bad according as the pro-
cess of business yields an adequate or inadequate
rate of profits. The controlling end is different in
the present, and the question of welfare turns on
the degree of success with which this different
ulterior end is achieved. Prosperity now means,
primarily, business prosperity; whereas it used to
mean industrial sufficiency.



THE IHEOKY OF MODERN WELFARE



A theory of welfare which shall account for the
phenomena of prosperity and adversity under the
modem economic order must, accordingly, proceed
on the circumstances which condition the modern
Ktuation, and need not greatly concern itself with
the range of circumstances that made ot marred
the common welfare under the older regime,
before the age of machine industry and business
enterprise.' Under the old order, when those in
whose hands lay the discretion in economic affairs
looked to a livelihood as the end of their endeavors,
the welfare of the commimity was regulated " by
the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which its
labor was generally applied." * What would mar
this common welfare was the occasionally disastrous
act of God in the way of unpropitious seasons and
the hke, or the act of man in the way of war and
untoward governmental exactions. Price varia-
tions, except as conditioned by these untoward intru-
sive agencies, had commonly neither a wide nor a
profound effect upon the even course of the com-
munity's welfare. Thia holds true, in a general
way, even after resort to the market had come
to be a fact of great importance in the life of large
classes, both as an outlet for their products and as

' Such % diBouBsion as Patten's Thtorn of rrntperity sppliea to the
regime ot "natural ecoDomj," and paaiably alao to that ot handicraft
and petty trade, but doe« cot acrioiuly touch tlie modern sltuaUon.
Tbe like Is true generally for current discuaaions of this topic.

' tVealth of Xation$, IntroductJon.



I

A



I



180 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

a base of supplies of coDsumable goods or of raw
materials, — as in the better days of the handicraft
system.

Until the machine industry came forward, com-
merce (with its handmaiden, banking) was the
only branch of economic activity that waa in any
sensible degree organized in a close and compre*
Ju'iiHive system of business relations. *' Business "
would then mean *' commerce," and little else.
Tliia was the only field in which men habitually
took account of their own economic circumstances
in terms of price rather than in terms of liveli-
hood. Price disturbances, even when they were
of considerable magnitude, seem to have had grave
consequences only in commerce, and to have passed
over without being transmitted much beyond the
commercial houses and the fringe of occupations
immediately subsidiary to commercial business.

Crises, depressions, bard times, dull times, brisk
times, periods of speculative advance, "eras of
prosperity," are primarily phenomena of business ;
they are, in their origin and primary incidence,
plienomena of price disturbance, either of decline
or advance. It i.s only secondarily, through the
mediation of business traffic, that these matters
involve the industrial process or the livelihood of
the community. They affect industry because
industry is managed on' a business footing, in terms
of price and for the sake of profits. So long aa



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 181



business enterprise habitually ran its course within
commercial traffic proper, apart from the industrial
process as such, so long these recurring periods of
depression and exaltation began and ended within
the domain of commerce.* The greatest field for

1 Thi« meftDS, in concrete terms, prior to the regime ol the machine
indiutry. Since the coming in of the macliioe, modem business ei
prise has taken over the management of industry ; that is to say, indus-
try hu come to b« maaaged by the method of investment for a profit —
by what is in aim and animus essentially the commercial method. As
has been remarked above, capital has became vendible In a decisive
degree. The material (acton engaged In industry, particularly In the
machine industry proper, are vendible In about the same (perhaps on
an average in a higher) degree as the material Items handled by com-
mercial trafBc are vendible. This is true of raw materials, labor
power, and Industrial equipment, but It is pecnliarly true of the indus-
trial equipment — the mechanical factors in the stricter sense. It is
In these mechanical appliances primarily, but in the other factors of
the machine industry In only a slightly lower degree, that the traffic
of Investment, and oI purchase and sale connected with InveHment, is
particularly active. Within these wider limits a further limitation
may be made. " Vendibility " of all items Involved is, as a broadly
general rule, carried to the highest pilch In those branches of Industry
that have to do with the production of "producer's goods." These
bruches are at the same time, and partly In consequence of this tact,
more widely and intimately related to other branches ot industry than
are any other group of Industrial processes that might be named, it
seems to be this extreme prevalence ot vendibility, together with this
more far-reaching and more exacting articulation with the industrial
process at large, that chiefly gives substantial significance to a cIhssI-
flcation of these lines ot Industry as " Produktivmiiiel-Industrien " by
lat« Oerman writers. There la, for business purposes, a diHerence
of degree, in both ol the respects named, between this (ill-deflnud)
group o{ Industrial processes on the one hand, and the contrasted
group occupied with the production of consamptlon goods on the other
band. The "productive-goods Industries" show the modem Indus-
trial and budnesa traits in an accentuated torm and force, and they
are, by consequence, lu a strategetically primary position in the busi-
ness situation.

Ct., e. i;., A. SpiethoB, Jahrbuch f. OtieUgfhiing Vtnaaitung k.
Kofi-wfrMcAqA,Tol.XXVLUeft2. "VorbemerkungensueinerTheorie



I



182 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



H business profits is now afforded, not by commercial

H trafHc in the stricter sense, but by the industries

H engaged in producing goods and services for the

H market. And the close-knit, far-reaching articula-

H tion of the industrial processes in a balanced sys-

H tem, in which the interstitial adjustments are made

H and kept in terms of price, enables price disturb-

B ances to be transmitted throughout the industrial

community with such celerity and effect that a
wave of depression or exaltation passes over the
whole community and touches every class employed
in industry within a few weeks. And somewhat in
the same measure as the several modem industrial
peoples are bound together by the business ties of
the world market, do these peoples also share in
common any wave of prosperity or depression
which may initially fall upon any one member of
this business community of nations. Exceptions
from this rule, of course, are such periods of pros-
perity or depression as result from local (material)
accidents of the seasons and the like, — accidents
that may inflict upon one community hardships
which through the mediation of prices are trans-
muted into gain for the other communities that
are not touched by the calamitous act of God to
which the disturbance is due.



derUberproducktioii."BndTOl. XXVII. pp. S43-35n; Tugan-BMAnow-
aky, Theorie vnd GaehkhU der ITandelikriitn in England, pp. lS-28
L. Pohle, PeriodiKhe Wirttehqfltkrittn, ceipeci&lly •eo. II. with
joined notea.



1 BUb- U



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 183



The true, or what may be called the normal,
crises, depressions, and exaltations in the business
world are not the result of accidents, such as the
failure of a crop. They come in the regular course
of business. The depression and the exaltation are
in a measure bound together. In the recent past,
since depression and exaltation have been nomuil
features of the situation, every strongly marked
period of exaltation (prosperity) has had its attend-
ant period of depression ; although it does not
seem to follow in the nature of things that a wave
of depression necessarily has its attendant reaction
in the way of a period of business exaltation. In
the recent past — the last twenty years or so — it
has been by no means anomalous to have a period
of hard times, or even a fairly pronounced crisis,
without a wave of marked exaltation either pre-
ceding or following it in such close sequence as
conveniently to connect the two as action and re-
action. But it would be a matter of some perplex-
ity to a student of this class of phenomena to come
upon a wave of marked business exaltation (pros-
perity) that was not promptly followed by a crisis
or by a period of depression more or less pro-
nounced and prolonged. Indeed, as the organizar
tion of business has approached more and more
nearly to the relatively consummate situation of
to-day, — say during the last twenty years of the
nineteenth century, — periods of exaltation have,



I



184 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE

on the whole, gro^vn less pronounced and less fre-
quent, wbei'eas periods of depression or " hard
times " have grown more frequent and prolonged,
if not more pronounced. It might even be a ten-
able generalization, though perhaps unnecessarily
broad, to aay that for a couple of decades past the
normal condition of industrial business has been
a mild but chronic state of depression, and that
any marked departure from commonplace dull
times has attracted attention as a particular case
calling for a particular explanation. The causes
which have given rise to any one of the more
pronounced intervals of prosperity during the past
two decades are commonly not very difficult to
trace; but it would be a bootless quest to go out in
search of special causes to which to trace back each
of the several periods of dull times that account
for the greater portion of the past quarter of a
century. Under the more fully developed business
system as it has stood during the close of the ceu-
tnry dull times are, in a way, the course of nature ;
whereas brisk times are an exceptional invention
of man or a rare bounty of Providence.

What current economic theory has to say on the
common welfare is more frequently found under
the caption of crisis and depression than in any
other one connection. And the theory of crisis
and depression has, as is well known, been one of
the less happy passages in the economists' repeiv



1



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 185

tory of doctrines. It has been customary to ap-
proach the problem from the side of the industrial
phenomena involved — the mechauical facts of
production and consumption; rather than from
the side of business enterprise — the phenomena of
price, earnings, and capitalization. This untoward
accident of a false start is probably accountable for
the fact that no tenable theory of these phenomena
has yet been offered. The solutions attempted
have commonly proceeded by an analysis of indus-
trial life apart fi'om business enterprise ; that is to
say, they have sought to explain the occurrence of
crises under that old-fashioned " natiu'al economy "
or '* money economy " under which crises did not
normally occur.^

Taking as a point of departure the patent fact
that crises, depressions, and brisk times are in their
first incidence phenomena of business, of prices
and capitalization, an explanation of their appear-
ance and disappearance, and of their bearing upon
the common welfare, may be sought by harking
bock to those business principles that underlie

■ ThU is nell exemplified in Tu^^nn-BsranowHlcr (Itandeltkriten'i,
wbo declares U, the ouUet (p. IT) that money and price are negligible
factors for the purpose in band. He thereby comuiis hlnuelt to the
posllion that these crises are pbeDomena of the material processes
of economio life (production and coDHamptlon), not of buslneas traffic.
Hence the ultimate failure ot tbU acute observer and tbeoreticUn to
reach a l^tnable solution of the question. Substantially the saiue ia
true of Marx, whom Tugau follows, though with largo reservations.
(Cf. Mant, Kapiint, vol. IIL oh. XV.)



cumstances which may further or
movements. Business depression an
are, at least in their first incidence,
of psychological fact, just as price m(
a psychological phenomenon.

The everyday circumstances whic
the modem business management of i[
sufficiently well known, and they ha
been reviewed in some detail in earlie
but they may perhaps advantageously
again in so far as they bear immedia
question in hand.

(1) Industry is carried on by meanf
ment, which is made with a- view tc
gain (the earnings). The business ma
ors in managing the affairs of the concei
investment has been made look to th(
The gains are kept account of as a pe;
the investment , and Ixi t^^^^gm^^^



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 187

from it, and this capitalization proceeds on the ground
afforded by the current rate of interest, weighted
by consideration of any prospective change in the
eaming-capacity of the concern. The management
of the concern is effected by a more or less intri-
cate and multifarious sequence of bargains. The
decisive consideration at every point in this traffic
of investment and administration is the considera-
tion of price in one relation or another.

(2) The industry to which the business men in
this way resort as the ways and means of gain ia
of the nature of a mechanical process, or it ia
some employment (as commerce or banking) that
is closely bound up with the mechanical industries.
Broadly, it ia such industry as lies under the
dominion of the machine, in that it is involved in
that comprehensive quasi-mechanical process of
modem industrial life that has been discussed in an
earlier chapter. Thia implication of each industry
in a comprehensive system, or thia articulation with
other branches of industry, is of such a nature
as to place each industrial concern in dependence
on one or more other branches of industry, from
which it draws its materials, appliances, etc., and
to which it disposes of its output ; and these rela-
tions of dependence and articulation form an end-
less sequence. That is to say, the interindustrial
relations into which any branch of industry neces-
sarily enters do not run to a final term in any



I


cern to another, or of one branch <
another, is that of bargaining, con
chase and sale. It is a pectiniary r
last resort a price relation, and the I
system of interstitial relations is a pi
(3) These interstitial pecuniary
tween the several concerns or brancht
that make up the comprehensive indd
at large, involve credit relations of g^
duration. The bargaining, by means
dustry is managed and the interstii
adjusted, takes the form of contrac
performance. All industrial concer
ciahle size are constantly involved :
tracts, which are, on an average, of
magnitude and duration, and comu
in several directions. These contrac
the natmie of loans, advances, out
counts, engagements for future deliv;



THE THEORTOF MODERN WELFARE 189

cerns the working relations between businesses that
are not under one ownership, or between which
the relations resting on separate ownership have
not been placed in abeyance by some such expe-
dient as lease, pool, syndicate, trust agreement, and
the like. Credit relations of one kind and another
are also found expedient and profitable at many
points where their employment is not precisely
unavoidable. These extended credit relations are
requisite to the most expeditious and profitable
conduct of business, and so to the highest degree
of success of the business. Under the regime o£
the machine industry and modern business methods
it is probably fair to say that the use of credit,
apart from loan capital and leases, imavoidably
goes to the extent required to cover all goods in
process of elaboration, from the raw material
to the finished goods, in so far as the goods change
hands (in point of ownership) during the process.

(4) The conduct of industry by competing busi-
ness concerns involves an extensive use of loan
credit, as spoken of in Chapter V. above.

The four conditions recited are characteristic

features of that recent past during which brisk

times, crises, and depressions followed one another

with some regularity as incidents of the normal

course of business.' Certain qualifications of this

1 The "cycle" ol ei»ltatlon, crlsto, and deprenlon baa frequently
been deMr1be<i. I'erhape as effective a dpjwrlpiion and nnnlysia as
an; la Uial of Tugui-Bftranowakj, JIaadelikrUen, ch^p. VIII.



I



acceleration takes place without al
credit, at least in the form of contra
and sale for future performance, if ■
form of loans. In times of protraa
the use of credit seems on the whol
what restricted, at least such is the!
hension of the case among business I
cannot confidentl}' be said that sa
tracted depression are due solely to
credit relations or to an unwillingnesi
credit relations. A comparison of
interest rates, e.g., does not warrant t
lion that the readiness with which
negotiated need be appreciably difie
and in dull times.' The readiness wi
tracts of purchase and sale are negoti
ciably greater in brisk times than
depression ; that, indeed, is the obvii
between the two. .



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 191



daimed the larger and livelier attention from
Btndenta, as it is also the more picturesque phenom-
enon. An industrial crisis is a period of liquida-
tion, cancelment of credits, high discount rates,
falling prices and " forced sales," and shrinkage of
valuas. It has as a sequel, both severe and lasting,
a shrinkage of capitalization throughout the field
affected by it. It leaves the business men col-
lectively poorer, in terms of money value; but the
property which they hold between them may not
be appreciably smaller in point of physical magni-
tude or of mechanical efficiency than it was before
the liquidation set in. It commonly also involves
an appreciable curtailment of industry, more severe
than lasting ; but the effects which a crisis has in
industry proper are commonly not commensurate
with its consequences in business or with the
importance attached to a crisis by the business
commimity. It does not commonly involve an
appreciable destruction of property or a large waste
of the material articles of wealth. It leaves the
community at large poorer in point of market
values, but not necessarily in terms of the material
means of life. The shrinkage incident to a crisis
is chiefly a pecuniary, not a material, shrinkage ; it
takes place primarily in the intangible items of
wealth, secondarily in the price rating of the tangi-
ble items. Apart from such rerating of wealth, the
most substantial immediate effect of a crisis is an



d



falling due at near dates, at the f
they hold bills receivable also in
To meet the demand o£ their cre{
upon their debtors, who may in t
bills receivable or may hold loani
The initial move in the sequence
may be the calling in of a call loa
additional collateral on a call 1(
point, earlier or later, in the sequen
the demand falls upon the holder
collateral which is, in the apprel
creditor, insufficient to secure reac
either by a shifting of the loan or b;
collateral. The collateral is commo
securities representing capitalized w
apprehension of the creditor may be
a doubt of tlie conservative cha
effective capitalization on which it rt
words, there is an apprehension thai


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 193

lateral has taken place on the basis of high prices
and brisk trade which prevail in such a period of
business exaltation as always precedes an acute
criflis. When such a call comes upon a given
debtor, the call is passed along to the debtors
farther along in the sequence of liabilities, and the
sequence of liquidations thereby gets under way,
with the effect, notorious through unbroken expe-
rience, that the collateral all along the line declines
in the market. The crisis is thereby in action,
and the further consequences follow as a well-
known matter of course. All this is familiar
matter, known to business men and students by
common notoriety.

The immediate occasion of such a crisis, then,
is that tliere arises a practical discrepancy between
the earlier effective capitalization on which the
collateral has been accepted by the creditors, and
the subsequent effective capitalization of the same
collateral shown by quotations and sales of the
securities on the market. But since the earlier
capitalization commonly, in the normal case,
comes out of a period of buainesa prosperity, the
point of inquiry is as to the ground and method
of this effective capitalization of collateral during
the period of prosperity that goes before a crisis,
and this, in turn, involves the question of the
nature and causes of a period of prosperity.

The manner in which the capitalization of col-



A



Tsutiiu, u~it can ne siiown on am
period of prosperity will bring on ;
between putative and actual ean
therefore between putative and
zation of collateral, even indej
expansion effected by loan credit.
A period of prosperity is no n
course than a crisis. It has its b
specific combination of circumstan
rise from some traceable favorab
the course of business. In and
potent fact which serves as incent^
eration of business is a rise of pric
prices presently becomes generaJ
progresses and becomes an habit
takes its start from some specific ia
of prices. That is to say, prices r
one industry or line of industries.*

■ As, €.g., the en of prosperity 1807-1902 t
demKiid fur an ppliea c



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 195



By new inveatmenta, as well as by extending the
operations o£ the plants already employed, busi-
ness men forthwith endeavor to take advantage of
Buch a rise. The endeavor to market an increased
supply of the things for which there is an en-
larged demand, brings on an increased demand
and an advance of prices in those liuea of indus-
try from which the concerns that had the initial
advantage draw their supplies. In part by actual
increase of demand and in part through a lively
anticipation of an advanced demand, aggressive
business enterprise extends its ventures and pushes
up prices in remoter lines of industry. This traa^
mission of the favorable disturbance of business
{substantially a psychological phenomenon) follows
very promptly under modern conditions, so that
any differential advantage that accrues at the out-
set to the particular line of industry upon which
the initial disturbance falls is presently lost or
greatly lessened. In the meantime extensive
contracts for future performance are entered into
in all directions, and this extensive implication of

lently th&n the vslue of conmmcr's goods," InMOiach m tbe T&lne of
producer's goods vaHes somewhat m ibe magnitude of the margin of
pro&ts, while that of the conaumei's goods varies Bomenhat as the
magnitude of the entire demand oa which this margin oF profits rests
Mftn increment, (The value o( producer's goods =/ (i), that of con-
sumer's goods =/ (demand + A).) From the like line of argameut
it should follow ifaU tbe initial break in time of orisia must come in
*Ome line of budnesa occupied with producer's goods. Cf. Qvarterlf
Jownal of Economics, Ma; 1003, pp. 407-500. See also foot-note on
p. 181 above.



J



196 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

the various lines of industry serves, of itself, to
maintain the prosperity for the time being. If
the original favorable disturbance of demand and
prices, to which the prosperity owes its rise, falls
off to the earlier level of demand, the era of pros-
perity has thereby a term set to its run ; although
the date of its termination is always at some dis-
tance in the future, beyond the time when the
original demand has ceased to act. The reason
for this retardation, whereby the close of an era
of prosperity is always delayed, other things equal,
beyond the lapse of the cause from which it has
arisen, is (1) the habit of buoyancy, or speculative
recklessness, which grows up in any business com-
munity under such circumstances, (2) the con-
tinued life of a considerable body of contracts for
future performance, which acts to keep up the
demand for such things as are required in order
to fill these contracts and thereby keeps up prices
in so far. In general it may be said that after
the failure of the favorable price disturbance to
which it is due, an era of prosperity will continue
for that (indefinite) further period during which
the fringe of outstanding contracts continues to
dominate the business situation. Some further,
new contracts will always continue to be made
during this period, and some unfilled contracts
will always be left standing over when the liqui-
dation sets in ; but, broadly speaking, the wiud-u]



I



THE THEOEY OF MODERN WELFARE 197

comes, not when this body of outstanding contracts
have run out or been filled, but wben the business
of filling them and of filling the orders to which
Uiey give rise no longer occupies the attention of
the business community in greater measure than
the rest of current business.

The run of business exigencies on which an era
of prosperity goes forward may be sketched in its
general features somewhat as follows : Increased
demand and enhanced prices, with the large con-
tracts which follow from such a state of the
market, increase the prospective earnings of the
several concerns engaged. These prospective earn-
ings may eventually be realized in full measure,
or they may turn out to have been putative earn-
ings only ; that is largely a question of how far
in the future the liquidation lies. The business
effect of increased prospective earnings, however,
is much the same whether the event proves the
eij)ectation of increased earnings to have been
well grounded or not. The expectation in either
case leads the business men to bid high for equip-
ment and supplies, Thereby the effective (mar-
ket) capitalization is increased to answer to the
increased prospective earnings. This recapitali-
zation of industrial property, on the basis of
heightened exijectation, increases the value of this
jn^perty as collateral. The inflated property be-
comes, in effect, collateral even without a formal



I



tiut during the free swing of tha
prise that characterizes an era ol
tracts are entered into with a
scrutiny of the property values av
a contract. So that as regards th
is the capitalization of the in dust
flated ou the basis of expectation,
ing of contracts the margin of
closely looked after than it is in
loans on collateral. There results
between the effective capitalizatic
perity and the capitalization as
the prosperity set in, and the hejg
zation becomes the basis of an e:
cation of credit in the way of coi
at the same time the volume of
set form, is also greatly increased
of prosperity.'

An era of prosperity is an era i
When nricef



THE THEOET OF MODERN WELFARE 199

putative increase of earnings on which prosperity
rests is in substance an apprehended differential
gain in increased selling price of the output over
the expenses of production of the output. Only
so long as the selling price of the output realizes
such a differential gain over the expenses of pro-
duction, is the putative increased rate of earnings
realized ; and so soon as such a differential advan-
tage ceases, the era of prosperity enters on its clos-
ing phase.*

Such a differential advantage arises mainly from
two causes: (1) The lines of industry which are
remote, industrially speaking, from the point of
initial disturbance, — from which, that is to say,
the lines of industry first and chiefly affected by the
rise draw supplies of one kind or another, — these
remote lines of industry are less promptly and less
acutely affected by the favorable disturbance of the
price level ; this retardation of the disturbance
affords the industries nearer the seat of disturbance a
differentia] advantage, which grows less the farther
removed the given enterprise is from the point of
initial disturbance.' (2) The chief and most secure
differential advantage in the case is that due to

< The " initial disttiTbftnce " here spoken ot taay ot courae be of &
progresfliTe or recuning duuacter, &Dd ea may keep the differential
advuitage going In & progresalve mnnner; aa, e.g., In the case of apro-
gcea^Te demand for auppltea dne to a protraoWd war or to a period of
contlnned preparation tor nar, such aa hu occurred In America during
ttie last few yean.



I



J



200 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

the relatively slow advance in the cost of labor
during an era of prosperity. Wages ordinarily are
not advanced at all for a considerable period after
such an era of prosperity has set in ; and so long
as the eventual advance of wages does not overtake
the advance in prices (which in the common nm of
cases it never does in full measure), so long, of
course, a differential gain in the selling price ac-
crues, other things equal, to virtually all business
enterprises engaged in the industries affected by
the prosperity.

There are, further, certain (outlying) lines of
industry, as, e.g., farming, which may not be di-awn
into the movement in any appreciable degree,and the
price of supplies drawn from these outlying indus-
tries need not rise; particularly they need not
advance in a degree proportionate to the advance
in the prices of the goods into which they enter as
an element of their expenses of production. To an
imcertain but commonly appreciable extent there
is also a progressive cheapening of the processes
of production during such an era, and this cheap-
ening, particularly in so far as it affects the pro-
duction of the goods contracted for, as contrasted
with the appliances of production, serves also to
maintain the differential advantage between the
contracted sale price and the expenses of produc-
tion of the goods contracted for.

In the ordinary course, however, the necessary



THE THEOEY OF MODEEN WELFARE 201

expenseB of production presently overtake or nearly
overtake the prospective selling price of the out-
put. The differential advantage, on which business
prosperity rests, then fails; the rate of earnings
falls off; the enhanced capitalization based on en-
hanced putative earnings proves greater than the
earnings realized or in prospect on the basis of an
enhanced scale of expenses of production ; the col-
lateral consequently shrinks to a point where it
will not support the credit extension resting on it
in the way of outstanding contracts and loans ; and
liquidation ensues, after the manner frequently set
forth by those who have written on these subjects.'
At some point in the system of investment and
business extension will be found some branches of
industry which have gradually lost what differen-



> There ix a point or two of further dot«il In what rnvj be called the

method of prosperity utd crisis, which are beat discusaed in connec-
tion with the phenomena of depreMion. These will, therefore, be
taken up presently. The above characterization of an era of prosper-
ity and the manner of its exhausting itself will serve as a description
of the course which snch an era l&lies under the regime of the more
highly developed business methods of the high tide of the nineteenth
century. For the earlier, less fully developed, busiaesa situation of
the early nineteenth century the corresponding course of eienU runs
somewhat different, owing, chiefly at least, (1) to a slower rate of trans-
misKion of any price disturbance, and (2) to the greater range and
value of "outlying" industries which are very tardily if at all drawn
into the oxulierant movement of prosperity. In this connectioo it is
north noting that during this earlier period of the ninleenlh century
the production of specifically productive goods had not been carried
to the point aftcrnard atuliml, cither in the differentiation and
special ixatinn of Industries occupied with this class of goods or In the
relative volume of this class of industries.



J


I



202 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEI8E



tial advantage they started out with when they
entered on the era of prosperity ; and if these
are involved in large contracts and undertakings
which are carried over into the phase of the
movement at which this particular branch of in-
dustry has ceased to liave a differential advantage
in the price of its output over the cost of its sup-
plies of material or labor, then what may have
been a conservative capitalization of their hold-
ings at an early phase, while their earning-ca-
paeity rested on a large differential advantage,
will become an excessive capitalization after their
eaming-capacity has declined through loss of their
differential advantage. Some branch or branches
and some firms or class of firms necessarily fall
into this position in the course of a period of
phenomenally brisk times. A business concern so
placed necessarily becomes a debtor, and its liabili-
ties necessarily become, in some degree, bad debts.
It is forced by circumstances to deliver its output
at prices which preclude its obtaining such a
margin as its extension of business presupposed.
That is to say, its capitalization becomes exces-
sive through shrinkage of its eaming-capacity
(as counted in terms of price). A concern of this
class which is a debtor is precluded from meeting
its obligations out of its current earnings; and if,
as commonly happens in an appreciable proportion
of cases, its obligations have already been aug-



THE THEOBY OF MODERN WELFARE 203

mented to the extent which its recent earning-
capacity would warrant, then the concern ia in-
solvent for the time being. If the claims against
it are pressed, it has no recourse but liquidation
through forced sales or bankruptcy. Either ex-
pedient, if the case is one of considerable magni-
tude, ia disastrous to the balanced sequence of
credit relations in which the business community
is involved. The system of credit relations pre-
vailing at such a time has grown up on the basis
of an eaming-capacity transiently enhanced by a
wave of differential price advantage; and when
this wave has passed, even if it leaves prices
higher all around, the differential advantage of
at least most concerns is past. The differential
price advantage has come to the several branches
or firms in succession, and has, in the typical case,
successively left each with an excessive capitaliza-
tion, and has left many with a body of liabilities
out of proportion to their subsequent earning-
capacity. This situation may, evidently, come
about in this manner, even without lowering the
aggregate (pecuniary) eaming-capacity of the busi-
ness community to the level at which it stood
before the wave of prosperity set in."

' The several pbasea o( Uils seqnenco of eialution and depreuion,
lor any glyea busiueea concern, may be ata(«d aa foUows : —

Lot ea = aamingB ; pr = sale price of oatput ; exp ~ expenses of
production of oatput ; mar = margin of gain on output = pr ~ eip ;
cap = initial effecUre capilalization j yp = year's puicbaoe at (cunent


204 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

But when such a situation has come, all that is
required to bring on the general catastrophe is
that some considerable creditor find out that the
present eaming-capacity of his debtor will prob-
ably not warrant the capitalization on which his
collateral is appraised. In self-defence he must
decline the extension of a loan, and forced liquida-
tion must follow. Such a liquidation involves



rates = lot) =



-, dlgregaiding risk ; cr = normal credit extension o



given «p = ^=/(?^).

Then at tlie Initial phue,

ea = (mw = pr — eip)oulp,



At Um mbaequent phase, o( eultation,

ea' = e« + Aea = mar" x ontp
= [Cpr'=pr + Apr)- exp] ontp
= (mar + Amar) outp>ea,



cap':



lnl~ int

cap' cap 4



->cap,


At Ibe concluding pbaae, oC depression,

ea"= ea'— Aea' = mar" x outp

= [1"^'— {*=n>'=B^ + Ae«p)]oatp<e»'

cp., = g = ?^LjL^<cap'.
cap" cap'— Acap'



<cr'.

For slnipUclty of statement, In all this no account is tahea of tbo
elementot risk, nor of the ItuctuaUouB of discount nttes or tbe variations
of volume of output. If these be included in tlie calculation as vari-
ables, tbe result la much the Bame. They arc functions of the variables
already included, and their incluaion would, on the whole, accentual«
the oacUlationa shown hj the computation as it etauda.



THE THEORY OF MODEKN WELFARE

cutting under the ruling prices of products, which
lessens the profits of competing firms and throws
them into the class of insolvents, and so extends
the readjustment of capitalization.

The point of departure for the ensuing sequence
of liquidation is not infrequently the failure of
some hanking house, but when this is the case it
is pretty sure to be a bank whose funds have been
"tied up" in "unwise" loans to industrial enter-
prises of the class spoken of above.'

The abruptness of the recapitalization and of the
redistribution of ownership involved in a period of
liquidation may be greatly mitigated, and the
incidence of the shrinkage of values may be more
equably distributed, by a judicious leniency on the
part of the creditors or by a well-advised and dis-
creetly weighted extension of credit by the govern-
ment to certain sections of the business community.
Such measures of alleviation were had, with liappy
effect, in the case of a recent stringency which is
sometimes spoken of as an averted crisis. But
where the situation answers the specifications



• A crisis may take Its rtac frnui crodit extension in olber than
properly indtuirl&l business. Such, e.g., was Id great measure ibe
AmerlckQ criiiis in 1S37, nben tlie moet obylous and diaastrous infla-
tion na« in apeeulatlre land values tuid the credlta baaed on them.
Bnt it la no stretch of the concept to say that In that case tlie situation
out ot iTbicb the ciiais arose was an overcaplUUzation of the land
valuea in question. Capitalised land ia, of oouiae, "capital" tor biial-
neia piirpiiaes aa truly as any other body of value* that are cftpitaJlied
and drawn into the money market.



■ LiiiLU lUcii me mosi suDsianiiai imi
of such a liquidation as is involve
redistribution of the ownership (
concerned in the liquidation, where
similar claimanta gain at the exp
vent debtors. Such being the cas(
cally follow that the large creditors
follow up their advantage by conca
the body of debtors to an abrupt Hqi
realizing as large a gain as possible
practicable delay, whenever the situs
Such may be the logic of the circ
such is not the course practically
large creditors under the circumstai
there is more than one reason. It
ently, that human kindness overrule
impulse to gain at the expense of the
ever recurring object-lessons affordec
in the stock and money market enf'
that when o ne bu9iness_man_sa^aJlt


TliE THEORY OF MODEEX WELFARE 207



the conventional routine seem to be fairly univer-
sal traits of the class of men who engage in the
larger business activities. So that, while it would
be to the unequivocal advantage of the large cred-
itor, in point of material gain, to draw in his
debtor's property at such a reduced valuation as
comes in a period of abrupt liquidation, yet he does
not ordinarily see the matter in that light ; because
the liquidation involves a shrinkage of the money
value of the property concerned, and the business
man, creditor or debtor, is not in the habit of
looking beyond the money rating of the property
in question or beyond the most immediate future.
The conventional base line of business traffic, of
course, is the money value, and a recognition of
the patent fact that this base line wavers incon-
tinently, and that it may on occasion shift very
abruptly, apparently exceeds the business man's
practical powers of comprehensioa Money value
is his habitual bench-mark, and he holds to the
conviction that this bench-mark is stable, in spite
of the facts.'

■ It is, In great put, through or b; force of fluctufttiona of this base
line of money valups thai large accumuUtionH of wealth are made.
One might almost say that this is the " aormal " method by which
savings are made and capitalized in iaUr modern tiniea. Flui;LuatLoiiE in
the stock market, of course, are of this character, as are commonly dIho
large Tariatiaiu of the course of prices outside the stock market, »« well
as floctiialions of the money market. The great gains of successful
promoters of corporations and the like come in this maiini^r usually.
They are due to enlargement of the money value ol a given block of
industrial equipment iDdependentty ol any change In the physic^



I


I



TOE THBOBT OF BUSDiXSS ENTERFBISE

It is tme, cases oocor, from time to time, of
tnoaactions of some appreciable magnitude in
which some degree ot reoognitaan ot this fact is
met with. S«ne lazge bonnees man m&j jet rise
to the requisite level of intelligence, and may com-
prehend and unresetredlj act npon the fact that
the money base line of business traffic at Urge ia
thoroughly onstable and may readily be manipu-
lated, and it will be worth going out of one's way
to see the phenomenal gains and the picturesque
accompaniments of such a man's work. Paren-
thetically it may be remarked that if such a degree
of insight should become the common property of
the business community, business traffic as now
carried on might conceivably collapse through loss
of its base line. What is yet lacking in order to
such a consummation is perhaps nothing more
serious than that business capita) be reduced to a
somcwbat more thorough state of int-angibility
than it has yet attained, and that does not seem a
remote contingency.'

churaeter of the equipment. Which comes near saying that Ihe large
forlonea ori^nate in such changes of the base line, — from which it
follows Uiat the larger accretions to the volume of capital are of this
origin. The tarRe proBta are made in the form of capital, which is
acquired b; virtue of a price Tariatlon. See foot-note, pp. 108-170.

> A BUbslanlial moTB in this direction would be that advocated by
Hr, F. 8. Stetson Iwfore the New Torh Bar Associuion, and reltented
btfore the United States Industrial Commission : " To permit the lor-
matlon of a distinct elais of business stoch corporations whose capital
■tock may ba Issued as representing proportional parts of the whole
oaplUl wlthonl aojr nomloai ot money value." The matkot value of


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 209

There is, however, another and more constrain-
ing circumstance which hinders the large creditors
from wilfully pushing the debtors to a reckoning
when things are ripe for liquidation. As was
indicated above, the sequence of credit relations in
an era of prosperity is endlessly ramified through
the business community ; whereby it happens that
very few creditors are not also debtors, or stand in
such relation to debtors as would involve them in
some loss, even if this loss should not be commen-
surate with their eventual gain at the cost of
other debtors. This circumstance by itself has
a strong deterrent effect, and when taken in
connection with what was said a^ve of the
habitual inability of the men in business to ap-
preciate the instability of money values, it is
probably sufficient to explain the apparently short-
sighted conduct of those large creditors to seek to
mitigate the severity of liquidation when the liqui-
dation has come due.

The account here offered of the "method" of
crises and eras of prosperity does not differ greatly
from accounts usually met with, except in explain-
ing these phenomena as primarily phenomena of
business rather than of industry. The disturbances
of the mechanical processes of industry, which are

such shares would be the only value assigned them, and little of a base
line in the way of a legally imputed value would remain. The de jur%
value would no longer hinder a free reco^ition of the facts. — Repmt
of th€ Industrial Commission^ voL I. p. ^6.



m SUCH a movement belongs wi
traffic rather than with the industi
Industry is controlled by businee
is carried on for business ends,
wide disturbance in business, ther
industrial processes pretty directly
quences, in the way of an expan
ment of industrial activity and
shortened output of product, are,
immediate and important. As a pi
the industrial aide, of an era of prof
munity gains greatly in aggregate i
The gain in material wealth, of cou
bly distributed ; most of it goes to
ness men, eventually in great par
come out of the subsequent liquidati
side. To some extent this aggrega
is offset by the unavoidable waste
stagnation that attends upon an en
It is furth er offset bv t bo faot. i\



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 211



form of wasteful expenditure, as, e.g., a sustained
war demand or the demand due to the increase of
armaments, naval and military, or again, such an
interference with the course of business as is
wrought by a differentially protective tariff. The
later history of America and Germany illustrates
both these methods of procuring an era of pros-
perity. These methods, it will be noticed, are, in
their primary incidence, of the nature of a waste of
industrial output or energy; but the prosperity
achieved is, none the less, to be recognized as a
beneficial outcome in point of heightened industrial
activity as well as in point of increased comfort
for the industrial classes.

To the workmen engaged in industry, particu-
larly, substantial benefits accrue from an era of pros-
perity. These benefits come, not in theway of larger
returns for a given amount of work, but more work,
fuller employment, at about the earlier rate of pay.
To the workmen it often moans a very substantial
gain if they can get a fuller livelihood by working
harder or longer, and an era of prosperity gives them
a chance of this kind. Gradually, however, as pros-
perity — that is to say, the advancing price level —
rises and spreads, the increased cost of living
neutralizes the gain due to fuller employment, and
after the era of prosperity has been under way for
some time the gain in the amount of work obtain-
able is likely to be fairly offset by the increased


I

I



212 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

cost of living. As noted above, much of the busi-
ness advantage gained in an era of prosperity is due
to the fact that wages advance more tardily than
the prices of goods. An era of prosperity does not
commonly bring an increase of wages until the era
is about to close. The advance of wages in such a
case is not only a symptom indicating that the
season of prosperity is passing, but it is a business
factor which must by its own proper, effect close
the season of prosperity as soon as the advance
in wages becomes somewhat general. Increasing
wages cut away the securest ground of that differ-
ential price advantage on which an era of prosperity
runs.

Periods of crisis or of prosperity are, after all,
relatively simple phenomena with strongly marked
features, and a passable explanation of them is
correspondingly easy. They have also the advan-
tage of having received much attention at the hands
of the students of economic history. On the other
hand, protracted depression, not traceable to wide-
spread hardship or calamity arising from circum-
stances outside the range of business transactions,
is a relatively new and untried subject for economic
theory. Newer, more obscure, with less pronounced
features and less definite limits than movements of
speculative advance or speculative crises, this phe-
nomenon has to a less extent engaged the steady



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 213



attention of students. An inquiry into the life
history and the causes and effects of depression,
from the point of view of a theory of business, may
therefore scarcely be expected to yield concise or
secure conclusions.

Since industry waits upon business, it is a matter
of course that industrial depression is primarily a
depression in business. It is in business that de-
pression is felt, since it is on the business side of
economic activity that the seat of economic sensi-
bility may be said to lie; it is also in business (pe-
cuniary) terms that the depression is measured
whenever a measure or estimate of the matter is
attempted. In so far as tliere is an attendant
derangement of the mechanical processes and of the
mechanical articulation of processes in industry, the
derangement follows from the pecuniary exigencies
of business. Depression and industrial stagnation
follow only in case the pecuniary exigencies of the
situation are of such a character as to affect the
traffic of the business community in an inhibitory
way. But business is the quest of profits, and an
inhibition of this quest must touch the seat of its
vital motives. Industrial depression means that
the business men engaged do not see their way to
derive a satisfactory gain from letting the industrial
process go forward on the lines and in the volume for
which the material equipment of industry is de-
signed. It is not worth their while, and it might



J



■ Itequently employed, is " uodercoi
The controversial question as
of any given " overproduction " d{
the present purpose, be left on one
side the theory of business and it
demerits for the purposes of a the
The point of interest here is rathei
its acceptation among business men al
which this notion has for them ; th^
chiefly of interest here to inquire inj
thought which give cogency and
dogma of " overproduction " as prac
the body of business men, — whal
means, why the dogma is held, a
effect on the course of business entei
"Overproduction," or "undercoi
it is met with in the views of b'
neither a vacant dogma nor a shifty
with to cover their own delinquenc:
concretfilv ""*^ p\Me tiL^SMm^i



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 215



dull ; and the concept covered by the term com-
prises the sufficient cause of the dulness, in the
apprehension of the business community, even
tliough they may not always speak of the difficulty
by that name. It may be worth while, even
at the risk of tedium, to point out that this concept
of "overproduction" applies, not to the material,
mechanical bearing of the situation, but to ita pe-
cuniary bearing. Tiie notion is never seriously
entertained that there is or may be an embarrassing
excess of goods, or of the appliances for their pro-
duction, above what would be of some human use
if the business situation permitted them to be
turned to use.

(1) The supply of consumable goods is, practi-
cally, never greater than the community's capacity
for consuming them. An embarrassing excess in
any line is practically a remote contingency at the
most.' There are many eloquent passages in the
economic manuals which may be called in witness
of this truism, where much pains is taken to show
that human wants are, in the nature of the case,
indefinitely extensible. Nothing stands in the
way, we are told, but "difficulty of attainment"
of the goods with which to satisfy these wants.
(2) In times of depression, or " hard times," there



1 SometbinK that mighl bear snoh a conitmctlon ocean, e.g., locally,
iihea a run of fiah ezceeda the ability ol the workmen to take care of
UitiDi. The fatuity of appealing to Bucti an example la plain.



J



tbe tOToe of workmen or requir
overtime and holidays. Quite the
sort of thing happens only in b
there is no overproduction. Se
euch platitudes as these may see
with the pjitience of the printer, or
for a light-headed excess of " «
Methode"; but these two forinul
cover all the conceivable way;
duction may occur, so long as the t<
from the point of view of the mec
the case. Seen from this side a peri
is a period of underproduction ; n
time or none, and the supply of ^
ita way into tlie hands of consul
scant for the demands of comfort.

The difficulty is, of course, a pec
the phrase Is used by business raer
iary sense in which it hiis an imi
on business^ ^f_£2Li£au£a-aaBUfliii



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 217

the cost of production of the goods and leave
something appreciable over as a profit. It is a
question of prices and earnings. The difficulty is
that not enough of a product can be disposed of at
fair prices to warrant the running of the mills at
their full capacity', or running them at a rate near
enough to their capacity to yield a fair profit. Or,
to turn the proposition about, as business men are
in the habit of doing, there is more of an output
offered than will be carried off at a fair price, —
Buch a price as will afford fair or ordinary profita
on the investment and the running expenses.
There is too large a productive capacity; there are
too many competitive producers and too much
industrial apparatus to supply the market at rea-
sonable prices. The matter reduces itself to a
question of ^ir prices and ordinary profits.^

If there is a large volume of outstanding credit
obligations, that will complicate the situation.
There is always a considerable amount of interest-
bearing securities outstanding, and the claims of
these securities have to be satisfied before divi-
dends can be paid on stock, or before profits accrue
to industrial ventures which have issued the secu-
rities. These fixed charges, together with others
of a like kind, narrow the margin from which
profita are derived and increase the handicap
which a season of dull times brings to the business

' Cf. Smart, Sluiiiei in Economica, cli. VII.



J



218 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

men in charge of industry. At the same time
fixed charges preclude shutting down, except at a
sure and considerable loss. The business men
involved are constrained to go on, and in the ab-
sence of wide combinations in industry tliey are
constrained to go on at such competitive prices as
to preclude reasonable profits.

The question of fair prices and reasonable
profits has some reference to current rates of in-
terest. A " fair " rate of profits is such a rate as
bears a reasonable relation to the current rate of
interest, although this relation of profits to inter-
est rates does not appear to be a strict one. Still,
there undoubtedly is some reference to the current
rate of interest as a sort of zero line to which
profits should not decline. New investments are
made on the basis of current rates of interest
and with a view to securing the differentia] gain
promised by the excess of prospective profits over
interest rates.

In a period of depression the aggregate indus-
trial equipment is, notoriously, not running at its
full capacity ; there are many idle and half-idle
plants and many idle workmen. The concerns in
question find themselves unable to do a full run of
business at reasonable profits. Still, unless the
depression is of exceptionally short duration, there
ia always some new investment going on. More
or less of new capital continues to find its way



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 219

into industrial business in competition with the
concerns that are already in the field.' In case of
a protracted depression the aggregate of new in-
vestments so made may, in the course of years,
atDount to a very considerable addition to the
industrial outfit, and the production of the new
establishments may very appreciably increase the
aggregate output. Indeed, the output of the new
establishments is a notable factor in swelling tlie
supply and keeping down prices. But the new
investments made during the depression are profit-
able, at least at the start. Or even if this should
be questioned when stated in this broad way, it
will at least hold true that they are commonly
entered upon with a well-advised expectation of
their being profitable if the situation does not mar
terially change between the time when the new
venture was entered upon and the time when the
new equipment has got under way. If the interval
between the inception of the new enterprise and
its completion is a long one, the situation may so
change in the meantime as to leave it unprofitable
even if it has been conservatively planned. There
are also, of course, fraudulent enterprises which
are not expected by their promoters to pay a profit
on the investment ; and there are probably, also,



' For Uie present puipow k concern which puse* througb a liqui-
dation and reappeaiB with a rerated uid reortnnized capital iutioii and

body of tiabiliUes also luu mucb of liie cliaraclcr ol a :



220 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

always some ventures entered upon during dull
times with a \'iew to being beforehand in prepara-
tion for better times. But after all has been said
in qualification of the main proposition, it remains
true that some new investment is going on with a
well-advised expectation of reasonable profits on
the basis of current costs, prices, and rates of
interest.'

The rate of interest in times of depression may
be unsatisfactory to lenders ; it may be discourag-
ing by comparison with the customary range of intei--
est rates during better times. Still, the obstacle to
business is not to be sought in an effectual dis-
couragement of lenders, for in point of fact money

' Ct. L. Poble, BevSlkemngihfoegvng, Kapilalbllitunff und perlo-
diiehe WirUchafUkriaea, who concludes tbat depression Is doe U> a
scarcity of capital aa compared with popalalion ; the rate of iQcraaae
of capital is conceived to fall abort of the rate of increase ol populaUon,
bence periodical depression.

Cf., on the oilier band, Macrosty, Truttt and the Slate, p. 133, who
finds, by recouree to the testicnony before the Royal Commission on
the Depression of Trade and Industry, that there is at such times
capital constantly seekjns investment and entering into competition
with what is already Inveate<l. Cf. Final Report nf the Jloyal Com-
mission on Depraxion of Trade and Industry (18S0). "The replies
received from Chambers of Commerce to the inquiries we addressed w
them confirm the slatements made by the witnesses who appeared
before us. Those replies lestlfy to the general maintenance or increase
of the volume of trade, accompanied in m^ny cases by a shrinkage in
iU value, and in all cases by a serious diminution of profit. They also
show how general la Ibe belief In commercial circles that overproduc-
tion, the fail of prices, and more effective forel^ni compelition. assisted
by high tarilb, go far to account for the existing position of trade
and industry in Ibia country " (pp. ii-x). Cf. also pp. xi-iv of the



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 221



ia readily to be had on good security during any
protracted depression.' There is also the fact that
investiuent is continually going on, which argues
that the difficulty is neither that capital cannot be
found for investment, nor that investment has no
prospect of reasonable profits. Practically, no ex-
ceptional amount of fluent funds is withheld from
the market, — except in time of panic, which is
another matter. It may be added that the rate of
interest need not be notably low in time of depres-
sion, just as, on the other hand, a period of busi-
ness exaltation is not uniformly accompanied by
a notably high rate of interest.

But a low or declining rate of interest is effective
in the way of depressing the business situation,
even though a depression may go on without it.
The line of its bearing upon business depression,
or at least one line, is as follows: Established
business concerns (particularly corporations) en-
gaged in industry have some appreciable fixed
(interest) charges to meet — on leases, mortgages,
and interest-bearing securities (preferred stock and
bonds). These outstanding obligations and securi-
ties may have been negotiated, " floated," at an
earlier period of higher interest rates and higher
profits, or they may have been carried over through
a period of higher interest rates. In the former

> Cf., e.g., Barton, Criitt and Drprenion), ch. IV., especially pp



I



J



222 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

case these interest charges are excessively high as
compared with the present capitalized value of the
property on which they rest, computing the cap-
italization on the basis of the present cost of
replacing this property and the present interest
charge ^vhich this coat of replacement would bear.
In the latter case the original capitalization of the
coiTesponding items of property will have under-
gone a practical (effective) recapitalization at a
lower figure to correspond with the higher rate of
interest prevalent during the interval in question j
and in the subsequent period of low interest, the
fixed charge on this recapitalization is excessively
high as compared with the current effective cap-
italization of the property. The liabilities are
excessive, in respect of their interest charges, aa
compared with the present eaming-capacity of the
property repi-esented by them.'



I More in detail, what happens in connection with interesl-bcaring
\a carried over an iiiierval of bigb iuteteat ralea and busineHS
activit; ma; be lormulaled as follows : When current iotcrcal ralps
advance, securitiea bearing a fixed rate (of dividends or interest)
decline on the market. That is to say, the eSective capitalised Talue
of the claim to these fixed rates of Income, aa ahoTnt by tbe market
quotations, shrinks. At the same time, since the period dming which
this readjustment occun is a period of acceleration in buitness, the
eaminR-capacity (actual or putatiye) ot the property on which these
securitiea rest has increased over what it was at the time the securities
were Soated. Hence this property (industrial equipment) is also
recapitalized. In the market quotations, at a higher value than It had
when the securitiea were floated. The etfectlTe recapitalisation carried
out by the maritet quotations acts, for the present purpose, to the same
effect upon the value of both of the items considered, this effect lieing
lo leave a margin of the property previously covered by the securiliea



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 223

What gives effect to this drawback for the
business enterprises which have such fixed interest

uncovered and available aa collateral on if hicb 10 float » ni
of credit, in the form of mortgage loan or inlereat-bearing security.
In tbo common run of business procedure tbis available margin,
between the current (higber) capitalized value of the property (eollat'
entl) and Ibe current (loner) capitalized value of the aecurilieB resting
upon It IB promptly covered by a fresh credit eztenElon ; wbetber this
esleaaion takes the set form of loan, bonds, preferred stock, and the
lik«, or the leu patent form of » Uuger volume of obligation! in the
way of contracts and the like, — the result, as touches the securities
and tbeir basis, being that the same nominal volume of spcnritjes ivith
the 8am« aggregate interest charge rests on a (uiaierialty) Gmaller
block of the industrial equipment after this readjiiBtineiit of capitali-
zation Is bad than it did when the securities were placed. Wben
depression ensues, and the rate of earnings aud interest declines, the
effective capitalization of the securities with a fixed rato of income Is
increased (If the securities are felt to he secure) to correspond with
the lower rate of iuterest; whereas the capitalized value of the block
ol Industrial equipment on which these securities [plus whatever may
have been added in the interval) rest shrinks to correspond with the
same taota. A discrepancy, sucb as was adjosled by a recapitalization
during the interval of high rates, reappears, but in the Inverse sense.
And this discrepancy cannot be corrected, Bince Uie margin on wbicb
the ptefious adjustment was made hasdisapp^red, and no correspond-
ing margin on tbe other side emerges. Business accounts do not deal
iu negative qiuintitics, except under stress of a necessity that violiitcs
the premises on which business accountancy proceeds.

Recurring to the notation employed on page 153, and letting I = par
value of securities with fixed charges, r = rate per annum of nxed
charges, I' = market value (effective capitalization) of these Mcnriltes,



eap'z



.rp =



It becomes InV (=ini + Aint), 1' becomes



(int + Aint:

cap* at tbe tame time becomes cap" =

wbenu in a period of falling interest,

lat' = lnt-4int, and 1"



int + A int InV



inl' = (int - A int)



J



224 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



charges to meet is the fact that the new invest-
ments, and those concerns that have gone into
bankruptcy or receivers' hands, come into com-
petition with the old. These new or rejuvenated
concerns are not committed to a scale of fixed
charges carried over from a higher interest level ;
and these are therefore carrying only such interest
charges as the current effective capitalization of
their property will warrant, whether effective cap-
italization be taken to mean cost of production of
the equipment, earning-capacity of the concern,
or market quotation of its securities. These un-
incumbered competitors are presumed to be making
reasonable profits at current prices, and theu- pres-
ence in the competitive market therefore precludes
an advance of prices to such a scale as would afford
a reasonable profit to the otlier establishments after
paying their interest cliarges on what is, in effect,
overcapitalized property.

This tentative explanation of depression applies
only so far as the period of depression is a time of
relatively low rates of interest. But depression
does not uniformly coincide with low interest
rates ; besides which, there are other facts in the
case which limit the applicability of the explana-
tion formulated above. To explain protracted
depression, e.g,, this line of argument would be
convincing only on the supposition of a progres-
sively falling rate of interest, — a condition not


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 225
commonly met with in a protracted period of



But this explanation, applicable within a limited
range of the phenomena that make up a period of
depression, points the way to another class of con-
siderations that go far toward explaining the rest.
It appears that the phase of the difficulty covered
by this explanation is traceable to a discrepancy
between the accepted capitalization, the interest
charges, and the eaming-capacity. And it appears
equally plain that the only remedy applicable to
the case (barring a speculative exaltation of busi-
ness) is a recapitalization of the concerns affected
on a lower basis, to fit the lowered cost of pro-
duction of the equipment and its lowered eaming-
capacity. But under existing conditions of law
Buch a remedy cannot be applied to the interest-
bearing securities, — except by process of insolvency,
— and it is very reluctantly applied to other capi-
talized wealth; besides which it is, practically,
very difficult to effect such an avowed recapitaliza-
tion as applied to the stock of incorporated com-
panies, particulariy in the case of those whose
stock 13 ostensibly the capitalized value of their
plant.

Such a readjustment of nominal value to actual
value as shown by the facta of eaming-capacity
is continually going on, in some measure; but it
does not cover the entire range of facts involved.



A


220 TBK TmM»T OP



and it is neariy ahnjs «{ tiw aatnre of a rehwtant
coDe M BJop, SMawia^ asij after the need of it haa
become aomewhit p pMain g. It can, therefore, in
the oommon mn of cues, not catdi i^ wilii the
pcogmnTe difficnltj wfaidi it is des^ned to meet,
in BO far as the diflKcahj is of a progreniTe
character.

A discrepancy between accepted capitalization
and current eaming-capaaty, similar to the dia-
crepaucy discussed above but of a progressive
character, arises tmder modem oonditioos apart
from a fall in the rate of interest. The discre-
pancy pointed out and proviaonally disposed of
above, due to a fait in interest rates, is a discre-
pancy between the nominal value (accepted capi-
talization) of the older establishments, computed on
their earlier eamiiig-capacity or on the original
cost of their equipment, on the one hand, and
their present actual value on the other hand, com-
puted on their current eaming-capacity in compe-
tition with rivals that have the advantage of a
lower cost of equipment, or, in other words, a
lower interest charge per unit of eaming-capacity.
Under the r<?gime of the later, more fully devel-
oped machine production, a discrepancy having a
similar effect arises out of a persistent divei^nce
between the past cost of production of a given
equipment and the current cost of a like or equiva-
»ment at any subsequent date, — suppos-



I
I


THE THEOBY OF MODERN WELFARE 227

ing that there intervenes no inflation of prices and
no extraneous cause making for a speculative
advance.'

Suppose priceB of flnished goods to be stable or
to vary by inconsequential fluctuations, negligible
for purposes of the argument, and suppose the
rate of interest to be in a similarly negligible
position. In other words, suppose such a condi-
tion as the business community would recognize
as ordinary, normal, sound, without ground for
pronounced hopes or fears. Under modern cir-
cumstances, dominated as the modem situation is
by the machine industry, sucli a state of affairs is
unstable, even apart from any disturbance of an
extraneous kind. It is unstable by virtue of the
forces at work in its own process, and these forces,
on the whole, make for a progressive change in the
direction of depression.

It has appeared above that the depressing effect
which a relatively low (declining) rate of interest
has upon industrial business is due to its setting
up a discrepancy between the accepted capitaliza-
tion of older establishments and the cost of new
establishments of an equivalent earning-capacity.

■ Cotnpare Ilobcon, Prohlem 0/ the Uiuviployed, ch. V., And Tugan-
Buanonsky, HandeUkriitn, ch, L and VI. In hU critioiam (pp. 191-
103) Tngan has quite miiwed Ihe point of Hobaon's theory m well
of bia lllualrallon, hsTing appniriitly not understood Hobaon's expoai-
tion, which ia, in effect, veiy ainiilar to hia own. Seo also Uobson,
IfoderH CapilalUm, ch. VIL, eapecialty sees. B aod 16.



poai- m


-Tfe atate tf the Uvlikl art< m the oUer
aeoMMriB aae B the haUk of o^ng it, is no
fci u^u t0 W Mt c i tBd Si ifitioiTyj ercn far ^m
ttnwbcii^ Ko**it>lial"theai7aCtlieiBdiiBirial
arts or ct bonm fnapaitj tb tenriJp, even far



the pmrpoaes ol a*'ataliea]''tlieorTof tbe iDdmtrial
■tnatioiL Progressively increasiDg eflKdeDCj of
tibe prDOesKS in use is a perrading trait of the
indiiBkrial sitaation. Xo two succesdve jears are
noir on the same, or TirtoaDy the same, plnoe in
respect of the efficiencj of the indnstrial arts;
indeed, the " period of production " can do longer
Bafely be construed to b^^n and end on the same
level in this respect. At the same time the pro-
grcflflively wider and more closeJinit articulation
of the Bcveral industries in a comprehensive process
ifl also going forward, and this also affects all
brandies of industrial business in some degree
and in the same direction, as will appear presently.
The items of the equipment (plant, materials,
and in a measure even good-will) in which any
industrial enterprise invests, and by the use of
which the business men in industry turn out their
output of vendible goods, are themselves products



THE THEOBY OF MODERN WELFARE 229

of the machine industry. Machine processes, ever
increasing in efficiency, turn out the mechanical
appliances and materials with which the processes
are carried on, at an ever decreasing cost ; so that
at each successive step the result is a process hav-
ing a higher efficiency at a lower cost.' This is
now no longer a sporadic e£Eect of ingenious con-
trivances having a local and limited application,
to be handled as trade secrete and exploited as an
enduring differential advantage.

The cost of production of "capital goods" is
steadily and progressively lowered, as counted in
terms of the processes involved in their production.
In a competitive market this is reflected, with
greater or less promptitude, in the prices of such
capital goods to all buyers. But the buyers whose
purposes this lower scale of prices particularly sub-
serves are chiefly the new investors who go into
business in the way of new industrial establish-
ments or extensions of the old. Each new venture
or extension goes into the competitive traffic of
producing and selling any line of staple goods
with a differential advantage, as against those that
have gone before it, in the way of a lower scale
of costs. A successively smaller aggregate value
of new equipment will turn out a given volume of

' 11)6 typical fonn tftken by tMa accelerftlion la llie mnchiiie pro-
dacUon of machinery, but in faol It involree the production of other
material focton u nell u the mechanJcal sppantus, notably llie
mftterinls nsed in induBlry.


230 THE THEORY OF BUSINESa EHTEEPEISE



vendible product. In so far as there ia no collu-
sive control of the output or the prices, this means
that the newcomers will cut under the scale of
prices at which their predecessors have been con-
tent to supply the goods. The run of competitive
prices is lowered; which means that at the new
competitive prices, and with their output remain-
ing on its old footing as regards expenses of pro-
duction, the older establishments and processes will
no longer yield returns commensurate with the
old accepted capitalization.' Prom the inherent
character of the machine indiistry itself, therefore,
it follows that the eaming-capacity of any indus-
trial enterprise enters on a, decline from the outset,
and that its capitalization, based on its initial
putative earning-capacity, grows progressively an-
tiquated from the start. The efficiency of the
machine process in the " instrumental industries"
sets up a discrepancy between cost and capitali-
zation. So that a progressive readjustment of
capitalization to correspond with the lowered earn-
ing-capacity is required by the nature of the case
It is also, in the nature of the case, impracticable.

> The esUbliahcd concern! havtng been capiultzed on Uie basil ol

pB8t cost, ire can sa; that In the older esiBbUslinienta, cap =/ (cont),
bat Id the new eBtnbliBhmenta with an equal earnlng-capaclty, cap, s

f (coati = cost — A cost) ; hence the rate of camlnfts =/ I — - 1

will be piogreasivelj higher oa coat decreases : —



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 231

In so far as tbe process of investment and business
management involves the use of credit, in the way
of interest-bearing securities or loans equivalent to
such securities, this element of credit retards the
readjustment by force of the fixed charges which it
involves. This retardation (aided as it is by the
reluctance of business men to lower their capitali-
zation) is of sufficient effect to hinder recapitaliza/-
tion, on the whole, from overtaking the progressive
need of it, with the result that a fair or *' ordinary "
rate of profits on industrial investments is not per-
manently attainable in the field of open competi-
tion. In order that tbe rate of interest should
effectually further business depression in this way,
therefore, it is not necessary that the rate should
rise or fall, or that it should be relatively high or
low, or that it should be uniform over the field,
but only that there should be a rate of interest in
each case, and that there should be some appreciable
volume of credit involved in industrial investments.
Credit is, in fact, a ubiquitous factor in modem
industrial business, and its effects in the way
indicated are therefore to be counted in as a
constant force in the situation.

However, even apart from the presence of this
ubiquitous credit element, a similar effect would
probably result from the progressive enhancement
of industrial efficiency when this enhancement pro-
ceeds at such a rate as has been the case for some



I



I



232 TUE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPKISE

time .past. As has been shown in an earlier
chapter, business men keep accoimt of their wealth,
their outgo and their income, in terms of money
Talue, not in terms of mechanical serviceability or
of consumptive effect. Business traflnc and busi-
ness outcome are standardized in terms of the
money unit, while the industrial process and its
output are standardized in terms of physical
measurements (mechanical efficiency). In the cur-
rent habits and conventions of the business com-
munity, the unit of money is accepted and dealt
with as a standard measure. The stability of the
standard unit cannot be effectually questioned
within the scope of business traffic. According to
the practical metaphysics of the business com-
munity, the money unit is an invariable magnitude,
whatever may be true of it in fact. A man
imbued with these business metaphysics and not
given to fine-spun reflection, as business men com-
monly are not, is richer or poorer in his own
apprehension, according as bis balance sheet showa
a greater or less number of these standard units of
value. Investment, expenses, vendible output,
earnings, fixed charges, and capitalization run in
terms of this value unit. A reduction of earnings
or of capitalization, as rated in terms of the value
unit, is felt as an impoverishment. The reduction
of capitalization in these terms is, therefore, a hard-
ship, which is only reluctantly and tardily submitted



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 233

to, even if it carries no hardship in the way of a
reduced command over the material means of pro-
duction, of Hfe, or of comfort. A business man's
rating in the business community likewise rests on
the pecuniary magnitude of his holdings and his
transactions, not on the mechanical serviceability of
his establishment or his output ; and this business
rating is a large part of the business man's every-
day ambition. An enhancement of it is a source of
secure gratification and self-respect, and a reduction
of it has a very substantial contrary eflfect.' A reduc-
tion of the pecuniary showing is submitted to only
reluctantly and tardily, after it haa become unavoid-



' Recurring Ui die noUtiun employed in note 2, page ICS, and letting
Um= unit of luaterial efBciency, llieu a given establislicd coucerD, A,

with a gi'™ equipment I'.(cap),'> (/'.(cap) * (/'.(oap) «* Kfj-rl.
prcaenll; fiuda iiiicU in competlUon with ft younger concern, B, having
iLD equivalent material equipment = {/.(cap]i procured at a lower cost
and requitiDg lower earnings (= ea') and lower fixed charge*.



0.(cap)i<.t7-.(



inl



') = tr,(c»p'=C8p — Acap).



Bat f_(cap), = E/'„(cap)t as competitors in the market Hence, with
Uie competitive lowerlngot earnings, and iLerelore of effective capitali-

P.(cap),-='y.fc»p')=^ t/,(cap - Acap) < F»(cap).
In effect A la overcapitalized by U,(cap — cap']. A'a nominal capital,
I/n(cap),'>>[^,(cap'+Acap), while A's effective capltaUzation

ir,(cap'),= C.Ccap — A cap).
Tlie buainesa man's Betulb ill ties in the case, therefore, suffer a lesloD



=/[..(



-K!



int



which is a monotonic function. The discrepancy between [''-(cap), and
ir,(cap') Is, in large part, embodied In securities with fixed charges ;
which iDakea a readjustment very difficult even apart from A's
reluctance.



J



234 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

able, and only to the least feasible extent. But under
conditions, such as now prevail, which involve the
requirement of a progressive relating of this kind,
this reluctant concession never overtakes the need of
readjustment, — and tlie discrepancy between capi-
talization and earning-capacity is therefore chronic
so long as no extraneous circumstances come in
temporarily to set aside the trend of business
affairs in this respect. It may, therefore, be said,
on the basis of this view, that chronic depression,
more or less pronounced, is normal to business
under the fully developed regime of the machine
industry.'

This deplorable trend given to business by the
excessive prevalence and efficiency of the machine
industry can, however, be set aside by several
factors more or less extraneous to the industrial
system proper. Even within the mechanical sys-
tem of industry there is at least one factor of some
consequence that consistently acts to mitigate the
trend indicated, and that may even put it in abey-
ance from time to time. As has been pointed out
above, questions of business are fundamentally
questions of price. A decline of prices which

' With tLe above analyitls may be contniated Man'i discusiloii
of the declining rate of profits &nd the maoner in wbicb be conceive*
overproduction, Hpeculation, and criaes to arise out of the tendenof of
profiU to a niuliDiini. (Kapiial, vol. III. cb. XV.) In the Mme con-
nection, see Tugan'Baranowsky'i criticism ot Man, Handeltkrisfn,
cU. VIL



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 235

widely touches business interests brings depression.
Conversely, an appreciable advance in prices, from
whatever cause, means improvement in business.
Such an advance in prices may come of a specular
tive movement ; which in turn may arise from a
variety of circumstances, for the most part circum-
stances extraneous to the industrial process. For
the present, however, the question of a speculative
movement is best left on one side. Another factor
touches the case more intimately. As has more
than once been the case, prices may be advanced
through a freer supply of the precious metals, or
by an inflation of the currency, or a more facile use
of credit instruments as a subsidiary currency
mechanism. Now, the growing efficiency of in-
dustry has an effect in lowering the (material) cost
of production of the precious metals and so in-
creasing the ease with which they are supplied,
after the same manner as it affects the supply of
goods for industrial or consumptive use. But the
increased supply of the precious metals has, of
course, an effect upon prices contrary to that ex-
erted by the increasing supply of goods. In so far
as this effect is had, it acts to correct or mitigate
the trend of business toward chronic depression.'

' Id point of direct mftterial serviceability, no doubt, ■ liveh supply
of the precious metals is one ol tbe least useful fonns of wealth to
the production of whiab industrial effort can be directed, but [or the
purposes of boslaeas ptoaperity at large It is probably the moat service-
able addition that can be made to the aggiegate wealth. Bapidly



.... t.v'uvi> ; at least, such seems to ha
case reoontlv. But bevonJ this, and
consequence, is a peculiarity afiEecting 1
the money metals. The annual prod
money metals is not annually consumed.
The use of them as money does not oon
except incidentally and very slowly. T
these metals in hand at any given tii
considerable and is relatively imperishabl
tlie annual accretion is but a small fracti
aggr^;ate supply. The lowered cost of tl
supply has therefore but a relatively sli(
upon the aggr^ate value of the available

The case is different as r^;ards the ax
put of vendible products, whether for ind
consumptive use. In this case, and partii
r^jards this matter of new investments a
sions of industrial equipment, the annu^
counts for bv far ♦i**^ '



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 237

is not to be regarded as substantially the only
&ctor that comes in question here. Accordingly,
it is only under very exceptional circumstances, at
times when the precious metals are supplied with
extraordinary freedom, that the increased output of
these metals can offset the trend of business toward
depression. Ordinarily this factor can count for
no more than a mitigation of the '^ tendency of
profits to a minimum." And even this mitigating
effect, it may be remarked, appears to be of less
radical consequence for the general situation of
business now than it was during the earlier phases
of the machine industry's regime. The most telling
effect of an increased supply of the precious metals
seems to be the incitement which it gives to
speculative inflation.^

It will be noted that the explanation here offered
of depression makes it a malady of the affections.
The discrepancy which discourages business men is
a discrepancy between that nominal capitalization
which they have set their hearts upon through
habituation in the inmiediate past and that actual
capitalizable value of their property which its cur-
rent eaming-capacity will warrant. But where
the preconceptions of the business men engaged
have, as commonly happens, in great part been


1 Cf. Smart, Studies in Economics, Essay VL, ** Must Prices Fall ?
Distribution of Income, bk. II, ch. IIL



99


I


238 THE THEORY. OF BCSINESS ESTEBPRISE

fixed and legalized in the form of interest-bearing
securities, this malady of the affections becomes
extremely difficult to remedy, even though it be
true that these legalized affections, preconceptions,
or what not, centre upon the metaphysical stabil-
ity of the money unit.

But while it is true that depression is primarily
a business difficulty and rests on emotional grounds,
that does not hinder its having grave consequences
for industry and for the material welfare of the
community outside the range of business interests.
Business enterprise, it is true, proceeds on meta-
physical grounds and is swayed by considerations
of nominal wealth rather than by considerations of
material serviceability ; but, none the less, business
enterprise and business metaphysics control the
coiu-se of industry.

Dull times in business means dull times in in-
dustry, of course. But a caution is necessary on
this head. The yearly output does not usually
vary extremely between brisk and dull times,
except as measured in price. As measured in
material terms the discrepancy in the volume of
output between brisk and dull times is much less.
The gross output as measured by weight and tale
is less in dull than in brisk times, other things
equal; but the deficiency as measured in these
terms is much less than the price returns would
indicate. Indeed, the output ae measured by


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 239

weight and tale need not average very appreciably
less during a protracted depression than during a
preceding period of good times.' The volume of
business as well as the volume of output (by weight
and tale) of industry may increase during a few
years of depression at nearly if not quite as liigh a
rate as during a corresponding period of good
times. A transition from dull to brisk times, how-
ever, commonly if not invariably involves a rapid
increase in values, while a converse transition
involves a corresponding shrinkage of values,
though commonly a slower shrinkage, — except
where a crisis intervenes.

The primary hardship of a period of depression
is a persistent lesion of the affections of the busi-
ness men ; the greatest secondary hardship is what
falls upon the workmen, in the way of partial
unemployment and a decline in wages, with conse-
quent precariousness and reduction of their liveli-

i Work goes on daring dull times, though at a slackened pace, and
extensions and ImproTements are continually being made. The voluma
ot output consequently increases, so tbat, even IF there has been a set-
back to production at the beginning of the depression, the aggregate
output presently again reaches the volume nhich it had when the
dull times set in. It may be added Lliat the rate ot cooeumpUan is
also appreciably lower during dull times, particularly in the more
wasteful forms of consumption. This lowered aggregate coD8umi>-
lion offsets the lowered intensity of production during dull times to
such an extent that it is probably safe to say that the net eur*
plui product, measured by weight and tale, is at least not appreci-
ably amaller during depression than during prosperity. Cf. Carroll
D. Wright, TeHlmony In Jttporl o/ Ihe InduMirial CorumSstion, vol.
VU.p.25.


I



ing of the means of living is ap
in wages fully, for such workn
work. So that in the case of
as well as in that of the businef
which dull times brings ia in so
emotional matter.

To the rest of the community
are outside of business enterpri
the industrial occupations prop
those (non-industrial) classes wll
salary or similar fixed income,
thinly disguised blessing. The
affections from the reflected en
of the business community, but
ease of livelihood and in their
difference between the price sea
dull times. To these classes ai
brings substantially nothing bu



1 The reduced sole o



living



THE THEORY OP MODERN WELFARE



Depression is primarily a malady of the affec-
tiona of the business men. That is the seat of the
difficulty. The stagnation of industry and the
hardships suffered by the workmen and other
classes are of the nature of symptoms and
secondary effects. Any proposed remedy, there-
fore, must be of such a nature as to reach this
emotional seat of the trouble and restore the bal-
ance between the nominal value of the business
capital engaged and the earnings of the business ;
that is to say, a remedy, to be efficacious, must
restore profits to a "reasonable" rate; which
means, practically, that prices must be brought to
the level on wliich the accepted capitalization has
been made. Such a remedy, to offset the disastrous
cheapening of products through mechanical improve-
ments, has been found in business coalitions and
working arrangements of one kind and another,
looking to the " regulation " of prices and output.
Latterly this remedy is becoming familiar to the
business community as well as to students of the
business situation, and its tangible, direct, and
unequivocal efficiency in correcting this main
infirmity of modem business is well recognized.
So much so, indeed, that its urgent advisability
has been formulated in the maxim that " Where

InTMlment (Kapitalbildning), and Pecuniary Eipectancy (VSntindet) .
Hii expoflitioD is not jet completed, but ho far aa may be gHllicrod from
what has come to band, he should reach Bubstaulially the iame out-
come SB that given aboTs.



I



242 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

combination is possible competition is impossible."
What is required is a business coalition on such a
scale as to regulate the output and eliminate com-
petitive Sides and competitive investment within a
field large enough to make up a seli-balanced,
passably independent industrial system, — such a
coalition of business enterprises as is loosely called
a " trust."

Such a business coalition, if it is comprehensive
and closely controlled, can adjust the output of
goods and services to the market with some nicety,
and can maintain the balance of the ruling prices,
or the price scale agreed upon, with such effect
that the received capitalization need not become
obsolete even in the face of very radical improve-
ments in the processes of industry. Its effect, in
the case of ideal success, is to neutralize the cheap*
ening of goods and services effected by current
industrial progress. It offsets industrial improve-
ments in so far as these improvements affect the
cost of goods more than they affect the value of
the money metals. It might seem at first sight
that by this inhibitory effect of the trust the
entire advantage derivable from industrial improve-
ments within the scope of the trust should inure to
the gain of the business men in the combination,
but such does not appear to be the practical out-
come. The practical outcome appears more nearly
to be that material advantage inures to no one from


Ij curies its
win be



I oi the
tnat, m ao far wm the
point. Tlik leitere cf tmt

liiliiii ii[i ■li.iM m I iiKiiiil
Isidditaoa to ill fBBe psrpoaeoC checking the
! of taaamgi om ^Mt inratmaits, such a
■ eoaljtkni k •!■> eaaUed to dirtribute «d j
nnsvoidsbfe dket of the progrcHvefy lednoed oort
<rf pvodoction of the prodactiTe goods employed,
Bomeidiat equably over the entire field of indostiy
comprised in the craiiticoi, and so obviate the prees-
nre of this untoward indostrial progress falling vith
exceptional severity at any given point. Econo-
mies effected are at the same time made to accrue to
the oollectiTe bosineaa organization, shomng them-
selves in the way of increased dividends and
increased effective (market) capitalization of the
ooali^n's property, instead of being dissipated in
competitive selling, and so going to the body of
B (V to the industrial system at large.



To retnm to a point temporarily set aside above.
By supposition, in what has just been said, any-
thing like a speculative inflation has been excluded
from the discussion of business depression ; and
necessarily so, since the two do not come at tlio
same time. But at one point the two show a
feature in common. Under both of tlieso two
widely different conditions of the business situation



i



244 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

there is a discrepancy between the accepted capital-
ization and the actual earning-capacitj.' But the
two differ even at this point iu that, in the case of
inflation, the discrepancy is not felt until the climax,
when a widespread realization of the discrepancy
brings on an abnipt readjustment, in the crisis
which follows inflation; whereas in a period of
depression the sense of this discrepancy and the
protest against it is the most striking circumstance
of the case. The discrepancy between capitalizar
tion and earning-capacity in a period of speculative
movement comes of an inflation of capitalization ;
whereas in time of depression the discrepancy is
due to a shrinkage of earning-capacity, — both
capitalization and earning-capacity being, of course,
counted in terms of money values. A speculative
movement offsets or checks the trend to depression
whenever it occurs ; and for some appreciable time
past, such speculative movements appear to have
been the only force which has from time to time
broken the otherwise uninterrupted course of busi-
ness depression. Under the regime of a perfected

' In the case ol a speculctlive inflation,


xiiit



>cap"r^-



In the former ca«e the current capitalization during inflation, be-
ing Of', exceeds the bona fide capita] value as proved by evenU, cap ;

while in the cue of depression tbe nominal ctipital, bcingcap'. eicceds
the capitalization warrauted by current eariiing-capaclty, cap".



TilE THEORY OF MODEUN WELFARE 245

machine industry and a perfect business organiza-
tion, with active competition tliroiigboiit, it is at
least probable that depression would not be seri-
ously interrupted by any other cause.

But it has been a point of economic dogma m
modem times — not to call it a point of theory,
since it is not held on reasoned grounds — that
depression and inflation, followed by crisis, succeed
one another with a rough periodicity, interminably
and in the nature of the case. The periodicity
fwith an interval of some ten to twelve years from
phase to pliase) has not been established with any
cogent show of evidence, except for the period from
1816 to 1873; and even within that period tlie
evidence has not been convincing to all students of
these phenomena. A tentative explanation of the
periodicity, such as there may have been within
that period, as well as of its absence before and
after the period in question, raay be ofiEered on the
basis of the views here set forth. Keeping in mind
the point that the disturbance, both in the case of
inflation and in that of depression, is a discrejiancy
between capitalization and eaming-capacity, and
also the manner tn which this discrepancy arises,
it may be said that prior to the earlier date men-
tioned the modem industrial system was not such
a comprehensive and articulate process that a dis-
turbance in one part or one member of the system
need be transmitted forthwith through the channels



I
J



246 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEHPRISE

of business to all the rest. A speculative move-
ment need not spread forthwith throughout the in-
dustrial system. The great episodes of speculation
and collapse that occurred during earlier modem
times were not of the nature of speculative inflar
tion affecting the entire business community occu-
pied with industiy. They are rather of the nature
of commercial speculation verging on gambling,'
So also, the crises of that earlier time, when they
were not collapses of gambling ventures, were com-
monly produced by some great disaster which
brought an absolute material lass upon the com-
munity, such as crop failures, invasions, or heavy
war expenditures. On the other hand, as regards
periods of depression prior to the early years of the
nineteenth century, they were also rare if not
unknown, except when due to failure of resources
or the burdens of government. The conditions
out of which depression could come, as a persist-
ent disturbance of business through a divergence
between the capitalization and the earning-capac-
ity of investments, were not had. The developed
machine system was absent, and without this the
cost of production of productive goods could not

' So Impresgive t, fact has the gambling charactCT of early perioda of
inflation and crlBss been tluit It bat led economista to look for gambling
aa a matter of courae in later phenomena that bave been classed as in-
flation and eriaea, even when no gambling element has been obvioualy
preaent. It haa been felt that gambling most presumptiTely be pren-
ent nhenerer there la Inflation or crlsei, because the showing of earlier
hiatory mna that way.


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 247

be progressively lowered at a rate large enough
to set up and maintain a persistent divergence
between capitalization and earning-capacity in in-
dustrial enterprises.

At some uncertain point in the first half of the
nineteenth century the system of machine industry,
and the business system based upon it, attained
such a breadth and consistency that business disturb-
ances of appreciable magnitude in any part would
affect values throughout the system. It had then
grown so large and was so closely articulated a
structure that the relations of its members to one
another and to the system as a whole were of
greater moment for the fortunes of these members
and for the orderly process of the whole than were
the relations of the members to industrial factors
lying outside the system of the machine industry
and the business community. Hence industrial
crises in the proper sense of the word seem well at
home in this period. They spread with great force
and facility whenever they came ; and they had the
true character of business crises, in that they ran
with great severity without involving an appreciable
aggregate loss of material wealth, except in terms
of price. They commonly meant a cancelment of
values, without appreciable aggregate loss of goods.
They seem also to have been true to the staple defi-
nition of crises in that they followed upon a period
of specxUative inflation in industrial investments.



A



248 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE

Chronic depression, however, does not seem to
belong, as a coiisist^ut feature of the course of
things, in this nineteenth-century period, prior to
the eighties or tlie middle of the seventies. The
usual course, it is commonly held, was rather:
inflation, crisis, transient depression, gradual ad-
vance to inflation, and so on over again.'

On the view of these phenomena here spoken
for, an attempt at explaining this circuit may be
made as follows : A crisis, under this early nine-
teenth-century situation, was an abrupt collapse of
capitalized values, in which the capitalization was
not only brought to the level of the earning-ca-
pacity which the investments would have shown
in quiet times, but appreciably below that level.
The efficiency and the reach of the machine indus-
try in the production of productive goods was not
then so great as to lower the cost of their produc-
tion rapidly enough to overtake the shrinkage in
capitalization and so prevent the latter from rising
again in response to the stimulus of a relatively
high eaming-capacity. The shock-effect of the
liquidation passed off before the cheapening of the
means of production had time to catch up with
the shrinkage of capitalization due to the crisis, so
that after the shock-efEect had passed there still
remained an appreciable undercapitalization as a

' Cf,,e.(f., Burton, CrfsM and Di?pr«»f(ow,ch. VIII., lor a nieclnct
MWcnml Ql (lepreaaioiui kud criaea Id ttie Uuiud Sutea duiing this period.



THE THEOEY OF MODERN WELFARE 249

sequel of the period of liquidation. Therefore
there did not result a persistent unfavorable dis-
crepancy between capitalization and earning-capao-
ity, with a consequent chronic depression. On
the other hand, the earning-capacity of iuvest-
menta was high relatively to their reduced capitali-
zation after the crisis. Actual earning-capacity
exceeded the nominal earning-capacity of indus-
trial plants by so appreciable a raai^in as to
encourage a bold competitive advance and a
sanguine financiering on the part of the various
business men, so soon as the shock of the liquida-
tion had passed and business had again fallen into
settled channels. But such a bold competitive
advance means the beginning of an extension of
credit and a speculative movement in industry,
such as has been discussed some pages back in
connection with crises. This movement has a
cumulative character, after the manner tliere in-
dicated, and its outcome is an inflation of capi-
talization and a large extension of credit, which
normally ends in a period of liquidation.

Within the period spoken of (1816-1873) this
liquidation is apparently always brought on by
some extraneous disturbance. But it seems that
the theory would require us to say that the extra-
neous disturbance requisite to bring such a specu-
lative movement to a head will be slighter the
farther the movement has gone; so that in the



A



250 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS E3ITERPRISE

earlier atagea of a given period of inflation a
liquidation could be brought on only by some
relatively violent disturbance, whereas at a higher
phase of speculative inSation a relatively Blight
disturbance would suffice.

Now, it takes some time for such a speculative
movement to bring on so large a discrepancy be-
tween capitalization and earaing-capacJty as may
not be adjusted by other means than a widespread
and severe liquidation.' Hence a rough periodicity
in the recurrence of these seasons of buoyancy and
of collapse in capitalized values. Other factors,
and varying ones, have, no doubt, been present in
each of the historic crises of the nineteenth century,
and these other factors would have to be taken
due account of in any history of crises, and even in
any theory of crises, which aimed at anything like
an exhaustive treatment ; but the factors here
pointed out seem to be the characteristic and con-
stant ones in the sequence of crises within this
period, at the same time that they are the factors
which are in a peculiar degree connected with that
process of business management in modern in-
dustry which is the objective point of the present
inquiry.

Since the seventies, as an approximate date and



' Tbe speculative moTemeiit requires time, becauae the Inflation la

a cumulative one and is c&rrled out uuint«ntlonBll]' and in ft semM
UDCODSciousIy.



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 261

as applying particularly to America and in a lesa
degree to Great Britain, the course of affairs in
business has apparently taken a permanent change
as regards crises and depression. During this
recent period, and with increasing persistency,
chronic depression has been the rule rather than
the exception in business. Seasons of easy times,
"ordinary prosperity," during tins period are
pretty uniformly traceable to specific causes ex-
traneous to the process of industrial business
proper. In one case, the early nineties, it seems
to have been a peculiar crop situation, and in the
moat notable case of a speculative inflation, the
one now (1904) apparently drawing to a close, it
was the Spanish-American War, coupled with the
expenditures for stores, munitions, and services
incident to placing the coimtry on a war footing,
that lifted the depression and brought prosperity
to the business community. If the outside stimu-
lus from which the present prosperity takes its
impulse be continued at an adequate pitch, the
season of prosperity may be prolonged ; otherwise
there seems little reason to expect any other out-
come than a more or less abrupt and searching
liquidation.

What would be an adequate pitch of the stimu-
lus making for prosperity is, of course, not easy to
say, but it is probably safe to say that in order to
keep up the season of prosperity for a Mnsiderable



A



252 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



number of years the stimulus would have to be
gradually increased. That is to say in other
words, the absorption of goods and services by
extra-industrial expenditures, expenditures which
as seen from the standpoint of industry are pure
waste, would have to go on in an increasing
volume. If the wasteful expenditure slackens, the
logical outcome should be a considerable perturba-
tion of business and industiy, followed by depres-
sion; if the waste on war, colonization, provincial
investment, and the like, comes to an abrupt atop,
the logical consequence, in the absence of other
counteracting factors, should be a crisis of some
severity.'

1 These estnUnduatrial eipendkures that have brought proaperitj-
are here spoken of us wtuteCul, not thereby implying [hat Ihey nmy
not be beneficlftl to the commnnity even Id respect to Uieir effect upon
the aggregate income or the aggregate accumulatiou of wealth in the
Gommiinity. They are called wasteful simply becaase these expendi-
taies directly, In their Brst incidence, merely withdraw and dissjpnte
wealtb and work from the indUBtrial process, and un productively con-
sume the products of industry. IndlrecUy they have a beneflciM
aggregate effect upon industry by inducing an employment of the full
productive efficiency of the industrial apparatus ; so that In a very
short time, it is at least conceivable, the aggregate net output of the
industrial process may be as large and serviceable as before the wasteful
eipenditures were entered upon, even with the destruction o( that
portion of the product which goes to mainlaJn the wasteful Pipendl-
tures. At the same time, the effect upon business roust be held to be
patently favorable. The wasteful expenditures enhance demand and
so incressQ the vendibility of the output, — they increase proflts and
raise capitalization. They therefore act unequivocally to advance the
values of the business men's lioldinga and increase their gains, as
counted in business terms. The wasteful expenditure is good for trade.
It la only in the eventual liquidation that a dlsadvantageou
conscijuence comes in view.



THE THEOEY OF MODERN WELFARE 253

It was said above that since the seventies the
ordinary course of affairs in business, when un-
disturbed by transient circumstances extraneous to
the industrial system proper, has been chronic
depression. The fact of such prevalent depression
will probably not be denied by any student of the
situation during this period, so far as regards
America and, in a degree, England.' For the
Continent of Europe this characterization would
have to be materially qualified. But the reply is
ready to band that governmental interferences with
trade have been so ubiquitous on the Continent,
particularly in the German-speaking communities,
that their case is fairly to be thrown out of any
general theory. It may also be questioned whether
the industrial system of Germany, e.g., throughout
this period conforms to the requirements of the
theory in respect of the degree of development of

It T)i11 be seen that od thin Tiev of the effect of wasteful expendi-
ture the position occupied b; some early economlBts, u Mftlthua,
Laiirlerdale, Chalmers, and others, ss well as bj eome later ones, U
RobertAon, Hoboon, is sabstantlally well taken, althooe^ the defence
of waai« which these economiats offer may be Incomplete. Waste
■eems necessary to keep trade brisk, and therefore to keep the indus-
trial proceaaes working at their fall capacitj. The nllerior reason for
this state of the case being the fact Uiat the decisive ground which
detennines the tnargin of activity in business, and therefore in Industry,
is the business men's reluctance to accept a reduction of profits ■■
measured in terms of price. The opponente of the Malthusiao view
failed lo appreciate the declsife importance of price, as contrasted
with serviceability, among the motives on which business proceeds.

' The objection would not come nneipected that this state ot ths
case is not to be taken as normal, — a point of opinion not readlljr to
be decided, bince it rests on a diSerence in the point of view.


I
I



254 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

the machine industry which such a state of aCEairs
supposes.'

The explanation of this persistent business
depression, in those countries where it has pre-
vailed, Ls, on the view here spoken for, quite
simple. By an uncertain date toward the close of
the seventies the advancing efficiency and articu-
lation of the processes of the machine industry
reached such a pitch that the cost of production of
productive goods has since then persistently out-
stripped such readjustment of capitalization as has
from time to time been made. The persistent
decline of profits, due to this relative overproduc-
tion of industrial apparatus, has not permitted a
consistent speculative expansion, of the kind which
abounds in the earlier half of the nineteenth cen-
tury, to get under way. When a speculative
movement has been set up by extraneous stimuli,
during this late period, the inherent and relatively
rapid decline of eaming-capacity on the part of
older investments has brought the speculative in-
flation to book before it has reached such dimen-
sions as would bring on a violent crisis. And
when a crisis of some appreciable severity has come
and has lowered the capitalization, the persistent
efficiency and facile balance of processes in the
modern machine industry has overtaken the de-
cline in capitalization without allowing time for

1 CI. Sombart, Kapttalitmtu, vol. I. ch. XVIIL-XX.



THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 255

recovery and consequent boom. The cheapening
of capital goods has overtaken the lowered capi-
talization of investments before tlie shock-effect of
the liquidation has worn off. Hence depression is
normal to the industrial situation under the con-
summate r%ime of the machine, so long as com-
petition is unchecked and no deus ex machina
interposes.'

The persistent defection of reasonable profits
calls for a remedy. The remedy may be souglit in
one or the other of two directions: (I) in an in-
creased unproductive consumption of goods ; or (2)
in an elimination of that " cutthroat " competition
that keeps profits below the " reasonable " level.
If enough of the work or of the output is turned
to wasteful expenditures, so as to admit of but a
relatively slight aggregate saving, as counted by
weight and tale, profitable prices can be main-
tained on the old basis of capitalization. If the
waste is sufficiently large, the current investment
in additional industrial equipment will not be suf-
ficient to lower prices appreciably through compe-
tition."

Wasteful expenditure on a scale adequate to
offset the surplus productivity of modern industry
is nearly out of the question. Private initiative

' Cf. Ilobeon, Pnihlem of the Un'mplnj/ed, Appendix W ch. V.

" Cf. Uobfton, rrvMtm of iht Unemploted, cli. VI. Mr. Hobaoa
does not <ue the term " waste" In this connection. AUo VUIlea,
Coniommation, final cliiipl«r.



I



I


I



THE THEORY OF BUSIlfESS EHTEEPEISE

cannot T^arry the waste of goods and eervlces to
nearly the point reqxiired by the business situa-
tion. Private waste is no doubt large, but business
principles, leading to saving and shrewd invest-
ment, are too ingrained in the habits of modem
men to admit an effective retardation of the rate
of saving.' Something more to the point can be
done, and indeed is being done, by the civilized
governments in the way of effectual waste. Arm-
aments, public edifices, courtly and diplomatic
establishments, and the like, are almost altogether
wasteful, so far as bears on the present question.
They have the additional advantage that the pub-
lic securities which represent this waste serve as
attractive investment securities for private savings,
at the same time that, taken in the aggregate, the
savings so invested are purely fictitious savings
and therefore do not act to lower profits or prices.
Expenditures met by taxation are less expedient
for this purpose; although indii'ect taxes have the
peculiar advantage of keeping up the prices of the
goods on which they are imposed, and thereby act
directly toward the desired end. The waste of
time and effort that goes into military service, as
well as the employment of the courtly, diplomatic,
and ecclesiastical personnel, counts effectually in

> "Saving" kt the utne time tskoe pince automsticRlly in ihe
ontrent operkUoni of coalition uid fncorporatioD, u lDdicat«d ftbove,
pp. 1(16-178.



I


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 257

the same direction. But however extraordinary
this public waste of substance latterly has been, it
is apparently altogether inadequate to offset the
surplus productivity of the machine industry, par-
ticularly when this productivity is seconded by the
great facility which the modern business organiza-
tion affords for the accumulation of savings in
relatively few hands. There is also the drawback
that the waste of time involved in military service
reduces the piu'chasing power of the classes that
are drawn into the service, and so reduces the
amount of wasteful consumption which these
classes might otherwise accomplish.'
So long as industry remains at its present level

1 Hobaon (PrtAltm of the Unemployed), whose analysis of over-
production and Ita rclallon to itcprcmion goes farUier than any other,
iCTlewa and criticises (ch. VIII.} tbepalllativemeasures that have been
advocated. He finds them, all and several, Inadeqiute and incon:
qoent, In that they do not touch the root of the evil — ovenaving
"underconsumption." They do not lonch this because they do t
mitigate the automatic saving and investment process that necessaril;
goes with the poescssion of large private incomes. Batin point of practi
cal efficiency bis own proposed remedies must also be scheduled under
the head of " palliatives." These proposed remedies are measures
looking to a " Reformed Distribution of Consuming Power" (cb. VL),
such as la»2tion of "unearned" incomeH, higher wages, shorter work-
ing day. The aim Is " to increase the proportion of the total wealth of
tbe comraunity, which tailing to them aa wages shall be spent in raising
the general standard of working-class consumption." The contemplated
move Ib manifestly chimerical in any community, such as tlie modern
iudustrial communities, where public policy is with growing singicncBS
of pnrpose guided by business interests with a naive view to an increase
of profits.

Cf. also Smart, Stiidiet in Beonomia, Essay VIII., on " Overpro-
duction" ; also Essay IX., " The Socializing of Consuniption." patticu-
laity sec. &, on "The Lioiite of CooaumpUon," pp. 203-20S.



I


258 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

of efficiency, and especially so long as incomes con-
tinue to be distributed somewhat after the present
scheme, waste cannot be expected to overtake pro-
duction, and can therefore not check the imtoward
tendency to depression. But if the balance cannot
be maintained by accelerating wasteful consump-
tion, it may be maintained by curtailing and regu-
lating the output of goods.

*• Cutthroat " competition, that is to say, free com-
petitive selling, can be done away by " pooling the
interests" of the competitors, so soon as all or an
effective majority of the business concerns which
are rivals in the market combine and place their
business management xmder one directive head.
When this is done, by whatever method, selling
of gooda or services at competitively varying
prices is replaced by collective selling (*' collective
bargaining") at prices fixed on the basis of "what
the traffic will bear." That is to say, prices are
fixed by consideration of what scale of prices will
bring the largest aggregate net earnings, due re-
gard being had to the effect of a lower price in
increasing sales as well as to the reduction of cost
through the increase of output. The outcome, as
regards the scale of prices, may easily be a reduc-
tion of the price to consumers ; but it may also,
and equaUy readily, be an increase of the average
price. But the prices of the output which is in
this way brought to a monopoly basis are nearly


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 259

certain to run more even than prices of the like
output while sold competitively by rival concerns.
What has been said in the last paragraph sup-
poses that the combination of business enterprises
is so comprehensive as to place the resulting coali-
tion in a position of practical monopoly. Such a
result is not always attained, however, especially
not in the earlier attempts at coalition in any par-
ticular branch o£ industry ; although the endeavor
is commonly repeated until at last a virtual mo-
nopoly ia achieved. But even where no effective
monopoly ia achieved, a coalition of this kind has a
salutary effect, at least temporarily. In almost all
cases a consolidation of this kind is able to effect
considerable economies in the cost of production,
as pointed out in an earlier chapter, and such econ-
omies bring relief through enabling the combined
industrial ventures to earn a reasonable profit at a
lower price for their product than before. They
are therefore able to go on on a scale of prices which
was not remunerative while they stood on their
old footing of severalty. But the relief which
comes of such measures, so long as competitive
selling goes on in rivalry with concerns standing
outside the coalition, is only transient. The de-
clining cost of production, and the consequent com-
petitive investment and extension in the industry,
presently catches up with the gain in economy;
the margin of advantage in the competition is lost,



I


260 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

and (lepressiotL again overtakes the consolidated
enterprises on their new footing. The remedy
again is a wider coalition, making possible farther
economies, and making some approach to a position
of secure monopoly.

It is only on a footing of monopoly that this
grinding depression can be definitively set aside.
But the monopoly need not be absolute in order to
afford a somewhat enduring relief. What is neces-
sary is that the monopoly should comprehend all
but a negligible fraction of the business concerns
and the equipment engaged in the field withm
■which competition has kept profits below a reason-
able level. What is a negligible quantity in such
a case is not to be determined on general consider-
ations, since it depends in each case on circum-
stances affecting the particular industry. But, in
a general way, the more nearly complete the mo-
nopoly, the more effectually is it likely to serve its
purpose.'

Such business coalitions have the effect of bring-
ing profits to a reasonable level, not only by



> The obvious remark maj- be added, tor completenew of sUt«-
ment, that Ihe various brandies of induiitry lend Uiemselves lo man-
agGuieiit b; monopoly In eilremely varying degrees, some, t-g,,
hrnilng, as an extreme Instance, not being amenable to this metbod
of management under existing circumstances; others, again, as, e.g.,
retail merchandising, can be managed by tills method only to a very
restricted extent ; while at the other end of the scale, In aacb indiis-
tries as railroading, monopoly managemeat, more or lew nnqtialified,
is fairly unavoidable.


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 261

making it possible to regulate output and prices,
but also by the economies which are made prac-
ticable on this footing. Coalitions of a less com-
prehensive character, aa spoken of above, also
effect economies in the cost of production. But
the lai^er coalitions which bring the business to
a monopoly basis have not only the advantage
which comes of the large-scale organization of the
industrial process, but they also enjoy peculiar
advantages in the matter of cost, due to their
monopoly position. These added advantages are
more particularly advantages in buying or bar-
gaining for all goods, materials, and services re-
quired, as well as in selling the output. So long
as the coalitions are not comprehensive enough
effectually to eliminate competition, they are con-
strained to both buy and sell in competition with
others. But when the coalition comes effectually
to cover its special field of operation, it is able,
not only to fix the prices which it will accept (on
the basis of what the traffic will bear), but also in
a considerable measure to fix the prices or rates
which it will pay for materials, labor, and other
services (such as transportation) on a similar ba.sis,
— unless it should necessarily have to do with
another coalition that is in a similar position of
monopoly.

The rule which governs the fixing of rates on
this side of the business dealings of a monopolistic



262 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



coalition is similar to that which guides its trans-
actions in the matter of sales. Prices and rates,
as, e.g.t for materials and labor, are not depressed
to the lowest possible point, but to the lowest
practicable point, — to the point compatible with
the largest net profits. This may or may not be
a point below the rates necessary under a regime
of competitive buying. It may be added that only
in rare cases does a coalition attain so strong a
position in respect of its purchases (of materials or
services) as to lift this side of its business entirely
above the reach of competition.'

Wherever this expedient of coalition has been
found practicable, the chronic depression of recent
times and the confusion and micertainty which
goes with a depressed competitive business situa-
tion have been obviated. The great coalitions do
not suffer acutely from the ills of depression, ex-
cept in cases where their industrial processes are
to a peculiar degree in the position of intermedi-
aries within the range of the competitive indus-
tries, as is the case, e.g., with most railroads. But

> Hitherto probably none of tbe Ameriain CosJiUonB have succeeded
In freehiglhenBelvestroin the Inconveniencea of competitive bidding for
Ubor, and very few liave achieved a purely monopoliatlc buying, either
'of materials or of any of the various kinds of aervlcce which they re-
quire. With regard to raw materials aloue have Mme, aa, e.Q., the
Standard Oil Company, been able to compass an effectual monopoly.
Something approaching thla position has been accompllahed by a very
few other coalitions, aa, t.g., the Sngar Reflncries. the Cotton Seed
Oil Company, the Untied States Steel Corporation, and In a local way

Aincoal, railway, lumber, and warehouse comianles.



THE THEORY OF MODEBN WELFARE 263

even in such a case the coalition which has a
monopoly is more fortunate as regards the stability
of its balance sheet than the same traffic would be
'nithout the advantage of monopoly.



Barring providential intervention, then, the only
refuge from chronic depression, according to the
view here set forth, is thoroughgoing coalition in
those lines of business in which coalition is prac-
ticable. But since this would include the greater
part of those lines of industry which are domi-
nated by the machine process, it seems reasonable
to expect that the remedy should be efficacious.
The higher development of the machine process
makes competitive business impracticable, but it
carries a remedy for its own evils in that it makes
coalition practicable. The ulterior effects of thoi^
oughgoing monopoly, as regards the efficiency of
industry, the constancy of emplojrment, the rates
of wages, the prices of goods to consumers, and
the like, are, of course, largely matter of surmise,
and cannot be taken up in this inquiry, the present
purpose being merely to give in outline an eco-
nomic theory of current business enterprise.

A further consideration "bearing on the later
phases of the business situation may be added.
The great coalitions and the business manoeuvres
connected with them have the effect of adding to the
large fortunes of the greater business men ; which



J


264 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPKISE

adds to the large mcomes that cannot be spent in
eonaumptive expenditures ; which accelerates the
increase of investments ; which brings competition
if there is a chance for it; which tends to bring on
depression, in the manner already indicated. The
great coalitions, tlierefore, seem to carry the seed
of this malady of competition, and this evil conse-
quence can accordingly be avoided only on the
basis of so comprehensive and rigorous a coalition
of business concerns as shall wholly exclude com-
petition, even iu the face of any conceivable amount
of new capital seeking investment.

What has made chronic depression the nonnal
course of things in modem industrial business is
the higher development of the machine process, —
given, of course, the traits of human nature as it
manifests itself in business traffic. The machine
process works this effect by virtue, chiefly if not
altogether, of these two characteristics : (1) a
relatively rapid rate of increasing efficiency; and
(2) the close interdependence of the several lines
of industrial activity in a comprehensive system,
wliich is growing more comprehensive and close-
knit as improvtjment and specialization of indus-
trial processes go on. The last-named factor counts
for more in proportion as the interdependence
grows closer and more comprehensive. Disturb-
ances are progressively transmitted with greater
facility and effect throughout the system, and each


THE THEORY OF MODERN WELFARE 2GG

line of induBtrial business comes to stand in relar
lively intimate relations to an ever increasing range
of other lines with which it carries on a tral!ic of
purchase or sale. A consequence of this state of
things is that any business coalition, in order efEec-
tually to serve its purpose of maintaining earnings
and capitalization, is required to be of larger scope
and closer texture. As the exigencies which en-
force the resort to coalition uninterruptedly gain
in scope and urgency, the " trust " must take the
same course of growth to meet these exigencies ;
until, with some slight further advance along the
accustomed lines, the trust which shall serve the
modern business situation must comprehend in one
close business coalition virtually the whole field of
industry within which the machine process is the
dominant industrial factor.'

To this there is a broad exception, given by the
circumstances of the industrial organization. This
organization rests on the distinction between busi-
ness management and ownership. The workmen
do not and cannot own or direct the industrial
equipment and processes, so long as ownership pre-
vails and industry is to be managed on business
principles. The labor supply, or the working pop-
ulation, can therefore not be included in the ideally

1 It is, e.g., already appareDt that the general railway aystem ut
America muHt presently come under ODe mansgeraent, and It mtui
fall into a coallLioD with the groap at IndiutrleB that are occupied
with the Bupply uvi elaborotiuii o( iron, coal, and lumber.



266 THE THEOKT OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

complete buainess coalition sii^ested above, how-
ever consummate the machine eystem and the
business organization built upon it may become.
So that when the last step in business coalition has
been taken, there remains the competitive friction
between the combined business capital and the
combined workmen.

From the considerations recited above it appears
that the competitive management of industry be-
comes incompatible with continued prosperity so
soon as the machine process has been developed to
its fuller efficiency. Further technological advance
must act to heighten the impracticability of com-
petitive business. As it is sometimes expressed, the
tendency to consolidation is irresistible. Modern
circumstances do not permit the competitive man-
agement of property invested in industrial enter-
prise, much less its management in detail by the
individual owners. In short, the exercise of free
contract, and the other powers inhering in the
natural right of ownership, are incompatible with
the modem machine technology. Business discre-
tion necessarily centres in other hands than those
of the general body of owners. In the ideal case,
so far as the machine technology and its business
concomitants are consistently carried through, the
general body of owners are necessarily reduced to the
practical status of pensioners dependent on the dis-



ilSE S


THE THEOBY OF MODERN WELFARE 267

cretion of the great holders of immaterial wealth ;
the general body of business men are similarly, in
the ideal outcome, disfranchised in point of bufi-
ness initiative and reduced to a bureaucratic hier-
archy under the same guidance ; and the rest, the
populace, is very difficult to bring into the schedule
except as raw material of industry. What may
take place to accentuate or mitigate this tendency
is a question of the drift of sentiment on the mat-
ter of property rights, business obligations, and eco-
nomic policy. So far as the economic factors at play
in the modern situation shape this drift of sentiment
they do so in large part indirectly, through the di.s-
ciplinary effect of new and untried circumstances of
politics and legal relation to which their working
gives rise.



CHAPTER Vni



BUSINESS PRINCIPLES IN LAW AND POLITICS

Popular welfare is bound up with the conduct
of businesa ; because iiiduatry is managed for busi-
ness ends, and also because there prevails through-
out modem communities a settled habit of rating
the means of livelihood and tlie amenities of life
in pecuniary terms. But apart from their effect
in controlling the terms of livelihood from day to
day, these principles are also in great measure
decisive in the larger affairs of life, both for tlie
individual in his civil relations and for the com-
munity at large in its political concerns. Modern
(civilized) institutions rest, in great part, on busi-
ness principles. Tina is the meaning, as applied
to the modem situation, of the current phrases
about the Economic Interpretation of History, or
the Materialistic Theory of History.

Because o£ this settled habit of seeing all the
conjunctures of life from the business point of
view, in terms of profit and loss, the management
of the affairs of the community at large falls by
common consent into the hands of business men



BUSINESS IK LAW AND POLITICS 269

and is guided by business considerations. Hence
modern politica is business politics, even apart
from the sinister application of tlie phrase to what
is invidiously called corrupt politics. This is true
both of foreign and domestic policy. IiCgislation,
police surveillance, the administration of justice,
the military and diplomatic service, all are chiefly
concerned with business relations, pecuniary inter-
ests, and they have little more than an incidental
ijearing on other human interests. All this appa-
ratus is also charged with the protection of life aud
personal liberty, but its work in this bearing has
much of a pecuniary color.

Legislation and legal decisions are based on the
dogma of Natural Liberty. This is peculiarly true
as regards the English-speaking peoples, the foun-
dation of whose jurisprudence is the common law,
and it holds true in an especial degree of America.
In other European communities the sway of natural-
rights preconceptions is not so unmitigated, but
even with them there is a visibly growing predilec-
tion for the natural-rights standpoint in all matters
touching business relations. The dogma of natural
liberty is peculiarly conducive to an expeditious
business traffic and peculiarly consonant with the
habita of thought wluch necessarily prevail in any
business community.

The current body of natural-rights preconcep-



I



J



270 THK THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISJE



tiona antedates the modern business situation. The
scheme of natural rights grew up and found secure
lodgement in the common sense of the community,
as well as with its lawgivers and courts, under the
discipline of the small industry and petty trade
("domestic industry") whose development cul-
minated in the eighteenth century.^ In industrial
matters the efficient and autonomous factor in the
days of the small industry was the individual work-
man, his personal force, dexterity, and diligence;
similarly in the petty trade of the precapitaliatic
English situation the decisive factor was the dis-
cretion and sagacity of the small merchant and the
petty employer, who stood in direct personal rela-
tions with their customers and their employees. In
so far as trade and industry was not restrained by
conventional regulations, statutory or customary,
both trade and iodustry was in effect an open field
of free competition, in which man met man on a
somewhat equable footing. While the competitors
were not on a footing of material equality, the
industrial system was sufficiently loose-jointed, of
a sufficiently diffuse growth, to make competition
effective in the absence of mandatory restrictions.
The like wOl hold of the business organization
associated with the small industry. Both trade
and industry were matters of personal efficiency



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS ' 271

rather than comprehensively organized proceBses of
an impersonal character.'

Natural ri^ht S) W *hpy fnpnA f.hpjr way intn t.hft

conceptions, of law and eq uity, were in effect the
aaaumed equal ri^^hts of men so situated on a plane
of at least construct ive equality that the indi-
viduals con ce rned would be left in _a podUoiL-Qf
effecti vely free choice if conventional restrictions
ware dop e away . ^The organization was not, me-
chanically, a close-knit one, in the sense that the
concatenation of industrial processes or of business
transactions was not rigorous either in point of
time relations or of the quantity and character of
the output or the work. Neither were the place,
pace, circumstances, means, or hours of work closely
determined for the workman or hia employer by
mechanical circumstances of the industrial process
or of the market. The standardization of life under
the old regime was of a conventional character, not
of a mechanical kind such as is visible in the more
recent development. And this conventional stand-
ardization was gradually losing force.

The movement of opinion on natural-rights
ground converged to an insistence on the system
of natural liberty, so called. But this insistence
on natural liberty did not contemplate the abroga-
tion of all conventional prescription. " The simple
and obvioua s y stem of natur al liberty " m eant

1 ScD Cbaptei IV. &bo?e.


I



272 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPKJSE



freedom from restrai nt. on .anj_ other p rescr iptive
ground than that afforded by the rights o f owner-
ship. In its economic bearing^the s ystem of
natural liberty meant a s ystem of free pecuniary
contract. "Liberty does not mean license;"
which in economic terms would be transcribed,
" The natural freedom of the individual must not
traverse the prescriptive rights of property."
Property rights being included among natural
rights, they had the indefeasibility which attaches
to natural rights. Natural liberty prescribes free-
dom to buy and sell, limited only by the equal
freedom of others to buy and sell ; with the
obvious corollary that there must be no interfeiv
ence with others' buying and selling, except by
means of buying and selling.

This principle of natural (pecuniary) li berie hag
found its most unmitigated acceptance in America ,
and has here taken the firmest hold on th e lega l
mind. Nowhere e lse has the sacredne sa of pecun-
iary obligations so pe rmeated the common sense of
the community,, and n owhere does pecuni ary obli -
gation_come so near being the only form of obli-
gation that has the iiTiri"-''lifipd an.iinl,inn nf current
com mon sense. Here, as nowhere else, do obliga-
tions and claims of the most diverse kinds, domestic,
social, and civil, tend to take the pecuniary form
and admit of being fully discharged on a mone-
tary valuation. (To a greater extent than else-



BUSIKESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 273

where public esteem is awarded to artiste, actors, ^ ^'
preachers, writers, scientists, officials, in some ^'''«'
rough proportion to the sums paid for their work./ - ■^

American civil rights have taken an extreme
form, with relatively great stress on the inviola-
bility of pecuniary relations, due to the peculiar
circumstances under which the American commu-
nity has grown up. The pioneers, especially in
that North-Atlantic seaboard community that has
been chiefly effective in shaping American tradi-
tions, brought with them a somewhat high-wrought
variant of the English preconception in favor of
individual discretion, and this tradition they put
in practice nnder circumstances peculiarly favorable
to a bold development. They brought little of the
remnants of that prescriptive code that once bound
the handicraft 83'stem, and the conditions of life in
the colonies did not foster a new growth of conven-
tional regulations circumscribing private initiative.
A ^pierica is the native habitat of the self-made man,
and the self-ma de man is a pecuniary organism .'

Presently, when occasion arose, the metaphysics
of natural liberty, pecuniary and other, was cm-
bodied in set form in constitutional enactments.
It is therefore involved in a more authentic form
and with more incisive force in the legal structure
of this community than in that of any other.

' CL, t.g., Asbley, "The Economic Atmospbere kA America," in
Suro^if HUtoTle and SconotrUc, pp. 106 a ttq.



I


274 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE

Freedom of contract is the fundamental tenet of
the legal creed, bo to speak, inviolable and inalien-
able ; and within the province of law and equity no
one has competence to penetrate behind this first
premise or to question the merits of the natural-
rights metaphysics on which it rests. The only-
principle (attested habit of thought) which may
contest its primacy in civil matters is a vague
"general welfare" clause; and even this can effec-
tively contest its claims only under exceptional
circumstances. Under the application of any
general welfare clause the presumption ia and
always must be that the principle of free contract
be left intact so far as the circumstances of the
case permit. The citizen may not be deprived o£
life, liberty, or property without due process of
law, and the due process proceeds on the premise
that property rights are inviolable. In its bearing
upon the economic relations between individuals
this comes to mean, in effect, not only that one
individual or group of individuals may not legally
bring any other than pecuniary pressure to bear
upon another individual or group, but also that
pecuniary pressure cannot be barred.

Now, through gradual change of the economic
situation, this conventional principle of immiti-
gated and inalienable freedom of contract began
to grow obsolete from about the time when it was
fairly installed ; obsolescent, of course, not in point



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 275



of law, but in point of fact. Since about the time
when this new conventional standardization of the
scheme of economic life in terras of free contract
reached its mature development, in the eighteenth
century,' a new standardizing force, that of the
machine process, has invaded the field." The
standardization and the constraint of the system
of machine industry differs from what went before
it in that it has had no conventional recognition,
no metaphysical authentication. It has not become
a legal fact. Therefore it neither need nor can be
taken account of by the legal mind. It is a new
fact which fits into the framework neither of the
ancient system of prescriptive usage nor of the
later system of free personal initiative. It does not
exist dejure, but only de facto. Belonging neither
to the defunct system nor to the current legal
system, since it neither constitutes nor traverses a

1 This date is true for England. For Amerlcn the discipline favor-
able to the growtb o[ the luituml-Uberty dogmft lasted nearly a ecDtary
longer. In America tlie new, modern, lActinalo^cal And busineu era
can scnrcel; be mud to have set in in good vigor nnlil the period of the
Civil War. Hence, with b longer and later training, the preconcep-
tions of naiur^ liberty are fresher and more Kiiacioiu in America.
For the Continental peoples the cue is different agnln. With them
the modem technological and buaineM situation is of appmximaleir
the same date as in America, but their training up to the date of the
tranaitioD to the modem situation was In a much Icga de|;ree a training
in Individual Initiative, free acatlered indUBtrjr, and petty trade. The
Continental peopiea for the moat pan made a somewhat abrnpt tran-
sition after the middle of the nineteenth century from a stale and
dilapidated system of guild and fcudnlistic prescriptions to the (for
them) exotic system of modern technolc^ and business principles;.

* See Chapter 11. above and Chapter IX. below.



\


276 THE THEORY OF BrSINESS ENTERPRISE

" natural right," it ia, as within the cognizance of
the law, non-existent. It ia, perhaps, actual, with
a gross, material actuality ; but it is not real, with
a legal, metaphysically competent reality. Such
coercion as it may exert, or aa may be exercised
through it8 means, therefore, is, in point of legal
reality, no coercion.

Where physical impossibility to fulfil the terms
of a contract arises out of the concatenation o£
industrial processes, tliis physical impossibility
may be pleaded as invalidating the terms of the
contract. But the pecuniary pressure of price or
subsistence which the sequence and interdepen-
dence of industrial processes may bring to bear has
no standing aa such in law or equity ; it can reach
the cognizance of the law only indirectly, through
gross defection of one of the contracting parties, in
those cases where the pressure ia severe enough to
result in insolvency, .'sickness, or death. The
material necessities o£ a group of workmen or
consumers, enforced by the specialization and con-
catenation of industrial processes, is, therefore, not
competent to set aside, or indeed to qualify, the
natural freedom of the owners of these processes
to let work go on or not, as tlie outlook for profits
may decide. Profits is a business proposition, live-
lihood is not.'

' Under the Byslcra of tumdicraft nnd petty trade the converse waa
true. Livelihood was (ht^ fundnmrntnl norm of buslnesB regulntioni ;
piuBtA h&d but a seconUar; Btanillng, if aiiy.


BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 277

Under the current de facto standardization of
economic life enforced by the machine industry,
it may frequently happen that an individual or a
group, e.g., of workmen, has not a de facto power
of free contract. A given workman's livelihood
can perhaps, practically, be found only on accept-
ance of one specific contract offered, perhaps not
at all. But the coercion which in this way bears
upon his choice through the standardization of
industrial procedure is neither assault and battery
nor breach of contract, and it is, therefore, not
repugnant to the principles of natural liberty.
Through controlling the processes of industry in
which alone, practically, given workmen can find
their livelihood, the owners of these processes may
bring pecuniary pressure to bear upon the choice
of the workmen ; but since the rights of prop-
erty which enforce such pressure are not repug-
nant to the principles of natural liberty, neither
is such pecuniary pressure repugnant to the law, —
the case is therefore outside the scope of the law.
The converse case, where the workmen take
similar advantage of their employers to bring
them to terms, is similarly outside the scope of
the common law, — supposing, of course, that
there has in neither case been a surrender of
individual liberty, a breach of contract, theft, a
resort to violence, or threats of violence. So long
as there is no overt attempt on life, liberty of the



1

J


278 THE THEOBT OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE



person, or the liberty to buy and sell, the law can-
not intervene, unless it be in a precautionary way
to prevent prospective violation of personal or
property rights.

The '* natural," conventional freedom of contract
is sacred and inalienable. De facto freedom of
choice is a matter about which the law and the
courts are not competent to inquire. By force of
the concatenation of industrial processes and the
dependence of men's comfort or subsistence upon
the orderly working of these processes, the exercise
of the rights of ownership in the interests of busi-
ness may traverse the de facto necessities of a
group or class ; it may even traverse tlie needs of
the community at large, as, €.(/., in the conceiv-
able case of an advisedly instituted coal famine;
but since these necessities, of comfort or of liveli-
hood, cannot be formulated in terms of the natural
freedom of contract, they can, in the nature of the
case, give rise to no cognizable grievance and find
no legal remedy.

The discrepancy between law and fact in the
matter of industrial freedom has had repeated
illustration in the court decisions on disputes
between bodies of workmen and their employers or
owners. These decisions commonly fall out in
favor of the employers or owners ; that is to say,
they go to uphold property rights and the rights of
free contract. The courts have been somewhat



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS



broadly taken to taak by a certain claaa of ob-
servers for alleged partiality to the owners' side in
this class of litigation. It has also been pointed
out by faultfinders that the higher courta decide,
on the whole, more uniformly in favor of the
employerowner than the lower ones, and especially
more so than the juries in those cases where juries
have found occasion to pass on the law of the case.
The like is true as regards suits for damages aris-
ing out of injuries sustained by workmen, and so
involving the question of the employer's liability.
Even a casual scrutiny of the decisions, however,
will show that in most cases the decision of the
court, whether on the merits of the case or on the
constitutionality of the legal provisions involved, '
is well grounded on the metaphysical basis of
natural liberty. That is to say in other words, the
decisions will be found on the side of the main-
tenance of fundamental law and order, "law
and order" having, of course, reference to tlie
inalienable rights of ownership and contract. As
should fairly be expected, the higher courts, who
are presumably in more intimate touch with the
principles of jurisprudence, being more arduously
trained and more thoroughly grounded In the law
at the same time that they have also presumably a
larger endowment of legal acumen, — these higher

) S-g., M to employer's liability for accidents or unmoltary prem-
ises, the wfeguarding of m&chlDerr, age limit of laboren Of hour limit
oE vorklng Une, eto.


280 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

courts speak more unequivocally for the meta-
physical principles and apply them with a surer
and firmer touch. In the view of these liigher
adepts of the law, free contract is so inalienable a
natural right of man that not even a statutory
enactment will enable a workman to forego its
exercise and its responsibility. By metaphysical
necessity its exercise attaches to the individual so
indefeasibly that it cannot constitutionally be dele-
gated to collective action, whether legislative or
corporate.' This extreme consequence of the
principle of natural liberty has at times aroused
indignation in the vulgar ; but their grasp of legal
principles is at fault. The more closely the logi-
cal sequence is followed up, the more convinc-
ingly does the legitimacy of such a decision stand
out.

' E.g. where a workman's accepting employmont on mBchluciy

nhich is not safeguarded na the law requires is construed as an exer-
cise of the ludefensible right of free contract on his part, wbicb thenbf
eiempU the empSoyer from liability tor eventual accidents.

In point of legal principle the reluctance to allow or recognize
limited liability in joint Gtuvk companies, in the English practice prior
to the Companies Acta, waa of much tlie aame nature as the cunent
reluctance to allow an alienation or abridgment of a workman's indi-
vidual responsibility for tbe terms of bis employment and the coose-
qiiences following from it. It waa felt that a pecuniary liabilitr was
a personal matter, of which the person was not competent to diveat
hiinseK under that By«lcm of mutual rigUta and duties in which the
meuibera of llie community were bound togetbcr. Impersonal, col-
lective, and limited liability won its way, as against the system of
natural liberty, In this field by sheer force of buaincas expediency.
In a conflict of principles between the main preposition and one ol
its corollariea, the corollary won because the facta bad outgrown the
primary Implication of the main proposition.


BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 281

In comparing the decisions of the higher courts
with those of the lower they contrast most signally
with the decisions rendered by juries in the lower
tribunals. While this contrast haa a significance
in another connection, it casts no shadow on the
legality of the decisions of the courts of higher
instance. The juries, in great measure, speak for
the untrained sympathies of the vulgar, which are
a matter somewhat apart from the foundations of
law and order.'

a law Is of course a tormulatlon of the dellverancea
n the points which it touches. But common law,
. sense, being a formulalioa of habiu of thought,
luigrowth of past ratlier tbaji of present circum-
stances, — in this ctue the circumstances of the eigbtecnib centuiy, —
wberess llie sympathies of the vulgar, as thej appear in jury deciiioos,
are lately the ouuome of those modern eiperiencea that are at in-
creasing variance with the foundations of tbe common taw.

It may be remarked by the way Uiat, while tbe charge of partiality
or corruption, often heard as against these higher tribunals, may in
a few scattering instances be founded, that la after all not much to
the point as regards practical consequences. The greater number
of tbe courta, indeed virtually the entire judiciary, are no doubt above
substantial suspicion in the premises. And after all, it they were
not incorruptible, — if the common run of the tribunals were cor-
ruptly working in tbe interest of the employere or owners, — that need
not seriously affect the outcome as regards the general tenor of the
dectsiona handed down. If they are corrupt or biassed, tbey will de-
cide in favor of Uie owners, wlio can afford ta pay, and they will be
under th« necessity ot finding plausible reasons in law for so doing.
Such reajton can be tuund only in the nietapbyHical natural righu
basis of the law ; and it It can be found by the help o( such legal
ratiocination, then it is a valid ground of decision, that being the
peculiar merit ot metaphysical grounds of decision. On the other
hand, if the oouTt is a " learned, upright judge," he will look for the
grounds of decision in the same place and lind ihem In the same
shape. Necesaarilf so, since the point in dispute is almost Invariably a
queatloD of the legal rights of property as against tbe material require-



L.



282 THE THEOKT OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

Popular sentiment, then, does not at all uni-
formly bear out these decisions o£ the courts in
disputes between property rights and naked man-
kind, especially not in the more rigorous enforce-
ment of the principle of free contract. Thia
discrepancy serves to show that the vulgar, the
laity, from whose numbers the juries are drawn,
have not an adequate sense of the principles that
lie at the root of the law; which may be due in
part to their not reaUzing how essential a founda-
tion of law, order, and common welfare these prin-
ciples of natural liberty are. The visible disparity
in the distribution of property may make those
classes who have little property envious of the
wealthy members, and so make them lose interest
in the maintenance of the rights of property.
But apart from this, the discipline of daily life,

menu of comfort or of livelihood ; and the rights of property Are the
fooBdation of modem law and order, while the reqairementa of com-
fort or livelihood passed out of the scope of the law on the abroga-
tion ol the outworn ayiteiii of miuidatory prescriptions governing
Indnatrial and trade relatioDB in earlj modem Umca. Since the dla-
patcs in qneition rarely if ever ariBe out of a breach of contract on
the part of the employer-owner, the decision can ordinarily, in the
nature of the caee, not go against him, inaamuch ai the foundation
of economic law and order is the freedom and inviolability of pecun-
iary contracts. It should, in fact, be nearly a matter of IndiSerenca
to the " popular" side of this olase ol litigation whether the courts
are corrupt or not. The question has little else than a speculative
interest In the nature of the case the owner a,lone has, ordlnarfiy,
any standing in court. All of wliich argues that there are probably
very few courts that are in any degree corrupt or biassed, so far as
touches litigation of thia class. Efforts to corrupt them would be
a work of supererogation, besides being Immoral.



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 283

from which the common-sense notions of the
vulgar are in good part derived, is no longer in
full accord with the natural-rights conceptions
handed down from the eighteenth century. In
other words, the conceptions of natural rights on
which the common law rests embody a technically
competent formulation of the deliverances of that
body of common sense which was inculcated by
the discipline of everyday life in the eighteenth
century, before the advent of the current situa-
tion ; whereas the discipline of everyday life under
the current technological and business situation
inculcates a body of common-sense views some-
what at variance with the received natural-rights
notions.

There is apparently something of a divergence
between the received notions on this head and the
deliverances of latter-day common sense. The
divergence is neither well defined nor consistent.
The latter^ay attitude toward questions of the
kind involved is vague, chiefly negative or critical,
and apparently fluctuating; but after all there is
a somewhat persistent divergence, which may even
be said to have a systematic character, bo far as
it goes. It runs in the direction of a (partial and
vacillating) disavowal or distrust of the meta^
physics of free contract, and even of natural lib-
erty generally. This imcertainty of allegiance to
the received foundations of law and order prevails



I


284 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

in unequal degrees among the various classes of
the community, being apparently largest and most
outspoken among the workmen of the industrial
towns, and being, on the whole, less noticeable
among the propertied and professional classes and
the rural population. The peculiar class dis-
tribution of this disintegration of received convic-
tions, as well as its connection with modem
industrial conditions, will be taken up again pres-
ently in another connection.

The state, that is to say, the government, was
once an organization for the control of affairs in
the interest of princely or dynastic ends. In
internal affairs statecraft was occupied with ques-
tions of the dynastic succession, the endeavors and
intrigues of the political magnates, fiscal adminis-
tration directed to finding adequate support for the
princely power, and the like. In external politics
the objective end was dynastic prestige and security,
military success, and the like. Such is still in
part the end of political endeavor in those coun-
tries, as, e.g., Germany, Austria, or Italy, where the
transition to a constitutional government has not
been completed. But since the advent of constitu-
tional government and parliamentary representa-
tion, business ends have taken the lead of
dynastic ends in statecraft, very much in the
same measure as the transition to constitutional



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 285

methods has been effectually carried through. A
constitutional goverament is a business govern-
ment. It is particularly through the business
expedient of parliamentary voting on the budget
that any constitutional executive, e.g., is kept
within constitutional bounds ; and the budget is
voted with a main view to its expediency for busi-
ness ends. The expediency of business enterprise
is not questioned, whereas the expediency of an
increase of princely power and dignity, with the
incidental costs, may be questioned.

Modern governmental policies, looking as they
do to the furthering of business interacts as their
chief care, are of a " mercantile " complexion. They
aim to foster trade, as did the mercantile policies of
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, although
since " trade " has come to include much else than
foreign commerce, the modern policies look to busi-
ness in the more comprehensive sense which the term
now necessarily has. But these modem mercan-
tile policies, with their tariffs, treaties, interstate
commerce regulations, and maxims prohibiting all
"restraint of trade," are after all not of the same
nature as the mercantile policies of the old French
and German state-smen, which they superficially
resemble. The old " mercantile system," as it
prevailed on the Continent of Europe, was conceived
in the interest of the prince, the furthering of com-
mercial advantage being a means to princely power


I



286 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

and dignity.' The modem mercantilism under con-
Btitutioual rule, on the other hand, looks to the
prince or to the government as a means to the end
of commercial gain. With the transition to con-
stitutional rule and methods, the discretion and
autonomy in the case has passed from the hands of
the prince into those of the business men, and the
interests of the business men have superseded
those of the crown.

Representative government meansr chiefly, repre -
sentatiop , o f hiiainasa int^reatji. The government
commonly works in the interest of the business men
with a fairly consistent singleness of purpose. And
in its solicitude for the business men's interests it
is borne out by current public sentiment, for there
is a naive, unquestioning persuasion abroad among
the body of the people to the effect that, in some
occult way, the material interests of the populace
coincide with the pecuniary interests of those busi-
ness men who live within the scope of the same set
of governmental contrivances. This persuasion is
an article of popular metaphysics, in that it rests
on an uncritically assumed solidarity of interests,
rather than on an insight into the relation of busi-

■ This ifl not true in oearly the same degree tot the mercmnUIe poll-
eiea of England, eTen iu early modem limes. In English policy, under
the Incboftte eonstituUonal ayetem of the mercaoUlist en, the ulterior
(avowed) end la slwaya the (business) advuitage of the "common-
wealth." The prince cornea in rather as second than M flnt cUlnunt
on the eolicitude of the meicantiliat etatesman.



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 28T

nesfl enterprise to the material welfare of those
classes who are not primarily business men. This
persuasion is particulariy secure among the more
conservative portion of the community, the business
men, superior and subordinate, together with the
professional classes, as contrasted with those vulgar
portions of the community who are tainted with
socialistic or anarchistic notions. But since the
conservative element comprises the citizens of sub-
stance and weight, and indeed the effective major-
ity of law-abiding citizens, it follows that, with the
sanction of the great body of the people, even in-
cluding those who have no pecuniary interests to
serve in the matter, constitutional government has,
in the main, become a department of the business
oi^anization and is guided by the advice of the
business men. The government has, of course,
much else to do besides administering the general
affairs of the business community ; but in most of
its work, even in what is not ostensibly directed to
biisiness ends, it is under the surveillance of the
business interests. It seldom happens, if at all, that
the government of a civilized nation will persist
in a course of action detrimental or not osten-
sibly subservient to the interests of the more
conspicuous body of the community's business men.
The degree in which a government fails to adapt
its policy to these business exigencies is the
measure of its senility.


288 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE


The ground of sentimeut on which rests the
popular approval of a government for buslneiis ends
may be summed up under two heads: patriotJBm
and property. Both of these terms stand for in-
stitutional facts that have come down out of a past
which differed substantially from the present situ-
ation. The substance of both ia of the nature of
unreasoning sentiment, in the sense that both are
insisted on as a matter of course, as self-legitimat-
ing grounds of action which, it is felt, not only
give expedient rules of conduct, but admit of no
question as to their ulterior consequences or their
value for the life-purposes of the community. The
former of these fundamental institutional habita
of thought (perhaps better, habits of mind) runs
back to the discipline of early barbarism, through
the feudal days of fealty to the earlier days of clan
life and clannish animosity. It iias therefore the
deep-rooted strength given by an extremely pro-
tracted discipline of predation and servitude. Under
modem conditions it is to be rated as essentially
an institutional survival, so ingrained in the pop-
ulace as to make any ap|>eal to it secure of a re-
sponse irrespective of the material merits of the
contention in whose behalf tlie appeal is made.'

' The line of descent of lbs preconception of patrictuim or chaii-
▼Iniam, u it findi cxpreuion in tbU lively sense of pecuniary soli-
duitf, mAj be outlined m toUnns : Under the ctaji (gentile or tribal)
■jTBlem out oi which the Weat-Europcnn peoples pMeed Into the r£gime
of feudal Christeudom, a eiveu group stood togelbcr in a union of


BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS

By force of this happy knack of clannish fancy
the common man is enabled to feel that he has
some sort of metaphysical share in the gains which
accrue to the business men who are citizens of the
same "commonwealth"; so that whatever policy
furthers the commercial gains of those business
men whose domicile is within the national boun-
daries is felt to be beneficial to all the rest of the
population.'

offence and defence, warlike and economic, on the basis of a putative
blood rcIalioDship. When the manor or the (esaentially servile) niarh
came to replace tbe clan group an the economic and cl<ril unit, the bond
of putative blood relaliotiBhtp peniiled in a elighcly modifled fonn and
force, the incidence of the sensB of Bolldarlty, tbe " conECiousneeB of
kind," then sbiEting to the neir group unit, niih allegiance centring
on the feudal head of the group, instead of, as formerly, on the senior
line of putative deiicent. When the stale came forward in medlnval
and early modem times and took over the powera and prerogatives of
tbe head of the manor or the feudal lord, it took over also tbe Incidence
of this sense of allegiance, and the sense ot solidarity came to cover
the larger group of tbe nation which had succeeded to the autonomy
of the manor. Where the line of institutional descent runs throngh
the industrial town, with guild, handicraft, and local government, the
transient features of the growth are superficially different but in effect
much the aamc. The discipline ot warfare, which kept up the practice
of joint action and had the appearance of joint entcr|>rise, served to
keep the sense of patriotic solidarity Qrm and vigorous and enabled It to
cover other Interests as well as the princely enterprise of warfare and
stale- mnkiiig. Wherever unbroken peace prevailed for an appreciable
period, so as to affect the growth of traditions, the sense of naiJonal
solidarity showed symptoms of slackening. For purposes of economic
solidarity tlio commonwealth Is conceived after the manner of an over-
grown manor. It fignrea as such, e.g.. In English mercantilist writings
of the sixteenth t« the eighteenth century, as well as In the patriotic
trade politics of tbe present.

' In passing it may be remarked that the fact of this sense of soli-
darity being an anachronism most not tie taken as implying anyOtlng
for or agMost the substantial merits of such a frame of mind.



I


290 THE THEORY OF BUSHTESS ENTEKPEISE

The second inatitutional support of business poli-
tics, viz. property, is similarly an outgrowth of the
discipline of the past, and similarly, thongh per-
haps in a less degree, out of touch with the disci-
pline of the more recent cultural situation. In the
form in which it prevails in the current popular
animus, the principle of ownership comes down
from the days of handicraft industry and petty
trade, as pointed out above. As it is of less ancient
and less imbroken descent, so it seems also to be
a less secure cultural heritage than the sense of
patriotic solidarity. It saya that the ownership of
property is the material foundation of human well-
being, and that tliis natural right of ownership is
sacred, after the manner in which individual life,
and more especially national life, is sacred. The
habits of life and thought inculcated by joint work
under the manorial system and by joint rules under
the handicraft system have apparently contributed
much to the notion of a solidarity of economic in-
terests, having given the notion such a degree of
consistency as has enabled it to persist in the face
of a visible discrepancy of interests in later, capital-
istic times. Under this ciurent, business regime,
business gains are the basis of individual wealth,
and the (pseudo) notion of joint acquisition has
taken the place of the manorial notion of joint
work. The institutional animus of ownership, as
it took shape imder the discipline of early modem



I



I



I



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS

handicraft, awards the ownership of property to
the workman who has produced it. By a dialectical
conversion of the terms, this metaphysical dictum
is made to fit the circumstances of later competitive
business by construing acquisition of property to
mean production of wealth ; so that a hushiess man
is looked upon as the putative producer of wliatever
wealth he acquires. By force of this sophistication
the acquisition of property by any person is held
to be, not only expedient for the owner, but meri-
torious as an action serving the common good.
Failure to bargain shrewdly or to accumulate more
goods than one has produced by the work of one's
own hands is looked upon with a feeling of annoy-
ance, as a neglect, not only of opportunity, but of
duty. The pecuniary conscience commonly does
not, of course, go to quixotic lengths in a public-
spirited insistence on everybody's acquiring more
than an aliquot part of the aggregate wealth on
hand, but it is felt that he beat serves the common
good who, other things equal, diverts the larger
share of the aggregate wealth to his own possession.
His acquiring a defensible title to it makes him the
putative producer of it.

The natural-rights basis of ownership is by this
paralogism preserved intact, and the common man
is enabled to feel that the business men in the
community add to the aggregate wealth at least
as much as they acquire a title to ; and the sue-


cessfiil business men are at least as well persuaded
that such is their relation to the aggregate wealth
and to the material well-being of the community
at large. So that both the business men whose
gains are sought to be enhanced by business poli-
tics and the populace by whose means the busi-
ness gains are secured work together in good faith
towards a well-advised business end, — the accu-
mulation of wealth in the hands of those men who
are skilled in pecuniary matters.'

The manner in which business interests work
out in government policy may be shown by follow-
ing up their bearing upon one phase of this policy.
An extreme expression of business politics, and at
the same time a characteristic trait of the higher
levels of national life in Christendom, is the cur-
rent policy of war and armaments. Modem busi-
ness is competitive, emulative, and the direction
of business enterprise is in the hands of men who
are single-minded in their competitive conduct of

I The two complemeQlary sentiments — patriotLam and peciininry
■olidarltT — are found In nnequal meaanre among the seTeml nations
of Christendom. The diaparlty In this respect correBpondB roughly with
adlBpuritjinpast natioDal experience. The Continental peoples, e.g.,
have, on the whole, a readier and fuller, more unequivocal, patrlotio
conviction, aa the; have bIbo had a longer, more aevere, and later dis-
cipline in the fealty that goes nith a system of dynastic warfnre and
graded servitude ; whereas the Engliah-apeaWng peoples are animated
with a more secure conviction that money valae is the chief end of
•erioos endeavor and that business solvency is the final attribute of
manhood. Bnt In either case the onlcome Is the primacy of business
In the counsels at nations, and its empire is none the less secure for its
resting mon on one or the other of these two supports.



I


BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 293

affairs. They neither are incliiied, nor will busi-
ness competition permit them, to neglect or over-
look any expedient that may further their own
advantage or hinder the advantage of their rivals.
Under the modern situation, aa it has taken shape
since the industrial revolution,' business competi-
tion has become international, covering the range
of what is called the world market. In this inter-
national competition the machinery and policy of
the state are in a peculiar degree drawn into the
service of the larger business interests; so that,
both in commerce and industrial enterprise, the
business men of one nation are pitted against those
of another and swing the forces of the state, legis-
lative, diplomatic, and military, against one an-
other in the strategic game of pecuniary advantage.
The business interests domiciled within the scope
of a given government fall into a loose organiza-
tion in the form of what might be called a tacit
ring or syndicate, proceeding on a general undeiv
standing that they will stand together as against
outside business interests. The nearest approach
to an explicit plan and organization of such a
business ring is the modern political party, with its
platform, tacit and avowed. Parties differ in their
detail aims, but tliose parties that have more than

■ For England Uie last half of the eighteeoih oenttiry, lor ConU-
neatAl Europe and America Ibe last half o[ the nineteeoth. In colo-
nial commerce Uu date tor both EnglMid and the Continent la much



1
I



294 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

a transient existence and superficial effect stand •
for different lines of buainess policy, agreeing all
the wliile in so far that they all aim to further
what they each claim to be the best, largest, most
enduring business interests of the community.
The ring' of business interests which secures the
broadest approval from popular sentiment is, under
constitutional methods, put in charge of the gov-
ernment establishment. This popular approval
may be secured on the ground of a sound business
platform or (in part) on some ground extraneous
to business policy proper, such as a wave of na^
tional animosity, a popular candidate, a large
grain crop, etc. But the only secure basis of an
enduring party tenure of the government machin-
ery is a business policy which falls in with the
interests or the prejudices of the effective majority.
In international competition the ultima ratio is,
as ever, warlike force, whetlier the issue be between
princes of the grace of God or prmces of ownership.
It is a favorite maxim of modem politics that
trade follows the flag. This is the business man's
valuation of national policy and of the ends of
national life. So stated, the maxim probably in-
verts the sequence of facts, but it is none the less
a fair expression of the close relation there is be-
tween business endeavor and the modern military

> " Ring" ia here nsed aa a deslgtiatlan of ibis loose orgftnizftUon
of buaioess iDteresls far the guidance of policy, wllbout Implying oriti-
cUu of the ring or of Its ftlms &ud tueUiods.



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 295

policies. Diplomacy, if it la to be effective for
whatever end, must be backed by a show of force
and of a readiness to use it. The definitive argu-
ment of those who speak for armaments (in Eng-
land and America) is that the maintenance of
business interesta requires the backing of arms.
On the Continent of Europe this argument com-
monly comes second, while patriotic fancy and
animosity take the first place.

Armaments serve trade not only in the making
of general terms of purchase and sale between the
business men of civilized countries, but they are
similarly useful in extending and maintaining
business enterprise and privileges in the outlying
regions of the earth. The advanced nations of
Christendom are proselyters, and there are certain
valuable perquisites that come to the business men
of those proselyting nations who advance the fron-
tiers of the pecuniary culture among the backward
populations. There is commonly a handsome mar-
gin of profit in doing business with these, pecunia-
rily unregenerate, populations, particularly when
the traffic is adequately backed with force. But,
also commonly, these peoples do not enter willingly
intolastingbusiness relationswith civilized mankind.
It is therefore necessary, for the purposes of trade
and culture, that they be firmly held up to such civil-
iied rules of conduct as will make trade easy and
lucrative. To this end armament is indispensable.


296 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE


But in the portioning out of the trade perquisites
that fall to the proselyters any business community
is in danger of being overreached by alien civiliz-
ing powers. No recourse but force is finally avail-
able in disputes of this kind, in which the aim of
the disputants is to take advantage of one another
as far as they can. A warlike front is therefore
necessary, and armaments and warlike demonstra-
tions have come to be a part of the regular appara-
tus of business, so far as business is concerned with
the world market.

In BO far as it is guided by the exigencies of
trade, the objective end of warlike endeavor is the
peace and security necessary to an orderly develop-
ment of business. International business relations,
it is well said, make for peace ; in the sense, of
course, that they enforce the pacification of recalci-
trant barbarians and lead to contention between
civilized nations for a revision of the peace terms.
When a modem government goes to war for trade
purposes, it does so with a view to reestablishing
peace on terms more lucrative to its business men.*

1 ArnuimeDts and large militaiy and naval e«tabliahmenta baTe also
a secondaiy aCLraetlon, of a more intimate kind, lor enterprlsine bual>
ness men, in that Uiey aSord opportiinitiet for transactiona ol a pecul-
iarly lucraiiTe character, One ot the partiu (the govemmeDt official)
concerned in suuli trantactiona baa leas than the usual incentive to
drive a oloae bargain. Hla own privaW g^n and loaa i» not immedl-
ktely iDTOlved, ao that be is leas given to petty buclut«,rlng and close
Burveillance of the execution of Uie contracts made. What adds forc«
to this coiiai deration is the (net tliat military and oaval esLabliitamenta
habitually are what the vuljjar would call currupt. The peconiaiT



I

I
I


BUSIHE33 IN LAW AND P0UTIC8 297

Tlie above inquiry into the nature and causes of
the wars of nations has resulted in little else than
a recital of commonplaces ; the facts and their
connection are matters of common notoriety, and
probably no one would hazard a question of the
slight and obvious inferences drawn in the course
of the recital. The excuse for this discursive
review of the motives and aims of a war policy is
that it gives a basis for an outlook on the present
and immediate future of business enterprise.'

The experience of Continental Europe in the
matter of armaments during the last half-century,
and of all the greater nations during the last
two decades, argues that when warlike emulation
between states of somewhat comparable force has
once got under way it assumes a cumulative
character ; so that a scale of expenditure for arma-
ments which would at the outset have seemed

InWrest ot the officinU does not colaclde with that of the esUbliiihmeDt.
There is an appreciable ■' margin of error" which a sagacioua buaintws

The great builneaa interests are the more inclined to look kind);
on an exienslon ol warlike enterprise and armaments, since the pecun-
iary advaotages iniiro to them, while the pecuniary biuden tails chiefly
on the rest ot the commuuity. It Is, to say the least, highly improb-
able that the biuineu gains which accrue from a well-couducted foreign
policy ever, in modern times, equal the coat at which they are secured ;
but that consideration scarcely enters, since the costs are not paid ont
of bustneu gains, but out of the industry of the rest of the people.
The people, however, are animated with an UDCrilieal persuasion that
they have some sort ot a residuary share in these gains, and that this
residuary share In some manner exceeds the whole of the gains
secured.

' See Chapter X. above.



i



298 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS EMTERPEISE

absurdly impossible comes presently to be accepted
as a matter of course. Hitherto the cumulative
augmentation of war expenditures and of war
animus shows no sign of slackening. One after
another, the states that have ofEered some show of
peaceable inclinations have been drawn into the
international game of competitive armaments, as
they have one after another become ambitious to
push the enterprises of their business men in the
international markets. An armament is service-
able only if it is relatively large; its absolute
magnitude is a matter of no particular consequence
for competitive politics. It is its comparative size
tliat counts. Hence the greater the several arma-
ments, the greater the political need of greater
armaments, and the prompter the resentment of
injuries and the livelier the felt need of offending
and of taking offence. A progressively larger pro-
portion of the nation's forces are withdrawn from
industry and devoted to warlike ends. In this
cumulative diversion of effort to warlike ends a
point is presently reached beyond which the ques-
tion of armament ia no longer, What amount of
warlike expenditure is needed to extend or main-
tain business traffic? but rather, What amount
will the nation's resources bear? But the pro-
gression does not stop at that point ; witness the
case of Italy, France, and Germany, where the war
drain has visibly impaired the industrial efficiency


:;s 299 ■

'here the H

stopping- H

"ticularly, m



BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS

of the several nations concerned, but where
burden still goes on growing, with no
place in sight. England and, more particularly,
America are not so near exhaustion, because they
have larger resources to draw on as well as a culture
and a population more efficient for industrial work.
But there is no evident reason why these two
should not likewise enter on a policy of emulative
exhaustion, and so sacrifice their aggregate indus-
trial and business interest to the furtherance of the
"great game."

The question may suggest itself, Why should
not the business community, who have a large
discretion in international politics and whose
aggregate gains are cut into by excessive war ex-
penditures, call a halt when the critical point is
reached ? There is more than one reason for their
failure to do so. War and preoccupation with
warlike enterprise breed a warhke animus in the
community, as well as a habit of arbitrary, auto-
cratic rule on the part of those in authority and
an unquestioning, enthusiastic subservience on the
part of the subjects. National animosity and
national pride demand more and more of military
standing, at the same time that the growing
official class needs increasing emoluments and a
larger field of employment and display. The
cultural effects of the discipline of warfare and



I


anuameut are much the same whether it is un(]ei
taken for dynastic or for business ends ; in either
case it takes on a dynastic complexion and breeds
the temperament, ideals, and institutional habits
proper to a dynastic system of poUtics. The
farther it goes the more it comes to make use
of business interests as a means rather than an
end, as, e.g.y in modem Germany, France, and Italy,
and in the Continental states of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. The crown, court, bureau-
cracy, military establishment, and nobility, under
whatever designations, gradually come to their
own again iu such a situation, and afiEairs again
come to turn on questions of the maintenance
and dignity of these superior elements of the popu-
lation. The objective end of protracted warlike
endeavor necessarily shifts from business advan-
tage to dynastic ascendancy and courtly honor.
Business interests fall to the position of fiscal ways
and means, and business traffic becomes subservient
to higher ends, with a fair chance of ultimate exhaus-
tion or collapse through the bankruptcy of the state.
Business enterprise is an individual matter, not
a collective one. So long as the individual busi-
ness man sees a proximate gain for himself in
meeting the demands for war funds and materials
to maintain the courtly and official establishments
that go with military politics, it is not in the

t Ct. Hobaou, fmpaialUm, pt. L ch. VII., pt IL ch. I. uid VIL



I
1


BUSINESS IN LAW AND POLITICS 301

nature of the business man to draw back. It is
always his profits, not his livelihood, that is in-
volved ; the question which touches his profits
is the relative gainfulness of alternative lines of
investment open to him. So long as the pecuniary
inducements held out by the state, in bidding for
funds or supplies, overbalance the inducements
offered by alternative lines of employment, the
business men will supply these demands, regardless
of what the ulterior substantial outcome of such a
course may be in the end. Funds and business
enterprise are now of so pronounced an interna-
tional or cosmopolitan character that any business
man may, even without fully appreciating the
fact, lend his aid to the fisc of a hostile power as
readily as to a friendly power or to the home gov-
ernment; whereby an equable and comprehensive
exhaustion of the several communities involved
in the concert of nations is greatly facilitated.
Barring accidents and untoward cultural agencies
from outside of politics, business, or religion, there
is nothing in the logic of the modem situation
that should stop the cumulative war expenditures
short of industrial collapse and consequent national
bankruptcy, siich as terminated the carnival of
war and politics that ran its course on the Conti-
nent in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.'

' On the TolnUon of biulneMto frarUke expenditnre in thesixUenth
ftud MTenteeoU) c«iiturie«, cf. Ehreaberg, ZeitaiUr der Fuggtr.



CHAPTER IX

THE CULTURAL INCIDENCE OF THE MACHINE
PROCESS

So far as regards the non-mechanical factors of
culture, such as religion, politics, and even business
enterprise, the present is in a very large degree
comparable with the scheme of things that pre-
vailed on the Continent of Europe in the seven-
teenth century. And so far as the working of
these cultural factors is undisturbed by forces that
were not present in the older days, they should
logically again work out in such a situation as
came to prevail in Central Europe in the course of
the eighteenth century. The modern situation, of
course, is drawn on a larger scale ; but that is due
to the intrusion of a new teclinology, a different
"state of the industrial arts," and not to a
substantially altered range of religious, political, or
business conceptions. The pitch of squalor that
characterized vulgar life in the busier Continental
countries at the close of the great era of politics
could probably not be reached again, but that
again, is due, not to these spiritual factors of cul-
tural growth, but to the altered state of the



CIVILIZATION ASD THE MACHINE PE0CES8 303



industrial arts. The factor in the modern Bituation
that is alien to the ancient r%ime is the machine
technology, with its many and wide ramifications.
Business conceptions and business methods were
present in vigorous growth in Central Europe in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as they had
been in South Europe from a slightly earlier
date ; although the large sweep of business enter-
prise is not had until a later date, being conditioned
by the machine technology. Business methods
and the apparatus of business traffic develop very
promptly whenever and wherever the situation
calls for them ; such is the teaching o£ economic
history.' There is nothing recondite about them,
little that has to be acquired by a protracted, cumu-
lative experience running over many generations,
such as is involved in technological development.
This business development in earlier modem times,
together with the accumulations of funded wealth
that came of this business enterprise, ran their
course to a finish in Continental Europe, leaving no
basis for a new start. The new start from wliich
the current situation takes its rise, in Europe and
elsewhere, was given to the Continental peoples by

' Tbe perfected Hystem of biuinesa principles tcbIs on the htatorical
basia of free InstilationB, and ao preBumes », proU'»cl«d historical gronlh
□[ theae lastitutiona ; but a bighlj efficient, tbough less perfect, bualneas
pjstem wu worked oat in a relatively short time by the South and
Ceutntl Eutopean peoples in early modem times on tbe basis of ft lest
consummntp system i)f rlRhts. — Cf. Ehrenberc, ZritalCtr der Ftigger;
Somban, KnpitalUmui, tuL 1L cb. VIU, XIV., XV.



I
I


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



£Vy/».



the English, ready-made, in the so-called Industrial
Revolution. The natural-rights metaphysics, tO'
which the eventual breakdown of the old Conti-
nental system owed its specific character, came also
from the English."

In point of blood and cultural descent the popii-
lation of Great Britain did not differ materially
from their neighbors across the Channel or across
the North Sea.* But from the beginning of the
modem cultural era Great Britain stood outside of
the general European situation, by force of its
physical isolation. So that during the modern era,
down to the close of the eighteenth century, the
British community was in the position of an inter*
ested third party rather than a participant in the
political concert of Europe. The era of •' state-
making," 80 called, is an era in which England
interferes, but is, on the whole, not greatly inter-
fered with, so far as her own home affairs are
concerned. England, and presently Great Britain,
being reduced to law and order under one crowa
and living in a condition of isolation and (rela-
tively) of internal peace, the cultural growth of
that country took a relatively peaceable direction.
The dommant note of everyday life was industry
and trade, not dynastic politics and war . This na-

> S«e Cbaptcr IV. kbove.

■ CL Ketne, Jfan, Pail and Preunt, ch. XIV. ; W. Z, RIplej, fiocu
o/ Europe; Laponge, VAryen; Montelius, Lts Umpi priliutoriqua en
Snide, etc. ; Andreu Hansen. XeniietteilagCeni A:'.<U.



i



I



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 305

tional experience gave as its outcome constitutional
government and the modern industrial technology,
together with the animus and the point of view of
the modern materialistic science. The point of de-
parture for the more recent, current situation,
therefore, is a twofold one; (1) the British peace-
able variant of the Western culture has contributed
constitutional methods and natural rights, together
with the machine technology brought in under the
head of the "industrial revolution"; and (2) there are
the patriotic ideals and animosities left as a residue
of the warlike political traffic in Continental Europe.
Since the new departure, made on the basis of
natural rights and modern industrial and scientific
methods, the complex of nations and of interna-
tional relations is a single, not a twofold one.
The stage over which affairs, political, industrial
and cultural, run their coiuse is no longer Conti-
nental or British, but cosmopolitan, comprising all
civilized communities and all civilized interests.
So that there is not now, as there was in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, an isolation
hospital for technology, science, and civil rights,
set apart from the general cuiTent of cultural
development. Whatever the forces at woric in the
modem situation may eventually bring to pass,
therefore, the outcome must touch all communities
in the same way and in approximately the same
degree. If the outcome is dynastic politics and



306 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

armament again played to a finish in popular
squalor, aristocratic virtues, and universal bank-
ruptcy, there will be no peaceable community of
matter-of-fact mechanics and shopkeepers left in
reserve from ■which to make a new cultural and
industrial start. The modem technology has, in a
manner, cut away the ground out of which it first
grew and from which it gathered' force to reshape
the coarse of history. It has made it impossible
for any community to stand peaceably outside of
the great complex of nations.

But within the comprehensive situation of to^ay
there is tliis new factor, the machine process. In
an earlier chapter (II.) the technological character
of this machine process has been set forth at some
length. The machine process pervades the mod-
em life and dominates it in a mechanical sense.
Its dominance is seen in tlie eaforcement of precise
mechanical measurements and adjustment and the
reduction of all manner of things, purposes and
acts, necessities, conveniences, and amenities of life,
to standard units. The bearing of this sweeping
mechanical standardization upon business traflBc is
a large part of the subject-matter of the foregoing
chapters. The point of immediate interest here is
the further bearing of the machine process upon
the growth of culture, — the disciplinary effect
which this movement for standardization and me-
chanical equivalence has upon the human material.



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 307

This diacipline falls more immediately on the
workmen engaged in the mechanical induatriea, and
only less immediately on the rest of the community
which lives in contact with this sweeping machine
process. Wherever the machine process extends, it
seta the pace for the workmen, great and small.
The pace is set, not wholly by the particular processes
in the details of which the given workman is im-
mediately engaged, but in some degree by the more
comprehensive process at large into which the
given detail process fits. It is no longer simply
that the individual workman makes use of one or
more mechanical contrivances for effecting certain
results. Such used to be his office in the earlier
phases of the use of machines, and the work which
he now has in hand still has much of that character.
But such a characterization of the workman's part
in industry misses the peculiarly modem feature of
the case. He now does this work as a factor in-
volved in a mechanical process whose movement
controls his motions. It remains true, of coiu^e,
as it always has been true, that he is the intelligent
agent concerned in the process, while the machine,
furnace, roadway, or retort are inanimate structures
devised by man and subject to the workman's
supervision. But the process comprises him and
his intelligent motions, and it is by virtue of his
necessarily taking an intelligent part in what is
going forward that the mechanical process has its


308 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPEISE

chief effect upon hira. The process atandardizes
his supervision and guidance of the machine.
Mechanically speaking, the machine is not his to
do with it as his fancy may suggest. His place is
to take thou<rht of the machine and its work in
terms given him by the process that is going for-
ward. His thinking in the premises is reduced to
standard units of gauge and grade. If he fails of
the precise measure, by more or less, the exigencies
of the process check the aberration and drive home
the absolute need of conformity.

There results a standardization of the workman's
intellectual life in termsof mechanical process, which
is more unmitigated and precise the more compre-
hensive and consummate the industrial process
in which he plays a part. This must not be taken
to mean that such work need lower the degree of
intelligence of the workman. No doubt the con-
trary is nearer the truth. He is a more efficient
workman the more intelligent he is, and the dis-
cipline of the machine process ordinarily increases
his efficiency even for work in a different line from
that by which the discipline is given. But the
intelligence required and inculcated in the machine
industry is of a peculiar character. The machine
process is a severe and insistent disciplinarian in
point of intelligence. It requires close and unre-
mitting thought, but it is thought which runs in
standard terms of quantitative precision. Broadly,



I

I

I



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 309

other intelligence on the part of the workman ia
useless ; or it is even worse than useless, for a
habit of thinking in other than quantitative terms
blurs the workman's quantitative apprehension of
the facta with which he has to do.'

In 80 far as he is a rightly gifted and fully dis-
ciplined workman, the final term of his habitual
thinking is mechanical ef&ciency, understanding
"mechanical" in the sense in which it is used
above. But mechanical efficiency is a matter of
precisely adjusted cause and effect. What the dis-
cipline of the machine industry inculcates, there-
fore, in the habits of life and of thought of the
workman, is regularity of sequence and mechanical
precision ; and the intellectual outcome is an habit-
ual resort to terms of measurable cause and effect,
together with a relative neglect and disparagement
of such exercise of the intellectual faculties as does
not run on these lines.

Of course, in no case and with no class does the
discipline of the machine process mould the habits
of life and of thought fully into its own image.
There ia present in the human nature of aU classes
too large a residue of the propensities and aptitudes
carried over from the past and working to a differ-
ent result. The machine's riSgime has been of too

' If, e.jf., he inhea to mjth-moking nnd peraonifiee the macbiae or
tlie process mid Imputes purpose and bcnevgteDCe to the mecbanlcal
) B[)ptl)Lnces,afi«rtheuiauDero(cuiTeQtourBei7UtleB and pulpit oratory,
be La aura to go wrong.



310 THE THEOKT OF BUSHfESS ENTERPRISE

short duration, strict as its discipline may be, and
tlie body of inherited traits and traditions is too com-
prehensive and consistent to admit of anything more
tlian a remote approach to such a consummation.

The machine process compels a more or less un-
remitting attention to phenomena of an impersonal
character and to sequences and correlations not
dependent for their force upon human predilection
nor created by habit and custom. The machine
throws out anthropomorphic habits of thought. It
compels the adaptation of the workman to his work,
rather than the adaptation of the work to the work-
roan. The machine technology rests on a knowl-
edge of impersonal, material cause and effect, not
on the dexterity, diligence, or personal force of the
workman, still less on the habits and propensities
of the workman's superiors. "Within the range of
this machine-guided work, and within the range
of modern life so far as it is guided by the machine
process, the course of things is given mechanically,
impersonally, and the resultant discipline is a
discipline in the handling of impersonal facts for
mechanical effect. It inculcates thinking in terms
of opaque, impersonal cause and effect, to the
neglect of those norms of validity that rest on
usage and on the conventional standards handed
down by usage. Usage counts for little in shaping
the processes of work of this kind or in shaping the
modes of thought induced by work of this kind.


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 311

The machine process gives no insight into ques-
tions of good and evil, merit and demerit, except
in point of materia! causation, nor into the founda-
tions or the constraining force of law and order,
except such meclianically enforced law and order
as may be stated in terms of pressure, temperature,
velocity, tensile strength, etc' The machine tech-
nology takes no cognizance of conventionally
established rules of precedence ; it knows neither
manners nor breeding and can make no use of
any of the attributes of worth. Its scheme of
knowledge and of inference is based on the laws
of material causation, not on those of immemorial
custom, authenticity, or authoritative enactment.
Its metaphysical basis is the law of cau-se and
effect, which in the thinking of its adepts has dis-
placed even the law of sufficient reason.'

The range of conventional truths, or of institu-
tional legacies, which it traverses is very compre-
hensive, being, indeed, all-inclusive. It is but
little more in accord with the newer, eighteenth-
century conventional truths of natiu-al rights,

'Such expressioits b8 "good and ill," "merit and demerit,"
"law and order," when applied to technological facts or to the out-
come of material gelence, are evidently ouly metapboricol expresaiona,
borroved from older uuge and wrviceable only as figures of speech.

* Tarde, Ptifchologlc Economiqve, vol. I. pp. 122-131, offers a cliar-
Kterliatlon of the psyciiology of modern work, conlrasling, among
other things, tlie work of the machine workman with that of the
handicraftsman in respect of its psycholugicitl requirements and effects.
It may be t^ken as a lemperal« formulation of the current ci
places on Ibis topic, and sccma to be fairly wide of the mark.


312 THE THEORY OP BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



natural liberty, natural law, or natural religion,
than with the older norms of the true, the beauti-
ful, and the good which these displaced. Anthropo-
morphism, under wliatever disguise, is of no uae
and of no force here.

The discipUne exercised by the mechanical occu-
pations, in 80 far aa it is in question here, is a
discipline of the habits of thought. It is, there-
fore, as processes of thought, methods of apper-
ception, and sequences of reasoning, that these
occupations are of interest for the present purpose ;
it is aa such that they have whatever cultural
value belongs to them. They have such a value,
therefore, somewhat in proportion as they tax the
mental faculties of those employed; and the largest
effects are to be looked for among those industrial
classes who are required to comprehend and guide
the processes, rather than among tliose who serve
merely as mechanical auxiliaries of the machine
process. Not that the latter are exempt from the
machine's discipline, but it falls upon them blindly
and enforces an uncriticiil accei)tance of opaque
results, rather than a theoretical insight into the
causal sequences which make up the machine
process. The higher degree of training in such
matterof-fact habits of thought is accordingly to
be looked for among the higher ranks of skilled
mechanics, and perliaps still more decisively


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 313

among those who stand in an engineering or
Bupervisory relation to the processes. It counts
more forcibly and farthest among those who
are required to exercise what may be called a
mechanical discretion in the guidance of the
industrial processes, who, as one might say, are
required to administer the laws of causal sequence
that run through material phenomena, who there-
fore must learn to thmk in the terms in which
the machine processes work.' The metaphysical
ground, the assumptions, on which such thinking
proceeds must be such as will hold good for the
sequence of material phenomena ; that is to say, it

' For lomoUilng more Ibaa & huadred yekra pnal this change in the
hablta of thonght of the warkman has been commoDl; spoken of as a
deterioration or numbing of hia intelligence. But that seems too
sweeping a characterization of the change brought on b; habituation
to machiue work. It is safe to say that such habituation brings a
change in the workman's hablta of thought, — In the direction, method,
aodcoDteDtoChia tliinking, — heightening his Intelhgcnce for some pur-
poaea and lowering It for certain others. No doubt, on the whole, the
machine's discipline lowers the Intelligence of the workman for such
purposes as were rated high as marks of iniclllgonce before the com-
ing of the machine, but it appears likewise to heighten his intelligence
for such purposes as hare been brought to the front h; the machine.
U be b by nature scantil; endowed with the aptitudes that would make
him think effectively In terms of the machin* process, it be has intel-
lectual capacity for other things and not for«bls, then the training of
Ihe machine may fairly be said to lower his intelligence, since it binders
the full development of the only capacities of which be is pcaaessed.
The resulting diSerence In inlellectual training is a dUerence in kind
and direction, not necessarily In degree. Cf. Schmutier, (Trundrii*
drr VolknelrCi^hiiflaichre, vo). I. sees. Sfi-SG, 132 ; Ilobson, Evolulion
of Modern Capilalitm, ch. IX. sees. 4 and 6 ; Cooke Taylor, Modem
Factory Syttem, pp. 434-4.15 ; Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Industrial
Dtmoeraqi, e.g. pp. 327 et »eg. ; K. Th. Keinhotd, Arbeit und Werkteug,
ch. X (particularly pp. 190-106) andcb. XL (particularly pp. 221-240).


I



314 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRISE

is the metaphysical assumptions of modern mate-
rial science, — the law of cause and effect, cumula-
tive causation, conservation of energy, persiatence
of quantity, or whatever phrase be chosen to cover
the concept. The men occupied with the modem
material sciences are, accordingly, for the purpose
in hand, in somewhat the same case as the higher
ranks of those employed in mechanical industry.'

Leaving aside the archaic vocations of war, poli-
ties, fashion, and religion, the employments in
which men are engaged may be distinguished as
pecuniary or business employments on the one
hand, and industrial or mechanical employments
on the other hand.* In earlier times, and indeed
until an uncertain point in the nineteenth century,
such a distinction between employments would not
to any great extent have coincided with a differ-
ence between occupations. But gradually, as time
has passed and production for a market has come
to be the rule in industry, there has supervened a
differentiation of occupations, or a division of
labor, whereby on'e clasa of men have taken over
the work of purchaee and sale and of husbanding a
store of accumulated values. Concomitantly, of
course, the rest, who may, for lack of means or of

I Cf. J. C. Sutherlaad, " The Engineering Mind," Popular Science
Monthly, Juiuujr 1003, pp. !i&4-2&e.

*Cf. "loduBlrial uid Fectmiary EmploymeDU," eapeclully pp.
108-218.


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 315

pecimiary aptitude, have been leas well fitted for
pecuniary pursuits, liave been relieved of the cares
of business and have with increasing specialization
given their attention to the mechanical processes
involved in this production for a market. In this
way the distinction between pecuniary and indus-
trial activities or employments has come to coin-
cide more and more nearly with a difference
between occupations. Not that the specialization
has even yet gone so far as to exempt any class
from all pecuniary care ; ' for even those whose
daily occupation is mechanical work still habitually
bargain with their employers for their wages and
with others for their supplies. So that none of the
active classes in modem life is fully exempt from
pecuniary work.

But the need of attention to pecuniary matters
ia less and less exacting, even in the matter of
wages and supplies. The scale of wages, for in-
stance, is, for the body of workmen, and also for
what may be called the engineering force, becoming
more and more a matter of routine, thereby lessen-
ing at least the constancy with which occasions

• As G, F. Stefien has described it : " ThoM who hire out their
labor power or Iheir capital or their land to the entrepreneurs are as a
rul« Dot abaolutelj pauive aa Been from Ibe point of view of business
enterprise. The; are not simply inanimate implements In the hands
of the entrepreneurs. They are ■ eiiterpi''slng Implements' (tDreta-
gande verktyg) who surrender their undertaking functions only to the
extent designated in the contract with the entrepreneur." — flroiio-
mltk Tidikrlfl, »o). V. p. 2W.


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

for detail bargaining in this respect recur. So also
as regards the purchase of consumable goods. lu
the cities and industrial towns, particularly, the
supplying of the means of subsistence has, in
great part, become a matter of routine. Retail
prices are in an increasing degree fixed by the
seller, and in great measure fixed in an impersonal
way. This occurs in a particularly evident and
instnictive way in the practice of the department
stores, where the seller fixes the price, and comes
in contact with the buyer only through the inter-
vention of a salesman who has no discretion aa to
the terms of sale. The change that has taken
place and that is still going on in this respect is
sufficiently striking on comparison with the past
in any industrial community, or with the present
in any of those communities which we are in the
habit of calling " industrially backward."

Conversely, as regards the men in the pecuniary-
occupations, the business men. Their exemption
from taking thought of mechanical facts and
processes is likewise only relative. Even those
business men whose business is in a peculiar de-
gree remote from the handling of tools or goods,
and from the oversight of mechanical processes, as,
for example, bankers, lawyers, brokers, and the
like, have still, at the best, to take some cognizance
of the mechanical apparatus of everyday life ;
they are at least compelled to take some thought


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PE0CES8 317

of what may be called the mechanics of consump-
tion. Whereas those business men whose business
is more immediately concerned with industry com-
monly have some knowledge and take some
thought of the processes of industry ; to some
appreciable extent they habitually think in me-
chanical terms. Their cogitations may habitually
run to pecuniary conclusions, and the test to
which the force and validity of their reasoning
is brought may habitually be the pecuniary out-
come ; the beginning and end of their more seri-
ous thinking is of a pecuniary kind, but it always
takes in some general features of the mechanical
process along the way. Their exemption from
mechanical thinking, from thinking in terms of
cause and effect, is, therefore, materially qualified.
But after all qualifications have been made, the
fact still is apparent that the everyday life of
those classes which are engaged in business differs
materially in the respect cited from the life of the
classes engaged in industry proper. There is an
appreciable and widening difference between the
habits of life of the two classes ; and this carries
with it a widening difference in the discipline to
which the two classes are subjected. It induces a
difference in the habits of thought and the habitual
grounda and methods of reasoning resorted to by
each class. There results a difference in the point
of view, in the facts dwelt upon, in the methods



318 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



of argument, in the grounds of validity appealed
to i and this difference gains in magnitude and
consistency as the differentiation of occupations
goes on. So that the two classes come to have an
increasing difficulty in understanding one another
and appreciating one another's convictions, ideals,
capacities, and shortcomings.

The ultimate ground of validity for the thinking
of the business classes is the natural-rights ground
of property, — a conventional, anthropomorphic
fact having an institutional validity, rather than a
matter-of-fact validity such as can be formulated
in terms of material cause and effect; while the
classes engaged in the machine industry are
habitually occupied with matters of causal se-
quence, which do not lend themselves to statement
in anthropomorphic terms of natural rights and
which afford no guidance in questions of institu-
tional right and wrong, or of conventional reason
and consequence. Arguments which proceed on
material cause and effect cannot be met with
arguments from conventional precedent or dialeo-
tically sufficient reason, and conversely.

The thinking required by the pecuniary occupa-
tions proceeds on grounds of conventionality,
whereas that involved in the industrial occupar
tions runs, in the main, on grounds of mechanical
sequence or causation, to the neglect of conven-
tionality. The institution (habit of thought) of



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 319

ownership or property is a conventional fact; and
the logic of pecuniary thinking — that is to say, of
thinking on matters of ownership — is a working
out of the implications of tliis postulate, this con-
cept of ownership or property. The characteristic
hahits of thought given by such work are habita
of recourse to conventional grounds of finality or
validity, to anthropomorphism, to explanations
of phenomena in terms of human relation, discre-
tion, authenticity, and choice. The final ground of
certainty in inquiries on this natural-rights plane
is always a ground of authenticity, of precedent,
or accepted decision. The argument is an argu-
ment de jure, not de facto, and the training given
lends facility and certainty in the pursuit of de
jure distinctions and generalizations, rather than
in the pursuit or the assimilation of a de facto
knowledge of impersonal phenomena. The end of
such reasoning is the interpretation of new facts
in terras of accredited precedents, rather than a
revision of the knowledge drawn from past experi-
ence in the matter-of-fact light of new phenomena.
The endeavor is to make facts conform to law,
not to make the law or general rule conform to
facts. The bent so given favors the acceptance of
the general, abstract, custom-made rule as some-
thing real with a reality .superior to the reality of
impersonal, non-conventional facts. Such training
gives reach and subtlety in metaphysical argu-



320 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPKISE



ment and in what is known as the "practical"
management of affairs ; it givea executive or ad-
ministrative efficiency, so-called, as distinguished
from mechanical work. " Practical " efficiency
means the ability to turn facts to account for
the purposes of the accepted conventions, to give
a large effect to the situation in terms of the
pecuniary conventions in force.'

The spiritual attitude given by thia training in rea-
soning dejuTtf from pecuniary premises to pecuniary
conclusions, is necessarily conservative. This species
of reasoning assumes the validity of the conven-
tionally established postulates, and is consequently
unable to take a sceptical attitude toward these
postulates or toward the institutions in which these
postulates are embodied. It may lead to scepticism
touching other, older, institutions that are at vari-
ance with its own (natural-rights) postulates, but its
Bcepticism cannot touch the natural-rights ground
on which it rests its own case. In the same man-
ner, of course, the thinking which runs in material
causal sequence cannot take a sceptical attitude
toward its fundamental postulate, the law of cause
and effect ; but since reasoning on this materialistic
basis does not visibly go to uphold the received

' Cf., on Uie other hand, Beinhold, Arbeit und Werkzeug, ch. XII.
kad XIV., where doubla dealing U confused with workmBoehip, vety
much after the manner familiar lo readers of eipOBitiona ol the
" wages of saperinteodence," but more broadly and ingenioualjr than


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 321

institutions, the attitude given by the discipline of
the machine technology cannot, for the present, be
called a conservative attitude.

The business classes are conservative, on the
whole, but such a conservative bent is, of course,
not peculiar to them. These occupations are not
the only ones whose reasoning prevailingly moves
on a conventional plane. Indeed, the intellectual
activity of other classes, such as soldiers, politicians,
the clergy, and men of fashion, moves on a plane of
still older conventions ; so that if the training
given by business employments is to be character-
ized as conservative, that given by these other,
more archaic employments should be called re-
actionary.' Extreme conventionalization means

' Individual eitc«pliona are, or coiirai?, lo be found in all classea,
but tliere is, nller all, a more or less conHlateiit, preTaleiitelaHi attitude,
Ab ia well known, clergymen, lawyers, soldicra, civil servant*, and
the like, are popularly held lo be of a conservative, it not reactionary
temper. ThU vulgar apprehension may be faulty in detail, and espe-
cially It nay be too sweeping In Its general iutions ; but there are,
after all, few persona not belonging to Cheao clasaen who will not
immedlalety recognize that this vulgar apprHisement of tliem rests on
Bubatanlial groanda, even though tbu appraisement may need qualifl-
cation. So, also, a eonaervative animus is seen to pervade all clasiea
more generally in earlier limes or on more archaic levels of culturtt
ihan our own. At the same time, In those early days and in the
more archaic cultural regions, the structure of conventionally accepted
tnitba and the body of accredited spiritual or extra-material (acts ars
more comprehensive and rigid, nnd the thinking on all topics Is more
consistently held to tests of autbenticity as contrasted wilh tests o(
sense perception. On the wholu, the number and variety of UimgK
that are fundamentally and eternally true and good Increase as one
ROes outwaril (rom the modem West-European cultural centres Into
tlie earlier barbarian past or Into the remoter barbarian present.


322 THE THEORY OF BUSDTESS ENTERFKfflE


extreme conservatism. Conservatism means the
maintenance of conventions already in force. On
this head, therefore, the discipline of modem busi-
ness life may be said simply to retain something
of the complexion which marks the life of the
higher barbarian culture, at the same time that it
has not retained the disciplinary force of the bar-
barian culture in so high a state of preservation as
some of the other occupations just named.

The discipline of the modem industrial employ-
ments is relatively free from the bias of conven-
tionality, but the difEerence between the mechanical
and the business occupations in this respect is a dif-
ference of degree. It is not simply that conven-
tional standards of certainty fall into abeyance
for lack of exercise, among the industrial classes.
Tlie positive discipline exercised by their work in
good part runs counter to the habit of thinking in
conventional, anthropomorphic terms, whether the
conventionality is that of natural rights or any
other. And in respect of this positive training
away from conventional norms, there is a large
divergence between the several lines of industrial
employment. In proportion as a given line of
employment has more of the character of a ma-
chine process and less of the character of handi-
craft, tlie matterof-fact training which it gives
is more pronounced. In a sense more intimate
tbau the inventors of the phrase seem to have



CIVILIZATION AJSD THE MACHINE PROCESS 323

appreciated, the machine has become the master
of the man wlio works with it and an arbiter in
the cultural fortunes of the community into whose
life it has entered.

The intellectual and spiritual training of the ma^
chine in modern life, therefore, is very far-reaching.
It leaves but a small proportion of the community
untouched ; but while its constraint is ramified
throughout the body of the population, and con-
strains virtually all classes at some points in
their daily life, it falls with the most direct,
intimate, and unmitigated impact upon the skilled
mechanical classes, for these have no respite from
its mastery, whether they are at work or at play.

The ubiquitous presence of the machine, with
its spiritual concomitant — workday ideals and
acepticLsra of what is only conventionally valid —
is the unequivocal mark of the Western culture
of to-day aa contrasted with the culture of other
times and places. It pervades all classes and
strata in a varying degree, but on an average in
a greater degree than at any time in the past, and
most potently in the advanced industrial commu-
nities and in the classes immediately in contact with
the mechanical occupations.^ As the comprehen-
sive mechanical organization of tlte material side
of life has gone on, a heightening of this cultural
effect throughout the community has also super-

> Hee Chapter IL above.


324 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPBISE

Tened, and with a farther and faster movement in
the same direction a farther accentuation of this
" modem " complexion of culture is fairly to be
looked for, unless some remedy be found. And
as the concomitant differentiation and specializa-
tion of occupations goes on, a still more unmiti-
gated discipline falls upon ever widening classes
of the population, resulting in an ever weakening
sense of conviction, allegiance, or piety toward the
received institutions.

It is a matter of common notoriety that the
modem industrial populations are improvident in
a high degree and are apparently incapable of
taking care o£ the pecuniary details of their own
life. This applies, not only to factory hands, but
also to the general class of highly skilled mechanics,
inventors, technological experts. The rule does
not hold in any hard and fast way, but it holds
with such generality aa may fairly be looked for.
The present factory population may be compared
in this respect with the class of handicraftsmen
whom they have displaced, aa also with the farm-
ing population of the present time, especially the
class of small proprietary farmers. The failure
of the modem industrial classes on this head is not
due to scantier opportunities for saving, whether
they are compared with the earlier handicraftemen
or with the modern farmer or peasant; nor la



len ^M

1


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 325

due to a lack of general intelligence, for a com*
parison in point of intelligence falls out in favor
of the modern industrial workmen. This improvi-
dence is commonly discussed in terms of depreca-
tion, and there is much preaching of thrift and
steady habits. But the preaching has no appre-
ciable effect. The trouble seems to be of the
nature of habit rather than of reasoned conviction.
Other causes may partially explain this improvi-
dence, but the inquiry is at least pertinent how
far the absence of property and thrift among them
may be traceable to tlie relative absence of pe-
cuniary training and to the presence of a discipline
which is at variance with habits of thrift.

Mere exemption from pecuniary training is not
competent alone to explain the patent thriftleas-
ness of modern workmen ; the more so since this
exemption is but partial and relative. Also, tlie
thriftless classes commonly have an envious ap-
preciation of pecuniary advantages. It is rather
the composite effect of exemption from pecuniary
training and certain positive requirements of
modem life. Among these positive requirements
is what has been called the canon of conspicuous
waste. Under modern conditions a free expendi-
tm^ in consumable goods is a condition requisite
to good repute.' This conduces to immediate con-
sumption rather than to saving. What ia perhaps

> CL TTuory of the LtUvre Clou, eepeclMj ck. IV. and V.



I


326 THE THEOET OF BDSINESS ENTEEPKISE



Btill more decisive against thrift on the part of
workmen is the fact that the modem large organi-
zation of industry requires a high degree of mo-
bihty on the part of employees. It requires, in
fact, that the labor force and the labor units be
mobile, interchangeable, distributable, after the
same impersonal fashion as the mechanical con-
trivances engaged are movable and distributable.
The worliing population is required to be standard-
ized, movable, and interchangeable in much the
same impersonal manner as the raw or half-
wrought materials of industry. From which it
follows that the modem workman cannot advan-
tiigeously own a home. By force of this latter
feature of the case he is discouraged from invest-
ing his savings in real property, or, indeed, in any
of the impedimenta of living. And the savings-
bank account, it may be added, offers no adequate
substitute, as an incentive to thrift, in the place of
such property as a dwelling-place, which is tan-
gibly and usefully under the owner's hand and
persistently requires maintenance and improve-
ment.

The conditions of life i mposed upon the working
population by the mac hine industry discouKipe
thrift. But after allowance has been made for
t his alm ost physical restraint upon thp fl-gnisitinn
o f property by th e working classes, something ia
apparently left over, to be ascribed to the moral


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 327

effect of t he machine tec hnolo ^. The in dustrial
classes appear to be l osing the ins tinct o f individua j
owne rship. The acquisition of prope rty is qeasin^
to appeal to th em as a natural, self-evident source
of com fort and st rength. The natural ri ght of
property no lon|;^r mea ns so muc h to them as it
once di d.

A like weakening of the natural-rights animus is k^^ y^\
visible at another point in the current frame of mind rtism.
of these classes. The growth of trade-unionism
and of what is called the trade-union spb-it is a
concomitant of industry organized after the manner
of a machine process. Historically this growth
begins, virtually, with the industrial revolution,
coming in sporadically, loosely, tentatively, with
no precise assignable date, very much as the revo-
lution does. England is the land of its genesis, ita
" area of characterization," and the place where it
has reached its fullest degree of speciiication and
its largest force ; just as England is the country in
which the modern machine industry took its rise and
in which it has had the longest and most consistent
life and growth. In this matter other countries
are followers of the British lead and apparently
borrowers of British precedents and working con-
cepts. Still, the history of the trade-union move-
ment in other countries seems to say that the
working classes elsewhere have not advisedly bor-
rowed ideals and methods of organization from
I



A



328 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

their British congenera so much as they have been
pushed into the same general attitude and line of
conduct by the same general line of exigencies and
experiences. Particularly, experience seems to aay
yiat it is not feasible to inl^oduce the tiade-iinion
spirit or the trade-union rules into any comnmniJy
until the machine industry has h ad tim e exten sively
to standardize the scheme of work and of life for the
working classes on mechanical lines . Workmen
do not take to full-blown trade-union ideals abruptly
on the introduction of those modern business
methods which make trade-imion action advisable
for the working class. A certain interval elapses
between the time when business conditions first
make trade-union action feasible, as a business
proposition, and the time when the body of work-
men are ready to act in the spirit of trade-unionism
and along the lines which the union animus
presently accepts as normal for men in the mechan-
ically organized industries. An interval of disci-
pline in the ways of the mechanically standardized
industry, more or less protracted and severe, seems
necessary to bring such a proportion of the work-
men into line as will give a consensus of sentiment
and opinion favorable to trade-union action.

The pervading characteristic of the trade-union
animus is tlie denial of the received natural-rights
dogmas wherever the mechanical standardization of
modem industry traverses the working of th^e



I


leso ^M



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PHOCESS 329

received natural rights. Recent court decisions in
America, aa well as decisions in analogous cases
in England at that earlier period when the British
development was at about the aame stage of ma-
turity as the current American situation, testify
unequivocally that the common run of trade-union
action is at variance with the natural-rights founda-
tion of the common law. Trade-unionism denies
individual freedom of contract to the workman, as
well as free discretion to the employer to carry on
his business as may suit his own ends. Many pious
phrases have been invented to disguise this icono-
clastic trend of trade-union aims and endeavors ;
but the courts, standing on a secure and familiar
natural-rights footing, have commonly made short
work of the shifty sophistications which trade-union
advocates have oifered for their consideration.
They have struck at the root of the matter in
declaring trade- union regulations inimical to the
natu ral riglits of work man and employer alike, iq
that t hey Iiamper individual liberty and act in
restraint of tradg. The regulations, therefore, vio-
late that system of law and order which rests on
natural rights, although they may be enforced by
that de facto law and order which is embodied
in the mechanical standardization of the industrial


Trade-unionism is an outgrowth of relatively
late industrial conditions and has come on gradu-



330 THE THEOEY OF BUSHTESS ENTEEPBISE

ally as an adaptation of old methods and work-
ing arrangements carried over from the days of
handicraft and petty trade. It is a movement
to adapt, construe, recast, earlier working arrange-
ments with as little lesion to received preconcep-
tions as the new exigencies and the habits of
thought bred by them will permit. It is, on its
face, an endeavor of compromise between received
notions of what "naturally" ought to be in mat-
ters of industrial business, on the one hand, aud
what the new exigencies of industry demand and
what the new animus of the workman will tolei--
ate, on the other hand. Trade-unionism is therefore
to be taken as a somewhat mitigated expression
of what the mechanical standardization of industry
inculcates. Hitherto the movement has shown a
fairly uninterrupted growth, not only in the num-
bers of its membership, but in the range and scope
of its aims as well ; and hitherto it has reached
no halting-place in its tentative, shifty, but ever
widening crusade of iconoclasm against the re-
ceived body of natural rights. Tlie kteat , matiirpiaf.
expres-sions of trade-unionism are, on the whole ,
the most ex treme, in so f ar as they are directe d
against the natural rights of property and pecun-
iary contrac t.
£jt^--^k.s "^^^ nature of the compromise offered by trade-
unionism is shown by a schedule of its demands :
collective bargaining for Avages and employment ;



I



CIVILIZATION AKD THE MACHINE PROCESS 331

arbitration of differences between owners and
workmen ; standard rates of wages ; normal work-
ing day, with penalized regulation of hours for
men, women, and children ; penalized regulation
of sanitary and safety appliances ; mutual insur-
ance of workmen, to cover accident, disability, and
unemployment. In all of this the aim of union-
ism seldom goes the length of overtly disputing
the merits of any given article of natural-rights
dogma. It only endeavors to cut into these
articles, in point of fact, at points where the
dogmas patently traverse the conditions of life
imposed on the workmen by the modem industrial
sj^Btem or where they traverse the consensus of
sentiment that is coming to prevail among these
workmen.

When xmionism takes an attitude of overt hos-
tiUty to the natural-rights institutions of property
and free contract, it ceases to be unionism simply
and passes over into something else, which may lie
called socialism for want of a better term. Such
an extreme iconoclastic position, which would
overtly assert the mechanical standardization of
industry as against the common-law standardiza^
tion of business, seems to be the logical outcome
to which the trade-union animus tends, and to
which some approach has latterly been made by
more than one trade-unionist body, but which is,
uu the whole, yet in tlie future, if, indeed, it is to


332 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



be reached at all. On the whole, the later ex-
pressions go farther in thia direction than the
earlier ; and the animus of the leaders, as well
as of the more wide-awake body of unionist work-
men, appears to go farther than their official
utterances.

A detail of trade-union history may be cited in
illustration of their attitude toward the natural-
rights principles that underlie modern business
relations. As is well known, trade-unions have
somewhat consistently avoided pecimiary responsi-
bility for the actions of their members or officials.
They avoid incorporation. Practically an employer
has had no recourse in case he suffers from a failure
on the part of his union workmen to live up to the
terms of an agreement made with the union. In
English practice this exemption from pecuniary
responsibility has acquired much of the force of
law, and indeed was supposed to have gained the
countenance of statutory enactment, until, within
the past few months, the so-called Taff Vale
decision of the House of Lords reversed the views
which had come to prevail on this head. This
decision, by the most conservative tribimal of the
British nation, is too recent to permit its conse-
quences for trade-unionism to be appreciated. But
it seems fair to expect that the question which the
decision bringa home to the unions will be, How
is this courtrmade pecuniary responsibility to


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PKOCESS 333

be evaded? not, How is it to be lived up to?
Patently,' the decision ia unexceptionable xinder
common law rules; but, also patently," it broadly
traverses trade-union practice and ia wholly alien
to the attitude of the trade-unionists.'

The animus shown by the trade-unionists in this
shirking of pecuniary responsibility is character-
istic of their attitude toward common law rules.
The unions and their methods of work are essen-
tially extra-legal. It is only reluctantly, as
defendants if at all, tliat unions are accustomed
to appear in court. When they make a move for
statutory enactment, aa for the enforcement of a
normal day or of sanitary and safeguariling regula-
tions, it is prevailingly to criminal law that they
turn.

To all this it might, of course, be said that the

> As, e.g., Mr. W. G. S. Adams cogenily polnte out In a recent
number o( the Journal of Polilieal Economy (Dcci'mber 1002).

* Ah Mr. Webb sboWH {Industrial Democracy, 1S02, pp, sziv-
xixri).

' Tha hiHloriCBl eiptanation ol this Ilouae of Lords reTsrsal of
trade-union practice is probabi; to be found in tbe conBerratlTe, or
rather reMtionary, trend giTcn io British aentimeol by Ibc imperialist
policy of tbe laat two or three decades, accentuated by the experiencca
of the Boer War. Tbe Boer War seems to mnrlc a turning-point In tba
growUi of sentiment and Institutions. Since the seventies the imperi-
alist interest, that is to say, the dynastic interest, has been coming
ijito the foreground Among tlie iut^resta that engnge tlie alleniion of
tlie British community. It seems now to hare deHnitivciy gained the
first place, and may Im expected in the immediate future to dominata
British policy both at home and abroad. Concomitantly, it may bo
remarked, the British community haa l>eeri slonlng donn, it not losing
(n^rand, in industrial animus, technolojjlcal eOlcicncy, and scienlihc
spirit, Ql. Hobsoii, Imperialism, part 11. ch. I. and 111.



1


334 THE THBOEY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

workmen who make up the trade-union element
take the course indicated simply because their
selfish interest urges them to this course ; that
their common necessities and common weakness
constrains them to etand together and to act coDee-
tively in dealing with their employers ; while the
fact that their demands have no standing in court
constrains them to seek their ends by extrarlegal
means of coercion. But this objection is little else
than another way of saying that the exigencies
forced upon the workmen by the mechanically
standardized industrial system are estra-legal exi-
gencies — exigencies which do not run in business
terms and therefore are not amenable to the
natural-rights principles of property and contract
that underlie business relations ; that they can
therefore not be met on common law ground ; and
that they therefore compel the workmen to see
them from another point of view and seek to dis-
pose of them by an appeal to other principles than
those afforded by the common law standpoint.
That is to say, in other words, these exigencies
which compel the trade-unionists to take thought
of their case in other terms than those afforded by
existing legal institutions are the means whereby
the discipline of the machine industry is enforced
and made effective for recasting the habits of
thought of the workmen. The harsh discipline of
these exigencies of livelihood drives home the new



\



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 335


point of view and holds the workmen consistently
to it. But that is not all that the mechanical
standardization of industry does in the case ; it
also furnishes the new tenns in which the revised
scheme of economic life takes form. The revision
of the scheme aimed at by trade-union action runs,
not in terms of natural liberty, individual property
rights, individual discretion, but in terms of stand-
ardized livelihood and mechanical necessity ; it is
formulated, not in terms of business expediency, but
in terms of industrial, technological standard xmits
and standard relations.

The abo^'e presentation of the case of trade-
unionism is of course somewhat schematic, as such
a meagre, incidental discussion necessarily must be.
It takes account only of those features of trade-
unionism which characteristically mark it off from
that business scheme of things with which it comes
in conflict. There are, of course, many survivals,
pecuniary and others, in the current body of trade-
union demands, and much of the trade-union argu-
ment is carried on in business terms. The crudities
and iniquities of the trade-union campaign are suf-
ficiently many and notorious to require no rehearsal
here. These crudities and iniquities commonly bulk
large in the eyes of critics who pass an opinion
on trade-unionism from the natural-rights point of
view ; and, indeed, they may deserve all the dis-
paraging attention that is given them. Trade-


336 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

unionism does not fit into the natural -rights scheme
of right and honest living; but therein, in great
part, lies its cultural significance. It is of the
essence of the case that the new aims, ideals, and
expedients do not fit into the received institutional
structure ; and that the classes who move in trade-
unions are, however crudely and blindly, endeavor-
ing, under the compulsion of the machine process,
to construct an institutional scheme on the lines
imposed by the new exigencies given by the
machine process.



The point primarily had in view in entering on
this characterization of trade-unionism was that
under the discipline of the mechanically standard-
ized industry certain natural rights, particularly,
those of property and free contract, are in a degree
falling into abeyance among those classes who are
most immediately subjected to this discipline. It
may be added that other classes also, to an uncer-
tain extent, sympathize with the trade-unionists
and are affected with a similar (mild and equivocal)
distrust of the principles of natural liberty. When
distrust of business principles rises to such a pitch
as to become intolerant of all pecuniary institutions,
and leads to a demand for the abrogation of prop-
erty rights rather than a limitation of them, it is
spoken of as " socialism " or " anarchism." This
Bocialistic disaffection is widespread among the



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 337

advanced industrial peoples. No other cultural
phenomenon is so threatening to the received eco-
nomic and political structure ; none is so unprec-
edented or 80 perplexing for practical men of
affairs to deal witli. The immediate point of
danger in the socialistic disaffection is a growing
disloyalty to the natural-rights institution o£ proj)-
erty, but this is backed by a similar failure of re-
gard for other articles of the institutional furniture
lianded down from the past. The claasas affected
with socialistic vagaries protest against the exist-
ing economic organization, but they are not neces-
sarily averse to a somewhat rigorous economic
organization on new lines of their own choosing.
They demand an organization on iiidu-strial as con-
trasted with business lines. Their sense of eco-
nomic solidarity does not seem to be defective,
indeed it seems to many of their critics to be un-
necessarily pronounced ; but it runs on lines of
industrial coherence and mechanical constraint, not
on lines given by pecuniary conjunctures and con-
ventional principles of economic right and wrong.

There is little agreement among socialists as
to a programme for the future. Their construc-
tive proposals are ill-defined and inconsistent and
almost entirely negative. The negative character
of the socialistic propaganda has been made a
point of disparagement by its critics, perhaps
justly. But their predilection for shifty icono-


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPRI8B


clasm, as well as the vagueness and mconaistency
of their constructive proposals, are in the present
connection to be taken as evidence that the atti-
tude of the socialists cannot be expressed in posi-
tive terms given by the institutions at present in
force. It may also be evidence of the untenability
of the socialistic ideals ; but the merits of the
socialist contentions do not concern the present
inquiry. The question here is as to the nature
and causes of the socialist disaffection ; it does
not concern the profounder and more delicate
point, as to the validity of the socialist contentions.
Current socialism is an animus of dissent from
received traditions. The degree and the direction
of this dissent varies greatly, but it is, within the
socialist scheme of thought, agreed that the insti-
tutional forms of the past are unfit for the work
of the future."

The socialistic disaffection has been set down

1 All this applies to anarchism as well aa to aocialiem ; eimilarly to
several minor CAtegorlei of dlssKntlEaU. In Lhair negative proposaJa
the aocialista anil anatchlsU are fairly agreed. It ia In the metaphjrft.
ical postulates ot tlicir protest and in Uieir constructive aims that they
part company. Of the tvro, the socialiata are more widely out ot tonch
nitli the establiahcd order. They are also more hopeleasly negatlTS
and destructive in their ideals, as seen from the ataodpolnt of Ibe
established order. This applies to the later socialists rather tlian ta
Uie earlier, and it appliea, ot course, only to the loweT-clBaa, '* demcv
craLic " socialists, not to the so-called slate and Christian BocialUto.

Anarchism proceeds on natural-rights ground, and is accordingly
In touch with the postulates of the existing prot>erty amngemenlB to
It is a more unmitigated working out of the same posLU'
a system of " natural liberty " umjualifled to the «xtaat
admitting prescriptive owricrsliip. Its b^is is a (divinelj



I



CIVIUZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 339

to envy, class hatred, discontent with their own
lot by comparison with that of others, and to a
mistaken view of their own interests. This criti-
cism may be well enough as far as it goes, but
it does not touch socialism in those respects in
which it differs from other movements into which
this range of motives enters; that is to say, it
touches, not the specific traits of socialism, but
the common features of popular discontent. His-
tory shows many such movements of discontent,
pushed on by real or fancied privation and in-
iquity ; and past experience recorded in history
should lead us to expect that, under the guidance

[□■tituted) order of Dftture, Ihe keynote of wliicli is an inolieiiEible tree-
dom and equalEty of the iiidi?idttal, quite in the eigbteentli-cenlury
spirit. It U in this sense an oCFshoot o( the Romantic scbool of tbongbb
AnArcblsm is a de jure scbeme, wblch lakes no account ot mechanical
exigencies but rests ils case altogether on antbropomorphlc postnlates
of natURtl rights. It Is, from the natural-rights standpoint, sufaslan-
Uallj auund, though seoselesgl; extreme.

What may be called the normal socialism, socialism of the lat«r,
tnoTS dangerous, and more perplexing, kind, docs not build on Uia
rcceired uietaphjsical basis of the "natural order." It demands a
recouBtruction of the social fnbric, but it does not know on what linei
tbe reconstntction is to be carried out. The natural rights of the indi-
vidual are not accepted as the standard (except by certain large bodiea
of neophytes, especially rural American, who are carryinR under social-
ist mottoes the burden of sniiuneitles and preconceptions that once
made populism), but nothing definite Is put in the place of this out*
worn standard. The socialists of the line, in so far as there is any
consensus among them, profess that the mechanical exlgenciFfl of the
industrial Hynleiii must decide what the social structure la to be, but
beyond this vague generality they have little to offer. And thtt
mechanical standardization can mauifestly afford no basis for legis-
lation on civH rights. Indeed, IL is difficult to see how any scheme
of civil rights, much or UtUe, can find a place Id a socialistic reorgan-
Izalion.


340 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPEISE

of such motives and such reasoning as is currently
imputed to the socialists by their conservative
critics, the malcontents would demand a redistri-
bution of property, a reorganization of ownership
on such new lines as would favor the discontented
classes. But such is not the trend of socialistic
thinking. It looks to the disappearance of prop-
erty rights rather than their redistribution. The
entire range of doctrines covered by the theory of
distribution in the received economics is essen-
tially (and characteristically) neglected by the
modern socialist speculations.'

The perplexity of those who protest against a
supposedly imminent socialistic subversion of prop-
erty rights is of a twofold kind : (1) The absence
of proprietary rights is incomprehensible, and a
living together in society without defined owner-
ship of the means of living is held to be imprac-
ticable ; ownership of goods, in the apprehension of

' The " icicntific socialism " of Msrx and Gnf^Ia U promalgnt^
during tbe third quarter a( Iho nlneU'enth centur; waa not of this
negalire chamctcr. It vritB a product of Hegelian ism blended with the
conceptioiia of nntural rights, its chief count being the " eiaim to tlia
full product of labor." This socialism never nude serious inroads
auiang tlie working claAsett outside of tiermany — the home of Heg»-
lianinin. Even tn that country the most Wgorous gronth of soclaliatio
Bentlmont came after Ilegelianism had begun to yield to Darwinian
methods of thought, and this Inter growth baa been progreasivelj le«H
Marxian and leas positive. MAnism is nnw little more than ft pro
forma confession of faith. Avowed socialism is praclically taking on
the character described above, except so far as It baa grown oppor-
tunist and has sought alSliation nitli the liberal democratic
and the reformers.



I

I

I



nil uppur- ^^_



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 341

the conservative critics, ia involved ic the presence
of goods. (2) Ownership of the means of living
is an inalienable right of man, ethically inevitable ;
the cancelment of property rights is felt to violate
a fundamental principle of morals. All this, of
course, proceeds on the assumption that the insti-
tution of ownership cannot be abrogated, as being
an elemental fimction of human nature and an
integral factor in the order of things in which
human life belongs.

To the modem socialist all this is coming to be
less and less convincing. In this respect there is
a fairly well marked progressive change in the
attitude of the professed socialists. Their position
IB progressively less capable of being formulated as
a business proposition ; their demands are progres*
sively more difficult to state in the form of a
pecuniary claim. The claim to the full product of
labor, which once filled a large place in socialistic
clamors and had a great carrying force during tlie
earlier three-quarters of the nineteenth century,
has gradually fallen into abeyance, both with the
agitators and the adiierents of the propaganda,
during the last generation. To-day this claim ia
an afterthought in the advocate's presentation uf
Bocialism, more frequently than it ia a point of
departure for the argument, and it is made more
of by the proselytes, who have carried the meta-
physics of it over from the current common sense


THE THEOEY OF BUSDTESS ENTERPHISE

of the buBinees community, than by the sociaKsts
of confirmed standing. The claim to the full prod-
uct is an article of natural-rights dogma, and as
Buch it is a reminiscence of the institutional situa-
tioQ from which socialism departs, rather than a
feature of the prospective situation to which social-
istic sentiment looks.

The like obsolescence of the sense of equity
in ownership is visible in the attitude taken by
strikers in the large, mechanically organized indus-
tries, outside of the ranks of avowed socialism.
These strikers are less and less deterred by consid-
erations of vested rights, property rights, owner's
interests, and the like. The principle that a man
may do what he will with his own is losing its
binding force with large classes in the community,
apparently because the spiritual ground on which
rests the notion of " his own " is being cut away
by the latter-day experience of these classes.
Abridgment of proprietary discretion, confiscation
of proprietary rights, is growing gradually less
repugnant to the industrial populace ; and the
question of indemnity for eventual loss is more and
more falling into neglect. With the socialistic
element the question is not, what shall be done in
the way of readjustment of property claims,
what is to be done to abolish them.


Where memben of Uie well-to-do clasaea avow soclalktlo
and Ideals it commonly tarns onl to be a ineTely hoinaiiic



I
I

s, but ■

lo aenU- ^H
initaiiui ^H



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PEOCBSS 343



The question of equity or inequity in the distribu-
tion of wealth presumes the validity of ownerehip
rights on some basis or other, or at least it presumes
the validity of some basis on which the claims of
ownership may be discussed. Ownership is the
major premise of any argument as to the equity
of distribution, and it is this major premise that is
being forgotten by the classes among whom social-
istic sentiment is gaining. Equity in this connec-
tion seems not to belong in the repertory of
socialist concepts. It is at this point — the point
of a common ground of argument — that the dis-
crepancy occurs which stands in the way, not only
of an eventual agreement between the socialistB
and their conservative critics, but even of their
meeting one another's reasoning with any substan-
tial effect. In the equipment of common-sense
ideas on the basis of which the conservatives
reason on this matter, there is included the con-
ventional article of ownership, as a prime fact ; in
the common-sense basis of socialistic thinking this
conventional premise has no secure place. Titer©



I



ftflpinktion for a more "eqoltftble" redutrlbation of nealth, a re-
adjostment of Uie scheme of oonerabip with some improved aate-
gutding of Uie " reuonabte " property cUima ot all meinbets of the
community. WLat " soclalUt " reform commonly meana to tbU cod-
tingeat of well-to-do [rregnlan Es aome scheme of equal rights of
ownerehip for all. Wbereaa to lociaJists of the lino equal righla of
ownership is as Idle a, propoHition hk an equal right of cItlKent U> sell
their votes. Instead of a reform o[ ownership tlie soclmllflls cOQtem-
pUtB the traoeleu dliiappeatance of ovnetship.


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS EUTEEPBISE

is, therefore, a discrepancy in reapect of the meta^
physics underlying the knowledge and reasoning
of the two parties to the controveray, and the outr
look for a common understanding is accordingly
vain. No substantial agreement upon a point of
knowledge or conviction is possible between persons
who proceed from disparate preconceptions.

Still the conservative reformers and the icono-
clasts have a good deal in common. The prevalent
habit of mind of both classes is a hybrid prcxiuct
of conventional principles and matterof-fact in-
sight. But these two contrasted grounds of opinion
and aspiration are present in imequal degrees in
the two contrasted classes ; in the conservatives
the conventional grounds of finality dominate and
bear down the matter-of-fact knowledge of things,
while the converse is true of the iconoclasts. Con-
trasted with earlier times and other cultural
regions the consensus, the general drift, of the
modem Western culture as a whole is of an icon-
oclastic character ; while the class contrast here
in question lies only within the range of this West-
em cultural consensus. As one or the other of the
two contrasted proclivities — recourse to conven-
tional precedents and recourse to matter-of-fact
insight — gains and overbalances the other, the gen-
eral cultural movement will drift toward a more
conservative (archaic), conventional position or



I
I

I


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 345

toward a more iconoclastic, materialistic position.
During modem times the cultural drift has set in
the lattflr direction. With due but not large ex-
ceptions, the effective body of the modem popula-
tion has been growing more matter-of-fact in their
thinking, less romantic, less idealistic in their
aspirations, less bound by metaphysical considera-
tions in their view of human relations, less man-
nerly, less devout.

The discrepancy between the conservatives and
the iconoclasts need not be taken to mean that the
two contrasted classes are moving in opposite
directions, nor even in widely divergent directions.
Neither class can properly be said to be reactionary.^
Taken generally, both wings have been moving
in the direction of a inoie impersonal, more matter^
of-fact, less conventional point of view. In this
composite cultural growth the matter^jf-fact habit
of mind has on tlie whole been gaining at the
expense of the conventional, and the conventional
premises that have been retained have also come
to bear more of a matterof-fact character, — as,
e.g., in the supersession of feudalistic or theocratic
principles of law by natural rights. So that the
position for which the effective body of conserva-
tives now stand Is not in substance a very archaic
one. It is a more matterof-fact position, less

1 Unless 11 be In the latest extremea of canHcrvatisni, such aa II
■hown in the recent success of dynastic politics in Gemianr, Tory
policy in England, and predatory pollUcal ideals in AmeiicA.


tL



346 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEBPEI3E



closely bound by authentic conventions, than the
position efEectively occupied by the iconoclastic
wing a hundred years ago.

Throughout the modem cultural coraplex there
is a somewhat variable, scattering shifting of
ground to a more matter-of-fact basis. The direc-
tion of spiritual growth or change is much the
same throughout the general body of the popula-
tion ; hut the rate of change, the rate at which
matter-of-fact ideals are superseding ideals o£ con-
ventional authenticity, is not the same for all
classes. Hence the class discrepancy here spoken
of. The coefficient of change is so much larger
in the vulgar, industrial classes as progressively
to widen the cultural interval between them and
the conservatives in the respect which is here in
question. And the resulting discrepancy of insti-
tutional aims and ideals may have none the less
serious consequences for being due to a differential
rate of movement rather than to a divergent cul-
tural trend.

In this diSerential rate of movement the de-
parture from the ancient landmarks has now gone
so far (or is reaching such a point) among the
socialistic vulgar as to place their thinking sub-
stantially on a plane of material matter of fact,
particularly as regards economic institutions.
Whereas in the conservative classes the change
is not yet large enough to take them off the plane



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PKOCESS 347

of received conventional truth, particidarly as re-
gards economic institutions and such social quea-
tions as are of an economic complexion. In the
case of the former this change in habit of mind
has been so considerable as, in effect, to constitute
a change in kind; crude matter of fact has come
to be the dominant note of their attitude, and con-
ventional authenticity has been relegated to a sub-
sidiary place; that is to say, the change is of a
revolutionary character. In the case of the con-
servative classes, so far as touches the institutional
notions here under inquiry, the corresponding
change has not yet gone so far as to amount to
a change in kind ; it is not of a revolutionary
nature. The views current among the respectable
classes on these matters still, in effect, run on the
ancient levels on which were built up the pecun-
iary institutions about which the controversy
circles. For the present there need be no appre-
hension that the more respectable classes will
reach a mature revolutionary frame of mind. The
discipline of their daily life does not, on the whole,
favor such a result.

This, in substance, is also the view taken by
the socialistic revolutionaries, particularly by those
that are of Marxian antecedents. It is a point
of conviction with them, though not wholly of
reasoned conviction, that the socialistic movement
is, in the nature of the case, a proletarian move-



I



I



L



348 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPEISE

ment, in which the respectable, that is to say
pecuniarily competent, classes can have no organic
part even if they try. It is held, in effect,
the well-to-do are, by force of their economic cir-
cumstances, incapable of assimilating the socialist
ideas. The argument here set forth may serve
to enforce this view, but with a difference. In-
stead of contrasting the well-to-do with the indi-
gent, the line of demarcation between those avail-
able for the socialist propaganda and those not
so available is rather to be drawn between the
classes employed in the industrial and those em-
ployed in the pecuniary occupations. It is a ques-
tion not 80 much of possessions as of employments ;
not of relative wealth, but of work. It is a ques-
tion of work because it is a question of habits of
thought, and work shapes the habits of thought.
The socialists themselves construe the distinction
to be a distinction in respect of habits of thought ;
and habits of thought are made by habits of life
rather than by a legal relation to accumulated
goods. This legal relation may count materially
in (shaping the animus of the several economic
classes; but it appears not to be competent of
itself to explain the limitations observable in the
spread of socialistic sentiment.

The socialbtic disaffection shows a curious
dency to overrun certain classes and to miss
tain others. The men in the skilled mechanical



m

BISE V

f the I
^nic H
that ^



tea- ^M
cer- ^M
nical ^H



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 349

trades are peculiarly liable to it, while at the
extreme of immunity ia probably the profession
of the law. Bankers and other like classes of
business men, together with clergymen and politi-
cians, are also to be held free of serious aspersion ;
similarly, the great body of the rural population
are immune, including the population of the coun-
try towns, and in an eminent degree the small
farmers of the remoter country districts ' ; so also
the delinquent classes of the cities and the popu-
lace of half-civilized and barbarous countries. The
body of unskilled laborers, especially those not
associated with the men in the skilled mechanical
trades, are not seriously affected. The centres
of socialistic disaffection are the more important
industrial towns, and the effective nucleus of the
sucialistic malcontents is made up of the more intel-
ligent body of workmen in the highly organized
and specialized industries. Not that socialism
does not spread in virulent form outside this
narrow range, but at a farther remove from the
centre of dispersion it appears rather sporadically
and uncertainly, while within this field it is fairly
endemic. As regards the educated classes, social-
istic views are particularly 1 ikely to crop out
among the men in the material sciences.

■ Socialistic notions are apparently making tome inroada among the
rural population o( the American prairie region, where n mechanically
or^aniz^d and alaiMlarclized method o( farming prevaili, with & large
use of mechanical appliaDceo.



I



I
I


350 THE THEOBY OF BUSUfESS ENTEBPfilSE

The advocates of the new creed have made
little headway among the rural classes of Em-ope,
whether peasant farmers or farm laborers. The
rural proletariat has hitherto proved virtually
impermeable.' The discipline of their daily life
leaves their spirit undisturbed on the plane of
conventionality and anthropomorphism, and the
changes to which they aspire lie within the scope
of the conventionalities which have grown out of
these circumstances of their life and which express
the habit of miud enforced by these circumstances.

Without claiming that this explanation is com-
petent to cover the case of socialism in all its bear-
ings, it may be pointed out that this socialistic bias
has effectively spread among the people only within
the last quarter of a century, which is also approx-
imately the period since which the machine process
and the mechanical standardization of industry has
reached its fuller development, both as regards the
extent of its field and as regards the extent of its
technological requirements; that it is foimd in vig^
orous growth only in those communities and partic-

1 So Btrikins hoB been the failure of tbe German Bociallsts, for
InatiLDce, in their attempu upoD the lategritj of the farming comma-
nity, thai they have latierly changed their tactics, and instead of at-
tempting to convert the peasants to a full socialistic programme, tbey
have turned to measures of compromise, in nhlch the chAracterlstia
And revolutionary featorea of tbe soclaliBllc prognunme are softeaed
beyond recognition, it not suppressed. The habits of life, and thetcfors
the hablls of thought, of the peasant farmers move on the ancient
levels of handicraft, pecuniary management, personal conseqaenoe,
and prescriptive custom.



I



I

I



laenoe, ^M



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PEOCE88 351


ularly among those classes whose life is closely
regulated by the machine technology ; and that the
discipline of this machine technology is peculiarly
designed to inculcate such iconoclastic habits of
thought as come to a head in the socialistic bias.
SociaUgm, in so far as the term means the subver-
sion of the economic foundations of modem culture,
occurs only sporadically and dubiously outside the
limits, in time and space, of the discipline of the
machine technology. While among those classea
whose evei-yday life schools them to do their habit-
ual serious thinking in terms of material cause and
effect, the preconceptions of ownership are appar-
ently becoming obsolescent through disuse and
through supersession by other methods of appre-
hending things.*

1 It this account of the class lirnilation of the socialist bUs is ao-
eepted, It has an Immediate bearing upon a question which Is lalterlf
engaging the attention of the Bdrocatefl of soclaliBin. The qoeslion
ts OS lo tlis part played by propertyless office employees and by Uie
business men vhom the modern consolidations of business rednce to
the position of salaried managers and snperlntendeuia. With tt faith
prompted by their own hopes rather Iban by observed tacu or by tha
logic of events, the spokesmen for socialism are strongly Inclined to
claim this " bvutness proletariat " as a contingent which the conrae of
economic development Is bound to throw Into the socialist camp.
The (acts do not In any appreciable degree countenance such an ex-
pectation. The unpropertled classes employed In business do not
take to aociallstle vagarlea with such alacrity as shoald Inspire a con-
fident hope In the advocates of socialism or a serious apprehension
in those who stand for law and order. This pecuniarily disfranchised
business popaUtion, In its revulnion against unassimilated facta, tama
rather to some STCuralon into praf^iatle romance, such an Social Settle-
ments, Prohibition, Clean Polllics, Single Tar, Arts and Crafts,
Neighborhood GuUds, InsUtuHonal Church. Christian Scleooe, New


L



352 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE



But the machine technology not only trains the
workmen into materialistic iconoclasm, it has also
a selective effect. Persons endowed with propensi-
ties and aptitudes of a materialistic, matter-of-fact
kind are drafted into the mechanical employments,
and such are also peculiarly available socialistic
material. Aptitude for the matter-of-fact work of
the machine technology means, in a general way,
ineptitude for an uncritical acceptance of institu-
tional truths. It ia probable, therefore, that the
apparent facility with which the mechanical em-
ployments (and the material sciences) induce a
socialistic or iconoclastic bent is to be set down in
part to the fact that the human material in these
employments is picked material, peculiarly amen-

Thougbt, or bodiq such cultural tbtmblcrig. The nork of the c&p-
taln of Industry in curtailing the range of indivitlual discretion in
business and In reducing the lesser undertakcis to tlie rank of clerks
and subalterns nned not be looked upon as imnvoidsblj fnrtheriug
the spread of the socisllstic bias, except in so fur a« tbe clianEe renalts
in throwing the men affected by It out of the pecuniary or biuinesa
occupations and subjecting them to the discipline of the mpchanicM
industry. At the most, apparently, the change from an independent
to a dependent busineaa life serves to weaken the men's Interest in
the question of property ; it docs not appear that It throws them into
an attitude of substantial distrust or iconocla^m. Their interest in
this particular institution slackens tbrongh the loss of that etnulatiTe
motive on which pecuniary endeavor proceeds, but their faith ia ita
IntriasEc Btness is not thereby shaken, nor are Ihey thrown into th«
ranks of the chronic dissentient*. The training given by their lite
continues prevailingly to run on conventional grounds ; that is to say,
on gronnds of legal relatioD, solvency, and the like. Accuuutanta and
olBce employees are nearly as conservative as clergymen and tftwf era,
and their being so Is apparently due to the fact that their
runs on much the same ground ol conventional finality.



ezperienoB ^H



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 353

able to this discipline. There is a sifting of tiie
working classes, whereby the socialistic and me-
chanically capable are roughly segregated out from
the rest and subjected to the iconoclastic discipline
of the mechanical employments and matter-of-fact
thinking ; while the residue, which is on the whole
made up of the persons that are relatively least
capable of revolutionary socialism, is at the same
time less exposed to the discipline that might fit
them for the socialistic movement. This sifting is,
of course, a rough one, and leaves many exceptions
both ways.

In the light of this consideration, then, it is to
be noted: (1) that the dominant of the machine
process in modem industry is not so potent a factor
for the inculcation of socialistic notions — it does
not so irresistibly shape men's habit of mind in the
socialistic sense — as the first survey of the facts
would suggest ; and (2) that the differentiation of
occupations involved in modem industrial methods
selectively bunches the socialistic elements together,
and so heightens their sense of class solidarity and
acts to accentuate their bias, gives consistency to
their ideals, and induces that boldness of convic-
tion and action which is to be had only in a com-
pact bfxly of men.

But in either case, whether the visible outcome
is chiefly due to their selective or to their discipli-
nary effect, the bearing of the industrial occupations


854 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEBPRISE

upon the growth of socialism seems equally close
and undeniable. The two modes of influence seem
to convei-ge to the outcome indicated above, and
for the purpose of the present inquiry a detailed
tracing out of the two strands of sequence In the
case neither can nor need be undertaken.'

With such generality as commonly holds in
statements of this kind, it may be said that the
modem socialistic disaffection is loosely bound up
with the machine industry — spreading where this
industry spreads and flourishing where this indus-

1 Conaecled with this npparent Belectlve action which the modem
epeclalicalion of occupatioos exerts, there is a fuither, anil at fltst sight
more singular, point of disparity between the sociatists and the con-
Krvatives ; and this difference ha« also a curious correlation with the
distribution of the machine Industry. In a degree, — slight and unoer-
talo, perlinps, bat scarcely to be mlalaken, — the socialiEts and tha
conservatives are apparently of different racial anlecedonta. It haa
been seen above Uiat the propaganda is moat vital and widespread ia
tlie industrial towns, as contrasted with the agricultural country. But
If the researches of such students Bb Ammon, Kipley, Lapouge, Clos-
aon, and others that might be named, ate taken at their face value. It
appears that the towns differ perceptibly from the open country in
point of race ; and that the migration from the country Into the indii»-
trlal towns has a selective effect of such a. kind that a larger propor>
tlon of one racial stock than of anotber resorts to the towns. Tiui
townit, In those countries where data are available, sbow a latter
admixture of the dollcho-blond stock than the open country. Tbla
seems to argue that the dolicho-blond slock, or the racial mlxtare at
the towns in which there is a relatively large admixture ol the doliohiv
blond, is perceptibly more elflclent in the machine industries, roora
readily inclined to think in materialistic terms, more given to radical
innovatlan, less bound by convention and prescription. This generali-
zation Is strengthened by the fact that the more dollchO'bloQd regiona
arc also, on the whole, more socialistic thau those in which tlua ele-
ment is leas In evidence. At the same time they are industrially Id
advance of the latter In the matter of machine industry ; and Qmj m
ProtMtant (Irreligious) rather than Catholic


CIVILIZATIOir AHD THE MACHIKE PE0CE88 355

try gives the dominant note of life. Tlie correla-
tion between the two phenomena is of such a kind
as to leave no doubt that tliey are causally con-
nected ; which means either that the machine in-
dustry, directly or indirectly, gives rise to socialism,
or that the two are expressions of the same com-
plex of causes. The former statement probably
expresses the truth of the case in great part, but
the latter need not therefore be false. Wherever
and in so far as the increase and diffusion of knowl-
edge has made the machine process and the me-
chanical technology the tone-giving factor in men's
scheme of thought, there modem socialistic icono-
clasm follows by easy consequence.

The socialistic bias primarily touches economic
institutions proper. But that is not the whole of
it. When the terra is used without modifying
phra«e it carries a certain implication toucliing
other than primarily economic matters. The po-
litical bias of this unmitigated socialism is always
radically democratic, to the extent that these social-
ists are in a high degree intolerant of any monarch-
ical, aristocratic, or other prescriptive government.
The state is doomed in the socialistic view.' The

> Thifl, of course, does not hnld for the innOenBive pAeudo-aoclnliatJo
diversions aet afoot by T&rious well-meaning politiciana and clrrgy-
men, known by vnriooB qualifying designation]!, such u "8t»W,"
"Christian," "Catholic," etc, and designed W act an corr«cttres of
the aocMistlo diatemper.



356 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

socialist antagODism to the state takes various
forms and goes to varying degrees of intemperance,
but it is consistently negative. Except in their
destructively hostile attitude to existing political
organizations, the socialists have nothing consist-
ent to offer on the head of political institutions, less,
indeed, latterly than in the earlier days of the
propaganda. There seems to be a growing shiftr
lessness of opinion on this head ; one gets the im-
pression that the sense of the socialist malcontents,
as near as it may be permissible to use that word
in this connection, is that the community can best
get along without political institutions.

There is a like departure from the ancient norms
touching domestic relations. This is not confined
to those portions of the community that avowedly af-
fect socialistic views, although it has, on the whole,
gone farthest among the classes among whom the
socialistic views prevail. There is a visible weak-
ening of the family ties, a disintegration of the
conventions of household life, throughout large
classes. The defection is even felt, by sensitive
and solicitous persons, to be of such grave propor-
tions as to threaten the foundations of domestic
life and morality. This disintegration of the fam-
ily ties shows itself most alarmingly among the
socialistic classes, with whom it all wears such an



\



^^k air of unconcern as argues that in this respect ^M

^^^^k they are incorrigible. To these the conventional ^|



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 357



form of the household has in good part ceased to
appeal as somethiDg sacred. It is no longer one of
their secure spiritual assets.

What appears to be in jeopardy, should this so-
cialistic defection gain ground, is the headship of
the male in the household economy. The family,
as it has come down from the mediaeval past, under
the shelter of the church, is of a patriarchal consti-
tution, at least in theory. The man has been vested
with discretionary control in domestic afEairs. In
the earlier days his discretion was very direct and
full, comprising corporal coercion. Latterly, after
and so far as mastery and servitude have passed off
the field and natural rights have come to rule, this
direct coercive control has been superseded by a
pecuniary discretion ; so that the male head of the
household is alone competent to exercise a proprie-
tary control of household affairs. This latter-day
conventional headship of the man is now in its turn
beginning to lose the respect of a good share of the
populace. The disintegration of the patriarchal
tradition has gone farthest among those industrial
classes who are at the same time inclined to so-
cialistic views.

At this point in the institutional structure, as
well as at other points where the industrial classes
are giving evidence of a loss of spiritual ground,
there is little indication of a constructive movement
toward any specific arrangement to take the place


^



358 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE

of the institution whose existence is threatened.
There is a loosening of the bonds, a weakening of
conviction as to the full truth and beauty of the
received domestic institutions, without much of a
consensus as to what is to be done about it, if any>
thing. In this, as at other junctures of a similar
kind, the mechanically employed classes, trained to
matter-of-fact habits of thought, show a notable
lack of spontaneity in the construction of new
myths or conventions as well aa in the reoonstruo
tion of the old.

All this disintegration of the spiritual founda-
tions of our domestic institutions spreads with the
most telling effect, because most heedlessly, among
the population of the industrial towns. But it
spreads also outside the limits of the industrial
classes ; for the habits of life and of thought in-
culcated by the machine technology are not limited
to them, even if these classes are the ones who
suffer most and most severely from the machine
discipline. The disintegration shows itself, in vary-
ing degree, in all modem industrial communities,
and it is visible somewhat in proportion as the
community is modem and industrial. Thf* ni'V
chine is a leveller, a vnlgarize r, whose e nd seems
to be the ex ti rpation of all tha t is re8pectable,j|Qblg,
and dignified in human interc ourse and ideals .
l/jt What happens within the narrow range of the
institutions of domestic life repeats itself in sub-



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 359



stance in the larger field of national life and ideals.
Fealty to a superior installed by law or custom
suffers under the discipline of a life which, as re-
gards its most formative exigencies, is not guided
by conventional grounds of validity. And the
transmuted form of fealty called patriotism is in
much the same inseciure case. The new grou nd o(
class solidarity and antagonism, for which tliese
extreme spokesmen of the industrial regime stand,
is neither ecclesiastic, dynastic, territorial, nor^Ho-
guistic ; it is industrial_ and materialistic. But in
their attitude of heedlessness toward the dynastic
and national conventions the socialists are merely
the extreme exponents of the spirit of the age in
the modem industrial communities.

So, again, as regards the religious life. Men
trained by the mechanical occupations to material-
istic, industrial habits of thought are beset with a
growing inability to appreciate, or even to appre-
hend, the meaning of religious appeals that pro-
ceed on the old-fashioned grounds of metaphysical
validity. The consolations of a personal relation
(of subservience) to a supernatural master do not
appeal to men whose habit of life is shaped by a
familiarity with the relations of impersonal cause and
efifect, rather than by relations of personal dominance
and fealty. It does not come as a matter of course
for such men to give the catechism's answer to
the question, What is the chief end of man ? Nor


(



fei-f't'ttt'



360 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPEI8E

do they instinctively feel themselves to be sinners
by virtue of a congenital, hereditary taint or ob-
liquity. Indeed, they can only with great difficulty
be seriously persuaded that they are sinners at all.
They are in danger of losing the point of view of
sin. The relation of status or fealty involved in
the concept of sin is becoming alien to their habit
of mind- They are therefore slow to realize that
their past life has violated such a relation of fealty,
on the one hand, and that it is of vital consequence
to reestablish such a relation of status by a work
of salvation or redemption. The kindly ministra-
tions of the church and the clergy grate on the
sensibilities of men so trained, as being so much
M^gj,,'^^ ado about nothing. (.The machine, their master,
is no respecter of persons and knows neither
morality nor dignity nor prescriptive right, divuie
or human ; its teaching is training them into in-
sensibility of the whole range of concepts on which
these ministrations proceed.' )

Not alone in the direction of growth ^ven to
vulgar sentiment and to the vulgar insight iuto
facts is the matter-of-fact discipline of the machine
technology apparent, but also in the scope and

1 The oulUinit era of K&tnral Righta, Natural Libenr, and Natuml
Beligion reduoed God to the rank of a "Great Artificer," and tlie
maisbiiie tectmolog; is, in tarn, relegating Him to that fringe of minor
employmeiila tuid thoae outlying iDdostiial regions to wbich the luuidl-
oraftsmea have been retired.



I


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 361

method of that scientific knowledge that has had
the vogue since the advent of the machine indus-
try. Scientific inquiry is directed to a difEcient
end and carried out under the guidance of a dilfer-
ent range of principles or preconceptions in the
modem industrial communities than in earlier
days or in cultural centres lying outside t!ie
machine's dominion, f Modem science is single-
minded in its pursuit of impersonal relations of
causal sequence in the phenomena with which
it is occupied.^

The line of descent of this matter-of-fact modem
science is essentially British, as is that of the
machine technology and of the characteristically
modern civil and political institutions. It is true,
beginnings of the modem scientific movement were
made in Italy in the days of the Renaissance, and
Central Europe had its share in the enlightenment ;
but these early modern risings of the scientific
spirit presently ran into the sand, when war,
politics, and religion reasserted their sway in the
south of Europe. Similar tentative stirrings of
matter-of-fact thought were had in Spain and
France before and during the early phases of the
state-making era ; but here, again, war and politics
rendered these onsets nearly nugatory, so that the
intellectual output was more speculation than
science. In the Low Coimtries something similar
holds tme, with a larger qualification. The Brit-



362 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEKPBISE

ish community made a later and slower start,
coming out of barbarism at a later date and with
a heavier handicap of physical obstructions. But
being, relatively, sheltered from war and poUticB,
the British were able to take up the fund of scien-
tific gains made by the South-European men of
workday insight, to turn it to account and to
carry it over the era of state-making and so pre-
pare the way for the modem scientific, techno-
logical era.

Of course, nothing but the most meagre and
sketchiest outline of this matter is practicable in
this place, and even that only in its relation to the
machine industry during the past one hundred
years or so. What is said above of the British
lead in modem science may perhaps be questioned,
and it b not necessary for the present purpose to
insist on its truth ; but so much seems beyond
hazard as tliat the lead in the material sciences lay
with the British through the early machine age,
and that the provenance of this modem scientific
research to-day does not extend, in any pronounced
degree, beyond those communities that lie within
the area of the modern machine industry.

In time and space the prevalence of the modem
materialistic science is roughly coextensive with
that of the machine process. It is, no doubt, re-
lated to it both as cause and as effect ; but that its
relation to modem industry is more that of effect



J



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 363

than cause seems at least broadly suggested by the
decay which presently overtook scientific research,
e.g., in the south of Europe when those peoples
turned their attention from material to spiritual
and political affairs.'

What is of immediate interest is the change
that has come over the scope and method of scien-
tific research since the dominance of the machine
process, in comparison with what preceded the
coming of the machine age. The beginnings of
modern science are older than the industrial revo-
lution ; the principles of scientific research (causal
explanation and exact measurement) antedate the
regime of the machine process. But a change haa
taken place in the postulates and animus of scien-
tific research since modern science first began, and
this change in the postulates of scientific knowledge
is related to the growth of the machine technology.

It is unnecessary here to hark back to that
scholastic science or philosophy that served as an
intellectual expression of the ecclesiastical and
political culture of tlie Middle Ages. Its character,
as compared with later science, is sufficiently no-
torious. By the change from scholastic knowledge
to modem science, to the extent to which the
change was carried through, the principle (habit of

• There !■ a similtr »uggestion Id Iho relative (slight but percep-
tible) decline of ftcleDllllc anlmos !□ England Hinoe the Engllih com-
munity bu tnmed Ita attaatloa and uplraiioDa to imperialistic leUs
of prowess mora than to IndiuCrial matUni.


864 THE THEOEY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBI8E

mind] of adequate cause was substituted for that
of sufficient reason. The law of causation as It is
found at work, in the maturer science of the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, com-
prises two distinguishable postulates : (1) equality
(quantitative equivalence) of cause and effect ; and
(2) similarity (qualitative equivalence) of cause and
effect. The former may, without forcing it, be
referred to commercial accountancy as its analogue
in practical life and as the probable cultural
ground out of which the habit of insisting on an
inviolable quantitative equivalence gathered con-
sistency. The ascendancy of the latter seems in a
similar manner to be referable to the prevalence
of handicraft as its cultural ground. Stated nega-
tively, it asserts that nothing appears in the effect
but what was contained in the cause, in a manner
which suggests the rule that nothing appears in
the product of handicraft but what was present in
the skill of the artificer. " Natural causes, " which
are made much of in this middle period of modern
science, are conceived to work according to certain
" natural laws." These natural laws, laws of the
" normal course " of things, are felt to tend to a
rational end and to have something of a coercive
force. So that Nature makes no mistakes. Nature
^ does nothing in vain. Nature takes the most eco-
nomical course to its end, Nature makes no jumps,
etc. Under this law of natural causation every



I


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 365

effect must have a cause which resembles it in
the particular respect which claims the inquirer's
attention. Among other consequences of this view
it follows that, since the details as well as the
whole of the material universe are construed to
show adaptation to a preconceived end, this " nat-
ural order" of things must be the outcome of
preexistent design residing in the "first cause,"
which is postulated by virtue of this imputed de-
sign and is designated the " Great Artificer."
There is an element of conation in this original
modern postulate of cause and effect The shadow
of the artificer, with his intelligence and manual
skill, is forever in the background of the concepts
of natural law. The " cause " dealt with in a given
case is not thought of as an effect ; and the effect is
treated as a finality, not as a phase of a complex
sequence of causation. When such a sequence is
under inquiry, as in the earlier, pre-Darwinian theo-
ries of evolution, it is not handled as a cumulative
sequence whose character may blindly change from
better to worse, or conversely, at any poiut ; but
rather as an unfolding of a certain prime cause in
which is contained, implicitly, all that presently
appears in explicit form.

In the conception of the causal relation as it
may be seen at work a hundred years ago, cause
and effect are felt to stand over against one an-
other, so that the cause controls, determines the



J


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

effect by transmitting its own character to it. The
cause is the producer, the effect the product. Rela-
lively little emphasia or interest falls upon the
process out of which the product emerges ; the in-
terest being centred upon the latter and its rela-
tion to the efficient cause out of which it has come.
The theories constructed under the guidance of this
conception are generalizations as to an equivalence
between the producing cause and the effect-product.
The cause "makes" the effect, in much the same
sense as the craftsman ia apprehended to make the
article on which he is engaged. There is a felt
distinction between the cause and the environing
circumstances, much as there is between the work-
man on the one hand and his tools and materials on
the other hand. The intervening process is simply
the manner of functioning of the efficient cause^
much as the workman's work is the functioning of
the workman in the interval between the inception
and the completion of the product. The effect ia sub-
sequent to the cause, as the workman's product is
Bubsequent to and consequent upon his putting forth
his productive efficiency. It is a relation of before
and after, in which the process comes in for atten-
tion as covering and accounting for the time interval
which, in analogy with workmanlike endeavor, is
required for the functioning of the efficient cause.


'Compare, howeTer, SombArt, Kapitalismug, MpecUUjr vot I,
oh. Vm ud XV, Sombart finds ibe modern Bcienliflo oonoept of



I

I



I



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 367

But as time passes and liabituation to the
exigencies of the machine technology gains in
range and consistency, the quasi-personal, handi-
craft conception of causation decays, — first and
most notably in those material, inorganic sciences
that stand in the closest relation to the mechani-
cal technology, but presently also in the organic
sciences, and even in the moral sciences. The ma-
chine technology is a mechanical or material process,
and requires the attention to be centred upon this
process and the exigencies of the process. In such
a process no one factor stands out aa unequivocally
the efficient cause in the ca^e, whose personal char-
canoe snd effect W be esscnlially ao outcome of the discipline of «c-
countancy enforced by bualncm trafBc. So that be makes bnelneas
enlerprlge ratber than mechaoical industry accountable for the ri«e
of modem science and for the matter-of-fact character which distin-
guishea this science. In this view there is, no doubt, a large and
valuable element of truth. To the end of a mathematical formulation
of causal phenomena as well aa a tenacloua granp of the principle of
quantitative equivalence, the accountancy enforced by the petty trade
of early modem times, as well as by commercial traffic proper, ap-
pears to have given the most eSective training. In ao far as tiiia
element of quantitative equivalence, simply, has dominated the
j;n>wth of science, it has given, aa its most perfect product, Potltlvlam.
Positivism nourished at Its best and freest in France, where the
modem economic culture was commercial nither than mechanical.
And when the machine discipline seriously invaded France, Poaltivism
languished and died. But modem science Is not a calculus simply.
It deals not with calculations of quantitative equivalence only, but
with efficient causes, active relations, creative forces. The concept of
efficient cause Is not a derivative of accounlancy, nor is it formed in
the Image of accountancy. But this generic concept of efficient cause,
the kinetic concept, antedates Positivism and has outlived It. In Its
earlier (eighteenth-century) phase this concept shows cloae relation-
ship with the uotioQ of workmanship, in its later (nineteenUi-centuT7}
uae It baa much In common with the notion of mecbaoical efficiency.



THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE


acter, so to speak, is transfused into the product,
and to whose workings the rest of the complex of
causes are related only as subsidiary or conditioning
circumstances. To the technologist the process
comes necessarily to count, not simply as the inter-
val of functioning of an initial efficient cause, but
as the substantial fact that engages his attention.
He learns to think in terms of the process, rather
than in terms of a productive cause and a product
between which the process intervenes in such a man-
ner as to afford a transition from one to the other.
The process is always complex ; always a delicately
balanced interplay of forces that work blindly, in-
sensibly, heedlessly ; in which any appreciable devi-
ation may forthwith count in a cumulative manner,
the further consequences of which stand in no oi^
ganic relation to the purpose for which the process
has been set going. The prime efficient cause falls,
relatively, into the background and yields prece-
dence to the process as the point of technological
interest.

This machine technology, with i^s accompanying
discipline in mechanical adaptations and object-
lessons, came on gradually and rose to a dominating
place in the cultural environment during the closing
years of the eighteenth and the course of the nine-
teenth century ; and as fast as men learned to think
in terms of technological process, tliey went on at an
accelerated pace in the further invention of mechani-



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 369

cal proceaaes, so that from that time the progress of
inventions has been of a cmoulative character and
has cumulatively heightened the disciplinary force
of the machine process. This early technological
advance, of course, took place in the British com-
munity, where the machine process first gained
headway and where the discipline of a prevalent
machine industry inculcated thinking in terms of
the machine process. So also it was in the British
community that modern science fell into the lines
marked out by technological thinking and began
to formulate its theories in terms of process rather
than in terms of prime causes and the like. While
something of this kind is noticeable relatively
early in some of the inorganic sciences, as, e.g..
Geology, the striking and decisive move in this
direction was taken toward the middle of the
century by Dar\vin and his contemporaries.' With-
out much preliminary exposition and without
feeling himself to be out of touch with his con-
temporaries, Darwin set to work to explain spe-
cies in terms of the process out of which they
have arisen, rather than out of the prime cause to
which the distinction between them may he due.'
Denying nothing as to the substantial services of the

1 D&rwin, of course, dnea nol sUnd ftlone. He is the great expo-
nnil of a niaas moTenient which InTolves s shifting of the point of
VL'iw and al the point ol Interest in icientilio reaeBreh and speculation.

* This to the snbstuice of DvwId'b AdTSDce over Lftmarclc, tor

Instance.


370 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

Great Artificer in the development of species, he
simply and naively left Him out of the scheme,
because, as being a personal factor, He could not be
stated and handled in terms of process. So Darwin
offered a tentative account of the descent of man,
without recourse to divine or human directive
endeavor and without inquu-y as to whence man
ultimately came and why, or as to what fortune
would ultimately overtake him. His inquiry
characteristically confines itself to the process of
cumulative change. His results, as well as hia
specific determination of the factors at work in
this process of cumulative change, have been ques-
tioned ; perhaps they are open to all the criticiama
levelled against them as well as to a few more not
yet thought of; but the scope and method given
to scientific inquiry by Darwin and the generation
whose spokesman he is has substantially not been
questioned, except by that diminishing contingent
of the faithful who by force of special training or
by native gift are not amenable to the discipline of
the machine process. The characteristically modern
science does not inquire about prime causes, design
in nature, desirabihty of efiects, ultimate results, or
eachatological consequences.

^ ^Of the two postulates of earlier modern science,

fc^ifttwm f),, ... . , , , ...

^-a>i*-<- — the quantitative eqiuvalence and the qualitative

equivalence of cause and effect, — the former has

come practically to signify the balanced articula-


I

I
I

1


CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE PROCESS 371

tion of the process of cumulative change ; the
endeavor of the Positivists to erect this canon of
quantitative equivalence into the sole canon of
acientific truth, and bo to reduce scientific theory
to a system of accountancy, having failed. TheJj**"'*^'*
latter thesis, that like causes produce like effects, or
that the effect is, in some sense, of the same char-
acter as the cause, has fallen into decay as holding
true only in such tenuously general terms as to
leave it without particular force. The scientists are
learning more and more consistently to think in the
opaque, impersonal terms of strains, mechanical
structures, displacement, and the like ; terma
which are convertible into the working drawings
and speciGcations of the mechanical engineer.

The older preconceptions are, of course, not
wholly eliminated from the intellectual apparatus
of scientific research and generalization. The
cultural situation whose dbcipline gives the out-
come is made up of inherited traditional notions at
least as much as of the notions brought in by the
machine process. Even among the scientific adepts
t here ha s be en no complete break wi th the past :
necess arily not, since they are, after all,_cceaturea
of their own generation. Many of them, but more
especially those who are engaged in upholding the
authentic results of scientific research, are somewhat
prone to make much of the definitive results
achieved, rather than of the process of research


372 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBISE

iu wliich. these results are provieioDal appliances
of work. And many of these, together with the
great part of those ■well-meaning persons who
exploit the sciences for purposes of edification,
such as clergymen and naturalistic myth-makers,
still personify the process of cause and effect and
find in it a well-advised meliorative trend. But
that work of research which effectually extends the
borders of scientific knowledge is nearly all done
under the guidance of highly impersonal, mechani-
cal, morally and aBsthetically colorless conceptions
of causal sequence. And this scientific work is
carried out only in those communities which are in
due contact with the modem mechanically organized
industrial system, — only imder the shadow of the
machine technology.

In the nature of the case the cultural growth
dominated by the machine industry is of a scep-
tical, matteiH>f-fact complexion, materialistic, un-
moral, unpatriotic, undevout. The growth of habits
of thought, in the industrial regions and centres
particularly, runs in this direction; but hitherto
there has enough of the ancient norms of Western
Christendom remained intact to make a very re-
spectable protest against that deterioration of the
cultural tissues which the ferment of the machine
industry unremittingly pushes on. The machine
discipliue, however, touches wider and wider circles



I



I



CIVILIZATION AND THE MACHINE I'KOCESS 373

of the population, and touches them m an mcreas-
ingly intimate and coercive manner. In the nature
of the case, therefore, the resistance opposed to
this cultural trend given by the machine discipline
on grounds of received conventions weakens with
the passage of time. The spread of materialistic,
matter-of-fact preconceptions takes place at a cumu-
latively accelerating rate, except in so far as some
other cultural factor, alien to the machine disci-
pline, comes in to inhibit its spread and keep its
disintegrating influence within bounds.


CHAPTER X

THE NATURAL DKCAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

Broadly, the machine discipline acta to disin-
tegrate the institutional heritage, of all degreee of
antiquity and authenticity — whether it be the
institutions that embody the principles of natural
liberty or those that comprise the residue of more
arcliaic principles of conduct still current in civil-
ized life. It thereby cuts away that ground of
law and order on which business enterprise is
founded. The further cultural bearing of this
disintegration of the received order is no doubt
sufficiently serious and far-reaching, but it does not
directly concern the present inquiry. It comes in
question here only in so far as such a deterioration
of the general cultural tissues involves a set-back
to the continued vigor of business enterprise. But
the future of business enterprise is bound up with
the future of civilization, since the cultural scheme
is, after all, a single one, comprising many inters
locking elements, no one of which can be greatly
disturbed without disturbing the working of all
the rest.

n its bearing on the question in hand, the



NATURAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 375

"social problem" at large presents this singular
Bituation. The growth of business enterprise rests
on the machine technology as its material founda-
tion. The machine industry is indispenaable to it;
it cannot get along without the machine process.
But the discipline of the machine process cuts away
the spiritual, institutional foundations of business
enterprise ; the machine industry is incompatible
with its continued growth ; it cannot, in the long
run, get along with the machine process. In their
struggle against the cultural effects of the machine
process, therefore, business principles cannot win
in the long run; since an effectual mutilation or
inhibition of the machine system would gradually
push business enterprise to the wall ; whereas with
a free growth of the machine system business prin-
ciples would presently fall into abeyance.

The institutional basis of business enterprise —
the system of natural rights — appears to be a
peculiarly unstable affair. There is no way of re-
taining it under changing circumstances, and there
is no way of returning to it after circumstances
have changed. It is a hybrid growth, a blend of
personal freedom and equality on the one hand
and of prescriptive rights on the other hand. The
institutiona and points of law under the natural-
rights scheme appear to be of an essentially
provisional character. There is relatively great
flexibility and possibility of growth and change ;



I
I



I


376 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPKISE

natural rights are singularly insecure under any
change of circumstances. The maxim is well
approved that eternal vigilance is the price of
(natural) liberty. When, aa now, this system is
endangered by socialistic or anarchistic disaffection
there is no recourse that will carry the institutional
apparatus back to a secure natural-rights basis.
The system of natural liberty was the product of a
peaceful r%ime of handicraft aud petty trade ;
but continued peace and industry preseutly carried
the cultural growth beyond the phase of natural
rights by giving rise to the machine process and
the large business ; and these are breaking down
the structure of natural rights by making these
rights nugatory on the one hand and by cutting
away the spiritual foundations of them on the
other hand. Natural rights being a by-product of
peaceful industry, they cannot be reinstated by a
recourse to warlike habits and a coercive govern-
ment, since warlike habits and coercion are alien
to the natural-rights spirit. Nor can they be
reinstated by a recourse to settled peace and
freedom, since an era of settled peace and freedom
would push on the dominance of the machine
process and the large business, which break down
the system of natural liberty.

"When the question is cast up as to what will
come of this conflict of institutional forces —
called the Social Problem — it is commonly made '



NATURAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPBI8E 377

a question of remedies : What can be done to save
civilized mankind from the vulgarization and dis-
integration wrought by tlie machine industry ?

Now, business enterprise and the machine process v
are the two prime movers in modern culture ; and
the only recourse that holds a promise of being
effective, therefore, is a recourse to the workings
of business traflic. And this is a question, not of
what is conceivably, ideally, idyllically possible for
the business community to do if they will take
thought and act advisedly and concertedly toward
a chosen cultural outcome, but of what is the
probable cultural outcome to be achieved through
business traffic carried on for business ends, not for
cultural ends. It is a question not of what ought
to be done, but of what is to take place.

Persons who are solicitous for the cultural future
commonly turn to speculative advice as to what
ought to be done toward holding fast that which
is good in the cultural heritage, and what ought
further to be done to increase the talent that has
been intrusted to this generation. The practical
remedy offered is commonly some proposal for
palliative measures, some appeal to philanthropic,
Ksthetic, or religious sentiment, some endeavor
to conjure with the name of one or another of the
epiphenomena of modern culture. Something must
be done, it is conceived, and this something takes
the shape of charity organizations, clubs and


S78 THE THEOBY OF BUSINESS ElfTERPRI8E



societies for social "purity," for amusement, educa-
tion, and manual training of the indigent classes,
for colonization of the poor, for popularization of
churches, for clean politics, for cultural missionary
work by social settlements, and the like. These
remedial measures whereby it is proposed to save
or to rehabilitate certain praiseworthy but obso-
lescent habits of life and of thought are, all and
several, beside the point so far as touches the
question in band. Not that it is hereby intended
to cast a slur on these meritorious endeavors to save
mankind by treating symptoms. The symptoms
treated are no doubt evil, as they are said to be ;
or if they are not evil, the merits of that particular
question do not concern the present inquiry. The
endeavors in question are beside the point in that
they do not fall into the shape of a business propo-
sition. They are, on the whole, not so profitable
a line of investment as cert;iin other ventures that
are open to modem enterprise. Hence, if they
traverse the course of business enterprise and of
industrial exigencies, they are nugatory, being in
the same class with the labor of Sisj'phus ; whereas
if they coincide in effect with the line along which
business and industrial exigencies move, they are a
work of supererogation, except so far as they may
be conceived to accelerate a change that is already
under way. Nothing can deflect the sweep of
business enterprise, unless it be an outgrowth of



I



NATURAL DECAY OP BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 379

this enterprise itself or of the industrial means by
which business enterprise works.

Nothing can serve as a corrective of the cultural
trend given by the machine discipline except what ^
can be put in the form of a business proposition.
The question o£ neutralizing the untoward effects
of the machine discipline resolves itself into a
question as to the cultural work and consequences
of business enterprise, and of the cultural value
of biisiness principles in so far as they guide such
human endeavor as lies outside the range of busi-
ness enterprise proper. It is not a question of
what ought to be done, but of what is the course
laid out by business principles; the discretion
rests with the business men, not with the moral-
ists, and the business men's discretion is bounded
by the exigencies of business enterprise. Even
the business men cannot allow themselves to
play fast and loose with business principles in
response to a call from humanitarian motives.
The question, therefore, remains, on the whole, a
question of what the business men may be expected
to do for cultural growth on the motive of profits.

Something they are doing, as others are, from
motives of benevolence, with a well-advised en-
deavor to maintain the cultural gains of the past
and to make the way of life smoother for man-
kind in the future. But the more secure and
substautial results to he looked for in this direc-


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



tion are those that follow incidentally, as by-
products of buaineaa enterprise, because these
are not dependent on the vagaries of personal
preference, tastes, and prejudices, but rest on a
broad institutional basis.

The effects of business enterprise upon the
habits and temper of the people, and so upon
institutional growth, are chiefly of the natui-e of
sequelse. It has already been noted that the dis-
cipline of businesa employments is of a conserva-
tive nature, tending to sustain the conventions
that rest on natural-rights dogma, because these
employments train the men engaged in them to
think in terms of natural rights. It is unneces-
sary to return to this topic here, except to notice
that, in its severer, more unmitigated form, this
discipline in pecuniary habits of thought falls on
a gradually lessening proportion of the population.
The absolute number of business men, counting
principals and subordinates, is, of course, not
decreasing. The number of men in business
pursuits, in proportion to the population, is also
apparently not decreasing; but within the business
employments a larger proportion are occupied
with ofhce routine, and so are withdrawn from
the more effectual training given by businesa man-
agement proper. If such a decrease occurs in any
country, it is almost certainly not to be found in
any other country than America.



NATURAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE 381

This business discipline is somewhat closely
limited both in scope and range. (1) It acts to
conserve, or to rehabilitate, a certain restricted
line of institutional habits of thought, viz. those
preconceptions of natural rights which have to
do with property. What it conserves, therefore,
is the bourgeois virtues of solvency, thrift, and
dissimulation. The nobler and more spectacular
aristocratic virtues, with their correlative institu-
tional furniture, are not in any sensible degree
fortified by the habits of busineais life. Business
life does not further tlie growth of manners and
breeding, pride of caste, pimctilios of " honor," or
even religious fervor. (2) The salutary discipline
of business life touches the bulk of the population,
the working classes, in a progressively less inti-
mate and less exacting manner. It can, therefore,
not serve to correct or even greatly to mitigate
the matter-of-fact bias given these classes by the
discipline of the machine process.

As a direct disciplinary factor the machine process
holds over the business employments, in that it
touches larger classes of the community and incul-
cates its characteristic habits of thought more unre-
mittingly. And any return to more archaic methods
of industry, such as is sometimes advocated on ar-
tistic grounds, seems hopeless, since business inter-
ests do not countenance a discontinuance of machine
methods. The machme methods that are corrupt-


THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

ing the hearts and manners of the workmen are
profitable to the business men, and that fact seems
to be decisive on the point. A direct, advised
return to handicraft, or any similar discontinuance
of the machine industry, is out of the question ;
although something in the way of a partial return
to more primitive methods of industry need not be
impracticable as a remote and indirect consequence
of the working of business enterprise.

The indirect or incidental cultural bearing of busi-
ness principles and business practice is wide-reaching
and forceful. Business principles have a peculiar
hold upon the affections of the people as something
intrinsically right and good. They are therefore
drawn on for guidance and conviction even in
concerns that are not conceived to be primarily
business concerns. So, e-g., they have permeated
the educational system, thoroughly and intimately.
Their presence, as an element of common sense,
in the counsels of the "educators" shows itaelf
in a naive insistence on the "practical" whenever
the scheme of instruction is under advisement.
"Practical" means useful for private gain. Any
new departure in public instruction, whether in
the public schools or in private endowed establish-
ments, is scnitinized with this test in mind ; which
results in a progressive, though not wholly con-
sistent, narrowing of instruction to such learning



I



NATURAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 383



as is designed to give a ready application of re-
sults rather than a systematic orgaiiization of
knowledge. The primary test is usefulness for
getting an income. The secondary test, practi-
cally applied where latitude is allowed in the
way of " culture " studies, is the aptness of the
instruction in question to fit the learners for
spending income in a decorous manner. Hence
quasi-scholarly accomplishments. Much of the
current controversy as to the inclusion or exclusion
of one thing and another from the current curric-
ulum of secondary and higher schools might be
reduced to terms of one or the other of these two
pxirposes without doing violence to the arguments
put forth and with a great gain in coociseaess and
lucidity.

There is also a large resort to business methods
in the conduct of the schools ; with the result that
a system of scholastic accountancy is enforced both
as regards the work of the teachers and the prog-
ress of the pupils ; whence follows a mechanical
routine, with meo-hanical tests of competency in
all directions. This lowers the value of the
instruction for purposes of intellectual initiative
and a reasoned grasp of the subject-matter. This
class of erudition is rather a hindrance than a help
to habits of thinking. It conduces to conviction
rather than to inquiry, and is thersfore a con-
servative factor.


384 THE THEORY OP BUSINESS BNTERPEISE

In the endowed schools there is, moreover, an
increasing introduction of business men and business
methods into the personnel and the administrative
work. This is necessarily so since these schools are
competitors for students and endowments. The
policy of these schools necessarily takes on some-
thing of the complexion of competitive business;
which throws the emphasis on those features of
school life that will best attract students and donors.
The features which count most directly in these di-
rections are not the same as would count most
effectively toward the avowed ends of these schools.
The standards which it is found imperative to live
up to are not the highest standards of scholarly
work. Courtesy as well as expediency inclines
these schools to cultivate such appearances and
such opinions as may be expected to find favor
with men of wealth. These men of wealth are
business men, for the most part elderly men, who
are, as is well known, prevailingly of a conserva-
tive temper in all cultural matters, and more
especially as touches those institutions that bear
on business affairs.

A more far-reaching department of the educa-
tional system, though not technically rated as
such, is the periodical press, both newspapers
and magazines. This is a field of business enter-
prise, and business principles may be expected to
work more consistently and to a more unqualified


LUfied H



NATURAL BECAY OF BUSINESS EMTEitPiUSE 385

resiJt in this field than in the school system,
where these principles come in incidentally.

The current periodical press, whether ephemeral
or other, is a vehicle for advertisements. This ia
its raison dhre, as a business proposition, and this
decides the lines of its management without mate-
rial qualification. Exceptions to the rule are
ofiicial and minor propagandist periodicals, and,
in an uncertain measure, scientific journals. The
profits of publication come from the sale of adver-
tising space. The direct returns from sales and
subscriptions are now a matter of wholly second-
ary consequence. Publishers of periodicals, of all
grades of transiency, aim to make their product
as salable as may be, in order to pass their adver-
tising pages under the eyes of as many readers as
may be. The larger the circulation the greater,
other things equal, the market value of the adver-
tising space. The highest product of this develop-
ment is the class of American newspapers called
"independent." These in particular — and they
are followed at no great interval by the rest — •
edit all items of news, comment, or gossip with
a view to what the news ought to be and
what opinions ought to be expressed on passing
events.^

The first duty of an editor is to gauge the senti-

> " Ought" 1b of course here used to deoote busiueBa expedieacj.



m

it they ^1



386 THE THEORY OF BXTSINESS EMTEXPBI8E

ments of his readers, and then tell them what
like to believe. By this means he maintains or
increases the circulation. His second duty ia to
see that nothing is said in the news items or edi-
torials which may discountenance any claims or
announcements made by his advertisers, discredit
their standing or good faith, or expose any weak-
ness or deception in any business venture that is
or may become a valuable advertiser. By thia
means he increases the advertising value of his
circulation.^ The net result is that both the news
columns and the editorial columns are commonly
meretricious in a high degree.

Systematic insincerity on the part of the osten-
sible purveyors of information and leaders of
opinion may be deplored by peraons who stickle
for truth and pin their hopes of social salvation
on the spread of accurate information. But the
ulterior cultural effect of the insincerity which is
in this way required by the business situation
may, of course, as well be salutary as the reverse.
Indeed, the effect is quite as likely to be salutary,
if "salutary" be taken to mean favorable to the
maintenance of the established order, since the
insincerity is guided by a wish to avoid any
lesion of the received preconceptions and preju-

> Ah a Hide line, which offordH play tor the BtaB's creative talent,
whatever is excepUonallj sensational al the same time that It ia harai-
leae to the adTertlaen' inteiuta should, in newspaper slang, be



I


pUyed ^1



NATURAL DECAY OF BnSINESS ENTEBPEISE 387

dices. The insincerity of the newspapers and
magazines seems, on the whole, to be of a
conservative trend.

The periodical presa is not only a purveyor of
news, opinions, and admonitions ; it also supplies
the greater part of the literature currently read.
And in this part of its work the same underlyiug
business principles are in force. The endeavor is
to increase the circulation at any cost that will
result in an increased net return from the sale of
the advertising space. The literary output of the
magazines is of use for carrj-ing the advertising
pages, and as a matter of business, as seen from
the standpoint of the business man's mterest, that
is its only use.

The standards of excellence that govern this
periodical literature aeem fairly to be formulated
aa follows : (1) In each given case it must confonn
to the tastes and the most ready comprehension of
the social strata which the particular periodical is
designed to reach ; (2) it should conduce to a
quickened interest in the various lines of services
and commodities offered in the advertising pages,
and should direct the attention of readers along
such lines of investment and expenditure as may
benefit the large advertisers particularly. At least
it must in no way hamjier the purposes of the
advertisers. Nothing should go in a popular
magazine which would cast a sinister shadow over



388 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE '

any form of business venture that advertises or
might be induced to advertise.'

Taken in the aggregate, the literary output is j
designed to meet the tastes of that large body of
people who are in the habit of buying freely. Tlie |
successful magazine writers are those who follow
the taste of the class to whom they speak, in any
aberration {fad, manDerism, or misapprehension)
and in any shortcoming of insight or force which i
may beset that class. They must also confonn to
the fancies and prejudices of this class as regards 1
the ideals — artistic, moral, religious, or social — for j
which they speak. The class to which the success-
ful periodicals turn, and which gives tone to
periodical literature, is that great body of people
who are in moderately easy circiunstances. Cul-
turally this means the respectable middle class I
(largely the dependent business class) of varioua
shades of conservatism, affectation, and snobbery.*

On the whole, the literature provided in this way
and to this end seems to run on a line of slightly i
more pronounced conservatism and affectation than l
the average sentiment of the readers appealed to.

1 Business enterprises that arc not notable adverilsera may tw
roundly taken to task, aa, e.g., the Standard Oil Company or the Ameri-
can Sugar Retlnlng Company ; and, indeed, It may be shrewd man-
agement to abuse these concerns, since such abuse redounds to the
periodical's reputation for popular sympathy and independence.

' " Snobbery " is here used without diBrespcct, as a convenient
term to denote the element of strain involved in the quest of gentility
on the part of persona whose accusiomed social standing is le«a higli
or less authentic than their aspicatious.



I

i

I
I



NATUBAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 389

This is true for the following reason. Readers
who are less conservative and less patient of afEec-
tationa, snobbery, and illiberality than the average
are in the position o£ doubters and dissentients.
They are less confident in their convictions of
what is right and good in all matters, and are also
not unwilling to make condescending allowances for
those who are less " advanced," and who must be
humored since they know no better ; whereas those
who rest undoubting in the more conservative
views and a more intolerant affectation of gentility
are readier, because more naive, in their rejection
of whatever does not fully conform to their habits
of thought.

So it comes about that the periodical literature
is, on the whole, somewhat more scrupulously
devout in tone, somewhat more given to laud and
dilate upon the traffic of the upper leisure class
and to carry on the discussion in the terms and
tone imputed to that class, somewhat more prone
to speak deprecatingly of tlie vulgar innovations
of modem culture, than the average of the readers
to whom it is addressed. The trend of its teach-
ing, therefore, ia, on the whole, conservative and
conciliatory. It is also under the necessity of
adapting itself to a moderately low average of
intelligence and information ; since on this head,
again, it is those who possess intelligence and infor-
mation that are readiest to make allowances ; they


890 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

are, indeed, mildly flattered to do so, besides being
the only ones who can. It is a prime requisite to
conciliate a large body of readers.

This latter characteristic is particularly evident
in the didactic portion of the periodical literature.
This didactic literature, running on discussions of
a quasi-artistic and quasi-scientific character, is, by
force of the business exigencies of the case, de-
signed to favor the sensibilities of the weaker
among its readers by adroitly suggesting that the
readers are already possessed of the substance of
what purports to be taught and need only be
fortified with certain general results. There
follows a great spread of quasi-technical terms and
fanciful conceits. The sophisticated animal stories
and the half-mythical narratives of industrial pro-
cesses which now have the vogue illustrate the
results achieved in this direction.

The literary output issued under the surveil-
lance of the advertising office is excellent in
workmanship and deficient in intelligence and
substantial originality. What is eucoiuuged and
cultivated is adroitness of style and a piquant
presentation of commonplaces. Harmlessness, not
to say pointlessness, and an edifying, gossipy
optimism are the substantial characteristics, which
persist through all ephemeral mutations of style,
manner, and subject-matter.

Business enterprise, therefore, it is believed,



NATUEAL DECAY OF BUSIMESS ENTERPBI8E 391

gives a salutary bent to periodical literature. It
conduces mildly to the mainteoance of archaic
ideals and philistine affectations, and inculcates
the crasser forms of patriotic, sportsmanlike, and
spendthrift aspirations.

The largest and most promising factor of cul-
tural discipline — most promising as a corrective
of iconoclastic vagaries — over which business
principles rule is national politics. The purposes
and the material effects of business politics have
already been spoken of above, but in the present
connection their incidental, disciplinary effects are
no less important. Business interests urge an
aggressive national policy and business men direct
it. Such a policy is warlike aa well aa patriotic.
The direct cultural value of a warlike business policy
is unequivocal. It makes for a conservative ani-
mus on the part of the populace. During war time,
and within the military organization at all times,
under martial law, civil rights are in abeyance ;
and the more warfare and armament the more
abeyance. Military training is a training in cere-
monial precedence, arbitrary command, and un-
questioning obedience. A military organization
is essentially a servile organization. Insubordi-
nation is the deadly sin. The more consistent
and the more comprehensive this military training,
the more effectually will the members of the com-


392 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPBI8E

muBJty be trained into habits of subordination and
away from that growing propensity to make light
of personal authority that ia the chief infirmity of
democracy. This applies first and most decidedly,
of course, to the soldiery, but it applies only in a
less degree to the rest of the population. They
learn to think in warlike terms of rank, authority,
and subordination, and so grow progrsBaively more
patient of encroachments upon their civil rights.
Witness the change that has latterly been going
on in the temper of the German people.'

The modem warlike policies are entered upon
for the sake of peace, with a view to the orderly
pursuit of business. In their initial motive they
differ from the warlike dynastic politics of the
sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries.
But the disciplinary effects of warlike pursuits and
of warlike preoccupations are much the same what-
ever may be their initial motive or ulterior aim.
The end sought in the one case was warlike mas-
tery and high repute in the matter of ceremonial
precedence ; in the other, the modem case, it is
pecuniary mastery and high repute in the matter
of commereial solvency. But in both cases alike
the pomp and circumstance of war and armaments,
and tlie sensational appeals to patriotic pride and



I



• Ct, e.g., Maurice r^ir, V Imperialitme alUmtmd, especiallj ch. IJ.
i ■ i III, Tlio like change of sentiment la Tisible in the British com-
lltf. Ct. Hobsoii, IinperiaUim, especially pt. tl. ch. I. ivnd III.



NATURAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE 393



animosity made by victories, defeats, or compari-
sons of military ai\d naval strength, act to rehabili-
tate lost ideals and weakened convictions of the
chauvinistic or dynastic order. At the same
stroke they direct the popular interest to other,
nobler, institutionally less hazardous matters than
the unequal distribution of wealth or of creature
comforts. Warlike and patriotic preoccupations
fortify the barbarian virtues of subordination and
prescriptive authority. Habituation to a warlike,
predatory scheme of life is the strongest disci-
plinary factor that can be brought to counteract
the vulgarization of modern life wrought by peace-
ful industry and the machine process, and to reha-
bilitate the decaying sense of status and differential
dignity. Warfare, with the stress on subordination
and mastery and the insistence on gradations of
dignity and honor incident to a militant organiza-
tion, has always proved an effective school in
barbarian methods of thought.

In this direction, evidently, lies the hope of a
corrective for "social unrest" and similar dis-
orders of civilized life. There can, indeed, be no
serious question but that a consistent return to the
ancient virtues of allegiance, piety, servility, graded
dignity, class prerogative, and prescriptive author-
ity would greatly conduce to popular content and
to the facile management of affairs. Such is the
promise held out hy a strenuous national policy.


THE THEORY OF BTJSINESS EHTEEPRI5E

The reversional trend given by warlike ex-
perience and warlike preoccupiitiona, it is plain,
does not set backward to the regime of natural
liberty. Modern bueineas principles and the
modern scheme of civil rights and constitutional
government rest on natiu^l-rigbts ground. But
the system of natural rights is a halfway house.
The warlike culture takes back to a more archaic
situation that preceded the scheme of natural
rights, viz. the system of absolute government,
dynastic politics, devolution of rights and honors,
ecclesiastical authority, and popular submission
and squalor. It makes not for a reinstatement
of the Natural Rights of Man but for a reversion
to the Grace of God.

The barbarian virtues of fealty and patriotism
run on national or dynastic exploit and aggrandize-
ment, and these archaic virtues are not dead. In
those modem communities whose hearts beat with
the pulsations of the world-market they find ex-
pression in an enthusiasm for the commercial
aggrandizement of the nation's business men.
But when once the policy of warlike enterprise
has been entered upon for business ends, these
loyal affections gradually shift from the business
interests to the warlike and dynastic interests, as
witness the history of imperialism in Germany and
England. The eventual outcome should be a re-
habilitation of the ancient patriotic animosity and



I
I



NATtJEAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTEHPRISE 395

dynastic loyalty, to the relative neglect of busineaa
interests. This may easily be carried so iar as to
sacrifice the profits of the business men to the
exigencies of the higher politics.'

The disciplinary effect of war and annaments
and imperialist politics is complicated with a
selective effect. War not only affords a salutary
training, but it also acts to eliminate certain
elements of the population. The work of cam-
paigning and military tenure, such as is carried
on by England, America, or the other civilizing
powers, lies, in large part, in the low latitudes,
where the European races do not find a favorable
habitat. The low latitudes are particularly im-
wholesome for that dolicho-blond racial stock
that seems to be the chief bearer of the machine
industry. It results that the viability and the
natural increase of the soldiery is perceptibly
lowered. The service in the low latitudes, as
contrasted with Europe, for instance, Is an extra-
hazardous occupation. The death rate, indeed,
exceeds the birth rate. But in the more advanced
industrial communities, of which the English and
American are typical, the service is a volunteer
service; which means that those who go to the
wars seek this employment by their own choice.
That ia to say, the human material so drawn off
is automatically selected on the basis of a peculiar
»Cf., e.g-, Ilobson, Imperially, pt. n. oh. VII.



396 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE

spiritual fitness for this predatory employment;
they are, on the whole, of a more malevolent and
vagabond temper, have more of the ancient bar-
barian animus, than those who are left at home
to carry on the work of the home community
and propagate the home population. And since
the troops and ships are officered by the yoimger
sons of the conservative leisure class and by the
buccaneering scions of the class of professional
politicians, a natural selection of the same chai^
acter takes efEect also as regards the of&cers.
There results a gradual selective elimination of
that old-fasliioned element of the population that
is by temperament best suited for the old-fash-
ioned institutional system of status and servile
organization.^

■ Tbe Heleclive effect of wuf&re, both ftDclent and nodeni, haa
been discossed b; varioiu writers. Protracted wars or a warlike policy
alwnys bare some such effect, no doubt, and in old times this li
shown ilaeU to be a serious cultural factor. It ia oommonly regarded
that the selection results in an elimination of the "best" bnman
material. Perhaps the most cogent spokesman for this view is D. S.
Jordan, The Blood of the Nalloa. The " best " in this case muet bo
taken to mean the best for the purpose, not necessarily tor other pur-
poses. In such a case as the Cbineso or the Jewish peoples, e.g., a
yery long-continued, though not in both cases a close, selective elimi-
nation of ttie peace-disturbing elements has left a residne that Is highly
efficient ("good") in certain directions, but not good war material.
The case of the North-European peoples, however, in the present junc-
ture is somewhat diSerent from these. Racially, the most efficient
war material among tbem seems to be those elements that contain a
appreciable admixture of the dollcbo-blond slock. These elements at
the same time are apparently, on the whole, also the ones most gener-
ally endowed with industrial initiative and a large, aptitude for Uie
machine teclinology and scientific research. Selective elimiDBtiou by



NAT0BAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTEKl'EISE 397

This selective elimination of conservative ele-
ments would in the long run leave each succeeding
generation o£ the community less predatory and
less emulative in temper, less well endowed for
carrying on its life under the servile institutions
proper to a militant r%ime. But, for the present
and the nearer future, there can be little douht
but that this selective shaping of the comnmnity's
animus is greatly outweighed by the contrary
trend given by the discipline of warlike preoccu-
pations. What helps to keep the balance in
favor of the reversional trend is the cultural
leaven carried back into the home community
by the veterans. These presumptive past masters
in the archaic virtues keep themselves well in the
public eye and serve as exemplars to the impres-
sionable members of the community, particularly
to the less mature.'

war ftnd military tenure in the case of LhesB peoples should, tUeraforo,
appAKUtly lower both tbelr lighting capacity and their liidastrlal and
intellectual capacity ; so that, by force of this double and cumulativo
affect, tlie resulting national decline should in their case be compre-
hensiTe and relatively precipitate.

■ with the complement of archaic virtues that Invests these adepts
there Is also associated a fair complement of those more elemental
vices that are growing obsolete In tlie peaceable civilized communities.
Such debaucheries, extravagances of cruelty, and general superfluity
of Daugbtinesi as are nameless or Impossible in civil life are blameless
matters of couiae in the service. In iJie nature of the case they are
inseparable from the service. The service commonly leares the vet-
erans physical, Intellectual, and moral Invalids (as witness the records
of the Pension Office). But these less handsome concomitants of the
serrlce should scarcely be made a point of reproach to those brave
men whose devotion to the Sag and the business luterests has led tbem



I



398 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTEEPEISE



i



The net outcome of the latter-day return
warlike enterprise is, no doubt, securely to
rated as fostering a reversion to national ideals
servile status and to institutions of a despotic
character. On the whole and for the pres-
ent, it makes for conservatism, ultimately for
reversion.

The quest of profits leads to a predatory na-
tional policy. The resulting large fortunes call
for a massive government apparatus to secure
the accumulations, on the one hand, and for large
and conspicuous opportunities to spend the result-
ing income, on the other hand; which means
a militant, coercive home administration and some-
thing in the way of an imperial court life —
a dynastic fountain of honor and a courtly
bureau of ceremonial amenities. Such an ideal
is not simply a moralist's day-dream ; it is a
s<]und business proposition, in that it lies on the
line of policy along which the business interests
are moving in their own behalf. If national
(that is to say dynastic) ambitions and warlike
aims, achievements, spectacles, and discipline be
given a large place in the commimity's life,
together with the concomitant coercive police
siuveillance, tlien there is a fair hope that the

bf the patliH of disenne and deprnvlt]r. Nor are the accumulated vices
to be light!; condemned, itince Iheir weight a.]ao falls on the conierva-
tire Bide ; boing arch&ic nnd authenticated, their oultnral bearing is,
on the whole, Kkliitary.



m

USE ^M

n to ^1
3 be H
1b of I



I



NATUEAL DECAY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE 399

disintegrating trend of the machine disciplme
may be corrected. The regime of status, fealty,
prerogative, and arbitrary command would guide
the institutional growth back into the archaic
conventional ways and give the cultural structure
something of that secure dignity and stability
which it had before the times, not only of social-
istic vapors, but of natural rights as well. Then,
too, the rest of the spiritual furniture of the
ancient regime shall presumably be reinstated;
materialistic scepticism may yield the ground to yj
a romantic philosophy, and the populace and the
scientists alike may regain something of that
devoutness and faith in preternatural agencies
which they have recently been losing. As the
discipline of prowess again comes to its own,
conviction and contentment with whatever is
authentic may return to distracted Christendom,
and may once more give something of a sacra-
mental serenity to men's outlook on the present
and the future.

But authenticity and sacramental dignity belong
neither with the machine technology, nor with
modem science, nor with business traffic. In so
far as the aggressive politics and the aristo-
cratic ideals currently furthered by the business
commtmity are worked out freely, their logical
outcome is an abatement of those cultural fea-
tures that distinguish modem times from what


400 THE THEORY OF BUSINESS ENTERPRISE



went before, including a decline of buslnesa
enterprise itself.^

How imminent such a consummation is to be 1
accounted is a question of how far the unbusiness-
like and unscientific discipline brought in by
aggressive politics may be expected to prevail
over the disciplme of the machine industry. It ]
is difficult to believe that the machme technology
and the pursuit of the material sciences will be
definitively superseded, for the reason, among
others, that any community which loses these
elements of its culture thereby loses that brute
material force that gives it strength against its
rivals. And it is equally difficult to imagine how
any one of the communities of Christendom can
avoid entering the funnel of business and dynastic
politics, and so running through the process whereby
the materialistic animus is eliminated. Which of
the two antagonistic factors may prove the stronger
in the long run is something of a blind guess ; but
the calculable future seems to belong to the one or ,
the other. It seems possible to say this much,
that the full dominion of business enterprise is I
necessarily a transitory dominion. It stands to I
lose in the end whether the one or the other of the I
two divergent cultural tendencies wins, because it I
is incompatible with the ascendancy of either.

1 See Chapter VIII. pp. 347-360.



a

I
I


I •

1



:«J



f

I'-



ll



'1



I ,'


if' .

■ b '



j

i I:



J



si



ii



!



':i



i- • '%

'i '


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

CECIL H. GREEN IIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

1415) 723-1493

All books may be (ecalled oFler 7 days

DATE DUE


