Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution
Thorstein Veblen (1915)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Thorstein Veblen's 'Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution' (New York: Macmillan, 1915). Scan via Internet Archive (Google Books). Google digitization boilerplate trimmed from the front; publisher's catalogue matter trimmed from the back. This 1915 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

IMPERIAL GERMf^lVF


i. if / t


- >.S


AND THE


INDU STRIA^ EVOLU ' riON


BY

THORSTEIN VEBLEN


w « THE THEOKV C F THE UB8«« CLASS*'
AUTHO ; ND - T HK - ST XNC T OK WOKKM.KSH.


, « «


THE MACM1LLAN CO****

™ ND ON. MACM.LLAN * CO.. ^

iqi<;


1915

^H rights reserved


^


j£T*


. £^&&23kS&&&.


*****


^I^I^L^L^L-I 1 *;.-—


-^A.


IMPEkL^:


IND"_^Ti:-l 12.'


1 *T H ~ £ "J* ' T • 1 " :


ZJj W


A *\


*.•*** '*v- *'S


CONTENTS

PAGI

CHAPTER I
Introductory: Racks and Peoples i

CHAPTER II
The Old Order n

CHAPTER III
The Dynastic State 5c

CHAPTER IV
The Case of England 8=

CHAPTER V
Imperial Germany 14c

CHAPTER VI
The Industrial Revolution in Germany . . 16S

CHAPTER VII
The Economic Policy of the Imperial State . 204

CHAPTER VIII
The Net Gain 23c

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

I
( Note to Chapter I ) 273

II

(Note to Chapter II) 282

III

(Note to Chapter III) 291

IV
( Note to Chapter VI) 315

V

(Note to Chapter VIII) 323

viii


IMPERIAL GERMANY AND THE
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION


CHAPTER I

Introductory — Races and Peoples

Among men who have no articulate acquaintance
with matters of ethnology it is usual to speak of the
several nations of Europe as distinct races. Even
official documents and painstaking historians are not
free from this confusion of ideas. In this colloquial
use "race" is not conceived to be precisely synonymous
with "nation," nor with "people;" although it would
often be a difficult matter to make out from the con-
text just what distinctive meaning is attached to one
or another of these terms. They are used loosely and
suggestively, and for many purposes they may doubt-
less be so used without compromise or confusion to
the argument ; so that it might seem the part of reason
to take them as they come, with allowance for such
■ margin of error as necessarily attaches to their col-
loquial use, and without taking thought of a closer
definition or a more discriminate use than what con-
tents those who so find these terms convenient for use
in all their colloquial ambiguity.


2 Imperial Germany

But through all the current ambiguity in the use of
these terms, and of others that serve as their virtual
equivalents, there runs a certain consistent difference
of connotation, such as to work confusion in much of
the argument in which they are employed. Whatever
else it may be taken to convey, "race" always implies
a solidarity of inheritance within the group so desig-
nated ; it always implies that the complement of heredi-
tary traits is substantially the same for all the indi-
viduals comprised in the group. "Race" is a biological
concept, and wherever it is applied it signifies common
descent of the group from an ancestry possessed of a
given specific type and transmitting the traits that
mark this type, intact to all members of the group so
designated. The other terms, that are currently used
as interchangeable with "race," as, e.g., "nation" or

"people," do not necessarily imply such a biological
solidarity of the group to which they are applied;
although the notion of a common descent is doubtless
frequently present in a loose way in the mind of those
who so use them.

In this colloquial use of terms, when the distinction
between these several peoples or alleged races is not
allowed to rest quite uncritically on a demarkation of
national frontiers, the distinguishing mark to which
recourse is usually had is the community of language.
So it comes about that habituation to a given type of
speech has come to do duty as a conventional mark of
biological derivation. A certain (virtual) uniformity
of habit is taken to mean a uniformity of hereditary
endowment. And many historians and publicists who
discuss these matters have been led into far-reaching


Introductory 3

generalisations touching hereditary characteristics of
temperament, intelligence and physique, in cases
where there is in fact ground for nothing more sub-
stantial than a discriminating comparison between di-
vergent schemes of use and wont. Such differences
of use and wont as mark off one people from another
may be a sufficiently consequential matter, of course ;
but their reach and effect are after all of quite another
character, and have quite another place and bearing
in the cultural growth, than differences of racial type.
The scheme of institutions in force in any given
community — as exemplified, e.g., by the language —
being of the nature of habit, is necessarily unstable
and will necessarily vary incontinently, though it may
be in a consistent manner; whereas the type of any
given racial stock is stable, and the hereditary traits
of spiritual and physical endowment that mark the
type are a matter of indefeasible biological heritage,
invariable throughout the life-history of the race. A
meticulous discrimination between the two concepts
— of habit and heredity — is the beginning of wisdom
in all inquiry into human behavior; and confusion of
the two is accountable for much of the polemical ani-
mus, and not a little recrimination, in recent and cur-
rent writing on historical, political and economic mat-
ters. And, of course, the larger the burden of chau-
vinism carried by the discussion the more spectacular
and sweeping has been its output of systematic
blunders.

If an inquiry into the case of Germany is to profit
the ends of theoretical generalisation bearing on the
study of human institutions, their nature and causes,


4 Imperial Germany

it is necessary to discriminate between those factors
in the case that are of a stable and enduring character
and those that are variable, and at the same time it is
necessary to take thought of what factors are peculiar
to the case of the German people and what others are
common to them and to their neighbors with whom
their case will necessarily be compared. It happens
that these two lines of discrimination in great part
coincide. In respect of the stable characteristics of
race heredity the German people does not differ in any
sensible or consistent manner from the neighboring
peoples ; whereas in the character of their past habitua-
tion — in their cultural scheme — as well as in respect
of the circumstances to which they have latterly been
exposed, their case is at least in some degree peculiar.
It is in the matter of received habits of thought — use
and wont — and in the conditions that have further
shaped their scheme of use and wont in the recent past
that the population of this country differs from the
population of Europe at large.

In view of the prevalent confusion or ignorance on
this head among the historians and publicists who
have been dealing with these matters, it seems neces-
sary, even at the cost of some tedium, to recite certain
notorious facts bearing on the racial complexion of the
German people. In so far as may bear on the question
of race for the German people taken as a whole, these
facts are no longer in controversy. Students of Euro-
pean race questions still are, and no doubt long will
be, engaged on many difficult problems of local dis-
placement, migration and infiltration of racial elements,


Introductory 5

even within the frontiers of the Fatherland; but for
the purpose in hand recourse need scarcely be had to
any of these matters of recondite detail. Even if more
might be convenient, nothing is required for present
use beyond those general features of the case on which
a secure consensus has already been reached.

It is only in so far as we can make shift to conceive
that the linguistic frontiers coincide in some passable
way with the political frontiers of German dominion
that we can make use of the name as it is currently
employed in historical, polemical and patriotic writing,
without phrase or abatement. Taking the name, then,
as loosely designating the Empire with its German-
speaking population — das deutsche Volk — and over-
looking any discrepancies in so doing, the aggregate
so designated is in no defensible sense to be spoken
of as a distinct race, even after all allowance has been
made for intrusive elements in the population, such
as the Jews or the Germanised Poles and Danes. The
German people is not a distinct race either as against
the non-German population of Europe or within itself.
In both of these respects the case of this population
is not materially different from that of any other
national population in Europe. These facts are no-
torious.

Like the populations of the neighboring countries,
the German population, too, is thoroughly and uni-
versally hybrid; and the hybrid mixture that goes to
make up the German people is compounded out of the
same racial elements that enter into the composition
of the European population at large. Its hybrid char-
acter is perhaps more pronounced than is the case in


6 Imperial Germany

the countries lying farther south, but the difference
in degree of hybridization as between the Germans and
their southern neighbors is not a serious one. On the
other hand the case oi: the Germans is in this respect
virtually identical with that of the peoples lying imme-
diately to the east and west. 1

In point of race the population of south Germany
is substantially identical with that of northern France
or the neighboring parts of Belgium ; while in the same
respect the population of north Germany has substan-
tially the same composition as that of Holland and
Denmark on the west and of western Russia on the
east ; and, taking the Fatherland as a whole, its popu-
lation is in point of race substantially identical with
that of the British Isles. The variations in local detail
within this broad belt of mixed populations are appre-
ciable, no doubt, but they are after all of much the
same character in one country as in another, and taken
one with another they run to much the same effect
both east, west and middle. When taken in the large
there is, in other words, no sensible difference of race
between the English, Dutch, Germans and the Slavs of
Great Russia.

In the current expositions of national merit and nota-
bility, when a pure-bred German, Germanic or Anglo-
Saxon race is spoken for, the context presently brings
into view that what is present in the eulogist's
conception, if anything in the way of a definite bio-
logical category, is the dolicho-blond. Now it happens,
unfortunately for the invidious insistence on purity of

*For a more detailed consideration, see Supplementary Note I,
page 273 below.


Introductory 7

race, that this particular racial stock is less frequently
to be found unmixed than either of the other two with
which it is associated. It is, indeed, quite safe to
affirm that there is no community extant, great or
small, that is made up even approximately of pure-
bred blonds to the exclusion of other racial elements.

One may even safely go further and assert that there
is not by any chance an individual to be found in the
population of Europe who, in point of pedigree, is of
unmixed blond extraction. Nor is there any reason-
able chance, nor any evidence available, that a com-
munity of pure-bred blonds ever has existed in any
part of Europe. And the like assertion may be made,
with but a slightly less degree of assurance, as regards
pure-bred specimens of the other main European races.

The variation in race characters is very appreciable
within each of these national populations ; in the Ger-
man case being quite pronounced between north and
south. Whereas the differences which go to make the dis-
tinction between these nationalities taken as aggre-
gates are of an institutional kind — differences in ac-
quired traits not transmissible by inheritance, sub-
stantially differences of habituation. On this side,
however, the divergence between one nationality and
another may be large, and they are commonly of a
systematic character; so that while no divergence of
racial type may be alleged, the divergence in the cul-
tural type may yet be serious enough.

The hybrid composition of these peoples affects
their character in yet another bearing, which is of
grave consequence in the growth of culture, at the
same time that it affects the fortunes of all the peoples


8 Imperial Germany

of Europe in much the same fashion, though perhaps
not in the same degree. By consequence of their
hybrid composition the individual members of these
nationalities vary more widely in respect of their na-
tive capacities and aptitudes than would be the case
in any pure-bred people. 1 So that these peoples each
present a much larger diversity of personalities than
would be found among them if they were not cross-
bred. On the physical side, in respect of such traits as
can be measured and compared by mechanical methods,
this great range and complexity of variations within
each nationality is obvious enough, — in stature, color,
mass and anatomical proportions. But it no less in-

x It is evident that under the Mendelian rules held to
govern matters of heredity in hybrids it follows that the
cross offspring of two (or three) distinct specific types may
vary by approximately as many permutations as the number
of viable combinations possible between the double (or
treble) range of determinants comprised is their double (or
treble) ancestry. That is to say, while the pure-bred repre-
sentatives of a given specific type may vary within the nar-
row limits of the type, through varying stress on the several
determinants comprised in the type constitution during the
growth of the filial individual (zygote) ; it is on the jother
hand contained in the premises that the cross-bred individual
may vary not only by consequence of such differences of
stress during its growth (what may be called' variation in
initially acquired characters) but also (what may be called
variation in hereditary characters) by a number of new
combinations of characters coming in from the two (or
three) sides of his double (or treble) ancestry and amount-
ing approximately to the square (or cube) — 1 of the number
of determinants comprised in the type constitution, — barring
such combinations, more numerous the more divergent the
two (or three) parent types, as may not be viable, and pro-
vided always that the filial generation in question is suffi-
ciently numerous to provide scope fQr so extensive a varia-
tion. The extreme variants in such a case may easily go
beyond the extreme range of either parent type in any given
direction, owing to the fact that a given determinant coming
in from one side may be fortified or inhibited (perhaps
more easily the latter) by a determinant coming in from the
other side and affecting the same group of tissues.


Introductory 9

dubitably comprises also those (spiritual and intellec-
tual) traits that are less amenable to anthropometrical
statistics at the same time that they are of greater
consequence to the fortunes of the people among whom
they are found. It is these psychological traits —
spiritual and intellectual proclivities, capacities, apti-
tudes, sensibilities — that afford the raw material out

of which any given scheme of civilisation is built up
and on which its life-history and the sequence of its

permutations run their course. It is, of course, a trite
matter-of-course that no people can work out a scheme
of culture that lies beyond or outside the range of its
capacities ; and it is likewise a matter-of-course that a
nation whose population is gifted with many and vari-
ous capacities is thereby better fitted to meet the exi-
gencies that arise in the course of its life-history, and
so will be in a position more promptly to respond to
any call. A larger, fuller, more varied and more
broadly balanced scheme of culture will, under toler-
able circumstances, be found among such a people
than in a community made up of individuals that breed
true with close approximation to a single specific type.
Such a hybrid population will, of course, also have
the faults of its qualities. The divergence of tempera-
ment and proclivities will be as wide as that of its
capacities and aptitudes; and the unrest that works
out in a multiform ramification of achievements on the
one side is likely to work out also in a profuse output
of irritation and dissentient opinions, ideals and aspira-
tions on the other side. For good or ill, such has been
the congenital make-up of the Western peoples, and
such, it may be called to mind, has also been the history
of Western civilisation.


io Imperial Germany

All the while it may as well be kept in mind that in
this respect, as regards the range and multifarious
character of their native endowment, these Western
peoples are today what they once were in neolithic
time. The range of variations in each and all is very
appreciably wider than would be had within any pure-
bred stock ; but it is no wider, nor is it in any sensible
degree different, among the hybrid generations that
occupy these countries today than it once was among
the similarly hybrid generations that carried this
Western culture in that earlier time. This wide rang-
ing heritage is after all a neolithic heritage ; and how-
ever multiform and picturesquely varied the cultural
scheme of the Western peoples in later times may
seem, the stream does not, after all, rise higher than
its neolithic source. The population that makes up
and carries forward this civilisation is, after all, en-
dowed with the faults of its qualities, and they are the
neolithic qualities.


CHAPTER II


The Old Order


The state of civilisation and of the industrial arts
into which the remote ancestry of the North Euro-
peans may be said to have been born was the earlier
neolithic, — the earliest phase of the stone age of
which there is certain evidence in northern Europe.
The European palaeolithic does not come into the case,
since it closed before the formation of that hybrid
population out of which these later European peoples
have sprung; besides which its traces are virtually
wanting throughout the habitat in which this popula-
tion of mixed race lived and moved and made good
their survival. Even for Europe at large, it is held,
there is no cultural continuity, and little if any racial
continuity, between the palaeolithic and the neolithic.
The neolithic is believed to have begun independently,
so far as concerns its course in Europe, having come in
as an intrusive culture, presumptively at the intrusion
of the Mediterranean race into Europe, probably late
in quaternary time; the earlier stages of the advance
that led up to the European neolithic having been
worked out outside the European area and before the
bearers of the neolithic penetrated that quarter of the

world.


ii


12 Imperial Germany

It may therefore be said that this early neolithic
state of the arts of life is in a way congenital to the
north-European peoples. Whether such a statement
will apply in the case of the Mediterranean race, which
is held to have brought this culture into Europe, may
be left an open question. It is of no immediate interest
here. The like is true for the Alpine stock, which is
held to have come in from the east, presumably from
Asia, during the early neolithic, and which is likewise
believed to have reached the neolithic stage before
breaking into the European situation. Neither of
these races, nor the two together, as they stood at the
time of their intrusion into Europe are to be reckoned
the ancestors of the north-Europeans, in the sense of
affording the ancestral type, whether physical or spirit-
ual, of that north-European population that presently
multiplies and continues to find a livelihood by help of
the neolithic technology on the north-European sea-
board. Doubtless each of these races contributes its
share to this ancestry ; they are both present from the
outset, or nearly so, in the mixed north-European
population, and they have apparently always continued
to account for at least one-half of the racial constitu-
tion of these peoples. But the ancestry of the north-
Europeans can not be said properly to have come into
effectual bearing until the dolicho-blond stock is mixed
with the other two, so as to give rise to the particular
hybrid strain that has continuously occupied this re-
gion since neolithic times and has peopled north
Europe with the nations now living. The racial history
of these peoples is the history of a population of hy-
brids made up of the three stocks in conjunction, not


The Old Order 13

of one and another of these racial types in severalty;
it can therefore not fairly be said to take its beginning
until the three racial factors requisite for its constitu-
tion came into conjunction.

The selective test of fitness to survive in the climatic
region of the Baltic and North Sea under neolithic
conditions, and to hold that habitat against all comers,
was not applied to the three constituent stocks in
severalty, and so was not a conclusive test of superior
fitness in either one of the three taken by itself. The
test, and the conclusion to be drawn from the experi-
ment, applies solely to the composite population into
which the three enter as essential constituents. Such
is obviously the case, since in the course of selective
breeding through several thousands of years no one of
the three constituent types has displaced both or
either of the other two in any part of the region in
question, nor has any one of the racial types at any point
displaced the hybrid offspring of the three. The most
that can be said is that while the population has con-
tinued through this long interval of time to be a hy-
brid mixture, the character of the mixture has come to
vary from one place to another in such a way that this
composite population is more blond toward the north
and more brunet toward the south, at the same time
that, even with an equal initial chance, the dolicho-
brunet (Mediterranean) counts for less both north and
south within this special climatic region than either of
the other two constituent stocks.

For a contrast that will enforce this line of argu-
ment illustrative instances may be drawn from almost
any country lying within striking distance of this


14 Imperial Germany

Baltic-North Sea tract. The hybrid populations of
this region have repeatedly, almost unremittingly,
broken bounds and migrated in force into other coun-
tries and so have been mixed in by cross-breeding with
these other peoples. But in no case where the experi-
ment has had time enough to be at all conclusive have
they succeeded in making over the racial constitution
of the peoples among whom they so have intruded,
with such effect as in any instance to supplant the in-
digenous population and substitute their own racial
composition for what they found at the time of their
immigration ; at least one of the racial factors that go
to make up the northern hybrids — the dolicho-blond
— has in all cases presently disappeared selectively
from these outlying populations into which it so has
been introduced; and the composite northern popula-
tion has proved itself unfit in its composite character
to live outside the Baltic-North Sea tract, at the same
time that its constituents have proved unfit to hold
this tract except in a composite. Nor has any intru-
sive population of a different racial derivation, pure-
bred or composite, succeeded in displacing the northern
hybrids from this habitat, whether by mass movement
or by infiltration, although that experiment has also
been tried on a sufficient scale, — as, e.g., in the ad-
vance of the Finns (Lapps) into the Baltic country,
particularly on the northern and northeastern borders
of this region that has by a process of selection been
proved to belong to the blond-hybrid peoples. At least
in the one instance of Finland, and less assuredly else-
where toward the north and east, the onset of the in-
truders was so far successful as to have displaced. the


The Old Order 15

language of the earlier population ; but in the long run
the racial composition of the inhabitants has reverted
substantially to what it was before the coming of the
Finns, so that there is at present no appreciable racial
difference between the two shores of the Baltic. 1

The early Baltic culture is of interest, then, as show-
ing the state of the arts of life to which the ancestry
of substantially all the north-European peoples was
originally accustomed ; which might, indeed, be said to
be congenital to these peoples. This culture runs
somewhat of an even course, as near as the evidence
permits it to be seen, over a long interval, — suffi-
ciently long to have tested the fitness of the Baltic
population for the manner of life which it offered, and
at the same time sufficiently exposed to contact with
other racial elements or aggregates outside to prove
that the characteristic hybrid mixture of these Baltic
peoples was better fitted than any competing population
for life on that technological footing and under the
geographical and climatic conditions in which they were
placed. A summary recital of the characteristic features
and salient events of this cultural period, so far as the
evidence permits, will substantiate the claim. 2

In general terms the Baltic stone age may be char-
acterised as a relatively advanced savagery, placed in
a geographic situation drawn on a relatively small
scale, — a small-scale system of tillage and presently
of mixed farming. It may perhaps as fairly be called a
relatively low stage of barbarism; there need be no
dispute about the alternative terms ; they both are sug-

*Cf. f e.g., A. H. Keane, Man Past and Present, ch. ix.
2 Sec Note II, p. 282.


16 Imperial Germany

gestive rather than technically competent descriptive
terms. And the bronze age comes under the same
loose designation, with the necessary caution that it
is marked, on the whole, by an appearance of greater
technological efficiency and a larger accumulation of
wealth, — perhaps also a more settled habit of life.

The neolithic population appear, throughout the
period and throughout their territory, to have lived in
open settlements of no great size scattered over the
face of the land as the available soil for tillage and pas-
ture might decide. It is doubtful whether these settle-
ments were grouped in villages or loosely dispersed by
individual households over the open country. But in
any case there is said to be no evidence of towns, or
even of large villages, 1 nor is there any trace of forti-
fications or any evidence of a preference for naturally
defensible sites. Taken in conjunction with the rela-
tive scarcity of weapons, and the total absence — in
the available evidence — of any form of defensive
armor, this defenseless distribution of settlements con-
veys perhaps an unduly broad suggestion of a peace-
able habit of life. Yet with all due caution of allow-


iThe kitchen middens — refuse heaps — that are so extraordi-
narily numerous and extensive on Danish ground may raise a
question as to the absence of large settlements. In the earlier
canvass of the matter of the kitchen middens it was some-
what naively taken for granted that their size roughly indi-
cated the size and duration of settlements that once occupied
these sites. Later and more critical handling of the question
is apparently coming to the conclusion that, for much of their
later accretions especially, these shell-mounds owe their for-
mation in great part to seasonal occupation of the sites on the
beach by a population whose chief interest and permanent habi-
tations are to be looked for on the cultivated lands farther back
in the country, — while it is, of course, not denied that the
shell-mounds may at the same time mark the sites of permanent
fishing villages.


The Old Order 17

ance for what the material does not, and perhaps can
not, show, it is impossible to set aside the circumstan-
tial evidence that the culture was characteristically a
peaceable one. And it necessarily follows also, in the
light of considerations already set out above, that the
population will have been of a peaceable temper on
the whole. The like conditions continue, and the cir-
cumstantial evidence runs on with a degree of con-
sistency to the same effect, not only through the stone
age but also through the* succeeding period of the
bronze age. In the latter period especially the distri-
bution of the population has in several places been
traced in some detail, showing that it followed the lay
of the land in such a way as to take account of the
most practicable fords and roadways, many of which are
still in use. 1


II


On the Merits of Borrowing

In one connection and another it has already ap-
peared that this stone and bronze-age culture of the
Baltic peoples drew for its elements on other cultural
regions and earlier phases of civilisation. These peo-
ples borrowed persistently and with great facility. So
far as this practice of borrowing is traceable in the
stone age it is necessarily a borrowing of technological

1 Cf. f e.g., Sophus Miiller, Aarboger for nordisk Oldkyndighed,
1904, "Vei og Bygd i Sten-og Bronzealderen ;" also later papers,
ibid! by the same author; H. A. Nielsen, ibid., 1906, Bidrag
til Danmarks forhistoriske Befolknings — sarligt Stenaldersfolk-
ets — Anthropologic," and "Yderligere Bidrag," ibid. 1911.


18 Imperial Germany

elements, since the nature of the materials in which
they worked has allowed very little but industrial ap-
pliances to come down to the present ; but as regards
these technological elements the borrowing is of the
most ubiquitous character. Even in the use. of flint,
as shown by the series of implements running through
the period specifically characterised by the kitchen
middens and down over the full-blown neolithic into
the bronze age, — even in their use of flint they appear
to have learned much of the serviceable innovations
from outside, chiefly from the south. The early kitchen-
midden implements are rather rudely chipped flints,
and it is apparent that the grinding of flint was un-
known on the Scandinavian waters in that time. Pres-
ently, when this improvement comes into vogue, it
comes in along with the use of new and more service-
able forms, such as to suggest that they were worked
out by help of examples drawn from the more ad-
vanced neolithic populations to the south. But along
with a due recognition of this technological indebted-
ness it is also to.be recognised that the Baltic peoples
presently carried this polished (and chipped) flint
technology to a perfection of workmanship and me-
chanical serviceability not surpassed, even if it may
have been equalled, by any other neolithic culture.
Again, neither the crop plants nor the domestic animals
are visibly present in the kitchen middens from the
outset. As for the crop plants this may mean only a
quite intelligible failure of evidence, and does not con-
clusively argue that, e.g., barley was not known and
used from the beginning of the Baltic settlement,
though the total absence of any trace is not to be set


The Old Order 19

aside as having no significance. For the domestic
animals, on the other hand, the negative evidence is
conclusive, and it must be taken as an ascertained fact
that these were introduced gradually at an appreciable
interval after the beginnings of the Baltic culture had
been made, and after the Baltic peoples had definitely
acquired the (hybrid) racial complexion that marks
them through later time. The paucity of the material*
not in volume but in range, permits little more to be
said in this connection for the stone age ; except it be
that the only other appreciable material evidence avail-
able, that of the graves and mounds, runs to much the
same effect, — the use of these being also held to have
been learned from outside, and developed in a charac-
teristic manner on lines originally given by the same
usage as it prevailed in other countries.

Throughout the bronze and iron periods of prehis-
tory the s^me facile borrowing goes on; both the use
and the material of the bronze and iron work being of
foreign derivation. And as the sequence comes on
down the ages and approaches historical dates, offer-
ing a progressively increasing volume and diversity of
archaeological material, the evidence of borrowing ex-
tends also to other than the industrial arts. As the
beginning of history, in the stricter sense, is ap-
proached this borrowing shows itself ever more notori-
ously in the aesthetic arts ; in which, at the close of the
pagan era, e.g., Scandinavian art shows its indebted-
ness to the Irish and other Gaelic 'culture at every turn.
What is known of late Baltic (mainly Scandinavian)
paganism carries the same insidious suggestion of fa-
cility for new ideas in the domain of supernatural


20 Imperial Germany

beliefs ; very much as the shifting progression of usages
in sepulture in the remoter past argues that these
peoples were not above learning from their neighbors,
or perhaps rather were temperamentally defenseless
against innovation from the outside. In the late pagan
era they seem, e. g., to have borrowed, and in some
degree made over, several deities of foreign extrac-
tion ; and it may be recalled that the pagan era closes
with the wholesale acceptance of an alien mythology
and religious scheme, the improvement and adaptation
of which to their own temperamental needs has occu-
pied much of the serious attention of these peoples
ever since.

None of this extensive and unremitting draft on the
technological and institutional resources of other cul-
tural regions can be called an idle borrowing. The
borrowed elements have invariably been assimilated,
drawn into the cultural system and so combined and
shaped to its purpose as to have led to an unbroken
evolution of a scheme peculiar to these (hybrid) peo-
ples and their needs, rather than to the substitution of
a scheme from outside or a piecing-out of the scheme
of things into which it is intruded. In other words, the
borrowing has been done in a thoroughly workmanlike
manner and with a free hand.

This proclivity to borrow, and the free and easy
efficiency with which borrowed elements are turned to
account, is a characteristic trait of north-European
antiquity, as, indeed, it is still something of a dis-
tinctive mark of these peoples. It probably marks a
temperamental bent of the north-European population,
at the same time that it gives a certain characteristic


The Old Order 21

flexibility to their scheme of institutions. As a tempera-
mental trait it would appear to be traceable, at least in
good part, to the fact of their hybrid extraction ; perhaps
also in part to the peculiar race characteristics of the
stocks from which this hybrid population is derived. 1

The efficacy of borrowing that fo comes to light in
the life-history of the Baltic culture, as also in a less
notorious manner in other instances of cultural inter-
course, puts up to the student of institutions a per-
plexing question, or rather a group of perplexing ques-
tions. Something has just been said on the question
of why one people borrows elements of culture or of


1 Certain other cultural regions and populations offer an in-
structive parallel on this head, notably the Japanese, and possi-
bly also the Aegean peoples of antiquity. Like the Baltic
peoples the Japanese are a hybrid people, a composite of two
(perhaps rather three) main racial stocks, with two or three
minor racial factors thrown in. "Such has apparently been the
composition of the Japanese population since the iirst begin-
nings of which anything can be said to be known, even if the
legends of the Ko Ji Ki— the "Records of Ancient Matters"— be
accepted at what may be called their face value. By a curious
coincidence, the period of Japanese prehistory and history
seems to cover loosely the same general interval of time as
that of the Baltic peonies; and as with the latter, so in the
case of the Japanese, the cultural life-history of the people is a
history of facile and ubiquitous borrowing done in the most
workmanlike manner and executed with the most serviceable ef-
fect. The instance of Japan, however, palpably suggests that this
temperamental facility for the acceptance and utilisation of
cultural elements from outside, whether in the Japanese or in
the Baltic population, should be credited not so much to any
marked racial traits of temperament in the constituents of
such a hybrid people, but rather to the fact of hybrid derivation
itself. It would seem to be due in great part to the exceptionally
wide range of variation among the individuals of such a
hybrid people, quite as much as to any presumed exceptional
facility of this kind in any one of the racial types that have
gone to make up the composite population. The parallel between
the Japanese and the Baltic peoples in this respect can by 110
stretch of fantastic ethnological argument be set down to a puta-
tive community of descent.


22 Imperial Germany

technology with greater facility and effect than an-
other. But the larger question stands untouched:
Why do the borrowed elements lend themselves with
greater facility and effect to their intrinsic use in the
hands of the borrower people than in the hands of the
people to whose initiative they are due? Why are
borrowed elements of culture more efficiently em-
ployed than home grown innovations? or more so than

r

the same elements at the hands of their originators?
It would of course be quite bootless to claim that such
is always or necessarily the case, but it is likewise not
to be denied that, as a matter of history, technological in-
novations and creations of an institutional nature have in
many cases reached their fullest serviceability only at the
hands of other communities and other peoples than
those to whom these cultural elements owed their
origin and initial success. That such should ever be
the case is a sufficiently striking phenomenon, — one
might even say a sufficiently striking discrepancy.

An explanation, good as far as it goes, though it may
not go all the way, is to be looked for in the peculiar
circumstances attending the growth, as well as the
eventual transmission by borrowing, of any article of
the institutional equipment. Technological elements
affecting the state of the industrial arts, as being the
more concrete and more tangible, will best serve to
demonstrate the proposition. Any far-reaching inno-
vation or invention, such as may eventually find a sub-
stantial place in the inventory of borrowed elements,
will necessarily begin in a small way, finding its way
into use and wont among the people where it takes its
rise rather tentatively and by tolerance than with a


The Old Order 23

sweeping acceptance and an adequate realisation of its
uses and ulterior consequences. Such will have been
the case, e.g., with the domestication of the crop
plants and the beginnings of tillage, or the domestica-
tion of the useful animals, or the use of the metals, or,
again, with the rise of the handicraft system, or the
industrial revolution that brought in the machine in-
dustry. The innovation finds its way into the system
of use and wont at the cost of some derangement to
the system, provokes to new usages, conventions, be-
liefs, and principles of conduct, in part directed ad-
visedly to its utilisation or to the mitigation of its im-
mediate consequences, or to the diversion of its usu-
fruct to the benefit of given individuals or classes; but
in part there also grow up new habits of thought due
to the innovation which it brings into the routine of
life, directly in the way of new requirements of manipu-
lation, surveillance, attendance or seasonal time-sched-
ule, and indirectly by affecting the economic relations
between classes and localities, as well as the distribu-
tion and perhaps the aggregate supply of consumable
wealth.

In the early times, such as would come immediately
in question here, it is a virtual matter-of-course that
any material innovation, or indeed any appreciable unit of
technological ways and means, will be attended with a
fringe of magical or superstitious conceits and observ-
ances. The evidences of this are to be found in good plenty
in all cultures, ancient or contemporary, on the savage
and barbarian levels; and indeed they are not alto-
gether wanting in civilised life. Many students of
ethnology, folk-psychology and religion have busied


24 Imperial Germany

themselves to good effect with collecting and analysing
such material afforded by magical and superstitious
practice, and in most instances they are able to trace
these practices to some ground of putative utility, con-
necting them with the serviceable working of the arts
of life at one point or another, or with the mainten-
ance of conditions conducive to life and welfare in
some essential respect. Where the ethnologist is un-
able to find such a line of logical connection between
superstitious practice and the exigencies of life and
welfare, he commonly considers that he has not been
able to find what is in the premises, not that the
premises do not contain anything of the kind he is
bound to expect. But if magical and superstitious
practices, or such of them as are at all of material
consequence, are with virtual universality to be traced
back through the channels of habituation to some puta-
tive ground of serviceability for human use, it follows
that the rule should work, passably at least, the other
way ; that the state of the industrial arts which serve
human use in such a culture will be shot through with
magical and superstitious conceits and observances
having an indispensable but wholly putative efficacy.
In many of the lower cultures, or perhaps rather in
such of the lower cultures as are at all well known, the
workday routine of getting a living is encumbered with
a ubiquitous and pervasive scheme of such magical or
superstitious conceits and observances, which are felt
to constitute an indispensable part of the industrial
processes in which they mingle. They embody the
putatively efficacious immaterial constituent of all
technological procedure; or, seen in detail, they are


The Old Order 25

the spiritual half that completes and animates any pro-
cess or device throughout its participation in the in-
dustrial routine. Like the technological elements with
which they are associated, and concomitantly with
them, these magically efficacious devices have grown
into the prevalent habits of thought of the population
and become an integral part of the common-sense
notion of how these technological elements are turned
to account. 1 And at a slightly farther shift in the cur-
rent of sophistication, out of the same penchant for
anthropomorphic interpretation and analogy, a wide
range of religious observances, properly so called, will
also presently come to bear on the industrial process
and the routine of economic life, with a proliferous
growth of ceremonial, of propitiation and avoidance,
designed to further the propitious course of things to
be done.

These matters of the magical and religious ritual of
industry and economic arrangements among the peo-
ples of the lower cultures are sufficiently familiar to all
ethnological students, and probably they also are so
far a matter of common notoriety that there is no need
of insistence on their place and value in these lower
cultures. They are spoken of here only to recall the
fact that the large and consequential elements involved
in any primitive system of industry have commonly
carried such a fringe of putatively efficacious, though
mechanically futile, waste motion. These naive forms
of mandatory futility are believed to belong only on

1 For illustration from contemporary lower cultures, cf. W. W.
Skeat, Malay Magic, perhaps especially ch. v.; for classic
antiquity cf. Jane E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of
Greek Religion, ch. iii. iv.


26 Imperial Gernumy

the lower levels of culture, although it should not be
overlooked that magical and religious conceits still ex-
ercise something of an inhibitory influence in the af-
fairs of industry even among the very enlightened peo-
ples of Christendom. But aside from these simple-
minded institutional inhibitions on industrial efficiency
that seem so much a matter of course in the lower
cultures, there are others that run to much the same
effect and hold their place among the more enlight-
ened peoples in much the same matter-of-course way.
These are in part rather obscure, not having been much
attended to in popular speculation, and in part quite
notorious, having long been subjects of homiletical
iteration. And since this growth of what may be
called secular, as contrasted with magical or religious,
institutional inhibitions on efficiency, has much to do
with latterday economic affairs, as well as with the
material fortunes of our prehistoric forebears, a more
detailed exposition of their place in economic life will
be in place.

On the adoption of new industrial ways and means,
whether in the way of specific devices and expedients
or of comprehensive changes in methods and pro-
cesses, there follows a growth of conventional usages
governing the utilisation of the new ways and means.
This applies equally whether the new expedients are
home-bred innovations or technological improvements
borrowed from outside ; and in any case such a growth
of conventions takes time, being of the nature of adap-
tive habituation. A new expedient, in the way of
material appliances or of improved processes, comes
into the industrial system and is adapted to the re-


The Old Order 27

quirements of the state of things into which it is in-
troduced. Certain habitual ways of utilising the new
device come to be accepted; as, would happen, e.g., on
the introduction of domestic animals among a people
previously living by tillage alone and having no ac-
quaintance with the use of such animals under other
conditions than those prevailing among purely pas-
toral peoples. So, again, the gradual improvement of
boat-building and navigation, such as took place among
the prehistoric Baltic peoples, would induce a progres-
sive change in the conventional scheme of life and
bring on a specialisation of occupations with some
division of economic and social classes. Or, again, in
such a large systematic shift as is involved in the
coming of the handicraft industry and its spread and
maturing ; class distinctions, occupational divisions,
standardisation of methods and products, together with
trade relations and settled markets and trade routes,
came gradually into effect. In part these conventional
features resulting from and answering to the new in-
dustrial factors continued to have the force of com-
monsense conventional arrangement only ; in part they
also acquired the added stability given by set agree-
ment, authoritative control and statutory enactment.

So, in the case of the handicraft system such matters
as trade routes, methods of package, transportation and
consignment, credit relations, and the like, continued
very largely, though not wholly nor throughout the
vogue of the system, to be regulated by conventional
vogue rather than by authoritative formulation; while
on the other hand the demarkation between crafts and
classes of craftsmen, as well as the standardisation of


28 Imperial Germany

methods and output, were presently, in the common
run, brought under rigorous surveillance by authorities
vested with specific powers and acting under carefully
formulated rules.

But whether this standardisation and convention-
alisation takes the set form of authoritative agreement
and enactment or is allowed to rest on the looser ground
of settled use and wont, it is always of the nature of a
precipitate of past habituation, and is designed to meet
exigencies that have come into effect in past experi-
ence; it always embodies something of the principle
of the dead hand ; and along with all the salutary ef-
fects of stability and harmonious working that may be
credited to such systematisation, it follows also that
these standing conventions out of the past unavoidably
act to retard, deflect or defeat adaptation to new exi-
gencies that arise in the further course. Conventions
that are in some degree effete continue to cumber the
ground.

All this apparatus of conventions and standard
usage, whether it takes the simpler form of use and
wont or the settled character of legally competent
enactment and common-law rule, necessarily has some-
thing of this effect of retardation in any given state of
the industrial arts, and so necessarily acts in some de-
gree to lower the net efficiency of the industrial system
which it pervades. But this work of retardation is
also backed by the like character attaching to the ma-
terial equipment by use of which the technological
proficiency of the community takes effect. The equip-
ment is also out of the past, and it too lies under the
dead hand. In a general way, any minor innovation


The Old Order 29

in processes or in the extension of available resources,
or in the scale of organization, is taken care of as far
as may be by a patchwork improvement and amplifica-
tion of the items of equipment already in hand ; the fash-
ion of plant and appliances already in use is adhered to,
with concessions, in new installations, but of course more
decisively so in any endeavor to bring the equipment in
hand up to scale and grade. Changes so made are in part
of a concessive nature, in sufficiently large part, indeed,
to tell materially on the aggregate ; and the fact of such
changes being habitually made in a concessive spirit so
lessens the thrust in the direction of innovation that even
the concessions do not carry as far as might be. 1

•

1 An illustrative instance of this obsolescence of equipment on
a large scale and in modern circumstances is afforded by several
of the underlying companies of the United States Steel Corpora-
tion. The plants in question had been installed at a period when
the later methods of steel production had not been perfected and
before the later and richer sources of raw materials had become
available by the latest methods of transportation; they were also
located with a view to smaller markets, distributed on an earlier
and now obsolete plan, which has become obsolete through
changes in the railway system and the growth of new centers
of population. It was technologically impossible to bring them
up to date as independent industrial plants, and as a business
proposition it was impracticable to discard them and replace
them by new equipment placed to better advantage and organ-
ised on a scale to take full advantage of available resources
and methods. The remedy sought in the formation of the
Steel Corporation was a compromise, whereby the obsolete
items of equipment — in part obsolete only in the geographical
sense that the industrial situation had shifted out of their
way — were gradually discarded and replaced with new plant de-
signed for specialised lines of production, at the same time
that the monopolistic position of the new Corporation enabled
the shift to be made at a sufficiently slow rate to mask the sub-
stitution and make the community at large pay for this tem-
porary lower efficiency due to a gradual disuse of obsolete equip-
ment and methods, in place of such an abrupt and sweeping
shift to a new basis as the altered technological situation
called for.

At a later juncture the Steel Corporation found itself also


\


30 Imperial Germany

It is in the relatively advanced stages of the indus-
trial arts that this retardation due to use and wont, as
* ' distinguished from magical and religious waste and

inhibitions on innovation, become of grave conse-
quence. There appears, indeed, t6 be in some sort a
systematic symmetry or balance to be observed in the
way in which the one of these lines of technological
inhibition comes into effectual bearing as fast as the
other declines. At the same time, as fast as commercial
considerations, considerations of investment, come to
rule industry, the investor's interest comes also to
exercise an inhibitory surveillance over technological effi-
ciency, both by the well-known channel of limiting the
output and holding up the price to what the traffic
will bear, — that is what it will bear in the pecuniary
sense of yielding the largest net gain to the business
men in interest, — and also by the less notorious reluc-
tance of investors and business concerns to replace
obsolete methods and plant with new and more efficient
equipment.

Beyond these simple and immediate inhibitory con-
volutions within the industrial system itself, there lies
a fertile domain of conventions and institutional ar-
rangements induced as secondary consequences of the
growth of industrial efficiency and contrived to keep

face to face with a serious difficulty due to "obsolescence through
improvement" of the same general kind; when it appeared that
by the later improved processes steel of the first quality could
be made from ore peculiar to the southern field as cheaply as
from the Minnesota supply on which the Corporation's :nilis
were in the habit of depending, and with special advantages of
access to certain markets. How far the resulting acquisition of
the southern coal, ore and lime by the Corporation may have
resulted in a retardation of efficiency in steel production would
be hazardous to guess.


The Old Order 31

its net serviceability in bounds by diverting its ener-
gies to industrially unproductive uses and its output
to unproductive consumption. 1

With any considerable advance in the industrial
arts business enterprise presently takes over the con-
trol of the industrial process; with the consequences
that the net pecuniary gain to the business man in
control becomes the test of industrial efficiency. This
may result in a speeding up of the processes of indus-
try, as is commonly noted by economists. But it also
results in "unemployment" whenever a sustained work-
ing of the forces engaged does not, or is. not believed
to, conduce to the employer's largest net gain, as may
notoriously happen in production for a market. Also,
it follows that industry is controlled and directed with
a view to sales, and a wise expenditure of industrial
efficiency, in the business sense, come to mean such
expenditure as contributes to sales; which may often
mean that the larger share of costs, as the goods reach
their users, is the industrially wasteful cost of adver-
tising and other expedients of salesmanship.

The normal result of business control in industry —
normal in the sense of being uniformly aimed at and
also in that it commonly follows — is the accumulation
of wealth and income in the hands of a class. Under
the well-accepted principle of "conspicuous waste'*
wealth so accumulated is to be put in evidence in
visible consumption and visible exemption from work.
So that with due, but ordinarily not a large lapse of
time, an elaborate scheme of proprieties establishes

2 See below, pp. 132-144.


32 Imperial Germany

itself bearing on this matter of conspicuous consump-
tion, so contrived as to "take up the slack." This sys-
tem of conspicuous waste is a scheme of proprieties,
decencies, and standards of living, the economic motive
of which is competitive spending. It works out in a
compromise between the immediate spending of in-
come on conspicuous consumption — together with the
conspicuous avoidance of industrial work — on the one
side, and deferred spending — commonly called "sav-
ing" — on the other side. The deferred spending may .
be deferred to a later day in the lifetime of the saver,
or to a later generation ; its effects are substantially the
same in either case. There is the further reservation
to be noted, that in so far as property rights, tenures
and the conjunctures of business gain are in any de-
gree insecure, measures will be taken to insure against
the risks of loss and eventual inability to keep up ap-
pearances according to the accepted standard of living ;
this insurance takes the shape of accumulation, in one
form or another, — provision for future revenue.

Like other conventions and institutional regulations
the scheme of spending rests on current, i.e., immedi-
ately past, experience, and as was noted above it is so
contrived as to take up the calculable slack, — the
margin between production and productive consump-
tion. It is perhaps needless to enter the caution that
such a scheme of conspicuous waste does not always,
perhaps not in the common run of cases, go to the
full limit of what the traffic will bear; but it is also to
be noted that it will sometimes, and indeed not infre-
quently, exceed that limit. Perhaps in all cases, but
particularly where the industrial efficiency of the com-


The Old Order 33

munity is notably high, so as to yield a very appreci-
able margin between productive output and necessary
current consumption, some appreciable thought has to
be spent on the question of ways and means of spend-
ing, and a technique of consumption grows up. It
will be appreciated how serious a question this may
become, of the ways and means of reputable consump-
tion, when it is called to mind that in the communities
where the modern state of the industrial arts has ade-
quately taken effect this margin of product disposable
for wasteful consumption will always exceed fifty per
cent of the current product, and will in the more fortu-
nate cases probably exceed seventy-five per cent of
the whole. So considerable a margin is not to be dis-
posed of to good effect by haphazard impulse. The due
absorption of it in competitive spending takes thought,
skill and time for the organisation of ways and means.
It is also not a simple problem of conspicuously con-
suming time and substance, without more ado; men's
sense of fitness and beauty requires that the spending
should take place in an appropriate manner, such as
will not offend good taste and not involve an odiously
aimless ostentation. And it takes time and habituation,
as well as a discriminate balancing of details, before a
scheme of reputable standardised waste is perfected;
of course, it also costs time and specialised effort to
take due care of the running adjustment of such a
scheme to current conditions of taste, ennui and con-
sumptive distinction, — as seen, e.g. t in the technique of
fashions. It has, indeed, proved to be a matter of some
difficulty, not to say of serious strain, in the industrially
advanced communities, to keep the scheme of conspicuous


34 Imperial Germany

waste abreast of the times; so that, besides the con-
spicuous consumers in their own right, there have grown
up an appreciable number of special occupations devoted
to the technical needs of reputable spending. The tech-
nology of wasteful consumption is large and elaborate
and its achievements are among the monuments of human
initiative and endeavor; it has its victories and its heroes
as well as the technology of production.

But any technological scheme is more or less of a
balanced system, in which the interplay of parts has such
a character of mutual support and dependence that any
substantial addition or subtraction at any one point will
involve more or less of derangement all along the line,
neither can an extremely large contingent of reputable
waste be suddenly superinduced in the accepted standard
of living of any given community — though this difficulty
is not commonly a sinister one — nor can a large retrench-
ment in this domain of what is technically called "the
moral standard of living" be suddenly effected without
substantial hardship or without seriously disturbing the
spiritual balance of the community. To realise the import
of such disturbance in the scheme of wasteful consump-
tion one need only try to picture the consternation that
wbuld, e.g., fall on the British community consequent on
the abrupt discontinuance of the Court and its social and
civil manifestations, or of horse-racing, or of the estab-
lished church, or of evening dress. But since the growth
and acceptance of any scheme of wasteful expenditure
is after all subsequent to and consequent upon the sur-
plus productivity of the industrial system on which it
rests, the introduction, in whole or in part, of a new and
more efficient state of the industrial arts does not carry


The Old Order 35

with it from the outset a fully developed system of
standardised consumption ; particularly, it need not follow
that the standard scheme of consumption will be carried
over intact in case a new industrial technology is bor-
rowed. There is no intimate or intrinsic mutuality of
mechanical detail between the technology of industry and
the technique of conspicuous waste; the high-heeled
slipper and the high-wrought "picture hat," e.g., are
equally well accepted in prehistoric Crete and in twen-
tieth-century France, and the Chinese lady bandages
her foot into deformity where the Manchu lady, in evi-
dence of the same degree of opulence in the same town,
is careful to let her foot run loose. It is only that,
human nature being what it is, a disposable margin of
production will, under conditions of private ownership,
provoke a competent scheme of wasteful consumption.

Owing to this mechanical discontinuity between any
given state of the industrial arts and the scheme of magi-
cal, religious, conventional, or pecuniary use and wont
with which it lives in some sort of symbiosis, the carrying-
over of such a state of the industrial arts from one
community to another need not involve the carrying-over
of this its spiritual complement. Such is particularly the
case where the borrowing takes place across a marked
cultural frontier, in which case it follows necessarily
that the alien scheme of conventions will not be taken
over intact in taking over an alien technological system,
whether in whole or in part. The borrowing community
or cultural group is already furnished with its owti sys-
tem of conceits and observances — in magic, religion,
propriety, and any other line of conventional necessity —
and the introduction of a new scheme, or the intrusion


36 Imperial Germany

of new and alien elements into the accredited scheme
already in force, is a work of habituation that takes time
and special provocation. All of which applies with added
force to the introduction of isolated technological ele-
ments from an alien culture, still more particularly, of
course, where the technological expedients borrowed are
turned to other uses and utilised by other methods than
those employed in the culture from which they were
borrowed, — as, e.g., would be the case in the acquisition
of domestic cattle by a sedentary farming community
from a community of nomadic or half-nomadic pastoral
people, as appears to have happened in the prehistoric
culture of the Baltic peoples. The interposition of a
linguistic frontier between the borrower and creditor
communities would still farther lessen the chance of im-
material elements of culture being carried over in the
transmission of technological knowledge. The borrowed
elements of industrial efficiency would be stripped of their
fringe of conventional inhibitions and waste, and the
borrowing community would be in a position to use them
with a freer hand and with a better chance of utilising
them to their full capacity, and also with a better chance
of improving on their use, turning them to new uses, and
carrying the principles (habits of thought) involved in
the borrowed items out with unhampered insight into
farther ramifications of technological proficiency. The
borrowers are in a position of advantage, intellectually,
in that the new expedient comes into their hands more
nearly in the shape of a theoretical principle applicable
under given physical conditions ; rather than in the shape
of a concrete expedient applicable within the limits of
traditional use, personal, magical, conventional. It is, in


The Old Order 37

other words, taken over in a measure without the faults
of its qualities.

Here, again is a secondary effect of borrowing, that
may not seem of first-rate consequence but is none the
less necessarily to be taken into account. The borrowed
elements are drawn into a cultural scheme in which they
are aliens and into the texture of which they can be
wrought only at the cost of some, more or less serious,
derangement of the accustomed scheme of life and the
accepted system of knowledge and belief. Habituation
to their use and insight into their working acts in its
degree to incapacitate the borrowers for holding all their
homebred conceits and beliefs intact and in full convic-
tion. They are vehicles of cultural discrepancy, conduce
to a bias of skepticism, and act, in their degree, to loosen
the bonds of authenticity. Incidentally, the shift involved
in such a move will have its distasteful side and carry
its burden of disturbance and discomfort; but the new
elements, it is presumed, will make their way, and the
borrowing community will make its peace with them on
such terms as may be had ; that assumption being included
in the premises.

In some instances of such communication of alien
technological and other cultural elements the terms on
which a settlement has been effected have been harsh
enough, as, e.g., on the introduction of iron tools and
fire-arms among the American Indians, or the similar
introduction of distilled spirits, of the horse, and of
trade — especially in furs — among the same general
group of peoples. Polynesia, Australia, and other coun-
tries new to the European technology, and to the Euro-
pean conceits and conceptions in law, religion and morals,


38 Imperial Germany

will be called to mind to the same effect. In these cases
the intrusion of alien, but technologically indefeasible,
elements of culture has been too large to allow the old
order to change; so it has gone to pieces. This result
may, of course, have been due in part to a temperamental
incapacity of these peoples for the acquisition of new and
alien habits of thought; they may not have been good
borrowers, at least they appear not to have been suffi-
ciently good borrowers. The same view, in substance, is
often formulated to the effect that these are inferior or
"backward" races, being apparently not endowed with
the traits that conduce to a facile apprehension of the
modern European technological system.

It appears to have been otherwise with the peoples of
the Baltic culture, late and early. They have been good
borrowers, having borrowed persistently, ubiquitously and
well. The proof of their exceptional capacity as bor-
rowers is the general run of the life-history of these
populations and their culture. As a general proposition,
they* appear not to have suffered a disproportionate set-
back in population or in productive efficiency even at
those epochs when the borrowing took on a wholesale
character, as, e.g., on the transition to bronze, or later to
iron, or later still in the sweeping shift from paganism
to Christianity. In each of these instances, of course,
something of a serious disturbance and impairment is
traceable, at least in the two latter episodes ; but even the
shift to the Christian faith appears to have involved only
a relatively transient decline, and in each case this cultural
region comes out of the era of transition apparently
stronger than before the intrusion of new cultural ele-
ments took place. As would be expected, the last named,


The Old Order 39

the shift to Christianity, was the most demoralising of
these adventures in cultural borrowing ; since this was, in
the main and immediately, a borrowing of immaterial,
institutional elements, without any corresponding gain
in technology; so that in this instance the shock to the
cultural scheme came from factors which did not carry
such an immediate and intrinsic compensation for the
resulting derangement as did the technological change
involved in the introduction of the metals. It is, of
course, also possible to overstate both the magnitude and
the abruptness of the change from the pagan to the
Christian scheme in the Baltic region; indeed, it has not
been unusual to do so. But when all is said the fact
remains that through all their borrowing of expedients,
information, institutions and ideals no collapse has over-
taken this culture, such as either to reduce the population
to virtual extinction — as has happened in analogous cir-
cumstances, e.g., in Tasmania, Australia, various parts of
Polynesia and America, in a more or less sweeping fashion
— or to substitute a substantially alien cultural scheme
for what prevailed before the coming of the innovation in
technology or in use and wont.

Not that there have been no serious, or even alarming,
conjunctures in the cultural history of the Baltic peoples ;
it is only that they have come through without that
degree of discontinuity that would involve a substitution
of a new race (or racial mixture) or a new scheme of
civilisation alien to what went before. There is at least
one juncture in the bronze age when the derangement
of the conditions of life in the Baltic country appear to
have fallen into really precarious shape, — between the
second and third periods of the bronze age in Montelius's


40 Imperial Germany

chronology, or between the "early" and the "late" bronze
age as more commonly spoken of, — and there is sug-
gestive evidence of something of a break at a later point
in the sequence, before the coming of iron. 1 Some-
thing of grave import, in the way of a difficult interval,
may also be surmised in the earlier half of the iron age.
What may have been the nature of these episodes that
so have an untoward look is at the best a matter of sur-
mise, with little chance of reaching anything like a secure
conclusion in the present state of the archaeological evi-
dence. There may have been something like hostile con-
tact with alien peoples outside, or internal dissensions,
or an epidemic disease, such, e.g., as the black death, or
the plague that visited Athens in the Fifth Century, or
it may conceivably have been nothing more serious than
an interruption of trade relations with the Mediterranean
and Black Sea, due to extensive raiding or the shifting of
peoples in the intervening area. Through it all, how-
ever, the continuity of the cultural sequence is visible, as
is also the efficiency of this culture, in the biological sense
that the population does not seriously or enduringly fall
off. The latter test is perhaps the more conclusive. So
much so that the Baltic region is known to antiquity as a
"cradle of nations" even before anything much else is
known of it by the civilised peoples of antiquity and their
writers. That it deserved that name and continued to
make it good is seen in the inexhaustible barbarian migra-
tions that continued to run outward from the Baltic
center.

1 Cf M e.g., Montelius, Les temps prihistoriques en Suide et
dans les autres pays Scandinaves; Sophus Mtiller, Vor Oldtid,
and VEurope prShtstorique.


The Old Order 41

The presumptive characteristics of this culture, then,
as one gets an impression from a study of its antiquities
and by inference from the conditions of life which the
country offers and from the make-up of its population,
may tentatively be set down. It would be a small-scale
culture, in the sense that the local units would be of no
great magnitude; although it may be conceived to have
covered a relatively extensive area in the aggregate and
to have covered this area with a fairly dense population ;
it habitually stood in fairly close communication with
other peoples outside, even over relatively long distances,
principally by way of trade; these peoples borrowed
freely, both in technological and in other institutional
matters, 1 and made notably Jree and^icient_use^f jail
b orrowed elemen ts ; the scheme of institutions, economic,
civil, domestic and religious, that would fit these circum-
stances would be of a relatively slight fixity, flexible,
loose-knit, and naive, in the sense that they would be
kept in hand under discretionary control of neighborly
commonsense, — the continued borrowing and the facil-
ity with which borrowed elements are assimilated and
turned to account goes far to enforce this conclusion. Al-
together its most impressive traits are a certain industrial
efficiency, particularly efficiency in the njechanic arts, and
its conduciveness to the multiplication of its people;
whereas its achievements in political organisation or in
the domain of art and religion are relatively slight. It is
a civilisation of workmanship and fecundity rather than
of dynastic power, statecraft, priestcraft or artistic
achievement.

1 In methods of burial, art motives, etc.


4 s Imperial Germany


III


The Pagan Anarchy

No contemporary, or nearly contemporary, record
is to be had of the culture of the Baltic peoples prior to
their conversion to Christianity and their consequent
entrance into the history of Christendom. Consequently
no direct evidence is at hand as to > the institutions of
that culture, except such as shows the state of things in
retrospect, as seen by writers who had, in a good measure
at least, left that culture behind and saw it as more or
less an alien state of society. Any presentation of the
state of the Baltic culture in prehistoric times, in any
but the material respect, therefore, must be of the nature
of a reconstruction on the basis of insufficient documents
and circumstantial evidence. Yet such is the need of
a perspicuous conception of this prehistoric state of
society, for any endeavor to understand the long-term
bent and hereditary genius of the English and German
peoples, considered as an offshoot of the Baltic civilisa-
tion, that it seems necessary to accept the hazard of the
adventure and make the most of the resources available
to this end. At its best the material leaves much to be
desired; but any inquiry into human institutions will in
such a case have to fall back on the proposition that
"The best is always good enough," and so make the most
of what is to be had.

Looking back through the perspective given by the
late-pagan culture of the Scandinavian countries, then, a
reconstruction of the prehistoric state of society on the


The Old Order 43

Baltic seaboard may be attempted, in rough outline and
in a provisional way, as seen against the background
afforded by the archaeological material of this region.
The purpose of such a tentative delineation is to present,
* as near as may be, the scheme of life and the state of
the industrial arts to which the north-European peoples
of to-day are, by hereditary temperament and capacity,
presumably, best suited; to which, in other words, they
are adapted by birth, and into which they would fall, if
circumstances permitted, as their "state of nature ;" and
from which they have been diverted only by force of
habituation under pressure of a later state of the indus-
trial arts that requires a different manner of life, essen-
tially alien to the north-European blond-hybrid popu-
lation. 1

In the civil organisation all power vests finally in the
popular assembly, made up, in effect, though not by strict
formal specification, of the freehold farmers; including
under that designation the able-bodied male citizens of
substantial standing, but not formally excluding any part
of the free population, and perhaps not even with absolute
rigor excluding all women. 2

This deliberative assembly exercised the powers, such
as were exercised, of legislation, executive (extremely

*See Note III, page 291.

2 The restriction of the franchise to able bodied men at arms,
and the requirement of coming to the assembly under arms,
such as is to be observed among the predatory bands and war-
like communities of these barbarians during and after their
incursion into the older civilised countries of Europe, does not
appear to have been in force in Scandinavian antiquity ; it would
rather appear that all that matter was left loosely in the
option of the citizens, although there was an occasional pro-
hibition of weapons at the assembly. Practice appears to have
varied.


44 Imperial Germany

slight), and judiciary. There is little, if any police power,
though there are established conventions of police regula-
tion; and there is no conception of the "King's peace,"
outside the king's farmyard ; nor is there any conception
of a "public peace" to be enforced by public authority
of any kind, outside the precincts of the popular assembly.
What stands out all over this civil fabric is the evidence
of its resting on the assumption of neighborhood
autonomy, and that within the self-sufficient neighbor-
hood the individual is depended on wholly to take care
of his own interest, with the backing of his kin and
within such loose limits of tolerance as may be implied
in the eventual formation of a vigilance committee in
case any individual or group should develop into an insuf-
ferable public nuisance. This civil system might be de-
scribed as anarchy qualified by the commonsense of a
deliberative assembly that exercises no coercive control ;
or it might, if one's bias leads that way, be called a
democratic government, the executive power of which is
in abeyance. All of which does not imply, in any degree,
the absence of a legal system, of a conception of legality,
or of specific, and even minute, provisions of law cover-
ing all conjunctures likely to arise in such a society.

While such a quasi-anarchistic scheme of social con-
trol, resting on insubordination, can be installed only on
the basis of a natural propensity in its favor — an ethical
or aesthetic sense of its equity — its practicability is con-
ditioned by certain mechanical circumstances. The
scheme depends on personal contact within the group,
and the group over which its rule will extend must be
limited by the bounds of such personal and informal
contact. It is in the nature of things a neighborhood or-


The Old Order 45

ganisation, and is not applicable beyond the effectual
reach of neighborhood relations. It is practicable, there-
fore, only so long and so far as the necessary industrial
relations do not overpass the possibilities of such neigh-
borly contact; and with any appreciable advance in the
state of the industrial arts, such as will unduly increase
the scale of industrial operations or of the consequent
economic relations, the anarchistic scheme of society
grows increasingly precarious.

Sooner or later the discrepancy grows too great, be-
tween what is mechanically practicable, or rather
unavoidable, in the extension of the industrial community
on the one hand, and the farthest practicable stretch of
the anarchistic system of neighborly commonsense sur-
veillance on the other hand. So that the old order ist
manifestly due to break down under the impact of cumu-!
lative change that entails a scale of organisation effectu-
ally exceeding the working limits of that undifferentiated
consensus of sentiment that conditions its efficiency. By
the same token, a people which has proved its eminent
fitness for this scale and measure in the arts of life, by
carrying forward a culture of this character under vary-
ing circumstances through several thousands of years,
should presumably be unable to find itself equally at home
under the conditions imposed by a state of the industrial
arts that greatly overreaches these moderate bounds, and
should so be unable, under these new conditions, to
achieve anything like the same measure of cultural bal-
ance and grace, of popular comfort and content, or of
wholesome commonplace fecundity.

With an advance in the industrial arts such as to
require a larger material equipment, or such as will per-


46 Imperial Germany

mit enterprise of a larger scope, the possessor of the
requisite means comes into a position to extend his enter-
prise beyond the bounds within which neighborhood
surveillance is effective. What he undertakes beyond
these bounds does not, under the anarchistic rule, concern
his neighbors who live within them. Indeed, in any enter-
terprise outside he will have the moral support of his
neighborhood group under the rule of Live and let live,
since it is right and good that he should live as good
him seems, so long as the traffic in which he engages does
not impinge in a disastrous way on his neighbors ; and in
case of need he will have their active backing, to a reason-
able extent, so far as the common-sense animus of
group solidarity may carry them. Gain at the cost of
other communities, particularly communities at a distance,
and nuore especially such as are felt to be aliens, is not
obnoxious to the standards of home-bred use and wont.

At the same time such gains add to the standing of
the man who makes them, as all pecuniary gains do in
a culture that makes much of property. And all gains
coming to any of its members from outside are felt to be
gain to the community, by award of the uncritical but
ubiquitous sense of group solidarity. 1


1 This sense of group solidarity is a trait of race psychology
that may not be readily explained by perspicuous reasoning. But
it will doubtless have to be accepted as an opaque hereditary
fact of human nature; and it is readily enough to be explained
by the logic of selective survival, since any racial type devoid
of this propensity, or in sufficiently furnished in this respect,
must infallibly have disappeared in the biological competition
with such types as included this trait, — inasmuch as human
life has been carried on only by groups, at least through that
segment of the life-history of mankind that touches the races
here in question.

The effectual presence and uncritical efficiency of this pro-
pensity is well seen in the attitude of modern nations on ques-


The Old Order 47

The good repute and the added power to be gained by
such enterprise acts as an incentive to its pursuit on the
one hand and as a sanction to the practice on the other
hand; until it becomes a commonplace of use and wont
that the competitive pursuit of gain by the use of all
available means is an inalienable right, and that gain at
the cost of outsiders is more to be commended than
serviceability to the home community. By some obscure
trick of psychological sophistry that is explicable in per-
spicuous analysis neither for prehistoric nor for histori-
cal times, but that is well authenticated by ancient and
modern usage and that may be rated as an hereditary
infirmity or an hereditary advantage, the sense of group
solidarity coalesces with the pride of achievement to such
effect that the members of the group at large are elated
with the exploits of any member of the group in good
standing. So far will this sentimental sophistry carry,
that the community not only looks with approval and
elation on the successful self-aggrandisement of a given
individual member at the cost of outsiders, but it will also
unreflectingly further such enterprises at a palpable cost
to itself and with the certainty of getting no gain from
the venture, — as, e.g., in exploits of loyalty.

So it is quite safe to say not only that the citizens in
the small-scale kingdoms of the old order had no material
interest in extending the boundaries of the realm, or in
adding a second kingdom to the patrimony of their prince,
but that, on the contrary, their interest palpably lay in


tions 9f international trade; where the trade is carried on for
the gain of the business men immediately concerned, and where
the benefit presumed to accrue to the community at large from
such gains for the home-bred businessmen will bear no scrutiny.


43 Imperial Germany

avoiding any such outcome. By sound logic they should
have taken measures to defeat the ambitions of the crown ;
whereas in point of fact they went to considerable lengths
to further such projects of dynastic aggrandisement. Such,
of course, has also been the history of dynastic war and
politics ever since. The claims and perquisites of the
prince appear under the old order of petty neighborhood
kingdoms to have been extremely slight and irregular ; but
so soon as the king's dominions increased to such a size
as to take him personally out of range of an effectual
surveillance by neighborly sentiment — that is to say so
soon as the realm increased beyond the extent of a single
rounded neighborhood — the crown would be able to use
the loyalty, of one neighborhood in enforcing exactions
from another, and the royal power would then presently
find no other obstacle to its continued growth than the
limit placed upon it by the state of the industrial arts.
This limit was determined primarily by the disposable
means of communication, and secondarily by the produc-
tive efficiency of the community on which the crown drew
for the supplies of men and means consumed in extend-
ing and controlling his wider dominions. Habituation,
enforced and authenticated by the royal authority, en-
gendered the virtue of loyalty ; until in the end — the end
of the old order — the rule of Live and let live passed
over into the rule that the king is to live as good him
seems and the common man is to live as the king of his
grace will let him. The predisposition to group solidarity
coalesced with the bias of approval for the aggrandise-
ment of their accredited spokesman, to such effect that
abnegation in his favor became the prime virtue of the
new order, in place of the insubordination and initiative


The Old Order 49

which, together with a neighborly tolerance, had formed
the pillars of the house under the old.

Enterprise at this point appears to have followed two
main lines, distinct but both leading in the end to much
the same outcome: (a) Local kings set about extending
their dominions, displacing and disinheriting such royal
lines as fell short in the struggle for empire and imposing
a more despotic rule on the communities that so coalesced
into a larger realm, (b) Restless young men, and older
men to whom the increasing pressure of royalty was in-
tolerable, set out in companies at adventure, fought their
way to a new footing outside or ran to waste in the tur-
moil. Those bands of marauders that overran and sub-
jugated what is now the Fatherland appear to have been
of this class. An occasional one of these hordes, as, e.g.,
the Heruli, may have been led by some scion of royalty ;
though such appears commonly not to have been the case.
But in any case the outcome is much the same, in that the
old order of qua^si-anarchistic autonomy presently gave
place to irresponsible authority and subjection.


CHAPTER III
The Dynastic State

What befell the Germanic peoples through the ages
that lie between prehistoric paganism and the late-modern
period, whether within their ancient habitat on the Baltic
seaboard, or abroad in those seats of conquest and immi-
gration that have since come to be spoken of as the
Fatherland, — all that does not concern this inquiry. Just
as the particular fortunes of these peoples in prehistoric
antiquity have also no interest in this connection, except
as the recital may serve to show what is the hereditary
racial bent of this population that so lived and thrived
under that archaic state of culture. That they did so
live and thrive goes to prove that that archaic culture,
and the state of the industrial arts in which it was
grounded, were suited to their temperamental bent. This
hereditary type of human nature, so shown in the work-
ing-out of this characteristic culture of pagan antiquity,
is of interest in this connection because it is the same
human nature with which these peoples today go to
their work of getting a living under the conditions offered
by the technology of today.

A summary paragraph in the way of a conspectus may
therefore be in place. By and large, all these north-
European peoples that live within the climatic region of
the Baltic-North Sea littoral are of one racial complex-

50


The Dynastic State 51

ion, irrespective of language or nationality. They are
all of a composite derivation, a hybrid population made
up of some three (or more) racial stocks, with minor
contingents thrown in sporadically; the composition of
this population varying only by negligible differences from
west to east, and varying north and south after a sys-
tematic fashion, in respect of the relative proportion in
which the several racial constituents enter in the hybrid
mixture, — always with the reservation that for the imme-
diate purpose this characterisation need apply only within
the climatic region of the Baltic and North Sea. The
population of these countries has, therefore, the wide
range of individual variability that belongs to a hybrid
stock. But even this wide variability, which goes far to
give a facile adaptiveness of the people to novel and even
to alien conditions, runs after all within certain broad,
selectively determined lines, and does not set aside the
effectual long-term assertion of a certain, flexible but
indefeasible, general drift or generic type of human
nature that runs through the whole of these populations,
— the tone-giving traits of this type of human nature
being those that show themselves in that archaic civilisa-
tion which the Baltic peoples worked out during that
early period of their racial life-history when they made
good their survival. This period of prehistory has been
the only phase in the experience of this population that
has lasted long enough under passably stable conditions to
exert anything like a definitively selective effect, and so
to test what they are fit for and what is fit for them. This
archaic culture, which so may be said, by selective test,
to be congenital to the north-Europeans, will, on its
technological side, typically have been of the character of


S2 Imperial Germany

the neolithic, rather than anything else that can be given
a specific name ; while in point of its domestic, social and
civil institutions it may be called a conventionalised an-
archy, in the sense that it lacks formal provision for a
coercive control, and is drawn on a sufficiently small scale
to make it workable by exercise of a tolerant neighbor-
hood surveillance. The like characterisation applies also
to the religious cult, and presumptively to the underlying
religious conceptions, so far as the available evidence
goes. When the polity of this pagan culture finally broke
down after many vicissitudes, its place was taken by a
predatory organisation that developed into the feudal
system among those warlike and piratical migrants that
settled in the outlying countries of Europe ; while among
the population left at home in the Baltic-Scandinavian
countries it was presently replaced by a coercive scheme
of government of somewhat the same character, con-
structed in invitation of feudalism.

Particular attention has here been directed to the
hybrid derivation of these peoples, and to the fact that
the racial composition of this population has not varied in
any serious degree since the initial settlement of the
Baltic-North Sea littoral in neolithic times ; with the pos-
sible qualification that the infusion of the brachycephalic-
brunet stock into the mixture may have taken effect after
the first settlement, although its coming falls also in
neolithic times. It results from this state of their racial
composition that there is today substantially no heredi-
tary difference between different nationalities within this
climatic region, or between the different social classes
that make up any one of these nationalities.

Their hybrid composition gives also an extremely large


The Dynastic State 53

facility for the acceptance of novel ideas from outside,
together with a wide range of adaptation in all the arts of
life, both in technological matters and as regards the
scheme of civil and social institutions and the currency
of religious and intellectual conceptions. At the same
time the same individual variability of the hybrid acts to
hinder any given scheme or system of accepted use and
wont from attaining a definitive stability ; in such a popu-
lation no system of knowledge, belief, usage, or control
can achieve that degree of authenticity and fixity that will
make it break rather than bend under the impact of new
exigencies that niay arise out of technological changes or
out of contact with an alien culture ; in so much that no
scheme of usage and convictions can be devised which
will, even with a reasonable margin of tolerance, fall
nicely in with the temperamental bent of all, or virtually
all, the individuals comprised under it. Therefore, in a
population of this character, any comprehensive scheme
of use and wont, of knowledge and belief, will in effect
necessarily be in some degree provisional; it will neces-
sarily rest on acceptance (.in some part concessive accept-
ance) by a majority of the individuals concerned, rather
than on a uniform and unqualified spontaneous consensus
of the entire population that lives under its rule. The
acceptance accorded such a standard scheme by this ef-
fective majority is also necessarily in some appreciable
measure an acceptance by consent rather than by free
initiative.

That such is the case is evident in any one of the revo-
lutionary changes that have passed over the peoples of
Christendom during the historical period ; as, e.g., in the
growth of feudalism and in the later development of a


54 Imperial Germany

dynastic state, together with the subsequent shift to a
constitutional basis, where that change has been carried
out; so also in the gradual acceptance and subsequent
growth of the Christian cult and its ecclesiastical domin-
ion, together with the many incidental adventures in
religious dissent, and in the variegated outcome of them.

This latter category, the adventures of the re-
ligious cult among the north-Europeans, affords perhaps
the most felicitous illustration available of the working
of such temperamental variability, and of the consequent
rise, dominance and decay of successive systems of
knowledge and belief. This is, of course, in its own
right, a department of the arts of life that is full of
polemical asperities and charged with frictional heat.
Yet it lies sufficiently aside from the main line of interest
involved in the present inquiry to admit of its being drawn
on for illustrative material without its engendering heat
in the main argument.

In the successful departures in the domain of faith, as
well as in those enterprises of devotion that have run a
troubled course to an inglorious end, it will be seen that
any such novel or aberrant scheme of habits of thought
touching the supernatural uniformly takes its rise as an
affection of a certain small number of individuals, who,
it may be presumed, have been thrown into a frame of
mind propitious to this new fashion of thinking by some
line of discipline, physical or spiritual, or rather both,
that is not congruous with the previously accepted views
on these matters. It will ordinarily be admitted by all
but the converts that such pioneers in the domain of the
supernatural are exceptional or erratic individuals, spe-
cially gifted personalities, perhaps even affected with


The Dynastic State 55

pathological idiosyncracies or subject to magical or pre-
ternatural influences; that is to say, in any case, erratic
variants of the commonplace racial type, whose aberrant
temperamental bent has been reenforced by some peculiar
discipline or exceptional experience, and so does not fall
in with the currently received habits of thought in these
premises. The resulting variant of the cult will then
presently find a wider acceptance, in case the discipline
exercised by current conditions is such as to bend the
habits of thought of some appreciable number of per-
sons with a bias that conforms to this novel drift of
religious conceit. And if the new variant of the faith is
fortunate enough to coincide passably with the current
drift of workday habituation, the band of proselytes will
presently multiply into such a formidable popular religi-
ous movement as will acquire general credibility and be-
come an authentic formulation of the faith. Quid ab
omnibus, quid ubique creditor, credendum est. Many
will so come into line with the new religious conceit who
could not conceivably have spun the same yarn out of
their own wool under any provocation; and the variant
may then even come to supplant the parent type of cult
from which it first sprang.

If it should be fortunate enough, again, to fit neatly
into the scheme of use and wont in secular matters, as
that scheme is being shaped by the current exigencies,
the new cult may then become the only true faith, and so
may become mandatory on all alike; particularly is this
likely to happen if at the same time it lends itself to the
ends of a ruling class who possess or can find the means >
of enforcing its observance. This last proposition may
also be turned about ; if the animus embodied in the new


S6 Imperial Germany

cult is effectually borne up by the discipline of current
workday experience at large, persons strongly imbued
with the bias of the cult are likely to be thrown up by
popular acclaim into responsible offices of discretion, and
so come to combine the promptings of their own interest
with their pious convictions in its support and bring it to
the mature phase of a self-evident and intolerant infal-
libility.

In the engendering and growth of habitual ideals and
convictions touching matters of use and wont at large
or in any given connection the run of events is not of a
character essentially different from the circumstances that
surround the inception and spread of these religious
verities. The changes that alter the face of national life
have small beginnings ; the traceable initial process having
commonly set in with some overt act on the part of a
small and distinctive group of persons, who will then
» presently be credited with insight and initiative in
case the move proves itself by success. Should the move-
ment fail of acceptance and consequent effect, these
spokesmen of its propaganda would then prove to have
been fanciful project-makers, perhaps of unsound mind.
To describe the course of such a matter by analogy, the
symptoms of the new frame of mind will first come in
evidence in the attitude of some one individual, who, by
congenital proclivity and through an exceptional degree
of exposure, is peculiarly liable to its infection. In so
far as the like susceptibility is prevalent among the rest
of the population, and so far as circumstances of habitua-
ation favor the new conceit, it will then presently find
lodgment in the habits of thought of an increasing num-
ber of persons, — particularly among those whom the ex-


The Dynastic State 57

cursive play of a hybrid heredity has thrown up as tem-
peramental variants peculiarly apt for its reception, or
whom the discipline of life bends with exceptional rigor
in the direction of its bias. Should the new idea also
come to have the countenance of those in authority or in
a position to claim popular deference, its vogue will* be
greatly helped out by imitation, and perhaps by compul-
sory observance, and so it may in a relatively short time
become a matter of course and of common sense. But
th£ reservation always stands over, that in such a hybrid
population the same prevalent variability of temperament
that so favors the infiltration and establishment of new
ideals will at the same time render their tenure corres-
pondingly precarious.

The point may be illustrated by the rise and decline of
warlike ideals from time to time among modern nations ;
though it is the rise and rule of these ideals, rather than
their decline, that will best illustrate the point. The de-
cline of such ideals and of the patriotic animosity in
which they find outward expression would appear to be
a matter of reversion through neglect rather than of
aggressive indoctrination through propaganda and suit-
able discipline. The cause of peace and amity appears
not to be served by polemical propaganda, any more than
by a strenuous warlike preparation for "keeping the
peace." There is always an appreciable warlike animus
present in these modern nations; necessarily so, since
their government establishments are necessarily of a coer-
cive character and their ruling classes are animated with
dynastic ambitions. In this matter the republican states
uncritically imitate the dynastic ones so effectually as to
make no grave exception from the rule. The historical


•V


58 Imperial Germany

tradition and precedents run that way. So that the fer-
ment is always at hand. But in the absence of special
provocation the commonplace body of the population,
being occupied with other interests and having no natural
bent for fighting in order to fight, will by easy neglect
drift into peaceable habits of thought, and so come habitu-
ally to think of human relations, even of international
relations, in terms of peace, if not of amity.

Temperamentally erratic individuals, however, and such
as are schooled by special class traditions or predisposed
by special class interest, will readily see the merits of
warlike enterprise and keep alive the tradition of national
animosity. Patriotism, piracy and prerogative converge
to a common issue. Where it happens that an individual
gifted with an extravagant congenital bias of this char-
acter is at the same time exposed to circumstances favor-
ing the development of a truculent megalomania and is
placed in such a position of irresponsible authority and
authentic prerogative as will lend countenance to his
idiosyncracies, his bent may easily gather vogue, become
fashionable, and with due persistence and shrewd man-
agement come so ubiquitously into habitual acceptance as
in effect to throw the population at large into an enthu-
. siastically bellicose frame of mind. Such is particularly
apt to be the consequence in case of a people whose his-
torical traditions run in terms of dynastic strategy and
whose workday scheme of institutions is drawn on lines
of coercion, prerogative and loyalty. .

It is only with the new departure of 1870 that Germany
has come to take its place in the general apprehension as
a singularly striking, not to say unique, instance of ex-


The Dynastic State 59

uberant growth. The history of its unfolding power, of
course, is not contained in this brief interval that lies
within the memory of men still living; but the new de-
parture by force of which the life-history of the German
nation has come to diverge so notably from the common-
place run of events in modern Europe can after all not be
pushed back far beyond that epoch. Anyone who seeks
a precise period from which to date this epoch of German
history will have difficulty in deciding on any given point
earlier than the year named. And what had taken place
in the way of an unfolding of national forces before that
date is of great significance only for its bearing on what
has taken place since then.

The visible achievements of the German people during
this historical period, so far as they are amenable to sta-
tistical statement, are a gain in population, in industrial
efficiency, and in military force. Other gains are claimed,
perhaps even of greater moment in the apprehension of
the spokesmen, and there is no inclination here to discount
or minimise their achievements outside of this material
domain ; but the magnitude of the advance in these other
lines is in some degree a matter of estimate and opinion,
which may in that degree be influenced by sentiments of
self-complacency or of depreciation, whereas the gains in
the material respect spoken for above are beyond cavil.
But judged by these physically measurable marks of ex-
cellence, the historical period within which this modern
onset of the German people runs will have to be dated
somewhat back of the French-Prussian war. In each of
the three respects named the advance was well under way
before that date. It is, however, safe to say that this
beginning of the current era falls within the second


60 Imperial Germany

quarter of the tenth century. 1 It is also safe to say that
the prime mover among these factors of the nation's un-
folding power has been its increased industrial efficiency,
rather than either of the other two. While their increas-
ing efficiency has doubtless been conditioned by the
growth in population, the initiative, as between these two,
has doubtless vested in the former rather than in the
latter. In the correlation between industrial advance and
population the primacy belongs to the former. The like
is true, of course, as regards the growth in military
strength. Also, doubtless, a large place among the causes
of growth and efficiency is believed to be due to a wise
governmental policy and a shrewd administration, but
opinion counts for much in the appraisal of this govern-
mental policy, and opinion on such a matter is liable to
partiality, for or against. The unfolding of warlike
power has unequivocally been a work of governmental
policy, and the same policy has unquestionably sought to
further the industrial advance ; the question that presents
itself in the latter connection is not as to the faithful in-
tentions and endeavor of the government — or "State,"
to use the German concept — but only as to the probable
degree of efficacy of these good intentions and endeavor ;
and on this head opinions will not coincide, and the
proposition will therefore best be left out of the premises.
As is well known, the practical movement for German
union, which came to a successful issue in the eventual
formation of the Empire, owed its beginnings and its


*Cf .,*.#., W. H. Dawson, The Evolution of Modern Germany,
ch. iii. ; also more at large, von Sybel, The Founding of the
German Empire, vol. i.; and Sombart, Die deutsche Volkswirt-
schaft im XIX. Jahrhundert, bk. ii.


The Dynastic State 61

earlier success to the economic needs of the German
countries, — or it may be said to have been provoked by
the grievous burden of artificial evils created by the gov-
ernments of the small states among which the country
was divided. So, as a practical measure, it begins with
the formation of a Tariff Union, designed to remove
certain of the obstacles which the particularist policies of
these states had erected. And this union and uniformity
of economic policy within the Empire is still one of the
chief assets of its strength, particularly the absence of
internal tariff restrictions.

The place and relation of Germany to the industrial
development of modern Europe, therefore, will neces-
sarily be the point of departure for any inquiry into the
fortunes and achievements of the German people in this
modern era. On this head, then, its natural resources
available for modern industrial use are of the same kind
and range as those found in the neighboring countries;
there is substantially nothing to distinguish the German
lands from those of north Europe at large, unless it be
that the resources of the country are slightly under grade
in quality and slightly scant in quantity, at least as com-
pared with the most fortunate of the neighboring coun-
tries. Again, in point of native proclivity and aptitude
the German population is virtually identical with its
neighbors. In respect of hereditary endowment — racial
character — it is the same people as the population of
the neighboring nations, — more particularly identical
with the Dutch, Belgian and British. By virtue of its
hybrid extraction it is, like these others, gifted with a
large capacity for acquiring and turning to account a
wide range of technological knowledge ; and by virtue of


62 Imperial Germany

the same hereditary bias of workmanship that animates
t these others it is, like its neighbors, assiduously and saga-
ciously addicted to industry and thrift. What chiefly
distinguishes the German people from these others in
this connection, and more particularly from the British,
is that the Germans are new to this industrial system;
and the distinctive traits of the German case are in the
main traceable to this fact that they are still in their
novitiate.

When the current era in the life-history of the German
people began, in the second quarter of the nineteenth
century, Germany was far in arrears, as compared with
its neighbors to the west, but more particularly as con-
trasted with the British. This is historical commonplace,
of course. It may be taken with such allowance and
qualification as seem needful ; the main fact remains, that
in certain decisive, or at least substantial, respects Ger-
many was in an anachronistic state, particularly as seen
from the station occupied by the English-speaking peo-
ples. There is no call to depreciate the merits of the
German culture of that time in those respects in which
it excelled, as there would also be no use in attempting an
undervaluation of it ; it is too large a fact in the heritage
of mankind to suffer seriously from an assault of words.
However, those genial respect? in which the civilisation
characteristic of Germany excelled, — in which, indeed,
Germany triumphed, — were not in the line of efficiency
that counted materially toward fitness for life under the
scheme of things then taking shape in Europe. It may
have been better or it may have been worse than what
came to take its place, but in any case it was not an articu-


The Dynastic State 63

late part of the working scheme; as is proven in the
sequel, which was worked out with only negligible con-
tributions from the accumulated wisdom of the German
people.

Germany was in arrears in the industrial arts and in
its political institutions, as well as in such features of its
civil and domestic scheme of life as come intimately into
correlation with, or under the dominant influence oi,, §
these fundamental agencies in the scheme of institutions.
This is the visible difference between the case of the
German and of the British peoples at the time, apart from
superficial peculiarities of usage and the decorative ele-
ments of culture. In industrial matters Germany was still
at the handicraft stage, with all that is implied in that
description in the way of institutional impedimenta and
meticulous standardisation of trifles. Measured by the
rate of progression that had brought the English com-
munity to the point where it then stood, the German
industrial system was some two-and-a-half or three cen-
turies in arrears — somewhere in Elizabethan times; its
political system was even more archaic; and use and
wont governing social relations in detail was of a char-
acter such as this economic and political situation would
necessarily foster.

The characterisation so offered applies to the indus-
trial organisation as a working system. It does not over-
look the fact that many alien details had been intruded
into this archaic system by force of Germany's unavoid-
able contact with the more modern industrial communities
of western Europe. But it was not until the second half
of the nineteenth century that the alien elements seriously
began to derange the framework of the archaic scheme.


64 Imperial Germany

I Politically much the same will hold, except that fewer
modernisms had found their way over the frontiers in
this domain, nor had such modernisms effected an equally
secure and disturbing lodgment in the tissues of the
body politic, Germany being still consistently organised
on the pattern of the "Territorial State," — a peculiarly

1 petty and peculiarly irresponsible autocracy, which has
come to its best maturity only among the Germanic
peoples, and which has held its place with remarkable ten-
acity within the limits of the Fatherland. The "Territorial
State," or its less finished replica under another desig-
nation, has not been unknown elsewhere in the north-
European country, but it passed out by obsolescence some
time ago among the other north-European peoples; so
that even the Scandinavian countries, which would ap-
pear by geographical necessity to have been designed for
petty things, had lost this archaic fashion of state policy
and political control by the time when the question of its
supersession began to attract an (ineffectual) speculative
interest in Germany. The territorial state is in effect a
territorial aggregate, with its population conceived as an
estate belonging in usufruct to a given prince ; the concept
is visibly of feudal derivation, and the habit of mind which
* makes it a practicable form of political organisation is
the feudal habit of personal subservience to a personal
master. In such a polity subordination, personal allegi-
ance, is the prime virtue, the chief condition precedent
to its carrying on ; while insubordination is the fatal vice,
incompatible with such a coercive system. As seen from
the standpoint of the political interests in such a State,
the spirit of abnegation is by apologetic euphemism
spoken of as "duty," while insubordination is called "con-


The Dynastic State 65

tumacy." The former is the habit of mind engendered
by continued and consistent suppression, and is the basis ,
of a servile political organisation, such as the territorial
state; the latter, if allowed a free course will eventuate
in an anarchistic autonomy, such as appears to have been
the constitution of Germanic society in the prehistoric-
ages before the barbarian invasions established a coercive
rule in what is now the Fatherland. The latter appears
to coincide with the natural bent of these peoples; but
the former has that secure hold on their spirit that results
from fifteen centuries of submission to a masterful dis-
cipline of coercion. The spirit of "duty" in these people
is apparently not "nature," in the sense of native pro-
clivity; but it is "second nature" with the people of the
Fatherland, as being the ingrained traditional attitude
induced by consistent and protracted experience.

In speaking of these things in the terms current among
modern civilised men it is nearly impossible to avoid the
appearance of deprecating this servile or submissive atti-
tude of "duty;" particularly will this difficulty beset
anyone using the English language, — the fringe of derog-
atory suggestion carried by the available words and
phrases is appreciably less embarrassing, e.g., in German,
although even there the commonplace vocabulary lends
itself with greater facility to the dispraise of servility and
irresponsible rule than to the commendation of these
elements of modern patriotism. That such should be the
case is doubtless due to the drift of institutional develop-
ment in western Europe in modern times, which has on
the whole set somewhat consistently in the direction of
a gradual loosening of the grip of dynastic autocracy.
This drift has perhaps not so much created or initiated


66 Imperial Germany

the growth of an anarchistic (that is to say, non-servile)
spirit, but rather has permissively harbored it and so
allowed the naturally anarchistic bent of these peoples to
reassert itself in a measure, by force of the indefeasible
resiliency that characterises all hereditary proclivities. 1
Any, even a very cursory, scrutiny of the historical
growth of free, or popular, institutions in modern Europe
should satisfy all parties in interest that this growth has
come about not because the authorities vested with dis-
cretion and power have not taken thought to defeat it
wherever a chance has offered, but because the con-
ditioning circumstances have not enabled them to dis-
courage it sufficiently. And by virtue of the close and
facile communication of ideas among modern peoples the
anarchistic penchant has, by channels of education and

*As already suggested in an earlier passage, the folk-tales, and
other folklore, of Germany testify to the tenacious hold which
this archaic, small-scale scheme of neighborhood autonomy still
has on the spirit of the German people. These folk-tales have
lived obscurely in the hand-to-mouth legendary lore trans-
mitted through generations of illiterate and commonplace idealists
held in subjection, and doubtless in loyal allegiance, under the
coercive rule of the dynastic territorial state; but the ideals to
which they give expression still are those of that quasi-anarchistic
neighborhood life that has not come within the horizon of these
peoples' experience, or even of their narratives of reality, since
long before the close of the pagan era. This state of the folk-
tales is all the more remarkable in view of the fact that the tales
have undergone a fairly complete revision in all that relates to
the religious cult, where the church, the cross, the priest and
the monk come in with all the . air of being well at home.
These "cult objects," as one might call them, are of the
mediaeval, or even of the modern pattern; whereas the social
and political life and apparatus still is typically idealised after
the pre-Christian fashion. The preservation of this homely
folklore of the archaic type has been the work of the sub-
merged classes. The corresponding legendary lore of the ruling
classes is of an other and later spirit, though this, too, is archaic
as tested by comparison with current actualities, turning to the
mediaeval rather than to the modern scheme in its ideal creations.


The Dynastic State 67

neighborly intercourse, come to infect even the subject
populations of the better preserved territorial states; so
that even there, under the shadow of the masterful sys-
tem, the current vocabulary shows a weakness for free
institutions and the masterless man.

While the exigencies of the language, therefore, almost
unavoidably give a color of deprecation to any discussion
of this surviving habit of abnegation in the people of the
Fatherland, there is no intention here to praise or to blame
this spirit of subordination that underlies so much of
German culture and German achievement. It is one of the
larger factors that have gone to the creation of the modern
era in that country, and this era and its "system" will have
to count with whatever strength or weakness this animus
of feudalism contributes to the outcome. Now, it happens
that this surviving feudalistic animus of fealty and sub-
servience has visibly been a source of strength to the
German State hitherto, as it presumably also has to the
economic system, apart from the political ends to be
served by the community's economic efficiency. This is
to be recognised and taken account of quite apart from
any question as to the ultimate merits of such a popular
temper in any other connection, or even as to its ulterior
value for the ends of the State. For all that concerns
the present inquiry it may or may not appear, as doubt-
less would appear to the mind of most English-speaking
persons, that this spirit of subservient alacrity on which
the Prussian system of administrative efficiency rests is
beneath the human dignity of a free man ; that it is the
spirit of a subject, not of a citizen; that except for
dynastic uses it is a defect and a delinquency; and that
in the end the exigencies of civilised life will not tolerate


7


68 Imperial Germany

such an anachronistic remnant of medievalism, and the
habit of it will be lost. For all that can be made to
appear to-day, it may also be true that it has only a
transient value even for the uses of the dynastic State;
but all that does not derange the fact that hitherto it
has visibly been a source of strength to the German
State, and presumably to the German people at large as
I an economic body.

In the second quarter of the nineteenth century there
began a complex movement of readjustment and rehabili-
tation in German affairs. At least on its face this move-
ment is primarily of an economic character, the immedi-
ate provocation to practical activity being the needs of
trade and of the princely exchequers. Much genial specu-
lation, of an academic kind, and much edifying popular
exposition and agitation of national ideals ran along
beside these practical measures, and this intellectual and
spiritual disturbance may have had more or less to do
with the measures taken and with the general drift of
national policy. It is not easy to say whether this spirit-
ual disturbance is to be rated as a cause or a concomitant
of the practical changes going forward during this period,
but it should seem reasonable to give it place on both of
these grounds. The fashion among historians of the
period, particularly among patriotic historians, has been
to construe this complex movement of forces, material
and immaterial, that makes German history through the
middle half of the century, as a movement of the German
spirit, initiated by the exuberant national genius of the
race. Such is the tradition, but the tradition comes out
of the Romantic era; out of which no tradition of a
more matter-of-fact character could conceivably come.


The Dynastic State 69

A matter-of-fact view of such an historical movement
will necessarily look to the factors which may have had
a part in shaping habits of thought at the time, and here
there are only two lines of derivation to which the analy-
sis can securely run back, — discounting, as is the cur-
rent fashion, any occult agencies, such as manifest destiny,
national genius, Providential guidance, and the like.
There is no call to undervalue these occult agencies, of
course, but granting that these and their like are the
hidden springs, it is also to be called to mind that it is
their nature to remain hidden, and that the tangible
agencies through which these presumed hidden prime
movers work must be sufficient for the work without
recourse to the hidden springs ; which can have an effect
only by force of a magical efficacy. Their relation to the
course of events is of the nature of occult or magical
efficacy, not of causal efficiency; and under the modern
materialistic prejudice in these matters of scientific in-
quiry, the causal sequence in which an explanation of
events is sought must be complete in all elements that
touch the motivation and the outcome, without drawing
on any but tangible fact, on matters that are of the
nature of "data." To the modern preconception in favor
of efficient cause, as contrasted with the Romantic postu-
late of efficacious guidance, any attempt to set up a
logical finality in any terms other than matter-of-fact is
quite nugatory. It may be a genial work of futility, and
it may have its value as dramatic art or homiletical dis-
course ; but in the house of scientific inquiry such prem-
ises, and generalisations in such terms, are but as sound-
ing brass and a tinkling cymbal.

There are two lines of agency visibly at work shaping


7° Imperial Germany

the habits of thought of the people in the complex move-
ment of readjustment and rehabilitation spoken of above.
These are the received scheme of use and wont, and the
* new state of the industrial arts ; and it is not difficult to
see that it is the latter that makes for readjustment ; nor
should it be any more difficult to see that the readjust-
ment is necessarily made under the surveillance of the
received scheme of use and wont. The latter is modified
in the course of this new range of habituation enforced
by the new state of the industrial arts, but the changes
taking place in use and wont are, here as elsewhere, made
in the way of tardy concession under the impact of exi-
gencies that tangibly will not tolerate usage that has
passed out of date. The complex movement in question
is a movement of readjustment in the arts of life to meet
the requirements of new technological conditions, and
of rehabilitation of the received scheme of princely policy
to make it workable under the new technological condi-
tions. The changes which appear in the outcome, there-
fore, come about on the initiative of the new technologi-
cal advance, and by expedient concessions and shrewd
% . endeavors on the part of the constituted authority to turn
the new- won efficiency to use for its own ends ; the con-
scious directive management in the case being under the
hands of the governmental organization and directed to
such a rehabilitation of the territorial state as would
enable it to do business on the increased scale imposed
by the new state of the industrial arts, and adequately
to handle the forces which the new industrial system so
placed at its disposal.

Much had already been done during the preceding hun-
dred years to take advantage of technological improve-


The Dynastic State 71

ments, so far as these improvements contributed directly
to the military strength of the prince, and much had been •
done, incidentally to the extension of territorial control
and of fiscal administration, in the way of improved *•
means of communication and intercourse ; but the modern
industrial system, as such, and except as an outside and
essentially alien factor, had not seriously touched the
German population, particularly not the Prussian domin-
ions which take the central place in the rehabilitation of
Germany in the nineteenth century. But the industrial
state of Germany was after all mediaeval rather than
modern, and the state of the industrial arts, therefore,
still continued on the whole favorable to the maintenance
of the old regime, particularly since this old regime was
securely lodged in the interests and traditional ideals of
the dynastic rulers and of the privileged classes. ^

There is a side line of influence from the technological
side in the growth of German culture prior to its mod-
ernisation, which requires to be noted in any attempt to
realise what has taken place in the unfolding of the
modern era. The art of printing and the consequent use
of printed matter had always been at home among the
German people since that technological advance first was
made. From the outset and down into the nineteenth
century the printer's art was a handicraft process, and
was well developed in Germany. But the institutional
consequences, the effect on use and wont, on the habit
of consuming printed matter need not therefore be of the
handicraft order. A free consumption of printed matter
means a free intercourse of ideas and therefore an ex-
posure of the consumers to contact with ideas current
beyond the circle of their immediate personal contact.


7% Imperial Germany

The habitual consumption of print has much the same
order of disciplinary effect as habituation to the wide-
reaching standardisation of the arts of life brought on by
the machine industry ; but it goes without saying that the
effect so wrought by the use of print will not extend
much beyond the class of persons addicted to it; the il-
literate, and the classes who make little use of print
anyway, will not be seriously or extensively disturbed, —
what may be called the extravasation of printed literature
is not a matter of large consequence, although it is not
to be denied that the diffusion of ideas conveyed by
print, among the illiterate, will always amount to some-
thing. Whereas the disciplinary value of life under the
standardisation regime of the machine industry touches
the illiterate perhaps more immediately and intimately,
and almost as comprehensively, as it touches the classes
who habitually read. It is worth noting in this immedi-
ate connection, although it is a proposition of general
validity, that in the nature of the case no profound or
massive revolutionary disturbance of the established
order, in any respect, can be carried through by the
medium of printed matter alone, or in the absence of
other, materially more exacting and peremptory factors
of habituation working to the same general effect. So in
the case of Germany, although that fraction of the popu-
lation that were given to reading had long been in con-
tact with the intellectual movement in Europe at large,
and had, indeed, from time to time, taken effective part
in the shaping of current ideas, yet this fraction made up
so small a class, was so little in touch with the mass of
the population, and held its intellectual convictions on
such "academic" tenure — that is to say, so uniformly


The Dynastic State 73

without reenforcement from their own experience of me-
chanical fact — that with the best intentions they never
succeeded in infecting the people at large with their own
ideals of a new order, or in disturbing the incumbents of
office in their tenure and usufruct of the old order. 1 At


1 The disturbances of 1848 may serve to show how things run
on this head. The enlightened conceptions and impulses of the
literate minority here joined hands with the irritation of the
illiterate due to intolerable conditions of physical discomfort,
with a transient appearance of success, and with the net result
that in the end both parties to the misunderstanding were con-
victed of contumacy.

By the same token, the meticulous vigilance of the keepers of
political antiquities in such an archaic state as Russia, e.g., should
be rated as supererogation, particularly as regards the circulation
of obnoxious literature that -purveys excessively modern ideas.
In spite of all efforts the diffusion of the ideas that come in by
way of print scarcely extends beyond the readers ; and of these,
again, it is only a fraction that are seriously deranged by what
they read; and the readers are, fortunately, but a negligible
percentage of the mass. The alien ways of thinking that come
in in this way, without treading the ground of the workday rou-
tine of industry, may flutter the birds of plumage that roost in
the upper branches of the tree of knowledge, but all the disturb-
ance will go on over the heads of that multitude the usufruct of
which is of value to the ruling class. The habits of thought of the
latter are made by the workday routine, and provided the rou-
tine of the system is not seriously deranged these will continue
in the same frame of mind, such that any goose-girl can still lead
them contentedly to the plucking-sheds. On the other hand the
substitution of a new industrial system, enforcing a workday
routine of a different trend, might easily breed mischief. But,
judging by the Gertnan example as an object lesson, the wiser
precaution against a fatal derangement of the system of ir-
responsible mastery would apparently be so far to engender the
habit of reading as to make the assimilation of the new industrial
order an easy matter, resulting in a marked advance in efficiency
and physical comfort, and then to temper coercion with a well
conceived cajolery.

The encouragement of illiteracy and the exclusion of ob-
noxious literature with a view to maintenance of the status quo
in religious concerns may be quite another matter. The derange-
ment to be hedged against in this case being of a somewhat
superficial kind — a change in the color-scheme of current super-
stitions—it is conceivable that heretical teachings might work
mischief even in the absence of discrepancies of a technological
land.


74 Imperial Germany

the same time printed matter is a highly efficient vehicle
for the spread, assimilation and standardisation of habits
of thought that are otherwise consonant with the work-
day exigencies of the arts of life; and then, too, the
habit of reading is a nearly indispensable auxiliary of
that machine technology that invaded the German com-
munity in the nineteenth century, — less so, of course, at
that date (middle of the century) than at any later time,
but sufficiently so even then to count seriously in the out-
come. 1 Now, literacy, both in the higher potency of
"learning" and in the homelier fashion of ability fluently
to read print, was relatively common among the German
people at the time when the new era came on; and the
movement for improving and extending the means of
popular education was already in good practicable shape,
so that deficiencies in this respect could be made good as
fast as they visibly required a remedy. It used to be one
of the stock aspersions on the German community that
it was top-heavy with a redundance of learned men.
Fault-finding on this score has ceased since the latter
part of the century, the learned class having been found
useful and the demand for men proficient in the sciences
having fully caught up. Meantime the character of this
learning, or rather the direction of it, has changed some-
what, the change resulting on the whole in a pronounced


*It should need no insistence or amplification to gain assent
to the proposition, e.g., that illiteracy is a serious, perhaps the
decisive, obstacle to the present reorganisation of the Russian
community (or communities) on the lines of the modern in-
dustrial system; nor need there be any doubt entertained that
the higher percentage and higher range of literacy among the
Germans or the English-speaking peoples accounts for much of
their superior industrial efficiency. Under the old regime of
handicraft and household industry, illiteracy was by comparison
a trivial deficiency if any.


The Dynastic State 75

shift toward those branches of knowledge that have some
technological or commercial value. 1

As regards the logical relation between the modern
industrial advance and the modernised dynastic State in
Germany, it may be held that the makers of this state,
the policy of the Hohenzollern dynasty from Frederick
the Great to William II., have made use of all available y
technological improvements to extend the dominion and
improve the efficiency of the state ; or it may be held, on
the other hand, that the technological advance which en-
forced a larger scale of industry and trade, as well as a
larger and more expensive equipment and strategy in the
art of war, also drove the dynastic state to reorganisation '
on a new and enlarged plan, involving an increased dif-
ferentiation of the administrative machinery and a more


1 The supererogatory character of German learning under the
old regime is doubtless connected with the absence of a lar^e-
scale technology of such a kind as to obtrude questions of wide
theoretical bearing. The organisation of social life on class
lines and the standardisation of it in terms of putative worth
and authenticity, birth and antecedents, will also have contributed
to a bias in favor of putative theoretical constructions and an
interest in the lore of intrinsic, that is to say metaphysical, crea-
tures and characters rather than in matter-of-fact. While those
classes whose conventional standard of propriety would not
admit their employment in useful or gainful occupations were
prevented by their ubiquitous poverty from going consistently
into a life of sports and standardised dissipation, at least on
such a scale and with such generality as to take up the slack of
the respectable classes; learning, being a form of dissipation
within the reach of this very numerous and very impecunious
gentry, came in for a larger share of attention at their hands
and came to be rated more confidently as a mark of gentility
than in England, e.g., or even in France. But learning that is or
may be gainful, or that concerns itself with matters germane to
the quest of a livelihood or to the ways and means of vulgar
industry, can not well be genteel, more particularly in a com-
munity where industry typically is of the vulgar nature of
manual labor, and manual labor is conventionally tabu to a
gentleman.


v


76 Imperial Germany

detailed and exacting control of the sources of revenue.
Either view appears to be equally true. German students
of the case have commonly adopted the former, somewhat
to the neglect of what force there is in the latter view.
It should be evident that the minuscular territorial state
of the high tide of German particularism, with its cre-
puscular statesmanship, would have no chance of survival
under the conditions prevailing in Europe in the nine-
f~ teenth century. It is equally evident that those dynastic
statesmen within this circle of particularism who, either
by force of insight or by force of special exigencies and
tentative expedients, were led to take advantage of the
larger and mechanically more efficient devices of the new
age would enjoy a differential advantage as against their
conservative neighbors, and would in the end supplant
them in the domain of statecraft and presently take over
their substance, — the dynastic state being necessarily of
v a competitive, or rapacious, character, and free to use any
expedient that comes to hand. It is a case of selective
survival working out through the competitive manoeuvres
of those who had the administration of the one and the
other policy in hand. When the state of the industrial
arts had so extended the physical reach of civil adminis-
tration and political strategy as definitively to make a
large-scale national organisation practicable, the old order
of self-sufficient petty principalities became impossible.
This change reached the German territories at a later date
than the rest of western Europe, and it did not take effect
in a reorganisation of national life until so late a date
that the retardation is a matter of surprise in spite of
all the explanations offered by the historians. But in con-
sequence of this retardation the magnitude of the re-


*


i


The Dynastic State 77

organization when it came was also such as to leave the
historians somewhat at a loss to account for it without
recourse to race characteristics imputed ad hoc and the
magical effects of a nepotic predilection on the part of
Providence.

By wise management on the part of the dynastic states- I A
men who have had the direction of policy and the con-
trol of the administrative machinery, the rapidly increas-
ing material efficiency of the German community, due to
the introduction of the modern state of the industrial
arts, has successfully been turned to the use of the State,
in a degree not approached elsewhere in western Europe ;
so that in effect the community stands to the Hohen-
zollern State somewhat in the relation of a dynastic estate,
a quasi-manorial demesne or domain, to be administered
for dynastic ends, very much after the fashion of the
cameralistic administration of fiscal affairs in the ter-
ritorial states of Germany a hundred years ago. This
subservience of the community to dynastic ends and
dynastic management has been secured in the gross by a
policy of warlike aggression, and in detail by a system v
of bureaucratic surveillance and unremitting interference
in the private life of subjects. It goes without saying
that there is no secure ground for such a scheme of
dynastic usufruct and control except in the loyal support
of popular sentiment; and it likewise goes without say-
ing that such a state of popular sentiment can be main-
tained only by unremitting habituation, discipline saga-
ciously and relentlessly directed to this end. More par-
ticularly must the course of habituation to this end be
persistent and unwavering if it is to hold the personal
allegiance of a body of subjects exposed to the disinte-


76 Imperial Germany

grating discipline of modern life; where the machine
industry constantly enforces the futility of personal force
and prerogative in the face of wide-sweeping inanimate
agencies and mechanical process, and where the ubiqui-
tous haggling of the price system constantly teaches that
every man is his own keeper. It is a matter of common
notoriety that all this has been taken care of with un-
exampled thoroughness and effect under the Prussian
rule. 1

Chief of the agencies that have kept the submissive
allegiance of the German people to the State intact is,
of course, successful warfare, seconded by the discipli-
nary effects of warlike preparation and indoctrination
with warlike arrogance and ambitions. The attention
deliberately given to these concerns is also a fact of
common notoriety; so much so, indeed, that the spokes-
men of the system have come to take it for granted as a
matter of course, and so are apt to overlook it. The
experience of war induces a warlike frame of mind ; and
the pursuit of war, being an exercise in the following of
one's leader and execution of arbitrary orders, induces an
animus of enthusiastic subservience and unquestioning
obedience to authority. What is a military organisation
in war is a servile organisation in peace. The system is
the same, and the popular animus requisite to its suc-
cessful working is the same in either case. It reaches
its best efficiency in either case, in war or peace, only
when the habit of arbitrary authority and unquestioning


1 Perhaps the most concise and yet the most illuminating
presentation of this Prussian economic policy, typically as pur-
sued by Frederick the Great, is that of Professor Schmoller,
The Mercantile System. (Translation reprinted in Economic
Classics, ed. Ashley.)


The Dynastic State 79

obedience has been so thoroughly ingrained that sub-
servience has become a passionate aspiration with the
subject population, where the habit of allegiance has at-
tained that degree of automatism that the subject's ideal
of liberty has come to be permission to obey orders, —
somewhat after the fashion in which theologians interpret
the freedom of the faithful, whose supreme privilege it
is to fulfil all the divine commands. Such an ideal growth
of patriotic sentiment appears to have been attained, in a
tolerable degree of approximation, in the German case,
if one is to credit the popular encomiasts, who explain
that "duty," in the sense indicated, combined with "free-
dom," makes up the goal to which the German spirit
aspires. "Duty," of course, comprises the exercise of
arbitrary command on the part of the superior as well
as the obedience of the inferior, but such arbitrary author-
ity is exercised only in due submission to higher
authority, until it traces back to the dynastic head, — who,
it would appear, in turn exercises only a delegated author-
ity, vested in his person by divine grace.

The phrase, "dynastic State," is here used in prefer-
ence to "patrimonial State," not because there is any
substantial difference between the two conceptions, but
rather because the later German spokesmen for the Ger-
man State, as it is seen at work during the Imperial era,
appear to have an aversion to the latter term, which they
wish to apply to the territorial state of the pre-imperial
time, in contradistinction to the state as rehabilitated in
the adoption of a constitution comprising a modicum of
representative institutions and parliamentary forms. The
designation "dynastic" is still applicable, however; and
in effect the constitutional rehabilitation has not taken the


80 Imperial Germany

German State out of the category of patrimonial mon-
archies. The difference resulting from the Imperial
\ constitution is in large part a difference in form and in
administrative machinery; it does not greatly circum-
scribe the effectual powers, rights and discretion of the
Imperial crown; still less does it seriously limit the
powers of the Prussian crown, or the dynastic claims of
suzerainty vested in the Prussian succession. Even under
the constitution it is a government resting on the suze-
rainty of the crown, not on the discretion of a parlia-
mentary body. It is, in other words, a government of
constitutionally mitigated absolutism, not of parliamen-
tary discretion tempered with monarchy.

In the shift from particularism to the Empire no
revolutionary move was made, comparable with the
change initiated in the United Kingdom by the revolu-
tion of 1688 ; if such a shift to a democratic constitution
is to overtake the German state, that move lies still in the
future. The changes introduced with the constitution
of the Empire, in so far as they have been effectual, were
such as were made necessary by the larger scale on which
the new national jurisdiction was required to work, and
involved only such a modicum of delegated jurisdiction
to parliamentary and local organisations as would be
expedient for the control and usufruct of territory and
resources, population, trade and industry, that exceed
the effectual reach of the simpler bureaucracy character-
istic of the small territorial state. The economic policy
of the Imperial era has still continued to be a "cameralis-
tic" policy, with such concessive adaptations as the mod-
ern scale and complexity of economic affairs necessitate.
It is true, under the administration of Bismarck there was


The Dynastic State 81

a perceptible drift in the direction of those "liberal" pre-
conceptions that subconsciously biassed the endeavors of
all European statesmen through much of the latter half
of the century ; but this drift, which showed itself in the
Bismarckian policies of trade, colonies, and incipient min-
isterial responsibility, never came to anything conclusive
under his hands ; nor had it gone so far as in any appre-
ciable degree to embarrass the endeavors of the later
emperor directed to the complete revendication of the
imperial suzerainty. The paramount authority, under
the Imperial constitution, vests in the crown, not in any
representative body, although this holds with even less
qualification in the Prussian than in the Imperial gov-
ernment; but Germany has, in these respects, been pro-
gressively "Prussianised" during the Imperial era, while
Prussia has not been drawing toward the lines of that
democratic autonomy that holds the rest of north and
central Europe, at least on a qualified and provisional
tenure.

Imperial Germany does not depart sensibly from the
pattern of Prussia under Frederick the Great, in respect
of its national policies or the aims and methods of gov-
ernment control, nor do the preconceptions of its states-
men differ at all widely from those prevalent among the
dynastic jobbers of that predaceous era of state-making.
The difference touches mainly the machinery of politics
and administration, and it is mainly of such a character
as is dictated by an endeavor to turn the results of mod-
ern industry and commerce to account for the purposes \
that once seemed good to the pragmatists of that earlier
era. That such is the case need give no occasion for
dispraise. At least there is nothing of the kind implied


82 Imperial Germany

here. It may be an untoward state of things, perhaps,
though sufficient proof of such a contention has not yet
come in sight. It is specifically called to mind here be-
cause it is one of the main factors in the case of Imperial
Germany considered as a phase of the development of
institutions in the Western culture.

This modern state of the industrial arts that so has led
to the rehabilitation of a dynastic state in Germany on a
i£ scale exceeding what had been practicable in earlier
times, — this technological advance was not made in
Germany but was borrowed, directly or at the second
I remove, from the English-speaking peoples, primarily,
and in the last resort almost wholly, from England. What
has been insisted on above is that British use and wont
I in other than the technological respect was not taken over
by the German community at the same time. The result
being that Germany offers what is by contrast with
England an anomaly, in that it shows the working of
the modern state of the industrial arts as worked out by
the English, but without the characteristic range of
institutions and convictions that have grown up among
English-speaking peoples concomitantly with the growth
of this modern state of the industrial arts. Germany
combines the results of English experience in the develop-
ment of modern technology with a state of the other arts
of life more nearly equivalent to what prevailed in Eng-
land before the modern industrial regime came on ; so that
the German people have been enabled to take up the
technological heritage of the English without having paid
for it in the habits of thought, the use and wont, induced
in the English community by the experience involved in
achieving it. Modern technology has come to the Ger-


The Dynastic State 83

/

mans ready-made, without the cultural consequences
which its gradual development and continued use has en-
tailed among the people whose experience initiated it
and determined the course of its development.

The position of the Germans is not precisely unique in
this respect; in a degree the same general proposition
will apply to the other Western nations, 1 but it applies to
none with anything like the same breadth. The case of
Germany is unexampled among Western nations both
as regards the abruptness, thoroughness and amplitude
of its appropriation of this technology, and as regards
the archaism of its cultural furniture at the date of this
appropriation.

It will be in place to call to mind in this connection
what has been said in an earlier chapter on the advantage
of borrowing the technological arts rather than developing
them by home growth. In the transit from one com-
munity to another the technological elements so borrowed
do not carry over the fringe of other cultural elements
that have grown up about them in the course of their
development and use. The new expedients come to hand
stripped of whatever has only a putative or conventional
bearing on their use. On the lower levels of culture this
fringe of conventional or putative exactions bound up
with the usufruct of given technological devices would
be mainly of the nature of magical or religious observ-
ances ; but on the higher levels, in cases of the class here
in question, they are more likely to be conventionalities


*It applies with at least equal cogency to the case of Japan,
and indeed the Japanese case is strikingly analogous to that of
Germany in this connection.


84 Imperial Germany

embedded in custom and to some extent in law, of a
secular kind, but frequently approaching the mandatory
character of religious observances, as, e.g., the require-
ment of a decently expensive standard of living.


CHAPTER IV

The Case of England

Propounded in this explicit fashion, the view that a
given technological system will have an economic value
and a cultural incidence on a community which takes it
over ready made, different from the effects its has already
wrought in the community from which it is taken over
and in which it has cumulatively grown to maturity in
correlation with other concomitant changes in the arts
of life, — when so stated as an articulate generalisation
this proposition may seem unfamiliar, and perhaps dubi-
ous. But apart from its formal recognition as a premise
to go on, the position has long had the assured standing
of commonplace. Where such an instance of borrowing
comes up for attention among historians and students of
human culture, the people that so has taken over an
unfamiliar system of industrial ways and means will
commonly be characterised as "raw," "immature," "un-
balanced," "crude," "underbred ;" the spokesmen of such
a community on the other hand are likely to speak of its
being "youthful," "sturdy," "unspoiled," "in the prime of
full-blooded manhood." The meaning in either case, in-
vidious emotions apart, being that such a people has on
the one hand not acquired those immaterial elements of
culture, those habits of thought on other than industrial
matters, that should, and in due course will, come into ef-

85


86 Imperial Germany

feet as the necessary correlate of such an advance in tech-
nological efficiency, and on the other hand that the people
with the new-found material efficiency has not come in
for the wasteful and inhibitory habits and fashions with
which in the course of time the same technological assets
have come to be encumbered among those peoples who
have long had the use of them. There is no need of
quarreling with either view. Seen as a phenomenon of
habituation, and so of the growth of use and wont, the
two supplement one another. They are two perspectives
of the same view. And the difference between the case
of Germany and that of the British, and indeed of the
other industrially advanced peoples of Europe, is of this
nature. The German people have come in for the modern
technology without taking over the graces of the modern
industrial culture in which this technology belongs by
right of birth, but it is at least equally to the point to
note that they have taken over this technological system
without the faults of its qualities.

Wherein the case of Germany falls short of the mea-
sure of experience and cultural maturity that has come
to the English-speaking peoples, or in other words what
the Germans have escaped in having stood to one side
of the current of material civilisation in the West, is best
to be seen in contrast with the case of the English people
through the period of this technological growth. The
racial derivation of the two peoples is the same and their
cultural antecedents are identical through antiquity, down
to a late period in the pagan era. Even in the Middle
Ages the experience of the two does not differ so widely
as to give a notably different cultural outcome. It is only
from the close of the feudal age that the divergence


The Case of England 87

begins to be pronounced, and it is within the interval
since the beginning of modern times, as counted by the
English chronology, that the technological situation has
taken on that modern character which until recently
distinguished the British industrial system from the Ger-
man. So it is also in modern times that the British pat-
tern of culture in other respects has sensibly diverged
from the German.

Differences of detail, such as should, of course, receive
attention in any careful historical survey, come in sight
quite early ; and these early differences may well be called
to mind here, since they are much the same in kind as the
later difference in situation between the two peoples, so
far as concerns the general lines of cultural development.
From the period of the Migrations the invaders of the
British Isles have been exposed to a different character
of circumstances from those that shaped the fortunes of
their congeners who invaded what is now the Fatherland.
The pagan invaders of Britain found a Christian and
Romanised population before them; which would mean
that the people whom they conquered, and for the con-
tinued subjection of whom their governmental organisa-
tion was first installed, were a people that had already
learned submission and an orderly life under the mastery
of the Roman Peace and of the priests of the church.
The barbarians who settled in Germany, on the other
hand, appear to have found a population less tractable and
presumably of less economic value ; at the same time the
various bodies of barbarians in the German territories

•

continued more unremittingly at war among themselves
on the one side and in continued hostile contact with the
Roman Empire and its successors on the other side. So


88 Imperial Germany

that, in spite of the absolutely tumultuous state of Britain
in the Anglo-Saxon period, the situation in the Island
was after all relatively tranquil by contrast with the state
of blood and wounds, rapine, slavery and oppression, that
made up the scheme of life in Germany through the dark
ages. Yet the two countries came through the experience
of the feudal age without differing in so general and
profound a manner in their mode of life that the two
could then be said to follow two divergent lines of cul-
tural development.

At the transition from mediaeval to modern time the
English people were in arrears, culturally, as compared
with the rest of west and central Europe, including west
and south Germany; whether that epoch is to be dated
from the close of the fifteenth century or from any
earlier period, and whether the comparison is to be made
in industry and material civilisation or in immaterial
terms of intellectual achievement and the arts of life.
But during the succeeding century the English community
had made such gains that by its close they stood (perhaps
doubtfully) abreast of their Continental neighbors. This
British gain Was both absolute and relative, and was due
both to an accelerated advance in the Island and a
retardation of the rate of gain in much of the Continental
territory, although the retardation is more visible on the
Continent during the seventeenth than even toward the
close of the sixteenth century. Relatively, by comparison
again with the state of things among the rival states on
the Continent, the English community at this time ex- 1
perienced a respite from political, military and religious
disturbances ; though this respite is a matter of mitigation,
not of surcease. It doubtless has much to do with the


The Case of England 89

advance of the new. trade, industry and learning of that
classic age, particularly in the increased security of life
which it brought ; and it is at the same time noteworthy
as the initial period of that British peace that has held
since then, at times precariously, no doubt, but after all
with sufficient consistency to have marked a difference in
this respect between the conditions of life offered in the I
Island and those that have prevailed on the Continent.
So that, with reservations, the arts of peace have claimed
the greater attention throughout modern times. It may be
doubtful whether one can with equal confidence say that
the arts of war and of dynastic politics and religion have
claimed the chief attention of the Continental peoples
during the same period; but in any case the contrast in
this respect is too broad to be overlooked, and of too
profound a character not to have had its effect in a
divergent growth of the institutions and preconceptions
that govern human relations and human ends.

For the purpose in hand this modern period of
British life may best be divided into two phases or stages,
contrasted in some respects. The earlier phase running
from an indefinite date in the early sixteenth to some-
where in the early seventeenth century, while the later
begins loosely in the later seventeenth and runs to the
historical present. The former phase, of course, comes
to its most pronounced manifestation in the Elizabethan
era; although its cultural consequences are more fully
realized at a later date. The high tide of the latter is
marked by the Industrial Revolution, conventionally so
called, and leaves its mark on British culture chiefly in
the nineteenth century. The criteria as well as the rea-
sons for so subdividing British modern time are chiefly


90 Imperial Germany

of a technological or industrial nature and bearing. The
earlier of these two periods is the high tide of English
borrowing and assimilation in the industrial arts, and
so corresponds in some sense with the Imperial era of
Germany ; the latter period is to be marked as in a special
sense a creative era in English life, which has engendered
the current technological system, characterised and dom-
inated by the machine industry, and which has no coun-
terpart in the life-history of the German people hitherto.
There would accordingly appear to be an interval of,
loosely, some three or four hundred years' experience
included in the life-history of the English community,
but omitted from the experience that has gone to make
the national genius of the German people.

Left in this unqualified shape this proposition doubt-
less would amount to an exaggeration. The necessary
qualifications to be made are obviously forcible, but they
are by no means easily reducible to a formal statement;
particularly would it be difficult to introduce qualifica-
tions that could be stated in quantitative terms, whether
of time or of any other dimension. And so far as bears
on the point here in question — the contrasted previous
experience and consequent contrasted habitual bent of the
two communities — the discrepancy is not to be reduced
by calling to mind that while the English have been ex-
posed to the discipline of life under this gradually
I modernised regime the German population has been
• gathering more and sterner experience of the ancient line.
Here, again, to avoid possible misapprehension, it
seems necessary to enter the caution that in so pointing a
contrast between the experience, and therefore the result-
ing habituation, that has fallen to the share of the two


The Case of England 91

contrasted peoples, no invidious comparison is intended.
Except as rated for some specified purpose, on some con-
ventionally agreed basis of merit or expediency, it does
not follow that the one is better or worse than the other ;
the whole point sought to be exhibited is that "there is a
discrepancy there." Of course, seen from the point of
view of the modern Occidental culture, as it runs in the
advanced industrial countries, this discrepancy will have
to be rated as an arrested spiritual development on the
German side of the comparison ; nothing in the way of
atrophy or of heritable defect, of course, but simply an
habitual bent at variance with the ideals, aims and animus
of latterday civilised mankind, as seen among those peo-
ples that have drifted farthest from medievalism; it is
not a trait of human nature in the substantial sense, but
only the second nature of habit and tradition. Such
farther drift from the holding-ground of the mediaeval
mind will be rated as gain or loss, of course, very much
according as one may have the grace to see it ; so that it
resolves itself into a question of taste, concerning which
there is no disputing.

Modern writers who have handled this segment of
English history from a large and genial outlook are apt
to look on Elizabethan England as a self-contained cul-
tural epoch, which made its own growth out of vital
forces cpmprised within its own historical limits ; and such
is doubtless a competent view of that exuberant season
of British achievement in so far as touches the exploits
of the new learning, the warlike and commercial enter-
prise of the period, and the swift and sure advance of
its literature, provided one confines one's attention to these
works of fruition and their immediate ground in the


92 Imperial Germany

wealth of unfolding energy that created them. But
Elizabethan England is not an episode that happened by
the way; no more than Imperial Germany. Like the
Imperial era in Germany the Elizabethan era grew out
of and carried out a new situation, a new posture of the
material forces that conditioned the life and endeavors
of the community. And like the corresponding German
case this new posture of economic forces is in great part
an outcome of new acquisitions in the industrial arts,
largely drawn from abroad. Earlier Tudor times that
led up to the Elizabethan period proper began the move-
ment for bringing English industry abreast of the neigh-
boring countries on the Continent, which was continued
through the greater part of Elizabeth's reign. This move-
ment is chiefly occupied with borrowing processes, de-
vices, workmen and methods, and with adapting all these
things shrewdly to the needs and uses of the island com-
munity. In so borrowing, the English had the advantage
that comes to any borrower in like case. They took over
what approved itself, and took it over without the con-
ventional limitations that attached to the borrowed ele-
ments in the countries of their origin. These conventional
elements were those characteristic of the handicraft sys-
tem, with its gild and charter regulations and the settled
usages, routes and methods of the petty trade that went
with that system. Among the new gains a noj incon-
siderable item is what the English learned from the
Dutch, of ship-building and navigation. An immediate
though secondary effect of the new departure in the in-
dustrial system — a departure which is better expressed
in terms of improvement and innovation than in those of a
new start — is the (virtual) discovery of resources made


The Case of England 93

available in the new posture which industrial forces were
taking, and the consequent freedom with which these new
resources were turned to account. New and wide oppor-
tunities offered, by contrast with what had been the run
of things before, and these opportunities, for enterprise,
then as ever, played into the posture of affairs as provo-
cations to enterprise; which then as ever brought on its
cumulative run of prosperity. The wealth in hand in-
creased in utility under the stimulus of new opportunities
for its gainful utilisation, and the men in whose hands
lay the discretion in industrial matters saw opportunities
ahead which their own faith in these opportunities en-
abled them to realise through adventurous enterprise
inspired by the new outlook itself. It is the tale familiar
to all students of periodic prosperity in trade and indus-
try — periods of cumulatively increasing confidence,
speculative advance, enhanced buoyancy, expansion, in-
flation, or whatever term is chosen as the antithesis of
depression — the chief distinguishing trait of this par-
ticular period of prosperity being that it grew out of the
acquirement of a new efficiency, due to what was in effect
a discovery of new technological resources backed by a
concomitant discovery that the natural resources at hand
were acquiring an increased industrial value through their
larger use under the new industrial regime; together
with the further characteristic feature that this virtual
discovery of powers went forward progressively over a
considerable space of time, so that no stagnation due to
an exhaustion of the stimulus overtook this era of pros-
perity and enterprise within the lifetime of the generation
which first caught the swing of its impulsion. In this
respect the case of Imperial Germany shows a parallel,


94 Imperial Germany

although the greater scale and rate of their acquiring the
new industrial system, as well as the swifter pace of mod-
ern trade and industrial enterprise, has so foreshortened
the corresponding experience of the Germans as to com-
press within a lifetime the rounded movement from initia-
tive to climax that would correspond with what occupied
the English for more than a century. This very different
tempo grows out of the different character of the machine
technology, as contrasted with the handicraft system and
its petty trade.

There is another, extraneous, feature of the case, that
also sets off this English period of enterprise in contrast
with the German case. Whereas the unfolding of the new
economic regime in Germany has taken place during a
half century of peace and advancing industrial enterprise
throughout the nations of Christendom, barring essen-
tially trivial and ephemeral disturbances, so that German
enterprise has had to make its way under the competition
of other industrial countries that already had the lead;
Elizabethan England has the differential advantage given
it in the matter of enterprise that the rest of Christendom
then was presently involved in destructive wars, and so
was caught in a protracted season of industrial incapacity
and economic decay, which, fortunately for the English
industrial community, fell with exceptional severity on
the most capable of their industrial and commercial
rivals. There followed the extended period of state-
making on the Continent, which involved Christian Eu-
rope, with the partial exception of the British Isles, in
interminable warfare and political intrigue, brought on
the collapse of the great era of south-German business
enterprise, and closed in a collapse of exhaustion. This


The Case of England 95

progressive, scarcely interrupted, economic decay of Con-
tinental Christendom gave the English such a progres-
sively sustained differential advantage in trade and indus-
try that in spite of all the disturbances fomented at home,
the island population retained the lead which the peculiar
circumstances of the sixteenth century had thrown into
their hands ; and so in spite of minor checks — some of
great absolute magnitude — the prosperity that set in
with the Elizabethan era may be said to have run on at
a lower tension through the succeeding two hundred
years, and to have been continuous with the new era
brought on by the Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth
century.

Much of this interval of commonplace material suc-
cess, it should be admitted, is to be set down less to the
credit of the English than to the discredit of their Con-
tinental neighbors. The great advantage of the English
was their easily defensible isolation, which left them in
comparative peace, and the dynastic ambitions and pa-
triotic and religious fervor of the Continental states,
which brought them to the extremities of economic con-
fusion and industrial decay, and so left the English free
to make a doubtfully efficient use of an unparalleled and
irretrievable opportunity. In respect of their economic
interests and the advancement of technology, the interval
from the accession of Elizabeth to the close of the Napo-
leonic era may, for the peoples of Continental Christen-
dom, be set down under the rubric of, The Years that the
Locust hath Eaten. For the English the middle half of
the same interval is occupied with a sluggish advance by
inertia.

But the time so allowed the English for the acquire-


96 Imperial Germany

ment of the technological wisdom of Continental
Christendom, and for the unimpeded usufruct of it, ex-
ceeds the corresponding time allowance of Imperial Ger-
many by some sixfold, and the enforced rate of utilisation
and transition to a new scheme would be correspondingly
temperate. The new scheme of habituation in the material
arts of life would accordingly have a more adequate
chance to work out its consequences in the way of a
revision of the community's habits of thought on other
heads; the technological institutions so taken into the
scheme of life would enforce their discipline upon the
population that so became addicted to this new economic
situation, and would bend their thinking on other matters
in consonance with the frame of mind inbred in the in-
dustrial system. The system which the English borrowed
and worked out into its farther consequences was the
system of handicraft and petty trade, and the frame of
mind native or normal to this industrial system is that
which stands for self-help and an equal chance. 1 All
this pervasive discipline of the industrial occupations and
of the scheme of interests and regulations embodied in
this system worked slowly, with a temperate but massive
and steady drift, to induce in the English people an animus
of democratic equity and non-interference, self-help and
local autonomy; which came to a head on the political
side in the revolution of 1688, and which continued to
direct the course of sentiment through the subsequent
development of a scheme of common law based on the
metaphysics of Natural Rights.

1 Cf. Werner Sombart, Der moderne Kapitalismus, bk. i. ch.
v. vi. vii., Der Bourgeois, "Einleitung," ch. ii. ; W. J. Ashley,
English Economic History and Theory, bk. ii. ch. vi. ; and authors
referred to by these writers.


The Case of England 97

An effect of the English forward move into the early
modern regime of handicraft and self-help, therefore, was
among other things the collapse of autocracy and the
decay of coercive surveillance on the part of self-consti-
tuted authorities. With the redistribution of discretion!
and initiative in economic matters, consequent on and !
enforced by the new industrial system, the ancient animus
of insubordination again took effect in the affairs of the
community, threw the material interests and initiative of
the individual into the foreground of policy, changed the (
"subject" into a "citizen," and went near to reducing
the state to a condition of "innocuous desuetude" by mak-
ing it a bureau for the administration of the public peace
and the regulation of equity between private interests.
All this drift of things away from the landmarks of the
ancient dynastic regime has never reached a consummate
outcome, — the proliferation of English Natural Rights
has never matured into a system of regulated anarchy,
after the prehistoric pattern, although a speculative ex-
cursion in that direction has made its appearance now
and again. Neither the large scale and intricate organi- 1
sation of modern industry and trade, nor the ever present J
shadow of international discord, has permitted such an '
eventuality.

All this has taken time. Time has been required for
the discipline of this industrial and commercial regime
to take effect in the rehabituation of the people and the
gradual readjustment of legal and moral conceptions to
the working conditions of the new scheme. The read-
justment doubtless took place in part advisedly, by a set
endeavor to make statutory specifications and authorita-
tive regulations fit the exigencies of the new industry and


98 Imperial Germany

commerce, to standardise civil and political relations in
such terms as should fit the new exigencies. These en-
deavors were not altogether successful. They proceeded
in great part on preconceptions carried over from the
earlier regime, rather than on habits of thought instilled
by the discipline of the new. Nor were these earlier en-
deavors of the constituted authorities to standardise and
regulate the new economic situation either of commen-
surate practical value or of permanent effect. More is to
be said for such later statutory and administrative
measures as presently grew out of the new situation in
the way of what may be called a psychological precipitate
of the new discipline. And still greater substantial value
attached to the revised outlook on matters of moral,
legal or intellectual interest, which in great part has taken
effect in current use and wont and current standards and
canons of valuation in these lines, without necessarily
being embodied in statutory or other authentic form. So
in religion, art — especially literature, — philosophy,
science and the canons of propriety and loyalty. Such a
growth takes time. It is a matter of habituation and of
the gradual displacement of received habits of thought.
Principles of valuation and of conduct, of this class, are
not to be acquired or to be put away in one generation ;
nor are they to be suddenly imposed by ordinance, al-
though doubtless a strenuous and well-conceived authori-
tative management may appreciably accelerate the pro-
cess of habituation through which they are to be acquired
or displaced. But the best-conceived authoritative sur-
veillance is relatively impotent to further the growth of
free institutions or of what may be called free thought,
such as characterises the English development during the


The Case of England 99

period in question. These things, being a product, by resil-
ience, of the ancient spirit of insubordination and initia-
tive, are not fostered by coercion.

It is unnecessary, and it would even more be tedious,
here to set out in any articulate fashion what has hap-
pened to the religious cult and its underlying theological
conceptions under the protracted discipline of this mod-
ern regime of work and self-help. The results have
varied through all degrees of devout authenticity, short
of the high dignity from which the new departure
diverged, and the patchwork of dissentingly autonomous
and obstreperous variants is such as no person of culti-
vated taste in the devout proprieties could willingly dwell
on. Philosophy has followed in the wake of the retreat of
religion, as should properly happen since philosophy at its
best is the handmaid of theology; so that the character-
istic English philosophical work in modern times has been
of a skeptical temper on the whole and has leaned greatly
on principles of self-interest and serviceability to human
use, with its moral premises and precepts strongly im-
pregnated with utilitarian and pragmatic, not to say ma-
terialistic, conceits.

The spirit of loyalty has suffered a like reduction to
lower terms. Not that the British subject in modern
times has not been loyal to the commonwealth, and even
on occasion to the sovereign and the dynasty ; but it has
more than once become painfully evident, both within the
Island and in the more considerable colonies — as, e.g.,
in the thirteen that formed the United States — that the
British subject's loyalty to the reigning monarch or to
the crown is conditioned on the serviceability of such
allegiance to his own material interests. A loyalty which


ioo Imperial Germany

raises the question, What for? comes far short of the
feudalistic ideal and of that spirit of enthusiastic abnega-
tion that has always been the foundation of a prosperous
dynastic state. British loyalty is not precisely to be
stigmatised as "fair-weather loyalty/' but as seen from
the standpoint of dynastic politics, neither is it a good
merchantable article in its class. It is too far tempered
with insubordination. At this point, again, the English
case diverges from that of Imperial Germany.

This difference of temper in respect of loyalty to the
dynasty, or even to the State, as between the English
and the German people, appears in the main to be a short-
coming on the English side. The English fall short in
point of self-sacrifice and abnegation for the sake of
dynastic politics and the advancement of the reigning
house and its patrician bureaucracy. By contrast with
the naive patriotic solidarity of the German people, the
allegiance of the English might even be called a mitigated
insubordination rather than loyalty tempered with self-
interest. Yet it is more a difference in degree than in
kind. The English appear to have lost something in the
course of these centuries which the Germans have re-
tained or even reenforced, — something in the way of an
habitual abandon of deference to the majesty, of the
State and the pretensions of the sovereign. There is less
devotion in the habitual outlook and temper of the Eng-
lish. There is, no doubt, a good and serviceable residue
of this honorable obsequiousness still left in the frame of
mind habitual among the English ; but it has the appear-
ance of having been left over, in some sense by over-
sight, and even what there is left over of it is subject to


The Case of England 101

a limit of tolerance imposed by an afterthought of self-
interest.

The shortcoming of the English as compared with the
Germans in respect of dynastic solidarity and subservience
arises out of a divergence of growth, due to more than
a single factor. When the lines began to diverge, at the
transition from the mediaeval to the modern regime, the
English were already less well furnished in this respect
than their friends on the Continent. Mediaevalism neveri
was as well developed in England, and its development!
in the German territories was of a particularly harsh and J
militant order. Since the new departure, loyalty to
dynastic ideals and subservience to the pretensions of the
sovereign have lost ground in England, due to the com-
paratively peaceable conditions prevailing there; at the,
same time all this habit of mind has, on the whole, gained I
rather than lost in Germany, particularly in respect of the
cruder and more truculent forms of loyalty to the person
of the ruler, due to the continued and strenuous discipline
in petty and personal warlike enterprise to which those
people have been subjected, 1 — more especially true of
the North, where personal mastery and servile allegiance
have, under less settled conditions, suffered less en-
croachment from conventionalisation of the rights of
tenure by prowess.

But the most striking feature of the English culture in
modern times, and at the same time the most character-
istic point of difference between the English and the
German scheme throughout the modern period, and down


*"The centuries have raised to high relief the elemental
Teutonic qualities of hate, greed, courage and devotion." — H. O.
Taylor, The MedUeval Mind.


102 Imperial Germany

to the middle of the nineteenth century, is after all the
English preoccupation with material realities. "Reality,"
in English, means materiality, whenever and in so far as
the person using the term does not advisedly take
thought of its wider extension; by neglect rather than
by aggressive intention the concept has suffered this
narrowing of its connotation at the hands of the modern
English-speaking peoples. This materialistic bias in the
English frame of mind culminates in the "mechanistic
conception," as it has been called by men who have had
occasion analytically to attempt a preciser definition of
this habit of thought. The mechanistic conception and
mechanistic point of view are, of course, of a visibly
technological nature and bearing. It comes on by de-
grees of approach throughout the modern period, and the
culmination has been reached only in the historical
present, — if it is fairly to be said that the culmination
of this movement has yet been reached, and not rather that
what appears in our perspective to be the culmination,
appears to be such only because it is the farthest point
yet arrived at along this line. Throughout the few
centuries of this modern era the drift in this direction
has gone on with such a degree of consistency that, as
seen from the point arrived at in its later phases, the
mechanistic conception has the appearance of a goal to-
ward which the discipline of modern life has tended.

In all this drift of modern intellectual life toward a
materialistic basis of valuations and recourse to a mech-
anistic logic in the handling of phenomena, the German
peoples have not shared in any sensible degree nor have
they borne any paft in or contributed at all appreciably


The Case of England 103

to it. An exception to this broad denial is doubtless due
as applies to the south-German peoples through the
earlier half of the modern era, but this exception holds
good only with progressively lessening force even during
the period when it applies at all; and seen simply in its
own light, not viewed from the standpoint of the ulterior
culmination which it never reached, it would scarcely
be so rated at all. Except for this earlier modern phase
— say, loosely, the sixteenth and perhaps the seventeenth
century — the intellectual drift among the German peo-
ples has been rather away from the materialistic animus,
though .perhaps not in any pronounced degree. . Within
the general confines of the Fatherland the discipline of
workday life through these centuries has on the whole
been of that personal character that throws immaterial
qualities and relations into the foreground of habitual
attention and leads to valuations of differential authen-
ticity, dignity, caste, class, precedent and precedence; it
has in an exceptional degree been the discipline of court,
camp, bureaucracy and police, rather than that of the
town-meeting, the open market and the open road, —
still less has it taken its bias from the machine shop and
the large industry. The intellectual bent and the prin- *
ciples of systematic thinking induced by such discipline
do not lie parallel with the mechanistic conception but
rather fall in with that higher range of habits of thought
that are spoken of as idealistic, spiritual, transcendental,
that lead into generalisation and subsumptions under im- 1
material and ulterior categories, — transcendental in the '
sense of seeking precision and finality by recourse to con- ,
ceptions that transcend the actualities of sense per- J
ception.


\


104 Imperial Germany

It is not that there is a sheer contrast between English
and German, through this earlier formative period of
modern times, in respect of the habituation that has gone
to shape the intellectual life of Christendom. They both
lie within the cultural confines of Christendom and within
the range of modern as contrasted with mediaeval cultural
interests, at least in the main. But they represent the two
extreme terms (or terminals) within this cultural com-
plex, so far as regards the intellectual life of Christendom
and so far as regards those elements of culture, par-
ticularly, that have much to say in the current shaping
of modern institutions. As there has already been occa-
sion to remark, the difference is one of degree, of the
different stress that falls on one or another of the sev-
eral factors that enter in the life of both; but such a
difference is most conveniently handled in terms of con-
trast, in so far as the point of inquiry is the difference
rather than the identity of the two.

Except for intrusive factors that had little more than
a transient and superficial effect, then, and except for
the earlier segment of modern times, the intellectual life
of the German peoples has taken the direction given by
the discipline of life in the Fatherland as characterised
above. Relatively little attention, with relatively very
slight effect, has been given to the material sciences or
/ to technological lore of the mechanistic kind, — until
such a date as English (and French) results achieved in
these lines began finally to take a hold by way of bor-
1 rowed gains, about the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury. German speculation and inquiry took what has
been called a profounder character, in that attention
; turned habitually to ulterior and transcendental systemati-


The Case of England 105

sations of the knowledge in hand and to a quest of realties
in the domain of the spirit, that is to say, in rationalised
terms of personal force and spiritual congruity, the ra- ^
tionalisation taking its color from the regime of mastery
and submission, orderly subservience to an authentically
imposed scheme of conventional values. The culmina-
tion, of course, is German metaphysics of the Romantic
school ; drawn on lines of logical congruence rather than
of efficient causation, and reaching its ultimate in the
quasi-pantheistic over-ruling dominance of a transcen-
dental personality. German speculation culminates in a
(qualified) pantheistic scheme of logical categories and
moral necessities, while the corresponding English move-
ment, in so far as touches the point here in question, has
tended strongly to an atheistic and unmoral scheme of
opaque and impersonal matter of fact. This work of the
human spirit as it has come into play under the German
habituation is spoken of as "nobler," "profounder," — a
point not to be disputed, since such discrimination is in-
vidious and is an affair of taste and perspective.

Yet the characteristic bent of the intellectual life among
the peoples of modern Christendom, as distinguished from
what has prevailed elsewhere and in other times, is the
animus that shows itself in the mechanistic conception.
This may be little to the credit of modern Christendom,
but the fact remains that only at this point has the culture
of modern Christendom outrun the known civilisations

*

that have gone before. It is also to be noted that this
animus has come into such a position of dominance in
modern intellectual life only by virtue of its practical
efficiency, its congruence with matter of fact; as it is
likewise to be noted that it is at the hands of the English-


106 Imperial Germany

speaking peoples, primarily, that the mechanistic con-
ception has been given its dominant place in the logic
of modern thinking; which comes to saying that it is an
outcome of the course of habituation to which the English
community has been subject since modern times began.
The conception is plainly of the technological order, and
this fact marks the modern culture in which it prevails
as a civilisation whose substantial core is the state of
the industrial arts, even more obviously and immediately
than such a proposition would apply to any other known
civilisation. But its technological counterfoil is found
in the late-modern state of the industrial arts, such as it
has prevailed since the Industrial Revolution, rather than
in the industrial system of modern times prior to that
epoch. 1

The manner in which this correlation between tech-
nological use and wont on the one side and the precon-
ceptions of scientific inquiry on the other runs through


1 What may appear to be an undue insistence on the priority
of the English-speaking peoples in this matter of initiative
and creative lead in the exact sciences does not overlook
the work of scientists belonging to other nationalities and
with other linguistic affiliations. It is not a matter of
linguistic or national affiliation, still less is it a matter of
race. The point of the argument is only that this lead in the
exact, and particularly in the material, sciences is closely
bound up with the state of the industrial arts — and the cognate
institutional conceptions — among the Western peoples; and that
the peculiar geographical distribution of the modern tech-
nological advance has brought a freer growth and fuller ma-
turity of the mechanistic bias that underlies modern science
in the Island than elsewhere, particularly during the later
eighteenth and earlier nineteenth century. At the same time,
and owing in chief to the use of print, the culture of these
Western countries, all through the modern period, has had a
cosmopolitan character; and the share — a very consequential
share — in the scientific development, due to Italian, Dutch,
South German, and even Scandinavian specialists, and
peculiarly and especially to the French, i& not to be under-


The Case of England 107

modern intellectual life, as well as the apparent sequence
of cause and effect in the case, has already been set out
elsewhere in sufficiently full outline for the present
purpose ;* and no useful end would be served by repeating
it all here. The discussion referred to shows the general
run of the facts in the case, as a phase of the Western

>

culture at large, but does not touch especially on those
circumstances of the case that have made this develop-
ment a work of the English-speaking peoples as distinct
from the rest of Europe. So that there is still something
due to 'be said of the particular circumstances of the
English case which brought about this development in
the Island rather than elsewhere, and which influenced
the manner of its growth in the Island.

The chief and decisive circumstance, the causa causans
of the other crrcumstances bearing on the case, is the
insularity of the Island. From this insular position of
the English community it followed that the feudal system
was not as well established or as well elaborated in Eng-


valued by comparison with the English contingent. (See
pp. 175-178.) These others, for the most part, came earlier
in this field, just as they have on the other hand borne a
slighter share in the onward movement during the period of
its more consummate modernisation under the more finished
mechanistic discipline.

In all of this, as in so much else that touches the apex of
growth in Western civilisation, the French community, of
course, stands out as an apparent exception to any general
characterisation that may apply to the Continental peoples at
large. That the French have continued throughout the
course of modern civilisation to occupy a position of hege-
mony does not disturb the analysis attempted above, which
is directed more immediately to the divergence between
the English and the German case, considered as extreme
types of the culture current among the peoples lying within
the climatic area of the Baltic-North Sea littoral.

*Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the In-
dustrial Arts, ch. vi. and vii.


108 Imperial Germany

land; the "dynastic State" was not maintained in so
coercive and workmanlike a fashion, nor did it last as well
or linger as long as on the Continent, since it lacked in
some degree the necessary provocation and opportunity
afforded by recurrent foreign warfare ; the industrial situ-
ation, including the handicraft system, was in a backward
state at the transition to the modern regime; and the
handicraft system, having a shorter term of life in the
Island, never reached the same degree of elaboration,
particularly in respect of its gild regulations. The whole
political, civil and industrial organisation was of a looser
texture and so offered a readier field of change and a
freer field for individual initiative. It is notorious that
insubordination and individual self-assertion showed
themselves somewhat more readily and on slighter provo-
cation in the Island than on the Continent in early-
modern times, as also that concessions in that direction
were more habitual. In the further course this insular
station continued to affect the concerns of the community
in the same sense ; the chief fact being a relatively peace-
able situation, leading to a further gradual weakening
of personal government and a decline of bureaucratic
surveillance, with a drift of interest and attention away
from militant patriotism and dynastic policy and toward
the arts of peace, a growing preoccupation with industry
and trade in the place of war and politics.

The industry which so engaged the everyday specula-
tions of the common man was of the order of handicraft,
of course, in England as elsewhere at that time. But in
the absence — relative absence or slighter pressure — of
other, higher and more idealistic canons of logic and cate-
gories of generalisation, the commonplace Englishman —


The Case of England 109

and they were mostly commonplace, like other people —
speculated on whatever engaged his curiosity by help of
the categories which habitually lay in his mind and by
use of the logic which his workday occupations had taught
him the force of. These categories, enforced by the
workday routine of getting along by self-help under a
system of handicraft, would be the categories of work-
manship, and the logic which he habitually carried about
with him by force of the same homely experience was
the logic of the industrial process and of the give and
take of the petty trade. By failure of due discipline in
discriminate conformity to conventions of immaterial
dignity and invisible splendor, he had lost much of that
compelling sense of distinction where there is no sensible
difference that has remained one of the ornaments of his
Continental congener. He fell, in the course of common-
place generations, into a materialistic habit of mind, and
his materialism took form from the industrial operations
that touched his routine of life and from the goods about
which his interest in his livelihood centered, as well as
from the meticulous figures of weight and tale and price
about which he grew excited in the "higgling of the
market." These matters, and matters of this kind, he
could understand, and the logic of them was by unbroken
indoctrination good logic to apply to whatever came
within the horizon of his interest ; and few things came
within this horizon unless they came in the guise of ma-
terial data, or at least of data capable of statement in
sensible terms of weight and tale and of something that
would serve as a price valuation.

In such a frame of mind, one sees the sequence of
events as a concatenation of sensible data, in which action


no Imperial Germany

at a distance has no place or force and in which it is boot-
less to look for a "sufficient reason" that will not bear
formulation in sensible terms of weight and tale. Indeed,
in such company argument on intangible grounds of
sufficient reason is less convincing than a wager, — the
latter being at least susceptible of statistical formulation
in standard units of the realm. But the logic of work-
manship runs on good and sensible ground of manual
contact and tangible alteration of the materials on which
the work is spent; a cause which sensibly "works" a
tangible effect is something within the metaphysical hori-
zon of the most commonplace materialist. It is against
this background of handicraft, and. in the dry light shed
by the statistics of commercial accountancy, that the
scientists of the new era see the phenomena that presently
begin to engage their curiosity and require them to find
a framework for the systematisation of their knowledge.
So it comes about that when scientific inquiry gets under
way in the English community it seeks efficient causes,
and finds these causes in a shape that continually suggest
craftsmanlike workmanship. Not that this is a new and
unprovoked discovery of the English ; the like is present
in all earlier systematisations of knowledge, but in the
nobler or more idealistic systems that run back to the
personal grounds of theology, metaphysics, magic, and
the like, — as e.g., the systematisations of the schoolmen
and the later (German) mystics 1 and the alchemists of
early modern times, 2 this principle (habit of thought)
of workmanlike efficient cause is present only obscurely
and in good part unavowedly, though pervasively through-

iCf., e.g., Jakob Boehme, The Signature of all Things.
2 Cf. Robert Boyle, The Sceptical Chymist.


The Case of England in

out the argument. Nor is it that the new era under the
English auspices claims right of priority in this matter;
these latterday seekers after physical causes seek support
wherever it is to be had and find it in many places, for
the principle is itself one of the most ancient and incorri-
gible metaphysical habits of the race. It is only that in
this new era under commonplace English auspices this
metaphysical postulate of workmanlike causation edges I
its way into the foreground of inquiry, and by default of \
higher principles through neglect it is left standing as
the sole and self-sufficient category of conclusive sys-
tematisation in the domain of knowledge. The Italians
in their day, when handicraft and private initiative had
bred habits of materialistic inquiry among them, and
before ecclesiastical persecution and partisan warfare had
again brought that community in under the dim, reli-
gious light of orthodoxy and loyalty, had gone out on the
same homely quest and brought home staple goods mer-
chantable in the same market; so had also the French,
Dutch and south Germans, in the times when analogous
conditions induced a similar orientation of the idle curi-
osity in those communities. Now, when the turn came
for the English they had the use of what had been done
— and what still was being done — elsewhere, though
circumstances decided that the English community
presently fell into the lead.

Presently, by insensible degrees, a further new depar-
ture was initiated, or initiated itself, when the handicraft
technology overpassed the bounds of its own character-
istic methods and began to loosen the texture of its own
peculiarly workmanlike habits of thought. Somewhere
along about the beginning of the eighteenth century the


ii2 Imperial Germany

recourse to such technological expedients as involve ex-
tensive and comprehensive physical processes, "labor-
saving devices," and mechanical prime movers, begins to
take on such proportions as to introduce engineering of a
sort into the technological scheme, and presently to
install this new line of approach to questions of industrial
efficiency as an intrinsic element in the state of the indus-
trial arts. This new factor, or rather this old factor
which now begins to take on proportions that make it
count toward the shaping of the technological system and
of the intellectual outlook induced by and subservient to
that system, 1 — this new factor comes into view in such
connections as the increasing size and mechanical elabora-
tion of shipping, together with a systematised and cal-
, culable art of navigation; the improvement of highways
(and waterways) and vehicles, and the consequent reduc-
tion of the ways and means of communication and
transport, to more of a mechanically systematised affair ;
the increasing use of water-wheels, windmills, and similar
mechanical prime-movers; the extension and systematic
determination of agricultural processes, together with a
rationalised and deliberate attention to improvement of
the breeds of domestic animals.

!The new factor in the technological scheme brought in by
increased recourse to mechanical ways and means will count as
a substantial contributory agent in the situation at large only if
it rises above a certain "threshold" of proportional magnitude
or intensity, relatively to the concert of agencies bearing on the
same point. This is particularly true as regards the several
factors of habituation in any given case; such as are present in
relatively slight measure may easily become negligible. The
case is analogous to what happens in therapeutics, where a drug
administered in less than the "minimal dose" has no effect, —
unless it may be, in the case of certain drugs that are peculiar
in this respect, persistent repetition of the minimal dose may in
time work a cumulative effect. Therapeutics, it should be re-
marked, is also a field of habituation.


The Case of England 113

It is, however, not until well along in the century that
this incursion into the industrial system of elements alien
to the simpler spirit of handicraft proper reach such
proportions as visibly to affect the state of the industrial
arts and to suggest that something in the way of a new
range of principles of efficiency is beginning to take the
place of the old, so that the "mechanic arts" is no longer
securely synonymous with workmanship. But some-
where in the third quarter of the century the primacy
among the habits of thought that made up the techno-
logical scheme may be said to have passed from workman-
ship to engineering, — at least so it appears when the
matter is seen in the perspective given by the later develop-
ment along the same line; it may be doubtful if any
one would have assented to that proposition simply in view
of the situation as it then stood, and uninfluenced by the
later course of events in the mechanical industries. 1 It
is only by after-thought that this epoch has been named
the Industrial Revolution, and even so the revolution has
conventionally been appraised in terms of "labor-saving
devices," as being a system of ways and means for
"facilitating and abridging" the manual operations of
handicraft. But as seen in the light of what has come
of it, the technological character of this industrial revo-
lution is not to be mistaken, except wilfully. The effi-
ciency of it is not that of specialised craftmanship but of
a process in which mechanical factors engage.

Yet at the outset, or more properly in the initial phases
of the era of the machine industry, the preconceptions

1 Adam Smith, e.g., did not so see the matter, although his
preoccupation with economic questions that turned on the
efficiency of the industrial process would logically place him at
an advantage in this respect.


ii4 Imperial Germany

with which the designers and projectors of the new ex-
pedients went to their work were plainly of the handicraft
order. In the early designing of machinery their con-
scious aim was, by mechanical means, to reproduce crafts-
manlike manual operations on an enhanced scale, scope or
pace. This will not hold, of course, in such matters as
ship-building, navigation, road-way engineering or cattle
breeding ; but while these matters now find their place in
the broader scheme of the machine technology as seen
ex post facto , and are seen to come under the dominion
of the mechanistic conception, they were not then appre-
hended as ramifications of the technology of thfe machine
era. The technological innovations which first, and for a
long time alone, commended themselves as such and, as
making the difference between the old and the new,
were the devices spoken of as machinery in the narrower
sense, — the designing of these new contrivances was
first actuated by preconceptions of craftsmanship, and
it was only gradually, insensibly, that the inventors and
designers swung free from these personalised con-
ceptions of industrial processes and came to work out
their mechanical- problems in the logic of the mechani-
cal factors and processes at work on the case, rather
than in that of the manual operations which these pro-
cesses had displaced. As always, habituation took time ;
and it was apparently necessary that the generation at
whose hands the decisive move into the world of me-
chanical process had taken place should pass, before the
logic of the mechanistic conception could gain a secure
lodgment in the habitual thinking even of the men who
were occupied with the concrete details of mechanical
process. The norms and categories of science, according


The Case of England 115

to which the current body of knowledge was to be sys-
tematised, being remoter derivatives from the discipline
of workday life, would suffer transmutation more tardily
than the preconceptions of the technologists; but being
derivatives of the same workday routine the transmuta-
tion would necessarily overtake them also, provided
only that this workday routine held its character consist-
ently enough and long enough for its discipline to take
conclusive effect. So it will be found that the men who J
did the scientific work of the generation or two following
the Industrial Revolution, still continue to conceive of
their systematisation in terms of efficient causes that look
much like abstractions from the typical handicraftsman
dealing with a parcel of raw materials and turning out a
piece of wrought goods, — and there is even more than
a passing suggestion of the ancient gild regulations in the
irrepressible framing of Natural Laws to govern the
sequence of cause and effect in the theoretical specula-
tions of those early generations of scientific men. 1

But slowly, irresistibly, and irresponsibly, this median-*
istic conception that so makes the efficient spiritual core
of the modern industrial arts has also been insinuating its
logic into the domain of knowledge at large; first and
most obviously, of course, in the field of material science,
but presently also among those inquiring spirits who
speculate on higher things. Very much in the same mea-
sure and with the same degree of generality as the ma-
chine technology has displaced handicraft and diverted

1 Indeed, except for the fear of giving annoyance, one might
find survivals of the gild-regulation concept of natural laws in
the work of scientists still living, particularly perhaps in those
sciences that lie farthest a Held from the technological domain
and so come least in touch with the logic of mechanical
engineering.


1


u6 Imperial Germany

interest from the concerns of ritual observance and
coercive rule, so has also the mechanistic conception sup-
planted the preconceptions of the college of divinity and
of the college of heraldry in the logic of scientific theory.
Always with the reservation, of course, that the latter
movement is consequent upon and conditioned by the
former, and will therefore show a marked degree of re-
tardation in moving along the same line.

In all this analysis of the English case it has been
assumed with unwarranted freedom that the state of the
industrial arts has worked unhampered toward a com-
prehensive habituation in materialistic and mechanistic
terms; and so has brought about a passably universal
animus of self-help and mechanistic logic, with no defer-
ence to the authentic conventions of the ancient regime
of prerogative, and with no respect of persons. Such is
manifestly not the case, of course, but by contrast with
what has befallen the German people during the same
historical interval, such as these have after all been the
more salient features of the distinctively British culture,
and indeed, of the civilisation of all the advanced indus-
trial countries. But in all these communities, and perhaps
not least in the British case, there have stood over out
of the past very substantial survivals, at least, of that
scheme of use and wont that antedates the coming of the
machine technology and that are not its offspring or of
its kind. Church and State and Nobility are still present
in effectual force ; but it is unnecessary here to look
closer into the play of these factors in modern British
life, inasmuch as history is by ancient convention still
written in the terms afforded by these categories of a
transfused antiquity, and common notoriety will supply all


The Case of England 117

necessary reminder and reference to their share in the
outcome. Their share in the cultural drift has in the
main being of the conservative kind.

On the other hand there has grown out of the new
industrial regime itself, in part by direct consequence of
its technological character and in greater part by way
of use and wont conditioned by the industrial efficiency
of the new regime, a broad fringe of usages, conven-
tions, vested rights, canons of equity and propriety, that
are no part of the new state of the industrial arts, but that
are after all not easily to be separated from it or from
its usufruct by the community whose work it is. In good
part these conventions and canons have the effect of
hindrances to the working of the industrial system, or of
deductions from its net efficiency.

Tn the English case, as in the rest of Europe, from time
immemorial the rights of ownership have had the sanc-
tion of law and custom ; and in England less than in much
of the rest of Europe these rights have been weakened
by the State's arrogation of a superior right of usufruct.
In the days of the handicraft system as well as, even
more pronouncedly, since the machine industry came in,
industry has been carried on on a pecuniary basis and for
pecuniary gain. Rut with the advance in industrial effi-
ciency and the increasing scale of operations and of
market relations, the pecuniary enterprise which began
in the shape of a "petty trade" and served as a handmaid
to handicraft, has in the course of time become the master
of the industrial system, owner of the industrial equip-
ment, and potentially the sole beneficiary of the com-
munity's technological efficiency, with full discretion to
direct the operations of industry for its own pecuniary


I


118 Imperial Germany

ends. So that the technological knowledge and proficiency
gained by the community in the course of modern times
primarily serves, by right of ownership, the pecuniary
gain of the business men in control, and only secondarily
contributes to the welfare of the population. This state
of things, of course, is not peculiar to the English case,
except in the fuller measure and security of discretion
which legally and customarily vests in the owners, and
except for the relatively large and long continued in-
dustrial efficiency of the English community, which has
given time and scope for a larger growth of subsidiary
consequences in this country than elsewhere.

These subsidiary consequences of the English industrial
system as managed for private gain fall under two gen-
eral heads: those which affect industry (production), and
those which affect the consumption of the product; the
former belong under the principle of competition, the
latter under that of conspicuous waste — also called the
standard of living. A third factor, the inertia of use and
wont, comes in powerfully to affect both of these two,
most usually to fortify them, at the same time that it has
serious effects of its own upon the efficiency of the in-
dustrial system, — particularly in the way of hindering
initiative and delaying innovations in industrial ways and
means. In all of these several directions there is some-
thing of a systematic growth, conditioned by the oppor-
tunities of the case and requiring time for mature results,
as well as for the discontinuance of the practices in ques-
tion in case such a course should become urgently ex-
pedient.

The industrial effects of business management, or rather
what may be called its "organic" effects on the industrial


The Case of England 119

system, are not all hurtful to its productive efficiency,
though nearly all of those that require time and habitua-
tion for their adequate development are of that nature.
These are well known, in a general way ; indeed they are
a matter of common notoriety, but they are also so inti-
mately bound up with the immemorial rights of owner-
ship and with the price system that they are — and
perhaps rightly — accepted as a matter of course that
lies in the nature of the economic situation. Most obvi-
ous, perhaps, is the systematic working at cross-purposes
due to competition in the market, the purpose of each
contestant being to divert gain to himself, and perhaps
incidentally to serve the material welfare of the com-
munity. Under given, but not infrequent, circumstances
this situation may take such a turn that the pecuniary
gain of the business men in control will best be served
by devices that are detrimental to the community's
material well-being, — as, e.g., in the use of adulterants
and disingenuous substitutes, such as shoddy; the pro-
duction and sale of unwholesome nostrums and bever-
ages; of unsafe and insanitary habitations, roadways,
vehicles, and contrivances for household use; the em-
ployment of dangerous machinery and poisonous ingre-
dients and processes in industry, and the like. These
dubious expedients of gain will be worked into the in-
dustrial and commercial scheme more fully and pervad-
ingly in the course of time; much ingenuity is spent on
these matters and much businesslike industry in the
course of time comes to have a vested interest in the
maintenance and the tolerant oversight of these "abuses,"
as they are sometimes called.

Next in order of notoriety, if not of importance, are the


120 Imperial Germany

■

frequent seasons, of idleness, unemployment or half-
employment of the equipment and working force due to
exigencies of the market. These difficulties are in-
creased through the growth of the industrial community
and its market relations into a large and complex system
in which there prevails a very large measure of inter-
dependence of the various parts and agents, due, in the
last analysis, to the specialisation and subdivision of the
industrial processes under the rule of the machine tech-
nology, and to the more immediate and decisive fact that
the several industries are managed with a view to private
gain in terms of price. Unemployment of this kind is
always due to considerations of price. From the like
competitive considerations of price, and of gain in terms
of price, it has come about that the interests of the em-
ployer are not at one with those of the workmen. This
divergence of interest has been volubly denied, and some
credit should doubtless be given to such volubility. The
run of the facts, however, is notorious ; on the one hand
the workmen have no whole-hearted interest in the effi-
ciency of the work done, but rather in what can be got
for it in terms of price ; on the other hand the employer
has none but a humanitarian — said to be quite second-
ary — interest in the well being, or even in the continued
efficiency, of the workmen. From which follow, on the
one hand inhibitory trades-union rules, strikes, lockouts,
and the like disturbances of the industrial process, and on
the other hand an exploitation of the human raw material
of industry that has at times taken quite an untoward
scope and direction, in the way of over-work, under-pay,
unsafe and unwholesome conditions, and so forth. In
the English case, specifically, these "abuses" have notori-


The Case of England 121

ously gone far, and they have, also notoriously, taken time
for their full development and require time and effort for
their correction. So, as one illustration out of an abund-
ance, and merely dispassionately to exemplify the work-
ing of this competitive principle in the employment of
hired labor, it is sufficiently established that during the
initial one-hundred years or so of the new industrial
regime in England the conditions of work, pay and liveli-
hood ran competitively to such a character as to produce
an appreciable population of "depauperate' ' workmen,
sufficiently damaged in their physique to transmit their
debilities to their offspring and leave them doubtfully fit
for any efficient use, "unto the third and fourth genera-
tion." 1


^'Depauperate" is here used in its technical sense, without any
designed implication of praise or dispraise for the businesslike
management that so led to the establishment of a generation of
"depauperate" Englishmen. It is a fact of some consequence as
bearing on the continued efficiency of the industrial system, more
particularly when this system is brought into competitive rela-
tions with that of another community which has not undergone
a protracted experience of the character that gives rise to a de-
pauperate working population. A "depauperate" population or
generation, of any species is one that has been subject to
conditions of life differing so widely from what has select-
ively been proved normal to the specific type as to stunt
the growth, derange the anthropometric proportions of the
frame or the functional work of the viscera, and enfeeble the
vital functions beyond the limits of recovery within the genera-
tion so subjected to these untoward conditions of climate, sani-
tation, nutrition, or strain.

Such a depauperate variation from the specific type will be
heritable, in effect, so long as the conditions to which it is due
continue, and through an uncertain period or number of genera-
tions after return to normal conditions. For the present purpose
it amounts to a transient variation of the type, due to "untoward"
conditions, and does not touch the question of permanence of the
racial type spoken of in an earlier passage. Variations of the
same untoward or unwholesome character may doubtless be had
by an untoward or unwholesome variation of the conditions of
life in the direction of overfeeding, excessive shelter from
the elements, or excessive sensual indulgence and insufficient


122 Imperial Germany

Connected with the competitive system of businesslike
management is the modern enterprise in salesmanship.
The extension of salesmanship goes forward in correla-
tion with the extension of business management in in-
dustry ; indeed, in the late-modern development and in
such lines of enterprise as come largely into the market,
as most industrial undertakings on a business footing do,
salesmanship will frequently come in for one-half or
more than one-half of the effort and funds expended by
any given business concern. The cost of salesmanship,
including advertising and similar adventures in notoriety,
will not infrequently rise appreciably over one-half the
price of the goods to the consumer, and will now and
again reach three- fourths, nine-tenths, or even within a
shadowy interval of one-hundred per-cent. The larger,
more complex, more adequately capitalised (in the sense
of being managed with sufficient means on such a scale
as to allow due specialisation of functions within the
given business concern), in short the more maturely
modern the business situation becomes, the larger a pro-
portion of the aggregate expenditures will on the whole
go into salesmanship. Expenditure on salesmanship is


strain of the faculties, such as is to be seen now and again
among the wealthy or privileged classes, as e.g., the royal, noble
or hereditary rich. While etymology will not permit untoward
variants due to excess of this kind to be called "depauperate,"
there appears to be no other term that has the sanction of
technical usage. In effect, these consequences of over-indulgence
among the privileged classes come to very much the same as
what is accomplished by under-feeding and over-work among
the indigent. It may also be noted that the two kinds of un-
toward variation will commonly be found together in the same
community, conditions which produce the one commonly also
inducing the other. England, e.g., had its quota of both as a
by-product of the era of business and industry, peace and pros-
perity, brought on by the technological advance in modern times.


The Case of England 123

nearly pure waste, as rated in terms of serviceability to
the material welfare of the community at large. How
nearly all waste it may be would be hazardous to guess,
but the deduction to be made for salesmanship that serves
a useful purpose at large will in any case be a negligible
quantity. Yet competitive salesmanship and the other
strategic expedients of competitive business are of the
essence of the business management of industry, and the
limits of their growth are set only by what the traffic will
bear — given time for a mature growth along this line.
What the traffic will bear is, in the last resort, a question
of how many men and how large an investment of funds
can be supported at what are called "living" rates of
wages and profits on the margin between the subsistence
minimum for the men and equipment employed in pro-
ductive industry and the total output of the same industry.
Given a living rate of profits on the capitalisable value of
the equipment and a living wage for the workmen em-
ployed, there is nothing but the time required for the
adjustment, that stands in the way of salesmanship ab-
sorbing whatever is left over. But the necessary adjust-
ment takes time, and as the technological scheme, and
consequently the material equipment, are continually
changing, and as the volume and distribution of the
population who are to serve as a market for the market-
able output are also changing, it is only in relatively old
industrial countries that the enterprise and investment
in salesmanship can with any tolerable degree of approx-
imation be brought to the limit of what the traffic will
bear; and even here, even in such a highly commercial-
ised community as the United Kingdom, the enterprise
in salesmanship has never yet come up to this limit,


124 Imperial Germany

although it has doubtless come very appreciably nearer
to it here than in any of the other, industrially newer,
countries that now live within the sweep of the machine
technology. The contrast with the late-coming German
case is sufficiently evident.

"Depreciation by obsolescence" is a rubric of ' some
importance in modern corporation accountancy and also
a source of irritation and perplexity to business men who
have to do with industrial plant. Its first and simplest
incarnation is seen in the competitive displacement of a
serviceable appliance or process by a more serviceable
one. Discussions of such depreciation frequently get
no farther than this point in the analysis of obsolescence,
although the more interesting as well as the more per-
plexing and disastrous cases lie beyond that point and
come of causes that have a wider reach than details of
mechanical invention. Detail obsolescence through tech-
nological innovation, such as alters the differential ad-
vantage enjoyed by one business concern as against its
competing neighbors in the same line of industry, have
commonly no detrimental effect on the industry as a
whole or on the efficiency or welfare of the community at
large ; the depreciation is a competitive one only and takes
effect only as a decrease in the pecuniary gains of one
business concern as against another. The community at
large, or the particular line of industry, gains in efficiency
by virtue of the innovation. The like is not true in
cases of what may be called "systemic" obsolescence,
which may come of a change of circumstances due to the
growth of the industrial community (or, also, due to its
decay), or to changes in the work to be done or in the


The Case of England 125

distribution of the population to be served or employed. 1
Obsolescence of this kind is an affair of growth and is
always in progress in any community where the state of
the industrial arts is undergoing any appreciable degree of
change, and the longer the growth of the technological
situation has continued the more unavoidable is such
depreciation.

An industrial system which, like the English, has been
long engaged in a course of improvement, extension, in-
novation and specialisation, will in the past have com-
mitted itself, more than once and in more than one con-
nection, to what was at the time an adequate scale of
appliances and schedule of processes and time adjust-
ments. Partly by its own growth, and by force of tech-
nological innovations designed to enlarge the scale or in-
crease the tempo of production or service, the accepted
correlations in industry and in business, as well as the
established equipment, are thrown out of date. And yet
it is by no means an easy matter to find a remedy ; more
particularly is it difficult to find a remedy that will ap-
prove itself as a sound business proposition to a com-
munity of conservative business men who have a pecu-
niary interest in the continued working of the received
system, and who will (commonly) not be endowed with
much insight into technological matters anyway. So long
as the obsolescence in question gives rise to no marked
differential advantage of one or a group of these business


1 The Cinque Ports afford an historic illustration of such de-
preciation through "systemic" obsolescence due to the growth
of the industrial system and changes in the distribution of
population; whereas the Roman Road in England shows how the
like obsolescence may come of the decay or decline of the
state of the industrial arts.


126 Imperial Germany

men as against competing concerns, it follows logically
that no remedy will be sought. An adequate remedy by
detail innovation is not always practicable; indeed,
in the more serious conjunctures of the kind it is virtually
impossible, in that new items of equipment are necessarily
required to conform to the specifications already govern-
ing the old.

So, e.g., it is well known that the railways of Great
Britain, like those of other countries, are built with too
narrow a gauge, but while this item of "depreciation
through obsolescence ,, has been known for some time, it
has not even in the most genial speculative sense come
up for consideration as a remediable defect. In the same
connection, American, and latterly German, observers
have been much impressed with the silly little bobtailed
carriages used in the British goods traffic ; which were well
enough in their time, before American or German rail-
way traffic was good for anything much, but which have
at the best a playful air when brought up against the
requirements of today. Yet the remedy is not a simple
question of good sense. The terminal facilities, tracks,
shunting facilities, and all the ways and means of hand-
ling freight on this oldest and most complete of railway
systems, are all adapted to the bobtailed car. So, again,
the roadbed and metal, as well as the engines, are well
and substantially constructed to take care of such traffic
as required to be taken care of when they first went into
operation, and it is not easy to make a piecemeal adjust-
ment to later requirements. It is perhaps true that as seen
from the standpoint of the community at large and its
material interest, the out-of-date equipment and organi-
sation should profitably be discarded — "junked," as the


The Case of England 127

colloquial phrase has it — and the later contrivances sub-
stituted throughout ; but it is the discretion of the business
men that necessarily decides these questions, and the
whole proposition has a different value as seen in the
light of the competitive pecuniary interests of the business
men in control.

This instance of the British railway system and its
short-comings in detail is typical of the British industrial
equipment and organisation throughout, although the ob-
solescence will for the most part, perhaps, be neither so
obvious nor so serious a matter in many other directions.
Towns, roadways, factories, harbors, habitations, were
placed and constructed to meet the exigencies of what is
now in a degree an obsolete state of the industrial arts,
and they are, all and several, "irrelevant, incompetent
and impertinent' ' in the same degree in which the techno-
logical scheme has shifted from what it was when these
appliances were installed. 1 They have all been im-
proved, "perfected/' adapted, to meet changing require-
ments in some passable fashion ; but the chief significance
of this work of improvement, adaptation and repair in this
connection is that it argues a fatal reluctance or inability
to overcome this all-pervading depreciation by obso-
lescence. 2

x Even in such an all-underlying and specifically British line of
work as the iron industry, observers from other countries — e.g.,
German, Swedish or American — have latterly had occasion to
find serious and sarcastic fault with the incompetently diminu-
tive blast-furnaces, the antiquated appliances for moving ma-
terials, and the out-of-date contrivances for wasting labor and
fuel.

2 An interesting contrast with this state of things in business-
like industry is to be seen in the British navy, where nearly
every item of equipment, as well as the greater part of the
systematic organisation and control of personnel and strategy,
have grown obsolete within the past decade. There is much


128


Imperial Germany


\


All this does not mean that the British have sinned
against the canons of technology. It is only that they
are paying the penalty for having been thrown into the
lead and so having shown the way. At the same time it
is not to be imagined that this lead has brought nothing
but pains and penalties. The shortcomings of this British
industrial situation are visible chiefly by contrast with
what the British might be doing if it were not for the
restraining dead hand of their past achievement, and by
further contrast, latterly, with what the new-come Ger-
man people are doing by use of the English technological
lore. As it stands, the accumulated equipment, both
material and immaterial, both in the way of mechanical
appliances in hand and in the way of technological
knowledge ingrained in the population and available for
use, is after all of very appreciable value; though the
case of the Germans should make it plain that it is the
latter, the immaterial equipment, that is altogether of first
consequence, rather than the accumulation of "produc-
tion goods'' in hand. These "production goods" cost
nothing bjit labor; the immaterial equipment of techno-
logical proficiency costs age-long experience.

This is, of course, not intended to apply to what is
currently spoken of as accumulated capital, that is to say
funded wealth invested in industrial business. That has


compromise and many makeshifts in the endeavors directed to
bring this naval establishment up to a satisfactory efficiency ac-
cording to current technological standards, but the measure of
retardation put up with in consequence is, after all, highly in-
considerable as compared with what passes for well enough in
the concerns of British industry. The industrial efficiency of
the community is of prime consequence, the naval establishment
is of secondary importance, or something less; but industrial
affairs are conducted on motives of competitive business enter-
prise.


The Case of England 129

relatively slight significance to the community at large.
Capital in this sense, business capital, in the aggregate
means little else than a pseudo-aggregate of differential
claims on the usufruct of the industrial equipment, ma-
terial and immaterial. And it will doubtless hold true for
the British, as for any other of the advanced commercial
countries, that the aggregate of capitalised wealth shown
by the records very greatly exceeds the aggregate market
value of the material items to which, in the last resort
of the accountant, these "book values" are presumed to
constitute a claim. Such is necessarily the case in any
country that makes extensive use of credit and of cor-
porate organisation in its conduct of business.

The discipline of the machine industry, simply in its
direct incidence, has a certain character of impersonality,
and will apparently not conduce to the stability or exten-
sion of personal government. It inculcates due apprecia-
tion of the sweep of mechanical processes, impersonal
and in that sense equitable, rather than subordination to
the discretionary call of a personal superior. In so far as
concerns the relations between the body of workmen and
the technological elements with which their work associ-
ates them, the habit of mind induced by addiction to the
modern methods of industry should favor an individualis-
tic bias in civil relations and an impatience of authorita-
tive government ; and such appears on the whole to have
been the net effect of the training enforced by modern
industrial life until a comparatively recent period. But
so soon as a businesslike control of industry takes exten-
sive effect and becomes the chief factor in the organiza-
tion and management of industrial occupations, personal
discretion again comes prominently into the case. The


130 Imperial Germany

authority of ownership, enforced by pecuniary pressure,
takes on a coercive character that grows more compre-
hensive and unavoidable as the scale of industry and
investment grows larger. Under latterday large-scale
conditions, this authority of ownership has the harsh
aloofness of irresponsible tyranny, but it has none of the
genial traits that may relieve even a very ruthless despot-
ism. The subordination which it enforces is of a sullen, un-
enthusiastic character, tending more and more to a grudg-
ing disloyalty, as the scheme of business control grows
more comprehensive and settles into more rigid lines.
So in the English case the alienation between the two
classes, the workman and their owners, is nearly com-
plete in all that bears on the conduct of the industrial
system.

Yet the result is after all a discipline in subordination
of a kind, and in concerted action and solidarity within
class lines. And this training in concerted action and
community of interests and convictions leaves the popu-
lation by so much the more amenable to control in the
mass, and more capable of being swung in a body to the
support of a national authority and the aggrandisement
of those in whose interest the constituted authority is
administered. In England, the sense of national soli-
darity, and the support of national policies that have no
material value to the common man, are in a visibly better
state of repair the last two or three decades than formerly
was the case, when business corporations of the joint-
stock order on the one side and labor organisations on
the other had only begun to contribute their discipline
toward the shaping of popular sentiment. *

It appears from this English case that the habits of


The Case of England 131

thought induced by the discipline of a given economic
situation are not necessarily such as conduce to the best
working of the system in force, or to the best material
interest of the community which gets its living by use of
this system; in other words, the principles and canons
of conduct that emerge out of the working of any given
system of ways and means, any given scheme of life, are
not such as will necessarily contribute either to the effi-
ciency of the system or to the prosperity of the popula-
tion. All that is a matter of fortuitous coincidence, as
some slight reflection on the nature of habituation will
easily show. There is, all the while, somewhat of a
chance, much of the time a very reasonable presumption,
that the principles (habits of thought) inculcated, say, by
life under a given state of the industrial arts will be
somewhat at cross-purposes with the conditions of life
afforded by this given state of the industrial arts, — save
only such habits of thought as are of a technological
nature, these being part of the state of the industrial arts
itself. The broad exception to this proposition will be
found where the technological scheme in question and its
concomitant scheme governing the other arts of life have
been proved suitable to the given population by the selec-
tive test of their prospering under these cultural condi-
tions in the early phases of the life history of this popu-
lation, when it made good its survival as a specific type
of man. For the British population, as for the other
peoples of the Baltic-North Sea region, this would mean
that the growth of habits (principles, institutions) in-
duced by modern life is presumably of an untoward
character, except in so far as its drift is toward a re-
habilitation of the cultural scheme prevalent in north


132 Imperial Germany

Europe in neolithic times ; and it would appear to be the
more untoward, on the whole, the more it diverges from
that line.

While there has been a growth of use and wont gov-
erning the system of production, with preconceptions,
vested interests and an industrial equipment now of a
somewhat archaic character, there has similarly gone for-
ward a growth of use and wont in consumption, with
usages, standards, prejudices that are no less settled and
exacting than the conventions which govern industry and
business. These conventions of consumption may be
classed together under the rubric of a standard of living,
as is commonly done in the terminology of the
economists; although in its technical use the term does
not refer to a standard of physical well-being, as its
etymological value might lead one to expect. It means
rather the standard of consumption, on whatever grounds
the consumption has been standardised, and it will com-
monly include items that bear no relation, or at least no
designed relation, to the consumer's physical well-being.
A large proportion, perhaps the greater part, of what is
Included under the standard of living for any class,
whether rich or poor, falls under the theoretical category
of Conspicuous Waste, 1 which comprises the consump-
tion of time and effort as well as of substance.

It is a familiar bit of aphoristic wisdom that want of
morals may be condoned but a lack of breeding can not.
The canons of propriety, that is of conformity to conven-

1 For a more detailed exposition of this principle and its place
in modern life, see The Theory of the Leisure Class, especially
ch. ii. — vii. and xii.


The Case of England 133

tion, are as. the law of the Medes and Persians, — they
yield not, and admit no extenuating circumstances. As
has often happened in the case of a simple and rigid code,
the penalty for transgression is outlawry, which may or
may not involve, as a duty incumbent on all gens de bien,
the pursuit and extirpation of the offender.

Ordinarily, in the common run of neighborly amenities
within the community, the resulting schedule of ostracism
eventuates in a social stratification, in which individuals
find their place by force of a "consciousness of kind"
that draws them into contact and cooperation with those
of a like habit in point of breeding and on a like level
in point of current expenditures, as also by force of ex-
clusion from those pecuniary levels on which they do not
belong. The general result is nothing much more serious
than a prevalence of irritation and envy between classes
and of emulation and disparagement between individuals.
In case the discrepancy of use and wont in respect of this
consumption of time and substance, and of the attendant
details of manner and breeding, is considerable and con-
sistent, and runs between culturally distinct communities,
the outcome is a state of aliency between the two, which
may on slight provocation rise to the pitch of man-
slaughter and seek relief in international hostilities. It is
on this sentimental ground of offended and offensive
conventionalities that patriotic animosities commonly
rest. The most capable dynastic statesmen and the
shrewdest strategists of commercial patriotism would be
helpless to bring about a state of international manslaugh-
ter among civilised men except for the quasi-moral ani-
mosity that arises out of such discrepancies of "culture."

Now, it happens that this growth of use and wont in


134 Imperial Germany

respect of what is apprehended to be decent and com-
mendable in the consumption of time and goods, and in
the demeanor and observances duly to be included in the
ritual of such consumption, has in the British community,
and even in the English-speaking communities at large,
in modern times, run to a visibly different effect from
the contemporary outcome in this respect among the
Continental peoples; and especially different from what
has been worked out among the German peoples, who
have in this particular as in so much else retained more
of the conventional virtues inculcated by a more archaic
phase of material civilisation. Hence a discrepancy in
"culture" that has become irreconcilable.

But what is of more immediate interest here is the
bearing of this growth of consumptive use and wont
on the net industrial efficiency of the British community.
As a matter of common notoriety the standard of living
is and has long been higher in the United Kingdom, and
particularly in England, than in the generality of Con-
tinental countries, and this standard has been rising,
with interruptions, of course, throughout the modern
period, and more notably since the Industrial Revolu-
tion. This advance in the current requirement of living
has affected all classes and conditions, but has had the
greatest relative effect on the higher pecuniary levels.
And as, in these matters of conventional necessity, the
example of the upper classes largely guides the growth
of use and wont among the lowlier, the code of (pecuni-
arily) right and honest living among the well-to-do comes
to have a far-reaching significance for the fortunes of
the community at large.

In the beginning, when England began to take up the


The Case of England '^ ' \ 135

slack and set out on that course of insular economic
policy that has created the modem industrial situation,
the English pecuniary scale of reputability was some-
what under the Continental standard. Even in the
Elizabethan days of flush and swagger the English
leaders of fashion were following Continental models;
and indeed were following the Continental exemplars at
such an interval that those who approached nearest to the
Continental standards of expensiveness and splendor were
currently disparaged as being effeminate wasters. 1 That
they were wasters, in the technical sense of the term, is
of course a proposition not open to correction or amend-
ment, — that being their place and use in the economy
of nature ; and it is to their credit as gentlemen that they
so efficiently filled the "station in life in which God had
placed them. ,, Seen from the collective standpoint of the
national culture, a gentleman is an article of verth> the
value of which lies in its consummate workmanship and its
conformity to the canons of a refined taste. That a gen-
tleman is a wasteful affair is of the essence of the case ;
how wasteful the standard or staple gentleman thrown
up as the type of reputable waste in any given culture
will be, is in effect a question of how wide a margin the
current scheme of production and distribution devotes to
conspicuously wasteful consumption.

The development of the perfect gentleman (and of the
perfect gentlewoman) in any given case takes time. As
an institution, the perfect gentleman (or gentlewoman)
is a complex affair of usages, distinctions, cultivated


1 Cf. e.g., Harrison's description of Elizabethan England, where
much acrid speech is spent on those English scions of gentility
for reaching out after the exotic perfections of Italy.


K, >


136 Imperial Germany

tastes, worked out under the general surveillance of the
principle (habit of thought) of conspicuous waste, against
a background of critical sentiment that will tolerate only
the most economical use of the materials employed. In
this connection this canon 01 economy requires that the
conspicuously wasteful consumption of the gentleman
must not incidentally or by leakage conduce in any degree
to the physical well-being, or to the pecuniary gain, of
anyone else. Judged on these marks of excellence it will
be admitted without argument that the staple product of
the pecuniary culture in England in the way of gentlemen
(and gentlewomen) is as good as human infirmity will
permit. The volume of output is also as large as might
fairly be expected ; indeed, and as a matter of course, it
is as large as the traffic will bear, for the English com-
munity has grown slowly and symmetrically to the high-
est and most substantial maturity attained by the pecu-
niary culture within the bounds of Christendom. The
other English-speaking peoples have been doing well, but
they have come into their heritage too late to have yet
worked out this knotty problem of how to dispose of their
disposable margin of goods and energies without leaving
a materially serviceable residue. As in so much else
their best efforts are directed to the conservation and
heightened efficiency of the institutions handed down from
English leadership in these premises.

So soon as the great elan of the Elizabethan juventus
mundi had given the English their start on the road to
the economic hegemony, the expensiveness of the English
well-to-do began to attract the attention of Continental
critics. The English took to travel — an expensive
usage — and it has been a conventionally accepted criti-


The Case of England 137

cism of English travelers ever since, that they -are strik-
ingly wasteful in their expenditure. 1 This criticism by
Continental observers will commonly carry a note of envy,
though its most obtrusive count is the uneconomical char-
acter of this British bill of expenses — uneconomical
under the canon of economy applicable in these matters,
as indicated above. Doubtless, the English to-day lead
the Christian world both in the volume of their gentility
and in its cost per unit. This cost comes out of the
margin of production, and reduces the net margin by
that much. The figures representing the net current cost
of British gentility in the aggregate may be drawn with
some confidence from the schedules of incomes ; taxable
incomes may safely be included under the caption of
Net Conspicuous Waste, to the extent to which they are
not exempt under the law, — any possible error arising
from this rating will be at least offset by wasteful expen-
ditures of the same class drawn from other sources, such,
e.g., as operating expenses of railway and steamship pas-
senger traffic, hotels, various places of amusement, etc.

Sports have been a very substantial resource in this
gradually maturing British scheme of conspicuous waste.
And sports have the advantage that they afford a politely
blameless outlet for energies that might otherwise not
readily be diverted from some useful end. Sport, on
the scale, and with the circumstance attending its cultiva-
tion in the United Kingdom, can not be incorporated in
the work-day scheme of life except at the cost of long
and persistent training of the popular taste. It is not to
be done by a brusque move. It is quite beyond the reach

Exceeded, perhaps put in the shade, latterly by their American
followers.


I »


138 Imperial Germany

of imagination that any adult male citizen would of his
own motion go in for the elaborate futilities of British
shooting or horse-racing, e.g., or for such a tour de force
of inanity as polo, or mountain climbing, or expeditions
after big game. The deadening of the sense of propor-
tion implied in addiction to this round of infantile make-
believe is not to be achieved in one generation ; it needs
to have all the authenticity that tradition can give it, and
then its inculcation in the incoming generation must be
begun in infancy and followed up throughout the educa-
tional system. Nor would it all be tolerated by popular
sentiment if it were not that popular sentiment has gradu-
ally been bent to the same bias by slow habituation. 1
Yet so far has the habituation done its work that the
community at large not only tolerates these things, but
all this superfluity of inanities has in the course of time
been worked into the British conception of what is right,
good and necessary to civilised life. 2

All this, and the like, may be good material for homi-
letical discourse, but its value in that respect is not in
question here. What is to the present purpose is the
bearing of these ingrained wasteful usages on the net
industrial efficiency of the British community, the net

1 Cf. Graham Wallas, The Great Society, perhaps especially
ch. iii. and v.

2 In the disturbance of British life due to the German war, e.g„
associations have been formed to care for the dogs whose
owners have Seen drawn into the army, and to keep them undi-
minished against the return of their owners. British news-
papers of the most sober character have been printing most
Britishly sober advice and admonition on how best to further
this necessary work of dog-maintenance. There is no avoiding
the impression that all this agitation about the due maintenance
of the soldiers' sporting equipment is really not a parcel of
whimsical tom-foolery. It is rather an illustration of the
dominion which habit may come to exercise over common sense.


The Case of England 139

serviceability to the community at large, of their usufruct
of this modern state of the industrial arts that they have
• had the fortune to bring forth. In further illustration —
lest the item of sports should be left standing in apparent
isolation as a single and disconnected count — mention
may be made of the wasteful consumption incumbent by
usage on the wealthy British in the matter of habitations
and domestic establishments. A gentleman of appreciable
wealth should have more than one habitation, residence,
or whatever term may best cover a construction of which
the sole ostensible occupant can not occupy more than an
inconsiderable fraction. How many residences, in towtl
and country, are mandatory on any given gentleman of
any given pecuniary rating can of course not be stated in
set terms; it can only be said that, in general terms, he
should have more than he can conveniently make use of,
even ostensibly, and as many and as large as he can afford
to keep up. The visible economic effect of this system
is to keep a corps of servants and care-takers for each
establishment out of useful employment, and at the same
time to keep the common man from making use of the
grounds attached to each establishment, which should be
as extensive as may be, — that is to say, the practice
serves to reduce the net available land surface of the
Island by that much.

Further details of the menial establishment and of the
ceremonial routine incumbent on persons of genteel stand-
ing in this community need not be recited. Common
notoriety will supply enough to enforce the point that,
by use and wont, much has gone into the category of con-
ventional necessaries, and that the margin between aggre-
gate productive capacity and net available surplus has


140 Imperial Germany

thereby been very appreciably narrowed, as well as the
further point that even if, or when, the exigencies of a
competitive situation should require this community to
make the most of its available forces it would be a work
of time, stress and perplexity to bring the effectual effi-
ciency nearly up to the theoretical efficiency of the com-
munity. 1

This conventionally standardised waste at the hands of
the conventionally accredited wasters is a sufficiently con-
sequential handicap in itself, but the indirect conse*
quences of it, in the direction it has given to popular
tastes and the spread of like usages by imitation, are
doubtless of graver consequence. As was noted above,
the standard of living in the British community at large
is higher than in the Continental countries and has on
the whole been advancing throughout the modern period.
This higher standard is in part a higher standard of


*0f course, this wasteful expenditure is not rated as wasteful
by the wasters, nor is the systematic diversion of wealth into
these channels by the financial strategists so rated in popular
apprehension. What may be called the economic theory of the
vulgar on this head is well seen in the following pronounce-
ment; which may or may not be veraciously reported, but which
is non the less true to life:

"The foundations of our real society rest upon money, and
it is only the workers who attain wealth."

"Take the Carnegies and Fricks, for instance," continued
Miss Morgan. "They have enormous riches and it was amassed
by prodigious labor. Those who work rule the destinies of the
social as well as the business world. . . . Society and its
ramifications depend upon the expenditure of money for their
existence. Who have the necessary money to spend upon enter-
tainments and the social functions that annually give employment
to thousands of tradesmen? It is the men of money. Could the
business world for one minute exist on the money that is placed
in circulation by the thousands of men who compose the
working element? By no means. Business is kept aliive by the
thousands of dollars that are spent by 'high society/ That is an
item that statisticians would do well to investigate."


The Case of England 141

physical comfort; it is frequently spoken of in terms
implying that it is altogether of that character. Yet inci-
dents of the order of the dog-feeding charities just men-
tioned are likely to raise a doubt. But it would be a
work of graceless vexation to scrutinise the petty fop-
peries and uncouth dissipations of the British working
classes with a view to appraise their economic value.

Certain facts of no questionable taste may, however,
be brought in to point a comparison between British
and Continental customs bearing on the industrial effi-
ciency of the community at large. It has, e.g., become
improper, not to say immoral, for English women to do
field work; whereas in Continental countries, and per-
haps especially in German countries, women work in the
fields without such a moral restraint. It is not a question
of physical hardship; work in the fields being no more
irksome and doubtless more wholesome than work in-
doors, as is borne out by the visible effects. The north-
European population is by heredity no less an outdoor
people than any other, perhaps more so than many others,
and the women are as much affected by this heredity as
the men. Various arguments are advanced for the "ex-
emption" of women from outdoor work. So far as these
arguments are fit to survive scrutiny they turn out to be
considerations of conventional propriety. They appear
to be of the nature of an impulsive imitation of that ex-
emption of well-to-do women from all useful work, that
constitutes one of the chief infirmities of the English
social code and one of its chief exemplifications of the
principle of conspicuous waste. The economic value of
these reputable exemptions is considerable, both in that
they directly lessen the available industrial force, and in


142 Imperial Germany

that they indirectly lower efficiency by lowering the vi-
tality of that portion of the population that comes under
the rule. The difficulty is traceable to the industrial effi-
ciency of this community, which has been high enough to
afford the waste, or at least to afford it in those upper,
quasi-leisure-class circles where these exemptions appear
first to have found a lodgment. In a community where
class distinctions and class exemptions run chiefly on
pecuniary ground, wasteful conventions spread with great
facility through the body of the population by force of
the emulative imitation of upper-class usage by the lower
pecuniary classes; so that an exemption of this kind,
which is an easy means of distinction among the well-to-
do, will presently find its way among the indigent as a
necessary mark of reputable living.

So also in the consumption of goods, much has come to
be required as a matter of decency that was once a matter
of superfluity, and these decencies, of apparel and house-
hold apparatus, e.g., have come to be no less necessaries
of life and included in the standard of living, than the
requisites of physical comfort. There is visibly more
of this mandatory expenditure on decencies, physically
superfluous and commonly aesthetically obnoxious,
among the working classes in the United Kingdom than
on the Continent, and more than there was in the Island
at any earlier date. 1 So, again, as a last illustration of


1 Adam Smith remarks, e.g., that in his time shoes had become
an article of everyday decency, included in the standard of
living as a necessary item of expense, among the English work-
ing classes, although their Scottish congeners had not at that
time come into the necessity of protecting their good fame by
this means. The illustration is good in that it is typical, and
the comparison will hold with the same force at present as
between the Island and the Continent. Although the particular


The Case of England 143

the growth of insidious inhibitions brought on by the
growing efficiency of this modern industrial system,
addiction to sport of one kind and another and preoccu-
pation with sportsmanlike interests and values has spread
from the levels of gentility down through the body of
the population, until this category of dissipations has
become almost the sole ground of common interest on
which workingmen meet or hold opinions. It is safe to
say that one-half the volume of printed matter daily put
out for popular consumption is devoted to sports ; a classi-
fication aiming to include all ramifications of the sport-
ing interest would probably rate the proportion somewhat
higher.

The mere, direct waste of time and substance involved
in this ubiquitous addiction to sports and their adoration
need perhaps stir no one's apprehension. That much of
dissipation may. nowise exceed the salutary minimum ;
though persons with a predilection for artistic and intel-
lectual dissipations may be moved to deprecate addiction
to dissipations of this crude and brutalising character.
What is more to the point here, however, is the fact that
this preoccupation with the emulative and invidious in-
terests of sportsmanship unavoidably has an industrially
untoward effect on the temper of the population, bends
them with an habitual bias in the direction of trivial


item of shoes is open to a specious objection, in that the modern
technology has incidentally made shoes something of a physical
necessity, — a change which has come on since Adam Smith's
time. Metals, glass, brick, pottery, stone and concrete pave-
ments, and the like refractory substances, are so ubiquitous in
modern life that the unprotected human foot is at a disadvantage.
The resulting necessity of a hard and heavy protection for the
feet, by the way, is a typical case of the systematic handicaps
which this state of the industrial arts carries along as an un-
avoidable deduction from its gross efficiency.


144 Imperial Germany

emulative exploits and away from that ready discrim-
ination in matters of fact that constitutes the spiritual
ground of modern technological proficiency. It is not so
much that this pervasion of the British population by
sportsmanlike preoccupations wastes the products and
the energies of the industrial system, as that it perverts
the sources from which the efficiency of the industrial
system is to come. Its high consequence as a means of
destruction lies in its burning the candle at both ends.
Again it is to be noted that the generation and establish-
ment of such a pervasive and stubborn habitual bent takes
time, and that to get rid of it would also require time
and experience.


CHAPTER V.
Imperial Germany.

#

As is true of the Elizabethan era in England, so the
Imperial era in Germany can not be said to have begun
abruptly at any specific date. It may defensibly be dated
from the formation of the Zollverein, or from the North-
German Confederation, or from the accession of William
I. (and Bismarck), or from the coronation at Versailles;
at any rate a later date would not be acceptable. Its be-
ginnings are to be sought earlier than the earliest of these
dates, especially in so far as these beginnings are looked
for in the material situation of the German peoples
rather than in their diplomatic history; but in any case
this modern period in German history lies this side of
the Napoleonic era. The modern industrial and commer-
cial situation begins seriously to affect the state of the
German peoples only after that date, and even then it is
only gradually that the Fatherland is drawn into this
modern system of trade and industry to such an extent
as to feel the exigencies of the new economic situation.
It is toward the west that the new conditions first take
visible effect, and it is apparently in commerce and the
improvements in transportation that contact with the
more advanced countries of the west first provoke efforts
of adjustment to the new state of things.

When Germany so comes into the complex of com-

145


146 Imperial Germany

mercial and industrial Europe in the nineteenth century
it is under the lead of the Prussian state, not under that
of the south German or Austrian peoples; and the lead
f of Prussia is wholly of a political character and is di-
{ rected to political ends. Prussia contributed nothing else
than a political (warlike) force and political ambitions.
German cultural elements, other than warlike and politi-
cal, come from the countries farther to the south and
west. But this contribution from the Prussian side has
been very consequential.

That the Prussian state so came into the hegemony
in this imperial era is of course neither an accident nor an
afterthought of Providence. It has not unusually con-
tented the German historians, and laymen, to ascribe
the leadership of Prussia to the wisdom and other politi-
cal virtues of the Hohenzollern, from the Great Elector,
through Frederick the Great, to the present incumbent;
just as those who incline to a romantic interpretation of
history have also been content to find in Bismarck the
chief cause of the eventual formation of the Empire on
those practicable lines on which its great history has run.
Doubtless the personal characteristics of these great fig-
ures of history have had much to do with the shaping
of events, and the present state of the German nation
owes much of its peculiar complexion to the work of
these great men. Yet it is not precisely that the German
peoples have been as wax in their hands, nor need it
follow that the outcome would have been substantially
different in any essential respect in the conceivable ab-
sence of these personages from the history of the past
two centuries. In their absence their room would prob-
ably have been so nearly filled by convenient understudies


Imperial Germany 147

that none but a very critical historical audience would
have detected a false line or gesture. The greatness of
these historic figures lies in their eminent fitness for the
place into which they fell, each and several, in the unfold-
ing of events. So great and unfailing is the degree of
this fitness of each for his role, that the question unavoid-
ably suggests itself : Did not the role create the person-
age out of commonplace plastic material, rather than the
personage create the role ? Seeing that the personages in .
question proved themselves quite commonplace in other
bearings than those immediately involved in the action
of the historical drama in which they played their part,
and seeing that the conjuncture of events would scarcely
have tolerated a different line of action in case the players
had been quite commonplace also in those respects in
which they are greatest.

It is true, there runs through this line of Prussian
statesmen a certain characteristically callous disingenu-
ousness, such as would in many another setting properly
have been rated as of heroic stature ; but then, the cordial
and unqualified commendation of this trait in their typi-
cal statesmen argues that the Prussian community should
have been able at any time to meet any reasonable demand
for a supply of statesmen eminent in just this quality!
In a way, this appears also to be a commonplace trait
in the circles from which these great statesmen were
drawn and on which they drew. One is induced to be-'
lieve that this distinguishing trait of Prussian statecraft'
is a product of habituation, and so a trait of Prussian}
civilisation, rather than a peculiar obliquity occurring*
sporadically in a few extreme variants of that population.
It would probably be putting the estimate too high to


148 Imperial Germany

say that the supply of Bismarckian statesmen and Hohen-
zollern sovereigns possible to be drawn from the Junker
population of Pomerania and Prussia is merely a special
case of the Malthusian law of population, but at the same
time such a view could scarcely be considered an un-
pardonable exaggeration. Prussian diplomacy and ad-
ministration has never yet lacked for material of this
nature, and at the same time the habitual bent shown in
these personages whom the chance of history has thrown
up into prominence is precisely what one expects to come
out of the circumstances whose creatures these person-
ages are.

Prussia came to take over the hegemony of the Em-
pire, not because her statesmen were what they were,
but because by long tradition and habit the Prussian
community, or at least its ruling class, were of such a
temper as was put in evidence by these statesmen ; not
I because these personages were exceptions, but because
Ithey were not. This peculiar fitness and efficiency of
Prussia for its place as the sovereign state of the Empire
was given by the previous experience of the Prussian
people, both in their political life and in that social life
that underlay and made possible the political career of the
Prussian state. It may have been a difference of degree,
mainly, but there was enough of a difference between the
Prussian North and the German South and West to de-
cide that neither Austria nor Bavaria became the
engineer, arbiter and pattern for Germany in the Imperial
&ra.

Many a well-meaning apologist for the German people,
since trouble and boundless odium have broken over that
community, has been at pains to recall that Prussia is not


Imperial Germany 149

Germany, and that the German spirit of the South espe-
cially, in the traditional seats of the characteristic German
culture, is of a very different and more genial kind than
that which animates the community of Junkers in the
North ; these Germans of the South and West, from
Austria all across to the confines of the Low Countries,
have, it is said by the apologists, in late modern time and
especially in the nineteenth century, shown an inclination
to live and let live; or as seen from the higher habitual
levels of Prussian efficiency, they have been a slack-
twisted lot. For an imperial State after the dynastic
fashion, destiny had no other choice within the confines of
the Fatherland. Had it, on the other hand, been a question
of commercial hegemony on lines of peace and thrift
alone, it is as unmistakably the South and West that must
have been thrown into the foreground. However, specu-
lation on such an impracticable might-have-been can have
only a speculative interest. W 7 ith Prussia in the ring a
German Fatherland bound in solidarity by other connec-
tive tissue than blood and iron, and animated with other
than dynastic ideals, was impracticable from the start.
While the kingdom of Prussia in the nineteenth cen-
tury comprised much else than the original territories of
Brandenburg, the Prussias and Pomerania, these terri-
tories still continued to be the substantial core of the
Hohenzollern dynastic State. Although much of the
material resources of the State were drawn from its
later acquired and economically more valuable possessions
to the West and South, the dynastic spirit of Prussia
and its statesmen, as well as its more responsible per-
sonnel, was the spirit and personnel of the territories
facing the Baltic littoral. By force of the Prussian rule,


ISO Imperial Germany

Prussian ideals in great measure came to permeate the
other, outlying territories and peoples of the kingdom,
and the center of diffusion of the peculiarly Prussian
variant of German culture continued to be the Prussian-
Baltic lands that had once constituted the original patri-
mony of the Prussian crown and the material foundation
of its political power. By and large, Prussia was then,
as it has after all continued to be since then, the ancient
lands of the Baltic littoral, with more and more extensive
territorial ramifications into the South and West; these
ramifications being in effect subject and subsidiary terri-
tories, useful for the purposes of the dynasty, but con-
tributory rather than participating members in the result-
ing dynastic State; they have only gradually and in an
uncertain measure been outgrowing their status of step-
children, and, it may perhaps be added, only in the mea-
sure in which they have gradually been trained into a
share in the dynastic genius of the Prussian State. The
process of assimilation has on the whole been pronounc-
edly one-sided, so that these outlying acquisitions of the
kingdom have in great measure taken oa the Prussian
complexion, and not conversely. The like holds true in
its degree for the rest of the German states since the
period of their coalescence into an empire under Prussian
hegemony.

The cultural pedigree of this Prussian community,
therefore, becomes a matter of immediate interest to any
inquiry into the work which this community has effected
in the rehabilitation of the Fatherland. The official —
Almanack de Gotha — pedigree of its reigning house and
its ruling families has, of course, no particular interest
in this connection, — these matters are at the most bubbles


Imperial Germany 151

in the scum that marks the drift of the current. It is
otherwise with that cultural pedigree of the community
by consequence of which the reigning house and the
ruling families are enabled to reign and rule after the
particular fashion in which these matters are here con-
ducted. That the Emperor and King rules by divine
grace rather than by choice of his subjects is not due to
any idiosyncracy in the sovereign, nor does it come of
any hereditary taint that might be conceived to incapaci-
tate the German people for an exercise of discretion in
these premises. With so much else that characterises the
Prussian-German State, it comes of the peculiar line of
habituation to which the German people, and particularly
the communities toward the northern and eastern sea-
board, have been subjected in the recent historic past. _\j

Taking the term to apply in its larger sense, Prussia
as a cultural area will comprise' the German speaking
lands of the Baltic littoral from the Russian frontier to
the general neighborhood of Liibeck, or perhaps to Kiel, 1
and extending irregularly inland to include whatever has
felt the effects of the occupation by the Teutonic Order.
This stretch of country, especially eastward from the
region of the Oder, is the youngest of the German lands ;
that is to say it is the portion of the Fatherland that
comes last in the sequence of reduction to Christianity and
German rule. It was made over into the pattern of feu-
dalists Christendom at a later date than the rest, later
by some six or eight centuries than the more cultured
lands of the South. The conquest of the Wendish,
Lithuanian and Esthonian peoples by the Teutonic order

*Cf. Meitzen, Siedelung und Agrarwesen, vol. ii. pp. 36-40
and Atlas, "Uebersichtskarte/'


152 Imperial Germany

in the thirteenth century, and their reduction to Christian-
ity, is the last great episode in the predatory settlement
of the Fatherland by German-speaking invaders, and the
immediate consequences of the invasion and settlement
were of much the same character here as elsewhere.
There followed a protracted period of ruthless exploita-
tion, terror, disturbances, reprisals, servitude, and grad-
ual habituation to settled allegiance, irresponsible personal

£ rule, and peaceable repression. .

-p The raid came at the time when the feudal system had
reached its final development as a fighting organisation ;
and since the conditions, essentially predatory, which so
were established in the lands reclaimed from paganism
were favorable to continued exploitation on a predatory
footing, the feudal spirit also continued in good vigor in
this outlying region longer than elsewhere in Europe, and
in a much better state of preservation. So soon as habitu-
ation to the servile state had induced in the subject
population a passably stable spirit of allegiance to their
noble masters, 1 so as to permit the forces of the com-
munity to be turned to account for external aggression,
these countries, or rather the body of feudalistic squires
in whom vested the usufruct of these lands and their
population, made their entry into the political concert of
Europe in the service of the dynastic ambitions of the
Hohenzollern. With the predatory animus and the ser-
vile allegiance of the feudal tradition still intact, and
imbued with the spirit of chicane and effrontery that
comes of a predatory settlement, this body took rank


1 This feudal allegiance was greatly helped out by the change
of faith. By their conversion to Christianity the subject people
shortly acquired a sense of solidarity with their Christian masters.


Imperial Germany 153

from the outset as a highly efficient engine of dynastic
aggression. An in as much as this career of dynastic
aggression has never ceased and has seldom suffered pro-
tracted interruption since it first got under way, the
discipline of every-day life has conserved in admirable
preservation the range of habits of thought with which
these peoples first entered on the stage of modern
Europe. They are best preserved remnant of mediae- r
valism in Europe of sufficient mass and commanding !
sufficient material resources to make them formidable in
international politics.

At their first emergence on this stage, and with gradu-
ally lessening effect for a long time after, this community
of squires and followers showed a troublesome spirit of
insubordination under the leadership of their overlords ;
and, indeed, something of this brittle quality is still
to be seen in the support which the Agrarian Squires
accord the crown, — their support is still to be had only
on conditions, only so long and far as the body of squires
is persuaded that the crown is a consistent partisan of
their particular material interests. They are the indis-
pensable refuge and strength of the dynastic statesman,
but they are also difficult and exacting. In the course
of time, with continued discipline in following after
dynastic ideals, working out the imperial destiny of the
sovereign State and strengthening the powers of the
crown, — all this consistent experience has greatly re-
duced the capricious particularism of the Junkers, and
has in great part brought a sentimental loyalty to the
State into the first place in their affections. The same
course of discipline has, of course, given the same general


154 Imperial Germany

>« <
drift among the people at large, whether in the Prussian

territories or in the Empire.

The entrance of Prussia into modern Europe was a
very different affair, in all it circumstances, from the
fortunes of Elizabethan England and the subsequent inci-
dents of English national life. Prussia came in with no
cultural traits other than a mediaeval militarism resting
on a feudally servile agrarian system, and made its way
forcibly as a political power of ever increasing potency
among an aggregation of small and feebly quarreling
neighbors. The new nation was surrounded on all sides
by jealous and unscrupulous rivals, with whom it un-
avoidably, as well as by inclination, was constantly brought
in contact in a ceaseless contest of dynastic chicane and
predation; a situation which forever provoked the con-
version of all available resources to political and warlike
ends, and furthered the growth of a centralised and irre-
sponsible autocracy, such as best comports with the pur-
* suit of dynastic wars.

About the same time England, on the other hand,
withdrew, or perhaps rather was forcibly withdrawn by
circumstances, from the concert of nations, and confined
to its island in enforced peace, with no reasonable chance
for an aggressive national policy, and affording no chance
of prolonged life for a dynastic State. So that while the
Hohenzollern extended their dominion by war and diplo-
macy and increased their powers, the Stuarts went re-
luctantly down to final abnegation, and the dynastic state
was replaced by a commonwealth in which royalty ceased
to be anything but a pious legend and a decorative bill of
expense. In the one case a feudalistic body of agrarian
squires has continued, in spite of adverse economic cir-


Imperial Germany 155

cumstances, to be of decisive weight in national policy i
and to control the administrative machinery, while in th<
other the barons and feudalistic gentry, after a wel
contested fight for place, were supplanted by the spoke*
men of business enterprise, whose interests dictate
peace, industry and a qualified return to the rule of Lr
and let live.

Not that British popular sentiment and collective am-
bition has ever fully declined to the level of pecuniary
quietism implied in this characterisation, nor that Prus-
sianised Germany sees no end in life beyond the power
of the State and the subservience of the subject, but the
contrast so pointed between the two will hold after all,
with due qualification. With due qualification it will hold
that in the reflections of the British citizen the Unitedj
Kingdom is conceived as a "commonwealth," while in th<
speculations of the German (Prussian) subject the Fathj
erland is a "State."

It is as difficult for the commonplace Englishman to un-
derstand what the German means by the "State" as it is
for the German to comprehend the English conception
of a "commonwealth," or very nearly so. The English
still have the word "state" in their current vocabulary,
because they once had the concept which it is designed to
cover, but when they do not in current use confuse it
with the notion of a commonwealth, as they commonly do
in making it serve as a synonym for "nation," it is taken
to designate an extensive tract of land; on the other
hand, the Germans, having never had occasion for such a
concept as that covered by the term "commonwealth,"
have no corresponding word in their vocabulary. The
State is a matter not easily to be expounded in English.


156 Imperial Germany

It is neither the territorial area, nor the population, nor
the body of citizens or subjects, nor the aggregate wealth
or traffic, nor the public administration, nor the govern-
ment, nor the crown, nor the sovereign ; yet in some sense
it is all these matters, or rather all these are organs of

I the State. In some potent sense, the State is a personal

* entity, with rights and duties superior and anterior to
those of the subjects, whether these latter be taken sev-

* erally or collectively, in detail or in the aggregate or
average. The citizen is a subject of the State. Under a
commonwealth, as in the United Kingdom, the citizen is,
in the ritual sense of heraldic rank, a subject of the
King — whatever that may mean- — but this relation of
subjection is a personal relation, a relation of mutual

1 rank between two persons. The terms to the relation are
necessarily personal entities, and they enter into this
relation only by virtue of their character as persons.

"The State is the people legally united as an independ-
ent power." So says one who speaks with authority in
these premises. But then, also, "The State is in the first
instance power, that it may maintain itself; it is not the
totality of the people itself, — the people is not altogether
amalgamated with it; but the State protects and em-
braces the life of the people, regulating it externally in all
directions. On principle it does not ask how the people
is disposed; it demands obedience." "The State is
power," says the same authority, and "it is only the State
that is really powerful that corresponds to our idea." It
might perhaps exceed the scope of the premises to follow
him farther and find that "power" here means "military
power." Plainly, government by consent of the governed
is not a State. The sovereignty is not in the people, but


Imperial Germany 157

it is in the State. Failure to understand this conundrum
is perhaps the most detestable trait of unreason that taints
the English-speaking peoples, in the apprehension of
intelligent Germans. The German ideal of statesman-
ship is, accordingly, to make all the resources of the
nation converge on military strength ; just as the English
ideal is, per contra, to keep the military power down to
the indispensable minimum required to keep the peace.
This personal — in English one is tempted to say quasi-
personal — entity, impersonate perhaps in the Sovereign
as its avatar, is a conception and an ideal which the
English-speaking peoples appear to have missed, through
its not lying within the horizon of their materialistic and
pecuniary cultural outlook ; they appear to have lost it in
losing the spiritual perspective peculiar to the mediaeval
mind. Rated in terms of the English cultural sequence,
the conception would seem to be an archaism, an insight
atrophied through disuse. It should seem also that it
might be recovered in case the British nation should have
the fortune to fall under the personal dominion of an
autocratic prince, and so set up a dynastic State after the
pattern preserved in the working constitution of Prussia.

The part played by this conception of the State in the
rehabilitation of Germany is so considerable, and the dif-
ference it has made between the German scheme of right
and honest living and that which prevails elsewhere,
among the other contemporary branches of the north-
European culture, is so characteristic and consequential
that it should merit more detailed scrutiny, both as to its
logical and sentimental contents and as regards its deriva-
tion and its bearing on the material fortunes of the race.

In point of its sentimental content, as regards the native


158 Imperial Germany

propensities which find expression in this concept of the
State, its chief ingredient is doubtless the ancient sense
of group solidarity, expanded to take in a nation seen
only in fancy, instead of the original neighborhood group
known by personal contact and common gossip. This
group solidarity is seen somewhat baldly at work in
the small communities of the lower cultures and in the
local pride and loyalty of neighborhoods and hamlets,
clubs and congregations, among the more naive and com-
monplace elements of the civilised populations. It has
been construed by the utilitarian philosophers, in their
time, as a calculated outcome of material self-interest
resorting to cooperation, — doubtless an inadequate if
not groundless account of a propensity that is frequently
seen to traverse the lines of self-interest. It would rather
appear to be a native and indefeasible bias in the race.
That such should be the case is all the more reasonable
in view of the fact that men have always lived in groups,
that the existence of the race has been continued only in
and by group life. That enterprising individuals now
and again successfully trade on this sentiment of soli-
darity for their own advantage gives no degree of support
to the notion that it is a derivative of self-interest; rather
the contrary.

But however jealous and self-complacent this sense
of solidarity may show itself to be under circumstances
which provoke its expression along lines of invidious com-
parison and emulation, the recognition of this tempera-
mental bent does not of itself carry us beyond the con-
ception of a community or commonwealth. There are
still lacking the elements of personality and unfolding
power, which are essential to the concept of the State as


Imperial Germany 159

distinct from that of a community. This is the more
evident if it be kept in mind that the State may — perhaps
rather typically does — unfold its power and assert its
initiative apart from, beyond, or even in contravention of,
any consensus on the part of the community. The bias
of solidarity is an essential element, no doubt, but it is a
solidarity subservient to an extraneous initiative; an
initiative not necessarily alien to the spontaneous con-
sensus of the group, but also not necessarily coincident
with or germane to the ends of life comprised in the
consensus of the community. In the ideal case — and
the Prussian case visibly approaches this ideal — the con-
sensus of the community will, at least passably, coincide
with the drift of the State's initiative; and that it does
so is a fortunate circumstance and an element of power
in the State, but it is a matter of coincidence rather than
an organic necessity. Where the popular consensus so
comes to coincide with the line of the State's initiative
and unfolding power, as in the Prussian case, it will com-
monly happen that this happy consummation is reached
through the community's accepting the State's ends as
its own, and also commonly without such knowledge of
the State's ends in the case as would enable the com-
munity to take stock of them and appreciate what has
been accepted or assented to. In other words, the coales-
cence of the community's consensus of interest with the
State's ambitions is a coalescence by submission or abne-
gation, whereby the community lends itself, willingly and
even enthusiastically, as a means to the State's realisation
of its own higher ends.

With great uniformity, wherever such a conception
of a State as an over-ruling personal — or quasi-personal


160 Imperial Germany

— entity prevails and takes effect as a working ideal, the
State is conceived as a monarchical establishment, — it is
what has here been spoken of as a "dynastic State." It
is, as in the Prussian case, an autocratic monarchy that
is had in mind as the only practical realisation or incor-
poration of this ideal of a State; an absolute dynastic
monarchy, "constitutional" by concession perhaps, but
paramount and peremptory at need. The State is per-
sonalised in the person of the sovereign. And this sov-
ereign or dynasty is not on a tenure of sufferance or good
will. He does not hold his authority by gift of the com-
munity. If he did he would be only the spokesman and
administrative servant of the community, and the State
would so disappear in a commonwealth woven together
out of expedient compromises between the several in-
terests living together in the community. It seems
doubtful if this working conception of the State can be
formulated in concrete terms as anything else than or
short of a dynastic monarchy, absolute at least in theory.
To cast back again into European prehistory for such
dim light as may so be had on the elements of human na-
ture that come in evidence in this current conception of
the State. In the petty communities, perhaps kingdoms,
managed on a basis of neighborhood solidarity and ad-
ministered somewhat anarchistically by force of a neigh-
borly consensus, — in these quasi-anarchistic groups of
remote Baltic antiquity the common understanding that
made group life practicable appears to have been in effect
the rule of Live and let live. Apart from their anarch-
istic scheme of administration there is only one institu-
tional fact that is confidently, or rather unavoidably, to
be imputed to these communities of the Old Order on the


Imperial Germany 161

evidence that has come down, viz., the ownership of
property. But the evidence of ownership under that
archaic regime goes back so near to the beginning of
things in the north-European culture — as it commonly
does elsewhere also — that there is not much to be sur-
mised of an earlier antiquity. There may also have been
kings in that early time, — the evidence is of course not
conclusive — but there can scarcely have been a State;
an anarchistic State will easily be conceded to be a mis-
nomer. As has appeared in other passages of this in-
quiry, 1 this state of culture, dimly shown in the archaeo-
logical evidence, has the sanction of natural law, in that
it was seen and approved as viable by a longer series of
generations than have lived since it disappeared. Such
slight institutional furniture as it gives evidence of should
be- near-hand expressions of a native bent in the peoples
concerned, and may be taken as a naive indication of
what is indefeasibly right and good in the sight of these
men. Among these time-tried institutions is the right of
ownership, the secure usufruct of what the owner may
have achieved or acquired, under the rules of the game as
approved by common consent. From some far-off point
in the cultural sequence, again apparently in remote an-
tiquity, inheritance has been a legitimate method of
coming into such usufruct. All this still approves itself to
the common sense of the common man today.

In later time, when this people came to deal with aliens
in the way of raiding and conquest, what a man might
achieve or acquire and transmit by inheritance came to
include such booty and such dominion over a subject

1 See Note III, page 291.


162 Imperial Germany

people as his fortune and initiative put him in the way
of — always subject to the rules of the game as seen
and approved by the community on whose consensus he
leaned. Out of these predatory beginnings, legitimised
by convention and settled by use and wont, presently came
the feudal regime; and out of this in turn, by further
.working of the anarchistic principle of usufruct appli-
cable to whatever one might achieve or acquire within the
rules of the game, came the dynastic State. The principle
of usufruct by right of ownership, which once applied
to a subject community (originally of aliens), is in the
dynastic State extended to cover the usufruct of a com-
munity which has by use and wont grown to feel itself at
one with its masters and has come into authentic accept-
ance of a comprehensive servile status. The ancient
principle of ownership has by historical permutation
taken such a turn as to vest the usufruct of the com-
munity at large in its dynastic head. And so long as the
situation at large continues to be transfused with dynastic
ambitions and chicane, so that the alternative effectively
offered any community would be subservience to its home-
bred dynastic head or to an alien dynasty, so long the
dynastic State continues in force, backed as it is by the
sense of group solidarity and not violating the principle
of Live and let live in any greater degree than the only
visible alternative to its rule, — subjection to another and
alien power of the same complexion.

In the Prussian environment the conditions of national
life have favored the conservation of this dynastic rule;
whereas in England, placed as that nation has been in
modern time, the dynastic conception has disintegrated
under the wasting impact of the common man's native


Imperial Germany 163

animus to Live and let live. The truth and beauty of a
regime of dynastic usufruct is not realised in the absence
of a suitable background of war and rapine. And one
finds that the encomiasts of this regime habitually pro-
test against any proposal to remove or soften this back-
ground.

Now it happens, perhaps as an accident involved in the
historical sequence, perhaps due to a recrudescence of
the ancient anarchistic bent, that in modern times the
drift of sentiment sets in the direction of Live and let
live, and discountenances all institutional establishments
of a visibly servile order. Such is peculiarly the case in
those communities, — like the French, English-speaking,
Dutch and Scandinavian countries, — that have been most
intimately engaged in the latterday technological and
scientific achievements. Now, whether by force of arro-
gation or by drift of sober common sense, this same
group of industrial nations have at the same time come
to be accounted the leaders among civilised peoples, in
so far as bears on the scheme of civil and political in-
stitutions. There is in fact an apparently well-advised,
or at all events well accepted, preconception lodged in
the body of current common-sense to the effect that
slavery, servitude and the like subjection to the dictates
of an irresponsible personal master, is a moral and aes-
thetic impossibility among civilised mankind; that such
personal subservience is a relic of feudalistic barbarism
and disappears irretrievably from among the usages and
the ideals of any people so soon as they emerge upon
the levels of latterday civilised life.

While this modernism apparently owes its rise and its
vogue to the growth of opinion among the advanced in-


164 Imperial Germany

dustrial peoples and to its congruity with the scheme of
peaceable industry to which these peoples are addicted, it
has also imposed itself by force of example on the later
comers among the peoples of Christendom, at least to the
extent of a shamefaced formal acceptance. So massive
and so ubiquitous is this persuasion of the shamefulness
of servitude, that even in those instances where the
dynastic State still stands intact as a practical effect,
and has not yet come to be felt as an irksome or insuf-
ferable grievance, it will no longer do to display its
character openly as an organisation of servitude based
on subjection to the person of the dynastic head. When
conceived in these bald terms of usufruct and submis-
sion, the uses of a dynastic establishment are seen to be
of the same nature as the uses of a tapeworm; and the
tapeworm's relation to his host is something not easy
to beautify in words, or even to authenticate in such
convincing fashion as will insure his affectionate reten-
tion on grounds of decorous use and wont.

However, by taking thought one may conserve the
facts and save appearances. The dynastic establishment
may be sublimated into a personalised collectivity of "the
people legally united as an independent power." There
is no obnoxious trait of servile subjection to an irre-
sponsible personal master in the community's so taking
collective action. This is what would be understood by
a "commonwealth." But a community so constituted is
not a State; it is more like a joint-stock company. Its
personality must become something more than a figure
of speech. If such a community is to be a power — to
exercise that "will to power" that one hears of — the
usufruct of the collective strength must be vested in a


Imperial Germany 165

personal agent with plenary discretion; and the requi-
site efficiency and stability of initiative and discretion
can be had only if this personal head is possessed of
paramount authority and in so far as his jurisdiction rests
on a tenure independent of the ebb and flow of vulgar
sentiment. The State must find "a local habitation and
a name" in the person of a dynastic prince, in whom
must vest the unqualified usufruct of the community's
powers. So will the dynastic state be reinstated, in
effect, unimpaired and unmitigated.

It is some such theoretical construction of a person-
alised collectivity that is held up to view in the ex-
positions offered by the spokesmen of the Prussian State
and its high destiny. But it is at the same time difficult
to make out that the patriotic sentiments of the Prussian
subject effectually center on anything more shadowy
than the personal dynasty of the Hohenzollern and the
personal ambitions of its head. With this feudalistic
loyalty goes an enthusiastic sense of national solidarity
and a self-complacent conviction of the superior merits
of the views and usages current in the Fatherland — the
"Culture" of Germany; but all that is not integral to
the conception of the State. The dynastic State, of
course, is a large element in the "Culture" of this people :
very much as its repudiation is an integral feature of
the cultural scheme accepted among English-speaking
peoples. Indeed, there is little, if substantially anything,
else in the way of incurable difference between the Ger-
man and the English scheme of things than this dis-
crepancy between this ideal of the dynastic state on the
one hand and the preconception of popular autonomy
on the other hand. The visible differences of principle


166 Imperial Germany

in other bearings will commonly be found to be deriva-
tives or ramifications of these incompatible sentiments
on the head of personal government.

The resulting difference between British and German
in respect of personal freedom and subordination is less
a matter of practical conduct than of "principle"; al-
though it will not be seriously questioned, because it
has been proven by experiment, that British, or English-
speaking, popular sentiment will eventually submit to
much less provocation before taking recourse to con-
certed insubordination. The margin of tolerance in this
respect is visibly narrower in the British case. Yet the
point of equilibrium reached by each of the two peoples
in their everyday conduct of affairs and in their practical
attitude toward the constituted authorities is by no means
widely different ; although the one may be held to reach
this equilibrium of working arrangements by concessive
abatement of the demands of insubordination, while
much the same practical outcome is reached from the
other side by expedient mitigation of the claims of abso-
lute tutelage and fealty. The English-speaking peoples
are democratic, indeed anarchistically democratic, in prin-
ciple, but by reason of common-sense expediency fortified
by a pervading respect of persons — what is sometimes
disrespectfully called flunkeyism — the effective degree
of freedom enjoyed by the individual, as restrained by
law and custom, is only moderately greater than that
which falls to the lot of the German subject whose point
of departure in the regulation of conduct would appear
to be this same flunkeyism, dignified with a metaphysical
nimbus and mitigated by common-sense expediency.
"Flunkeyism" has an odious sound in modern ears, but


Imperial Germany 167

unfortunately there is no equally precise term available
to cover the same range of sentiment without invidious
implications; it is a fault of the current vocabulary.
Both German and English-speaking peoples make much
of personal liberty, as is the fashion in modern Christen-
dom, but it would seem that in the German conception
this liberty is freedom to give orders and freely to follow
orders, while in the English conception it is rather an
exemption from orders — a somewhat anarchistic habit
of thought.

It was this dynastic power of the Prussian State,
resting on an authentic tradition of personal fealty,
unlimited in the last resort, that was the largest single
factor of a cultural kind entering into the Imperial era
from the German side. It is at least conceivable that in
the course of time, the protracted disintegrating impact
of the discipline exercised by modern industrial habits
would have brought this dynastic State and its coercive
organisation to much the same state of decay as that
which once overtook its smaller and feebler counterpart
in Elizabethan England. But the course of time has not
had a chance to run in this Prussian case. Elizabethan.
England, and its soaring imperialistic aspirations, was I
exposed to the slow corrosion of peace and isolation, with \
the common interest converging more and more on the
industrial arts and the fortunes of trade; and it took
a hundred years and more to displace dynastic statecraft
and eliminate imperialist politics — in so far as these ele-
ments of the ancient regime can be said to have been lost
— and it took another two-hundred years to reach the
farthest point along the line of liberal policy and peaceable
ideals eventually attained by the English community.


CHAPTER VI

The Industrial Revolution in Germany

Economic policy as pursued by German statesmen at
J the time when the new industrial era opens — say, in the
second quarter of the nineteenth century — is still of the
cameralistic kind. This is true of the German states
throughout, including Prussia and Austria with the rest,
even if minor and transient excursions out of the cam-
• eralist circle of traditions had been made here and there,
e.g., by various German followers of Adam Smith. It
follows from the political constitution and traditions of
the German principalities, absolute and militarist, that
in effect, none but a cameralistic policy could be enter-
tained. 1 The economic situation entered on a new epoch


1 The patriotic economists of that generation (middle of the
19th century) in Germany, and the publicists who reflect their
views, prefer the designation "National Economy," rather than
Cameralism, in speaking of the policies which they propose. It
may be worth remark, parenthetically, that the professed econo-
mists of the time were chiefly concerted with formulations of
policy, rather than with theoretical inquiry in any detached
sense; their protestations against the system of Political
Economy offered by the English (Classical) school of theorists
run chiefly on the ground that the practical guidance afforded by
the Classical formulations is of no service, has in fact no par-
ticular bearing, towards the building up of a national power,
and "national" in this connection connotes a dynastic State
organised for defense and offense and jealously guarding its
frontiers. The difference between the typical Cameralists of the
eighteenth century and the "Nationalist," or Historical, econo-
mists of the nineteenth century is a difference not of principle
and purpose so much as of the wider range of ways and means

168


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 169

in industry and trade, and the statesmen of the
Fatherland therefore entered on a campaign of economic
policy directed to making the most of what the new
system in trade and industry had to offer. In this new f
campaign the ideals of statecraft remain the same as
ever, but the new ways and means to be taken account
of unavoidably alter the outline of the policy to be pur- I
sued, without deflecting it from the ancient cameralistic 1
aim of making the most of the nation's resources for the ;
dynastic purposes of the State.

The economic history of the new era might well be
written as a history of the economic policy of the Prus-
sian State and the Prussianised Empire. Such a history
would not be the political history of Imperial Germany,
although it would also at no point lose sight of the polit-
ical use and bearing of the phenomena of trade and
industry with which it would be occupied. It would
be an account oif the material fortunes of a great indus-
trial and commercial nation, whose industrial and
commercial concerns have been under the regulative con-
trol of an interest centering on other than industrial and j

necessary to be considered by the later theorists of the economic )
foundations and agenda of the State. The state of trade and
industry had visibly changed from the earlier time, and the
economic policy most conducive to the material power of the
State would necessarily be of wider scope than what had
seemed adequate in that earlier time. Mere fiscal measures of
exploitation were no longer adequate to the best utilisation of
a community with extensive commercial relations and a cap-
italised industrial system. Yet it remains true that the ma-
terial interests of the State continue to hold the first place in
German Economics of the nineteenth century, and that fiscal
considerations are given a weight and prominence in all their
systematic exposition, such as they never had among the English.
Financial Science has continued to be the strongest line of
economic theory among the Germans, and it goes on the premise,
uniformly, that the interests of the State are paramount; the
reverse is true of the English, particularly of the Classical school.


170 Imperial Germany

' commerical ends, on ends lying beyond the material wel-
fare of the community, and indeed beyond the fortunes
of the community in any respect. This need not, at
least conceivably, imply the pursuit of an economic policy
inimical to the community's material welfare, — indeed
it is part of the convictions of these statesmen that the
material interests of the community are best conserved
by such a policy that looks to the success of the State
as its ulterior end; but it will necessarily follow that
these material interests will be conceived in such fashion,
with such incidents and restrictions, as may best serve
the State's usufruct. It is, of course, not the intention
to attempt such a history here, but only to recall the
special circumstances under which the history of this era
has been enacted and to indicate how these peculiar cir-
cumstances have affected the outcome.

Whether in peace or in war, that is to say whether as
a business proposition or as a proposition in international
politics, modern technology does not tolerate a minus-

i cular State after the fashion of the German principalities,

• even after the fashion of them as they stood subsequent
to the Napoleonic disturbance. This technology and
the business community in whose usufruct the modern
state of the industrial arts lives and moves is of an im-
personal and cosmopolitan character. Personal idio-

' syncrasies, local traits and national frontiers are dis-
serviceable rather than otherwise in all that concerns the
life of trade and industry in modern times. So patent
is the inhibitory effect of circumscription, whether on
grounds of personal or class prerogative or on grounds
of national segregation, that even the statesmen of these
German principalities, whose segregation appears to have


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 171

been the sole end of their existence, were reluctantly
brought to realise the futility of trying to live in and by
the modern economic system as industrially and com-
mercially segregated communities. Concessively, with
much reserve and by tardy expedients, the States that
got their material means of life from the industry of the
German people drew together into the Customs Union,
presently after into the North-German Confederation,
and finally into the Empire. The good effects of this
move, in the way of heightened efficiency and therefore
of material prosperity, are well enough known, and they
have been shown with sufficient publicity and commenda-
tion by many writers competent to speak of such matters.
The most striking item in the reform so wrought is the
removal of tariff frontiers and similar interstitial ob-
stacles to trade and communication.

This furtherance of trade and industry by the states-
men was almost wholly of a negative or permissive sort,
in that it consisted in the removal of restrictions pre-
viously enforced ; and the like continues to be true of the
Imperial policy in trade and industry down to a late date
in Bismarck's administration. The good effects are
traceable to the removal of obstacles. Which suggests
that a farther pursuit of the same policy should have had
similarly good effects in increasing the efficiency of Ger-
man industry, such, e.g., as the total abolition of the
frontier, in respect of economic regulations of all kinds.
The retention of the frontier and the return to more
of a mercantilist policy of tariffs and the like that pres-
ently followed, was a political expedient, an expedient
for the good of the State rather than of the industrial
community. The furtherance of the community's ma-


172 Imperial Germany

terial prosperity simply, regardless of the dynastic ad-
vantage of the German State, would doubtless have dic-
tated the practical abolition of the frontier and of all
discrimination between German and non-German busi-
ness and industry ; just as the same consideration dictated
the abolition of frontiers and discriminations of the same
kind within the Empire.

The advantage to the German people, simply in the
material respect, would have been of the same kind as
was derived from the removal of similar restrictions
within the country, and the gain should presumably have
been as much greater from such a conceivable abolition
of the Imperial frontier as this frontier was a greater
fact than the detail frontiers which it displaced. But the
Imperial frontier, as a means of obstructing trade, was
the chief means of making the Empire a self-sufficing
economic community, and therefore a self-balanced whole
to be employed in the strategy of international politics.
It is true, the country would have been better off, simply
in point of material prosperity and in the rate of its
economic progress, if no such barrier as the Imperial
frontier had been kept up; but the immediate result
would have been such a specialisation of industry and
, such trade relations as would have left the community
■ dependent for a large and indispensable part of its cur-
rent consumption on foreign countries; from which it
would follow that the Empire would be relatively vulner-
able in case of war, at the same time that the com-
munity, the people, would be much more reluctant to go
' to war. Such a policy would, in other words, nowise
comport with the strategy of dynastic politics, at least
ndt as seen by statesmen of the school of Frederick the


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 173

Great. Therefore the policy that has actually been pur-
sued in this matter has been a policy of reasonable re-
striction and pressure, whereby a compromise has been
effected between a free development of industrial effici-
ency and the development of a self-contained industrial
community, all of whose forces could be directed to a
given political (warlike) end and which could with the least
hesitation take a hostile attitude toward other countries.
In the later phases of its development, as the warlike
ideals have come more into the foreground, the policyf
has more consistently been directed to placing the country
in a defensible position, by creating a self-contained in-
dustrial community.

The main line of interference with or regulation of
industrial affairs has been by way of a protective tariff.
Like other tariff regulation this has been almost wholly
inhibitive, of course. Aside from this, the chief directive
work of the statesmen in this field has been concerned
with the building of railways, largely with a view to
military strategy, and the subsidising and surveillance of
shipbuilding, also in good part for warlike purposes. But
the more substantial fact is always the tariff. What
might have come of the new industrial era in the absence
of the Imperial frontier and its customs is a speculative
question, of course, and can not be answered with any
degree of confidence, but an indication of the shortcom-
ings which the tariff has sought to remedy may after all
be interesting as going to show the nature of the outcome
from which the State's policy has preserved the German
industrial situation.

As is well known, the Fatherland is not at all specially
fortunate in natural resources of the class that count


174 Imperial Germany

toward modern industry. As regards mineral resources
Germany has a decided advantage in the one item of
potash alone. The iron and coal deposits are well enough,
but can by no means be counted as better than second
best, in point of quality, location or abundance. Beyond
this Germany does not count even as second best in
any of the natural resources on which the modern in-
dustry draws. Forests and fisheries are not exactly neg-
ligible, but they are also not of great consequence; the
soil varies from good to bad, what there is of it, but there
is not enough to support nearly the whole population
without somewhat drastically forcing industry from
other fields to an intensive cultivation — more intensive
than would be an attractive business proposition under
free trade in agricultural products. The shipping facili-
ties, harbors and natural waterways, are also to be
classed as inadequate by comparison with other com-
merical countries. The one large asset in the way of
natural resources is an industrious, healthy and intelli-
gent population; in this respect Germany was, on the
whole, better off when the new era set in than any of
the neighboring countries except France, together with
the smaller nations of the class of Belgium.

In the conceivable case that the new era in trade and
industry could have been left unregulated by state
authority for State ends, it is fairly to be presumed that
the outlines of the . resulting situation would not even
approximately have coincided with what has actually
come to pass. In the first place, or rather as a prelimi-
nary admission, it may be remarked that the net aggregate
efficiency of the industrial community, as well as its rate
of gain in efficiency and consequent volume of output,


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 175

would doubtless have been very appreciably larger — ^
barring providential intervention — and that the distri-
bution of this gain among the population would pre-
sumably have been somewhat more equable. Agricul-
tural production, and perhaps especially the production
of meat and dairy produce, would have been relatively
smaller, perhaps absolutely smaller ; whereas the imports
under this head would have notably increased. This
would have been accompanied by a perceptibly lower cost
of the necessaries and a better nourishment of the in-
dustrial classes, which might be counted on to bring a
higher coefficient of increase in the population, together
with a slightly longer average life and a higher efficiency
per capita. A further immediate consequence of the
lessened home production in agriculture would be an
increase in the over-sea import of foodstuffs; resulting
in an increase of the shipping industry, and presumably
inducing some slight but continuous emigration in con-
nection with this carrying trade and with the extension
of agriculture in the countries from which these imports
would be drawn. Something of this latter kind is already
visible in connection with the over-sea trade with both
North and South America. With the added impetus
given by such an enlarged over-sea trade as would result
under a free trade policy, the German emigration of this
inconspicuous kind might fairly be expected to result in
an effectual colonisation in more than one of these
countries ; one gets the impression that as things actually
have run the German emigration has barely fallen short
of the mass and consistency required to make effectual


176 Imperial Germany

German colonies in Brazil, Argentine and the United
States. 1

Under a free trade policy both the coal and the iron,
of Germany would have been worked, but to a less extent)
than has been the case. A larger proportion of these
materials than at present would have been imported, and
this should logically have amounted to a very appreci
ably larger absolute volume than the present imports!
Consequently the industries that work up the raw and*
half-wrought materials into the fully wrought and mer-
chantable goods should have correspondingly increased,
involving in their growth an extension and further im-
provement of the transportation system, both internal
and over-sea, required to take care of the increased vol-
ume of traffic. German industry would presumably have
gone farther in the production of wrought goods, and
would consequently have been bound in more extensive
and indispensable trade relations than at present; which,
as an incidental result, would have made a breach o4
the peace by Germany or with Germany nearly impos-l
sible, since the dependence of the German people on
foreign markets in such a case would involve as its
counterfoil the like dependence of the other parties to


1 Such German colonies would, of course, have but a slight
dynastic value, if any; unless they might, conceivably, reach
such a magnitude and retain so large a measure of loyalty to
the crown as would lead to their secession from the national
government under whose auspicies they had grown up and to
their voluntary affiliation as colonies of the Empire. Such an
outcome would scarcely be presumed, since the pecuniary cost
of loyalty to the Empire is notoriously high and its pecuniary
advantage somewhat dubious. Nor does the alacrity with which
German subjects who settle abroad seek shelter under some other
— one might incline to say any other— flag than the German at all
suggest that such a colony would willingly thrust itself in under
the heavy hand of the Imperial State.


m

The Industrial Revolution in Germany 177

traffic on the German markets. The resulting situation
in the general goods market would presumably have been
something like what has recently come into view in the
German- American trade in dye-stuffs on the one side and
cotton on the other. Another secondary consequence of
some magnitude would have been the absence of plausible
grounds for an exorbitant military and naval establish-
ment to keep a peace not intended to be broken. There
are, however, a number of subsidiary considerations and
secondary consequences of too speculative a character
for detailed enumeration here, some of which will come
in sight in the further discussion.

In the course actually taken by events in the new era
the national frontier has always been a large factor, in
many connections one of the chief determining factors.
The most telling and most obvious way in which the
question of the frontier comes into the case in the earlier
phases of the Imperial era is the relative freedom within
this enlarged national territory, — virtual free trade over
a relatively large extent of country. Under the rule of
Bismarck there was moreover a visible drift in the
direction, not of absolute free trade in international rela-
tions, perhaps, but at least toward a greater freedom,
somewhat after the British fashion. This policy, never
very pronounced in practice, fell quietly into abeyance
following the retirement of that statesman; the new
spirit of a larger and more militant Weltpolitik drew
the economic policy of the Empire more and more to-
wards a position of self-dependence by exclusion, inci-
dentally heightening the alienation of sentiment, as well
as of interest, between the German people and their
neighbors. The trade policy pursued under the present


178 Imperial Germany

reign has had its substantial share in the growing an-
tagonism between Germany and the other industrial
nations, perhaps a share no less considerable than that
borne by the increasingly ostentatious militarism of the
same period. This trade policy has been of a singularly
mercantilistic kind, aiming at the illusory ideal of a one-
sided trade in exports.

A side issue of this trade policy, fortified also by
visions of imperialistic magnitude, has been the colonial
policy of the Empire since Bismarck's retirement. By
the acquisition of colonies, it has been hoped the raw
materials of industry could in great part, perhaps in the
end exclusively, be drawn from these dependencies; so
making the Empire independent of foreign nations for
its supply of the materials of its industry, at the same
time that the same colonies would afford a market for
wrought goods. The aim has been to achieve an indus-
trially self-contained imperial state. This traffic in
colonial enterprise is one of the less flattering and less
profitable chapters of Imperial policy, the dynastic
statesmen of the Fatherland having been unable to as-
similate the lesson learned by the English on this head, —
that a colony can not serve as a dynastic domain and at
the same time make its way as an industrial community
and a participant in the world's commerce. The German
colonies have consequently been dependencies of the
Empire instead of being, after the English fashion, rami-
fications of the German industrial community. So far as
the German economic community has effectively put out
such ramifications they have insinuated themselves, with-
out too much concerted effort, along the ways of trade
and industry in lands not subject to German rule.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 179

What has been said above would seem to imply that
the material success of the German people during the
Imperial era has been achieved not by furtherance of
the imperial state but in spite of it. There is a modicum
of truth in such a view, but there is doubtless much to
be set down on the other side of the account. The more
closely the dealings of the Imperial government with
the country's economic concerns is scrutinised the more
obvious becomes the obstructive character of its policy,
and the more obscure and elusive will the benefits appear
which it is currently claimed to have conferred in any
of its endeavors to regulate, guide and foster the material
interests of the country. Yet there is a substantial body
of economic gains, subsidiary but none the less conse-
quential, to be set down to the credit of this obscurer
bearing of the Imperial policies on the country's material
welfare, as it is hoped may presently appear.

In many accounts current of German economic achieve-
ment during the Imperial era much is made of the handi-
cap under which the German people came into the con-
cert of industrial communities in the nineteenth century.
This handicap is doubtless substantial enough, and it
has also been made sufficiently notorious by the various
relations of these events, and there is therefore no need
of recalling that side of the case here. This handicap is
made up of the several difficulties that beset the new-
comer who goes to work with scant means and slight
experience. 1

1 Even so competent an observer as Professor Sombart (die
Deutsche V ' olkswirtschaft im 19. Jahrhundert, bk. ii.) sees
and expounds this side of the case somewhat to the neglect of
the advantages given by the same state of things. It is alto-


f


1 80 Imperial Germany

The chief difficulty so to be surmounted is commonly
held to be the want of capital, understanding by that
term funds available for investment. Such funds were
not precisely wanting in the German case, nor were they,
on the other hand, to be had in abundance on easy terms.
The habit of investment in industrial enterprise was also
wanting, though such a habit seems to have been readily
acquired ; at the same time the banking facilities needed
appear also to have been readily found, so soon as the
business situation called for a more extended recourse to
the use of credit served by institutions of this class.

Any historical survey of a commercial or industrial
epoch will suffice to show that the installation of adequate
banking and similar financiering concerns is among the
features of the case that may be taken for granted.
They are much in the public eye and exercise a large
discretion in detail, and so they commonly hold the at-
tention, especially of persons readily impressed by sta-
tistics of trade, and come to be rated high as agencies
of industrial growth.

A difficulty of a greater and more obstinate kind is
the lack of experience or of knowledge in industrial
matters, and the presence of such customs and legal
rights as will hinder the free use of new-found ways and

gether the common view and is fertile ground for admiration
(doubtless deserved) of the German achievement, as well as for
some self-complacency and "racial" esteem on the part of the
spokesmen of Germanism. Cf., e.g., W. H. Dawson, Evolution
of Modern Germany, which has the distinction of having been
somewhat extensively transcribed (without credit and therefore
with unqualified approval) by a man eminent in the Imperial
Diplomatic Service; so also, e.g., E. D. Howard, The Cause
and Extent of the Recent Industrial Progress of Germany. Of
all studies on the modern economic era in Germany, Sombart's
survey, cited above, is doubtless the most valuable to the student
of this period.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 181


means. Difficulties of this class there were in the Ger- r
man case, and much of the retardation seen in the early
half of the century is to be set down to the account of
legal and customary obstacles which the German people!
were gradually getting rid of, between the Napoleonic
era and the date of the formation of the Empire. Dur-
ing the same interval the necessary information was
also being gathered, less by tedious experience than by
imitative acquisition from British sources.

The necessary technological proficiency was of a kind
to be readily acquired ; much more so than the corre-
sponding technological proficiency acquired by the Eng-
lish in Tudor times by borrowing from the Continent.
In this earlier English case what had to be borrowed
and assimilated was not only a theoretical knowledge
and practical insight into the industrial arts to be so
taken over, but a personal habituation and the acquisi-
tion of manual skill on the part of the workmen em-
ployed ; a matter that requires not oaly insight but long
continued training of large numbers of individuals, —
apprenticeship, as is well known, used to run from five
to seven years, and the training of the workman did not
close with- his apprenticeship. A favorite method of
introducing new industrial arts under the handicraft
system was to import the trained workmen, and one of
the substantial services rendered the English common-
wealth by the warring princes of the Continent was their
driving skilled workmen into exile to England.

The machine technology which the Germans borrowed
in the nineteenth century is a different affair in respect
of the demands which it makes on the capacities and
attention of the community into which it is introduced.


182 Imperial Germany

It is primarily an affair of theoretical knowledge, backed
by such practical insight into its working conditions as
may be necessary to the installation of the mechanical
equipment. In all this there is little of an obscure, ab-
struse or difficult kind, except for such detailed working
out of technological applications of theory as call for the
attention of expert specialists. The machine industry
runs on certain broad propositions that are simple in
themselves and have a very wide application in detail
processes, so that it lends itself to oversight and control
by a relatively few experts. The workmen employed
need commonly not be specially trained, in any corre-
sponding degree. The special training required for serv-
ice as operative workmen in the common run of the
machine industries is very greatly less than the cor-
responding training required to make an equally
competent workman under the handicraft system. Gen-
eral information and manual dexterity, together with
some, relatively slight, special habituation to the par-
ticular processes involved in the given mechanical
occupation, is all that is needed in this way to make a
very passable working force in the machine industry. 1
To appreciate the character and magnitude of the
German achievement, and the rate of their progress, it is
necessary to recognise the nature of what they borrowed


1 Much has been said, commonly in an acrimonious tone, of the
extremely mechanistic, monotonous, and stupid nature of the
part taken by the common workman in the machine industry.
Not infrequently these invectives reflect a degree of ignorance on
the part of the speakers, and the invective doubtless often runs
near the limit of tolerance in over-statement, but after all due
allowance for exaggeraf'on there still remains the fact of a very
substantial difference in this respect between handicraft and the
machine industry, such as is claimed above.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 183

in this modern state of the industrial arts. The premises
and logic of this machine technology are not of such a
nature as to offer any serious difficulty in themselves.
Their acquirement, in essentials, is a sufficiently simple
matter. It all, in its elements, calls for no profound or.
occult insight, no reach of shrewd wisdom and cunning,
no exploit of faith or of poetic vision, no stretch of
imagination or of ascetic contemplation. It is, indeed,
the most commonplace achievement of the human race,
and its premises and logic are patent to the meanest un-
derstanding at the fir,st contact. Much of it, so much
of it as makes the foundation and point of departure for
the whole, is unavoidably and indispensably familiar to
the common man in all his commonplace dealings with
the commonest inanimate objects that surround him. Its
point of departure and its scope and method is summed
up in the phrase, "matter of fact."

The epoch-making intellectual achievement of the
English technologists and their like, who prepared the
Industrial Revolution and have afterward worked out
its consequences in technology and the material sciences,
is not so much that they gained a new manner of insight
into the nature and working of material things, as that ;
they were, by force of circumstances, enabled to forget
much of what was known before their time ; by atrophy
of the habitual bent for imputing anthropomorphic quali-
ties and characters to the things they saw, they were en-
abled to interpret these things in terms of matter-of-
fact. Circumstances, the chief of which appears to have
been the decay of personal government consequent on
the decay of dynastic enterprise, weakened the inveter-
ate habit received from the past of construing material


184 Imperial Germany

phenomena in occult, magical, quasi-personal, spiritual
terms. This habitual imputation of spiritual potencies
and correlations among material facts had fallen into
abeyance in the Island sooner and farther than on the
Continent, and the curious ones among its inhabitants
therefore fell more readily than their Continental neigh-
bors into the prosaic habit of taking these external things
at their face value, as opaque matter of fact, and so
construing them and their movements in terms of (rela-
tively) unsophisticated sense-perception, without meta-
physical afterthought, or with a negligible residue of such
afterthought. 1

In their elements, therefore, the premises and logic of
the machine technology are in every man's mind, although
they may often be overlaid with a practically imperme-
able crust of habits of thought of a different and alien
sort. This does not mean that everyone, or any com-
munity, is ready forthwith to evolve the working tech-
nology of the machine industry out of his inner con-
sciousness, provided only that no one interferes with his
cogitations. Even given the premises and the logical
insight, there is a large field of empirical, matter-of-fact
knowledge to be covered under the working-out of these
premises; and this can be had only at the cost of large
and long experience and experimentation, for the details
of this knowledge are of the "opaque" nature of all
empirical, particularly physical, information, and are to be
had only by the narrow channel of sense perception.
Even when and in so far as one is freed from superin-
cumbent preconceptions of an alien sort, the necessity

*Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, ch. ii. iii. vi. vii.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 185

of acquiring this material content by slow degrees and
by trial and error still remains; and it was this slow
process of finding out the opaque matters of fact that
make up the material of technological science that occu-
pied several generations of the British before the Ger-
mans took over any appreciable portion of it. The first
acquisition of this material knowledge is necessarily a
slow work of trial and error, but it can be held and
transmitted in definite and unequivocal shape, and the
acquisition of it by such transfer is no laborious or un-
certain matter.

It follows from this state of the case that no great
difficulty need be experienced and no great interval of
time need be consumed in assimilating the working ele-
ments of this technology when once they are presented.
What is required to a sufficient understanding and an
intelligent employment of the appliances and processes
of the machine industry is nothing more recondite than
a certain body of matter-of-fact information as to the
physical behavior of certain material objects under given
conditions. The details, all told, of course are sufficiently
numerous and complex, and no man may hope to master
the whole range of information that enters in the working
of the system as a whole, but the system is after all the
most matter-of-fact organisation of knowledge extant.
It can therefore be taken over with extreme facility by
any community whose circumstances otherwise are suit-
able to the employment of those mechanical appliances
and processes which it offers.

The German people, by native gift, were endowed with
the kind and degree of intelligence required, being in
this respect on identically the same footing with those


A


1 86 Imperial Germany

British, and other, communities which had worked out
this modern state of the industrial arts. They had at the
same time, in their educated classes, all the intellectual
habituation necesisary to its ready acquisition, and in
their working classes a sufficiently well instructed force
' of operative workmen. So that the rate at which they
could attain proficiency in the new industry was little else
than a question of how fast and far their circumstances
would admit its use. The rate of its introduction and
. expansion, therefore, became largely a question of the
enterprise of those who had the discretion in matters of
business and industry, which resolves itself into a ques-
tion of the pecuniary inducement and of their insight into
the opportunities offered by this new industry.

In these matters the German community was peculiarly
i well placed. The classes who were in a position to profit
from these new ventures were accustomed by tradition
to a relatively low return on similar industrial enterprises
under the earlier regime, and so a given rate of remu-
neration would appeal more strongly to them than to a
^business community accustomed to larger returns; the
: natural resources to be made use of, having been lying
I relatively idle, were to be had at relatively slight cost; a
competent supply of workmen could be had at very rea-
sonable wages ; and last but by no means least, the break
with an earlier and traditional situation in trade and
{industry left German enterprise hampered with fewer
(conventional restrictions and less obsolescent equipment
Jand organisation on its hands than the corresponding
agencies of retardation in any of the contemporary
English-speaking countries. This last count in the sched-
ule of German advantages should be sufficiently evident


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 187

as against the moss-grown situation of trade and industry
in contemporary England, — as has already been indi-
cated in an earlier passage. It may be less evident,
perhaps less applicable, and may even be questioned, as
concerns the American community, — which stands as the
foremost of the outlying English-speaking countries.
Americans whose vision is in any degree blurred with
patriotic sentiment will, of course, repudiate such an
aspersion on their vaunted spirit of business enterprise,
but a dispassionate view of the relevant facts may be
relied on to allow the claim as made. 1

The German captains of industry who came to take
the discretionary management in the new era were for-
tunate enough not to have matriculated from the training
school of a country town based on a retail business in
speculative real estate and political jobbery managed
under the rule of "prehension, division and silence.".
They came under the selective test for fitness in the ag-|
gressive conduct of industrial enterprise, not under that
of making good as prehensile conservatives in a distri-
bution of pecuniary flotsam. The country being at the I
same time in the main — indeed, with only negligible local
exceptions — not committed to antiquated sites and
routes for its industrial plant; the men who exercised
the discretion were free to choose, with an eye single
to the mechanical expediency of locations for the pur-
suit of industry. Having no obsolescent equipment and
no out-of-date trade connections to cloud the issue, they
were also free to take over the processes of the new
industry at their best and highest efficiency, rather than

'Sec Xote IV, page 315.


1 88 Imperial Germany

content themselves with compromises between the best
equipment known and what used to be the best a few
years or a few decades ago. So also in the financiering
of the new ventures, since the aim was not so much to
get something for nothing by a financial shuffle as to find
the pecuniary means necessary for equipment and work-
ing capital for the production of merchantable goods and
services, the road was relatively plain, with virtually no
necessary recourse to the recondite and devious ways
of the impecunious company-promoter who aims to pro-
duce merchantable corporation securities. Not that the
company-promoter was out of sight in the German com-
munity in the days when the French milliards were in
sight ; but there remains after all relatively little waste or
dissipation of means to be written off the German ac-
count for astute financiering designed to divert funds

! from industry to the strategists of conservative chicane.
These German adventurers in the field of business,
being captains of industry rather than of finance, were
also free to choose their associates and staff with a view
to their industrial insight and capacity rather than their
astuteness in ambushing the community's loose change.

* And of suitable men to choose from, men with a capacity
for work, not gone to seed in street-corner politics, and
with sufficient educational qualifications and an interest
in the new industrial perspective, — of such there was
also no lack, for the German community was well sup-
plied with educated men glad to find employment in some
conventionally blameless occupation. For want of means
suitable to more drastic forms of dissipation, learning
had long been a chief resort of young men with time and
energy to spend; and since commonplace mercantile pur-


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 189

suits were conventionally somewhat beneath the dignity
of a gentleman, as was also commonplace manual labor,
and since the respectable callings of the civil service,
clergy and university instruction were already crowded
to the point of the subsistence minimum ; this supply of
scholarly young men flowed readily into the new chan
nel so opened to them, in which a relatively lucrative
visibly serviceable, and not positively disreputable chanc
of work was offered. So soon as this drift of youn
men into the industrial field had once set in it directly
served as its own legitimation ; it gave a degree of pecu-
niary authentication to those who successfully followed
the new pursuit, and its popularity served of itself to
make it fashionable. The responsible staff and corps in [
these industries, being men who had come through the
schools instead of through the country store and the pet-
tifogger's law office, were not incapable of appreciating
that range of theoretical and technical knowledge that \
is indispensable to the efficient conduct of modern in- A
dustry, and so the German industrial community was as
surely and unresistingly drawn in under the rule of the
technological expert as the American at about the same
period was drawn* in under the rule of the financial
strategist.

These subalterns, as well as the discretionary heads
of the several industrial ventures, had been accustomed
to a relatively frugal way of living and a relatively par-
simonious income, for the whole German community
was by tradition in consistently impecunious circum-
stances and in a parsimonious frame of mind. The de-
ductions from gross earnings on account of salaries and
current perquisites of management were consequently


i0o Imperial Germany

small, as compared with what was current practice in the
older industrial communities, or even with what has
gradually come to be the practice in the Fatherland in
the course of prosperous years.

So also as regards the disposable labor supply, which
was of abundant quantity and of good quality, both
physically and intellectually, and which had moreover the
merit of a ready pliability under authority and was well
Itrained to an impecuniously frugal standard of living, —
jpheap, capable and abundant* This labor supply was also
fiot in any appreciable degree made up of a "depauper-
ate" population of that congenitally ineffectual kind —
tmdersized, anaemic, shriveled and wry-grown — that
bulks so large in the English industrial towns, as the
butcome of that country's first hundred years of com-
jpetitive business enterprise under the regime of the
/machine process. This, too, has changed perceptibly in
some respects since the beginning ; the standard of living
has advanced, though not to equal that of the English-
speaking countries; and the workmen have at the same
time grown difficult and discontented in some degree,
but not after the refractory fashion in which they have
tried the patience and lessened the gains of their capi-
talist-employers in these other countries. Working-
class traditions, and indeed middle-class traditions, too,
have rather favored the useful employment of women
in manual occupations in the German past, and this tra-
dition of usage stands over still in good preservation,
though here again there are symptoms at least of a drift
into the same general attitude of a conventionally repu-
table exemption or exclusion of women from manual
employment, particularly from manual labor in the open.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 191

Not much loss has yet been sustained by the German
community from this source of impairment; the German f
women, e.g., still continue to work in the fields and have '
not yet acquired much of a putatively inferior physical ■
capacity, nor do they, apparently, suffer in a correspond-
ingly increased degree from the diseases of idleness. It >
is perhaps unnecessary to remark that all this, of course,
does not apply to the women of the well-to-do, who ap-
pear to be nearly as infirm (conventionally) as the best
usage would dictate.

From the outset, and through much of the unsophistifc
cated later course of this industrial era, both the men
in charge and the body of workmen appear to have taken!
a lively interest in industrial, perhaps especially techno-1
logical, concerns of all kinds. One consequence of this
naive attitude toward their work being that they have
had no crying need of systematic diversion, in the way
of sports, cabals, sensational newspapers, drunkenness,
political campaigns, religious dissension, and the like.
Also, from the same cause, the relative absence of
ennui, there was not the same need of vacations and
occasional holidays as in those more mature industrial
communities where industrial concerns and technological
information has grown stale in men's taste from long
familiarity and conventional irksomeness; and on the
same ground working hours could profitably be longer,
so long as the work had not entirely lost its appeal to
men's curiosity and its attraction as an unfolding of
workmanlike mastery. Diversions and dissipation ex-
traneous to their workday interests are not greatly re-
quired to keep men in humor and out of nervous dis-
orders so long as their workday occupation continues to


19 2 Imperial Germany

hold their curiosity and consequently their interested
attention; and the loss of appetite for information and
of speculations on matter that appeals so directly to
men's curiosity as the range of applied science called the
machine technology is in good part due to fashion, and
so requires to be propagated by imitation and borne up
by the introduction of some satisfactory substitute in-
terest; all of which takes time.

But in the nature of the case a substitute will eventu-
ally be found. Any community that lives by com-
mercialised industry necessarily comes under the para-
mount jurisdiction of the price system, in all that touches
its canons of propriety ; a partial and transient exception
may be made in favor of a religious or military hier-
archial scheme of rank, but such exception is only par-
tial and likely to be transient, at the same time that it
does not traverse the award of the price system at the
) point here in question. And the price system quite un-
ambiguously decides that no interest or habitual frame
of mind of such an overtly serviceable and economical
nature as this sentimental addiction to workmanship can
long continue to be of good repute in a community given
to pecuniary ideals, since it traverses the plain principle
of conspicuous waste. It is only a question of how soon
it will be found out, and how ( soon an adequate substitute,
not obnoxious to that principle, can be found and worked
into tenable shape. The common resort is some form
of sport, some form of dissipation that is expensive and
unprofitable at the same time that it will bear a plausible
appearance of "something doing," such as will not leave
the sense of workmanship instantly nauseated with its
futility.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 193

As has been remarked in an earlier passage, in Eng-
land the addiction to sports, though in the main vicari-
ously, is an inveterate habit and permeates the community
in a degree fairly incredible to any German who may
be unfamiliar with English everyday life. This addiction
runs back to a date before the coming-in of the machine
industry, although it is plainly more of a universal in-
stitution now than ever before. It has grown to its
present pitch and ubiquity only gradually, although it has
long been a serious abatement on British industrial effi-
ciency, both in that it involves a futile expenditure of
time and substance and in that it habitually occupies
men's minds with matters that are worse than useless
for the purposes of industry. It is fairly encrusted with
reputability, however, being quite useless at the same
time that it makes a sufficiently specious show of achieve-
ment and has also the countenance of the highest gen-
tility. In the course of their brief experience under the
paramount price system the Germans, too, have been
elbowing their way into the circle of sportsmanlike ob-;
servances, in a tentative and heavy-handed f a3hion, but '
in this as in their ingrained parsimony they have much
to overcome before they can hope to take rank with
the better sort among the peoples of the pecuniary civili-
sation.

At least in its current phase, in the phase of it to which
the German people have fallen heir, the modern state
of the industrial arts is bound up with its administration
by business methods and by businessmen. This means
that, very presently, in any community that takes over
this system of technology, the industrial system will be
taken over by the business interests and managed with an


194 Imperial Germany

eye single to the businessmen's pecuniary gain. Whereas,
at the outset the business management at least appears
to be in the service of industrial enterprise, the inevitable
outcome is a reversal of that relation, so that industry
becomes a means to business, and in the end comes to
figure in practical management as an adventitious matter
that waits on the exigencies of financial strategy.

This financial strategy is directed to getting the largest
net gain obtainable for the strategists, which may or
may not coincide with the line of management that would
add the largest net increase to the community's material
wealth or productive efficiency. In the early phases of
the German development the connection between the
businessmen's gain and the output of merchantable
product was fairly simple and direct — with such ex-
ception as may have to be allowed for even here; but
as time passes and the situation getjs into that maturer
phase that prevails in the English-speaking countries,
where the business of financiering industrial corporations
has become a distinct branch of traffic, this connection
grows less direct and consistent, until it becomes quite
remote and wholly doubtful. In such a case a slackening
off or stoppage of industry will easily arise out of the con-
servative management of the financial houses endeavoring
to conserve their funded wealth — wealth as reckoned in
money units — but with the effect of stopping or reduc-
ing the community's production of material wealth —
wealth as reckoned by weight and tale — and so leaving
the community poorer day by day as time goes on.
Experiences of that class have, of course, been had in
Imperial Germany; they are the necessary accompani-
ment of a businesslike management of industry; but,


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 195

through the earlier phases especially, while Germany
was in course of adopting the modern industrial sys-
tem, experiences of that class were relatively less con-
siderable, since the businessmen were occupied with
meeting and directing the growing need of industrial
equipment, and looked for their gains to come from the
increasing merchantable output.

What was of particular effect in this direction was the
wide margin on which industrial business in Germany
was able to proceed, a margin between a fair price in a
ready market on the one hand and a low cost and short
supply on the other hand. Such was the situation in the
earlier phases of the development, and such has continued
to be the situation in an unremittingly decreasing degree
as German industry has approached the conditions that
prevail in respect of cost and markets among its com-
mercial rivals. The margin has narrowed and grown
precarious, become subject to doubts and fluctuations,
partly because the ready markets have been invaded by
competitors, partly because factory and selling costs have
been increasing and partly because the financiering costs
have increased. One of the elements in the decline of the
market for industrial products has been the falling off
in the home demand for increased equipment; this has
quite evidently not been a falling off in the absolute
magnitude of the requirements of new plant and facili-
ties, including such concomitants as new habitations
and apparatus of living for the industrial population,
and the like; in absolute figures this demand shows no
decrease, but relatively to the aggregate output of Ger-
man industry at the earlier and later dates it would not
be difficult to show that this division of the home market


196 Imperial Germany

has suffered a shrinkage. It is also a matter of course
that the effective growth of the foreign market has not
kept pace with the growing productive capacity. This
is a matter of common notoriety and has had solicitous
attention both from the German statesmen and from
the various boards of trade. It is one of the motives
alleged for the colonial policy adopted in the later half
of Bismarck's administration and pushed with more de-
termination under his successors. It may seem singular
to anyone acquainted with the facts in the case that such
a colonial project should have been seriously entertained
for such a purpose, but it is also impossible to avoid giv-
ing some credence to the solemn allegations of these men
that the quest of markets has been one of the leading
incentives to this colonial policy. It is fairly to be pre-
sumed that no man would lay claim to such folly without
believing himself entitled to the stultification, least of all
men of such solemn self-complacency as the Prussian-
Imperial statesmen.

A more substantial and at the same time a more stub-
born difficulty that has grown with the growth of Ger-
man industry has been a rising cost of production, which
set in in a small way not long after the new era had got
under way and has been gaining cumulatively ever since,
— as indeed it will necessarily have to gain still further
so long as the same factors continue active in the further
unfolding of the situation. In some small part this
increasing cost of production is of a factitious nature, in
so far as it is an effect of capitalisation rather than of
physical expenditure of resources or physical deteriora-
tion ; but it is none the less effectual in that the capitalisa-
tion in question becomes an integral part of the con-


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 197

ditions under which the financing of the industrial
ventures is conducted. In Germany, as elsewhere, nat-
ural resources as well as differential advantages of loca-
tion and differential benefits of legal exemption, subsidy,
and tariff-made monopoly, have to some extent been
capitalised on the basis of the prospective gains to be
derived from these useful assets. And being so capital-
ised they have been made the basis of business ratings,
and so of credit extensions, and have come to figure
among the assets on which standard rates of earnings
are due. Such is more particularly the case where assets
of this class have been drawn into the capitalisation of
corporations and have thereby become the basis of fixed
charges due to be paid out of gross earnings. This pro-
cess of capitalisation of differential advantages within
the community, with the accompanying burden of fixed
charges, has gone forward gradually and cumulatively.
It is an unavoidable consequence, or rather a concomitant,
of a businesslike management of industry, particularly
where an extensive use is made of credit and corporate
capitalisation, and it necessarily grows with the passage
of time and the development of the capitalistic system.
At the same time, and unavoidably because it is intrin-
sic to the growth of the industrial system, these differen-
tial advantages of location and the like have in part begun
to depreciate through obsolescence, so that they no longer
have as high a value in point of earning-capacity as was
imputed to them in the process of capitalisation ; where-
by an unfavorable discrepancy arises between the fixed
charges which these items carry, or which the given
business concern carries on the strength of its possessing
these assets, ahd the earnings which come from their


198 Imperial Germany

possession. This obsolescence, as has been noted in an
earlier passage, need not be of the nature of physical
deterioration, or even of supersession by improved tech-
nological devices, but comes simply of the fact that the
industrial system at large has in a degree outgrown their
use, through a change of scale, a displacement of centers
and routes of production, transportation and marketing,
a shifting of other, correlated, industrial establishments,
a change in standard requirements, or seasonal demands
for labor, and the like, — matters which are in large part
beyond control of the business concerns involved, and
beyond remedy. These various causes of discrepancy
between accepted capitalisation and effective earning-
capacity have their effect, and they unavoidably come
along as a concomitant of growth, change and readjust-
ment in any industrial community governed by business
considerations; and they increase in volume, on the
whole, as time passes. So that while the German in-
dustrial community has had its modest share of these
concomitants of modern industrial enterprise, there is
plainly more of the same kind due and coming to them.
A further difficulty of a different kind but running to
somewhat the same general effect arises out of the
growth of the industry beyond the supply of raw ma-
terials that can be drawn from the nearer-lying, more
available natural resources. Recourse must be had to
increasingly distant or increasingly difficult sources of
supply. This acts to increase costs, whether the recourse
is to resources lying within the national boundaries or
without. It will be said, and there need be no hesitation
in assuming, that this increased cost per unit of raw
material is likely to be at least fully offset by the in-


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 199

creased economy of production given by the same larger
scale of industry that so necessitates recourse to less
available resources. Yet the fact remains that the
higher efficiency of the larger scale and compass of
the industrial system suffers this deduction, whatever it
may be worth. Indeed, this was one of the foreseen
difficulties which the statesmen of the Empire, by some
curious twist of logic, argued themselves into believing
that they could remedy by an acquisition of colonies!

More serious than either of these drawbacks in-
herent in the growth of the system, and equally indefeas-
ible, is the rising cost of production due to a rising stand-
ard of living, — perhaps more correctly a rising stand-
ard of expenditure. This involves the added mischief
that in so far as it is a question of increased cost of
maintenance of the working classes it carries a burden
of discontent and irritation, with the obstruction and
retardation of industry that is inseparable from "labor
troubles." At this point, too, the German industrial era
has had its handicap, beginning with negligible deduc-
tions from the margin of sale-price above costs in the
early days, and growing by insensible degrees until in the
course of some thirty or forty years it has come to be a
somewhat formidable affair.

In Germany as elsewhere the discontent of the work-!
men growing out of the rising standard of expenditure
has in part coalesced with the discontent of the subject
classes as such with the exercise of irresponsible author-
ity vested in the propertied and privileged classes,
whether by virtue of customary and legalised privilege in
the way of an aristocratic and autocratic government
establishment or by force of the rights of ownership


2oo Imperial Germany

exercised by those possessed of property. This coales-
cence has never been complete, at the same time that it
is not always possible to distinguish between the two in
any concrete case. This difficulty, which besets indus-
trial business in all the advanced commercial countries,
has been very effectively dealt with by the authorities,
both by concessions and remedies and by repressive
measures ; so that the German industrial community has
suffered less than might seem their due share of dis-
turbance, hindrance and irritation from this source. Yet
it is evident that, in spite of all the shrewd management
of the statesmen and the public bodies concerned, the
demands of the working classes have latterly been rising
to an inconvenient pitch, so as to have become some-
thing of a menace to German business by threatening the
margin out of which "living profits ,, are to be paid on
capitalisation, and at the same time also a perplexing
issue for the State authorities, in that it brings into view
a contingency that the disposable margin may by this
means eventually grow too narrow to support the politi-
cal and warlike establishment of the State on a suitable
footing.

In this last connection the rising standard of living offers
a singularly annoying problem of statecraft. There is,
e.g., no disloyalty felt or imputable to the workmen who
ask for a larger share in the returns of industry, so that
appeals to patriotic sentiment can not be made to them
with the best grace or with reasonable hope of a suc-
cessful issue; to hold the loyal affections of this class it
is, rather, necessary to convince them that the State is
with them in demands which they put forward in good
faith and with conviction. On the other hand, appeals


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 201

of a similar nature to the capitalist-employers are at
least equally futile, since these are moved primarily by
a view to the main chance — otherwise they would not
be capitalist-employers — and are also tangled in a web
of credit-extensions, corporate obligations and fixed
charges that leaves them little choice, beyond the alter-
native of eventually withdrawing from under the pres-
sure and taking their business elsewhere. In neither of
these bearings can the situation yet be said to have
reached a climactic phase, although such an eventuality
has latterly appeared to be not remote. But since all this
has been dealt with by the Imperial and Prussian states-
men, and since it is in the last resort their concern more
than that of anyone else, the inquiry will best return
to this question at a later point, in reviewing the policy
of the State bearing on these matters.

But the rising standard of living affects the rich and
the well-to-do as well as those who work with their
hands ; and the conventional necessities of the former are
no less pressing than those of the latter, even though they
may run on a level more remote from the physical sub-
sistence minimum. The standard of living is in all cases
mainly a standard of reputable expenditure, also called
"decent living/' and the lesion suffered in falling short
of such a standard of decent living is of a spiritual
nature, — in so far as the spiritual needs of "decency"
are not satisfied at the cost of physical comfort, so as to
throw the impact of hardship over on the latter and
make it appear that there is actual habitual privation
touching the prime physical needs of subsistence. Such
is commonly the case, however, and in so far as this takes
place it is felt by the victims of privation as a. bona fide


202 Imperial Germany

physical privation, and is on that account all the less
amenable to correction or amendment by appeal to rea-
son or sentiment. As among the indigent, so also among
the wealthy and well-to-do, a standardised scale of de-
cent expenditures will come to be mandatory; and, for
reasons that can not be gone into at length here, 1 the
scale of expenditure that so comes to be standardised
and accepted as the staple of decency in any class or
community is determined, roughly, by what the habitual
income of the class or community will support in the
way of wasteful consumption. It is another application
of the principle of "what the traffic will bear." The
adjustment of such a conventional scale of conspicuous
waste to the bearing-capacity of the habitual income is
a work of habituation, however, and so requires time and
some attentive elaboration. But so soon, or rather so
far, as a staple run of decent expenditures has so been
worked into the texture of everyday habits, it takes its
place in the schedule of necessities and becomes good
and indefeasible. In this matter the German com-
munity, with their traditions of frugality handed down
from the days of enforced parsimony, have hitherto made
only moderate progress. Not that the most expensive
among them are not sufficiently spendthrift, but the com-
mon run have scarcely yet learned to consume large in-
comes with that unobtrusive efficiency that marks the
gentleman of inherited wealth who has had the benefit
of life-long experience in a community of wasters. It
is probably still a safe proposition that an English gen-
tleman of the better sort will cost, all told, several-fold

1 Cf. The Theory of the Leisure Class, ch. ii. — vi.


The Industrial Revolution in Germany 203

the cost of a German gentleman of conventionally equal
standing. Still, the Germans, wealthy and well-to-do,
are taking up the slack as well and as fast as might
fairly be expected. It should be called to mind that,
as they are racially identical with their English com-
peers, they will also not be behindhand in this feature of
the cultural advance, given only the opportunity and a
reasonable allowance of time.

There is, of course, no inclination here to find fault
with this decent waste of time and substance. It is one
of the necessary concomitants of the price system. And
it is one of the points at which Imperial Germany has not
yet caught up with the maturer industrial nations; but
the German community is moving so effectually in this
direction that, barring accidents — which is a large res-
ervation just at the present conjuncture — the disposable
margin between the industrial output and the current
consumption might be expected shortly to disappear.
What would hinder its disappearance by this channel
would be the persistent shifting of fortunes from one
line of businessmen to another, and the continued en-
hancement of industrial productiveness through the con-
tinued advance in the industrial arts.


CHAPTER VII
The Economic Policy of the Imperial State

Quite in accord with its cameralistic traditions and
with the line of policy pursued with such eminent suc-
cess by the long line of Prussian statesmen, the Hohen-
zollern rule in Imperial Germany has consistently made
the requirements of the State, or the dynasty, the para-
mount object of its solicitude. It has guided the eco-
nomic policy of the Empire with far-seeing wisdom and
with uncompromising determination. But it has been
dynastic wisdom, and consequently it has been substan-
tially a mercantilist, or even cameralistic, policy. An
aggressive dynastic policy necessarily means a policy
directed to warlike success, and the Imperial policy
has consistently made warlike power its first considera-
tion. The State, in the sense of a coercive war power,
is held to be the first interest of the coirimunity, to which
all other interests must bend just so far as may be ex-
pedient for the purposes of the State. Other interests
than this politico-military interest are good and legiti-
mate in so far as they subserve, or at most are in no
degree disserviceable to, this abiding end of endeavor.
The economic policy has accordingly been pursued with
an eye single to the enhancement and husbanding of the
resources of the State as a warlike power. It is true,
this policy has been consistently coupled with profes-

204


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 205

sions of an undeviating determination to keep the peace
at all costs. How far these professions have been of
the nature of diplomatic platitude it is, of course, im-
possible, perhaps needless, to hazard a guess. They will
perhaps best be interpreted, if there is need of interpre-
tation, in the light of Prussian statecraft as it touches
questions of war and peace, from its beginnings in the
days of the Great Elector to the present.

This policy of militant statecraft is spoken of as
"Prussian" by critics of the Empire. And such no doubt
it is, in the sense that it runs in unbroken continuity
from the earlier period of Prussian aggression down into
the Imperial era. Such was also the view of it in the
earlier days of the Empire, and in the times immediately
preceding the formation of the Empire, as seen by the
lesser, particularly the south-German, states. Such is
perhaps still the view held by many peaceable citizens,
surreptitiously, in these states that came under the Prus-
sian hegemony tardily and reluctantly, but if such is the
case now it is not confidently discernible by an outsider.
The Prussian spirit, in this respect, has apparently been •
so well infused in the German people at large that there
seems no arguable abatement to the claim of a "united
Germany" today, and what Germany is united on is
this Prussian ideal of a State.

But while the Imperial State and its policy are of
Prussian pedigree, it is easy to over-rate that fact. It
should be called to mind that while the subjects of the
south-German states, particularly a large element among
the educated classes, were disinclined to the Prussian
rule and the Prussian aims, the population of these
states have after all, and including the educated classes,


V


2o6 Imperial Germany

passed under the Prussian hegemony and accepted the
drift of Prussian political aims somewhat easily. In
point of fact there was not much of anything available
in the way of public sentiment and national aspirations
in these non-Prussian states, else than a dilute form of
the same thing. Their earlier experience had run along
the same general lines, except for a certain lack of suc-
cess attending their princely politics. They were, in
fact, dynastic states of much the same complexion but
drawn on an incompetently diminutive scale, and since
there was no habitual bent of a different nature, no bias
that would actively traverse the inculcation of the Prus-
sian line of aspirations, the assimilation of the Prus-
sian teaching has followed with great facility. There
were no positive traditions of their own, and no inbred
institutional bent, with which the south-Germans would
have to break in making the Prussian outlook and disci-
pline their own, so that the change meant little else to
them, substantially, than more of the same kind as that
in which they were already at home. It is not as if the
Prussian system had been imposed on an English-speak-
ing people, e.g., with inbred notions of popular auton-
omy and private initiative.

The pursuit of this State policy has had many and
wide-reaching consequences for the economic fortunes of
the Fatherland and its people, some of which are suffi-
ciently notorious through repeated publication by many
and divers competent spokesmen. The exploits of Im-
perial policy in furthering the material progress of the
country are among the most noted facts of current his-
tory. It is therefore needless here to review these fea-
tures of the case, particularly as it has already appeared


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 207

in an earlier passage of this inquiry that these exploits
of furtherance have chiefly been of a negative character.
Indeed, it seems quite probable that a united Germany
without a superincumbent Imperial State — if such a
thing were conceivable — should have prospered at least
in as high a degree.

With a view to the fighting capacity of the state, and^
indeed with no other view, the economic system of the ■
country has been controlled wherever control was con- j
ceived to be expedient for this purpose. The railway 1
system was laid out under state surveillance on strategic
lines, and some of the state-built roads were built with
no expectation of their paying their cost in peaceful
traffic. Shipping has been subsidised and adapted to
naval use, in its building and equipment, and in its per-
sonnel, with the same object. Tariff legislation has been
devised to so distribute and specialise the industry of the
country as to make it a self-contained productive organisa-
tion, in so far as concerns the military and other needs
of the community in times of war, with the incidental
result of leaving the nation free and ready to go to war
on short notice. The same tariff legislation has beenr
made a means of favoring the Agrarians, chiefly the so-l
called "J un ^ ers >" whose support is necessary to the gov- \
ernment in its warlike preparations at the same time that \
it can be had only by concessions to their special pecu- J
niary interests. So also the continued support of the
same warlike element has been conciliated and substan-
tially enhanced by studiously failing to carry out the
constitutional provisions for a periodic redistribution of
parliamentary districts. The resulting gerrymander is as
scandalous a piece of corrupt party politics as the cor-


208 Imperial Germany

responding abuses that once supported the power of the
landed interest in the British parliament at the high tide
of parliamentary corruption in that country. So, again,

^any growth of popular sentiment inimical to imperialism
and coercion has been carefully pruned back and re-
pressed by drastic exercise of the police power and a free

, recourse to juridical excesses. On the other hand the like
suppression, or more properly subornation, of popular
opinion has been sought by way of class legislation os-
tensibly favoring the working classes in the way of pen-
sions and insurance for disability, old age, etc. Again,

1 the educational equipment, schools of all grades and
kinds, as well as the periodical press, has been censored,
subsidised, coerced, comprehensively and effectually, to
carry through an unremitting propoganda of "German-
ism/' that is to say of aggressive loyalty to the dynastic
policies of the Empire. The whole reflects the highest
credit on the Imperial statesmen and their agents for
admirably thorough work and singleminded devotion to
duty; — a singlemindedness obstructed by no consideration
of law, equity or humanity, — in effect leaning on the
principles of martial law.

All this characterisation of the Imperial system carries
a note of reprehension, because many of the details
necessarily involved in effectually carrying through such
a systematic work of the "will to power" as the Im-
perial statesmen have had in hand are reprehensible in
the eyes of modern men in whose scheme of right and
honest living such details have no place. The working
out of such a dynastic policy unavoidably involves hard-
ship to one and another, and it is not always possible for
the practical statesman nicely to observe the punctilios


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 209

of usage and conventional taste in manhandling the hu-
man raw material that is to be shaped to his uses. The
system has the faults of its qualities, and among its
qualities are not amiability, toleration or ingenuousness.
A dynastic State can not be set afloat in the milk of hu-
man kindness. Nor, indeed, does the equity or the aes-
thetic value of this adventure in imperialism concern the
present inquiry, which is occupied with the conditions
and limitations of its success. •

Anyone entering on such an inquiry will necessarily
face the question as to what is the end of endeavor in
the case. In a striking figure of rhetoric this end sought
has been spoken of as "a place in the sun" for Germany.
This figure of speech seems intended to convey that what
is wanted is a fair chance for the unfolding life of the
people of the Fatherland. But this evidently does not
mean simply a fair chance of material welfare for the
German population, considered as an aggregate of indi-
viduals. Apart from the Imperial State, there is no
special burden or obstacle resting on the individuals and
hindering them each and several from personally fol-
lowing their natural bent and making the most of their
opportunities and aptitudes. Indeed, there can be no
question but that the common man has absolutely nothing
lo gain in the material respect from the success of the
Imperial State. There is the plea, made in good faith
and commonly allowed in good faith, that the increasing
German population needs ground on which to house
their increase, that the German population multiplies on
the face of the earth and so needs its share of the earth's
face on which to multiply. But the earth's face is, no-
toriously, as accessible for any such multiplication out-


210 Imperial Germany

side the German frontiers as it would be in case these
frontiers were extended to include any outlying terri-
tory. In the material respect it is a question of trans-
portation, and of the conditions of life offered in the
new territories aimed at; and transportation would be in
no degree facilitated by an extension of the German
frontiers, while the conditions of life in the new settle-
ments would be no easier under German rule than those
now offered in the same localities; indeed, experience
would appear to teach, somewhat unequivocally, that
German rule is a good deal of a material burden, and
that, merely as a question of private economy, a man
will commonly be more at ease under almost any other
governmental establishment, within the civilised world.
^Taxation is relatively heavy, not to say exorbitant, under
the Empire, and the degree of interference with private
affairs commonly exercised by the state exceeds what
prevails elsewhere and is, indeed, endurable only by
virtue of long and thorough habituation. There can in
fact be no question but that in the material respect the
(contemplated or prospective) excess population of the
Fatherland would be happier in crossing the Imperial
frontier than in carrying it with them.

It may be noted by the way that the German colonies
have hitherto attracted substantially no German immi-
grants, settlers, apart from officials and businessmen
engaged in enterprise of the nature of exploitation; nor
indeed have they attracted immigrants of any other
nationality seeking a place in the sun under German
auspices. Germans seeking to better their opportunities
by emigration have continued to escape from the Em-
pire.


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 211

Considerations much to the same effect apply also in
sundry other respects, besides that of the material com-
fort and opportunity afforded migrant individuals. Not
that there are no drawbacks to emigration across the
national frontiers, but as things commonly go today it is
at least highly probable that the net aggregate of such
drawbacks will, for the present and the calculable fu-
ture, continue to bear at least as heavily on settlers going
to German colonies as on those going elsewhere. It is,
of course, a hardship to find oneself in a community
speaking another language; but that contingency is no
graver or more imminent in the case of German settlers
in any of the larger British colonies, or in similar coun-
tries open to immigration in which considerable German-
speaking settlements are already established, than for
settlers in the colonies of the Empire. With the passage
of time it may be expected that the later generations of
these German emigrants will adopt the language to-
gether with the other customs of the land of their adop-
tion; but when that takes place it will not be felt as a
hardship. Such migrants and their natural increase will
be lost to the German-speaking world, it is true; but
that is another matter and belongs in another connection.
A more serious and more immediate difficulty encoun-
tered by such settlers in a foreign country is their un-
familiarity with the laws of the land. This is a grave
matter for the first generation, scarcely at all for the sec-
ond. Beyond this it can scarcely be said that such emi-
grants have anything to lose, as compared with migration
to a German colony, beyond the sentimental loss involved
in shifting their allegiance from one national establish-


I


212 Imperial Germany

ment to another; and this step is optional, with little
ground for choice other than personal inclination.

Any such recital of personal advantages or disadvan-
tages attaching to emigration into a foreign country, as
against migration to a colony of the Fatherland, is ex-
tremely unconvincing; as is any enumeration of individ-
ual benefits derivable from the Imperial establishment
and its policies. It all fails to ring true and seems be-
side the point, very much like the grave protestations
with which diplomatists are in the habit of masking the
point at issue in their negotiations. In fact, it is as futile
as the verbiage of a peace advocate. These matters are
not of decisive consequence, even if they can be said to
have any appreciable weight among the motives that,
hold men to an enthusiastic maintenance of such an es-
tablishment as the Empire, or that lead men to make
material sacrifices for the Fatherland. Patriotism or
loyalty is a frame of mind and rests on a sentimental
adhesion to certain idealistic aspiration^. These as-
pirations, it is true, will commonly not bear analysis;
but they are just as good and valuable assets for their
particular use, for all that. The common man has no
rational interest in the continued success of the govern-
mental establishment under which he is living, except
in so far as its failure would throw him under the rule
of another government that would use him more harshly.
But the Empire can make no plea on such ground, since
the fear of Turkish dominion in Europe has gone by.
Yet the common man in the Fatherland is doubtless as
loyal to his state establishment as any European subject,
and probably very appreciably more patriotic than the
subjects of most other European states, as is evidenced


\


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 213

by the economic burdens and the coercive surveillance /
to which the German population has submitted without
serious murmur during the Imperial era. It is not read-
ily credible that any equally intelligent population would
have lent itself with equal patience, not to say enthusi-
asm, to so costly and profitless an enterprise as the Im-
perial policy. But it is not a question of profit and
loss, whether in the pecuniary respect or as touches the
conditions of life in any other bearing. For the people! \
the common man, it is a question of working togethen
unselfishly for the realisation of an ideal accepted un-
critically as the outcome of habituation ; for the director-
ate, the dynastic establishment and their servants, it is
a question of the use to be made of this unselfish spirit
of devotion in the common man. But for all and several
that stand together in support of this enterprise, it should
be kept in mind, the enterprise on which they are bent
is not an enterprise of a selfish kind — except perhaps
for the Imperial establishment and the ruling class — and
for neither the one nor the other is the ulterior purpose
of the enterprise pecuniary or other material gain. It is
something that can not be called sordid, unless a profit-
less self -aggrandisement of the dynasty should be so
called.

While any censorious critic of the Imperial policies
might readily, and defensibly, construe these policies as
an enterprise of self-aggrandizement on the part of the
dynastic establishment — superficially the appearances
very strongly support such a view — yet it is to be noted
that such a motive is not avowed by those who exercise
the discretion in these matters, and that there is at the
same time no call to believe that this is the chief and


214 Imperial Germany

consciously accepted aim of the German people in sup-
porting these policies. Such dynastic aggrandisement is
doubtless present among the aspirations on which popu-
lar sentiment converges, but there is also much else. It
can perhaps be of little use, but it should also do no
harm, to attempt an analysis of what this "much else"
consists in, that so is included in the burden of patriotic
aspirations carried by the German people, and that so
induces them to lend themselves to the policies of the
Empire.

What one hears most commonly and convincingly
avowed as an end of endeavor is the conservation and
propagation of the German culture. Culture is an im-
material asset, of course, and it is an inclusive category,
the content of which may not be altogether well defined
in the mind of those who use it, but which is after all
definite in such a degree as to be used quite intelligibly.
An enumeration of cultural features included under the
term in its colloquial use in this connection could scarce-
ly hope to be quite acceptable to all or to do justice to
the conception of culture at large, — which is a spiritual
matter and does not lend itself to statistical formulation.
Still, certain main features of the case will bear handling
in objective and impersonal terms.

Culture, any given culture, is a balanced system of
habits, essentially habits of thought. Among these
habits prevalent at large in the Fatherland, e.g., the one
that lies next to hand is the language. In certain other
cultural, or national, communities the currently accepted
religious cult might have to take the first place among
the tangible characteristics that go to make up the com-
munity's distinctive civilisation. Such would be true,


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 215

e.g., in the Turkish case, or perhaps in the case of Spain,
or possibly even in that of Russia; but such is not the
case with Germany, where a distinctive religious cult is
not avowed and could not be. In this matter of language
it is not a question of retaining the current form of
speech for the use of the current generation of German
subjects, but of conserving it for later generations and
extending its use to later generations of peoples who are
not now in the habit of using it. This would seem to be'
a humanitarian question, bearing on the future welfare
of mankind. It should, for one thing, apparently be a
question of the serviceability of the German speech as
contrasted with another — e.g., English, — for use in
the everyday affairs of life, including science and litera-
ture. On this head there appears in point of fact to be
nothing much to say for or against the expediency of
conserving or extending the use of this language. Its
merits are not to be overlooked, but it is extremely
doubtful whether such an endeavor to conserve or extend
the use of it would be worth while as a matter of general
utility. 1

As between German and English, e.g., considered as a
medium for science there is little to choose, German
being perhaps rather the less facile on the whole. In
point of the literary assets conserved in the one or the
other of the two media, predilection will necessarily have


1 While recognising that this is necessarily a question of senti-
mental predilection, in which arguments of expediency at large
can have no more than a subsidiary bearing, an outsider, to
whom English is not native and to whom at the same time Ger-
man is not unfamiliar, may perhaps without arrogance confess a
total inability to see any useful purpose to be served by a sub-
stitution of German for English in any of the uses which
language serves.


216 Imperial Germany

much to say; English has had the advantage of being
the medium employed by a longer line through the course
of a more extended and more varied cultural experience.
Any outsider, presumably, would scout the notion of a
cultural gain at this point through the supersession of
English by German. It is not improbable that the award
of an impartial court would fall out to much the same
effect if the comparison were to be made with French.
And unless the question at issue is a question of super-
session, there is no question.

The culture spoken for will; further, include such tan-
gible elements as technology and the exact sciences. These
are elements of the Western civilisation at large, not
special features of German culture as contrasted with
the other civilised nations, least of all, of course, as con-
trasted with the British. By historical accident, the Brit-
ish community has unequivocally led the advance in these
matters down to a date within the memory of men still
living, — in whom the lead vests today would be an un-
profitable topic of discussion, since the lack of perspec-
tive will permit no dispassionate appraisal, and chauvin-
istic sentiment would admit no agreement. That the
lead in technology and in the cognate field of the exact
sciences has been with the British is an historical acci-
dent, as just remarked, and in itself it has no particular
bearing on the question in hand. But this state of the
case has a bearing in the sense that it throws the whole
question out of court. In point of race, and therefore
of capacity and native aptitude for this peculiar work
of the Western civilisation, there is no ascertainable
difference between the Germans and the British. Under
modern conditions, again, national or linguistic frontiers


4


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 217

are no bar to the diffusion of technological or scientific
knowledge; and Christendom at large has none but a
sportsmanlike interest in the national affiliation of its
scientists or technologists, provided only that the gov-
ernmental system of any given nation is not of a charac-
ter to hinder the pursuit of knowledge along these lines.
Now, it happens that the governmental system differs
notably in these two contrasted nations, so that the Ger-
man, e.g., is appreciably the more arbitrary and bureau-
cratic of the two. This difference should lead one to ex-
pect that the pursuit of scientific and technological
knowledge under the auspices of the one will in some
degree take a different scope and method and yield an
output different from what may be expected under the
other. A priori, it should apparently follow that the
current work, both in science and technology, should
under the German discipline show more of "thorough-
ness/' in the sense of a close application to detail and a
diligent work of routine, with results more notable for
elaboration and sobriety than for bold or large innovation
in the range of general conceptions necessarily made use
of in this work. Whereas, in a degree — and only in a
degree, since the determining difference between the two
cultural systems is only a matter of degree — the con-
verse should hold true for the English-speaking nations,
as it apparently also should in even a more pronounced
fashion for the French. Such, indeed, would appear to be
the run of the pertinent facts ; although it is always con-
ceivable that the antecedent probability of such an out-
come may predispose one to see the pertinent facts in
such a light as will bear out the antecedent probability.
It may, of course, also be that the continued lead of the


218 Imperial Germany

French and the English-speaking peoples in respect of
the larger and theoretically creative conceptions in sci-
ence and technology is of a transient nature, and that
the German specialists may presently come into the lead,
when that community shall have had time and oppor-
\ tunity for mature assimilation of that impersonal, matter-
of-fact habit of mind that necessarily underlies all cre-
ative work in this field. Meantime the work of the two,
in so far as they differ, should presumably continue to
supplement one another very much as they have done

•

in the recent past. It would appear, in fact, that the
German culture has nothing characteristic to offer on
this head; what the Germans have in hand being so
recently borrowed from English (and French) sources
that there could be no sensible gain looked for in any
conceivable move to let it supplant its own source.

However, there is the further count of German
achievement and accumulated assets in the field of philos-
ophy, the free, or even the mandatory, diffusion of
which it is felt would be of substantial cultural service
to mankind. In so far as "philosophy" is not taken in
the colloquial sense of a personal appraisal of the values
to be attached to the various institutions and incidents
of life, it must be taken in this connection to designate
the moral and metaphysical outlook involved in this cul-
tural complex. Here, as in the bearings already spoken
of, the difference between the neighboring communities is
necessarily a difference of habituation, not of racial or he-
reditary endowment, since there is no difference in the
latter respect. And in point of habituation, and consequent
habitual bent, such as would give a characteristic scope
and method of philosophical thought, the peculiar fea-


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 219

tures of the German case will therefore have to be con-
ceived as a precipitate of the peculiar experience which
their historical circumstances may have given them in
the days before they began seriously to take over the
modern technology and the logic of modern science.
There is no later or other source or point of departure
for a distinctively German philosophy; and philosoph-
ical system named "German" and not of such a derivation
would be a misnomer, and any endeavor to conserve it
as a landmark or corner-stone of German culture would
accordingly be misspent effort.

The merits of this heritage of the German people, in
point of its intrinsic truth and beauty, can of course not
be made a subject of inquiry here ; all that is, after all, a
question of taste, about which there is no disputing. It
is more to the point to recall that since this characteristic
philosophical precipitate of the life-history of the German
community, which makes its appearance in the eighteenth
and comes to its mature climax in the nineteenth cen-
tury, is a philosophical expression of the Romantic
spirit, it is viable only within the spiritual frontiers ot
Romanticism ; that is to say since and in so far as the
German people have made the transition from Roman-
ticism to the matter-of-fact logic and insight character-
istic of modern technology and applied science, the char-
acteristic philosophy of Germany's past is also a phenom-
enon of the past age. It can live and continue to guide
and inspire the life and thought of the community only
on condition that the community return to the conditions
of life that gave rise and force to this philosophy; that
is, only on condition that the German nation retreat from
its advance into the modern state of the industrial arts


220 Imperial Germany

and discard such elements of the modern scheme of in-
stitutions as they have hitherto accepted. But with such
a retirement in the direction of the mediaeval and feud-
alists scheme of life, if such a retreat were conceivable,
the question in hand would also lapse, since, such a re-
treat would involve a return to the small and incompetent
conditions of Germany's pre-capitalistic and pre-imperial
age.

The peculiarly German philosophy is peculiarly ineffec-
tual for the purposes of modern science, and peculiarly
incapable of articulating with or illuminating any of the
questions with which modern scientific inquiry is occu-
pied. It is an idealistic philosophy, that is to say, at its
nearest approach to the domain of fact it is a theoretical
construction in termls of sufficient reason rather than of
efficient cause, in terms of luminous personal valuation
rather than of opaque matter-of-fact. Its high qualities
and great aesthetic value may not be questioned; it is a
monument of what was best in German life in the days be-
fore the technological deluge ; but it finds no application in
the scheme of thought within which the modern science
and technology live and move. Remnants of it are still
afloat in the atmosphere of the German scholarly world,
and it is even true that, under the shadow of the feud-
alising Prussian State, well-intended endeavors, whether
well-advised or not, have also latterly been made to
rehabilitate it. 1 But this is to be taken as indicating the

1 Such will have to be the appraisal of the move toward vital-
ism and neo-Kantianism in latterday German speculations, as
well as of the "return to Goethe" that has been spoken for with
so much feeling. This endeavor to turn back may perhaps best
be taken as a mere movement of revulsion, but it may also be
taken as evidence of the efficacy of that discipline in personal
valuation and of discrimination in degrees of occult virtues and


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 221

degree of reversion embodied in the Imperial policies and
the degree of revulsion induced by the discipline of life
under its institutional scheme, rather than as evidence
of the viability of this philosophical scheme under mod-
ern conditions of life, properly speaking. Similar an-
achronistic remnants of the ancient regime are, of course,
also to be met with in some degree of vigor elsewhere,
and a correspondingly atavistic revulsion of taste in
philosophical speculations is also to be found elsewhere ;
although, apart from the frankly mediaeval aspirations
of the theologically-minded sons of the Church, such
recidivism is greatly more in evidence in Imperial Ger-
many, perhaps particularly in Prussian Germany, than
among the scholars of Christendom at large. The tedi-
ous caution may again be pardoned, that all this implies
nothing in the way of praise or dispraise of the philo-
sophical predilections so handed down from the pre-
mechanistic past, and aimed to be rehabilitated in the
mechanistic present by men schooled in the institutional
methods carried over into this present under the aegis
of the dynastic State. It is not even intended to imply
that such endeavor to rehabilitate a logic and outlook
that once articulated with the discipline of workday life
in that institutional past need be a bootless endeavor.

potencies, which the coercive personal rule, and its government by
personnel, constantly exerts. — Cf., e.g., Henri Lichtenberger,
Germany and its Evolution in Modern Times, bk. iii. ch. v.;
Aliotta, The Idealistic Reaction against Science, perhaps espe-
cially part i. sec. i. ch. ii., sec. ii. ch. ii. and iii., and "Conclusion."
Any attentive observer will remark a characteristic divergence
between the Anglo-American speculations in this connection and
the German; where the former prevailingly resort to quasi-sub-
jective conceptions, of the nature of Pragmatism, the latter are
inclined to take refuge in mystical notions of a super- subjective
or praeter-natural vitalism, a transcendent Sollen and an
Ueber-Ich.


222


Imperial Germany


What is implied is that a competent rehabilitation of the
Romantic philosophy is conditioned on the rehabilitation
of the Romantic institutional and technological scheme, —
perhaps somewhat aft^r the fashion of things in the days
of the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire. It is at
least extremely doubtful whether the dynastic system
of the Empire and its institutional scheme will avail to
effect a retention of or reversion to the Romantic philos-
ophy, even as it stood in the immediately pre-Darwin-
istic days of German scholarship. One might go farther
land say that unless the discipline of the Imperial system
khould have some such effect upon the prevalent intel-
lectual attitude of its subjects, it will itself fall into decay
under the impact of the same forces of habituation that
\\o to make the Romantic philosophy futile in the eyes
c i modern men.


What remains to be spoken of under the head of Ger-
man culture, distinctively so called, is the institutional
scheme just referred to, substantially the administrative
system of the Empire. In so far as the German scheme
is distinctive and individual, so as to stand out in con-
trast with corresponding use and wont in other Euro-
pean countries and mark an aspect of German life, it is
a distinctive form of the current compromise between
the irresponsible autocracy of the mediaeval State and the
autonomy of popular self-government. By and large,
the German system differs from that of other modern
countries in being of a somewhat more coercive charac-
ter, comprising a larger measure of authority and a
smaller measure of popular self-direction.

In the English case, e.g., — that is in the case of the


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 223

English-speaking peoples — the compromise embodied in
the accepted, and more or less popularly acceptable,
scheme of institutions, goes relatively far in the direc-
tion of a reversion to that anarchistic neighborhood auton-
omy that has appeared in earlier passages of this in-
quiry to have been the prehistoric constitution of society
among the north-European peoples. Not that the boasted
"self-government" of the "Anglo-Saxons" is a precari-
ously near approach to neolithic anarchism, or even to
the quasi-anarchistic rule of the petty kingdoms of late
Scandinavian paganism. But it is nearer than the Ger-
man compromise, by nearly all the difference between
them; and to the spokesmen of the German scheme of
mitigated repression it looks much like a dubious playing
fast and loose with anarchy, a harboring of "license"
under the sign of "liberty." The reversion toward the
archaic quasi-anarchistic rule has gone but a relatively
little way in the German scheme, answering to the rela-
tively brief and relatively scant exposure of the German
population to the disintegrating impact of the mechan-
istic state of the industrial arts, — disintegrating in re-
spect of those habits of subjection and subservience to
personal rule that characterise the dynastic State and
constitute the spirit of loyalty.

Here again, it is bootless to argue the intrinsic merits
of the two contrasted institutional schemes. It seems
plain that the quasi-autonomy to which the English-
speaking peoples turn their affections is more nearly the
institutional counterfoil of the modern state of the in-
dustrial arts; but that amounts only to saying that it is
more nearly the unguarded outcome of the habits of
thought fostered by modern science and technology, not


224 Imperial Germany

that it is therefore a more suitable scheme of life for
civilised men, even when this life is carried on by means
of this science and technology.

It seems likewise plain that, with a more protracted
experience of modern industry, the popular predilection
among the German- speaking peoples should, by force of
habituation, also come to incline more and more to the
like popular autonomy in their institutional scheme. But
even if such a change of spiritual base may be in pros-
pect, it remains true that to the German people of today
such a change would seem untoward, not to say dis-
\ astrous. The current Imperial system of mitigated re-
pression and bureaucratic guidance is apparently accept-
able to the German people and apparently works to
good effect among them, although it would presumably
not be workable if imposed on a population with a differ-
ent recent historic past. That it works so well in the
Fatherland would appear to be due in part to the fact that
the population has so recently emerged from a state of
unconditional fealty and subjection, that even the slight
. and dubious mitigation of irresponsible personal rule
j embodied in the Prussian bureaucratic system is felt as
1 a relief and a privilege, it is "freedom" by contrast with
conditions that still live in tradition, and to some extent
in the continued habitual attitude of the subjects, al-
though it might seem "bondage" to another population
with a different traditional experience and a different
habitual bent.

This bureaucratic system of guidance and control has
the merit of great efficiency and of being visibly service-
able for the purposes which it is designed to serve; and
its purpose is one that meets, on the whole, the cordial


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 225

approval of the subjects of the Empire. That it is so
eminently efficient and successful is not unusually as-
cribed by its spokesmen to the peculiarly high degree of
honesty, sobriety, intelligence, and energy that is held to
be native to the German character, — that is to say its
successful operation is ascribed to the presence of certain
hereditary traits in the German people. But since there
is no racial, that is hereditary, difference between the
people of the Fatherland and their neighbors, either east
or west, that explanation fails, and one's curiosity returns
to the question: Why is the Prussian-Imperial system
of bureaucratic guidance and control more efficient and
freer from abuses than, e.g., the somewhat stale bureau-
cracy of Austria, or the massive web of official corrup-
tion that has until recently carried on the administrative
government of Russia, or, again, the Turkish system,
structurally of the same class, that is conventionally re-
ferred to as "unspeakable" ?

Since an explanation in terms of hereditary race char-
acteristics will not serve, except for homiletical edifica-
tion, the only recourse for analysis of the case is to pe-
culiarities of habituation. In this respect the Prussian-
Imperial scheme occupies a peculiar place, on several
accounts, the leading ones of which may be called to
mind. Chief among these peculiar features of the case
that make for efficiency and integrity would appear to be
its recency; it has not yet had time to grow old and
mature into a competent routine of perquisites and sine-
cure. There is said to be evidence that such a growth
is not altogether lacking, but it is at least commonly
accepted that what modern colloquialism calls "graft" is
relatively absent; whereas in the more mature estab-


226 Imperial Germany

lishments of the class, as e.g., the Turkish or the Persian,
"graft" appears to be the structural core of the system
\ and the prime mover in its functioning. The traditions
of the German people, including the personnel of the
civil service, are traditions of frugality and parsimony,
quite necessarily so, and these are fortified in this con-
nection by a traditional loyalty of service to a master, to
whom the civil servant stands in a relation of personal
stewardship. The improvement in the material circum-
stances of the civil servants effected by the liberal emolu-
ments of the service, as contrasted with past penury,
has not yet grown into a commonplace insufficiency and
become a point of departure for discontent and larger
' pecuniary aspirations. At the same time the immaterial
emoluments in the way of rank, decorations, and royal
condescension, mean more in a community that has long
been fed on distinctions of rank and that has not yet
achieved an adequate appreciation of commercial stand-
ards. These and the like incidents of immaturity may
be outgrown.

The like reflection will apply as regards the current
efficiency of this bureaucratic system. It is apparently
unavoidable that such a system should gradually achieve
a certain consistency of procedure, a binding texture of
routine and precedent. So long as the routine is still in
process of adaptation to the exigencies to meet which
it is being elaborated, it will have but a slight if any
retarding or hindering effect in the work to be done. It
is flexible so long as it is engaged in establishing prece-
dents, but so soon or so far as the precedents have once
been established, and in the measure in which the exi-
gencies gradually change their character, so as to be


The Economic Policy of the Imperial State 227

less well served by routine embodying precedents already
established, in the same measure the bureaucratic system
working under such routine will grow inflexible and in-
hibitive, the amount of lost motion and wasted energy
will increase, and the margin of perquisites and sinecures
will widen. What may be the rate of growth and the
final degree of such senescence to be looked for in the
Prussian-Imperial bureaucracy is of course only a mat-
ter for conjecture, at the best; but its extreme volume,
comprehensiveness and elaboration would suggest that
something very appreciable in that way is fairly within
the probabilities, since this state of things leaves rela-
tively little of German life outside the sweep of the
bureaucratic system, and so affords little purchase for
any combination of forces that might conceivably hinder
its perfect decrepitude. 1

At this point, therefore, the aspiration of patriotic
Germans to extend the benefits of the Imperial system
to mankind at large in its further generations, is at the
best a dubious speculation. On the one hand, if the
system of bureaucratic direction maintains its ascend-
ency it is in all human probability bound to change its
character somewhat pronouncedly in the direction which
other bureaucratic administrations of an autocratic char-
acter have followed; while, if, on the other hand, the
modern habits of thought as shown in latterday science
and technology take effect in a popular disavowal of
autocratic and dynastic institutions, as has happened in
the countries that have preceded Germany on the road


*It is true, the present (April 1915) conjuncture may so turn
that speculations as to the future of the Imperial bureaucratic
system will have little more than a speculative interest.


228 Imperial Germany

of industrial advance, and bring on a consequent disinte-
gration of the foundations of this bureaucracy, the bless-
ings conferred by its extension would at the best be of
a wholly evanescent kind.

Apart from a feudalistic ambition, patriotic in the
bald and naive sense, to further the dynastic dominion
of the Imperial State as a regnant power, it does not
appear that there should be much in an aggressive Im-
perial policy to engage the serious affections of the Ger-
man people. There is no substantial ground for an as-
piration to propagate or to conserve the distinctive Ger-
man culture; and assuming that something could be
I done towards its diffusion abroad, the chance of such
diffusion producing a substantial or enduring effect
would seem to be small. As a cultural community the
Fatherland is at present in an eminently unstable, trans-
itional phase. Its population is in the singularly un-
toward position — untoward, that is, in the present im-
mediate bearing — that they have come out of an obsoles-
I cent cultural situation so recently as in effect not to have
i forgotten what is necessary to forget, at the same time
that they have not been in contact with the things of the
modern world long enough or intimately enough to have
fully assimilated the characteristically modern elements
of the Western civilisation.

This is not saying that they may not, for the tran-
sient time being, be all the better off in any and every
respect that may conceivably be worth while; but it does
say that they are not in a position to take up a relation
of tutelage to any other community, with the slightest
chance of a successful issue, for good or ill. They are
physically, technologically, politically, socially, comprised


The Economic Policy of the Imperial Stale 229

within the frontiers of modern Christendom; but they
are, in certain indefeasible respects, notably the indus-
trial respect, new-comers whose scheme of life has not
yet been made over in the image of that culture into
which they are moving by force of unavoidable habitua-
tion, — unavoidable except by a precipitate retreat into
that more archaic phase of Western civilisation out of
which they have latterly been escaping. It is not yet too
late, perhaps. They may yet be able to effect such a re-
treat by recourse to so drastic a reaction in their civil and
political institutions as will offset, presently neutralise,
and eventually dispel the effects wrought by habituation
to the ways and means of modern industry and the exact
sciences. There is the object-lesson of Turkey, of course,
which teaches that there is always another way, and that
one should not underrate the cultural efficiency of a
tenacious adherence to archaic institutions in the face of
any eventuality.


CHAPTER VIII


The Net Gain


In the course of the last preceding chapter it has ap-
peared that any project for transfusing the characteristic
elements of the current German culture abroad among
the other nations of Christendom would be nugatory,
owing to the fact that, however intrinsically desirable it
may be, what the Fatherland has to offer in this way is,
in its elements, out of date and therefore out of touch
with the habits of thought in such communities of a
maturer culture as, e.g., the French or the English. The
chief distinctive characteristic of the German culture
being a retarded adherence to certain mediaeval or sub-
mediaeval habits of thought, the equivalents of which be-
long farther back than the historic present in the experi-
ence of these others. It is further argued, on similar
. ground, that any endeavor to hold fast the main body of
this peculiarly German culture in statu quo within the
confines of the Fatherland would similarly be nugatory,
because as a cultural scheme it is out of date and touch
with itself, in that it is in part archaic and in part quite
new. All this, of course, does not bear on the intrinsic
merits of this body of culture or on the question of its
desirability. It is also, of course, intended only to de-
scribe the facts in the case and the effective practicability
of such conceivable endeavor, and it is by no means in-

230


The Net Gain 231

tended to set forth the run of convictions current on this
head among loyal German subjects.

So seen in its historical setting and in the light of the
circumstances that have shaped it and that will continue
to determine its further life-history — that is to say, con-
sidered genetically — this variant of the Western civili-
sation is evidently an exceptionally unstable, transitory,
and in a sense unripe phase. Comprising, rather than
combining, certain archaic elements — as, e.g., its tra-
ditional penchant for Romantic metaphysics and feudal-
ists loyalty — together with some of the latest ramifica-
tions of mechanistic science and an untempered applica-
tion of the machine industry, it necessarily lacks that
degree of homogeneity in its logic and orientation that
would characterise a maturer cultural complex. The
resulting want of poise is not to be accounted an in-
firmity, perhaps; it makes for versatility and accelera-
tion of change ; but it is also a clear warrant that the ex-
isting congeries of cultural elements does not constitute
a stable compound.

Such is, of course, not the appraisal of the spokesmen
of this culture, in whose apprehension it necessarily
stands as a finality, since it is all their own. And doubt-
less, sound and kindly men as they are, they are sincerely
concerned to benefit mankind at large by its extension
over the civilised world. Indeed, in their appraisal, as
it abundantly comes into view, much is made of the
stability, poise, deliberation and "profundity" of the na-
tional character in which this cultural is conceived to be
imbedded. Doubtless, a penchant for profundity and
deliberation bulks large among the habits of those who
cultivate this culture. But nothing can be more pro-


232 Imperial Germany

foundly and meticulously deliberate than the measured
footsteps of the man who no longer knows where he is
going, though he is on his way.

Now, to carry out this benevolent design of extending
the dominion of the culture of the Fatherland it is in-
dispensable that the Prussian-Imperial State should ex-
tend its dominion; inasmuch as the prime postulate of
the faith that moves these its spokesmen runs to the effect
that the State is the first need of any cultured com-
munity; and as the Prussian-Imperial State is central
and intrinsic to the German cultural scheme, it follows
that this State will necessarily be the indispensable prime-
mover and chief end in the regeneration of humanity
that so is to be effectuated. Whoever wills the end must
make his peace with the means. So it has come about
that the higher fortunes of humanity are conceived to
be bound up indissolubly with the paramount dominion
of the Prussian-Imperial State; which in its turn, in
concrete fact, is identified with the suzerainty of the
Hohenzollern dynasty. All of which greatly simplifies
the plan of cultural salvation, at the same time that it
brings the clear call of human duty to accord with the
sportsmanlike impulsion of patriotic sentiment.

It is true, the run of the reasoning by which such a
patriotic conclusion is reached may in fact be the reverse
of that here given. The initiative and point of departure
may in effect lodge in the patriotic sentiment, from
which the analysis may then be run back into these pro-
founder grounds of human duty and high intent, which
so come to authenticate and sanctify the sportsmanlike
zeal of the patriotic devotee. But the policy to be pur-
sued is more commonly justified on some such moral


The Net Gain 233

grounds as indicated, rather than as an impulsive onset
of sportsmanlike patriotism. And the outcome is th$

1

same in either case; it is an admirably singlemjnded de*
votion to the ascendancy of the Imperial State.

Something has already been said of the economic policy
pursued by the Imperial government. This policy has
been much commended for the benefits it has conferred
on the German people. No doubt, much of this com-
mendation is an uncritical laudation of success; and
earlier passages of this inquiry have shown reasons for
believing that this industrial success has in part been due
to circumstances not connected with the state or its
policy. But after all due allowance for adventitious
circumstances there doubtless remains much to be cred-
ited to the government's policy. A critical scrutiny will
probably bring into relief the meritorious deeds of omis-
sion and riddance that should be credited to the Empire,
but the Imperial policy is by no means without merit on
the side of its deeds of commission also.

The economic policy of the Empire has not run the
same throughout its course, although it has consistently
aimed at warlike power throughout. In its earlier period,
the administration of Bismarck, the aim seems to have
been warlike security rather than Imperial expansion;
since the present reign it has, with fair consistency, been
the latter. But throughout the Imperial era the material
fortunes of the nation have consistently been furthered
and conserved for the ulterior end of warlike power.
To this end it has been sought to make the Fatherland,
as near as practicably may be, a self-contained industrial
community, — a policy which conduces to no other end,


234 Imperial Germany

and which, incidentally but unavoidably, lowers the in-
dustrial efficiency of the nation.

A policy directed to making a nation industrially self-
contained or self-sufficient necessarily depends on mea-
sures of inhibition. It is only by obstructing the free
ramification of the industrial system across the national
frontiers that such self-sufficiency can be achieved. A
self-contained industrial community is one whose in-
dustry draws for its raw materials only on the natural
resources comprised within the national frontiers, whose
population draws its subsistence from the soil of the
country, and which exports only superfluities, or at the
most, articles of consumption that can readily be dis-
pensed with. On the other hand the modern state of the
industrial arts is drawn on an international scale, in that
it works to the best, that is to say the most productive,
effect by the free use of materials drawn from many
sources, far and near, and by such free local specialisation
of industry as will permit the supply of any given line of
goods, finished or half-wrought, to be turned out wher-
ever the facilities for their production are at their best.
This is the chief service of the modern means of trans-
port and communication.

Illustrations of this point should seem needless, yet an
illustrative instance or two drawn from the German
situation may not be out of place. So, it is evident that
German industry would better depend on outside sources
for its necessary supply of copper and petroleum, as well
as for the precious metals, and it is only a degree less
evident that the industrial community at large, as dis-
tinct from special interests, would profit by free access
to outside supplies of iron, coal and lumber. With mod-


The Net Gain 235

ern means of transportation, the economy of such free
access is sufficiently evident. So, again, it is evident
that the German population can find their needed supply
of fruits, grain, meat and fish at less cost by drawing
a large proportion of it from outside, in exchange for
their wrought goods, rather than from the soil of the
Fatherland.

It is only by putting obstacles in the way, or — what
comes to the same thing — by offering special induce-
ments to special interests, that the ramifications of the
industrial system can be prevented from extending across
the national frontiers; which comes to saying that that
end can be achieved only by hindering the industrial
community from taking full advantage of the modern
state of the industrial arts, and so lowering its industrial
efficiency below what it would be in the absence of such
hindrance. This, of course, is commonplace. In the
German case as in others elsewhere, the chief instru-
ment of this obstructive nationalist policy has been the
national tariff. The results achieved* have, of course,
fallen far short of the desired self-sufficiency on the part
of the German nation. To set aside the effects of mod-
ern technology to that extent has not been feasible.

Doubtless the Imperial endeavors to create such a self-
contained war power in the Fatherland have materially
abated the net industrial efficiency of the German com-
munity ; but the effects of the control and inhibition ex-
ercised with this end in view have after all not been so
serious, nor has the net waste involved in armament and
warlike preparation been nearly so grave a matter, as
the mere prima facie statistical computations in the case
would tend to show. The effects of this governmental


236 Imperial Germany

management are not exhausted in the first incidence of
the measures taken ; in effect there is involved something
like that "repercussion" of which the theories of taxation
take account. Most obvious among such secondary ef-
fects, after the analogy of "repercussion," would be the
effect intended by the Imperial tariff system. It has

I diverted industry to less productive channels, but it has
also had much of its intended effect in making the nation
self-dependent in the material respect and has bred an
enhanced attitude of national animosity toward foreign
nationalities. These are valuable assets for the Imperial
purpose. It has also had the further intended effect of
holding the loyal affections of the Agrarians and main-

, taining them in their position of preponderance. These

1 are obvious matters, and notorious.

Less obvious are certain secondary consequences and
circumstances due to this Imperial war policy. In earlier
passages of this inquiry attention has been directed to the
cumulative growth of wasteful expenditures, euphe-
mistically spoken of as a rising standard of living, in the
British community in modern times. Enforced by a
sense of conventional propriety, this wasteful consump-
tion has been institutionalised and so has taken on a
character of moral necessity. As has also been noted,
the German population brought relatively little of this
line of conventions with them when they came into the
modern industrial world, half-a-century ago, having been
trained in a school of penurious frugality under the
earlier regime of small means and princely rapacity.
Now, the Imperial draught on current resources, while
it has not fallen directly and formally on such wasteful
expenditures, has after all acted to reduce the margin of


The Net Gain 237

surplus available for such wasteful consumption ; so that
it has in part, to that extent, merely diverted to warlike
waste what would otherwise have gone into conspicu-
ously wasteful living at the hands of its recipients. In
the measure in which the resulting draught on the na-
tion's income for warlike expenditure has so constituted
a deduction from expenditures on conspicuous waste, it
may on a large view fairly be said to have cost the coun-
try nothing. It may perhaps safely be taken as a matter
of course that the cost of the warlike establishment is not
all to be checked off in this way against bootless private
waste foregone ; but it is equally a matter of course that
under the peculiar circumstances affecting the life of the
German population during this period a very appreciable
compensatory effect of this kind will have been had.

Yet, while warlike expenditures have in the aggregate
undoubtedly exceeded what any reasonable allowance for
conspicuous waste in the service of gentility might
amount to, and while the drain of military and Imperial
needs has doubtless reduced and retarded the growth of
wasteful standards of living, still such a growth has by
no means been altogether wanting. The decencies —
mostly pecuniary and emulative — can not be denied their
equitable claim, and the German people have after all
done something appreciable toward bringing their stand-
ards of decent expenditure into line with those of their
neighbors. The disposable margin of output above (con-
ventionally) necessary consumption has doubtless been
narrowed appreciably by this means. And still, to the
extent to which this policy of warlike expenditure has
reduced the conventionally necessary waste, it has not
only not impoverished the community (directly, at least)


238 Imperial Germany

but has also left the country by so much the more cap-
able to bear any sudden strain put on it by warlike enter-
prise in the event of actual hostilities.

There is another count of the same general bearing
that similarly comes into view on contrasting the German
case with the English. Distinguishable from, but inex-
tricably woven into the broad web of wastefully re-
spectable living in the United Kingdom, is the addiction
to sports. Taken merely as a matter of wasteful con-
sumption — which means in statistical terms approxi-
mately one-hundred per cent — this cultivation of sports
will count up simply as a wasteful dissipation of time and
substance, of course ; but it has its value also as a staple
means of diverting the energies and attention, and there-
fore the acquired proficiencies and the further habitua-
tion, of a large section of the community into this, eco-
nomically speaking, arid channel of dissipation ; whereby
the time, use and effect of this fraction of the population
is diverted from useful ends to the production of a
moderate output of mischief.

When the modern era set in in Germany that country
was not possessed of anything like a full complement of
these genteel and manly dissipations, and what there was
to carry over of a home-bred equivalent was largely jet-
tisoned in the transhipment, so as to leave something of
a margin of energy, intelligence and manly conceit free
to be taken up by any reputable interest that might offer.
Such an outlet, reputable, sensational and conspicuous,
was found for the Fatherland's sporting blood in draft-
ing this susceptible element of the idle classes into the
service; with no loss to the community in any visible
respect and with great gain to the warlike preparations


The Net Gain 239

of the State. All this has in some measure hindered the
free development of sportsmanship in Germany, and has
also doubtless contributed materially to the growth of an
aggressive war spirit.

The comprehensive and exacting demands of universal
military service as it applies to the population at large
has had a somewhat similar effect on the common man,
by diverting interest from the make-believe of sports to
that of war; and it is not at all certain that the loss to
industry from this cause, considerable as it has unques-
tionably been, has not been fully offset by the greater
docility of the working classes resulting from their ex-
perience of surveillance and subjection in the army. A
military organisation is necessarily a servile organisation,
and the discipline of servile obedience will always have
its effect. 1

Running to the same general effect, and working in t
harmonious concert with the servile discipline of the
army, is the government policy of tutelage for the work-
ing class, in the way of hospital service, insurance and
pension arrangements, and the like. In this, again, there
is no visible economic loss, perhaps, even a visible eco-


iSo, universal military service has proved the most effectual
corrective yet brought to bear on the socialistic propaganda and
similar movements of discontent and insubordination; and the
discipline of servility, or of servitude, enforced in the service is
probably to be accounted the chief agency in bringing about the
definitive collapse of socialism in Germany, — definitive, that is,
for the present and the calculable future, and in all respects but
the name, the ritual and the offices. The concomitant warlike
propaganda and unstinted dynastic magniloquence have contrib-
uted their share to this consummation, but except for the posi-
tive training in subjection to personal authority given by univer-
sal military service it is at least very doubtful if the German
socialist movement could by this date have fallen into its present
state of "innocuous desuetude."


f


240 Imperial Germany

nomic gain, in that it offsets some of the untoward effects
of a businesslike quest of profits on the part of capitalist-
employers gifted with a scant regard for the long-term
welfare of the community. What will be the ulterior
consequences of such a policy of tutelage can not well
be surmised, but among these consequences should come
a more passive dependence of the common man on the
directive authority of the government and its bureau-
cratic machinery, together with a slackening of initiative
and of the. spirit of autonomy, and the growth of a certain
partisan loyalty to the reigning house. Past experience
and discipline, it should be remarked, predispose the
workmen for this tutelage and its effects. As is well
known, though not always avowed, under the circum-
stances of the large-scale industry as managed for busi-
ness ends, the indigent workmen are helpless while acting
in severalty, and no effectual remedy for this individual
helplessness has yet been found in any form of self-
directed collective action. The economic value, and the
political expediency, of the crown's tutelage is all the
more evident, and the ulterior consequences of this
tutelage may accordingly be expected to be all the more
far-reaching. But such ulterior consequences are chiefly
to be looked for among the effects of habit, and in the
main they are yet in the future.

It will be seen, then, that both in its cultural antece-
dents and in the current circumstances there are several
factors of considerable scope peculiar to this German
case and converging to an outcome different from what
has resulted, so far, among the English-speaking peoples
as a consequence of their taking over the modern indus-


The Net Gain 241

trial arts, — different, indeed, in a very appreciable de-
gree from what can by any dispassionate line of reason-
ing be looked for among the English-speaking peoples
within the calculable future.

Germany carried over from a recent and retarded past
a State, of the dynastic order, with a scheme of detail
institutions and a popular habit of mind suitable to a
coercive, centralised, and irresponsible control and to the
pursuit of dynastic dominion. Quite unavoidably, the
united Fatherland came under the hegemony of the most
aggressive and most irresponsible — substantially the
most archaic — of the several states that coalesced in its
formation ; and quite as a matter of course the dynastic
spirit of the Prussian state has permeated the rest of
the federated people, until the whole is now very appre-
ciably nearer the spiritual bent of the militant Prussian
State of a hundred years ago than they have been at
any time since the movement for German union began in
the nineteenth century.

This united German community, at the same time,
took over from their (industrially) more advanced neigh-
bors the latest and highly efficient state of the industrial
arts, — wholly out of consonance with their institutional
scheme, but highly productive, and so affording a large
margin disposable for the uses of the dynastic State.
Being taken over ready-made and in the shortest prac-
ticable time, this new technology brought with it virtu-
ally none of its inherent drawbacks, in the way of con-
ventional waste, obsolescent usage and equipment, or
class animosities; and as it has been brought into full
bearing within an unexampled short time, none of these


242 Imperial Germany

drawbacks or handicaps have yet had time to grow to
formidable dimensions.

Owing in part to the same unprecedentedly short period
of its acquirement and installation, and in part to the
nearly unbroken medievalism of the institutional scheme
into which the new technology has been intruded, it has
hitherto had but a slight effect in the w,ay of inducing
new habits of thought on institutional matters among the
German population, such as have formed the institutional
counterpart of its gradual development among the Eng-
lish-speaking peoples. Such institutional consequences
of a workday habituation to any given state of the in-
dustrial arts will necessarily come on by slow degrees
and be worked out only in the course of generations.

In the English case, as has been indicated in earlier
passages, such growth of popular institutions and ideals
of autonomy and initiative as may be observed in modern
times has not placed popular autonomy in anything like
a position of unqualified domination in any of the col-
lective concerns of life. There is much standing over
from the earlier, feudalistic and dynastic, regime, as,
e.g., the crown, the nobility with its house of lords, and
the established church; although these remains so left
over are in a visibly infirm state and have something of
an air of incongruity and anachronism in their modern
setting. "Dead letter" and "legal fiction" have a large
place in English conceptions, and these archaic strands
in the institutional fabric are in great part to be viewed
in that light. At the same time, while the modern insti-
tutional notions of popular autonomy have been en-
croaching on the domain once held by feudalism and the
State, there have, along with this growth, also grown


The Net Gain 243

into the scheme a new range of customary conceptions
and usages that greatly circumscribe the de facto su-
premacy of popular institutions in the British common-
wealth.

Any English-speaking community is a commonwealth
rather than a State ; but none of these communities, for
all that, is a commonwealth of free, equal, and ungraded
men; their citizens are not "masterless men," except in
the cognizance of the law. Discrepancies of wealth have
grown great and found secure lodgment in the institu-
tional scheme at the same time that these modern com-
munities have been falling back on those ancient ideals of
personal insurbordination that make the substance of
their free institutions. And serious discrepancies of
wealth are a matter not provided for in that ancient hered-
itary bent that once made the petty anarchistic groups of
the Baltic culture a practicable engine of social control,
and that is now reasserting itself in democratic discon-
tent. While property rights work no de jure disturbance
of the democratic scheme, their de facto consequences are
sufficiently grave, so that it is doubtful if a free but in-
digent workman in a modern industrial community is at
all better off in point of material circumstances than the
workman on a servile tenure under feudalism. Indeed,
so grave and perplexing has the situation in the English-
speaking countries become, in respect of the de facto
control of the community's material fortunes by the own-
ers of large property, that none but a graceless "pessi-
mist" is conceived to be capable of calling attention to so
sore a difficulty for which no remedy can be discovered.
Yet, while the current administration of affairs may be
carried on by bailiffs of the wealthy and well-to-do, and


/

/


c.


244 Imperial Germany

primarily in their interest, it remains true that in point
of popular sentiment the sovereignty vests collectively in
the common man ; and it will scarcely be questioned that
if brought to a test, this popular sentiment would stub-
bornly assert its paramount dominion.

Partial and incomplete as this shift to popular auton-
omy proves to have been in the English-speaking na-
tions, it has taken some centuries of experience to carry
the community from a position comparable to that occu-
pied by the Germans at the formation of the Empire to
the compromise in force among these peopleis today.
This growth of free institutions and insubordination,
such as it is, has apparently come partly of the positive
discipline in mechanistic habits of thought given by the
modern industrial arts, but partly also as a reassertion
of the hereditary anarchistic bent of this population in the
absence of duly rigorous circumstances going to enforce
a scheme of coercion and loyalty. The net outcome may
be rated as a gain or loss, according as one is inclined to
see it. But it is an outcome of the working of the mod-
ern industrial system, and if it is to be rated as an in-
firmity it is also to be accepted as one of the concomitants
of that system, inseparable from it in the long run be-
cause it is made of the same substance as this technolog-
ical system.

It is this "long run" that is still wanting in the Ger-
man case, and it must necessarily be all the longer a
run for the care taken by the Imperial State to prevent
such an outcome. Meantime the Imperial State has
come into the usufruct of this state of the industrial
arts without being hampered with its long-term institu-
tional consequences. Carrying over a traditional bias of


The Net Gain 245

Romantic loyalty, infused anew with a militant patriotism
by several successful wars, and irritably conscious of na-
tional power in their new-found economic efficiency, the
feudalistic spirit of the population has yet suffered little
if any abatement from their brief experience as a mod-
ern industrial community. And borne up by its ancient
tradition of prowess and dynastic aggression, the Prus-
sian-Imperial State has faithfully fostered this militant
spirit and cultivated in the people the animus of a soli-
darity of prowess. Hence a pronounced retardation in
the movement toward popular autonomy, due to follow
from habituation to the mechanistic logic of the modern

tab

technology and industrial organisation.

In this work of retarding the new and conserving the
old the Imperial State has been greatly furthered by
finding ready to hand a large and serviceable body of
men, useless for industrial purposes by force of conven-
tional and temperamental disabilities, who have eagerly
entered the career of prowess opened to them by the
warlike enterprise of the Empire and have zealously
fallen in with the spirit of that policy, — such being the
run of traditions out of which they have come in the
recent past. Indeed, so large, so strongly biassed, and
so well entrenched in the use and wont of the Father-
land, have this contingent of specialists in prowess been,
that even with a very moderate degree of moral support
from the constituted authorities, perhaps even on a foot-
ing of tolerance — if such a footing were conceivable under
the Imperial auspices — their organisation into a special-
ised corps of war-leaders should have followed as a mat-
ter of course ; and the presence of such a body of pro-
fessional military men, pervaded with a headlong enthu-


'l


246 Imperial Germany

siasm for warlike enterprise, would of itself have had
the effect of heightening the war spirit abroad in the
community at large and inducing a steady drift of senti-
ment leading to a warlike climax.

It has been the usual fortune of military establish-
ments and warlike class organisations presently to fall
into a certain state of moral decay, whereby rank, rou-
tine, perquisites and intemperate dissipation come to en-
gage the best attention of the specialists in war. Like
other works of use and wont this maturing of the war-
like establishment takes time, and the corps of war
specialists under the Imperial auspices has not yet had
time to work out the manifest destiny of warlike estab-
lishments in this respect; although it may be admitted
that "irregularities" of the kind alluded to have by no
means been altogether wanting. The corrosion of mili-
tary use and wont, in the way of routine, subordination,
arrogance, indolence and dissipation, has perhaps gone
so far as would unfit this picked body of men for the
duties of citizenship under any but an autocratic govern-
ment, but they have probably suffered no appreciable im-
pairment in respect of their serviceability for war and
its advocacv.

In the same connection, it is also credibly reported,
though not officially confirmed, that the highly efficient
? school system of the Empire, perhaps especially of Prus-
sia, is, under Imperial auspices, made a vehicle for prop-
aganda of the same patriotism of prowess that per-
vades the body of officers. Something of the kind is
known to be true of the Prussian universities. Much
can of course be done toward giving a bent of this kind


The Net Gain 247

to the incoming generation by well-directed inculcation
during the impressionable period of schoolboy life.

One further item should be included in any recital of
the special circumstances that go to make Imperial Ger-
many and shape its destiny. Among the gains that have
come to the Imperial State, and by no means least among
these gains if one is to judge by the solicitous attention
given it, is the use of the modern technology for war-
like equipment and strategy. It has already been noted
that the railway system, as also the merchant marine
and its harbor equipment, has been developed under sur-
veillance, with a view to its serviceability in war; in part
this transportation system has been projected and built
avowedly for strategic use, in part under specifications
and with subventions designed to make it an auxiliary
arm. The importance of such a competently organised
transportation system in modern strategy needs no argu-
ment ; its bearing on the animus of the statesmen at whose
disposal so efficient a factor of warlike equipment is
held, as well as on that of the people at large, should
also not be overlooked. 1 But beyond this, and doubtless
of graver import, is the direct service rendered by the
modern technology and applied science to the art of war.
Since the modern technology fell into the hands of the
Germans they have taken the lead in the application of
this technological knowledge to what may be called the

1 "Ih£Xje is something in the possession of superior strength
most dangerous, in a moral view, to its possessor. Brought in
contact with semi-civilised man, the European, with his endow-
ments and effective force so immeasurably superior, holds him as
little higher than the brute, and as born equally for his service.
He feels that he has a natural right, as it were, to his obedience,
and that this obedience is to be measured, not by the powers of
the barbarian, but by the will of his conqueror. Resistance be-


(


248 Imperial Germany

industrial arts of war, with at least no less zeal and no
less effect than in its utilisation in the arts of peace. In
the "armed peace" of Europe, Imperial Germany has
consistently aimed to be the most heavily armed and the
readiest for any eventual breach of the peace. These
preparations, it has been usual to declare, have been made
With a view to keeping the peace. Some weight may per-
haps attach to these declarations. They have been made
by statesmen of the school of Frederick the Great. The
run of the facts in the case is that throughout the forty-
four years of its life-history hitherto, and more par-
ticularly through the latter quarter of a century, prepara-
tion for war on a large scale has been going forward un-
interruptedly, and at a constantly accelerating rate,
whether as measured in terms of absolute magnitude or
as measured in terms of expenditure per capita of the
population, or of percentages of current income or of
accumulated wealth, or as compared with the correspond-
ing efforts of neighboring states.

This drift toward a warlike fatality has been facili-
tated by subsidiary consequences that should, in their im-


coraes a crime to be washed out only in the blood of the vic-
tim. The tale of such atrocities is not confined to the Span-
iard." — Prescott, Conquest of Peru, bk. iv.

Such loss of moral perspective through an overweening sense
of power appears to follow equally whether the stronger is or
is not superior in any other respect, — perhaps even more pro-
nouncedly in the latter case. The Huns and Turks show it in
their dealings with the Romanised Europeans, just as the
Children of Israel show it on contact with Canaanites and
Philistines, and as it appears again in the animus of Gauls,
Goths, Visigoths and Vandals, in their time. So also the swag-
gering Elizabethan "gentleman adventurer" in his degree, as
well as the Spanish conquistador or the Prussian-Imperial states-
man. It is the moral attitude of the pot-hunter towards the fur-
bearing animals. One does not keep faith with the. fur-bear-
ing animals.


The Net Gain 249

mediate incidence, seem to have no bearing of the kind.
So, e.g., their great success in business and industry
inspired the commonplace German subjects with a
gree of confidence and self-complacency that impresses
their neighbors as conceit and braggadocio. Human na-
ture being what it is, it is unavoidable that German sub-
jects should take the German successes to heart in this
way and that they should fall into something of an over-
bearing attitude toward other nationalities, and on simi-
larly sufficient grounds it follows that those who are
brought in contact with this very natural magisterial
swagger find it insufferable. All of which engenders a
resentful animosity, such as will place all international
relations on a precarious footing. So, by force of cir-
cumstances over which no control could be had, and
which it must be admitted have not been sought to be
controlled, it has come about that their economic success
has brought the German people an abundance of ill-will ;
not unmixed with envy, but good and competent ill-will
for all that.

It may be worth noting that something of the same
sense of estrangement is visible in the attitude of the
Continental peoples toward the English of the swagger-
ing Elizabethan times, and after. But the resulting
animosity in that case appears not to have reached so
high a pitch, and the insular position of the English
served in any case to prevent any such animosity from
becoming a menace to the public peace. The conscious-
ness of this pervading ill-will has doubtless contributed
appreciably to that patriotic solidarity of prowess in the
German people on which the warlike policy of the Im-
perial government leans, and so has served to accelerate


250 Imperial Germany

the shifting of the Empire's forces, material and spir-
itual, into a strategical position incompatible with any
but a warlike outcome.

Latterday events have so turned as to cut off specu-
lation as to the chances of war and peace contained in
this posture of German affairs. And efforts to place or
shift or distribute the blame for the state of war into
which Europe has fallen would be little if any more
profitable. 1 Yet it may not be altogether beside the point
to look farther into the circumstances, as distinct from
the diplomatic reasons, which have brought events to
this climax. It may safely be said that the outbreak came
as a shock to everyone; but it was a surprise to none
but the diplomatists, and to them it was only a diplomatic
surprise. Along with the shock there was a perceptible
sense of relief as from long suspense. It may also safely
be said that it was not necessary to desire the war in
order to bring it to a head, if only care was taken to
make the preparations so complete as to make war un-
avoidable.

The Imperial government is said not to have desired
the war, but the proposition is not formulated to the
effect that the Imperial government expected to avoid
this war in the long run. It has been tacitly assumed —

iMuch has been said and little has been accomplished in the
diplomatic recrimination by which the blame has been sought
to be apportioned. All parties to this exchange of blame deny
any intention to bring on the war; the German denial being on
the whole the more voluble. The reason for this denial is the
need of it. There can be no harm in recognising the entire
disingenuousness of all parties to the controversy. That the
German volume of prevarication is the larger is something of
a fortuitous circumstance, due to their more urgent diplomatic
need. With the same opportunities and provocation it' is doubt-
ful if British diplomacy would not have done just as well, and
it is not doubtful that the Russians would haive done better.


The Net Gain


251


the overt affirmation is officially disavowed — that the
conjuncture of circumstances has made recourse to war
unavoidable, and it is for Germany specifically that the
war has so been recognised as unavoidable. Had there
been no Imperial Germany included in the concert of
nations the outcome might not have been substantially
different in the long run, so far as regards Europe's
eventual fortunes in respect of peace and war ; but with
Germany included there has been no room to doubt that,
whenever this prospective war should break out, Germany
would be the seat of the disturbance, whether on the
offensive or defensive. On this account the case of Ger-
many is of especial interest in its bearing on the con-
junction of circumstances.

The decisive circumstance in this German case is what
has been strikingly summed up in a phrase as Germany's
need of "a place in the sun." The meaning of the phrase
is sufficiently plain and is currently accepted as sufficiently
cogent, and there need be no quarrel with it. But it is
well to call to mind the commonplace and obvious fact
that this need is a need on the part of the Imperial State,
and that the population of Germany — the inhabitants,
individually or collectively — have no material interest in
this quest of a place in the sun, except the sentimental
interest due to that solidarity of prowess that has been
alluded to before. It is a need of sportsmanlike patriot-
ism ; and the material fortunes of the common man
could not conceivably be benefited in the slightest degree
by a successful pursuit of this quest.

It lies in the nature of a dynastic State to seek do-
minion, that being the whole of its nature. This Im-
perial State has had a certain situation to take care of


1


252 Imperial Germany

and to make use of, as has been outlined above. The
industrial community at its disposal has been gaining
in efficiency, and therefore in point of serviceability as
a material basis for the Imperial policy; but this gain
or at least the rate of acceleration of this gain, has
slightly slackened off in the later years. The rate of
gain in population has also declined, indicating among
other things an unprofitable rise in the under-class
standard of living, — itself a deduction of increasing con-
sequence to be made from the net output of industry
available for Imperial use. The like wasteful consump-
tion among the wealthy and well-to-do classes has mean-
time been taking the same untoward upward turn, — un-
toward in that it acts to narrow the margin of disposable
surplus for Imperial use. In spite of the partial repres-
sion and domestication of the socialist partisans, under-
class discontent has also increased of late years, par-
ticularly, it is said, in the immediately recent past. These
are elements not of present weakness, perhaps, but of
eventually threatening weakness. While the coefficient
of movement in these several lines is still a coefficient
of gain, it is in each and severalof these lines a gradually
and cumulatively declining coefficient.

Of themselves these untoward, or rather prospectively
untoward, changes have, at least hitherto, brought no
positive or absolute weakening of the material founda-
tions of the Imperial State. But war and dynastic poli-
tics is an emulative enterprise, competitive ; and in com-
petitive enterprises strength is a relative, not an abso-
lute, magnitude. While the Fatherland has been gain-
ing in material powers, its competitors in world politics
have also been gaining; and latterly these competitors


The Net Gain 253

have on the whole been gaining at a cumulatively accel-
erating rate.

Other European countries, as, e.g., France, Italy, Rus-
sia, and the minor and outlying nations, have also in-
creasingly come in for the usufruct of the same machine
technology to which Imperial Germany owes its domi-
nant place in the industrial world; and while none of
them may have made, or even prospectively will be ex-
pected to make, gains of the same absolute importance
as those recently made by Germany, they still have al-
ready begun to narrow the lead of Germany in the in-
dustrial field. Their larger resources, more commodious
emplacement, and greater aggregate mass will make their
competition sufficiently serious even without the same
efficiency per capita. So, e.g., even on a smaller coeffi-
cient, Russia, with its large mass and unlimited re-
sources, might be counted on presently to overtake Ger-
many in point of aggregate industrial strength, and there-
fore presumably in point of warlike capacity; and Rus-
sia has of late been making disquieting advances in
modern industry. Relatively to the situation at large,
therefore, Germany has latterly been gaining, if at all,
only at a lessened rate. It is perhaps safe to say that
in this relative sense the Empire has latterly begun to
lose. It is even possible that the statesmen of the Em-
pire have come to perceive the fact, or have at any rate
begun to be apprehensive of some such untoward even-
tuality. The best guess of a shrewd outsider not un-
duly influenced by the clamorous laudation of the Ger-
man achievements would probably be that the date at
which Germany ceased to gain in industry and com-
merce, relatively to the situation at large, came some


254 Imperial Germany

»

half-a-dozen years ago. At the same time, this date
marks no abrupt shift in the course of events and has
nothing of a catastrophic meaning.

So far, therefore, as regards the material conditions
underlying the Imperial policies of dominion, it would
appear that these were in their most propitious con-
juncture for Imperial utilisation some time, say, within
the past half-decade. On the other hand, as regards the
factors making directly for a present recourse to arms,
the military and naval preparations of the Imperial gov-
ernment were going forward all this while at an accel-
erated pace. In absolute terms, it is not to be doubted,
the equipment and personnel have grown very appre-
ciably larger, and at the same time more efficient per
capita, year by year. But here again it is doubtful if
this absolute increase in warlike capacity is safely to be
counted as a sustained gain in relative warlike force,
relatively to the European situation at large. The other
European nations have also been making gains, also
at an accelerated pace, especially during the past few
years ; and it should seem that even if the coefficient of
increase has been slighter, yet the resulting massive ag-
gregate of increase in warlike capacity among the na-
tions with whom Imperial Germany has had to make
up its account has been such as would, during the last
few years, throw the net balance of the differential gain
slightly against the Empire's score.

This posture of affairs, consequently, has placed the
Empire on the defensive. Such, at all events, is the
avowed apprehension of the matter on the part of the
Imperial statesmen. The German theory of a defensive
offense is sufficiently well known. It has been the burden


The Net Gain 255

of voluminous diplomatic explanations bearing on cer-
tain late occurrences. Placed as the Imperial State has
been, with large schemes of dominion, partly avowed and
partly matter of common notoriety, and with grievances
of obstruction to its legitimate movements waiting to
be redressed, the strategy of the defensive offense should
demand an unfolding of all available force at the point
in this precession of differentials when the cumulative
Imperial strength was at its best, relatively to the cumu-
lative strength to be counted with in its environment.
Doubtless these matters have had the solicitous atten-
tion of the statesmen. But the statesmen have been
patriotic subjects (and sovereign), and being nearer to
their own work of preparation than to that of their
prospective enemies, in spite of any conceivable efficiency
of espionage, they appear to have unduly discounted
the gains latterly made by the latter, or perhaps rather
they have somewhat overrated their own elements of
strength. With the result that the defensive offense has
apparently been delayed beyond the most propitious date.
Certain concrete items in this large scheme of Imperial
dominion' and strategy may be cited as conducing to this
untoward delay: So it would appear that the latterday
rate both of recuperation and of new growth on the
part of Russia has been unaccountably undervalued by
the Imperial statesmen, both in the economic field and
as regards military equipment and organisation. The
like can, of course, scarcely be said for the case of France,
nor for the United Kingdom; although in the case of
the latter there appears to have been some appreciable,
and for the Imperial cause unfortunate, discrepancy be-
tween the effective support tendered by the British col-


256 Imperial Germany

onies and the German statesmen's estimates of it. Minor
states involved in the present conflict appear also to have
been disappointingly strong and ready. On the other
hand the colonial possessions of the Empire have dur-
ing these years not been in a securely defensible condi-
tion, and it has apparently not been found practicable to
give them the necessary security by surrounding them
with the requisite diplomatic defences. There would
rightly be some reluctance about risking the loss of these
colonies when a respite would add materially to the
chances of holding them- intact, whether by diplomatic
guaranties or by warlike defences. Specifically, the con-
tinued occupation of Kiau Chao, e.g., could be rendered
reasonably secure with a suitable allowance of time to
complete its defences. In like manner there was the
sanguine, perhaps over-sanguine, project for taking over
Turkey in Asia, or more specifically the Mesopotamian-
Chaldaean tract and the right of way to the Persian gulf,
coupled with the rehabilitation of the Ottoman power as
a dependent state under the Imperial suzerainty. This
latter may well have been the most seductive provocation
to procrastinate unduly in the execution of that defen-
sive offense to which the state has been committed by
its policy of dominion. There was much to have been
gained here, both as an outlet for the Empire's com-
merce and disposable population and as a direct accession
of military force, if only the necessary work could have
been accomplished within the time limit imposed by the
menacing growth of these other nations. On any cir-
cumspect calculation of the convergence of events it
should have been reasonably plain that the time required
for this project would unduly postpone the day of ac-


The Net Gain 257

counts. The miscalculation at this point appears to have
lain chiefly in an overrating of what could be done with
the Turkish establishment to bring it up to an adequate
level of serviceability within a scant allowance of time.
In any case it would appear that the defensive offense
had been delayed beyond the date at which the warlike
force of the Empire wfts at its best, relatively to the
situation at large.

Again it is bootless, of course, to speculate on what
might have been. It may be more to the point to inquire
into the effectual value and consequence of this Prus-
sian-Imperial diversion in its bearing on the civilisation
of Christendom. The pursuit of the Imperial policy has
led Christendom into an unexampled war, — an outcome
which all men deprecate, whether sincerely or other-
wise. At the best rating that can be had, the current
war will necessarily be accounted an untoward episode.
In the perspective of history it may also some day be
so rated. Meantime the fact should not be lost sight of
that it was entered on in a sense deliberately and ad-
visedly, and with the best intentions on both sides. This
is particularly true for the Prussian-Imperial statesmen
and their strategy of defensive offense, though the bona
fides of the party of the second part is perhaps more
perspicuously evident on the face of the returns. In-
terest, therefore, can not center on the questibn of praise
and blame. Neither can the purpose of the contest,
as seen from either side, claim sustained attention, since
on the one hand the aim on either side appears to have
been sufficiently creditable in the eyes of those in whom
discretion vested, while on the other hand the contest


258 Imperial Germany

will run its course to much the same outcome, and carry
substantially the same consequences, whatever the aim
may have been.

It is a plain and easy generalisation that the more con-
sequential and enduring effects of the conflict will be of
an immaterial nature, in the way of bias and sentiment,
affecting the spiritual and intellectual outlook of the
peoples, and so coming to an ulterior effect in more or
less of a revision of the current institutional scheme.
Hitherto the distinctive gains made by this civilisation
have been made by way of peace and industry, — by
"gains" being understood whatever has conduced to an
advance in the direction of the latterday cultural situa-
tion among the distinctively Occidental peoples, as con-
trasted with the cultural scheme of their own barbarian
past, in, the Dark and Middle Ages. By the generality
of civilised men this advance will be rated as, on the
whole, an improvement over what it has displaced. Such
an appraisal, however, is a matter of taste and opinion,
in which the habituation embodied in this modern cul-
tural scheme is itself taken as a base-line of appraisal;
and it could, therefore, not be accepted as definitive in
any argument on the intrinsic merits of this culture, in
contrast with any other. But it is useful as showing that
the current consensus, such as there is, runs to the effect
that the change from medievalism to the modern regime
is, on the whole, to be rated as an advance, and that
consequently this meaning of the term is the only one
that is at home in current usage in these premises.

This modern regime, like any other cultural scheme,
late or early, is possessed of a certain systematic soli-
darity, due to the fact that is pervaded -by a certain char-


The Net Gain 259

acteristic logic and perspective, a certain line of habitual
conceptions having a degree of congruity among them-
selves, a "philosophy" as it would once have been called.
The exceptions, digressions, excursions and discordant
incumbrances carried over by tradition from earlier usage
or drawn in from side lines of interest or of constraint, —
all this is scarcely to be rated as adventitious or neg-
ligible, and it will bulk large in any given cultural scheme,
particularly in such a one where the range is wide and
the changes are rapid and diverse. Yet, owing to the
fact that the community which carries this scheme and
is exposed to its discipline is made up of individuals
each and several of which is a single agent and is there-
fore bent as a whole by any habituation to which he is
exposed, it follows that just in so far as it is possible
to conceive any given cultural complex as a distinctive
scheme, it will be characterised by one generally pervad-
ing habit of mind, — by no means universally prevalent,
but prevalent so extensively and pronouncedly as to be
effectual as a common run. Where and in so far as this
solidarity of habit does not prevail, the cultural situa-
tion is currently recognised as lacking homogeneity, as
being a hybrid civilisation, an unstable or transitional
phase, etc.

As regards the civilisation of modern Christendom in
this bearing, what marks it off pervasively and dynami-
cally from its own earlier phases as well as from other
cultures with which it is contrasted, is a certain char-
acter of matter-of-fact; showing itself on the institu-
tional side, e.g., in a nearly universal avowed repudia-
tion — often futile enough in practice — of all personal dis-
crimination and prerogative; and showing itself more


260 Imperial Germany

unequivocally on the side of knowledge, in an imper-
sonal, mechanical conception of objective things and
events. So, the most characteristic habit of thought that
pervades this modern civilisation, in high or low degree,
is what has, in the simplest terms hitherto given it, been
called the mechanistic conception. Its practical work-
ing-out is the machine technology, of which the intel-
lectual precipitate and counterpart is the exact sciences.
Associated with these in such a way as to argue a cor-
relation, of the nature of cause and effect, is the modern
drift toward free or popular institutions. 1

Coercion, personal dominion, self-abasement, subjec-
tion, loyalty, suspicion, duplicity, ill-will, — these things
do not articulate with the mechanistic conception. What-
ever human experience conduces to this range of habits
of thought will, by so much, act to retard and defeat the


x This pervasion of modern communities by such a mechanistic
conception and by t bias inimical to prerogative and personal gov-
ernment is, of course, to be taken as a matter of habituation and
acquired bent, not a derangement or deflection of the underlying
instinctive proclivities of human nature. Yet, the habituation
leading to this mechanistic, matter-of-fact drift in Western civi-
lisation may presumably be better conceived as a disciplined
obsolescence of habitual elements derived from the recent past
and no longer enforced by current circumstances, instead of
newly acquired habits of thought coercively enforced upon a
human nature to which they are essentially alien. It would
appear to be a work of divestment or riddance, quite as much
as of investiture or inculcation of a new proficiency. In the
absence of, or under reduced pressure from, discipline condu-
cive to personal subjection and abasement, or to the interpreta-
tion of objective things and relations in the personalised terms
of magical or occult forces, it may be conceived that human
faculty will, in a sense atavistically, assert its native bent of
matter-of-fact in both of these cognate directions. With the
, obsolescence of putative occult powers and qualities in the con-
ception of objective reality, such as is required by the machme
technology, the like obsolescence of a similar habitual imputa-
tion of occult grounds of privilege, authority, and subservience
will take effect in the institutional scheme.


The Net Gain 261

cultural drift toward matter-of-fact; and any scheme
or order of control that runs on these grounds will not
enduringly contain that range of conceits and convictions
that make up the modern body of theoretical knowledge
and the principles of the common law. Personal do-
minion is essentially incongruous with the logic and per-
spective of this modern culture, and is therefore system-
atically incompatible with its ascendency. Warlike ex-
perience is experience in personal rule, spoliation, loyalty,
hate, subordination and duplicity. Therefore, whatever
may be the nominal balance of profit and loss in the

way of what is called the "fortunes of war," the net con-

*

sequences will be much the same ; and these consequences
can not but be of the nature of retardation to Western
civilisation in those respects that mark it as Western
and modern.

This warlike-dynastic diversion in which the Imperial
State has been the protagonist is presumably of a tran-
sient nature, even though it can by no means be expected
to be ephemeral. The Prussian-Imperial system may be
taken as the type-form and embodiment of this reaction
against the current of modern civilisation ; although that
State is not thereby to be accounted the sole advocate of
medievalism among the nations, nor is it a whole-hearted
advocate. In the long run, in point of the long-term hab-
ituation enforced by its discipline, the system is neces-
sarily inimical to modern science and technology, as well
as to the modern scheme of free or popular institutions,
inasmuch as it is incompatible with the mechanistic
animus that underlies these habits of thought ; not neces-
sarily hostile in respect of the sentiments that animate
its statesmen and spokesmen in their attitude towards


262 Imperial Germany

these landmarks of the Western civilisation, but inimical
in respect of the set and fashion of the habit of mind
which it inculcates.

Yet the Imperial system of dominion, statecraft and
warlike enterprise necessarily rests on the modern me-
chanistic science and technology, for its economic foun-
dations and its material equipment as well as for its
administrative machinery and the strategy necessary to
its carrying on. In this, of course, it is in the same case
with other modern states. Nothing short of the fullest
usufruct of this technology will serve the material needs
of the modern warlike State; yet the discipline incident
to a sufficiently unreserved addiction to this mechanistic
technology will unavoidably disintegrate the institutional
foundations of such a system of personal dominion as
goes to make up and carry on a dynastic State.

The Imperial State, therefore, may be said to be un-
able to get along without the machine industry, and
also, in the long run, unable to get along with it; since
this industrial system in the long run undermines the
foundations of the State. So that what the Prussian-
Imperial State is, in effect, contending for in its offen-
sive defense of German dominion, is something in the
nature of a reprieve for personal government; but the
situation has this singular feature that whether the Im-
perial State wins or loses in the contest for the hegemony,
the movement of cultural reversion for which in sub-
stance it is contending stands to gain at least to the ex-
tent of a substantial, though presumably temporary, im-
pairment and arrest of Western civilisation at large.

While these and the like immaterial consequences of
warlike enterprise — its cultural consequences in the con-


The Net Gain 263

ventional sense of the term — are doubtless its most sub-
stantial and far-reaching effects, the material cost and
the economic sequelae of the conflict in which this con-
cert of dynastic enterprise has culminated are also no
slight matter. It is usual, especially among the peace ad-
vocates, to speak eloquently of the waste of property and
life involved in warfare, and to make much of the con-
sequent impoverishment of the countries at war; and
no doubt rightly so. So much as the common peace
advocate takes note of in these premises being taken for
granted, then, there remains to add and deduct what
further items a dispassionate scrutiny necessarily would
bring into the account.

As to the destruction of property, it has been noted
as worthy of remark by many careful writers that coun-
tries overrun and devastated by armed force in modern
times recover their material prosperity in a surprisingly
short time, — surprising, that is, to the historians who
record the facts without much reflection on the concatena-
tion of circumstances that bring about this prompt re-
cuperation. Their capacity for surprise in this connec-
tion is in some degree helped out by standard economic
theory, which makes much of "production goods as a
productive agency. The material equipment in such a
case of devastation will have been greatly damaged, and
that is always a handicap ; but the immaterial equipment
of technological proficiency — the state of the industrial
arts considered as a system of habits of thought — will
have suffered relatively slight damage, provided the sea-
son of hostilities is not protracted beyond expectation,
and what damage it may have suffered in the way of a
loss of specially trained personnel, is relatively easy to


264 Imperial Germany

remedy under the current technological system. This
immaterial equipment is, far and away, the more import-
ant productive agency in the case; although, it is true,
economists have not been in the habit of making much
of it, since it is in the main not capable of being stated
in terms of price, and so does not appear in the statis-
tical schedules of accumulated wealth.

On the other hand, under settled conditions of peace
and commonplace prosperity a large share — commonly
somewhat over fifty per cent — of the customary, and con-
ventionally necessary, consumption of the population will,
as has already been remarked before, consist of articles
whose use is only conventionally necessary, and the con-
sumption of which may be discontinued without physi-
cal hardship and without lowering the productive ca-
pacity of the population. In time of stress, as in a sea-
son following warlike devastation, the conventions gov-
erning the necessary consumption of decent superfluities
are likely to be seriously demoralised, so that this "un-
productive" consumption will be greatly reduced for
the time being ; at the same time, and on similar grounds,
the conventionally decent avoidance of productive work,
whether on the strength of sacred or of secular tabu, will
also fall somewhat into abeyance. Of minor importance,
but of the same general bearing, is the slighter need of
and the slighter attention given to sports and similar dis-
sipations at such seasons of general stress, when every-
one has something more interesting to occupy the atten-
tion. The "secret" of this phenomenon of recuperation
would accordingly be that under these circumstances the
net production of the community rises nearly to the level
of its gross productive capacity, or at least comes much


The Net Gain 265

nearer that level than in piping time of peace. While
there need be no intention, therefore, to minimise the
devastation of war, it appears also that the gravity of
the material destruction involved may readily be over-
rated.

The economic effects of war finance should also not
be overlooked. Modern wars, as, e.g., the one now cur-
rent, are largely conducted on a credit basis. Taxes and
similar imposts, mandatory and voluntary, of course, play
their part, and these might also afford interesting topics
of inquiry ; but war-taxes are after all of much the same
character and incidence as taxes for governmental con-
sumption in time of peace, and a pursuit of their idiosyn-
crasies in this place would lead too far afield. War loans,
and all the class of credit extensions in which they be-
long are, on the other hand, so large and consequential
a feature of the case as to merit some special attention.

The aggregate of war taxes, plus loans and similar
obligations floated on occasion of the war, may be taken
as roughly indicating the aggregate wealth consumed in
prosecuting the enterprise, not including the incidental
waste due to devastation of one kind and another. This
is of itself a sufficiently notable matter; but it is also
sufficiently notorious, and it is matter for the eloquence
of the peace advocates. An ulterior effect of these fiscal
transactions has not had the same degree of attention.
War loans, and floating obligations that will presently
be funded, effect a re-distribution of wealth, which may
not be of large proportions as counted in percentages on
the face of the securities issued, but which will bulk
large in the aggregate and in the long run because of
the large volume of these obligations and because of their


266 Imperial Germany

presumably perpetual character. The demand for war
loans invariably advances the rate of interest on securi-
ties of its class, which leads immediately to a rerating
of outstanding securities with a fixed income, at a lower
capitalisation. Apart from disturbancies of trade and
markets incident to the war, property is in effect recap-
italised on the basis of a higher rate of interest. 1 The
volume of obligations is also increased, probably by a
figure not far short of the total war obligations issued. 2
At the same time neither the aggregate property in hand
among the nations of Christendom, nor their aggregate
productive efficiency, is increasing at any comparable
rate, if there is not rather a decrease than an increase
in these items. The new claims on the aggregate income
so established by this issue of securities, and the covert
lien on the aggregate wealth in hand conveyed by these
instruments, constitute in effect a transfer of ownership
to the holders of these securities of an undivided inter-
est in the community's wealth amounting approximately
to the aggregate face value of the securities issued. By
that much, the usufruct of the productive capacity of
these countries passes to the holders of the securities.


!See Note V, page 323.

2 It has been estimated, with apparent care and good faith,
that the current cost of the war now in progress, to the United
Kingdom alone, aggregates some seven-and-a-half million dol-
lars a day. This sum may without exaggeration be tripled to
represent the current aggregate cost of the war to the bellig-
erents. This does not include the costs incurred in this behalf
by neutrals, or the obligations issued by them. It will perhaps
not be excessively wide of the mark to assume that the volume
of loans outstanding increases at the rate so indicated; since
the loans to neutrals on account of war costs will probably offset
whatever costs incurred by the belligerents are not defrayed out
of loans.


The Net Gain 267

And since no wealth and no productive capacity is created
by this enterprise, it should follow that the ownership
of the existing aggregate of wealth, including the capi-
talisable productive resources of all kinds, personal and
impersonal, will be redistributed in the measure which
these considerations may indicate. How far the newly
credited claims may, in the end, fall short of the total
wealth in hand or of the aggregate usufruct of the pro-
ductive capacity of the Western nations it would be haz-
ardous to estimate just yet. Incidentally, this extensive
transfer of ownership raises an interesting question also
as to whose discretion is to guide the affairs of these
nations on this new pecuniary footing, and in whose
behalf.

The loss of life incident to the enterprise is doubtless
a more serious matter than the loss of wealth, and a
more interesting one even apart from any humanitarian
reflections on the hardships and obscenities of the cam-
paign. But there are certain (economically) mitigating
circumstances that should not be overlooked, also in this
connection. Probably the most consequential loss as
touches the personnel engaged in the warlike operations
is the loss of morale, loss of the frame of mind service-
able for peaceful occupations, due to the discipline of
the service, to incidental dissipation and "irregularities,"
to exposure to the vicissitudes of a vocation made up of
those things that would in private life be called arson,
treason, murder, larceny, and the rest of what the deca-
logue forbids. These are infirmities that unavoidably
beset the personnel and unavoidably lower their indus-


268 Imperial Germany

trial serviceability. 1 The like is true for the physical in-
firmities due to disease and exposure.

But at this point, as at so many others, there is a
margin between gross and net; although the margin at
this point may not be so wide as in the matter of the in-
dustrial equipment spoken of above. As regards the ac-
tual mortality caused by such a war, the loss of econom-
ically valuable personnel is by no means precisely the
same as the aggregate loss of life. Even under a sys-
tem of conscription and universal service there is a de-
gree of self-selection takes effect in the formation of a
military or naval force. Those individuals whose tem-
peramental bent fits them for a military rather than an
industrial occupation are after all drawn into the service
somewhat more inclusively, and to the (slight) extent
to which such a selective process is operative in drawing
men into the service it will also be effective as touches
the mortality in the service. As regards the rank and
file the mortality will probably have little of this selec-
tive effect, particularly under a system of universal con-
scription. But the case is not the same as regards the
officers, especially where they are drawn by self -selection


1 Such experience of irresponsible outrage and irremediable
calamity as is brought on by war has also the effect of driving
the men (and women) exposed to it into recourse to magical
and supernatural aid, — the futility of which is only known, not
proven. With ill concealed glee the clergy are already calling
attention to a recrudescence of rel'gious superstition among the
troops engaged on both sides in the current campaign, and the
like evidence that common sense is being superseded by spas-
modic sentiment is to be seen also among the unfortunate ones
left at home, whose addiction to devout observances is said to
have greatly increased. Of much the same bearing, by some
sort of inversion or repercussion, is also the notably increased
volume of profanity in which, it is credibly reported, the osten-
sible unbelievers are seeking refuge from their sense of help-
lessness and incurable wrong.


The Net Gain 269

chiefly from the well-to-do classes, as happens, e.g., in
the case of the Germans and British. These will pre-
sumably be men peculiarly fit for warlike enterprise,
and so presumably unfit for the arts of peace. Also,
whatever may be the case in respect of their congenital/
fitness for war, it should be noted that officers commonly I
are gentlemen, in the several senses which that word)

1

conveys; and gentlemen commonly have no industrial
value. Indeed, as bears on the net industrial efficiency
of the community they have appreciably less than no
value, being typically unproductive consumers. The
mortality among the officers may therefore be set down
as net gain, in the economic respect; and since they will
at an average be highly efficient consumers, their demise
should count as an economic relief to the community at
large, and count at something more than a mere per-
capita rating.

Among persons who are solicitous to credit warfare
with many evil consequences it is not unusual to hold
that the mortality of war works a permanent detriment
to the population by destroying "the best" of the male
population and selectively leaving the dependents, delin-
quents and defectives to continue the breed. The modi-
cum of truth in this sensational allegation is not to be
denied, but the necessary qualifications are nearly suffi-
cient to set it aside. "The best," as contemplated by
this proposition, are the best for the warlike purpose,
not necessarily for any other. And under the Mende-
lian rule of heredity, breeding from what may be called
the "depauperate" representatives of this hybrid stock
should in the course of some two or three generations
give the same results as breeding from the best ex-


270 Imperial Germany

emplars. Some slight and transient lowering of the aver-
age is doubtless to be looked for from this cause; but
the current state of the European populations in respect
of physical vigor and of the other qualities of manhood
should be sufficiently reassuring on this head, in so far
as touches the long-term effect of mortality in war. These
populations have been subjected to a selective weeding-
out of the men fit for warlike consumption, ever since
the barbarian invasions began, and there is not the slight-
est evidence of a lower average fitness in their manhood
today than at any previous period.


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

i

(Note to Chapter I, page 6)

Confining attention to the tract of country immediately in
question, and accepting the scheme of European races offered
by Mr. Ripley 1 and by the wide consensus of anthropologists
for whom Mr. Ripley speaks, it appears that the European
populations are made up of three main racial stocks — the
Mediterranean (dol'cho-brunet), the Alpine (brachycephalic-
brunet), and the Northern (dolicho-blond) — neglecting minor
factors, some of which may be of appreciable consequence
locally. 2

In rough outline, and so far as bears on the German popula-
tion, these three main racial stocks are found to be distributed
in three broad, overlapping bands which tend loosely to conform
to parallels of latitude, in such a way that the area of greatest
frequency for the Mediterranean race falls along the Mediter-
ranean seaboard, wh'le that of the Alpine runs across the
middle of Europe, and the dolicho-blond is found chiefly in the
north and more particularly in the seaboard region of the
Baltic and North Sea. But in this geographic distribution of
races no one of the three occupies any of these three zones to
the exclusion of either of the other two; this being particularly
true of the tract of country occupied by the German people and
their immediate neighbors. While each race is at its strongest

l W. Z. Ripley, The Races of Europe.

'Much the same result will be had, so far as bears on the ques-
tion in hand, if the scheme offered by Deniker (The Races of Man)
is adhered to, but with the difference that the argument would then
have to do with Ave or six main racial stocks composing the
European population at large. (Cf. C.O.E. Arbo, "Den blonde
Bracnycephal og dens sandsynlige Udbredningsfelt," Christiania
Vid. Selsk. Forh. 1906). Neither do the special considerations
offered by Sergi's scheme (The Mediterranean Race) affect the
present question in such way as to disturb the line of argument
based on Ripley's presentation of the racial traits of the contem-
porary European peoples.

273


*74 Imperial Germany

within the zone so indicated as its area of greatest frequency,
each is also seen to be diffused through the other two zones, but
more sparingly the farther outward from what may be called
its home area. Of these three stocks it is safe to say that the
dolicho-blond is the more closely confined to the region of its own
latitude, at the same time that it also visibly tends to be con-
fined, somewhat loosely, to the seaboard country — taking "sea-
board" in a large and liberal sense.

It follows that the German population is made up in the main
of the two races that center upon the middle and northern
latitudes of Europe — the Alpine and Northern races — but by
no means to the exclusion of the third — the Mediterranean race
— which comes into this resulting hybrid mixture in such con-
siderable force that it can not fairly be rated as a negligible or
minor factor, even if it is present in a less obtrusive way and
in smaller volume than either of the other two. Each of these
three stocks, then, is diffused throughout the German area, as
also through the territories occupied by those other peoples with
whom the Germans are most frequently compared or contrasted ;
and there is no class or condition of men, and no locality,
either in Germany or in these neighboring countries, that does
not contain a mixture of these races; but this racial mixture
varies from place to place in respect of its average composition
in such a way that, e.g., the dolicho-blond is found in a de-
creasing proportion at each farther remove from the seaboard
region of the Baltic and North Sea, while it virtually disappears
on the Mediterranean seaboard. The brunets, therefore, pre-
ponderate in the south, while the blond stock is at its strongest
in the north, where, as e.g., on the Baltic seaboard, it may in
given localities account for as much as one-half of the popu-
lation. It may be remarked by way of parenthesis that there is
quite commonly something of an inclination to overstate the
prevalence of the blond stock in the north-German and Scandi-
navian region.

As has been indicated above, while these several racial stocks
are diffused at large through the length and breadth of Europe,
the diffusion of each tends at the same time to follow parallels
of latitude, loosely, it is true, but still somewhat consistently.
This applies more decisively to the dolicho-blond than to either
of the other two, at the same time that this stock does not
readily or permanently spread very far from the seaboard, or
out of the climatic reach of the seaboard. It follows that the


Supplementary Notes 275

geographical distribution of the racial mixture that character-
ises the German people takes the shape of a roughly oblong or
rectangular region, confined on the west by the Atlantic and on
the east, with a much less definite frontier, by the limits of the
eastward reach of the climatic area of the North Sea. This
region lies approximately within the meridians of 10° west and
30° east of Greenwich. Its northern and southern frontiers are
much less easy to define, depending greatly on the configuration
of the land surface and on the reach of the Baltic-North Sea
climatic area. In the most general way it is confined toward
the south and southeast by the height of land that makes the
watershed between the North Sea and the Mediterranean. On
the north the (highly irregular) frontier may fairly be said to be
determined by the same climatic dependence. It will be seen that
the delimitation is essentially a climatic one and that the central
and dominant factor in this climatic area is the Baltic-North
Sea littoral, with a cool, humid and equable meteorological
character. The region in question lies (roughly) between,
though its limits do not in any way coincide with, the parallels
of 48° and 60° north latitude. So consequential a part does the
seaboard climate play in determining the limits of this anthropo-
logical region that it might, again, be indicated in rough outline
as the area covered by the sweep of a vector measuring some
12° to 15° latitude and pivoting in the neighborhood of Chris-
tiania or Stockholm; its sweep would then include the British
Isles on the west and Petrograd on the east. Within this ex-
tensive tract the racial complexion of the population will be
found to vary less through its length on any parallel so de-
termined than across its width at any cross section. An ex-
ception to this general statement would perhaps be found in
Russian territory, where such a cross section would probably
show relatively little systematic variation ; and the same general
proposition is, on the other hand, well illustrated in German
territory, where the difference in racial composition is greatly
larger between north and south than it is between east and west.
Some slight chance there will always be, of course, that
through long continued natural selection among this hybrid
population, under local conditions that have strongly favored a
given one of these racial types as against its co-rivals, a so-
called "pure line" may have been established,— effectually pure-


276 Imperial Germany

bred in point of heredity though not of pedigree. 1 Such an
ep'sodic outcome of selective breeding might not unreasonably be
looked for, e.g., among the blonds of Finland, or among the
brachycephalic-brunets of the Alps or the Tyrol, or again among
the dolicho-brunets of Sicily or Sardinia. The irrelevancy of
any such conceivable episodic "pure line," as bearing on the
question of race purity in any of the European nations, is
sufficiently evident.

For reasons evident to all students of race distribution in
Europe, the chance of such a selective working-out of a pure
line is also much smaller as regards the blond stock than as
regards the other two main races. The climatic tolerance of
this type of man ?s much more restricted than that of either of
the two brunets, and very greatly more restricted than that of
the brachycephalic-brunet. While the blond does not survive,
even in a dilute hybrid form, for many generations in the
special habitat of the Alpine, the latter has apparently very little
if any handicap as against the blond in that North-Sea habitat
in which alone the latter type can permanently maintain itself.
From this viability under varying climatic and topographic con-
ditions on the part of the Alpine type, it follows that while the
blond tends incontinently to disappear from among the brunet
populations lying to the south, the brunet shows no tendency to
disappear from among the blonds in the north. So it has come
about that there is presumably no community, assuredly not
within the limits of the German Empire or of the British Isles,
that can safely be rated as more than half blond. What can
be said in these premises is that, by and large, this hybrid popu-
lation of Germany, or of the British Isles, is more blond towards
the north and more brunet towards the south, but that taken in
the aggregate the brunet elements will doubtless greatly out-
weigh the blond in both countries.

Before leaving this matter of European races and their hybrid
offspring a further consideration may be in place, bearing on
questions of the stability of national types. The theories of
heredity currently held by the general body of biologists con-
ceive the type of any given species to be invariable throughout
the life-history of the species. So that under this rule of the
stability of specific types no effectual change, no change trans-

^'Pure line" is borrowed from the usage of Professor W.
Johannsen (cf. Element e der exakten Erblichkeitslehre, IX. Vorle-
sung, esp. p. 133), but it will be noticed that the term is not here
used in precisely the sense which he assigns it.


Supplementary Notes 277

missible by inheritance, can come in so long as the race (species)
endures. Trans ; ent changes of adaptation — "ecological" varia-
tions — are not excluded; but these changes are ephemeral only,
they are only such changes as will not permanently alter the
complement of hereditary traits that mark the type.

Hitherto anthropologists and ethnologists have not made up
their account with this biological tenet; although they have long
been in the habit of tacitly assuming such a stability of types
for the races of mankind, in so far as their researches have
turned on race identity over intervals of time or space, but with
the (tacit and matter-of-course) infraction of this rule in all
inquiries into the rise and derivation of any given race, his-
torians have, quite naturally, not been troubled with biological
conceptions of this recondite order. That such has been the
state of things on this head is doubtless due to the fact that the
biologists themselves have come to a realisat'on of the scope
and bearing of this concept of invariable types only within the
last fifteen years, since Mendel's experiments on hybrids have
been known and their bearing on heredity and variation is coming
to be appreciated.

Whatever laws of heredity may prove to hold for animals at
large will necessarily hold for mankind. And, accepting what
is commonly accepted among biologists on this head, it follows
that the several racial stocks that go into the makeup of the
European populat'ons today are what they were in the beginning.
Ever since these types of man extant in Europe today took their
rise — in quaternary, or tertiary time perhaps — the complement
of hereditary traits with which they are capable of endowing
their offspring have not varied, for better or worse. So that
no heritable amelioration or deterioration (with the exception
of ephemeral variations as spoken of above) has taken place in
any of the races of Europe since these races made their first
settlement, presumably in the neolithic age. In point of native
gifts, therefore, the population of Christendom today is a faithful
reproduction of its ancestry in the stone age.

Some slight special attention may here be given to the case
of the dolicho-blond stock and its origin and heredity, chiefly as
a convenient illustrative instance of the position which this
biological tenet of stability assigns any given race of men as
regards their hereditary traits. This race is not known to have
lived (except by transient excursions) outs ; de of Europe, nor
indeed in any permanent way outside the climatic reach of the


278 Imperial Germany

Baltic-North Sea region; nor is it known ever to have lived in
isolation from other races, the archaeological evidence running
uniformly to the effect that the communities in which blonds
have been found have had a mixed population. It is also not
known, with any approach to certainty, to have lived in Europe
earlier than the late quaternary time, — perhaps not until at or
near the close of the last period of glaciation. In archaelogical
chronology this would mean neolithic time.

This state of the archseolog'cal evidence, taken in conjunction
with the biological rule that specific types are stable and can
therefore arise only by abrupt mutation from previously ex-
isting types, gives at least presumptive force to the view that
this type of man arose in Europe, presumably in late quaternary
(neol'thic) time, by mutation from some (neolithic) stock of
men then inhabiting that country. 1

Little — some say nothing — is known by direct observation of
the rise of a new specific type or stock by mutation from
another parent stock. The theory is held on grounds of un-
avoidable inference from evidence mainly supplied by observa-
tions of reversion to type among hybrids, which takes such a
direction as to involve the necessary assumption of the stability
of specific types. But even with the rejection of the mutation
theory as a method of explaining the presence of the dolicho-
blond in Europe, the acceptance of the dictum that specific
types are stable — and that position appears to be unassailable —
leaves the force of the argument at this point much the same
as if the mutation theory were accepted. This argument, then,
leads to the conclusion (a) that since this type of man makes
its appearance in Europe in early neolithic time and survives
as an element of enduring and growing importance in the neo-
lithic population, it, or rather its hybrid offspring produced by
crossing back on its parent or associate stock, must have been
well suited by native gift to the conditions of life offered at
the time. Its later, and permanent, restriction to the peculiar
habitat offered by the Baltic seaboard argues further that this
type (or its hybrids) was well adapted to the conditions of
life, climatic and other, offered by that region. What these
conditions were, as well as the manner in which this neo-
lithic population met and took advantage of these conditions,
is coming to be passably well known from the archaeological

"Cf. "The Mutation Theory and the Blond Race," The Journal of
Race Development, April 19X3,


Supplementary Notes 279

evidence of life in the neolithic on the Baltic littoral. The
eminently successful way in which that blond (hybrid) pop-
ulation made good its survival and multiplied under the
given conditions argues further also, though less conclusively,
that the type and its ordinary range of hybrid off-spring
were peculiarly suited to the manner of life adopted in
so making good the survival of the type, and therefore pre-
sumably less well adapted to any other, widely different, man-
ner of life. The run of evidence from other species of animals
appears on the whole to go pretty consistently to the effect that
each species is less well suited to survive under conditions
widely different from those to which it may be said to be
native. Most species suffer with any radical change of environ-
ment, many to the point of extinction. Specifically applied to this
type of man this proposition would be formulated to the effect
that the European blond is native to the neolithic culture and
will thrive under the (widely different) conditions of civilised
life only by tolerance and by force of assiduous training. The
parallel offered by the domestic animals, particularly by trained
animals, as contrasted with the same species in the wild state, is
suggestive on this head. The European blond's (hybrid) state
of nature, or wild state, would be the neolithic culture of
Europe, rather than anything more primitive or anything more
recent

(b) Placed as the blond stock has been in early European
time, in a tract of country occupied by a mixed population, this
stock can from the outset have survived only by way of cross-
breeding with the other race or races with which it has been as-
sociated. This proposition takes on an added degree of force
and definition if the blond is recognised as a mutant type,
arisen in Europe as suggested above. In such a case the stock
that so arises by mutation is born into a community made up
of its parent stock, and it will have no chance of breeding
except by crossing back on the parent stock. A degree of re-
flection on the known distribution of races, far and near, will
leave little doubt that what is here said of the special case of
the dolicho-blond applies with more or less cogency to the
case of any other race, whether in Europe or elsewhere; and in
every case the acceptance of the mutation theory, with the con-
sequent definite recognition of the stability of racial types, will
further enforce this proposition and give a sharper definition to
the conception of "race" as distinct from "people."


280 Imperial Germany

(c) What has taken place in the domestication of animals and
their adaptat'on by selective breeding to their special uses and
the special conditions of life under domestication suggests a
line of argument that might seem applicable to the several
nationalities of Europe, and here specifically to the German
population. The domestic animals are commonly held to be, in
the main, of hybrid derivation. Selective breeding extending
over long intervals of time has been directed to certain fa ; rly
definite ends, and therefore to the production in each case of
a certain fairly definite range of hereditary traits; with the
result that certain artificial races have been established, showing
in each case a certain, passably well defined, racial character.
These artificial races of hybrid derivation are passably stable- —
breed true approximately — so long as they enjoy the selective
surveillance and degree of isolation that has given them their
characteristic type. Latterly, by strict and intelligent selection,
it has proved possible to establish new racial types of this arti-
ficial kind within a relatively short series of generations. But
these types so established by selective breeding are stable only in
a provisional sense. When these artificial races escape from do-
mestication they will commonly either revert in the direction
of one or another of their ancestral types (as, e.g., in the case
of the mustang — broncho, cayuse — of Spanish-Arab derivation,
which appears when run wild to have made appreciable progress
in the direction of the type of equus Przevalskii) or they pres-
ently disappear (as, e.g., commonly happens with the domestic
fowl escaped from domestication), with or without a concomit-
ant loss of their characteristic marks.

Pursuing the analogy so afforded by the domestic animals it
might be argued that any given cultural scheme or system, as,
e.g., the latterday German, acting with a consistently selective
effect on a hybrid population, should in the course of time give
rise to a hereditary national type, after the analogy of the
several breeds or races of domestic animals. Such a national
race would then be of a provisionally stable type, in a manner
and degree comparable with the stability of type characters
found in the artificial races of animals, as, e.g., in the various
breeds of hens or geese. The several nations or peoples of
Europe would then, on this view, be fairly regarded as hybrid
races which have been selectively bred into a passably, but
effectually, uniform type — uniform in respect of the characters
required by this cultural scheme — which will stand so long as the


Supplementary Notes 281

selective eond'tions out of which it has arisen may continue in
force.

Several considerations come in to disable this line of argument
as applies to any European nation, and specifically as regards the
population of Germany. Man is a slow-breeding animal, some
th ; rty years being conventionally given to one generation; the
length of time required to effect the definition of such a hybrid
type as is contemplated would therefore be very considerable,
even if the selective breeding for type were carried out under the
strictest conce ; vable control and with the most intelligent and
unwavering am. But the selective action in the case is nothing
more exacting than a relatively lax and shifty differential ad-
vantage in favor of such individuals as conform with exceptional
facility to a given traditional manner of life and system of
opinions and ideals. At the same time the system of institutions
that is supposed to work this selective adaptation is engaged in
an incontinent process of change, such as to change the conditions
of life unremittingly, and therefore progressively to vary the
ground of selective breeding by that much. These changes in
the cultural situation have been going forward at a visibly
rapid rate in modern times, particularly as regards those tech-
nological factors that directly affect the material conditions of
life; and it is necessarily these material conditions that will
have the strictest and most immediate selective effect on the
population.

It would be only under the (presumably) stable or slow-
changing conditions of prehistoric t'mes that this population
could conceivably have been exposed to sufficiently active selec-
tive forces through a sufficient series of generations to give rise to
a selectively established hybrid type of the kind in question;
and assuming that such a national type had been achieved in
prehistoric times, it must in any case have gone to pieces in the
succeeding turmoil of the barbarian invasions and the troublous
times that have made up the later history of the peoples about
the Baltic and North Sea.

So also it is a matter of common notoriety that immigrants of
pure-bred German, Slavic, or British extraction who settle in
America, or in any of the other north-European colonies, lose
their distinctive national character in two or three generations;
that is to say, just so soon as they have outlived the traditional
views, prejudices, habits and ideals brought from home; which
goes to show that none of these nationalities, or others that


282 Imperial Germany

might be named, have worked out a national type of hybrids.
Whether the matter is taken from the side of current everyday
observation or from that of European race-history, the outcome
appears to be the same: there is no hereditary difference be-
tween, e.g., the British, the German and the Slavic population —
say of Great Russia — when these are considered as aggregates.
Each varies by wider differences within itself than the average
difference between one and another.


II

(Note to Chapter II, page 15)

In any such survey recourse will necessarily be had chiefly
to Scandinavian sources, and primarily to the Danish evidence
and the work of Danish archaeologists. Not that the civilisation
in question is in any consequential sense to be accounted Danish,
as contrasted with other nationalities of northern Europe. This
whole early phase, or sequence of phases, of civilisation lies so
far in the past, beyond the beginnings of a Danish nationality,
that any such territorial delimitation would be meaningless, as
would also any attempt to discriminate between Danish origins
and the origins of the other Baltic peoples in that early time.
The precedence necessarily given to Danish antiquities and
archaeologists, even as related to those of the other Scandinavian
countries, is in a way a matter of accident.

Geographical circumstances decided that what are now
Danish coast lands came to be the central area of this cultural
region; though it would perhaps be equally true and more per-
spicuous to say that this Baltic culture centered about the narrow
waters of these Scandinavian shores, of which, however, a great
share falls within what are now Danish lands. The remains of
the early Baltic culture occur more abundantly in Denmark; but
southwestern Sweden is nearly as important a field ; and the work
of Swedish scholars in this field is scarcely to be rated second
to that of the Danes, assuredly second to none else.

There is a second reason for turning by preference to the
work of the Danes, and of their friends in Sweden and Norway.
They were the first in this archaeological field and have culti-
vated it the most diligently — as they also have had the largest and
most immediate access to the materials. At the same time.


Supplementary Notes 283

doubtless in part because tfiey have been occupied with this
study so long and intimately, they are also fortunate in having
reached a more sober and matter-of-course appreciation and
insight than many of their neighbors who have spent valuable
work in the same field. The bias of chauvinism has perhaps
not yet been wholly lost by these Scandinavian scholars, but it
has at least ceased to dominate their inquiries, to infuse their
premises, and color their conclusions in the degree that it once
did long ago when the early generation of them began the work ;
one can not truthfully say the like, or at least not with the same
assurance, for their nearest neighbors, whose work in any case
is of a slighter character and is more pervasively marked with
the blemishes that come of youthful haste.

There were several material circumstances that threw these
Scandinavian lands, or waters, into their central position in the
early Baltic cultural region : These narrow waters afforded an
abundant food supply as well as, presently, an easy means of
movement and communication ; the Danish lands, particularly, af-
forded an abundant and accessible supply of fl'nt of the best qual-
ity, — the indispensable primary material for tools in the neolithic
technology ; and the forests yielded an excellent and plentiful sup-
ply of timber, while the soil — prevailingly sandy with sufficient
marl — was fertile and easily tilled; all of which quickly and
easily brought the population to such density as would most
efficiently make use of the resources at hand with the state of
the industrial arts at their disposal. Presently, in the course of
the stone age, there was added to this combination of adfvantages
the discovery of the amber supply on the beaches of Jutland, and
of its commercial value, which further acted to maintain the
Danish lands in the central position they had already taken.

With such security as material of this kind can afford, the
available evidence goes to show that the culture which so grew
up about the Scandinavian waters ran a fairly even course, with
a moderate and not notably fluctuating rate of advance, over a
long interval of time; long even as counted in generations, and
coming near enough to an unvarying character to exercise a
somewhat consistent and presumably decisive selective action on
the mixed population that so got their living under its rule.
The Baltic stone age shows a sequence of changes, both in
technological and in other matters, but they are, after all, such
changes as circumstances will permit within the relatively nar-
row compass of a neolithic technology, and such changes as


284 Imperial Germany

occur are distributed over a period which doubtless exceeds by
many fold the interval that has elapsed since its close. 1

The age of bronze is of shorter duration, its close being con-
sidered by Scandinavian students to. fall between 800 and 300
B. C. Montelius speaks for 500 B. C. At the same time changes
or disturbances are more vis'ble in the evidence from the bronze
age. Yet its one thousand years or more will scarcely be rated
as comparable with a like interval elapsed since these Baltic
peoples came into history, in point of wide-reaching innovations
and shiftng fortunes for these populations. The prehistoric iron
age shows a still less settled state -of things, whether in the
state of the industrial arts or in. the conditions of life more at
large. In the amplitude and frequency of the changes that passed
over the Baltic population, indeed, the iron age is rather sugges-
tive of the restless state of western Europe since the barbarian
invasions set in.

The age of stone, and less convincingly that of bronze, there-
fore, are the only period in their life-history that offers a tech-
nological situation of sufficient stability and duration to have
exercised a decisively selective action on this north-European
hybrid population and so to have tested their hereditary fitness
to live and enduringly to prosper under its dominion. Con-
genially, therefore, this population should be pre-eminently fit
to conduct their affairs by the ways and means which the stone
age placed at their disposal and according to the scheme of life
which resulted from the use of those means in this peculiar
environment.

The available direct evidence from the stone age necessarily
is altogether of a material kind and therefore bears witness
directly to nothing else than the material conditions and the
state of the industrial arts; indirectly, by way of circumstantial
evidence, something, but not much, is also shown as to the
state of institutions. So, it is known that this Scandinavian

'On the Chronological basis offered by Montelius, who is to be
rated as conservative in the matter, the Danish stone age should
have run from the close of quaternary time — the last recession of
the north-European ice-sheet — to about 1700 b.c. What this in-
terval may amount to in centuries is a question for the geologists,
but there is apparently no consensus among the adepts at present
that would rate it at less than 10,000 years for the Scandinavian
stone age as a whole, and allowing at least 3,000 years for its
period of full development. Cf. O. Montelius, Les temps prehistor-
iques en Suede; Sophus Miiller, Vor Oldtid; A. Penck and Ed.
Bruckner. Die Alpen im Eiszeitalter, vol. iii. Schluss, ch. ii.
"Chronologie des Eiszeitalters in den Alpen ;" also Sophus Miiller,
Aarboger for Nordiak Oldkyndighed. 1909, "Bronzealderens Beg-
yndelse og aldre Udvikiing i Danmark, efter de nyeste Fund."


Supplementary Notes 285

(Danish-Swedish) region through the best part of this pre-
historic period was furnished with abundant forests, productive
fisheries, including shell-fish, a good supply of game, and with
an equable climate. 1 In addition, as already noted above, it
offered a fertile soil and a ready supply of excellent flint, the
material of the primary tools in the stone age. 2

The country is drawn on a small scale, in that it is so cut into
strips and patches of land and water as to interpose an insuper-
able obstacle to the coercive control of extensive territories by
any industrial organisat ; on or by any authority of a govern-
mental kind which has command of only such ways and means
as the neolithic technology will afford. Yet it is a tract of
country that includes relatively little waste land, and what
waste land there is is not sufficiently rough to interpose serious
barriers to communication; and the like may be said for the
waters of the region, which cut it into parcels, but at the same
time afford a convenient means of intercourse. The parcelment
and diversification goes far enough effectually to hinder ex-
tensive control without hindering extensive intercourse, with the
material means at the disposal of the Baltic peoples; in that
state of the industrial arts it may be said that the character of
the country facilitated escape from any undue or irksome
coercion, while it hindered. effectual pursuit as well as an ef-
fectual reach of economic pressure, such as will support a
large- political power or a wealthy idle class. 8

*Irt all this there is a suggestive resemblance to the North-
west Coast region of America.

'Owing to its peculiar geological formation Denmark, and South-
western Sweden in a less pronounced way, was fortunate above
all other European countries in its large, excellent and readily
accessible flint supply. The Danish islands and much of the penin-
sula are superficially of the nature of a moraine on a large scale,
thrown up across the south end of the Baltic trough by glacial
action which scooped out that trough and left a moraine-like bar
carrying non-chalky boulders, boulder clay, sand, marly soil, and
particularly the refractory flint nodules derived from the chalk.
The underlying formations are also mainly cretaceous. The flint
consequently occurs in extraordinarily large proportion, as com-
pared with places where it is found only in place in the chalk beds,
as, e.g., on the English downs.

'There is in this respect a good deal of a parallel between the
Baltic and the Aegean regions ; but the parcelment is harsher in
the Aegean, the barriers of waste land are more mountainous and
more discouraging to travel and traffic, and the stretches of water
are more open and more difficult for a primitive navigation ;
neither does any one spot in the Aegean region hold a place of
such differential advantage in resources and location as is to be
found on the Danish waters (with the partial and doubtful excep-
tion of Melos and its obsidian deposits). The outcome, in early
times, also shows a parallel in that the population of both regions
are scattered in small communities, independent but in close com-
munication and showing a community of the arts of life. But with


286 Imperial Germany

From the diversified character of the country and its re-
sources follows the peculiar character of its industrial system.
During the greater part of the stone age, but more pro-
nouncedly through the period of its full development, it appears
to have been a country of mixed farming, with a good deal of
fishery and hunting as accessory means of living. Except for
an indefinite, though perhaps very considerable, interval at the
outset, it can not be claimed that hunting and fishing were the
main dependence; and there is room for serious doubt as to
whether these pursuits were more important than tillage even
from very near the beginning of the Danish stone age. This
mixed farming makes use of the crop-plants — chiefly grains as
far as known — that have since continued to feed Europe; the
earliest being barley, with other grains presently added. Its
complement of domestic animals is likewise the usual range of
European live-stock; the number of species used gradually in-
creasing with the passage of time. As a characteristic trait of
its industrial system, it is eminently a wood-working people;
stone work being relatively absent — except in the matter of
stone tools, — and even pottery being less in evidence, either for
quantity or quality, than might be looked for by students unfa-
miliar with the local conditions of climate and the local supply of
raw materials. Far and away the most characteristic and frequent
article among stone-age antiquities is the wood-worker's axe, — a
polished flint blade of a size and shape to suggest the steel
blade of the modern woodsman. Next to this axe, in numbers
and in workmanlike quality are the wood-working chisels, of vari-
ous forms for different uses. Weapons, whether for hunting or
for warfare, make a notably scantier showing, although the care
and workmanship bestowed on them are often of the very best
that the stone-age craftsman has put in evidence. It may be
remarked parenthetically that there is evidence that some form
of machinery, possibly of an automatic kind, was in use for the
manufacture of flint tools in the best days of the polished-flint

It all, the Aegean region, offering sharper and more stubborn
natural lines or delimitation, shows also a closer and more coer-
cive organisation of its early peoples, into sharply defined and
diffeientiated communities that choose defensible positions and take
precautions against coercion from without.

On the other hand this Baltic situation comes in contrast with
the large-scale continental regions of the East, as, e.g., the Asiatic
steppes or the Mesopotamian-Chaldean lowlands ; where large bodies
of serviceable land have lent themselves to the early organisation
of a pastoral, or in places also an agricultural, industry on a large
scale, with consequent large groupings of population, wide dis-
crepancies in the distribution of wealth, and a close and often
coercive governmental control.


Supplementary Notes 287

industry; as also that there appears to have been something in
the way of production for a market.

In characterisation of this stone-age mixed farming it should
be noted that all crop plants and domestic animals made use of
are of introduced species, from outside of Europe, so far as the
evidence shows. It is always possible, though it is not in evi-
dence, that some form of cabbage or turnip, or some domestic
derivative of the kale, may have been in use; so that that much
in the way of original plant domestication might (problematic-
ally) be credited to the Baltic culture. Apart from this possi-
bility, the Baltic peoples plainly borrowed all that complement
of crop-plants which their tillage made use of. Likewise as to
their live-stock; it is a borrowed outfit, introduced presumably
from Asia, with the problematic exception that a strain of the
wild cattle of northern Europe may have been introduced by
cross breeding into the stock of introduced cattle. And in the
same connection it is perhaps worth remark that no other ele-
ment of their technology can at all confidently be asserted to
be of home growth; the initial move in every technological
device and expedient employed in this culture appears to have
come from abroad. So far as touches the state of its industrial
arts, this people drew all the elements they made use of from
outside, and the like statement will apply with great generality
also to other than technological elements. The explanation of
this state of things may of course be that all the great inventions
and exploits of technological initiative serviceable in the prem-
ises had been made before their time; but it is after all a
feature of the case. It is to be supplemented with the further
statement that while these Baltic peoples borrowed with facility
they made effective use of what they borrowed, and that they
worked out the borrowed elements into their full efficiency, so
as to meet their own needs in their own way.

So also— although this is only negative evidence, and indeed
negative evidence of a particularly neutral value — there is noth-
ing going to show a system of cadastration, such as is to be
expected where anything like a "Landed Interest" controls the
agricultural industry, more particularly where husbandry is car-
ried on by some form of servile tenure or slave labor. But the
negative suggestion is not to be overlooked when taken in con-
nection with the like absence of symmetrical parcelment in the
distribution of the cutivated lan'd even at a very late date in
this central area of the Baltic civilisation; it stands out by con-


288 Imperial Germany

trast with what occurs throughout those outlying territories of
the Fatherland that came in the course of time to be occupied by
force and organised on a system of servile tenure, as e.g., the
lands lying beyond the border of Holstein and Friesland. 1 This
meticulous cadastration of the cultivated lands takes different
forms in different localities, but wherever it occurs it is pre-
sumed to be a mark of servile tenure and to have been (worked
out on behalf of a coercive control of the agricultural industry
for the benefit of some form of a "landed interest." It occurs
in those parts of the German territory at large that are believed
to have been acquired by invasion and held by right of prowess.
It is virtually unknown, as a survival from antiquity, in the
lands about the narrow Scandinavian waters.

In what has been said it is not intended to imply that there
were no class differences of wealth or of social consequence in
this Danish stone-age community; still less is there any ground
to believe that any form of a communistic organisation prevailed.
Neither the state of soc'al organisation in later and better
known times, nor the circumstantial evidence of the stone-age
antiquities, will afford ground for such a belief. So, e.g., the
chief, almost the sole, structures standing over from this period
are certain sepulchres (grave-mounds, dolmens, chamber tombs),
numerous, widely distributed, and elaborate, but far too few after
all to have served as the ordinary burial places of the common
people, at the same time that they will have been too costly to
come within the reach of all. They are an item of such wasteful
mortuary consumption as the common man could not compass.
Plentiful as theses sepulchres are in this region, their number
and capacity shrinks to very moderate proportions when con-
trasted with the mass of tools and appliances that served the
needs of the living population.

On the immaterial side of the arts of life this culture, then,
appears to offer nothing of appreciable magnitude, in the way
of empire or statecraft. There is no ground for assuming any
large or powerful political or civil units, nor any elaborate
governmental machinery. The most that suggests itself in the
way of public control would be a loose neighborhood organisa-
tion, perhaps on lines resembling the organisation of local self-
government in the earlier period (900-1100 A. D.) of the Ice-

l Cf. Meitzen, Siedelung und Agrarwesen, etc., vol. ii. Part xi., and
the corresponding pages of the Atlas. Meitzen is here referred to
for the facts only ; his own inferences by no means coincide with
the present line of argument.


Supplementary Notes 289

Ian die republic. And the conclusion is fairly unavoidable that
warlike (predatory) enterprise of any kind is no integral part
of the scheme. Of the religious life, or perhaps of supersti-
tious conceits and practices, in the stone age there is less evi-
dence than might be looked for; or if the evidence is at hand it
must be of such an improbable character as to have escaped
attention. There do occur some few articles that are interpreted
as "cult objects," — figurines, amulets, and the like; but the
whole is so slight in volume and so apparently trivial in char-
acter as to be extremely disappointing to persons interested in
religious antiquities. The sepulchres and the articles buried
with the dead afford the most substantial, and most circum-
stantial, evidence available of a belief in the supernatural; but
even these yield little. So also in objects of art these antiquities
are poor. There is a little something in the way of decorated
pottery, but it is crude both in design and in execution, and
there are some few other articles that show a tentative move-
ment of the aesthetic impulse; but it remains true here as in
the domain of religion that the available evidence is surprisingly
scant and such as it is it is barely sufficient to argue an extreme
poverty in both respects. Yet there is a certain large reservation
to be made in any argument on the materials at hand in this
domain of the aesthetic arts — a reservation that applies perhaps
equally to the question of religious observances.

As has already been indicated above, the Baltic population
was eminently a wood- working people; from which it should
follow that their decorative art, and their cult objects, will
presumably have been worked in wood, and so will have dis-
appeared with the disappearance of the perishable material in
which the work was done. This caution, indeed, gathers very
considerable force from what is known of cult objects and
decorative art in the Scandinavian countries at a later period, in
late pagan and early historical times. This latter period, too, is
eminently an age of woodwork, and by far the more character-
istic and the most abundant examples of Scandinavian decora-
tive art from this period are in wood and in colors ; the next in
importance being the work done in woollen textiles, which suffer
in the same way from the perishability of the material. The
evidence of the material at hand is accordingly not to be taken
without allowance as bearing on the state of the aesthetic arts
in antiquity, nor does it necessarily indicate in any adequate way
what may have been the range and character of contrivances


29 Imperial Germany

employed in the service of religion or of superstitious beliefs.
Of course, a caution of the same kind is to be observed in
judging of industrial appliances and articles of daily use, and
therefore in any appraisal of the state of the industrial arts, in
this prehistoric culture; the chief materials were wood, skins
and wool. Yet the flint tools, which have been preserved, being
the primary tools — the tools of the tool-makers — they yield a
competent, even if inadequate, criterion of the character and
efficiency of the technology of the stone age.

With the passage of time, as bronze comes in to supplant or
supplement the flint in the Baltic technology, the apparent poverty
of this culture in the domain of art is relieved in an appreciable
degree ; and in a less degree the like will apply to appliances de-
signed for religious or magical uses. T*he best of the decorative
work in bronze has scarcely been surpassed by any people living
on nearly the same level of civilisation, either for its consummate
aesthetic sensibility or for the perfection of its workmanship.
This characterisation will apply without reserve to the decorative
art of the Baltic bronze age at its best, and it should be noted
that this best output of bronze work comes from the early half
of the bronze age. The slight attempts at representative art from
the same general section of prehistory can not be spoken of
with the same respect. This latter is puny and futile in a de-
gree scarcely credible when taken in juxtaposition with the
purely decorative work from the same period; it runs about on
a level with the contemporary Etruscan commercial art work
at its worst, which it visibly resembles and from which it ap-
pears to have drawn much of its inspiration. Intercourse with
the Adriatic seaboard at the time makes such an affiliation of
the Baltic art work probable, and the borrowed forms, style and
mannerisms may serve to show how the affiliation took effect.
But these considerations of intercourse with the commercial cen-
ters of northern Italy and the head of the Adriatic yield no
plausible explanation of the highly characteristic decorative
work in bronze, particularly of the early bronze age, which is
distinctive in style and is artistically superior to the best work
imported from the Mediterranean. There remains the alterna-
tive suggestion that this earlier decorative work in bronze is a
derivative of the like decorative art in wood and colors carried
over from the stone age; so that the art-life of the age of flint
may perhaps best be appreciated in the reflected light of the out-
put of the succeeding period, which for the first time afforded the
Baltic artists a material in which their work could endure.


Supplementary Notes 291

III

(Note to Chapter III, page 43)

What was said above (page 42) of the extreme paucity, not
to say total want, of contemporary documentary evidence on the
state of society in north-European prehistory does not overlook
the existence or the value of the contemporary classical writers
on Germanic antiquities. These old writers have been so fully
utilised and so exhaustively canvassed by many able scholars that
what they have to say has already gone into the common stock
of information on this head, and may therefore fairly be taken
for granted as the stable background against which any repre-
sentation of Germanic antiquities will unavoidably be seen. Such
doubt as may bear on the value of these classical sources is not
a doubt as to their veracity and substantial consequence, but
rather a question of their inherent limitations. What they have
to offer is at its best of the nature of fragmentary outline, and
the best of them — Tacitus — is a tendenzschrift, an account
rationalised in the sense of the views then prevalent among
Latin scholars as to primitive social conditions, and drawn with
an eye to the discipline and edification of his Roman audience.
But it is more to the point, since for the purpose in hand it is
a more substantial infirmity, that his account, like the rest, is
drawn from observation and informants of Germanic com-
munities that had, notoriously, wandered long and far from
their ancestral seats, that were still engaged in a mass move-
ment — a "barbarian migration" — with a view partly to booty,
partly to the seizure of profitable territory, or that were (at
least provisionally) settled as a master class on an underlying
population already settled on the land. The peoples whom these
accounts describe are the later generations, in a more or less
mature state of reorganisation, of bodies of adventurers who
had gone out from their initial habitat on an errand of preda-
tion, and afford at the best about as true an image of the state
of society out of which they came as did the viking raiders of
the tenth century. Of course, the fact remains that they car-
ried out from home the preconceptions which they had acquired
at home; but it is equally evident that the circumstances under
which they had lived since leaving home had done much to shape
their habits of thought and current use and wont among them
at the time they came under observation ; as also that the longer


292 Imperial Germany

and farther they wandered the greater would be the resulting
changes in their habits of life and of thought as affected by
their experience under alien skies. In other words, they faith-
fully reflect the Baltic culture of their forebears in somewhat
the degree in which the Mongols or the Manchus in China,
or the Moguls in India, reproduced the culture of the steppes
out of which they came; or as the resident administration of
the East India Company reproduced British institutions and
gave an object lesson of British culture; or, again, at the best,
as near as the Forty-niners in California gave a faithful ex-
hibition of American society.

Therefore, since it may be assumed that these classical sources
are sufficiently known by common notoriety, and since they are
scant at the best and afford ground only for remote inference
as to the state of society out of which the Germanic peoples
to which they relate had once come, — for these reasons no
further use will be made of these standard documents in this
place, beyond a general regard to their suggestions, and par-
ticularly an avoidance of what they forbid. A second range of
documentary material, of which the several codes of the "Bar-
barian Laws" are typical, falls under the same limitations. 1 In
a less, but after all in the least degree, the literary remains of
the barbarian peoples themselves are liable to the same line of
objections; and as being the best evidence available, both in point
of the immediacy of its testimony and in point of its relative
abundance, it is to this class of material that recourse must
chiefly be had by anyone who wishes to find a working conception
of what society was like in Baltic prehistory, — in its industrial
system, its social organisation, its political life, its principles of
equity, its prescriptive conventions, beliefs and ideals. By what
may be called historical accident it happens that the most con-
siderable of this material relates to the Scandinavian peoples,
most considerable both for its volume and for the character of
its testimony; and it happens, again, that within this Scandi-
navian domain the most valuable in all its bearings is the ma-
terial afforded by the Icelandic literature. In so far as bears on
the present inquiry the Icelandic material relates primarily to
Norwegian prehistory, though at a slightly further remove it
reflects also the condition of society in the other Scandinavian

1 More to the point are the several collections of Scandinavian
laws, Oragda more so than any other perhaps, although even here
the late and Christian influences are in evidence. In what follows,
regard is had to these texts, with such allowance as seems due.


Supplementary Notes 293

countries, and more remotely on the run of events and institu-
tions on the Baltic-North Sea region more at large. The
strongest plea that can be made for such recourse to this ma-
terial is that it is the best there is to be had, not that it is all that
could be desired. It is plain to students familiar with the
pertinent facts that all other documentary material is fully in-
telligible only in the light afforded by the Icelandic accounts, and
that these other sources are useful rather as appendices and
minor correctives than as prime sources of information and
independent grounds of secure inference.

These Scandinavian countries have for the present purpose
the differential advantage as against the rest of the Germanic
world that history overlook them in the : r prehistoric state.
These communities were the last survivors of the Germanic
pagan world, standing over intact in a degree far beyond what
can be alleged of the rest at their entrance into European
h ; story. They have also the second and no less consequential
advantage that they comprise virtually the only area within the
Baltic-North Sea cultural region that had, at its entrance into
history, not been disturbed by invasion from alien cultures, or
acquired by seizure and reorganised by predation, from this
Baltic central area. All the barbarian raids — Volkerwanderungen
— that were of a Germanic complexion ran outward from this
broad center, while nothing of the kind penetrated into this
hyperborean "cradle of the nations." They comprise, in other
words, the initial home area of the Baltic culture and of the
north-European racial mixture, and they stand over as the
last working model of Baltic paganism.

These preferential claims of the Scandinavian material are,
of course, not to be allowed without abatement. There is, first,
the objection that the documents relate primarily to Norway, —
doubtless the least significant of the three Scandinavian countries
as bearing on the Baltic prehistoric culture. Yet taking things
as they come it will be adnrtted that the records of Norwegian
paganism, with their excursions and reflections on the state of
society in neighboring lands, are after all the most significant
body of material extant. Norwegian conditions at the close of
the pagan era are not a faithful reproduction of Baltic prehistory
at large, for Norway was comparatively slight, poor, and lay out-
side of the center, but with due allowance they yield information
not otherwise to be had. Further, the Icelandic records are not
contemporary; they come from the hands of Christian scholars


294 Imperial Germany

who lived some couple of centuries after the formal close of the
pagan era, and under conditions differing notably from those
that prevailed in Norway in late pagan times. In extenuation
it is to be said that while paganism conventionally closes with
the end of the tenth century, it is easy to overrate the magni-
tude and the abruptness of this shift to the new faith in this
outlying corner of Christendom ; so that the laying of the spirit
of paganism among the Scandinavian population by no means
coincides with the conventional date of its obsequies. Also, the
literature in question is voluminous enough in great measure to
correct its own shortcomings in detail, by recourse to the con-
sensus of its testimony as a whole; all the more so since there
is in these earlier narratives no visible bias of criticism or
apology with respect to the events and conditions described, the
animus of the whole being, with remarkable singleness, that of
the story-teller's art. The sagas are in this respect, as in many
others, in the same class with the histories of Herodotus. A
more serious difficulty with the Icelandic material is that it
relates, directly, not to the state of things current even in
Norway in the midst and high tide of pagan prehistory, but
rather to the condition of things during the last period of pre-
history, when the pagan system was engaged in all that move-
ment of change that presently brought its era to a close. It
yields an account of how the pagan system came to its end,
rather than how it stood through the long reaches of its life-
history.

This period of prehistory that leads down to the close of the
pagan era in the eleventh century is spoken of as the Viking
Age as being characterised by the growth of an organised
piratical enterprise; it is conventionally said to begin with the
closing years of the eighth century, though such piratical enter-
prise is known to date farther back in the Scandinavian countries,
and it is, indeed, evidently already an established fact and
in a flourishing condition by that time. Indeed, the roots of this
growth reach very far back. 1 So much so that the more the mat-
ter is looked into the less occasion does there seem to be to draw
a line of any hard and fast kind between the pirate raids and
the overland raids of plunderers that are known by the politer
name of the "migrations of the peoples." And to follow up

1 Cf. e.g., Alexander Bugge, Norges Historie, vol. 1. part li. especi-
ally sec. Ix.


Supplementary Notes 295

these latter to their origins would lead very far back into
prehistory. 1

Yet the viking enterprise will after all have to be recognised
as specifically characteristic of the closing phases of the pagan
era, whether the conventional duration assigned it, of some two
hundred and fifty years, be accepted as a sufficient allowance, or
it be allowed something like twice that length of time, as in-
clusive both of its rise and its maturer development. It comes
on as a characteristic factor in the later pagan scheme of life,
and its presence requires explanation both as to its antecedent
causes and as to its effects on the state of society at the time. In
outline, the immediate economic and social consequences of in-
corporating such an institution as piracy in the scheme of use
and wont should be fairly plain: There should result a
heightening of the warlike animus; a lessening of the security
of property and industry, and of life and limb; 2 an increase in
the number of slaves, and, presumably, an increase of their
hardships, along with a decline in their price, — the slave trade
being one of the main supports of the viking traffic; a conse-
quent sharper conception of and insistence on class distinctions.
Among the causes of its growth there is only one that can be
cited with full confidence; viz., an improvement in the technology
of boat-building and navigation sufficient to make extensive sea
voyages practicable in sufficient force and with sufficiently re-
duced risk of accidents by sea. Less plainly is it required, as a

'-While the causes that led to the migrations of the peoples, the
barbarian invasions overland, may have been substantially or the
same kind as those that occasioned the rise of the viking raids,
the reaction of each on the habits and workday conceptions of the
home population should be somewhat widely different. The free-
booters who set out overland did not return, brought nothing home,
and had nothing further to say in the run of affairs : whereas the
pirates habitually returned home over winter — for the most part
and especially during the earlier part of the period — and they also
brought home both slaves and superfluous articles of decorative
consumption, and they retained their place as citizens in good
standing and eventually settled down as farmers and heads of
families. The contrast is, of course, not quite so broad as this
would make it. Many of the pirates stayed away, settled abroad,
in the various centers of piracy, or as settlers in some foreign
country ; and on the other hand there is sufficient evidence that
communication was free and continuous between the Baltic sea-
board and the countries of southern and central Europe through
the period of the migrations, so that many of the migrants, or their
descendants, will have found their way back from time to time
and the home community will have kept more or less adequately
in touch with these wandering hosts for some time after their de-
parture. Yet, on the whole, the contrast between the two fashions
of excursion into foreign parts is too substantial to be overlooked.

■It may be noted as a side light on this particular point that
the practice of the K6lmgang most commonly comes into the sagas
in connection with the vikings and their traffic.


296 Imperial Germany

condition precedent to such a development, that there must have
been something of a surplus population, and that the country's
industry must ha/ve been sufficiently productive to afford the
very considerable investment in equipment and supplies necessary
for such enterprise, — an expenditure for which no substantial
equivalent was gained from the traffic, apart from the slave labor
imported. Apart from the slaves, what was brought home from
these raids appears to have consisted almost wholly of superflu-
ities, trinkets, and the precious metals ; and even on the most
liberal valuation of these "imports" there is no chance of their
having, at an average, equalled the cost of their acquisition.
Regard being had to the very appreciable prevalence of mutual
raiding, both as between different pirate bands and as between
different communities, within the Scandinavian countries, it is
doubtless well within the mark to say that on an average all
that went into this viking traffic, in equipment, supplies and
personnel, is to be counted as a total loss. So that, economically
speaking, it is a sheer drain on *the resources and productive
capacity of the communities concerned* which argues, among
other things, that they must haye been in such a position, in
respect of productive efficiency, as to be able to afford this
systematic waste without serious weakening through the cen-
turies of its duration. That there was no serious decline of the
country's industrial capacity during this, era is evidenced, e.g., by
the fact that the viking enterprise itself went on uninterruptedly
advancing, in the volume and character of its equipment, down
to the period of its collapse in the early eleventh century.

Now, it is Scandinavian life in the viking age, so called, that
is immediately reflected in the Icelandic material, and what is re-
flected in the way of use and wont and institutional preconcep-
tions will be not the untroubled prehistoric situation of remoter
antiquity, but this prehistoric culture as it stands after the archaic
state of society has suffered whatever measure of change this
growth of piracy may indicate, or that may have been induced
by it or by the causes that brought it about.

Some slight account of the place which the viking traffic held
in the interest of the community, therefore, and of the manner
in which it fitted into their workday life, may serve to show
roughly what measure of weighting or allowance is necessary
on this score in making use of the available material. As it
typically comes in sight in its simpler and apparently earlier
phases the viking traffic is an enterprise of adventurous young


Supplementary Nojes 297

men, commonly the sons of substantial farmers, who have the
means at their disposal for the equipment of such an expedition ;
though it should be noted that something like an extension of
credit may sometimes be involved in the outfitting of a viking
crew. The crew may be made up of volunteers who combine
their means, or of these young country gentlemen of means
spoken of, together with unpropertied farm hands and dis-
engaged young men of the neighborhood. The organisation of
the crew is (commonly) of a democratic character, the officers
for the cruise being chosen by the members of the crew, though
the choice, which seems to have been theoretically quite free,
will commonly fall on the gentlemen of means or of experience
among them. As one might say, they "sign articles" for the
cruise, — the articles being of a somewhat exacting character and
apparently well settled by convention in a traditional form. A s
has already been remarked above, the purpose is piracy, in the
most liberal construction of the term. The expedition may con-
sist of a single boat or of several such boats, and it may last
(most usually) for. a single season, or for two or more. When
the cruise is done the pirates return home, commonly with the
beginning of winter, house their boats and other equipment, and
disband and fall into their several places and occupations in the
neighborhood as before, but usually with some accession of
standing and weight in the community due to the glamor of
great deeds and to whatever pecuniary gain they may have made.
Such is the simplest and perhaps the more archaic type, in case
of a successful issue. It was also rather expected that young men
who so went out on adventure and made good would follow up
this piratical work for several seasons, before they finally set-
tled down among their neighbors. However, this is only the
simplest type. There were also vikings who followed this calling
as a permanent business and sole occupation, and who grew old
in the trade. So also there were businesslike undertakers who
organised piratical concerns of a larger and more durable char-
acter, with hired crews and with considerable investment in
equipment, — suggestively resembling the traditional whaling
business of the New Englanders. In the course of time, par-
ticularly at a period well along in the tenth century, a more
permanent and businesslike organisation came into effect, and
coalitions of piratical bands were formed, resembling, but by
all accounts far outnumbering, the similar coalitions of the buc-
caneers along the Spanish main. Yet, while the permanent


298 - Imperial Germany

establishments and businesslike coalitions of the later viking age
were undeniably a factor of grave import in the social situation,
even rising to the rank of a political power, 1 it remains true
that it is after all the homelier, one might almost say the do-
mestic, ventures in piracy that continue to lend their color to
the state of society and of the arts of life as reflected in the
sagas.

The economic foundations of this early society were husbandry
(mixed farming) and household industry of the order of handi-
craft, with fishery as a subsidiary and hunting as an incidental
source of livelihood. There also goes everywhere an itinerant
trade, mostly in such necessaries as iron and salt, together with
luxuries like wheat, honey and spices, and decorative super-
fluities; and there is in the later period the viking enterprise.
As regards exports through this itinerant trade, the chief article
in late pagan times appears to have been furs and pelts, at an
earlier date mainly amber, with wool or woollens and possibly
dried fish. The trade is not of first rate importance to the com-
munity, which is self-supporting in all essential respects. The
economic unit is the farmstead, with its population, commonly of
a loosely defined number, but running all the way from a single
moderate sized family to an aggregation of perhaps a couple of
hundreds. Typically the farm is of a relatively large size and
with a large equipment, sufficient to take care of its own needs
in nearly all necessary lines of industry; but there seems to
have been a considerable number of half dependent, outlying
farms, partly freehold, partly worked on some form of custo-
mary tenure which varied very appreciably from one case to
another. All classes and conditions of men took part in the
work, there being apparently no leisure class exempt from
manual labor — unless a (partial and doubtful) exception is to
be made in favor of royalty and the more prominent and wealthy
among the landed gentry. Both men and women took part in
the field work, and skill in some form of industry was expected
of all reputable persons.

The community falls into a system of social classes, based on
wealth and birth, either of which gives standing in the com-
munity and neither of which will long suffice by itself. At the
bottom are the slaves, which according to tradition appear to
have formed a class in the community from remote antiquity,
although it may be difficult to understand how there should have

&As shown, e.g., in the Jdmsvihinga Saga.


Supplementary Notes 299

been an appreciable number of slaves present before the rise of
piracy. Their numbers appear to have been considerable, though
it is fairly clear that they were not the largest class among the
inhabitants. These slaves were the chattels of their masters, in
full ownership, though the system of slavery appears, on the
whole, not to have taken an extremely harsh form ; owing prob-
ably to the relative difficulty of controlling a slave population
which differed neither in physical appearance nor in speech from
their masters, in a country where waste lands and scattered
settlements offered favorable means of escape. Above the slave
class is the (probably) larger class of the half-free tenants,
cottiers or dependent working class. And above these again
what may be called the commonalty made up of the freehold
farm population (bcendir), great and small; this would appear
to have been appreciably the more numerous of the several
social classes, and they are unquestionably the main body of the
community considered as a civil society. Distinct from the
freehold farm population in popular apprehension, though not
so clearly distinct in either economic or civil consequence and
rank, are the people of noble or gentle birth (jarl and hersir).
The place and consequence of these in the social fabric are not
clear, but their presence is undoubted and appears to be a
typical feature of the fabric. They appear in effect to have,
typically, been substantial farmers and men of local influence;
they may also, by conventional tolerance, have enjoyed certain
ill-defined prerogatives and immunities. Somewhat the same is
to be said of the kings, who make up a distinct class in this
social scheme. Royalty is probably (though not beyond a doubt)
the smallest of these classes, as it is unequivocally the first in
rank. 1

It will be noticed that nothing is here said of a tribal or clan
organisation; the reason being that there is no trace of such a
system in the original documents, and there is no word in the

'The earliest known exposition of class distinctions in Scandi-
navian paganism — the "Rigsthula" — makes four social classes:
slaves, commoners, earl folk, and royalty, and appears to hold that
these class distinctions rest on racial differences, all but the last
two, — royalty, It appears, being derived from the race of earls. At
the same time it seems also to be the meaning of the ancient
theorist that these follow one another in seniority in the order
named, the race, or class, of slaves being the earliest and the kings
the latest comers. A second point on which the poem dwells —
not usually brought into the foreground by the commentaries — is
the gift or occult and magical lore properly belonging to the king,
and which alone apparently serves as a distinctive trait to set off
the breed of kings from that of earls.


300 Imperial Germany

old language that can by any reasonable use of violence be con-
strued to cover the concept of a tribe or a clan. The imputa-
tion of a tribal system, as a matter of course, to the German
peoples is a work of rationalisation by the scholars who have
dealt with these matters under the guidance of those Latin
scholars of antiquity who spoke *n these terms because the con-
cept of a tribal organisation was familiar matter of course with
them from home. On the other hand the "kin" is a substantial
fact in the case. The ind'vidual is responsible to and for his
kindred; but this kindred is a vague category; there are no
definite limits to the degrees of consanguinity which it covers,
on the male or female s ; de, by ties of birth or of marriage;
though in a general way, other things being equal, the dues of
kindred reach (perhaps) farther and bind closer on the paternal
than on the maternal side, and on the whole the ties of blood
have greater force than those of marriage. Except for their
greater extension arid greater constraining force, the bonds of
kinship work out to surprisingly near the same effect in Scandi-
navian paganism as among the modern Scandinavian or Eng-
lish-speaking peoples. The rights and duties of the "next friend"
are doubtless more exacting and by legal definition more specific
in Scandinavian paganism, particularly in cases of death by
violence, than in modern Britain or Scandinavia, but even at
this point the difference is one of degree rather than of principle.
There is so much of a patriarchal regime as may be implied in
the use of patronymics as the sole legally competent designation
of persons, and in an uncertain tutelage of women, — this latter
is legally rigorous, apparently, but is not thoroughly effective,
being often disputed by the women and not infrequently falling
into abeyance. One might easily be persuaded, on slight direct
evidence, that the tutelage of women was a relatively late innova-
tion, perhaps an item of civil rights borrowed from the feudalised
countries to the south or from the Romanised countries to the
east. But the use of patronymics shows none of the marks of
an upstart institution. Except as nicknames, metronyms are
not used, and surnames, in the feudalistic or modern sense, of
course are unknown.

While a tribal system or anything like a well matured patri-
archal regime are not included among the civil institutions or
the legal antiquities of this culture, the kingship on the other
hand appears to be intrinsic to the scheme. The kingship is a
matter of course; but the king's place and value in the com-


Supplementary Notes 301

munity's life is not easy to define. In the process of consoli-
dation into larger units that went on through the viking age the
kings, on whose initiative and by whose intrigues the coalescence
into larger kingdoms was effected, arrogated to themselves many
and extensive powers, in imitation of the prerogatives and per-
quisites enjoyed by the feudal rulers of the larger countries of
south and middle Europe; and the royal office so took on much
of the dignity and militant air that belongs with feudalism. But
the kingship as it comes down in use and wont from earlier
prehistoric ages is evidently an institution of slighter material
consequence, though it is apparently an indispensable factor in
the social fabric. This royalty of the ancient line, as seen in
hazy outlines against the prehistoric background, is somewhat
suggestive of the Seven Kings of Yvetot. The king is the first
gentleman of the realm; that much may safely be asserted and
may stand without further phrase or qualification. But beyond
this the case of royalty is in an obscure state. The crown has
apparently little if any legislative authority and no police power,
beyond what the king's personal force and private means may
enable him transiently to arrogate, and it is not clear that he
has any stated revenues except from his private estate in farm-
lands, which he apparently holds on the same tenure and with
the same incidents of ownership as any common freeholder.
Perhaps the only semblance of political or civil power that can
confidently be imputed to him — apart from exceptional cases of
forceful personality — is his presumptive leadership in times of
war, defensive or offensive.

However, there is at least one further item of what may be
called the royal prerogative. The king appears to stand ; n some-
thing like a priestly or quasi-priestly relation to the national
solemnities of paganism, on such occasions, e.g., as the convoking
of the popular assembly and the attendant peace-hallowing of
its precincts. He comes in evidence on these occasions in some
sort as the assembly's chaplain, and perhaps its chairman. And
through the various references to the king and his work there
runs some suggestion of such a semi-sacred or quasi-priestly
nature in other connections as well. This connection between
the kingly office and the pagan cult is a sufficiently obscure


302 Imperial Germany

matter, which has not had the benefit of due attention from the
students of Scandinavian antiquities. And no light on this
question is to be looked for from outside Scandinavian paganism,
since the wandering hosts of predatory migrants engaged in the
barbarian invasions had no kings, except self-made ones, war-
lords installed for purposes of war and predation and not endued
with the sacred character vested by birth in the royal line. The
kingly office, it may be added, appears to have been loosely
elective, by popular choice, which may of course have often
amounted to nothing more than a tolerant consent; but by ex-
acting use and wont the choice is confined to persons of royal
descent, with a presumption in favor of the next of kin, and
of the male line, and with a loosely held presumption in favor
of the eldest son.

In this dimmer past, out of which the traditions of the pagan
kingship have come down to color the legends of a later time,
little is seen of the kingly power but more of the kingly
presence. Direct evidence bearing on the size, as well as on the
constitution, of these prehistoric kingdoms comes almost en-
tirely from Norway, that being the only one of these Baltic
countries in which the process of consolidation and royal ag-
gression had not taken serious effect before the beginnings of
recorded history. Even as regards Norway it is almost wholly
a matter of conjecture how many and how large these kingdoms
were before the prehistoric situation was disturbed; but it is
quite safe to place their number as high as several dozen. Their
boundaries appear to have been drawn on topographical lines;
so that wherever a relatively large tract of country would fall
readily into a single system of neighborhood relations the re-
sulting realm would have some appreciable extent; under the
reverse circumstances the realm might comprise a very moderate
area indeed. One gets the impression that the normal kingdom
may have ranged in extent from that of a parish to that of a
county, or thereabout. Tradition says, e.g., that once upon a
time there used to be a total of five kingdoms in the valley of
Valdres, counting from the head of the valley to Naes at the
head of Lake Spirilen. On the other hand, Ringerike seems by
tradition to have been a single kingdom; and so it also appears
that, e.g., in the ninth century Hordaland, Rogaland, Agdir,
Sognefiord, made one kingdom each; whereas Harald the Fair-


Supplementary Notes 303

haired is said to have dealt with some six or eight kings in what
is now Trondhjem. 1

As regards what may be called the domestic range of in-
stitutions under this prehistoric regime, they appear to have
been neither so rudimentary nor so out of scale with modern
conditions as the civil and political system. Of these institu-
tions the tenure of property and the incidents of ownership are
precise and of fundamental consequence beyond any other, —
unless one should be inclined to give precedence to the some-
what less well defined but indefeasible claims of kindred.

iThe tradition of this pagan kingship has survived in a singu-
lar state of preservation In the folk tales of this region, being
best preserved among the Norwegians and Swedes, as would be
expected, but also giving its color to the folk tales farther afield,
wherever the Germanic legends come in evidence. The king and
his domestic circumstances and establishment come in for fre-
quent attention in these tales, as they do in the similar — or in
many cases the same — tales told in divers and various places
through the length and breadth of the Asiatic-European conti-
nent. But traditional royalty wears a different character in this
western world from what it does elsewhere, so that even in the
same story as told, e.g., in the Punjab or on the Euphrates and
in Scandinavia the same kingly stage-flgure will play his part in
the East as an august monarch ruling with despotic power over
large dominions, while on the Baltic seaboard he is reduced to a
somewhat genial but headstrong gentleman-farmer whose do-
minions are of such extent that the wedding bells which ring in
the conclusion of the story can be heard "across seven kingdoms."

In practical fact within the historical period, the folk who tell
and who listen to these tales in the West have had no experience
of kingdoms or kingly rule of anything like this diminutive scale
and homely style. They have in fact revised the ancient tradition
in the light of their historical experience on such matters as the
church-bells and the clergy, which have come into the frame-work
of the tales at a later date than the disappearance of the last of
the petty kingdoms ; so also fire-arms and other technological
innovations of a later date, as, e.g., chimneys, have found easy
lodgment in this reminiscent folklore. These things have be-
come matters of course to such a degree that they neither help
nor hinder in the furtherance of the tale, whereas the petty king-
shin and the homely scale of life in which it belongs are so in-
dereasibly embedded in the popular sentiment touching what is
right, good and normal, that it all stands over unquestioned as
the ideal type of things in spite of its having all disappeared from
popular experience at a still remoter date. The folk tales carry
the suggestion, to be taken for what it may be worth, that this
small-scale, half -anarchistic, neighborhood plan of society is the
only one that will stand the long-term test of popular sentiment
among these peoples? — the one plan, in effect, to which they will
drift by natural bent and In which they instinctively see the land
of the heart's desire and the empire of content for their kind.

What further there may be reflected, in the way of long-term
ideals or reminiscence, in these tales, where they speak In a com-
placent matter-of-course way of the transmission of the royal
office by the spindle side to the lucky young man who marries the
princess, — that line of surmise need perhaps not be attended to.
What Karl Pearson has to say in these premises, e.g.. (The
Chances of Death, essays on "Hans in Luck," "Woman as Witch,"
etc.), may be both interesting and significant, even if the argu-
ment is not accepted as conclusive of the somewhat radical de-
ductions which he offers.


304 Imperial Germany

Property is held in severalty, with a conventionally effective
but ill-specified reversionary interest on the part of the kindred.
This applies, apparently without qualification, to realty and
personalty alike. A distinction of principle between realty and
personalty does not seem to have been contemplated; although
it is evident that the law (of the nature of common law) was
elaborately worked out in all its bearings on property rights. 1
Property passed by inheritance very much after the modern
fashion in those countries where there is neither entail nor
primogeniture; illegitimate children (a category to be counted
with in this case) having apparently — at least at the close of the
pagan era — no legal claim except in the absence of legitimate
issue, though they seem to have had something of an effectual
conventional claim. Marriage arrangements have a similarly
modern air, except that polygamy and concubinage appear to
have been included in the scheme, — although one gets the im-
pression that the freedom allowed in this respect was not very
fully taken advantage of. Separation was easy, on very slight
plea, and equally open to either party. The tutelage of children
also fell very much into modern lines, much after the fashion
that now prevails in those countries where a minimum of re-
straint is exercised by the parents, and where no restraint is
exercised much beyond the age of puberty; girls being held

*Such a conception as a communistic holding of property,
whether in land or in chattels, does not come within the legal
horizon of these peoples, and such an organisation as the "mark"
of scholarly tradition is as foreign to that scheme of things as
the modern stock market.

The conventionally accepted view of early Germanic society
has, until lately, been notably different from the one here spoken
for. Nor has this earlier view yet been formally abandoned by
historians and prehistorians ; it appears to be dying by neglect
rather than by refutation, although some of the most substantial
and ambitious of later studies in Germanic antiquities have been
conducted from its point of view and with assumption of its pre-
mises. Among the more considerable and valuable of these later
works, of which many are of substantial value, may be men-
tioned as examples : Matthaeus Much, Die Heimat der Indoger-
manen; Herman Hirt, Die Indogermanen (2 vols.) ; Richard Hilde-
brand, Recht und Sitte auf den verachiedenen wirtschaftlichen
Kulturatufen (vol. i.) ; and the great work of August Meitzen,
Siedelung und Agrarweaen der Weatgermanen und Oatgermanen,
etc., which affords an extraordinary volume of well-digested ma-
terial that is equally serviceable whether the author's assump-
tions are accepted or not. The abandonment, or rather the falling
away, of this older view of north-European antiquities appears
to be due to the relinquishment of the romantic point of view in
historical interpretation and its supersession by an economic and
genetic conception. This movement of supersession having taken
less effect among German scholars than elsewhere, the older view
is still doing service among German historians and enthnologists
somewhat more extensively than elsewhere.


Supplementary Notes 305

in tutelage rather more closely than boys, and apparently to a
higher age. On a separation of the parents, children of tender
age apparently went with the mother, quite as frequently as with
the father. Such, in a general way, appears to have been the
practice; in legal theory there appears to have been a prevalent
conception of tutelage of women and children by the male head
of the household, but this conception appears not to have made
its way successfully in practice. It may be added that, while
marriage had its formalities and ceremonial, there is no evi-
dence of its having had a religious or other ritual significance;
it is rather to be characterised as a civil contract only.

The religious faith and life of the late pagan era has had
much attention from students of antiquity, and the views current
among the adepts on this head, particularly on the side of
mythology, have been fortunate enough to achieve an appreci-
able publicity. And it is to be noted that in this respect Germanic
antiquities give a fuller account of themselves than do the an-
tiquities of other, neighboring cultures. That such is the case
is due primarily to the work of one man, seconded by the earlier
work in the same field of his immediate predecessor among
Icelandic scholars. Except for Snorri's Edda and the poems of
the elder, or "poetic," Edda on which he drew, the mythology of
the Germanic peoples would scarcely be better known today
than that of the Druids ; and possibly even less would be known
about it if the occasional references to religious practices in the
older sagas were also wanting. Any other information, from
German, English or classical sources, has no consistency except
as it clusters about Snorri's account. Now, Snorri's Gylfagin-
ning, Bragaroedur and Skdldskaparmdl are light literature, the
work of an artist gifted with a Shakesperian sense for the
ludicrous, and the Asa gods come through his hands in what is
perhaps an excessively humanised recension. At any rate,
whatever they may have been like in their legendary shapes
before they got into his hands, when they leave his hands they
are figures of no great stature considered as deities. 1 The
mythological passages of the elder Edda have a more sedate
air than Snorri's ancedotes, and the passing references in the
older sagas to occasional rites and observances of a religious

1 Translators and commentators have commonly approached
Snorri's work with their minds made up for solemnities, not un-
touched with filial piety and theological exaltation. The inter-
pretations so arrived at have showed as larg-e an excess of magni-
tude and divinity in the Asa gods as Snorri's ipaiasima verba may
show too much of horse-play and slack-twisted human nature.


306 imperial Germany

or magical nature give more of an impression of sombre super-
stition than is conveyed by anything Snorri has to say. But
when all is said, the fact remains that Snorri is the one chief
and indispensable informant and that his anecdotes will have to
be taken, with whatever weighting may seem necessary, as the
only consistent body of information extant on this head. Other
sources stand to Snorri very much in the relation of marginal
notes and glosses.

Barring a certain lightness, approaching flippancy, then, on
Snorri's part, and barring the visible influence exercised by the
Greek Olympian system on his schematic grading of the Asa
gods and goddesses, his representation of them, their manner
of life and their relation to mankind, bears the marks of a
veracious account. There is among these northern gods no
figure of a divine autocrat, absolute, august, austere and aloof,
whose will is the fundamental law and whose goa.d pleasure
constitutes good and ill. What vouches for the veracity of this
account is the unfailing coincidence of this divine with the
human scheme. It is a scheme in which a shrewd and genial
elder plays the part of a typical petty king, such as still is met
with in the northern folk tales, and in which the several mem-
bers of the society of gods each pursue their several interests as
their several propensities may decide, and within such decent
bounds of intrigue and sharp dealing as were currently held per-
missible, or respectable, among the! men of that age, and as still
give character to the folk tales. So slight is the theological con-
tent of this scheme of divinity that it has required much labor
and more bias to satisfy the aspirations of even the more modest
seekers for hidden truths in this supernatural underbrush. And
since there is to be had, neither in Snorri's account nor outside
of it, anything substantial in the way of a description, or even
a characterisation, of the cult of observances, the ritual and the
sacred properties that will have given the Asa faith a practical
effect, there seems but little to go on in any endeavor to re-
construct a system of worship. Something comes in sight here
and there, in references to sacrifice, which appears to have
marked both seasonal periods and special occasions — culminat-
ing in infrequent but apparently authentic instances of human
sacrifice — as also in references to the hof (temple or precincts)
and to sacred images. The god head so propitiated appears
most frequently to have been Frey, an agricultural divinity to
be conciliated with a view to crops and to material welfare at


Supplementary Notes 307

large. Frey (or Frigg) appears to have been a diety of long
standing, being with some confidence traced back to the bronze
age. 1

The most considerable material survivals of the pagan cult
would appear to be the well known and highly characteristic
carved portals that are still to be found in use in the surviving
churches dating from the earliest Christian centuries, — valu-
able also as monuments of the late pagan art work in carved
wood. With the exception of slight, late and on the whole in-
ferior specimens, these portals show no Christian symbolism,
and their uniform style over large distances argues that they
are the outcome of long-continued use and wont, demanding
more time than can possibly be allowed within the early Chris-
tian period. The leading symbolical motive in this work is the
dragon of northern legend, helped out with minor reptilian
forms and seconded by a conventionalised tree form. Both by
their ubiquitous occurrence and by the excellence and magnificent
scale of the work, these material remains would appear to bear
witness to a consistent, wide spread and systematised cult, far
beyond what the literary remains independently suggest.

Yet, whatever may have been the reach and systematic con-
sistency of the cult, there is no evidence, literary or otherwise, of
a priesthood, — beyond the sufficiently evident discharge of
priestly, or at least of ritual, duties by local magnates whose chief
■duties appear to have been of a civil character. The Icelandic
godi is the nearest approach to a priest that anywhere comes in
sight; and the discrepancy between a priesthood in the accepted
sense of the term and these gentlemen-farmers and keepers of
the sacred properties is sufficiently obvious. A sacerdotal class
and an ecclesiastical establishment appear both to be wanting,
although some of the functions and equipment requisite for both
appear to be at hand. The religious life would seem to have

»Cf., e.g., Sophus Bugge, "Fricco, Frigg und Priapos," Chria-
tiania Viaenaka088el8kaba Forhandlinger. 1904.

For the latterday conventional view or this pagan cult and creed
as they prevailed in late prehistoric times and as seen in the light
of current research and scholarship in the Scandinavian countries,
see Alex. Bugge, Norgea Historic, vol. i. part i. sec. v ; where the
traits of this paganism will be seen to have greatly unbent from
that austere and inflexible state of beatitude that invests it all
In Schrader and his contemporaries, particularly among German
scholars. The view set forth, or the interpretation rendered, by
Dr. Bugge is a conservative and reverent revision of the tradi-
tional rendering, but it has the benefit of the later and more
matter-of-fact scholarship as well as the authentication of Scandi-
navian students occupied with these materials today.


308 Imperial Germany

reached a degree of systematisation and, at least for some con-
siderable period toward the close of the pagan era, to have found
expression in a cult that embodied passably uniform observances
over a relatively wide domain, very far exceeding any national
boundaries; but this cult and its observance appears at the same
time to have achieved no appreciable hierarchical organisation
and no great degree of coercive authority. There are traces of
coercion, as in legal penalties for blasphemy (godgjd), as also
ecclesiastical rights and perquisites, as in a voluntary imposi-
tion of tithes for support of the local • sanctuary ; but taken by
and large the impression one gets of this religious life is of
much the same character as that given by the civil organisation,
— best to be described as a conventionally systematised anarchy
regulated by common sense. Such a system of social organi-
sation, whether in the spiritual or in the temporal domain,
would be enforceable only within such territorial, bounds as
would be covered by the habitual range of neighborly contact, —
a contact sufficiently close and alert to ensure a certain (ef-
fective) solidarity of neighborhood sentiment on all matters
touching the conditions of life in the group; and the control
exercised by such neighborhood surveillance would run within a
fairly broad margin of tolerance. Any uniformity of use and
wont over a wider tract of country, or over the region at large,
whereby an effectually homogeneous culture comes to prevail
among these various autonomous parcels of society, could rest
in the long run only on a substantial similarity of material sur-
roundings, and of temperament, a similar state of the industrial
arts, free intercourse, and a (consequent) homogeneity of
language. 1

»What has here been said of the Old Order on the Baltic Sea-
board draws on the evidence from this region and applies to the
culture of this region alone. But it is not thereby intended to
claim that this culture differs widely from what has been preva-
lent in other places and among other peoples on a similar general
level of civilisation. It is only that these other instances do not
immediately concern the subject under inquiry. In fact, it will
be found that the cultures loosely classed as upper-savage or
lower-barbarian quite commonly show much the same institutional
traits as those here indicated. The like loose, quasi-anarchistic,
non-coercive social organisation comes in sight as a matter-of-
course, e.g.,, among the Eskimo, particularly the eastern and
central Eskimo, who are by force of circumstances more habitu-
ally at peace than their western relations ; so, again, in a degree
and with a difference, among the Indians of the North -West Coast,
or among the Pueblo Indians, and there are similar resemblances
and reminiscences to be found here and there in Indonesia and
Polynesia. All of which argues that this Old Order of the north-
European civilisation is neither erratic, exceptional nor of a pre-
carious kind ; and that there is all the more reason to look for
recrudescence of its underlying spiritual attitude in cases where
the current circumstances favor or admit a reversion to condi-
tions of peace.


Supplementary Notes 309

The maintenance of this old order under stress of changing
technological conditions would be helped out by certain peculiar
circumstances of the case: As has been noted above, the Baltic
peoples habitually borrowed new technological ideas as well as
new elements of decorative art, which they handled with such
freedom as would argue that these borrowed elements carried
over in their transit little or none of the fringe of conventionali-
ties, magical precautions and tabus, that customarily attach to
such elements among the people among whom they have arisen
or have gone through a protracted development. That they
borrowed freely of all those things that could leave a material
residue to testify to their presence would argue that they will
also have borrowed with some facility of such immaterial ele-
ments as would leave a residue only in the texture of the in-
stitutional fabric of succeeding generations. 1 Such persistent
borrowing has a direct effect in the way of discouraging a
growth of rigid conventions or a reduction of institutional
details to ultra-rigorous authenticity. On the other hand the
borrowing implies continued and passably amicable intercourse
with other cultural areas; at the same time that it shows what
may be called a receptive attitude toward foreign usage and
ideas. The net yield of such intercourse should be more of
flexibility than of authenticity in the resulting scheme of life,
so that adaptation to new exigencies should be made with rela-
tively slight reluctance, or relatively slight lesion to the accredited
principles of right and honest living. Within limits, relatively
wide limits, the scheme would bend rather than break. At the
sarne time such changes as make for a longer reach and larger
organisation of the industrial forces will commonly also con-
duce to a wider effectual human contact ; so that, as one con-
sequence of the technological advance, the effectual reach of
neighborly solidarity will be somewhat increased and the system
of anarchistic neighborhood control will be competent to cover
a larger population. An increasing density of population, due to
the same set of changes, will have the like effect.

It follows that the enhanced scale and reach of the indus-
trial arts, working toward the destruction of the old order,
in a measure carries its own corrective. But it is none the less
evident that the increased viability so given the old order of
institutions is due to be overreached by the technological changes

1 Some evidence to this effect is to be seen in the borrowed Gods
Included In the Asa mythology, as well as in the shifting fashions
of sepulture. ,


3io Imperial Germany

which condition it; since technological advance is of the nature
of cumulative habituation, while the practicability of anarchistic
neighborhood control depends on native traits of human nature
that do not change and whose channels of efficiency must always
continue to be personal contact through the senses, however,
this contact may be helped out at one point and another by me-
chanical expedients. By analogy it might be said that an an-
archistic system works by manual labor and its scope can not
exceed the manual reach of those engaged, with whatever slight
equipment of tools may be conceived to add to the reach of
manual labor ; whereas the industrial arts are of the nature of a
mechanical process which may indefinitely exceed the manual
reach of the individual workman. The substantial fact in the
one is the personal force and temper of the human individual;
in the other it is the impersonal interplay of mechanical pro-
* cesses.

So, the old order began to disintegrate and presently broke
so soon as the state of the industrial arts pushed the reach of
individual initiative beyond the scope of this control exercised
by an undifferentiated consensus of neighborly sentiment. The
particular point at which the advance of industry finally and
decisively disestablished the conditions requisite to the old order
in the Baltic countries appears to have been in the arts of
nav'gation ; although excessive improvement in other means
of communication, as, e.g., in roadways and wheeled vehicles,
may have contributed materially to its decay and displacement
in Denmark and Sweden, as perhaps also in the countries
farther to the south. The conditions that made dynastic coercion
possible made local autonomy impossible. Not that the resulting
coercive system proved itself eminently expedient in any other
sense than that nothing else could stand in competition with it
when once the technological conditions had overpassed the
breaking point of the old order. Indeed, the situation that
supervened with the triumph of state and church in the Scandi-
navian countries, e.g., and particularly in Norway, can not well
be characterised as anything but imbecile and nasty. But the
technological advance had passed the point beyond which the
old order ceased to be viable; and no retreat could be made to
a line of defense so far rearward that the new order, having
once taken over the powers of the community, could be dis-
possessed in favor of the old. It is true of institutional systems
as of personal claimants : Beati possidentes.


Supplementary Notes 311

In the course of time, though it appears to have occupied
several thousand years of slow but scarcely broken advance,
their excessive efficiency in the mechanic arts pushed the north- \ %/
European peoples out of that state of culture answering to .
their natural bent. And ever since they so passed the tech-
nological limit of tolerance of that archaic scheme of use and
wont they have been restlessly casting back for some workable
compromise that would permit their ideal of "local self-
government" by neighborly common sense to live somehow in
the shadow of that large-scale coercive rule that killed it.
Now, it happens that insubordination is the vital principle of
this defunct system of local self-government, whereas it is the
sin against the Holy Ghost of dynastic coercion. So the com-
promise has not been found, or it has not been found to work,
and yet this ideal of insubordination, of Live and let live, has
eaten too close to the bone in the north-European hybrid to let
him settle down into wholesome content without its realisation.

As has appeared above, and as has been argued more at length
in an earlier passage, such a quasi-anarchistic system of neigh-
borhood control — "local self-governing autonomy" — can run on
and do well only in case the population which carries on such
a cultural scheme is endowed with a type of human nature
suited to this manner of life. A short-term success may attend
any scheme of institutions, even if it is not eminently suited to
the moral genius of the people, particularly if it is seconded by
propitious material conditions and a serviceable state of the in-
dustrial arts; but where there is a wide discrepancy between
the temperamental bent of the people and the system of control
and habits of life superinduced by their material surroundings
and industrial organisation, no enduring continuity of popular
welfare is to be looked for, and the life-history of such a cul-
ture or such a community will be marked by catastrophic disturb-
ances and recurrent collapse.

Conversely, where the material surroundings and the current
state of the industrial arts are such as to offer mankind a living
only on these terms, as would be true through the long pre-
historic ages in the Baltic region, the only type of human
nature that could make good its survival would be of the fashion
suitable to this neighborhood management by common consent.
So that the north-European population is adapted to this manner -''
of life by its hereditary bent. Not that this need be conceived as
a unique distinction of the north-European hybrid peoples. The


3i2 Imperial Germany

conditions of life in prehistoric times — in the days of selective
elimination of the unfit types — will in this respect have com-
monly been of much the same character elsewhere; and the
same natural bent is visible, in more or less effectual force,
among many of the peoples of the lower cultures, particularly
among peaceable, sedentary peoples, such as the Pueblo Indians
or the Eskimo. But these others do not immediately concern
the present inquiry, and there is no need here to point a contrast
in this respect between the peoples of the Baltic culture and any
others. For all that concerns the present argument, this an-
archistic animus may well mark a generic bent of the human
race at large.

So far as bears on the relations between man and man, and
between the individual and his social group, this anarchistic
morality is formulated in the homely aphorism : Live and let
live. It has been the peculiar merit of this archaic anarchism —
a merit at least in the eyes of the north-European — that it al-
lows the common man to live as good as him seems, within
the margin of neighborhood tolerance : at the same time it is
involved in this scheme of things, as a condition precedent to
its working, that the common man must by natural bent be gifted
with a penchant for letting his neighbor live as good as him
seems, within the same margin of neighborhood tolerance. This
is the ideal of "justice" according to the anarchistic conception,
— called also, by way of euphemism and compromise, the indi-
vidualistic or democratic conception. 1 These are the two
spiritual foci about which the orbit of right and honest living
swings; and so long as this orbit maintains its balance it meets
the demands of justice, because such is the moral bias native to
man, as selectively determined in the archaic days when the
extant types of human nature made good their survival.

That a man should live as good him seems will mean that he
is to do his own work in h's own way, to the limit of such
initiative and capacity as there is in him, — always with the

l tfn historic times the moral attitude underlying this principle
of justice has reasserted itself with notable resiliency from time
to time, in the development of the common law and of. so-called,
free institutions. It is nearly the whole of the moral wisdom
embodied in the system of Natural Rights, and it is the founda-
tion of the utilitarian school of morals, from Bent ham to Spencer.

The ubiquity and persistence of this moral bent is by no means
a newly discovered fact, of course. It is precisely this manifest
ubiquity and persistence of it that makes this human trait — per-
haps human infirmity — an invaluable premise in any inquiry into
the practicability or expediency of any given scheme of control
or any projected line of collective enterprise.


Supplementary Notes 313

reservation that he will not transgress the margin of tolerance
rooted in the moral common sense of his neighbors. The con-
fines of this margin of tolerance appear to be fixed by the cur-
rent apprehension of what is serviceable for the common good
on the one hand and what is disserviceable on the other hand;
so that, in so far as it is a question of tolerance, individual
idiosyncrasy runs free so long as its bearing on the common
good is indifferent. Settled and persistent disserviceability is
morally odious, presently becomes obnoxious, and so falls under
the corrective intervention of common sense as soon as it
swells to such excess as to stir the neighborhood into action.
Evidently, what has been called the "instinct of workmanship"
comes in for a large share in this moral bias, particularly in
respect of the limit of tolerance ; economic reprobation has much
to do with the intolerance that eventually moves the community
to concerted measures for putting down an obnoxious super-
fluity of naughtiness. Evidently, too, individual grievance suf-
fered by one and another in the community, will have much to
do in bringing on such a common-sense reprobation of any such
superfluity. 1

Several causes contributed to the decay and eventual col-
lapse of this old order of things, but they may all be run back
to the one common ground of an excessive advance in the indus-
trial arts, — excessive, of course, only in the sense that it was
inconsistent with the working arrangements that had been suffi-
cient under the old order. 2 As has been noted in an earlier
passage, the archaeological evidence indicates the presence of
property arid distinctions of wealth as far back as an early
period in the stone age, and the evidence of such a difference in
wealth grows more pronounced from that time on. A difference
of this kind sets up a disparity between the members of the
group, so that to Live and let live no longer means an equal, or
equitable, chance for all in the use of the group's natural
resources or in the utilisation of the state of the .industrial arts.
Accumulated wealth confers a differential advantage on its
owner, so that with the same free hand as his neighbors and with
the added reach given by his "means" he is in a position to bene-

*It is characteristic of this archaic system of justice that no
public authority and no legally concerted action ordinarily is
called in to redress grievances. The award of the court enforces
no penalty ; it only gives due legal sanction to reprisal.

*Ct„ Graham Wallas, The Great Society, especially ch. i. ; also
H. C. Adams. "Economics and Jurisprudence ;" Presidential Address,
Am. Econ. Assoc. 1896, especially sec, ii.


314 Imperial Germany

fit beyond the ordinary; which means, conversely, that the com-
mon man lies under a corresponding differential disadvantage as
against his wealthy nc'ghbor, both in the use of the natural re-
sources and in the usufruct of the community's technological
knowledge. So that the accumulation of wealth in private hands
works, from its beginnings, at cross purposes with the principle
of Live and let live ; in so far as the wealthy, in full accord with
the principle, is allowed to live as good as him seems, and to do
as he will with his own, the common man with fewer means has
less than an even chance to live as good as him seems and do
as he will with his own. 1 But the accumulation of wealth and
the consequent exercise of power may go some length and still
be amenable to control by neighborhood sentiment, and it tnay go
still farther without effectually escaping all such control or totally
defeating the social order. 2

Under the anarchistic rule of Live and let live the institution
of property readily finds lodgment in the fabric of use and
wont. If a metaphysical rationale need be sought for it, it is
easily found in the shape in wh ; ch John Locke formulated it
at that modern epoch when the right of pecuniary contract
again came into the central position in the scheme of civil
rights. The psychological ground of it is not difficult to find,

X A11 this, of course, implies no criticism or derogation of the
institution of private property at large, either as to its defensi-
bility on moral grounds or as to its expediency on economic
grounds. Ownership with full discretion in the use of property
appears, both by logical congruity and by the test of use and wont,
to be an intrinsic effect of the rule of Live and let live ; it is
only in its consequences that it comes in conflict with that rule,
and these consequences appear to have come seriously into play
only gradually and in the course of institutional growth.

The history of the Icelandic republic shows how the accumu-
lation of wealth was itself sufficient to put an end to the old
order. The republic never had an executive or administrative
organ, and grew by deliberate adaptation and improvement out
of a system of neighborhood autonomy. It came of an aggrega-
tion of settlements made, in the main, by refugees from Norway,
who had made their escape from the increasing, and to them in-
tolerable, pressure of a coercive state organised by Harald the
Fair-haired and his immediate successors, and modeled on the
pattern of the feudal principalities lying farther to the south, —
on the principles of duty as contrasted with that of right. This
"anarchistic" republic appears to have served its purpose passably
from the outset, but with increasing difficulty, hardship, and loss,
as wealth and power progressively accumulated in the hands of
fewer families, and so came to be managed in appreciable masses
under anarchistic rules by competing chieftains — "bosses" they
would be called in latterday colloquial speech — who swung the
forces of the community for their own ends ; until the collapse
came as the close of a protracted season of internal raids, law-
lessness, civil war and assassination, carried out in the endeavors
of these magnates each to live as good him seemed.


Supplementary Notes 315

whether on the side of the owner who comes in for the property
or on that of his neighbors who countenance him in his pos-
session and use of it. And so long as the whole matter runs
its course within the range of effective neighborly surveillance
no serious difficulty arises out of such a practice, which com-
mends itself to each as expedient for his own purposes. Mean-
time it grows into a settled usage, is given definite formulation
by use and wont, as to its reach and incidents, and becomes one
of the assured points of support in the legal system, — an ancient
right, sanctioned by unbroken usage from time immemorial.


IV

(Note to Chapter VI, page 187)

«
It is no part of this inquiry to pass appraisal on American

business enterprise or on the dealings of American business men
with the country's resources and opportunities. Yet certain
relevant considerations may contribute something to the com-
parison undertaken between the English and the German case at
this point.

Much is made in public speech of the unlimited possibilities of
this country, and of the utter freedom, boldness and assiduity
of its enterprising captains of industry. It is true, these encomi-
ums come most commonly and most loquaciously from among
the members of the craft, but they are after all so integral an
article of the popular faith that any question of them becomes
an ungrateful if not an odious heresy. It will accordingly be
more to the point to recite the circumstances of the case than
to add fruitless asseverations.

There need be no deduction allowed on the count of America's
unlimited opportunities for profitable business enterprise. Within
the circle of industrial countries the material resources of the
country may well be adnrtted to have no counterpart ; its work-
ing population is also to be rated as of unexceptionable quality.
But accepting these premise^, the industrial outcome should log-
ically be something quite unexampled, rather than second best.
In respect of its business community America is the country of
the self-made man ; such was the state of the case unqualifiedly
in that brief past when current business traditions took on what
consistency they have, and such is still the state of the case as


3 J 6 Imperial Germany

touches not less than nine-tenths of the volume of traffic or of
the personnel. While one does not lightly lay profane hands on
this palladium of the republic, it seems unavoidable in this
connection to inquire somewhat into the current process of
production of this self-made man, and so into his bearing on
the state of enterprise in the business community.

The raw material out of which he is made is substantially the
same as that which goes to make the American politician, and
the arts of production employed and serviceable are also much
the same in both cases. As is true of most native Americans,
he comes from the farm, in the sense that he has commonly
been born outside the limits of any properly urban community;
but he will commonly have left the farm for the country town
in boyhood. It is in the country towns, and in the smaller
cities, so-called, that far and away the greater number of Ameri-
can business men have their beginnings ; and the greater number
of them, indeed, spend their later life and endeavors in the
same surroundings. Success in these surroundings becomes the
test of fitness to do business, or to be trusted with discretion
in business aside from or beyond these surroundings. For all
but a vanishing nrnority, it is these country-town circumstances
that selectively decide whether a given candidate for self-made
business enterprise is fit to survive. So that the great proportion
of those who have the country's business, and therefore its in-
dustry, in hand are those who have proved their fitness for
survival under the conditions imposed by the country town, or
by the small city, which is an overgrown town.

The American country town, and the small city in its degree,
is a peculiar institution, little appreciated by observers from
over-sea. It is a business community; that is to say it lives for
and by business traffic, primarily of a merchandising sort. It
is often spoken of as a center or sub-center for the distribution
of goods to the country population, and for the receipt and
transmission of country produce; but this is definition by
enumeration of mechanical facts only. The reason of its being
is the gain to be got by doing business in this particular place.
The nucleus of its population is the local business, men, whose
interests constitute its municipal policy and control its municipal
administration. These local business men are such as the local
bankers, merchants of many kinds and degrees, real-estate pro-
moters, local lawyers, local clergymen. In the typical town all
these have something of a hand in municipal politics, which is


Supplementary Notes 317

conducted as in some sort a public or overt extension of that
private or covert organisation* of local interests that watches
over the joint pecuniary benefit of the local businessmen. It is
a means of rewarding serviceable local politicians with salaries
and perquisites, especially the latter, and of safe-guarding the
local business community against interlopers and against any
evasive tactics on the part of the country population that serves
as host to this businesslike growth. This politico-pecuniary en-
terprise in municipal perquisites is a case of joint action rather
than of collective action, since each and several of the partici-
pants, overt and covert, takes part as strategist or diplomatic
agent for his own pecuniary interest.

The nature of this country town will be better appreciated if
one takes a genetic view of it. Typically it is a product and
exponent of the American land system. In its beginning it is
located and "developed" as an enterprise of speculation in land
values; that is to say it is a businesslike endeavor to get
something for nothing by engrossing as much as may be of the
increment of land values due to the increase of population and
the settlement and cultivation of the adjacent agricultural area.
It never (hitherto) loses this character of real-estate specula-
tion. The businessmen who take up the local traffic ixi merchan-
dising, litigation, church enterprise, and the like, commonly
begin with some share in this real-estate speculation. This af-
fords a common bond and a common ground of pecuniary in-
terest, which commonly masquerades under the name of local
patriotism, public spirit, civic pride, and the like. This pretense
of public spirit is so consistently maintained that most of these
men come presently to believe in their own professions on that
head. Pecuniary interest in local land values involves an in-
terest in the continued growth of the town. Hence any credit-
able misrepresentation of the town's volume of business traffic,
population, tributary farming community, or natural resources,
is rated as serviceable to the common good. And any member
of this businesslike community will be rated as a meritorious
c'tizen in proportion as he is serviceable to this joint pecuniary
interest of these "influential citizens."

The American country town, considered as an institution and
an engine of cultural discipline, is chiefly a growth of the nine-
teenth century, and it has grown to its fullest efficiency in that
north-middle region that was effectively brought into the re-
public during the later three-quarters of the century, more


318 Imperial Germany

particularly during the period of large immigration from north-
ern Europe. It owes much of its character to this immigration:
The immigrants settled over this stretch of country as tillers
of the soil, while the American population of the East at the
same time scattered over the same region in the towns; with the
result that the foreign immigrants did the work necessary to
the reclamation of this stretch of fertile land, and the native-
born in the towns did the business. This business was prevail-
ingly of a prehensible character, being carried on by men well at
home in the common law of the land and directed to getting
something for nothing at the expense of the foreign immi-
grants who were unfamiliar with the common law. Being, in
the view of their masters, aliens in the land, the foreign im-
migrants were felt to have no claim to consideration beyond
what the laws that they did not know would formally secure
to them in case matters were brought to the legal test. The
presumption in the mind of honest businessmen at all points
was on the side of their own pecuniary advantage, leaving any
doubts to be settled by eventual litigation that might be brought
by the foreign immigrants, — who could with great uniformity be
relied on most meticulously to avoid all litigation under a system
of law with which they had no acquaintance, before local magis-
strates (businessmen) whom they had no reason to trust, in a
language which they did not understand. So, within these prem-
ises, the civil law in great measure became a dead letter, except in
so far as it served the pecuniary advantage of the businessmen
in the country town; but the formal legality that so inured to
the consequent system of astute depredation served to make it
morally blameless in the eyes of its beneficiaries and to give it
the meritorious appearance of thrift. Whereby the moral fron-
tiers between chicane and thrift have eventually fallen somewhat
into abeyance in American business ethics, particularly in the
country-town business community that has been specially ex-
posed to this devastation of American morals by the foreign
immigrants.

The number of self-made men that have emerged from this
traffic, however, has been very considerable. So considerable,
indeed, as still to give its distinctive character to the American
business community at large, in spite of an increasing con-
tingent, especially of younger men, drawn from other sources
and different antecedents. There is consequently enough of a
country-town animus pervading this community selectively to


Supplementary Notes 319

■

bring any recruits from other breeding-grounds into conformity
with these country-town ideals of what is the suitable conserva-
tive temper that a man should possess in order to be trusted to
do business.

The successful man under this state of things succeeds
because he is by native gift or by training suited to this situation
of petty intrigue and nugatory subtleties. To survive, in the
business sense of the word, he must prove himself a serviceable
member of this gild of municipal diplomats who patiently wait
on the chance of getting something for nothing; and he can
enter this gild of waiters on the still-born pecuniary gain, only
through such apprenticeship as will prove his fitness. To be
acceptable he must be reliable, conciliatory, conservative, secre-
tive, patient and prehensile. The capacities that make the out-
come and that characterise this gild of self-made businessmen
are cupidity, prudence, and chicane, — the greatest of these, and
the one that chiefly gives its tone to this business life, is pru-
dence. And indispensable among the qualities that command
that confidence of his associates without which no man can make
himself as a business man, is a conservative temper.

The ways and means to the making of the self-made man in
American business are of this character, and the product is of
such a quality as these ways and means may be expected to
yield, acting as they do with great uniformity both by training
and by selection. It by no means follows that either the busi-
ness men created by this means, or the business community
built out of this select and well-wrought material, lacks enter-
prise of a sort. But it is enterprise in the way of pecuniary
strategy, in the getting of something for nothing by shrewd man-
agement of pecuniary values. It is enterprise of the kind that
eschews innovation. Adventures in new, untried, unstandardised
industrial projects and expedients are alien and anathema to the
prudent, conservative business community. It is only after such
excursions have proved their pecuniary gain fulness in spite of
the business community's astute incredulity, that they come to be
taken over as a source of gain. But in expeditiously intercepting
the gain derivable from such industrial innovations as have
proved their gainfulness in spite of the incredulity of the busi-
nessmen, or from the usufruct of such resources as are known
to lend themselves to the standard methods of pecuniary manipu-
lation, this business community shows a high degree of efficiency.

America is the land of unlimited possibilities, it is believed,


3^0 Imperial Germany

both in respect of material resources and in respect of inventive
genius. But it is a notorious commonplace that the mechanical
inventions which have in a sense made America what it is in
the industrial respect have not only not been made by the busi-
nessmen — they are astute and conservative pecuniary strategists,
with neither insight nor aptitude in technological matters — but
have also not been made with their support.

It is worth noting that the country-town method of select-
ing and training the community's businessmen, in that it makes
its selection on grounds of astuteness, caution and cupidity, at
the same time and by the same tests rejects such candidates as
are endowed with technological insight or an aggressive curiosity
in matters of industrial innovation. And connected with this
selective bidding up of pecuniary astuteness and quietism is the
well-known inefficiency of business management in American in-
dustry, — well-known among men competent to speak on these
matters, though not well credited among the businessmen at
large, who commonly lack even the degree of technological in-
sight necessary to appreciate the pecuniary loss involved in their
own astute mismanagement. The "efficiency engineers" have no
hesitation about saying that the businessmen's management of
industry has resulted in a wasteful use of the equipment and
labor employed, sometimes rising to figures fairly incredible to
the common layman. This waste may be more or less, but it is
a systematic result of the management of industrial enterprises
by the self-made businessman. At the same time the efficiency
engineers' criticism takes no account of the waste involved in
downright unemployment or stoppage of workmen and plant,
due to the pecuniary strategy of the same conservative business-
men, although this item of waste doubtless exceeds by several
fold that caused by incompetent management while the plant is
running.

Something is always to be allowed for exceptions and side
issues in any generalisation so broad as this, and the broad
proposition just set down in characterisation of the American
businessman is not to be* taken as applying without such quali-
fication. But when all desired qualifications have been allowed
there remains this unflattering state of the facts, notorious and
comprehensive : America has unrivalled material resources and
a working population nowise inferior to any other for industry
under the machine technology; American businessmen have had
a free hand and a minimum of burdens in the way of taxes or


i:


Supplementary Notes 321

other government exactions (American taxation has, as is well
known, fallen chiefly on the farm population and other classes
not engaged in business, and has not been extremely high at
that) ; the American achievement in this field within the same
period has been notoriously less conspicuous and less sub-
stantial e.g., than that of Germany since the formation of the
Empire. Nowhere have the businessmen had so full and large
a discretion, nowhere have they been favored by government
regulations to the same extent — for the reason that nowhere
have they controlled the making and administration of the laws
in anything like the same degree; and nowhere have they fallen
short of their opportunities by so wide a margin.

It is true, there is much said of American boldness and re-
sourcefulness in business enterprise ; and there is some substance
to this boast in so far as "business enterprise" is taken as a
synonym for "pecuniary intrigue," also called finance. But if
it is to be taken in any more substantial sense it is useful only as
evidence that men like to be flattered by imputation of virtues
which they do not possess. The country-town self-made man
is not the only kind comprised in the American business com-
munity, nor is the self-made man's country-town spirit of con-
servative chicane the whole scope and method of business in this
community; but he is far and away the most numerous species
of businessman in this community, he has been so by tradition
so long and consistently that business usages, relations and
ideals in this community have been conventionalised on his
lines; so that by force of conventions, in good part embodied
in law, and by force of the like spirit in an effective majority of
the living generation, it comes about that this country-town
conservative chicane is accepted as the type of safe and sane
business enterprise.

Even the larger business finance and the large American busi-
ness financiers accordingly still show the earmarks of this
country-town derivation, — not that these individuals who hold
the industrial fortunes of the country in their hands have
therefore individually come up through the country town to
their later stations of responsibility, but only that the authentic
concept*ons of business methods and animus, to which all safe
and sane businessmen must conform, are of this derivation,
and that therefore the business community at large will do busi-
ness only on this footing. American business is eminently of
a financial character, and the traffic of these financiers runs


322 Imperial Germany

within the closed circuit of money-market strategy, with any
industrial effects of this financial management coming in as inci-
dentals. The controlling incentives are those of the market
for securities, not those of the output of goods; and the final
discretion vests in the investment banker, not in the engineering
staff or the manager of the works. The discretionary direction
of affairs has in effect passed into the hands of these financiering
houses, whose ostensible relation to the industrial concerns is
that of underwriters only. While these financiers exercise the
discretion, they have no responsibility for the conduct of the in-
dustries dependent on their discretion.

It is well known now, though there is commonly not much
said about it, that the "trust movement," so called, of the late
nineties and later, began as an enterprise on the part of certain
great financiers to secure "bonuses" and similar gains through
the recapitalisation and combination of certain industrial and
railway corporations, which had, in some cases been manceuvered
into such financial difficulties as to call for a heroic remedy.
In great part, indeed for the greater part, these industrial
corporations so organised have continued in a state of depend-
ence on these financial houses, instrumental to their financial
traffic. There is little surprise and no censure of this arrange-
ment; the reason being that in this community it is altogether
typical and commonplace.

It may be noted by way of parenthesis in this connection, and
as illustrating how much of a matter of course this large-scale
strategy for the interception of the "rake-off" has become, that
the head of one of the greatest of these investment-banking
houses, which is at the same time probably the greatest discre-
tionary power in control of American industrial corporations,
has recently testified that in his opinion the directors of such
corporations can not properly be considered responsible for the
conditions of work at the establishments of the corporations,
since the directors are financial agents only and have no direct
connection with the working of the corporations' plant About
the same date and in the same connection another, the spokes-
man of perhaps the second greatest of these financiering in-
terests, has with grave deliberation put forth the view that the
direction of these same establishments must equitably be left in
the discretion of these same directors, without surveillance from
the side of the public authorities and with full authority.


] Supplementary Notes 3 2 3


! V

i
i
i

j (Xote to Chapter VIII, page 266)

■

| It may be in place to indicate ; n a more articulate way how

I these large loans and high rates of interest work out in the in-

dustrial situation and the redistribution of ownership. The im-
mediate results are twofold : The general rate of discount rises ;
and a large volume of funds is placed at the disposal of the
debtor governments. From the rise in the rate of interest (as,
e.g., from 4% to 6%) it follows immediately that the market
' value of previously outstanding securities declines by a cor-

responding amount; other vendible property similarly declines,
although much of the industrial plant will very shortly recover,
owing to secondary effects of the transfer of funds involved in
the loans. The immediate (and transient) effect of the loans is
to withdraw funds from the general loan market, leaving the
business community short in respect of the funds currently em-
ployed in industrial financiering and as "working capital" among
industrial business concerns; hence a pronounced depression, as
.the first consequence, which is heightened by the prevalent short-
• s'ghted temerity of businessmen. The war loans, however, have

1 not decreased the volume of funds currently available; on the

contrary, this volume has doubtless been increased by the opera-
tion, inasmuch as the new inducements offered will have led
to an. added strain on the part of the possible lenders; the finan-
ciering houses will "trade on a thinner equity" under provocation
of an advancing rate of discount and an unexceptionable se-
curity offered by the governments. The borrowed funds are
r shortly thrown into the goods market as a demand for articles

of use, directly and indirectly, in the prosecution of the war;
which increases the demand and advances the price of such
' goods, and brings on activity in the industries that supply these
goods or the raw materials and subsidiary materials required
for the purpose. Other lines of industry will apparently not be
affected, for the time being, and so will fall into a more lasting
depression. Industrial plant (and common stock) in the in-
dustries that so come in for an era of prosperity due to the war
demand will then probably advance in market price, to answer to
these increased gains. Here, aga ; n, specially provocative induce-
ments and an assured market for output will lead to "trading
on a thinner equity" than is usual in ordinary times. There


m


drawn off from ihe
!{| Jid as these war funds


paym


: for


(Kapitalsmarkt) will
in war loans unavoid-
hostilities, ne : ther the
for such goods as are
>ellum level so long as

lose of the war period,
tnmediately in quest on,
tli industries sub-
industry in other
: industrial prop-
ipitalized, on a
idends, at an aggre-
_^0P^hM if an equivalent equip-
j&'flS \^'(»B^7iiO|^?LH H'tstanding cap'talisation

rn&*S*»if**fi \&*8l> "f 1"^ industrial com-
Sj|t>ft"B|-^ tf ^JS<'S:fcW*haii it was before the
$S*&:S*)«S§wi :CpBiS"«3Jji&*|Satioti is to be added the
'■•---■■---■-.*^a[h^g»aiu I which are, in effect

'^•*K"S e 3^ l P' t;i '' 5at ' 011 °* l ^ e coni *

, r i ..',...,. *«-j c h constitutes a "fixed

1 therefore a deduction

his deduction may

t may, indeed, pass

unforeseen changes

of war prosperity

ring the aggregate capi-

. earning capacity, and to

earnings.


The following pages contain
advertisements of books by the
same author, or upon related
subjects.


The Theory of the Leisure Class

By THORSTEIN VEBLEN
An Economic Study of Institutions

Cloth, i2mo, $2.00
Macmillan Standard Library Edition, $0.50

EXTRACT FROM PREFACE

It is the purpose of this inquiry to discuss the place and value
of the leisure class as an economic factor in modern life, but
it has been found impracticable to confine the discussion strictly
within the limits so marked out. Some attention is perforce
given to the origin and the line of derivation of the institution,
as well as to features of social life that are not commonly
classed as economic.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter I. Introduction.

Chapter II. Pecuniary Emulation.

Chapter III. Conspicuous Leisure.

Chapter IV. Conspicuous Consumption.

Chapter V. The Pecuniary Standard of Living.

Chapter VI. Pecuniary Canons of Taste.

Chapter VII. Dress as an Expression of the Pecuniary Culture.

Chapter VIII. Industrial Exemption and Conservation.

Chapter IX. The Conservation of Archaic Traits.

Chapter X. Modern Survivals of Prowess.

Chapter XI. The Belief in Luck.

Chapter XII. Devout Observances.

Chapter XIII. Survivals of the Non-Invidious Interest.

Chapter XIV. The Higher Learning as an Expression of the

Pecuniary Culture.

"The study is a thoughtful and interesting one and is couched
in clear and straightforward English." — Minneapolis Journal.


