The Engineers and the Price System
Thorstein Veblen (1921)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Thorstein Veblen's 'The Engineers and the Price System' (New York: Huebsch, 1921). Scan via Internet Archive (Cornell University Library). Library stamps and digitizer boilerplate trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's 'THE END'. This 1921 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE  ENGINEERS

AND  THE  PRICE  SYSTEM


OTHER  BOOKS  BY  THORSTEIN  VEBLEN

THE  HIGHER  LEARNING  IN  AMERICA,  $2.50

THE  NATURE  OF  PEACE,  $2.50

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  LEISURE  CLASS,  $2.50

THE  INSTINCT  OF  WORKMANSHIP,  $2.50

IMPERIAL  GERMANY  AND  THE  INDUSTRIAL  REVO-
LUTION, $2.50

THE  PLACE  OF  SCIENCE  IN  MODERN  CIVILISATION
AND  OTHER  ESSAYS,  $3.00

THE  VESTED  INTERESTS  AND  THE  COMMON  MAN,
$1.50

THE  ENGINEERS  AND  THE  PRICE  SYSTEM,  $1.50
Published  by  B.  W.  HUEBSCH,  Inc.,  New  York


THE  ENGINEERS

AND THE PRICE SYSTEM


BY

THORSTEIN  VEBLEN


^f^
,-foiitf


new  York B.  W.  HUEBSCH,  Inc. mcmxxi


COPYRIGHT,  1921,  BY
B. W. HUEBSCH, lire.

(5)

V\C  106,3
V4


©23  (>iT


PRINTED  IN IT.  S.  A.


PUBLISHER'S  NOTE

The  following  series  of  papers  are  reprinted
from  the  Dial,  where  they  appeared,  from  time
to  time,  during  19 19.  They  discuss  the  Ameri-
can industrial  situation  as  it  stood  at  that  time,
during  the  months  immediately  following  the  Ar-
mistice; and  more  particularly  certain  difficulties
involved  in  the  industrial  situation  as  it  stood  at
that  time.  But,  since  then,  no  substantial  change
has  taken  effect  in  the  state  of  industry,  of  such
a  character  as  to  make  this  discussion  less  perti-
nent now  than  it  was  at  the  time  these  papers
were  first  printed;  indeed,  the  difficulties  involved
in  or  arising  out  of  the  industrial  situation  have
only  come  forward  into  fuller  bearing  since  then.
Therefore,  these  papers  are  here  reprinted  with-
out change.

February,  IQ2I


CONTENTS

I On  the  Nature  and  Uses  of  Sabotage,  i

II The  Industrial  System  and  the  Captains  of
Industry,  27

III  The Captains of Finance and the Engi-

neers, 52

IV  On  the  Danger  of  a  Revolutionary  Over-

turn, 83

V On  the  Circumstances  which  Make  for  a
Change,  105

VI A  Memorandum  on  a  Practicable  Soviet  of
Technicians,  138


ON THE NATURE AND USES OF SABOTAGE

"  Sabotage  "  is  a  derivative  of  "  sabot,"  which  is
French  for  a  wooden  shoe.  It  means  going  slow,
with  a  dragging,  clumsy  movement,  such  as  that
manner  of  footgear  may  be  expected  to  bring  on.
So  it  has  come  to  describe  any  manoeuvre  of  slow-
ing-down,  inefficiency,  bungling,  obstruction.  In
American  usage  the  word  is  very  often  taken  to
mean  forcible  obstruction,  destructive  tactics,  in-
dustrial frightfulness,  incendiarism  and  high  ex-
plosives, although  that  is  plainly  not  its  first  mean-
ing nor  its  common  meaning.  Nor  is  that  its
ordinary  meaning  as  the  word  is  used  among  those
who  have  advocated  a  recourse  to  sabotage  as  a
means  of  enforcing  an  argument  about  wages  or
the  conditions  of  work.  The  ordinary  meaning  of
the  word  is  better  defined  by  an  expression  which
has  latterly  come  into  use  among  the  I.  W.  W.,
"  conscientious  withdrawal  of  efficiency  " —  al-
though that  phrase  does  not  cover  all  that  is
rightly  to  be  included  under  this  technical  term.
The  sinister  meaning  which  is  often  attached
to  the  word  in  American  usage,  as  denoting  vio-


2  THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

lence  and  disorder,  appears  to  be  due  to  the  fact
that  the  American  usage  has  been  shaped  chiefly
by  persons  and  newspapers  who  have  aimed  to
discredit  the  use  of  sabotage  by  organized  work-
men, and  who  have  therefore  laid  stress  on  its  less
amiable  manifestations.  This  is  unfortunate.  It
lessens  the  usefulness  of  the  word  by  making  it  a
means  of  denunciation  rather  than  of  understand-
ing. No  doubt  violent  obstruction  has  had  its
share  in  the  strategy  of  sabotage  as  carried  on  by
disaffected  workmen,  as'  well  as  in  the  similar  tac-
tics of  rival  business  concerns.  It  comes  into  the
case  as  one  method  of  sabotage,  though  by  no
means  the  most  usual  or  the  most  effective;  but  it
is  so  spectacular  and  shocking  a  method  that  it
has  drawn  undue  attention  to  itself.  Yet  such
deliberate  violence  is,  no  doubt,  a  relatively  minor
fact  in  the  case,  as  compared  with  that  deliberate
malingering,  confusion,  and  misdirection  of  work
that  makes  up  the  bulk  of  what  the  expert  prac-
titioners would  recognize  as  legitimate  sabotage.
The  word  first  came  into  use  among  the  organ-
ized French  workmen,  the  members  of  certain
syndicats,  to  describe  their  tactics  of  passive  re-
sistance, and  it  has  continued  to  be  associated  with


SABOTAGE  3

the  strategy  of  these  French  workmen,  who  are
known  as  syndicalists,  and  with  their  like-minded
running-mates  in  other  countries.  But  the  tactics
of  these  syndicalists,  and  their  use  of  sabotage,  do
not  differ,  except  in  detail,  from  the  tactics  of
other  workmen  elsewhere,  or  from  the  similar
tactics  of  friction,  obstruction,  and  delay  habit-
ually employed,  from  time  to  time,  by  both  em-
ployees and  employers  to  enforce  an  argument
about  wages  and  prices.  Therefore,  in  the  course
of  a  quarter-century  past,  the  word  has  quite  un-
avoidably taken  on  a  general  meaning  in  coramon
speech,  and  has  been  extended  to  cover  all  such
peaceable  or  surreptitious  manoeuvres  of  delay,  ob-
struction, friction,  and  defeat,  whether  employed
by  the  workmen  to  enforce  their  claims,  or  by  the
employers  to  defeat  their  employees,  or  by  com-
petitive business  concerns  to  get  the  better  of  their
business  rivals  or  to  secure  their  own  advantage.
Such  manoeuvres  of  restriction,  delay,  and  hin-
drance have  a  large  share  in  the  ordinary  conduct
of  business ;  but  it  is  only  lately  that  this  ordinary
line  of  business  strategy  has  come  to  be  recognized
as  being  substantially  of  the  same  nature  as  the
ordinary  tactics  of  the  syndicalists. So  that  it


4 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

has  not  been  usual  until  the  last  few  years  to  speak
of  manoeuvres  of  this  kind  as  sabotage  when  they
are  employed  by  employers  and  their  business  con-
cerns. But  all  this  strategy  of  delay,  restriction,
hindrance,  and  defeat  is  manifestly  of  the  same
character,  and  should  conveniently  be  called  by
the  same  name,  whether  it  is  carried  on  by  busi-
ness men  or  by  workmen;  so  that  it  is  no  longer
unusual  now  to  find  workmen  speaking  of  "  capi-
talistic sabotage  "  as  freely  as  the  employers  and
the  newspapers  speak  of  syndicalist  sabotage.
As  the  word  is  now  used,  and  as  it  is  properly
used,  it  describes  a  certain  system  of  industrial
strategy  or  management,  whether  it  is  employed
by  one  or  another.  What  it  describes  is  a  resort
to  peaceable  or  surreptitious  restriction,  delay,
withdrawal,  or  obstruction.

Sabotage  commonly  works  within  the  law,  al-
though it  may  often  be  within  the  letter  rather
than  the  spirit  of  the  law.  It  is  used  to  secure
some  special  advantage  or  preference,  usually  of
a  businesslike  sort.  It  commonly  has  to  do  with
something  in  the  nature  of  a  vested  right,  which
one  or  another  of  the  parties  in  the  case  aims  to
secure  or  defend,  or  to  defeat  or  diminish;  some
preferential  right  or  special  advantage  in  respect
of  income  or  privilege,  something  in  the  way  of  a


SABOTAGE  5

vested  interest.  Workmen  have  resorted  to  such
measures  to  secure  improved  conditions  of  work,
or  increased  wages,  or  shorter  hours,  or  to  main-
tain their  habitual  standards,  to  all  of  which  they
have  claimed  to  have  some  sort  of  a  vested  right.
Any  strike  is  of  the  nature  of  sabotage,  of  course.
Indeed,  a  strike  is  a  typical  species  of  sabotage.
That  strikes  have  not  been  spoken  of  as  sabotage
is  due  to  the  accidental  fact  that  strikes  were  in
use  before  this  word  came  into  use.  So  also,  of
course,  a  lockout  is  another  typical  species  of
sabotage.  That  the  lockout  is  employed  by  the
employers  against  the  employees  does  not  change
the  fact  that  it  is  a  means  of  defending  a  vested
right  by  delay,  withdrawal,  defeat,  and  obstruc-
tion of  the  work  to  be  done.  Lockouts  have  not
usually  been  spoken  of  as  sabotage,  for  the  same
reason  that  holds  true  in  the  case  of  strikes.  All
the  while  it  has  been  recognized  that  strikes  and
lockouts  are  of  identically  the  same  character.

All  this  does  not  imply  that  there  is  anything
discreditable  or  immoral  about  this  habitual  use
of  strikes  and  lockouts.  They  are  part  of  the  or-
dinary conduct  of  industry  under  the  existing  sys-
tem, and  necessarily  so.  So  long  as  the  system
remains  unchanged  these  measures  are  a  neces-
sary and  legitimate  part  of  it. By  virtue  of  his,


6 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

ownership  the  owner-employer  has  a  vested  right
to  do  as  he  will  with  his  own  property,  to  deal
or  not  to  deal  with  any  person  that  offers,  to
withhold  or  withdraw  any  part  or  all  of  his  indus-
trial equipment  and  natural  resources  from  active
use  for  the  time  being,  to  run  on  half  time  or  to
shut  down  his  plant  and  to  lock  out  all  those  per-
sons for  whom  he  has  no  present  use  on  his  own
premises.  There  is  no  question  that  the  lockout
is  altogether  a  legitimate  manoeuvre.  It  may
even  be  meritorious,  and  it  is  frequently  consid-
ered to  be  meritorious  when  its  use  helps  to  main-
tain sound  conditions  in  business — that  is  to  say
profitable  conditions — as  frequently  happens.
Such  is  the  view  of  the  substantial  citizens.  So
also  is  the  strike  legitimate,  so  long  as  it  keeps
within  the  law;  and  it  may  at  times  even  be  meri-
torious, at  least  in  the  eyes  of  the  strikers.  It  is
to  be  admitted  quite  broadly  that  both  of  these
typical  species  of  sabotage  are  altogether  fair  and
honest  in  principle,  although  it  does  not  therefore
follow  that  every  strike  or  every  lockout  is  neces-
sarily fair  and  honest  in  its  working-out.  That
is  in  some  degree  a  question  of  special  circum-
stances.

Sabotage,  accordingly,  is  not  to  be  condemned
out  of  hand,  simply  as  such. There  are  many


SABOTAGE  7

measures  of  policy  and  management  both  in  pri-
vate business  and  in  public  administration  which
are  unmistakably  of  the  nature  of  sabotage  and
which  are  not  only  considered  to  be  excusable,
but  are  deliberately  sanctioned  by  statute  and
common  law  and  by  the  public  conscience.  Many
such  measures  are  quite  of  the  essence  of  the  case
under  the  established  system  of  law  and  order,
price  and  business,  and  are  faithfully  believed  to
be  indispensable  to  the  common  good.  It  should
not  be  difficult  to  show  that  the  common  welfare
in  any  community  which  is  organized  on  the  price
system  cannot  be  maintained  without  a  salutary
use  of  sabotage  —  that  it  to  say,  such  habitual
recourse  to  delay  and  obstruction  of  industry  and
such  restriction  of  output  as  will  maintain  prices
at  a  reasonably  profitable  level  and  so  guard
against  business  depression.  Indeed,  it  is  pre-
cisely considerations  of  this  nature  that  are  now
engaging  the  best  attention  of  officials  and  busi-
ness men  in  their  endeavors  to  tide  over  a  threat-
ening depression  in  American  business  and  a  con-
sequent season  of  hardship  for  all  those  persons
whose  main  dependence  is  free  income  from  in-
vestments. ,,..,

Without  some  salutary  restraint  in  the  way  of
sabotage  on  the  productive  use  of  the  available


8 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

industrial  plant  and  workmen,  it  is  altogether  un-
likely that  prices  could  be  maintained  at  a  rea-
sonably profitable  figure  for  any  appreciable  time.
A  businesslike  control  of  the  rate  and  volume  of
output  is  indispensable  for  keeping  up  a  profitable
market,  and  a  profitable  market  is  the  first  and
unremitting  condition  of  prosperity  in  any  com-
munity whose  industry  is  owned  and  managed  by
business  men.  And  the  ways  and  means  of  this
necessary  control  of  the  output  of  industry  are
always  and  necessarily  something  in  the  nature
of  sabotage  —  something  in  the  way  of  retarda-
tion, restriction,  withdrawal,  unemployment  of
plant  and  workmen  —  whereby  production  is
kept  short  of  productive  capacity.

The  mechanical  industry  of  the  new  order  is
inordinately  productive.  So  the  rate  and  volume
of  output  have  to  be  regulated  with  a  view  to
what  the  traffic  will  bear  —  that  is  to  say,  what
will  yield  the  largest  net  return  in  terms  of  price
to  the  business  men  who  manage  the  country's  in-
dustrial system.  Otherwise  there  will  be  "  over-
production," business  depression,  and  consequent
hard  times  all  around.  Overproduction  means
production  in  excess  of  what  the  market  will
carry  off  at  a  sufficiently  profitable  price.  So  it
appears that the continued prosperity of the


SABOTAGE  9

country  from  day  to  day  hangs  on  a  "  conscien-
tious withdrawal  of  efficiency  "  by  the  business
men  who  control  the  country's  industrial  output.
They  control  it  all  for  their  own  use,  of  course,
and  their  own  use  means  always  a  profitable  price.
In  any  community  that  is  organized  on  the  price
system,  with  investment  and  business  enterprise,
habitual  unemployment  of  the  available  indus-
trial plant  and  workmen,  in  whole  or  in  part,  ap-
pears to  be  the  indispensable  condition  without
which  tolerable  conditions  of  life  cannot  be  main-
tained. That  is  to  say,  in  no  such  community
can  the  industrial  system  be  allowed  to  work  at
full  capacity  for  any  appreciable  interval  of  time,
on  pain  of  business  stagnation  and  consequent
privation  for  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.
The  requirements  of  profitable  business  will  not
tolerate  it.  So  the  rate  and  volume  of  output
must  be  adjusted  to  the  needs  of  the  market,  not
to  the  working  capacity  of  the  available  resources,
equipment  and  man  power,  nor  to  the  commun-
ity's need  of  consumable  goods.  Therefore  there
must  always  be  a  certain  variable  margin  of  un-
employment of  plant  and  man  power.  Rate  and
volume  of  output  can,  of  course,  not  be  adjusted
by  exceeding  the  productive  capacity  of  the  indus-
trial system. So  it  has  to  be  regulated  by  keep-


IO THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

ing  short  of  maximum  production  by  more  or  less
as  the  condition  of  the  market  may  require.  It
is  always  a  question  of  more  or  less  unemploy-
ment of  plant  and  man  power,  and  a  shrewd  mod-
eration in  the  unemployment  of  these  available
resources,  a  "  conscientious  withdrawal  of  effi-
ciency," therefore,  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  in
all  sound  workday  business  enterprise  that  has  to
do  with  industry.

All  this  is  matter  of  course,  and  notorious.
But  it  is  not  a  topic  on  which  one  prefers  to  dwell.
Writers  and  speakers  who  dilate  on  the  meri-
torious exploits  of  the  nation's  business  men  will
not  commonly  allude  to  this  voluminous  running
administration  of  sabotage,  this  conscientious
withdrawal  of  efficiency,  that  goes  into  their  ordi-
nary day's  work.  One  prefers  to  dwell  on  those
exceptional,  sporadic,  and  spectacular  episodes  in
business  where  business  men  have  now  and  again
successfully  gone  out  of  the  safe  and  sane  high-
way of  conservative  business  enterprise  that  is
hedged  about  with  a  conscientious  withdrawal  of
efficiency,  and  have  endeavored  to  regulate  the
output  by  increasing  the  productive  capacity  of
the  industrial  system  at  one  point  or  another.

But  after  all,  such  habitual  recourse  to  peace-
able or  surreptitious  measures  of  restraint,  delay,


SABOTAGE  I I

and  obstruction  in  the  ordinary  businesslike  man-
agement of  industry  is  too  widely  known  and  too
well  approved  to  call  for  much  exposition  or  illus-
tration. Yet,  as  one  capital  illustration  of  the
scope  and  force  of  such  businesslike  withdrawal
of  efficiency,  it  may  be  in  place  to  recall  that  all  the
civilized  nations  are  just  now  undergoing  an  ex-
periment in  businesslike  sabotage  on  an  unex-
ampled scale  and  carried  out  with  unexampled
effrontery.  All  these  nations  that  have  come
through  the  war,  whether  as  belligerents  or  as
neutrals,  have  come  into  a  state  of  more  or  less
pronounced  distress,  due  to  a  scarcity  of  the  com-
mon necessaries  of  life;  and  this  distress  falls,  of
course,  chiefly  on  the  common  sort,  who  have  at
the  same  time  borne  the  chief  burden  of  the  war
which  has  brought  them  to  this  state  of  distress.
The  common  man  has  won  the  war  and  lost
his  livelihood.  This  need  not  be  said  by  way  of
praise  or  blame.  As  it  stands  it  is,  broadly,  an
objective  statement  of  fact,  which  may  need  some
slight  qualification,  such  as  broad  statements  of
fact  will  commonly  need.  All  these  nations  that
have  come  through  the  war,  and  more  particularly
the  common  run  of  their  populations,  are  very
much  in  need  of  all  sorts  of  supplies  for  daily  use,
both  for  immediate  consumption  and  for  produc-


12 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

tive  use.  So  much  so  that  the  prevailing  state  of
distress  rises  in  many  places  to  an  altogether  un-
wholesome pitch  of  privation,  for  want  of  the
necessary  food,  clothing,  shelter,  and  fuel.  Yet
in  all  these  countries  the  staple  industries  are
slowing  down.  There  is  an  ever  increasing
withdrawal  of  efficiency.  The  industrial  plant  is
increasingly  running  idle  or  half  idle,  running
increasingly  short  of  its  productive  capacity.
Workmen  are  being  laid  off  and  an  increasing
number  of  those  workmen  who  have  been  serv-
ing in  the  armies  are  going  idle  for  want  of  work,
at  the  same  time  that  the  troops  which  are  no
longer  needed  in  the  service  are  being  demo-
bilized as  slowly  as  popular  sentiment  will  toler-
ate, apparently  for  fear  that  the  number  of  un-
employed workmen  in  the  country  may  presently
increase  to  such  proportions  as  to  bring  on  a
catastrophe.  And  all  the  while  all  these  peoples
are  in  great  need  of  all  sorts  of  goods  and  services
which  these  idle  plants  and  idle  workmen  are  fit  to
produce.  But  for  reasons  of  business  expediency
it  is  impossible  to  let  these  idle  plants  and  idle
workmen  go  to  work  —  that  is  to  say  for  reasons
of  insufficient  profit  to  the  business  men  interested,
or  in  other  words,  for  the  reasons  of  insufficient
income  to  the  vested  interests  which  control  the


SABOTAGE  1 3

staple  industries  and  so  regulate  the  output  of
product.  The  traffic  will  not  bear  so  large  a
production  of  goods  as  the  community  needs  for
current  consumption,  because  it  is  considered
doubtful  whether  so  large  a  supply  could  be  sold
at  prices  that  would  yield  a  reasonable  profit  on
the  investment  —  or  rather  on  the  capitalization ;
that  is  to  say,  it  is  considered  doubtful  whether
an  increased  production,  such  as  to  employ  more
workmen  and  supply  the  goods  needed  by  the
community,  would  result  in  an  increased  net
aggregate  income  for  the  vested  interests  which
control  these  industries.  A  reasonable  profit
always  means,  in  effect,  the  largest  obtainable
profit.

All  this  is  simple  and  obvious,  and  it  should
scarcely  need  explicit  statement.  It  is  for  these
business  men  to  manage  the  country's  industry,  of
course,  and  therefore  to  regulate  the  rate  and
volume  of  output;  and  also  of  course  any  regula-
tion of  the  output  by  them  will  be  made  with  a
view  to  the  needs  of  business.;  that  is  to  say,  with
a  view  to  the  largest  obtainable  net  profit,  not
with  a  view  to  the  physical  needs  of  these  peoples
who  have  come  through  the  war  and  have  made
the  world  safe  for  the  business  of  the  vested  in-
terests. Should  the  business  men  in  charge,  by


14 XHE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

any  chance  aberration,  stray  from  this  straight
and  narrow  path  of  business  integrity,  and  allow
the  community's  needs  unduly  to  influence  their
management  of  the  community's  industry,  they
would  presently  find  themselves  discredited  and
would  probably  face  insolvency.  Their  only
salvation  is  a  conscientious  withdrawal  of
efficiency.  All  this  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  case.
It  is  the  working  of  the  price  system,  whose  crea-
tures and  agents  these  business  men  are.  Their
case  is  rather  pathetic,  as  indeed  they  admit  quite
volubly.  They  are  not  in  a  position  to  manage
with  a  free  hand,  the  reason  being  that  they  have
in  the  past,  under  the  routine  requirements  of  the
price  system  as  it  takes  effect  in  corporation
finance,  taken  on  so  large  an  overhead  burden  of
fixed  charges  that  any  appreciable  decrease  in  the
net  earnings  of  the  business  will  bring  any  well-
managed  concern  of  this  class  face  to  face  with
bankruptcy.

At  the  present  conjuncture,  brought  on  by  the
war  and  its  termination,  the  case  stands  somewhat
in  this  typical  shape.  In  the  recent  past  earnings
have  been  large;  these  large  earnings  (free  in-
come) have  been  capitalized;  their  capitalized
value  has  been  added  to  the  corporate  capital  and
covered  with  securities  bearing  a  fixed  income-


SABOTAGE  1 5

charge;  this  income-charge,  representing  free  in-
come, has  thereby  become  a  liability  on  the  earn-
ings of  the  corporation;  this  liability  cannot  be
met  in  case  the  concern's  net  aggregate  earnings
fall  off  in  any  degree;  therefore  prices  must  be
kept  up  to  such  a  figure  as  will  bring  the  largest
net  aggregate  return,  and  the  only  means  of  keep-
ing up  prices  is  a  conscientious  withdrawal  of
efficiency  in  these  staple  industries  on  which  the
community  depends  for  a  supply  of  the  neces-
saries of  life.

The  business  community  has  hopes  of  tiding
things  over  by  this  means,  but  it  is  still  a  point  in
doubt  whether  the  present  unexampled  large  use
of  sabotage  in  the  businesslike  management  of  the
staple  industries  will  now  suffice  to  bring  the  busi-
ness community  through  this  grave  crisis  without
a  disastrous  shrinkage  of  its  capitalization,  and  a
consequent  liquidation;  but  the  point  is  not  in
doubt  that  the  physical  salvation  of  these  peoples
who  have  come  through  the  war  must  in  any  case
wait  on  the  pecuniary  salvation  of  these  owners
of  corporate  securities  which  represent  free  in-
come. It  is  a  sufficiently  difficult  passage.  It
appears  that  production  must  be  curtailed  in  the
staple  industries,  on  pain  of  unprofitable  prices.
The  case  is  not  so  desperate  in  those  industries


1 6 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

which  have  immediately  to  do  with  the  produc-
tion of  superfluities;  but  even  these,  which  depend
chiefly  on  the  custom  of  those  kept  classes  to
whom  the  free  income  goes,  are  not  feeling  alto-
gether secure.  For  the  good  of  business  it  is
necessary  to  curtail  production  of  the  means  of
life,  on  pain  of  unprofitable  prices,  at  the  same
time  that  the  increasing  need  of  all  sorts  of  the
necessaries  of  life  must  be  met  in  some  passable
fashion,  on  pain  of  such  popular  disturbances  as
will  always  come  of  popular  distress  when  it
passes  the  limit  of  tolerance.

Those  wise  business  men  who  are  charged  with
administering  the  salutary  modicum  of  sabotage
at  this  grave  juncture  may  conceivably  be  faced
with  a  dubious  choice  between  a  distasteful  cur-
tailment of  the  free  income  that  goes  to  the  vested
interests,  on  the  one  hand,  and  an  unmanageable
onset  of  popular  discontent  on  the  other  hand.
And  in  either  alternative  lies  disaster.  Present
indications  would  seem  to  say  that  their  choice
will  fall  out  according  to  ancient  habit,  that  they
will  be  likely  to  hold  fast  by  an  undiminished  free
income  for  the  vested  interests  at  the  possible
cost  of  any  popular  discontent  that  may  be  in
prospect  —  and  then,  with  the  help  of  the  courts
and  the  military  arm,  presently  make  reasonable


SABOTAGE  1 7

terms  with  any  popular  discontent  that  may  arise.
In  which  event  it  should  all  occasion  no  surprise
or  resentment,  inasmuch  as  it  would  be  nothing
unusual  or  irregular  and  would  presumably  be
the  most  expeditious  way  of  reaching  a  modus
vivendi.  During  the  past  few  weeks,  too,  quite
an  unusually  large  number  of  machine  guns  have
been  sold  to  industrial  business  concerns  of  the
larger  sort,  here  and  there,  at  least  so  they  say.
Business  enterprise  being  the  palladium  of  the
Republic,  it  is  right  to  take  any  necessary  meas-
ures for  its  safeguarding.  Price  is  of  the  essence
of  the  case,  whereas  livelihood  is  not.

The  grave  emergency  that  has  arisen  out  of  the
war  and  its  provisional  conclusion  is,  after  all,
nothing  exceptional  except  in  magnitude  and
severity.  In  substance  it  is  the  same  sort  of  thing
that  goes  on  continually  but  unobtrusively  and  as
a  matter  of  course  in  ordinary  times  of  business
as  usual.  It  is  only  that  the  extremity  of  the  case
is  calling  attention  to  itself.  At  the  same  time  it
serves  impressively  to  enforce  the  broad  proposi-
tion that  a  conscientious  withdrawal  of  efficiency
is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  in  all  established  busi-
ness enterprise  that  has  to  do  with  industrial  pro-
duction. But  it  has  been  found  that  this  grave
interest  which  the  vested  interests  always  have  in


1 8 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

a  salutary  retardation  of  industry  at  one  point
or  another  cannot  well  be  left  altogether  to  the
haphazard  and  ill-coordinated  efforts  of  indi-
vidual business  concerns,  each  taking  care  of  its
own  particular  line  of  sabotage  within  its  own
premises.  The  needed  sabotage  can  best  be
administered  on  a  comprehensive  plan  and  by  a
central  authority,  since  the  country's  industry  is
of  the  nature  of  a  comprehensive  interlocking
system,  whereas  the  business  concerns  which  are
called  on  to  control  the  motions  of  this  indus-
trial system  will  necessarily  work  piecemeal,  in
severalty  and  at  cross-purposes.  In  effect,  their
working  at  cross-purposes  results  in  a  sufficiently
large  aggregate  retardation  of  industry,  of  course,
but  the  resulting  retardation  is  necessarily  some-
what blindly  apportioned  and  does  not  converge
to  a  neat  and  perspicuous  outcome.  Even  a  rea-
sonable amount  of  collusion  among  the  interested
business  concerns  will  not  by  itself  suffice  to
carry  on  that  comprehensive  moving  equilibrium
of  sabotage  that  is  required  to  preserve  the  busi-
ness community  from  recurrent  collapse  or  stag-
nation, or  to  bring  the  nation's  traffic  into  line  with
the  general  needs  of  the  vested  interests.

Where the national government is charged
with  the  general  care  of  the  country's  business  in-


SABOTAGE  1 9

terests,  as  is  invariably  the  case  among  the  civil-
ized nations,  it  follows  from  the  nature  of  the
case  that  the  nation's  lawgivers  and  administra-
tion will  have  some  share  in  administering  that
necessary  modicum  of  sabotage  that  must  always
go  into  the  day's  work  of  carrying  on  industry
by  business  methods  and  for  business  purposes.
The  government  is  in  a  position  to  penalize  ex-
cessive or  unwholesome  traffic.  So,  it  is  always
considered  necessary,  or  at  least  expedient,  by  all
sound  mercantilists,  as  by  a  tariff  or  by  subsidies,
to  impose  and  maintain  a  certain  balance  or  pro-
portion among  the  several  branches  of  industry
and  trade  that  go  to  make  up  the  nation's  indus-
trial system.  The  purpose  commonly  urged  for
measures  of  this  class  is  the  fuller  utilization  of
the  nation's  industrial  resources  in  material,
equipment,  and  man  power;  the  invariable  effect
is  a  lowered  efficiency  and  a  wasteful  use  of  these
resources,  together  with  an  increase  of  interna-
tional jealousy.  But  measures  of  that  kind  are
thought  to  be  expedient  by  the  mercantilists  for
these  purposes  —  that  is  to  say,  by  the  statesmen
of  these  civilized  nations,  for  the  purposes  of  the
vested  interests.  The  chief  and  nearly  the  sole
means  of  maintaining  such  a  fabricated  balance
and  proportion  among  the  nation's  industries  is  to


20 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

obstruct  the  traffic  at  some  critical  point  by  pro-
hibiting or  penalizing  any  exuberant  undesirables
among  these  branches  of  industry.  Disallowance,
in  whole  or  in  part,  is  the  usual  and  standard
method.

The  great  standing  illustration  of  sabotage
administered  by  the  government  is  the  protective
tariff,  of  course.  It  protects  certain  special  in-
terests by  obstructing  competition  from  beyond
the  frontier.  This  is  the  main  use  of  a  national
boundary.  The  effect  of  the  tariff  is  to  keep  the
supply  of  goods  down  and  thereby  keep  the  price
up,  and  so  to  bring  reasonably  satisfactory  divi-
dends to  those  special  interests  which  deal  in  the
protected  articles  of  trade,  at  the  cost  of  the
underlying  community.  A  protective  tariff  is  a
typical  conspiracy  in  restraint  of  trade.  It  brings
a  relatively  small,  though  absolutely  large,  run  of
free  income  to  the  special  interests  which  benefit
by  it,  at  a  relatively,  and  absolutely,  large  cost
to  the  underlying  community,  and  so  it  gives  rise
to  a  body  of  vested  rights  and  intangible  assets
belonging  to  these  special  interests.

Of  a  similar  character,  in  so  far  that  in  effect
they  are  in  the  nature  of  sabotage  —  conscientious
withdrawal  of  efficiency  —  are  all  manner  of
excise and  revenue-stamp regulations; although


SABOTAGE  2 1

they  are  not  always  designed  .for  that  purpose.
Such  would  be,  for  instance,  the  partial  or  com-
plete prohibition  of  alcoholic  beverages,  the  regu-
lation of  the  trade  in  tobacco,  opium,  and  other
deleterious  narcotics,  drugs,  poisons,  and  high  ex-
plosives. Of  the  same  nature,  in  effect  if  not  in
intention,  are  such  regulations  as  the  oleomargar-
ine law;  as  also  the  unnecessarily  costly  and  vexa-
tious routine  of  inspection  imposed  on  the  pro-
duction of  industrial  (denatured)  alcohol,  which
has  inured  to  the  benefit  of  certain  business  con-
cerns that  are  interested  in  other  fuels  for  use  in
internal-combustion  engines ;  so  also  the  singularly
vexatious  and  elaborately  imbecile  specifications
that  limit  and  discourage  the  use  of  the  parcel
post,  for  the  benefit  of  the  express  companies  and
other  carriers  which  have  a  vested  interest  in
traffic  of  that  kind.

It  is  worth  noting  in  the  same  connection,  al-
though it  comes  in  from  the  other  side  of  the
case,  that  ever  since  the  express  companies  have
been  taken  over  by  the  federal  administration
there  has  visibly  gone  into  effect  a  comprehensive
system  of  vexation  and  delay  in  the  detail  conduct
of  their  traffic,  so  contrived  as  to  discredit  federal
control  of  this  traffic  and  thereby  provoke  a  popu-
lar sentiment  in  favor  of  its  early  return  to  pri-


22 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

vate  control.  Much  the  same  state  of  things  has
been  in  evidence  in  the  railway  traffic  under
similar  conditions.  Sabotage  is  serviceable  as  a
deterrent,  whether  in  furtherance  of  the  adminis-
tration's work  or  in  contravention  of  it.

In  what  has  just  been  said  there  is,  of  course,
no  intention  to  find  fault  with  any  of  these  uses  of
sabotage.  It  is  not  a  question  of  morals  and  good
intentions.  It  is  always  to  be  presumed  as  a
matter  of  course  that  the  guiding  spirit  in  all  such
governmental  moves  to  regularize  the  nation's
affairs,  whether  by  restraint  or  by  incitement,  is
a  wise  solicitude  for  the  nation's  enduring  gain
and  security.  All  that  can  be  said  here  is  that
many  of  these  wise  measures  of  restraint  and  in-
citement are  in  the  nature  of  sabotage,  and  that
in  effect  they  habitually,  though  not  invariably,
inure  to  the  benefit  of  certain  vested  interests  —
ordinarily  vested  interests  which  bulk  large  in
the  ownership  and  control  of  the  nation's  re-
sources. That  these  measures  are  quite  legiti-
mate and  presumably  salutary,  therefore,  goes
without  saying.  In  effect  they  are  measures  for
hindering  traffic  and  industry  at  one  point  or  an-
other, which  may  often  be  a  wise  business  pre-
caution.

During  the  period  of  the  war  administrative


SABOTAGE  23

measures  in  the  nature  of  sabotage  have  been
greatly  extended  in  scope  and  kind.  Peculiar
and  imperative  exigencies  have  had  to  be  met,
and  the  staple  means  of  meeting  many  of  these
new  and  exceptional  exigencies  has  quite  reason-
ably been  something  in  the  way  of  avoidance,  dis-
allowance, penalization,  hindrance,  a  conscien-
tious withdrawal  of  efficiency  from  work  that
does  not  fall  in  with  the  purposes  of  the  Admin-
istration. Very  much  as  is  true  in  private  busi-
ness when  a  situation  of  doubt  and  hazard  pre-
sents itself,  so  also  in  the  business  of  government
at  the  present  juncture  of  exacting  demands  and
inconvenient  limitations,  the  Administration  has
been  driven  to  expedients  of  disallowance  and
obstruction  with  regard  to  some  of  the  ordinary
processes  of  life,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  non-
essential industries.  It  has  also  appeared  that
the  ordinary  equipment  and  agencies  for  gather-
ing and  distributing  news  and  other  information
have  in  the  past  developed  a  capacity  far  in  ex-
cess of  what  can  safely  be  permitted  in  time  of
war  or  of  returning  peace.  The  like  is  true  for
the  ordinary  facilities  for  public  discussion  of  all
sorts  of  public  questions.  The  ordinary  facili-
ties, which  may  have  seemed  scant  enough  in  time
of  peace  and  slack  interest,  had  after  all  de-


24 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

veloped  a  capacity  far  beyond  what  the  govern-
mental traffic  will  bear  in  these  uneasy  times  of
war  and  negotiations,  when  men  are  very  much
on  the  alert  to  know  what  is  going  on.  By  a
moderate  use  of  the  later  improvements  in  the
technology  of  transport  and  communication,  the
ordinary  means  of  disseminating  information  and
opinions  have  grown  so  efficient  that  the  traffic
can  no  longer  be  allowed  to  run  at  full  capacity
during  a  period  of  stress  in  the  business  of  gov-
ernment. Even  the  mail  service  has  proved  in-
sufferably efficient,  and  a  selective  withdrawal  of
efficiency  has  gone  into  effect.  To  speak  after
the  analogy  of  private  business,  it  has  been  found
best  to  disallow  such  use  of  the  mail  facilities  as
does  not  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the  Administra-
tion in  the  way  of  good  will  and  vested  rights  of
usufruct.

These  peremptory  measures  of  disallowance
have  attracted  a  wide  and  dubious  attention;  but
they  have  doubtless  been  of  a  salutary  nature  and
intention,  in  some  way  which  is  not  to  be  under-
stood by  outsiders  —  that  is  to  say,  by  citizens  of
the  Republic.  An  unguarded  dissemination  of
information  and  opinions  or  an  unduly  frank  can-
vassing of  the  relevant  facts  by  these  outsiders,
will  be  a  handicap  on  the  Administration's  work,


SABOTAGE  25

and  may  even  defeat  the  Administration's  aims.
At  least  so  they  say.

Something  of  much  the  same  color  has  been  ob-
served elsewhere  and  in  other  times,  so  that  all
this  nervously  alert  resort  to  sabotage  on  unde-
sirable information  and  opinions  is  nothing  novel,
nor  is  it  peculiarly  democratic.  The  elder
statesmen  of  the  great  monarchies,  east  and  west,
have  long  seen  and  approved  the  like.  But  these
elder  statesmen  of  the  dynastic  regime  have  gone
to  their  work  of  sabotage  on  information  because
of  a  palpable  division  of  sentiment  between  their
government  and  the  underlying  population,  such
as  does  not  exist  in  the  advanced  democratic  com-
monwealths. The  case  of  Imperial  Germany
during  the  period  of  the  war  is  believed  to  show
such  a  division  of  sentiment  between  the  govern-
ment and  the  underlying  population,  and  also  to
show  how  such  a  divided  sentiment  on  the  part  of
a  distrustful  and  distrusted  population  had  best
be  dealt  with.  The  method  approved  by  Ger-
man dynastic  experience  is  sabotage,  of  a  some-
what free-swung  character,  censorship,  embargo
on  communication,  and  also,  it  is  confidently
alleged,  elaborate  misinformation.

Such  procedure  on  the  part  of  the  dynastic
statesmen  of  the  Empire  is  comprehensible  even


26 THE  ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

to  a  layman.  But  how  it  all  stands  with  those
advanced  democratic  nations,  like  America,  where
the  government  is  the  dispassionately  faithful
agent  and  spokesman  of  the  body  of  citizens,
and  where  there  can  consequently  be  no  divi-
sion of  aims  and  sentiment  between  the  body
of  officials  and  any  underlying  population  —  all
that  is  a  more  obscure  and  hazardous  subject  of
speculation.  Yet  there  has  been  censorship,
somewhat  rigorous,  and  there  has  been  selective
refusal  of  mail  facilities,  somewhat  arbitrary,  in
these  democratic  commonwealths  also,  and  not
least  in  America,  freely  acknowledged  to  be  the
most  naively  democratic  of  them  all.  And  all
the  while  one  would  like  to  believe  that  it  all  has
somehow  served  some  useful  end.  It  is  all  suf-
ficiently perplexing.


II

THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM  AND  THE CAPTAINS
OF INDUSTRY

It  has  been  usual,  and  indeed  it  still  is  not  un-
usual, to  speak  of  three  coordinate  "  factors  of
production  " :  land,  labor,  and  capital.  The  rea-
son for  this  threefold  scheme  of  factors  in  pro-
duction is  that  there  have  been  three  recognized
classes  of  income :  rent,  wages,  and  profits ;  and  it
has  been  assumed  that  whatever  yields  an  income
is  a  productive  factor.  This  scheme  has  come
down  from  the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  pre-
sumed to  have  been  true,  in  a  general  way,  under
the  conditions  which  prevailed  in  the  eighteenth
century,  and  it  has  therefore  also  been  assumed
that  it  should  continue  to  be  natural,  or  normal,
true  in  some  eminent  sense,  under  any  other  con-
ditions that  have  come  on  since  that  time.

Seen  in  the  light  of  later  events  this  threefold
plan  of  coordinate  factors  in  production  is  notable
for what it omits. It assigns no productive

effect  to  the  industrial  arts,  for  example,  for  the

27


28 THE ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

conclusive  reason  that  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  yields  no  stated  or  ratable  income  to  any  one
class  of  persons;  it  affords  no  legal  claim  to  a
share  in  the  community's  yearly  production  of
goods.  The  state  of  the  industrial  art  is  a  joint
stock  of  knowledge  derived  from  past  experience,
and  is  held  and  passed  on  as  an  indivisible  posses-
sion of  the  community  at  large.  It  is  the  indis-
pensable foundation  of  all  productive  industry,
of  course,  but  except  for  certain  minute  fragments
covered  by  patent  rights  or  trade  secrets,  this
joint  stock  is  no  man's  individual  property.  For
this  reason  it  has  not  been  counted  in  as  a  factor
in  production.  The  unexampled  advance  of  tech-
nology during  the  past  one  hundred  and  fifty  years
has  now  begun  to  call  attention  to  its  omission
from  the  threefold  plan  of  productive  factors
handed  down  from  that  earlier  time.

Another  omission  from  the  scheme  of  factors,
as  it  was  originally  drawn,  was  the  business  man.
But  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  century  the
business  man  came  more  and  more  obtrusively  to
the  front  and  came  in  for  a  more  and  more  gener-
ous portion  of  the  country's  yearly  income  —
which  was  taken  to  argue  that  he  also  contributed
increasingly  to  the  yearly  production  of  goods.
So  a  fourth  factor  of  production  has  provisionally


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  20.

been  added  to  the  threefold  scheme,  in  the  person
of  the  "  entrepreneur,"  whose  wages  of  manage-
ment are  considered  to  measure  his  creative  share
in  the  production  of  goods,  although  there  still  is
some  question  as  to  the  precise  part  of  the  entre-
preneur in  productive  industry.

"  Entrepreneur  "  is  a  technical  term  to  desig-
nate the  man  who  takes  care  of  the  financial  end
of  things.  It  covers  the  same  fact  as  the  more
familiar  "  business  man,"  but  with  a  vague  sug-
gestion of  big  business  rather  than  small.  The
typical  entrepreneur  is  the  corporation  financier.
And  since  the  corporation  financier  has  habitually
come  in  for  a  very  substantial  share  of  the  com-
munity's yearly  income  he  has  also  been  conceived
to  render  a  very  substantial  service  to  the  com-
munity as  a  creative  force  in  that  productive  in-
dustry out  of  which  the  yearly  income  arises.
Indeed,  it  is  nearly  true  that  in  current  usage
"  producer  "  has  come  to  mean  "  financial  man-
ager," both  in  the  standard  economic  theory  and
in  everyday  speech.

There  need  of  course  be  no  quarrel  with  all
this.  It  is  a  mattter  of  usage.  During  the  era
of  the  machine  industry  —  which  is  also  the  era
of  the  commercial  democracy  —  business  men
have  controlled  production  and  have  managed  the


30 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

industry  of  the  commonwealth  for  their  own  ends,
so  that  the  material  fortunes  of  all  the  civilized
peoples  have  continued  to  turn  on  the  financial
management  of  their  business  men.  And  during
the  same  period  not  only  have  the  conditions  of
life  among  these  civilized  peoples  continued  to  be
fairly  tolerable  on  the  whole,  but  it  is  also  true
that  the  industrial  system  which  these  business
men  have  been  managing  for  their  own  private
gain  all  this  time  has  continually  been  growing
more  efficient  on  the  whole.  Its  productive
capacity  per  unit  of  equipment  and  man  power  has
continually  grown  larger.  For  this  very  credit-
able outcome  due  credit  should  be,  as  indeed  it
has  been,  given  to  the  business  community  which
has  had  the  oversight  of  things.  The  efficient
enlargement  of  industrial  capacity  has,  of  course,
been  due  to  a  continued  advance  in  technology,
to  a  continued  increase  of  the  available  natural
resources,  and  to  a  continued  increase  of  popula-
tion. But  the  business  community  have  also  had
a  part  in  bringing  all  this  to  pass;  they  have  al-
ways been  in  a  position  to  hinder  this  growth,  and
it  is  only  by  their  consent  and  advice  that  things
have  been  enabled  to  go  forward  so  far  as  they
have  gone.

This  sustained  advance  in  productive  capacity,


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  3 1

due  to  the  continued  advance  in  technology  and  in
population,  has  also  had  another  notable  conse-
quence. According  to  the  Liberal  principles  of
the  eighteenth  century  any  legally  defensible  re-
ceipt of  income  is  a  sure  sign  of  productive  work
done.  Seen  in  the  light  of  this  assumption,  the
visibly  increasing  productive  capacity  of  the  in-
dustrial system  has  enabled  all  men  of  a  liberal
and  commercial  mind  not  only  to  credit  the  busi-
nesslike captains  of  industry  with  having  created
this  productive  capacity,  but  also  to  overlook  all
that  the  same  captains  of  industry  have  been
doing  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  to  hold
productive  industry  in  check.  And  it  happens
that  all  this  time  things  have  been  moving  in  such
a  direction  and  have  now  gone  so  far  that  it  is
today  quite  an  open  question  whether  the  busi-
nesslike management  of  the  captains  is  not  more
occupied  with  checking  industry  than  with  in-
creasing its  productive  capacity.

This  captain  of  industry,  typified  by  the  cor-
poration financier,  and  latterly  by  the  investment
banker,  is  one  of  the  institutions  that  go  to  make
up  the  new  order  of  things,  which  has  been  com-
ing on  among  all  the  civilized  peoples  ever  since
the  Industrial  Revolution  set  in. As  such,  as  an


32 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

institutional  growth,  his  life  history  hitherto
should  be  worth  looking  into  for  any  one  who
proposes  to  understand  the  recent  growth  and
present  drift  of  this  new  economic  order.  The
beginnings  of  the  captain  of  industry  are  to  be
seen  at  their  best  among  those  enterprising
Englishmen  who  made  it  their  work  to  carry  the
industrial  promise  of  the  Revolution  out  into  tan-
gible performance,  during  the  closing  decades  of
the  eighteenth  and  the  early  decades  of  the  nine-
teenth century.  These  captains  of  the  early
time  are  likely  to  be  rated  as  inventors,  at  least  in
a  loose  sense  of  the  word.  But  it  is  more  to  the
point  that  they  were  designers  and  builders  of
factory,  mill,  and  mine  equipment,  of  engines,
processes,  machines,  and  machine  tools,  as  well  as
shop  managers,  at  the  same  time  that  they  took
care,  more  or  less  effectually,  of  the  financial  end.
Nowhere  do  these  beginnings  of  the  captain  of
industry  stand  out  so  convincingly  as  among  the
English  tool-builders  of  that  early  time,  who  de-
signed, tried  out,  built,  and  marketed  that  series
of  indispensable  machine  tools  that  has  made  the
practical  foundation  of  the  mechanical  industry.
Something  to  much  the  same  effect  is  due  to  be
said  for  the  pioneering  work  of  the  Americans


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  33

along  the  same  general  lines  of  mechanical  de-
sign and  performance  at  a  slightly  later  period.
To  men  of  this  class  the  new  industrial  order  owes
much  of  its  early  success  as  well  as  of  its  later
growth.

These  men  were  captains  of  industry,  entrepre-
neurs, in  some  such  simple  and  comprehensive
sense  of  the  word  as  that  which  the  economists
appear  to  have  had  in  mind  for  a  hundred  years
after,  when  they  have  spoken  of  the  wages  of  man-
agement that  are  due  the  entrepreneur  for  produc-
tive work  done.  They  were  a  cross  between  a
business  man  and  an  industrial  expert,  and  the
industrial  expert  appears  to  have  been  the  more
valuable  half  in  their  composition.  But  factory,
mine,  and  ship  owners,  as  well  as  merchants  and
bankers,  also  made  up  a  vital  part  of  that  busi-
ness community  out  of  whose  later  growth  and
specialization  the  corporation  financier  of  the
nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  has  arisen.
His  origins  are  both  technological  and  com-
mercial, and  in  that  early  phase  of  his  life  history
which  has  been  taken  over  into  the  traditions  of
economic  theory  and  of  common  sense  he  carried
on  both  of  these  lines  of  interest  and  of  work  in
combination. That  was  before  the  large  scale,


34 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

the  wide  sweep,  and  the  profound  specialization
of  the  advanced  mechanical  industry  had  gathered
headway.

But  progressively  the  cares  of  business  manage-
ment grew  larger  and  more  exacting,  as  the  scale
of  things  in  business  grew  larger,  and  so  the  direc-
tive head  of  any  such  business  concern  came  pro-
gressively to  give  his  attention  more  and  more
exclusively  to  the  "  financial  end."  At  the  same
time  and  driven  by  the  same  considerations  the
businesslike  management  of  industry  has  progres-
sively been  shifting  to  the  footing  of  corporation
finance.  This  has  brought  on  a  further  division,
dividing  the  ownership  of  the  industrial  equip-
ment and  resources  from  their  management.  But
also  at  the  same  time  the  industrial  system,  on
its  technological  side,  has  been  progressively
growing  greater  and  going  farther  in  scope
diversity,  specialization,  and  complexity,  as  well
as  in  productive  capacity  per  unit  of  equipment
and  man  power.

The  last  named  item  of  change,  the  progressive
increase  of  productive  capacity,  is  peculiarly  sig-
nificant in  this  connection.  Through  the  earlier
and  pioneering  decades  of  the  machine  era  it  ap-
pears to  have  been  passably  true  that  the  ordi-
nary routine  of  management  in  industrial  busi-


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  35

ness  was  taken  up  with  reaching  out  for  new  ways
and  means  and  speeding  up  production  to  maxi-
mum capacity.  That  was  before  standardiza-
tion of  processes  and  of  unit  products  and  fabri-
cation of  parts  had  been  carried  far,  and  there-
fore before  quantity  production  had  taken  on  any-
thing like  its  later  range  and  reach.  And,  partly
because  of  that  fact  —  because  quantity  produc-
tion was  then  still  a  slight  matter  and  greatly  cir-
cumscribed, as  contrasted  with  its  later  growth  —
the  ordinary  volume  of  output  in  the  mechanical
industries  was  still  relatively  slight  and  manage-
able. Therefore  those  concerns  that  were  en-
gaged in  these  industries  still  had  a  fairly  open
market  for  whatever  they  might  turn  out,  a
market  capable  of  taking  up  any  reasonable  in-
crease of  output.  Exceptions  to  this  general  rule
occurred;  as,  e.  g.,  in  textiles.  But  the  general
rule  stands  out  obtrusively  through  the  early  dec-
ades of  the  nineteenth  century  so  far  as  regards
English  industry,  and  even  more  obviously  in  the
case  of  America.  Such  an  open  market  meant  a
fair  chance  for  competitive  production,  without
too  much  risk  of  overstocking.  And  running  to
the  same  effect,  there  was  the  continued  increase
of  population  and  the  continually  increasing  reach
and  volume  of  the  means  of  transport,  serving  to


36 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

maintain  a  free  market  for  any  prospective  in-
crease of  output,  at  prices  which  offered  a  fair
prospect  of  continued  profit.  In  the  degree  in
which  this  condition  of  things  prevailed  a  reason-
ably free  competitive  production  would  be  prac-
ticable.

The  industrial  situation  so  outlined  began
visibly  to  give  way  toward  the  middle  of  the  nine-
teenth century  in  England,  and  at  a  correspond-
ingly later  period  in  America.  The  productive
capacity  of  the  mechanical  industry  was  visibly
overtaking  the  capacity  of  the  market,  so  that
free  competition  without  afterthought  was  no
longer  a  sound  footing  on  which  to  manage  pro-
duction. Loosely,  this  critical  or  transitional
period  falls  in  and  about  the  second  quarter  of
the  nineteenth  century  in  England;  elsewhere  at
a  correspondingly  later  date.  Of  course  the
critical  point,  when  business  exigencies  began  to
dictate  a  policy  of  combination  and  restriction,
did  not  come  at  the  same  date  in  all  or  in  most  of
the  mechanical  industries;  but  it  seems  possible
to  say  that,  by  and  large,  the  period  of  transition
to  a  general  rule  of  restriction  in  industry  comes
on  at  the  time  and  for  the  reason  so  indicated.
There  were  also  other  factors  engaged  in  that  in-
dustrial situation,  besides  those  spoken  of  above,


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  37

less  notable  and  less  sharply  defined,  but  enforc-
ing limitations  of  the  same  character.  Such
were,  e.  g.,  a  rapidly  gaining  obsolescence  of  in-
dustrial plant,  due  to  improvements  and  exten-
sions, as  also  the  partial  exhaustion  of  the  labor
supply  by  persistent  overwork,  under-feeding,  and
unsanitary  conditions  —  but  this  applies  to  the
English  case  rather  than  elsewhere.

In  point  of  time  this  critical  period  in  the  affairs
of  industrial  business  coincides  roughly  with  the
coming  in  of  corporation  finance  as  the  ordinary
and  typical  method  of  controlling  the  industrial
output.  Of  course  the  corporation,  or  company,
has  other  uses  besides  the  restrictive  control  of
the  output  with  a  view  to  a  profitable  market,
but  it  should  be  sufficiently  obvious  that  the  com-
bination of  ownership  and  centralization  of  con-
trol which  the  corporation  brings  about  is  also
exceedingly  convenient  for  that  purpose.  And
when  it  appears  that  the  general  resort  to  cor-
porate organization  of  the  larger  sort  sets  in
about  the  time  when  business  exigencies  begin  to
dictate  an  imperative  restriction  of  output,  it  is
not  easy  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  this  was  one
of  the  ends  to  be  served  by  this  reorganization
of  business  enterprise.  Business  enterprise  may
fairly  be  said  to  have  shifted  from  the  footing  of


38 THE  ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

free-swung  competitive  production -to  that  of  a
'  conscientious" withholding  of  efficiency,"  so  soon
and  so  far  as  corporation  finance  on  a  sufficiently
large  scale  had  come  to  be, the  controlling  factor
in  industry.  ,  At  the  same  time  and  in  the  same
degree  the  discretionary  control  of  industry,  and
of  other  business  enterprise  in  great  part,  has
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  corporation  financier.
Corporate  organization  has  continually  gone
forward  to  a  larger  scale  and  a  more  comprehen-
sive coalition  of  forces,  and  at  the  same  time,  and
more  and  more  visibly,  it  has  become  the  ordinary
duty  of  the  corporate  management  to  adjust  pro-
duction to  the  requirements  of  the  market  by  re-
stricting the  output  to  what  the  traffic  will  bear;
that  is  to  say,  what  will  yield  the  largest  net  earn-
ings. Under  corporate  management  it  rarely
happens  that  production  is  pushed  to  the  limit  of
capacity.  It  happens,  and  can  happen,  only
rarely  and  intermittently.  This  has  been  true,
increasingly,  ever  since  the  ordinary  productive
capacity  of  the  mechanical  industries  seriously
began  to  overtake  and  promised  to  exceed  what
the  market  would  carry  off  at  a  reasonably  profit-
able price.  And  ever  since  that  critical  turn  in
the  affairs  of  industrial  business  —  somewhere  in
the  middle  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  —  it


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  39

has  become  increasingly  imperative  to  use  a  wise
moderation  and  stop  down  the  output  to  such  a
rate  and  volume  as  the  traffic  will  bear.  The
cares  of  business  have  required  an  increasingly
undivided  attention  on  the  part  of  the  business
men,  and  in  an  ever  increasing  measure  their  day's
work  has  come  to  center  about  a  running  adjust-
ment of  sabotage  on  production.  And  for  this
purpose,  evidently,  the  corporate  organization  of
this  business,  on  an  increasingly  large  scale,  is
very  serviceable,  since  the  requisite  sabotage  on
productive  industry  can  be  effectually  adminis-
tered only  on  a  large  plan  and  with  a  firm  hand.

"  The  leaders  in  business  are  men  who  have
studied  and  thought  all  their  lives.  They  have
thus  learned  to  decide  big  problems  at  once,
basing  their  decisions  upon  their  knowledge  of
fundamental  principles." — Jeremiah  W.  Jenks.
That  is  to  say,  the  surveillance  of  this  financial
end  of  industrial  business,  and  the  control  of  the
requisite  running  balance  of  sabotage,  have  been
reduced  to  a  routine  governed  by  settled  princi-
ples of  procedure  and  administered  by  suitably
trained  experts  in  corporation  finance.  But  under
the  limitations  to  which  all  human  capacity  is  sub-
ject it  follows  from  this  increasingly  exacting  dis-


40 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

cipline  of  business  administration  that  the  busi-
ness men  are  increasingly  out  of  touch  with  that
manner  of  thinking  and  those  elements  of  knowl-
edge that  go  to  make  up  the  logic  and  the  relevant
facts  of  the  mechanical  technology.  Addiction  to
a  strict  and  unremitting  valuation  of  all  things  in
terms  of  price  and  profit  leaves  them,  by  settled
habit,  unfit  to  appreciate  those  technological  facts
and  values  that  can  be  formulated  only  in  terms
of  tangible  mechanical  performance ;  increasingly
so  with  every  further  move  into  a  stricter  addic-
tion to  businesslike  management  and  with  every
further  advance  of  the  industrial  system  into  a
still  wider  scope  and  a  still  more  diversified  and
more  delicately  balanced  give  and  take  among  its
interlocking  members.

They  are  experts  in  prices  and  profits  and  finan-
cial manoeuvres;  and  yet  the  final  discretion  in
all  questions  of  industrial  policy  continues  to  rest
in  their  hands.  They  are  by  training  and  interest
captains  of  finance;  and  yet,  with  no  competent
grasp  of  the  industrial  arts,  they  continue  to  ex-
ercise a  plenary  discretion  as  captains  of  indus-
try. They  are  unremittingly  engaged  in  a  rou-
tine of  acquisition,  in  which  they  habitually  reach
their  ends  by  a  shrewd  restriction  of  output;  and
yet  they  continue  to  be  entrusted  with  the  com-


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  4 1

munity's  industrial  welfare,  which  calls  for  maxi-
mum production.

Such  has  been  the  situation  in  all  the  civilized
countries  since  corporation  finance  has  ruled  in-
dustry, and  until  a  recent  date.  Quite  recently
this  settled  scheme  of  business  management  has
shown  signs  of  giving  way,  and  a  new  move  in  the
organization  of  business  enterprise  has  come  in
sight,  whereby  the  discretionary  control  of  in-
dustrial production  is  shifting  still  farther  over
to  the  side  of  finance  and  still  farther  out  of  touch
with  the  requirements  of  maximum  production.
The  new  move  is  of  a  twofold  character:  (a)
theTihancial  captains  of  industry  have  been  prov-
ing their  industrial  incompetence  in  a  progres-
sively convincing  fashion,  and  (b)  their  own
proper  work  of  financial  management  has  progres-
sively taken  on  a  character  of  standardized  rou-
tine such  as  no  longer  calls  for  or  admits  any  large
measure  of  discretion  or  initiative.  They  have
been  losing  touch  with  the  management  of  indus-
trial processes,  at  the  same  time  that  the  manage-
ment of  corporate  business  has,  in  effect,  been
shifting  into  the  hands  of  a  bureaucratic  clerical
staff.  The  corporation  financier  of  popular
tradition  is  taking  on  the  character  of  a  chief  of
bureau.


42 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

The  changes  which  have  brought  the  corpora-
tion financier  to  this  somewhat  inglorious  position
of  a  routine  administrator  set  in  along  with  the
early  growth  of  corporation  finance,  somewhere
around  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and
they  have  come  to  a  head  somewhere  about  the
passage  to  the  twentieth  century,  although  it  is
only  since  the  latter  date  that  the  outcome  is  be-
coming at  all  clearly  defined.  When  corporate
organization  and  the  consequent  control  of  out-
put came  into  bearing  there  were  two  lines  of
policy  open  to  the  management:  (a)  to  maintain
profitable  prices  by  limiting  the  output,  and  (b)
to  maintain  profits  by  lowering  the  production
cost  of  an  increased  output.  To  some  extent
both  of  these  lines  were  followed,  but  on  the
whole  the  former  proved  the  more  attractive;  it
involved  less  risk,  and  it  required  less  acquaint-
ance with  the  working  processes  of  industry.  At
least  it  appears  that  in  effect  the  preference  was
increasingly  given  to  the  former  method  during
this  half-century  of  financial  management.  For
this  there  were  good  reasons.  The  processes  of
production  were  continually  growing  more  exten-
sive, diversified,  complicated,  and  more  difficult
for  any  layman  in  technology  to  comprehend  —
and  the  corporation  financier  was  such  a  layman,


CAPTAINS OP INDUSTRY  43

necessarily  and  increasingly  so,  for  reasons  indi-
cated above.  At  the  same  time,  owing  to  a  con-
tinued increase  of  population  and  a  continued  ex-
tension of  the  industrial  system,  the  net  product
of  industry  and  its  net  earnings  continued  to  in-
crease independently  of  any  creative  effort  on  the
part  of  the  financial  management.  So  the  cor-
poration financier,  as  a  class,  came  in  for  an
"  unearned  increment  "of  income,  on  the  simple
plan  of  "  sitting  tight."  That  plan  is  intelligible
to  any  layman.  All  industrial  innovation  and  all
aggressive  economy  in  the  conduct  of  industry
not  only  presumes  an  insight  into  the  technolog-
ical details  of  the  industrial  process,  but  to  any
other  than  the  technological  experts,  who  know
the  facts  intimately,  any  move  of  that  kind ''will
appear  hazardous.  So  the  business  men  who
have  controlled  industry,  being  laymen  in  all  that
concerns  its  management,  have  increasingly  been
content  to  let  well  enough  alone  and  to  get  along
with  an  ever  increasing  overhead  charge  of  inef-
ficiency, so  long  as  they  have  lost  nothing  by  it.
The  result  has  been  an  ever  increasing  volume  of
waste  and  misdirection  in  the  use  of  equipment,
resources,  and  man  power  throughout  the  indus-
trial system.

In  time,  that  is  to  say  within  the  last  few  years,


44 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

the  resulting  lag,  leak,  and  friction  in  the  ordi-
nary working  of  this  mechanical  industry  under
business  management  have  reached  such  propor-
tions that  no  ordinarily  intelligent  outsider  can
help  seeing  them  wherever  he  may  look  into  the
facts  of  the  case.  But  it  is  the  industrial  experts,
not  the  business  men,  who  have  finally  begun  to
criticize  this  businesslike  mismanagement  and
neglect  of  the  ways  and  means  of  industry.  And
hitherto  their  efforts  and  advice  have  met  with
no  cordial  response  from  the  business  men  in
charge,  who  have,  on  the  whole,  continued  to  let
well  enough  alone  —  that  is  to  say,  what  is  well
enough  for  a  short-sighted  business  policy  looking
to  private  gain,  however  poorly  it  may  serve  the
material  needs  of  the  community.  But  in  the
meantime  two  things  have  been  happening  which
have  deranged  the  regime  of  the  corporation
financier:  industrial  experts,  engineers,  chemists,
mineralogists,  technicians  of  all  kinds,  have  been
drifting  into  more  responsible  positions  in  the  in-
dustrial system  and  have  been  growing  up  and
multiplying  within  the  system,  because  the  system
will  no  longer  work  at  all  without  them;  and  on
the  other  hand,  the  large  financial  interests  on
whose  support  the  corporation  financiers  have
been  leaning  have  gradually  come  to  realize  that


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  45

corporation  finance  can  best  be  managed  as  a
comprehensive  bureaucratic  routine,  and  that  the
two  pillars  of  the  house  of  corporate  business  en-
terprise of  the  larger  sort  are  the  industrial  ex-
perts and  the  large  financial  concerns  that  control
the  necessary  funds;  whereas  the  corporation
financier  is  little  more  than  a  dubious  intermediate
term  between  these  two.

One  of  the  greater  personages  in  American
business  finance  took  note  of  this  situation  in  the
late _  nineties  and  set  about  turning  it  to  account
for  the  benefit  of  himself  and  his  business  asso-
ciates, and  from  that  period  dates  a  new  era  in
American  corporation  finance.  It  was  for  a  time
spoken  of  loosely  as  the  Era  of  Trust-Making,
but  that  phrase  does  not  describe  it  at  all  ade-
quately. It  should  rather  be  called  the  Era  of
the  Investment  Banker,  and  it  has  come  to  its
present  stage  of  maturity  and  stability  only  in  the
course  of  the  past  quarter-century.

The  characteristic  features  and  the  guiding
purpose  of  this  improved  method  in  corporation
finance  are  best  shown  by  a  showing  of  the  meth-
ods and  achievements  of  that  great  pioneer  by
whom  it  was  inaugurated.  As  an  illustrative
case,  then,  the  American  steel  business  in  the  nine-


46 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ties  was  suffering  from  the  continued  use  of  out-
of-date  processes,  equipment,  and  locations,  from
wasteful  management  under  the  control  of  stub-
bornly ignorant  corporation  officials,  and  particu-
larly from  intermittent  haphazard  competition
and  mutual  sabotage  between  the  numerous  con-
cerns which  were  then  doing  business  in  steel.  It
appears  to  have  been  the  last-named  difficulty  that
particularly  claimed  the  attention  and  supplied
the  opportunity  of  the  great  pioneer.  He  can
by  no  stretch  of  charity  be  assumed  to  have  had
even  a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  technological
needs  and  shortcomings  of  the  steel  industry.
But  to  a  man  of  commercial  vision  and  financial
sobriety  it  was  plain  that  a  more  comprehensive,
and  therefore  more  authoritative,  organization
and  control  of  the  steel  business  would  readily
obviate  much  of  the  competition  which  was  de-
ranging prices.  The  apparent  purpose  and  the
evident  effect  of  the  new  and  larger  coalition  of
business  interests  in  steel  was  to  maintain  profit-
able prices  by  a  reasonable  curtailment  of  produc-
tion. A  secondary  and  less  evident  effect  was  a
more  economical  management  of  the  industry,
which  involved  some  displacement  of  quondam
corporation  financiers  and  some  introduction  of
industrial experts. A further, but unavowed,


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  47

end  to  be  served  by  the  same  move  in  each  of  the
many  enterprises  in  coalition  undertaken  by  the
great  pioneer  and  by  his  competitors  was  a  bonus
that  came  to  these  enterprising  men  in  the  shape
of  an  increased  capitalization  of  the  business.
But  the  notable  feature  of  it  all  a$  seen  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  public  at  large  was  always
the  stabilization  of  prices  at  a  reasonably  high
level,  such  as  would  always  assure  reasonably
large  earnings  on  the  increased  capitalization.

Since  then  this  manner  of  corporation  finance
has  been  further  perfected  and  standardized,  until
it  will  now  hold  true  that  no  large  move  in  the
field  of  corporation  finance  can  be  made  without
the  advice  and  consent  of  those  large  funded  in-
terests that  are  in  a  position  to  act  as  investment
bankers ;  nor  does  any  large  enterprise  in  corpora-
tion business  ever  escape  from  the  continued  con-
trol of  the  investment  bankers  in  any  of  its  larger
transactions;  nor  can  any  corporate  enterprise  of
the  larger  sort  now  continue  to  do  business  ex-
cept on  terms  which  will  yield  something  appre-
ciable in  the  way  of  income  to  the  investment
bankers,  whose  continued  support  is  necessary  to
its  success.

The  financial  interest  here  spoken  of  as  the  in-
vestment banker  is  commonly  something  in  the


48 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

way  of  a  more  or  less  articulate  syndicate  of
financial  houses,  and  it  is  to  be  added  that  the
same  financial  concerns  are  also  commonly,  if  not
invariably,  engaged  or  interested  in  commercial
banking  of  the  usual  kind.  So  that  the  same
well-established,  half-syndicated  ramification  of
banking  houses  that  have  been  taking  care  of  the
country's  commercial  banking,  with  its  center  of
credit  and  of  control  at  the  country's  financial
metropolis,  is  ready  from  beforehand  to  take  over
and  administer  the  country's  corporation  finance
on  a  unified  plan  and  with  a  view  to  an  equitable
distribution  of  the  country's  net  earnings  among
themselves  and  their  clients.  The  more  inclusive
this  financial  organization  is,  of  course,  the  more
able  it  will  be  to  manage  the  country's  industrial
system  as  an  inclusive  whole  and  prevent  any  haz-
ardous innovation  or  experiment,  as  well  as  to
limit  production  of  the  necessaries  to  such  a  vol-
ume of  output  as  will  yield  the  largest  net  return
to  itself  and  its  clients.

Evidently  the  improved  plan  which  has  thrown
the  discretion  and  responsibility  into  the  hands
of  the  investment  banker  should  make  for  a  safe
and  sound  conduct  of  business,  such  as  will  avoid
fluctuations  of  price,  and  more  particularly  avoid
any  unprofitable  speeding-up  of  productive  indus-


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  49

try.  Evidently,  too,  the  initiative  has  hereby
passed  out  of  the  hands  of  the  corporation  finan-
cier, who  has  fallen  into  the  position  of  a  financial
middleman  or  agent,  with  limited  discretion  and
with  a  precariously  doubtful  future.  But  all  hu-
man institutions  are  susceptible  of  improvement,
and  the  course  of  improvement  may  now  and
again,  as  in  his  case,  result  in  supersession  and
displacement.  And  doubtless  it  is  all  for  the
best,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  good  of  business,  more
particularly  for  the  profit  of  big  business.

But  now  as  always  corporation  finance  is  a
traffic  in  credit;  indeed,  now  more  than  ever  be-
fore. Therefore  to  stabilize  corporate  business
sufficiently  in  the  hands  of  this  inclusive  quasi-
syndicate  of  banking  interests  it  is  necessary  that
the  credit  system  of  the  country  should  as  a  whole
be  administered  on  a  unified  plan  and  inclusively.
All  of  which  is  taken  care  of  by  the  same  conjunc-
tion of  circumstances;  the  same  quasi-syndicate  of
banking  interests  that  makes  use  of  the  country's
credit  in  the  way  of  corporation  finance  is  also  the
guardian  of  the  country's  credit  at  large.  From
which  it  results  that,  as  regards  those  large-scale
credit  extensions  which  are  of  substantial  conse-
quence, the  credits  and  debits  are,  in  effect,  pooled
within  the  syndicate,  so  that  no  substantial  de-


50 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

rangement  of  the  credit  situation  can  take  effect
except  by  the  free  choice  of  this  quasi-syndicate
of  investment  banking  houses;  that  is  to  say,  not
except  they  see  an  advantage  to  themselves  in
allowing  the  credit^ situation  to-be  deranged,  and
not  beyond  the  point  which  will  best  serve  their
collective  purpose  as  against  the  rest  of  the  com-
munity. With  such  a  closed  system  no  exten-
sion of  credit  obligations  or  multiplication  of  cor-
porate securities,  with  the  resulting  inflation  of
values,  need  bring  any  risk  of  a  liquidation,  since
credits  and  debits  are  in  effect  pooled  within  the
system.  By  way  of  parenthesis  it  may  also  be  re-
marked that  under  these  circumstances  "  credit  "
has  no  particular  meaning  except  as  a  method  of
accounting.  Credit  is  also  one  of  the  timeworn
institutions  that  are  due  to  suffer  obsolescence  by
improvement.

This  process  of  pooling  and  syndication  that  is
remaking  the  world  of  credit  and  corporation
finance  has  been  greatly  helped  on  in  America  by
the  establishment  of  the  Federal  Reserve  system,
while  somewhat  similar  results  have  been  achieved
elsewhere  by  somewhat  similar  devices.  That
system  has  greatly  helped  to  extend,  facilitate,
simplify,  and  consolidate  the  unified  control  of
the  country's  credit  arrangements,  and  it  has  very


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY  5 1

conveniently  left  the  substantial  control  in  the
hands  of  those  larger  financial  interests  into
whose  hands  the  lines  of  control  in  credit  and
industrial  business,  were  already  being  gathered
by  force  of  circumstances  and  by  sagacious  man-
agement of  the  interested  parties.  By  this  means
the  substantial  core  of  the  country's  credit  sys-
tem is  gathered  into  a  self-balanced  whole,  closed
and  unbreakable,  self-insured  against  all  risk  and
derangement.  All  of  which  converges  to  the
definitive  stabilization  of  the  country's  business;
but  since  it  reduces  financial  traffic  to  a  riskless
routine  it  also  converges  to  the  conceivable  obso-
lescence of  corporation  finance  and  eventually,
perhaps,  of  the  investment  banker.


Ill

THE  CAPTAINS  OF  FINANCE  AND  THE  ENGINEERS

In  more  than  one  respect  the  industrial  system
of  today  is  notably  different  from  anything  that
has  gone  before.  It  is  eminently  a  system,  self-
balanced  and  comprehensive ;  and  it  is  a  system  of
interlocking  mechanical  processes,  rather  than  of
skilful  manipulation.  It  is  mechanical  rather
than  manual.  It  is  an  organization  of  mechan-
ical powers  and  material  resources,  rather  than
of  skilled  craftsmen  and  tools;  although  the
skilled  workmen  and  tools  are  also  an  indispensa-
ble part  of  its  comprehensive  mechanism.  It  is
of  an  impersonal  nature,  after  the  fashion  of  the
material  sciences,  on  which  it  constantly  draws.
It  runs  to  "  quantity  production  "  of  specialized
and  standardized  goods  and  services.  For  all
these  reasons  it  lends  itself  to  systematic  control
under  the  direction  of  industrial  experts,  skilled
technologists,  who  may  be  called  "  production
engineers,"  for  want  of  a  better  term.

This  industrial  system  runs  on  as  an  inclusive
organization  of  many  and  diverse  interlocking  me-
sa


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  53

chanical  processes,  interdependent  and  balanced
among  themselves  in  such  a  way  that  the  due
working  of  any  part  of  it  is  conditioned  on  the
due  working  of  all  the  rest.  Therefore  it  will
work  at  its  best  only  on  condition  that  these  in-
dustrial experts,  production  engineers,  will  work
together  on  a  common  understanding;  and  more
particularly  on  condition  that  they  must  not  work
at  cross  purposes.  These  technological  special-
ists whose  constant  supervision  is  indispensable
to  the  due  working  of  the  industrial  system  con-
stitute the  general  staff  of  industry,  whose  work
it  is  to  control  the  strategy  of  production  at  large
and  to  keep  an  oversight  of  the  tactics  of  produc-
tion in  detail.

Such  is  the  nature  of  this  industrial  system  on
whose  due  working  depends  the  material  welfare
of  all  the  civilized  peoples.  It  is  an  inclusive
system  drawn  on  a  plan  of  strict  and  compre-
hensive interdependence,  such  that,  in  point  of
material  welfare,  no  nation  and  no  community  has
anything  to  gain  at  the  cost  of  any  other  nation  or
community.  In  point  of  material  welfare,  all  the
civilized  peoples  have  been  drawn  together  by  the
state  of  the  industrial  arts  into  a  single  going  con-
cern. And  for  the  due  working  of  this  inclusive
going  concern  it  is  essential  that  that  corps  of


54 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

technological  specialists  who  by  training,  insight,
and  interest  make  up  the  general  staff  of  indus-
try must  have  a  free  hand  in  the  disposal  of  its
available  resources,  in  materials,  equipment,  and
man  power,  regardless  of  any  national  preten-
sions or  any  vested  interests.  Any  degree  of  ob-
struction, diversion,  or  withholding  of  any  of  the
available  industrial  forces,  with  a  view  to  the  spe-
cial gain  of  any  nation  or  any  investor,  unavoid-
ably brings  on  a  dislocation  of  the  system;  which
involves  a  disproportionate  lowering  of  its  work-
ing efficiency  and  therefore  a  disproportionate
loss  to  the  whole,  and  therefore  a  net  loss  to  all
its  parts.

And  all  the  while  the  statesmen  are  at  work  to
divert  and  obstruct  the  working  forces  of  this  in-
dustrial system,  here  and  there,  for  the  special  ad-
vantage of  one  nation  and  another  at  the  cost  of
the  rest;  and  the  captains  of  finance  are  working,
at  cross  purposes  and  in  collusion,  to  divert  what-
ever they  can  to  the  special  gain  of  one  vested
interest  and  another,  at  any  cost  to  the  rest.  So
it  happens  that  the  industrial  system  is  deliber-
ately handicapped  with  dissension,  misdirection,
and  unemployment  of  material  resources,  equip-
ment, and  man  power,  at  every  turn  where  the
statesmen  or  the  captains  of  finance  can  touch  its


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  55

mechanism;  and  all  the  civilized  peoples  are  suf-
fering privation  together  because  their  general
staff  of  industrial  experts  are  in  this  way  required
to  take  orders  and  submit  to  sabotage  at  the
hands  of  the  statesmen  and  the  vested  interests.
Politics  and  investment  are  still  allowed  to  decide
matters  of  industrial  policy  which  should  plainly
be  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  general  staff  of
production  engineers  driven  by  no  commercial
bias.

No  doubt  this  characterization  of  the  indus-
trial system  and  its  besetting  tribulations  will  seem
overdrawn.  However,  it  is  not  intended  to  ap-
ply to  any  date  earlier  than  the  twentieth  cen-
tury, or  to  any  backward  community  that  still  lies
outside  the  sweep  of  the  mechanical  industry.
Only  gradually  during  the  past  century,  while  the
mechanical  industry  has  progressively  been  taking
over  the  production  of  goods  and  services,  and
going  over  to  quantity  production,  has  the  indus-
trial system  taken  on  this  character  of  an  inclusive
organization  of  interlocking  processes  and  inter-
change of  materials;  and  it  is  only  in  the  twentieth
century  that  this  cumulative  progression  has  come
to  a  head  with  such  effect  that  this  characteriza-
tion is  now  visibly  becoming  true. And  even  now


56 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

it  will  hold  true,  visibly  and  securely,  only  as  ap-
plies to  the  leading  mechanical  industries,  those
main  lines  of  industry  that  shape  the  main  condi-
tions of  life,  and  in  which  quantity  production
has  become  the  common  and  indispensable  rule.
Such  are,  e.  g.,  transport  and  communication;  the
production  and  industrial  use  of  coal,  oil,  electric-
ity and  water  power;  the  production  of  steel  and
other  metals;  of  wood  pulp,  lumber,  cement  and
other  building  materials;  of  textiles  and  rubber;
as  also  grain-milling  and  much  of  the  grain-grow-
ing, together  with  meat-packing  and  a  good  share
of  the  stock-raising  industry.

There  is,  of  course,  a  large  volume  of  indus-
try in  many  lines  which  has  not,  or  only  in  part
and  doubtfully,  been  drawn  into  this  network  of
mechanical  processes  and  quantity  production,  in
any  direct  and  conclusive  fashion.  But  these
other  lines  of  industry  that  still  stand  over  on  an-
other and  older  plan  of  operation  are,  after  all,
outliers  and  subsidiaries  of  the  mechanically  or-
ganized industrial  system,  dependent  on  or  sub-
servient to  those  greater  underlying  industries
which  make  up  the  working  body  of  the  system,
and  which  therefore  set  the  pace  for  the  rest.
And  in  the  main,  therefore,  and  as  regards  these
greater  mechanical  industries  on  whose  due  work-


FINANCE AND  THE ENGINEERS  57

ing  the  material  welfare  of  the  community  de-
pends from  day  to  day,  this  characterization  will
apply  without  material  abatement.

But  it  should  be  added  that  even  as  regards
these  greater,  primary  and  underlying,  lines  of
production  the  system  has  not  yet  reached  a  fatal
degree  of  close-knit  interdependence,  balance,  and
complication;  it  will  still  run  along  at  a  very  tol-
erable efficiency  in  the  face  of  a  very  appreciable
amount  of  persistent  derangement.  That  is  to
say,  the  industrial  system  at  large  has  not  yet  be-
come so  delicately  balanced  a  mechanical  struc-
ture and  process  that  the  ordinary  amount  of  de-
rangement and  sabotage  necessary  to  the  ordinary
control  of  production  by  business  methods  will
paralyze  the  whole  outright.  The  industrial  sys-
tem is  not  yet  sufficiently  close-knit  for  that.  And
yet,  that  extent  and  degree  of  paralysis  from
which  the  civilized  world's  industry  is  suffering
just  now,  due  to  legitimate  businesslike  sabotage,
goes  to  argue  that  the  date  may  not  be  far  dis-
tant when  the  interlocking  processes  of  the  indus-
trial system  shall  have  become  so  closely  interde-
pendent and  so  delicately  balanced  that  even  the
ordinary  modicum  of  sabotage  involved  in  the
conduct  of  business  as  usual  will  bring  the  whole
to  a  fatal  collapse. The  derangement  and  priva-


58 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

tion  brought  on  by  any  well  organized  strike  of
the  larger  sort  argues  to  the  same  effect.

In  effect,  the  progressive  advance  of  this  in-
dustrial system  towards  an  all-inclusive  mechan-
ical balance  of  interlocking  processes  appears  to
be  approaching  a  critical  pass,  beyond  which  it
will  no  longer  be  practicable  to  leave  its  control
in  the  hands  of  business  men  working  at  cross  pur-
poses for  private  gain,  or  to  entrust  its  continued
administration  to  others  than  suitably  trained
technological  experts,  production  engineers  with-
out a  commercial  interest.  What  these  men  may
then  do  with  it  all  is  not  so  plain;  the  best  they
can  do  may  not  be  good  enough ;  but  the  negative
proposition  is  becoming  sufficiently  plain,  that  this
mechanical  state  of  the  industrial  arts  will  not
long  tolerate  the  continued  control  of  production
by  the  vested  interests  under  the  current  business-
like rule  of  incapacity  by  advisement.

In  the  beginning,  that  is  to  say  during  the  early
growth  of  the  machine  industry,  and  particularly
in  that  new  growth  of  mechanical  industries  which
arose  directly  out  of  the  Industrial  Revolution,
there  was  no  marked  division  between  the  indus-
trial experts  and  the  business  managers.  That
was  before  the  new  industrial  system  had  gone


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  59

far  on  the  road  of  progressive  specialization  and
complexity,  and  before  business  had  reached  an
exactingly  large  scale;  so  that  even  the  business
men  of  that  time,  who  were  without  special  train-
ing in  technological  matters,  would  still  be  able  to
exercise  something  of  an  intelligent  oversight  of
the  whole,  and  to  understand  something  of  what
was  required  in  the  mechanical  conduct  of  the
work  which  they  financed  and  from  which  they
drew  their  income.  Not  unusually  the  designers
of  industrial  processes  and  equipment  would  then
still  take  care  of  the  financial  end,  at  the  same
time  that  they  managed  the  shop.  But  from  an
early  point  in  the  development  there  set  in  a  pro-
gressive differentiation,  such  as  to  divide  those
who  designed  and  administered  the  industrial
processes  from  those  others  who  designed  and
managed  the  commercial  transactions  and  took
care  of  the  financial  end.  So  there  also  set  in  a
corresponding  division  of  powers  between  the  busi-
ness management  and  the  technological  experts.
It  became  the  work  of  the  technologist  to  deter-
mine, on  technological  grounds,  what  could  be
done  in  the  way  of  productive  industry,  and  -  to
contrive  ways  and  means  of  doing  it;  but  the
business  management  always  continued  to  decide,
on  commercial  grounds,  how  much  work  should


60 THE  ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

be  done  and  what  kind  and  quality  of  goods  and
services  should  be  produced;  and  the  decision  of
the  business  management  has  always  continued  to
be  final,  and  has  always  set  the  limit  beyond  which
production  must  not  go.

With  the  continued  growth  of  specialization  the
experts  have  necessarily  had  more  and  more  to
say  in  the  affairs  of  industry;  but  always  their
findings  as  to  what  work  is  to  be  done  and  what
ways  and  means  are  to  be  employed  in  production
have  had  to  wait  on  the  findings  of  the  business
managers  as  to  what  will  be  expedient  for  the  pur-
pose of  commercial  gain.  This  division  between
business  management  and  industrial  management
has  continued  to  go  forward,  at  a  continually  ac-
celerated rate,  because  the  special  training  and  ex-
perience required  for  any  passably  efficient  organ-
ization and  direction  of  these  industrial  processes
has  continually  grown  more  exacting,  calling  for
special  knowledge  and  abilities  on  the  part  of
those  who  have  this  work  to  do  and  requiring
their  undivided  interest  and  their  undivided  at-
tention to  the  work  in  hand.  But  these  special-
ists in  technological  knowledge,  abilities,  interest,
and  experience,  who  have  increasingly  come  into
the  case  in  this  way  —  inventors,  designers,  chem-
ists, mineralogists,  soil  experts,  crop  specialists,


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  6 1

production  managers  and  engineers  of  many  kinds
and  denominations  —  have  continued  to  be  em-
ployees of  the  captains  of  industry,  that  is  to  say,
of  the  captains  of  finance,  whose  work  it  has  been
to  commercialize  the  knowledge  and  abilities  of
the  industrial  experts  and  turn  them  to  account
for  their  own  gain.

It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  add  the  axiomatic
corollary  that  the  captains  have  always  turned  the
technologists  and  their  knowledge  to  account  in
this  way  only  so  far  as  would  serve  their  own  com-
mercial profit,  not  to  the  extent  of  their  ability;
or  to  the  limit  set  by  the  material  circumstances;
or  by  the  needs  of  the  community.  The  result
has  been,  uniformly  and  as  a  matter  of  course,
that  the  production  of  goods  and  services  has  ad-
visedly been  stopped  short  of  productive  capacity,
by  curtailment  of  output  and  by  derangement  of
the  productive  system.  There  are  two  main  rea-
sons for  this,  and  both  have  operated  together
throughout  the  machine  era  to  stop  industrial  pro-
duction increasingly  short  of  productive  capacity,
(a)  The  commercial  need  of  maintaining  a  profit-
able price  has  led  to  an  increasingly  imperative
curtailment  of  the  output,  as  fast  as  the  advance
of  the  industrial  arts  has  enhanced  the  productive
capacity. And  (b)  the  continued  advance  of  the


6l THE ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

mechanical  technology  has  called  for  an  ever-
increasing  volume  and  diversity  of  special  knowl-'
edge,  and  so  has  left  the  businesslike  captains  of
finance  continually  farther  in  arrears,  so  that  they
have  been  less  and  less  capable  of  comprehend-
ing what  is  required  in  the  ordinary  way  of  indus-
trial equipment  and  personnel.  They  have  there-
fore, in  effect,  maintained  prices  at  a  profitable,
leved  by  curtailment  of  output  rather  than  by  low-
ering production-cost  per  unit  of  output,  because
they  have  not  had  such  a  working  acquaintance
with  the  technological  facts  in  the  case  as  would
enable  them  to  form  a  passably  sound  judgment
of  suitable  ways  and  means  for  lowering  produc-
tion-cost ;  and  at  the  same  time,  being  shrewd  busi-
ness men,  they  have  been  unable  to  rely  on  the
hired-man' s-loyalty  of  technologists  whom  they  do
not  understand.  The  result  has  been  a  some-
what distrustful  blindfold  choice  of  processes  and
personnel  and  a  consequent  enforced  incompetence
in  the  management  of  industry,  a  curtailment  of
output  below  the  needs  of  the  community,  below
the  productive  capacity  of  the  industrial  system,
and  below  what  an  intelligent  control  of  produc-
tion would  have  made  commercially  profitable.

Through  the  earlier  decades  of  the  machine  era
these  limitations  imposed  on  the  work  of  the  ex-


FINANCE  AND THE ENGINEERS  63

perts  by  the  demands  of  profitable  business  and
by  the  technical  ignorance  of  the  business  men,
appears  not  to  have  been  a  heavy  handicap,
whether  as  a  hindrance  to  the  continued  develop-
ment of  technological  knowledge  or  as  an  obstacle
to  its  ordinary  use  in  industry.  That  was  before
the  mechanical  industry  had  gone  far  in  scope,
complexity,  and  specialization;  and  it  was  also
before  the  continued  work  of  the  technologists
had  pushed  the  industrial  system  to  so  high  a  pro-
ductive capacity  that  it  is  forever  in  danger  of
turning  out  a  larger  product  than  is  required  for
a  profitable  business.  But  gradually,  with  the
passage  of  time  and  the  advance  of  the  industrial
arts  to  a  wider  scope  and  a  larger  scale,  and  to
an  increasing  specialization  and  standardization
of  processes,  the  technological  knowledge  that
makes  up  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  has  called
for  a  higher  degree  of  that  training  that  makes
industrial  specialists;  and  at  the  same  time  any
passably  efficient  management  of  industry  has  of
necessity  drawn  on  them  and  their  special  abilities
to  an  ever-increasing  extent.  At  the  same  time
and  by  the  same  shift  of  circumstances,  the  cap-
tains of  finance,  driven  by  an  increasingly  close
application  to  the  affairs  of  business,  have  been
going  farther  out  of  touch  with  the  ordinary  real-


64 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

ities  of  productive  industry;  and,  it  is  to  be  ad-
mitted, they  have  also  continued  increasingly  to
distrust  the  technological  specialists,  whom  they
do  not  understand,  but  whom  they  can  also  not  get
along  without.  The  captains  have  per  force  con-
tinued to  employ  the  technologists,  to  make  money
for  them,  but  they  have  done  so  only  reluctantly,
tardily,  sparingly,  and  with  a  shrewd  circumspec-
tion; only  because  and  so  far  as  they  have  been
persuaded  that  the  use  of  these  technologists  was
indispensable  to  the  making  of  money.

One  outcome  of  this  persistent  and  pervasive
tardiness  and  circumspection  on  the  part  of  the
captains  has  been  an  incredibly  and  increasingly
uneconomical  use  of  material  resources,  and  an  in-
credibly wasteful  organization  of  equipment  and
man  power  in  those  great  industries  where  the
technological  advance  has  been  most  marked.  In
good  part  it  was  this  discreditable  pass,  to  which
the  leading  industries  had  been  brought  by  these
one-eyed  captains  of  industry,  that  brought  the
regime  of  the  captains  to  an  inglorious  close,  by
shifting  the  initiative  and  discretion  in  this  domain
out  of  their  hands  into  those  of  the  investment
bankers.  By  custom  the  investment  bankers  had
occupied  a  position  between  or  overlapping  the


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  65

duties  of  a  broker  in  corporate  securities  and
those  of  an  underwriter  of  corporate  flotations  —
such  a  position,  in  effect,  as  is  still  assigned  them
in  the  standard  writings  on  corporation  finance.
The  increasingly  large  scale  of  corporate  enter-
prise, as  well  as  the  growth  of  a  mutual  under-
standing among  these  business  concerns,  also  had
its  share  in  this  new  move.  But  about  this  time,
too,  the  "  consulting  engineers  "  were  coming  no-
tably into  evidence  in  many  of  those  lines  of  in-
dustry in  which  corporation  finance  has  habitually
been  concerned.

So  far  as  concerns  the  present  argument  the
ordinary  duties  of  these  consulting  engineers  have
been  to  advise  the  investment  bankers  as  to  the
industrial  and  commercial  soundness,  past  and
prospective,  of  any  enterprise  that  is  to  be  under-
written. These  duties  have  comprised  a  pains-
taking and  impartial  examination  of  the  physical
properties  involved  in  any  given  case,  as  well  as
an  equally  impartial  auditing  of  the  accounts  and
appraisal  of  the  commercial  promise  of  such  en-
terprises, for  the  guidance  of  the  bankers  or  syn-
dicate of  bankers  interested  in  the  case  as  under-
writers. On  this  ground  working  arrangements
and  a  mutual  understanding  presently  arose  be-


66 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

tween  the  consulting  engineers  and  those  banking
houses  that  habitually  were  concerned  in  the  un-
derwriting of  corporate  enterprises.

The  effect  of  this  move  has  been  twofold:  ex-
perience has  brought  out  the  fact  that  corpora-
tion finance,  at  its  best  and  soundest,  has  now  be-
come a  matter  of  comprehensive  and  standard-
ized bureaucratic  routine,  necessarily  comprising
the  mutual  relations  between  various  corporate
concerns,  and  best  to  be  taken  care  of  by  a  clerical
staff  of  trained  accountants ;  and  the  same  experi-
ence has  put  the  financial  houses  in  direct  touch
with  the  technological  general  staff  of  the  indus-
trial system,  whose  surveillance  has  become  in-
creasingly imperative  to  the  conduct  of  any  profit-
able enterprise  in  industry.  But  also,  by  the  same
token,  it  has  appeared  that  the  corporation  finan-
cier of  nineteenth-century  tradition  is  no  longer
of  the  essence  of  the  case  in  corporation  finance
of  the  larger  and  more  responsible  sort.  He  has,
in  effect,  come  to  be  no  better  than  an  idle  wheel
in  the  economic  mechanism,  serving  only  to  take
up  some  of  the  lubricant.

Since  and  so  far  as  this  shift  out  of  the  nine-
teenth century  into  the  twentieth  has  been  com-
pleted, the  corporation  financier  has  ceased  to  be
a  captain  of  industry  and  has  become  a  lieutenant


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  67

of  finance;  the  captaincy  having  been  taken  over
by  the  syndicated  investment  bankers  and  admin-
istered as  a  standardized  routine  of  accountancy,
having  to  do  with  the  flotation  of  corporation  se-
curities and  with  their  fluctuating  values,  and  hav-
ing also  something  to  do  with  regulating  the  rate
and  volume  of  output  in  those  industrial  enter-
prises which  so  have  passed  under  the  hand  of  the
investment  bankers.

By  and  large,  such  is  the  situation  of  the  in-
dustrial system  today,  and  of  that  financial  busi-
ness that  controls  the  industrial  system.  B'ut  this
state  of  things  is  not  so  much  an  accomplished  fact
handed  on  out  of  the  recent  past;  it  is  only  that
such  is  the  culmination  in  which  it  all  heads  up  in
the  immediate  present,  and  that  such  is  the  visible
drift  of  things  into  the  calculable  future.  Only
during  the  last  few  years  has  the  state  of  affairs
in  industry  been  obviously  falling  into  the  shape  so
outlined,  and  it  is  even  yet  only  in  those  larger
and  pace-making  lines  of  industry  which  are  alto-
gether of  the  new  technological  order  that  the
state  of  things  has  reached  this  finished  shape.
But  in  these  larger  and  underlying  divisions  of
the  industrial  system  the  present  posture  and  drift
of  things  is  unmistakable. Meantime  very  much


68 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

still  stands  over  out  of  that  regime  of  rule-of-
thumb,  competitive  sabotage,  and  commercial  log-
rolling, in  which  the  businesslike  captains  of  the
old  order  are  so  altogether  well  at  home,  and
which  has  been  the  best  that  the  captains  have
known  how  to  contrive  for  the  management  of
that  industrial  system  whose  captains  they  have
been.  So  that  wherever  the  production  experts
are  now  taking  over  the  management,  out  of  the
dead  hand  of  the  self-made  captains,  and  wher-
ever they  have  occasions  to  inquire  into  the  estab-
lished conditions  of  production,  they  find  the
ground  cumbered  with  all  sorts  of  incredible
makeshifts  of  waste  and  inefficiency  —  such  make-
shifts as  would  perhaps  pass  muster  with  any
moderately  stupid  elderly  layman,  but  which  look
like  blindfold  guesswork  to  these  men  who  know
something  of  the  advanced  technology  and  its
working-out.

Hitherto,  then,  the  growth  and  conduct  of  this
industrial  system  presents  this  singular  outcome.
The  technology  —  the  state  of  the  industrial -arts
—  which  takes  effect  in  this  mechanical  industry  is
in  an  eminent  sense  a  joint  stock  of  knowledge
and  experience  held  in  common  by  the  civilized
peoples. It  requires  the  use  of  trained  and  in-


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  69

structed  workmen  —  born,  bred,  trained,  and  in-
structed at  the  cost  of  the  people  at  large.  So
also  it  requires,  with  a  continually  more  exacting
insistence,  a  corps  of  highly  trained  and  specially
gifted  experts,  of  divers  and  various  kinds.
These,  too,  are  born,  bred,  and  trained  at  the
cost  of  the  community  at  large,  and  they  draw
their  requisite  special  knowledge  from  the  com-
munity's joint  stock  of  accumulated  experience.
These  expert  men,  technologists,  engineers,  or
whatever  name  may  best  suit  them,  make  up  the
indispensable  General  Staff  of  the  industrial  sys-
tem; and  without  their  immediate  and  unremit-
ting guidance  and  correction  the  industrial  sys-
tem will  not  work.  It  is  a  mechanically  organ-
ized structure  of  technical  processes  designed,  in-
stalled, and  conducted  by  these  production  engi-
neers. Without  them  and  their  constant  atten-
tion the  industrial  equipment,  the  mechanical  ap-
pliances of  industry,  will  foot  up  to  just  so  much
junk.  The  material  welfare  of  the  community
is  unreservedly  bound  up  with  the  due  working  of
this  industrial  system,  and  therefore  with  its  un-
reserved control  by  the  engineers,  who  alone  are
competent  to  manage  it.  To  do  their  work  as  it
should  be  done  these  men  of  the  industrial  general
staff  must  have  a  free  hand,  unhampered  by  com-


70 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

mercial  considerations  and  reservations;  for  the
production  of  the  goods  and  services  needed  by
the  community  they  neither  need  nor  are  they  in
any  degree  benefited  by  any  supervision  or  inter-
ference from  the  side  of  the  owners.  Yet  the
absentee  owners,  now  represented,  in  effect,  by
the  syndicated  investment  bankers,  continue  to
control  the  industrial  experts  and  limit  their  dis-
cretion, arbitrarily,  for  their  own  commercial  gain,
regardless  of  the  needs  of  the  community.

Hitherto  these  men  who  so  make  up  the  gen-
eral staff  of  the  industrial  system  have  not  drawn
together  into  anything  like  a  self-directing  work-
ing force;  nor  have  they  been  vested  with  any-
thing more  than  an  occasional,  haphazard,  and
tentative  control  of  some  disjointed  sector  of  the
industrial  equipment,  with  no  direct  or  decisive  re-
lation to  that  personnel  of  productive  industry
that  may  be  called  the  officers  of  the  line  and  the
rank  and  file.  It  is  still  the  unbroken  privilege
of  the  financial  management  and  its  financial
agents  to  "  hire  and  fire."  The  final  disposition
of  all  the  industrial  forces  still  remains  in  the
hands  of  the  business  men,  who  still  continue  to
dispose  of  these  forces  for  other  than  industrial
ends.  And  all  the  while  it  is  an  open  secret  that
with  a  reasonably  free  hand  the  production  ex-


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  7 1

perts  would  today  readily  increase  the  ordinary
output  of  industry  by  several  fold,  —  variously
estimated  at  some  300  per  cent,  to  1200  per  cent,
of  the  current  output.  And  what  stands  in  the
way  of  so  increasing  the  ordinary  output  of  goods
and  services  is  business  as  usual.

Right  lately  these  technologists  have  begun  to
become  uneasily  "  class-conscious  "  and  to  reflect
that  they  together  constitute  the  indispensable
General  Staff  of  the  industrial  system.  Their
class  consciousness  has  taken  the  immediate  form
of  a  growing  sense  of  waste  and  confusion  in  the
management  of  industry  by  the  financial  agents
of  the  absentee  owners.  They  are  beginning  to
take  stock  of  that  all-pervading  mismanagement
of  industry  that  is  inseparable  from  its  control  for
commercial  ends.  All  of  which  brings  home  a
realization  of  their  own  shame  and  of  damage  to
the  common  good.  So  the  engineers  are  begin-
ning to  draw  together  and  ask  themselves,
"What  about  it?"

This  uneasy  movement  among  the  technol-
ogists set  in,  in  an  undefined  and  fortuitous  way,
in  the  closing  years  of  the  nineteenth  century;
when  the  consulting  engineers,  and  then  presently
the "  efficiency  engineers,"  began  to  make  scat-


72 THE ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

tered  corrections  in  detail,  which  showed  up  the
industrial  incompetence  of  those  elderly  laymen
who  were  doing  a  conservative  business  at  the
cost  of  industry.  The  consulting  engineers  of
the  standard  type,  both  then  and  since  then,  are
commercialized  technologists,  whose  work  it  is
to  appraise  the  industrial  value  of  any  given  en-
terprise with  a  view  to  its  commercial  exploita-
tion. They  are  a  cross  between  a  technological
specialist  and  a  commercial  agent,  beset  with  the
limitations  of  both  and  commonly  not  fully  com-
petent in  either  line.  Their  normal  position  is
that  of  an  employee  of  the  investment  bankers,
on  a  stipend  or  a  retainer,  and  it  has  ordinarily
been  their  fortune  to  shift  over  in  time  from  a
technological  footing  to  a  frankly  commercial
one.  The  case  of  the  efficiency  engineers,  or  sci-
entific-management experts,  is  somewhat  similar.
They  too  have  set  out  to  appraise,  exhibit,  and
correct  the  commercial  short-comings  of  the  or-
dinary management  of  those  industrial  establish-
ments which  they  investigate,  to  persuade  the  busi-
ness men  in  charge  how  they  may  reasonably  come
in  for  larger  net  earnings  by  a  more  closely  shorn
exploitation  of  the  industrial  forces  at  their  dis-
posal. During  the  opening  years  of  the  new  cen-
tury a  lively  interest  centered  on  the  views  and


FINANCE  AND  THE ENGINEERS  73

expositions  of  these  two  groups  of  industrial  ex-
perts; and  not  least  was  the  interest  aroused  by
their  exhibits  of  current  facts  indicating  an  all-
pervading  lag,  leak,  and  friction  in  the  industrial
system,  due  to  its  disjointed  and  one-eyed  man-
agement by  commercial  adventuiers  bent  on  pri-
vate gain.

During  these  few  years  of  the  opening  century
the  members  of  this  informal  guild  of  engineers
at  large  have  been  taking  an  interest  in  this  ques-
tion of  habitual  mismanagement  by  ignorance  and
commercial  sabotage,  even  apart  from  the  com-
mercial imbecility  of  it  all.  But  it  is  the  young
rather  than  the  old  among  them  who  see  industry
in  any  other  light  than  its  commercial  value.
Circumstances  have  decided  that  the  older  gener-
ation of  the  craft  have  become  pretty  well  com-
mercialized. Their  habitual  outlook  has  been
shaped  by  a  long  and  unbroken  apprenticeship  to
the  corporation  financiers  and  the  investment
bankers;  so  that  they  still  habitually  see  the  in-
dustrial system  as  a  contrivance  for  the  round-
about process  of  making  money.  Accordingly,
the  established  official  Associations  and  Institutes
of  Engineers,  which  are  officered  and  engineered
by  the  elder  engineers,  old  and  young,  also  con-
tinue to  show  the  commercial  bias  of  their  ere-


74 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ators,  in  what  they  criticize  and  in  what  they  pro-
pose. But  the  new  generation  which  has  been
coming  on  during  the  present  century  are  not
similarly  true  to  that  tradition  of  commercial  en-
gineering that  makes  the  technological  man  an
awestruck  lieutenant  of  the  captain  of  finance.

By  training,  and  perhaps  also  by  native  bent,
the  technologists  find  it  easy  and  convincing  to
size  up  men  and  things  in  terms  of  tangible  per-
formance, without  commercial  afterthought,  ex-
cept so  far  as  their  apprenticeship  to  the  captains
of  finance  may  have  made  commercial  after-
thought a  second  nature  to  them.  Many  of  the
younger  generation  are  beginning  to  understand
that  engineering  begins  and  ends  in  the  domain
of  tangible  performance,  and  that  commercial  ex-
pediency is  another  matter.  Indeed,  they  are
beginning  to  understand  that  commercial  expedi-
ency has  nothing  better  to  contribute  to  the  engi-
neer's work  than  so  much  lag,  leak,  and  friction.
The  four  years'  experience  of  the  war  has  also
been  highly  instructive  on  that  head.  So  they
are  beginning  to  draw  together  on  a  common
ground  of  understanding,  as  men  who  are  con-
cerned with  the  ways  and  means  of  tangible  per-
formance in  the  way  of  productive  industry,  ac-
cording to  the  state  of  the  industrial  arts  as  they


FINANCE AND  THE ENGINEERS  75

know  them  at  their  best;  and  there  is  a  growing
conviction  among  them  that  they  together  consti-
tute the  sufficient  and  indispensable  general  staff
of  the  mechanical  industries,  on  whose  unhindered
team-work  depends  the  due  working  of  the  indus-
trial system  and  therefore  also  the  material  wel-
fare of  the  civilized  peoples.  So  also,  to  these
men  who  are  trained  in  the  stubborn  logic  of  tech-
nology, nothing  is  quite  real  that  cannot  be  stated
in  terms  of  tangible  performance;  and  they  are
ac£ordingly_coming  to.  understand  _that  the  whole
fabric  of  credit  and  corporation  finance  is  a  tissue
o f  make-believe.

Credit  obligations  and  financial  transactions
rest  on  certain  principles  of  legal  formality  which
have  been  handed  down  from  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, and  which  therefore  antedate  the  mechanical
industry  and  carry  no  secure  conviction  to  men
trained  in  the  logic  of  that  industry.  Within
this  technological  system  of  tangible  performance
corporation  finance  and  all  its  works  and  gestures
are  completely  idle ;  it  all  comes  into  the  working
scheme  of  the  engineers  only  as  a  gratuitous  in-
trusion which  could  be  barred  out  without  derang-
ing the  work  at  any  point,  provided  only  that  men
made  up  their  mind  to  that  effect  —  that  is  to  say,
provided the make-believe of absentee owner-


76 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ship  were  discontinued.  Its  only  obvious  effect
on  the  work  which  the  engineers  have  to  take  care
of  is  waste  of  materials  and  retardation  of  the
work.  So  the  next  question  which  the  engineers
are  due  to  ask  regarding  this  timeworn  fabric  of
ownership,  finance,  sabotage,  credit,  and  un-
earned income  is  likely  to  be :  Why  cumbers  it
the  ground?  And  they  are  likely  to  find  the
scriptural  answer  ready  to  their  hand.

It  would  be  hazardous  to  surmise  how,  how
soon,  on  what  provocation,  and  with  what  effect
the  guild  of  engineers  are  due  to  realize  that  they
constitute  a  guild,  and  that  the  material  fortunes
of  the  civilized  peoples  already  lie  loose  in  their
hands.  But  it  is  already  sufficiently  plain  that
the  industrial  conditions  and  the  drift  of  convic-
tion among  the  engineers  are  drawing  together
to  some  such  end.

Hitherto  it  has  been  usual  to  count  on  the  in-
terested negotiations  continually  carried  on  and
never  concluded  between  capital  and  labor,  be-
tween the  agents  of  the  investors  and  the  body  of
workmen,  to  bring  about  whatever  readjustments
are  to  be  looked  for  in  the  control  of  productive
industry  and  in  the  distribution  and  use  of  its  pro-
duct. These  negotiations  have  necessarily  been,


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  77

and  continue  to  be,  in  the  nature  of  business  trans-
actions, bargaining  for  a  price,  since  both  parties
to  the  negotiation  continue  to  stand  on  the  conse-
crated ground  of  ownership,  free  bargain,  and
self-help;  such  as  the  commercial  wisdom  of  the
eighteenth  century  saw,  approved  and  certified  it
all,  in  the  time  before  the  coming  of  this  perplex-
ing industrial  system.  In  the  course  of  these  end-
less negotiations  between  the  owners  and  their
workmen  there  has  been  some  loose  and  provi-
sional syndication  of  claims  and  forces  on  both
sides ;  so  that  each  of  these  two  recognized  parties
to  the  industrial  controversy  has  come  to  make  up
a  loose-knit  vested  interest,  and  each  speaks  for
its  own  special  claims  as  a  party  in  interest.
Each  is  contending  for  some  special  gain  for  itself
and  trying  to  drive  a  profitable  bargain  for  itself,
and  hitherto  no  disinterested  spokesman  for  the
community  at  large  or  for  the  industrial  system
as  a  going  concern  has  seriously  cut  into  this  con-
troversy between  these  contending  vested  inter-
ests. The  outcome  has  been  businesslike  conces-
sion and  compromise,  in  the  nature  of  bargain  and
sale.  It  is  true,  during  the  war,  and  for  the  con-
duct of  the  war,  there  were  some  half-concerted
measures  taken  by  the  Administration  in  the  in-
terest of  the  nation  at  large,  as  a  belligerent;  but


78 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

it  has  always  been  tacitly  agreed  that  these  were
extraordinary  war  measures,  not  to  be  counte-
nanced in  time  of  peace.  In  time  of  peace  the
accepted  rule  is  still  business  as  usual;  that  is  to
say,  investors  and  workmen  wrangling  together
on  a  footing  of  business  as  usual.

These  negotiations  have  necessarily  been  in-
conclusive. So  long  as  ownership  of  resources
and  industrial  plant  is  allowed,  or  so  long  as  it  is
allowed  any  degree  of  control  or  consideration  in
the  conduct  of  industry,  nothing  more  substantial
can  come  of  any  readjustment  than  a  concessive
mitigation  of  the  owners'  interference  with  pro-
duction. There  is  accordingly  nothing  subversive
in  these  bouts  of  bargaining  between  the  feder-
ated workmen  and  the  syndicated  owners.  It  is
a  game  of  chance  and  skill  played  between  two
contending  vested  interests  for  private  gain,  in
which  the  industrial  system  as  a  going  concern  en-
ters only  as  a  victim  of  interested  interference.
Yet  the  material  welfare  of  the  community,  and
not  least  of  the  workmen,  turns  on  the  due  work-
ing of  this  industrial  system,  without  interference.
Concessive  mitigation  of  the  right  to  interfere
with  production,  on  the  part  of  either  one  of  these
vested  interests,  can  evidently  come  to  nothing
more  substantial  than  a  concessive  mitigation.


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  79

But  owing  to  the  peculiar  technological  char-
acter of  this  industrial  system,  with  its  specialized,
standardized,  mechanical,  and  highly  technical
interlocking  processes  of  production,  there  has
gradually  come  into  being  this  corps  of  techno-
logical production  specialists,  into  whose  keeping
the  due  functioning  of  the  industrial  system  has
now  drifted  by  force  of  circumstance.  They  are,
by  force  of  circumstance,  the  keepers  of  the  com-
munity's material  welfare;  although  they  have
hitherto  been  acting,  in  effect,  as  keepers  and  pro-
viders of  free  income  for  the  kept  classes.  They
are  thrown  into  the  position  of  responsible  direc-
tors of  the  industrial  system,  and  by  the  same
move  they  are  in  a  position  to  become  arbiters  of
the  community's  material  welfare.  They  are
becoming  class-conscious,  and  they  are  no  longer
driven  by  a  commercial  interest,  in  any  such  de-
gree as  will  make  them  a  vested  interest  in  that
commercial  sense  in  which  the  syndicated  owners
and  the  federated  workmen  are  vested  interests.
They  are,  at  the  same  time,  numerically  and  by
habitual  outlook,  no  such  heterogeneous  and  un-
wieldy body  as  the  federated  workmen,  whose
numbers  and  scattering  interest  has  left  all  their
endeavors  substantially  nugatory.  Injhqr^_the
engineers  are  in  a  position  to  make  the  next  move.


8o THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

By  comparison  with  the  population  at  large,
including  the  financial  powers  and  the  kept  classes,
the  technological  specialists  which  come  in  ques-
tion here  are  a  very  inconsiderable  number;  yet
this  small  number  is  indispensable  to  the  con-
tinued working  of  the  productive  industries.  So
slight  are  their  numbers,  and  so  sharply  defined
and  homogeneous  is  their  class,  that  a  sufficiently
compact  and  inclusive  organization  of  their  forces
should  arrange  itself  almost  as  a  matter  of  course,
so  soon  as  any  appreciable  proportion  of  them
shall  be  moved  by  any  common  purpose.  And
the  common  purpose  is  not  far  to  seek,  in  the  all-
pervading  industrial  confusion,  obstruction,  waste,
and  retardation  which  business  as  usual  continu-
ally throws  in  their  face.  At  the  same  time  they
are  the  leaders  of  the  industrial  personnel,  the
workmen,  of  the  officers  of  the  line  and  the  rank
and  file;  and  these  are  coming  into  a  frame  of
mind  to  follow  their  leaders  in  any  adventure  that
holds  a  promise  of  advancing  the  common  good.

To  these  men,  soberly  trained  in  a  spirit  of
tangible  performance  and  endowed  with  some-
thing more  than  an  even  share  of  the  sense  of
workmanship,  and  endowed  also  with  the  com-
mon heritage  of  partiality  for  the  rule  of  Live  and
Let  Live,  the  disallowance  of  an  outworn  and  ob-


FINANCE AND THE ENGINEERS  8 1

structive  right  of  absentee  ownership  is  not  likely
to  seem  a  shocking  infraction  of  the  sacred  re-
alties. That  customary  right  of  ownership  by
virtue  of  which  the  vested  interests  continue  to
control  the  industrial  system  for  the  benefit  of  the
kept  classes,  belongs  to  an  older  order  of  things
than  the  mechanical  industry.  It  has  come  out
of  a  past  that  was  made  up  of  small  things  and
traditional  make-believe.  For  all  the  purposes
of  that  scheme  of  tangible  performance-  that  goes
to  make  up  the  technologist's  world,  it  is  without
form  and  void.  So  that,  given  time  for  due  irri-
tation, it  should  by  no  means  come  as  a  surprise
if  the  guild  of  engineers  are  provoked  to  put  their
Heads  together  and,  quite  out  of  hand,  disallow
that  large  absentee  ownership  that  goes  to  make
the  vested  interests  and  to  unmake  the  industrial
system.  And  there  stand  behind  them  the  massed
and  rough-handed  legions  of  the  industrial  rank
and  file,  ill  at  ease  and  looking  for  new  things.
The  older  commercialized  generation  among  them
would,  of  course,  ask  themselves:  Why  should
we  worry  ?  What  do  we  stand  to  gain  ?  But  the
younger  generation,  not  so  hard-bitten  by  com-
mercial experience,  will  be  quite  as  likely  to  ask
themselves:  What  do  we  stand  to  lose?  And
there  is  the  patent  fact  that  such  a  thing  as  a


82 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

general  strike  of  the  technological  specialists  in
industry  need  involve  no  more  than  a  minute  frac-
tion of  one  per  cent,  of  the  population;  yet  it
would  swiftly  bring  a  collapse  of  the  old  order
and  sweep  the  timeworn  fabric  of  finance  and  ab-
sentee sabotage  into  the  discard  for  good  and  all.
Such  a  catastrophe  would  doubtless  be  deplor-
able. It  would  look  something  like  the  end  of
the  world  to  all  those  persons  who  take  their
stand  with  the  kept  classes,  but  it  may  come  to
seem  no  more  than  an  incident  of  the  day's  work
to  the  engineers  and  to  the  rough-handed  legions
of  the  rank  and  file.  It  is  a  situation  which  may
well  be  deplored.  But  there  is  no  gain  in  losing
patience  with  a  conjunction  of  circumstances.
And  it  can  do  no  harm  to  take  stock  of  the  situa-
tion and  recognize  that,  by  force  of  circumstance,
it  is  now  open  to  the  Council  of  Technological
Workers'  and  Soldiers'  Deputies  to  make  the  next
move,  in  their  own  way  and  in  their  own  good
time.  When  and  what  this  move  will  be,  if  any,
or  even  what  it  will  be  like,  is  not  something  on
which  a  layman  can  hold  a  confident  opinion.
But  so  much  seems  clear,  that  the  industrial  dic-
tatorship of  the  captain  of  finance  is  now  held  on
sufferance  of  the  engineers  and  is  liable  at  any
tjme  to  be  discontinued  at  their  discretion,  as  a
matter  of  convenience.


IV


ON  THE  DANGER  OF  A  REVOLUTIONARY
OVERTURN

Bolshevism  is  a  ,menace  to  the  vested  rights
of"' property  and  privilege.  Therefore  the
guardians  of  the  Vested  Interests  have  been
thrown  into  a  state  of  Red  trepidation  by  the  con-
tinued functioning  of  Soviet  Russia  and  the  con-
tinual outbreaks  of  the  same  Red  distemper  else^
where  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  It  is  feared,
with  a  nerve-shattering  fear,  that  the  same  Red
distemper  of  Bolshevism  must  presently  infect
the  underlying  population  in  America  and  bring
on  an  overturn  of  the  established  order,  so  soon
as  the  underlying  population  are  in  a  position  to
take  stock  of  the  situation  and  make  up  their  mind
to  a  course  of  action.  The  situation  is  an  uneasy
one,  and  it  contains  the  elements  of  much  trouble ;
at  least  such  appears  to  be  the  conviction  of  the
Guardians  of  the  established  order.  Something
of  the  kind  is  felt  to  be  due,  on  the  grounds  of  the
accomplished  facts.  So  it  is  feared,  with  a  nerve-
shattering  fear,  that  anything  like  uncolored  in-

83


84 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

formation  as  to  the  facts  in  the  case  and  anything
like  a  free  popular  discussion  of  these  facts  must
logically  result  in  disaster.  Hence  all  this  un-
seemly trepidation.

The  Guardians  of  the  Vested  Interests,  official
and  quasi-official,  have  allowed  their  own  knowl-
edge of  this  sinister  state  of  things  to  unseat  their
common  sense.  The  run  of  the  facts  has  jostled
them  out  of  the  ruts,  and  they  have  gone  in  for  a
headlong  policy  of  clamor  and  repression,  to
cover  and  suppress  matters  of  fact  and  to  shut
off  discussion  and  deliberation.  And  all  the
while  the  Guardians  are  also  feverishly  at  work
on  a  mobilization  of  such  forces  as  may  hopefully
be  counted  on  to  "  keep  the  situation  in  hand  "  in
case  the  expected  should  happen.  The  one  mani-
festly conclusive  resolution  to  which  the  Guar-
dians of  the  Vested  Interests  have  come  is  that
the  underlying  population  is  to  be  "kept  in
hand,"  in  the  face  of  any  contingency.  Their
one  settled  principle  of  conduct  appears  to  be,  to
stick  at  nothing;  in  all  of  which,  doubtless,  the
Guardians  mean  well.

Now,  the  Guardians  of  the  Vested  Interests  are
presumably  wise  in  discountenancing  any  open
discussion  or  any  free  communication  of  ideas
and opinions. It  could  lead to  nothing  more


A REVOLUTIONARY OVERTURN  85

comfortable  than  popular  irritation  and  distrust.
The  Vested  Interests  are  known  to  have  been
actively  concerned  in  the  prosecution  of  the  War,
and  there  is  no  lack  of  evidence  that  their  spokes-
men have  been  heard  in  the,  subsequent  counsels
of  the  Peace.  And,  no  doubt,  the  less  that  is
known  and  said  about  the  doings  of  the  Vested
Interests  during  the  War  and  after,  the  better
both  for  the  public  tranquility  and  for  the  con-
tinued growth  and  profit  of  the  Vested  Interests.
Yet  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  facts  of  such
magnitude  and  of  such  urgent  public  concern  as
the  manoeuvres  of  the  Vested  Interests  during
the  War  and  after  can  not  be  altogether  happily
covered  over  with  a  conspiracy  of  silence.  Some-
thing like  a  middle  course  of  temperate  publicity
should  have  seemed  more  to  the  point.  It  may
be  unfortunate,  but  it  is  none  the  less  unavoidable,
that  something  appreciable  is  bound  to  come  to
light ;  that  is  to  say,  something  sinister.

'  It  should  be  plain  to  all  good  citizens  who  have
the  cause  of  law  and  order  at  heart  that  in  such
a  case  a  more  genial  policy  of  conciliatory  prom-
ises and  procrastination  will  be  more  to  the  pur-
pose than  any  noisy  recourse  to  the  strong  arm
and  the  Star  Chamber.  A  touch  of  history,  and
more  particularly  of  contemporary  history,  would


86 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

have  given  the  Guardians  a  touch  of  sanity.
Grown  wise  in  all  the  ways  and  means  of  blame-
lessly defeating  the  unblest  majority,  the  gentle-
manly government  of  the  British  manage  affairs
of  this  kind  much  better.  They  have  learned
that  bellicose  gestures  provoke  ill  will,  and  that
desperate  remedies  should  be  held  in  reserve  until
needed.  Whereas  the  Guardians  of  the  Vested
Interests  in  America  are  plainly  putting  things  in
train  for  a  capial  operation,  for  which  there  is  no
apparent  necessity.  It  should  be  evident  on
slight  reflection  that  things  have  not  reached  that
fateful  stage  where  nothing  short  of  a  capital
operation  can  be  counted  on  to  save  the  life  of
the  Vested  Interests  in  America;  not  yet.  And
indeed,  things  need  assuredly  not  reach  such  a
stage  if  reasonable  measures  are  taken  to  avoid
undue  alarm  and  irritation.  All  that  is  needed
to  keep  the  underlying  population  of  America
in  a  sweet  temper  is  a  degree  of  patient  ambiguity
and  delay,  something  after  the  British  pattern;
and  all  will  yet  be  well  with  the  vested  rights  of
property  and  privilege,  for  some  time  to  come.

History  teaches  that  no  effectual  popular  up-
rising can  be  set  afoot  against  an  outworn  insti-
tutional iniquity  unless  the  movement  effectually


A REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  87

meets  the  special  material  requirements  of  the
situation  which  provokes  it;  nor  on  the  other
hand  can  an  impending  popular  overturn  be  staved
off  without  making  up  one's  account  with  those
material  conditions  which  converge  to  bring  it
on.  The  long  history  of  British  gentlemanly  com-
promise, collusion,  conciliation,  and  popular  de-
feat, is  highly  instructive  on  that  head.  And  it
should  be  evident  to  any  disinterested  person,  on
any  slight  survey  of  the  pertinent  facts,  that  the
situation  in  America  does  not  now  offer  such  a
combination  of  circumstances  as  would  be  re-
quired for  any  effectual  overturn  of  the  estab-
lished order  or  any  forcible  dispossession  of  these
Vested  Interests  that  now  control  the  material
fortunes  of  the  American  people.  In  short,  by
force  of  circumstances,  Bolshevism  is  not  a  pres-
ent menace  to  the  Vested  Interests  in  America;
provided  always^  that  the  Guardians  of  these
Vested  Interests  do  not  go  out  of  their  way  to
precipitate  trouble  by  such  measures  as  will  make
Bolshevism  of  any  complexion  seem  the  lesser
evil, —  which  is  perhaps  not  a  safe  proviso,  in
view  of  the  hysterically  Red  state  of  mind  of  the
Guardians.

No movement for  the dispossession of the
Vested  Interests  in  America  can  hope  for  even


88 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

a  temporary  success  unless  it  is  undertaken  by  an
organization  which  is  competent  to  take  over  the
country's  productive  industry  as  a  whole,  and  to
administer  it  from  the  start  on  a  more  efficient
plan  than  that  now  pursued  by  the  Vested  Inter-
ests ;  and  there  is  no  such  organization  in  sight  or
in  immediate  prospect.  The  nearest  approach  to
a  practicable  organization  of  industrial  forces  in
America,  just  yet,  is  the  A.  F.  of  L. ;  which  need
only  be  named  in  order  to  dispel  the  illusion  that
there  is  anything  to  hope  or  fear  in  the  way  of  a
radical  move  at  its  hands.  The  A.  F.  of  L.  is
itself  one  of  the  Vested  Interests,  as  ready  as  any
other  to  do  battle  for  its  own  margin  of  privilege
and  profit.  At  the  same  time  it  would  be  a
wholly  chimerical  fancy  to  believe  that  such  an
organization  of  workmen  as  the  A.  F.  of  L.  could
take  over  and  manage  any  appreciable  section  of
the  industrial  system,  even  if  their  single-minded
interest  in  special  privileges  for  themselves  did
not  preclude  their  making  a  move  in  that  direc-
tion. The  Federation  is  not  organized  for  pro-
duction but  for  bargaining.  It  is  not  organized
on  lines  that  would  be  workable  for  the  manage-
ment of  any  industrial  system  as  a  whole,  or  of
any  special  line  of  production  within  such  a  sys-
tem. It  is,  in  effect, an  organization for  the


A  REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  89

strategic  defeat  of  employers  and  rival  organiza-
tions, by  recourse  to  enforced  unemployment  and
obstruction;  not  for  the  production  of  goods  and
services.  And  it  is  officered  by  tacticians,  skilled
in  the  ways  and  means  of  bargaining  with  poli-
ticians and  intimidating  employers  and  employees ;
not  by  men  who  have  any  special  insight  into  or
interest  in  the  ways  and  means  of  quantity  pro-
duction and  traffic  management.  They  are  not,
and  for  their  purpose  they  need  not  be,  techni-
cians in  any  conclusive  sense, —  and  the  fact  should
not  be  lost  sight  of  that  any  effectual  overturn,
of  the  kind  hazily  contemplated  by  the  hysterical
officials,  will  always  have  to  be  primarily  a  tech-
nical affair.

In  effect,  the  Federation  is  officered  by  safe
and  sane  politicians,  and  its  rank  and  file  are  vo-
taries of  "  the  full  dinner-pail."  No  Guardian
need  worry  about  the  Federation,  and  there  is  no
other  organization  in  sight  which  differs  mate-
rially from  the  Federation  in  those  respects  which
would  count  toward  a  practical  move  in  the  direc-
tion of  a  popular  overturn, —  unless  a  doubtful
exception  should  be  claimed  for  the  Railroad
Brotherhoods.  The  A.  F.  of  L.  is  a  business  or-
ganization with  a  vested  interest  of  its  own;  for
keeping  up  prices  and  keeping  down  the  supply,


90 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

quite  after  the  usual  fashion  of  management  by
the  other  Vested  Interests ;  not  for  managing  pro-
ductive industry  or  even  for  increasing  the  output
of  goods  produced  under  any  management.  At
the  best,  its  purpose  and  ordinary  business  is  to
gain  a  little  something  for  its  own  members  at  a
more  than  proportionate  cost  to  the  rest  of  the
community;  which  does  not  afford  either  the
spiritual  or  the  material  ground  for  a  popular
overturn.

Nor  is  it  the  A.  F.  of  L.  or  the  other  organ-
izations for  "  collective  bargaining  "  that  come  in
for  the  comfortless  attentions  of  the  officials  and
of  the  many  semi-official  conspiracies  in  restraint
of  sobriety.  Their  nerve-shattering  fears  center
rather  on  those  irresponsible  wayfaring  men  of
industry  who  make  up  the  I.  W.  W.,  and  on  the
helpless  and  hapless  alien  unbelievers  whose  con-
tribution to  the  sum  total  is  loose  talk  in  some
foreign  tongue.  But  if  there  is  any  assertion  to
be  made  without  fear  of  stumbling  it  will  be,  that
this  flotsam  of  industry  is  not  organized  to  take
over  the  highly  technical  duties  involved  in  the
administration  of  the  industrial  system.  But  it
is  these  and  their  like  that  engage  the  best  atten-
tion of  the  many  commissions,  committees,  clubs,
leagues,  federations,  syndicates,  and  corporations


A REVOLUTIONARY OVERTURN  9 1

for  the  chasing  of  wild  geese  under  the  Red  flag.

Wherever  the  mechanical  industry  has  taken
decisive  effect,  as  in  America  and  in  the  two  or
three  industrialized  regions  of  Europe,  the  com-
munity lives  from  hand  to  mouth  in  such  a  way
that  its  livelihood  depends  on  the  effectual  work-
ing of  its  industrial  system  from  day  to  day.  In
such  a  case  a  serious  disturbance  and  derangement
of  the  balanced  process  of  production  is  always
easily  brought  on,  and  it  always  brings  immediate
hardship  on  large  sections  of  the  community.
Indeed,  it  is  this  state  of  things  —  the  ease  with
which  industry  can  be  deranged  and  hardship  can
be  brought  to  bear  on  the  people  at  large  —  that
constitutes  the  chief  asset  of  such  partisan  organ-
izations as  the  A.  F.  of  L.  It  is  a  state  of  things
which  makes  sabotage  easy  and  effectual  and  gives
it  breadth  and  scope.  But  sabotage  is  not  revo-
lution. If  it  were,  then  the  A.  F.  of  L.,  the  I.
W.  W.,  the  Chicago  Packers,  and  the  U.  S.  Sen-
ate would  be  counted  among  the  revolutionists.

Far-reaching  sabotage,  that  is  to  say  derange-
ment of  the  industrial  system,  such  as  to  entail
hardship  on  the  community  at  large  or  on  some
particular  section  of  it,  is  easily  brought  to  bear
in  any  country  that  is  dominated  by  the  mechan-


92 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ical  industry.  It  is  commonly  resorted  to  by  both
parties  in  any  controversy  between  the  business-
like employers  and  the  employees.  It  is,  in  fact,
an  everyday  expedient  of  business,  and  no  serious
blame  attaches  to  its  ordinary  use.  Under  given
circumstances,  as,  e.  g.,  under  the  circumstances
just  now  created  by  the  return  of  peace,  such  de-
rangement of  industry  and  hindrance  of  produc-
tion is  an  unavoidable  expedient  of  "  business  as
usual."  And  derangement  of  the  same  nature  is
also  commonly  resorted  to  as  a  means  of  coercion
in  any  attempted  movement  of  overturn.  It  is
the  simple  and  obvious  means  of  initiating  any
revolutionary  disturbance  in  any  industrial  or
commercialized  country.  But  under  the  existing
industrial  conditions,  if  it  is  to  achieve  even  a
transient  success,  any  such  revolutionary  move-
ment of  reconstruction  must  also  be  in  a  position
from  the  outset  to  overcome  any  degree  of  initial
derangement  in  industry,  whether  of  its  own  mak-
ing or  not,  and  to  do  constructive  work  of  that
particular  kind  which  is  called  for  by  the  present
disposition  of  industrial  forces  and  by  the  present
close  dependence  of  the  community's  livelihood
on  the  due  systematic  working  of  these  industrial
forces.  To  take  effect  and  to  hold  its  own  even
for  the  time  being, any  movement  of  overturn


A REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  93

must  from  beforehand  provide  for  a  sufficiently
productive  conduct  of  the  industrial  system  on
which  the  community's  material  welfare  depends,
and  for  a  competent  distribution  of  goods  and
services  throughout  the  community.  Otherwise,
under  existing  industrial  conditions,  nothing  more
can  be  accomplished  than  an  ephemeral  disturb-
ance and  a  transient  season  of  accentuated  hard-
ship. Even  a  transient  failure  to  make  good  in
the  management  of  the  industrial  system  must
immediately  defeat  any  movement  of  overturn  in
any  of  the  advanced  industrial  countries.  At
this  point  the  lessons  of  history  fail,  because  the
present  industrial  system  and  the  manner  of  close-
knit  community  life  enforced  by  this  industrial
system  have  no  example  in  history.

This  state  of  things,  which  so  conditions  the
possibility  of  any  revolutionary  overturn,  is
peculiar  to  the  advanced  industrial  countries;  and
the  limitations  which  this  state  of  things  imposes
are  binding  within  these  countries  in  the  same
measure  in  which  these  peoples  are  dominated  by
the  system  of  mechanical  industry.  In  contrast
with  this  state  of  things,  the  case  of  Soviet  Rus-
sia may  be  cited  to  show  the  difference.  As  com-
pared with  America  and  much  of  western  Europe,
Russia  is  not  an  industrialized  region,  in  any  de-


94 THE  ENGINEERS  AND  THE PRICE  SYSTEM

cisive  sense;  although  Russia,  too,  leans  on  the
mechanical  industry  in  a  greater  degree  than  is
commonly  recognized.  Indeed,  so  considerable
is  the  dependence  of  the  Russians  on  the  mechan-
ical industry  that  it  may  yet  prove  to  be  the  de-
cisive factor  in  the  struggle  which  is  now  going  on
between  Soviet  Russia  and  the  Allied  Powers.

Now,  it  is  doubtless  this  continued  success  of
the  Soviet  administration  in  Russia  that  has
thrown  this  ecstatic  scare  into  the  Guardians  of
the  Vested  Interests  in  America  and  in  the  civil-
ized countries  of  Europe.  There  is  nothing  to  be
gained  by  denying  that  the  Russian  Soviet  has
achieved  a  measure  of  success;  indeed,  an  aston-
ishing measure  of  success,  considering  the  ex-
tremely adverse  circumstances  under  which  the
Soviet  has  been  at  work.  The  fact  may  be  de-
plored, but  there  it  is.  The  Soviet  has  plainly
been  successful,  in  the  material  respect,  far  be-
yond the  reports  which  have  been  allowed  to  pass
the  scrutiny  of  the  Seven  Censors  and  the  Asso-
ciated Prevarication  Bureaux  of  the  Allied
Powers.  And  this  continued  success  of  Bolshe-
vism in  Russia  —  or  such  measure  of  success  as  it
has  achieved  —  is  doubtless  good  ground  for  a
reasonable  degree  of  apprehension  among  good
citizens  elsewhere;  but  it  does  not  by  any  means


A REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  95

argue  that  anything  like  the  same  measure  of  suc-
cess could  be  achieved  by  a  revolutionary  move-
ment on  the  same  lines  in  America,  even  in  the
absence  of  intervention  from  outside.

Soviet  Russia  has  made  good  to  the  extent  of
maintaining  itself  against  very  great  odds  for
some  two  years ;  and  it  is  even  yet  a  point  in  doubt
whether  the  Allied  Powers  will  be  able  to  put
down  the  Soviet  by  use  of  all  the  forces  at  their
disposal  and  with  the  help  of  all  the  reactionary
elements  in  Russia  and  in  the  neighboring  coun-
tries. But  the  Soviet  owes  this  measure  of  suc-
cess to  the  fact  that  the  Russian  people  have  not
yet  been  industrialized  in  anything  like  the  same
degree  as  their  western  neighbors.  They  have
in  great  measure  been  able  to  fall  back  on  an
earlier,  simpler,  less  close-knit  plan  of  productive
industry ;  such  that  any  detailed  part  of  this  loose-
knit  Russian  community  is  able,  at  a  pinch,  to
draw  its  own  livelihood  from  its  own  soil  by  its
own  work,  without  that  instant  and  unremitting
dependence  on  materials  and  wrought  goods
drawn  from  foreign  ports  and  distant  regions,
that  is  characteristic  of  the  advanced  industrial
peoples.  This  old-fashioned  plan  of  home  pro-
duction does  not  involve  an  "  industrial  system  "
in  the  same  exacting  sense  as  the  mechanical  in-


96 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

dustry.  The  Russian  industrial  system,  it  is  true,
also  runs  on  something  of  a  balanced  plan  of  give
and  take;  it  leans  on  the  mechanical  industry  in
some  considerable  degree  and  draws  on  foreign
trade  for  many  of  its  necessary  articles  of  use;
but  for  the  transient  time  being,  and  for  an  ap-
preciable interval  of  time,  such  a  home-bred  in-
dustrious population,  living  close  to  the  soil  and
supplying  its  ordinary  needs  by  home-bred  handi-
craft methods,  will  be  able  to  maintain  itself  in
a  fair  state  of  efficiency  if  not  in  comfort,  even  in
virtual  isolation  from  the  more  advanced  indus-
trial centers  and  from  the  remoter  sources  of  raw
materials.  To  the  ignorant, —  that  is  to  say,  to
the  wiseacres  of  commerce, —  this  ability  of  the
Russian  people  to  continue  alive  and  active  under
the  conditions  of  an  exemplary  blockade  has  been
a  source  of  incredulous  astonishment.

It  is  only  as  a  fighting  power,  and  then  only  for
the  purposes  of  an  aggressive  war,  that  such  a
community  can  count  for  virtually  nothing  in  a
contest  with  the  advanced  industrial  nations.
Such  a  people  makes  an  unwieldy  country  to  con-
quer from  the  outside.  Soviet  Russia  is  self-sup-
porting, in  a  loose  and  comfortless  way,  and  in
this  sense  it  is  a  very  defensible  country  and  may
yet  prove  extremely  difficult  for  the  Allied  Pow-


A REVOLUTIONARY OVERTURN  97

crs  to  subdue ;  but  in  the  nature  of  the  case  there
need  be  not  the  slightest  shadow  of  apprehension
that  Soviet  Russia  can  successfully  take  the  offen-
sive against  any  outside  people,  great  or  small,
which  has  the  use  of  the  advanced  mechanical  in-
dustry.

The  statesmen  of  the  Allied  Powers,  who  are
now  carrying  on  a  covert  war  against  Soviet  Rus-
sia, are  in  a  position  to  know  this  state  of  the
case;  and  not  least  those  American  statesmen,
who  have  by  popular  sentiment  been  constrained
reluctantly  to  limit  and  mask  their  cooperation
with  the  reactionary  forces  in  Finland,  Poland,
the  Ukraine,  Siberia,  and  elsewhere.  They  have
all  been  at  pains  diligently  to  inquire  into  the  state
of  things  in  Soviet  Russia;  although,  it  is  true,
they  have  also  been  at  pains  to  give  out  surpris-
ingly little  information, —  that  being  much  of  the
reason  for  the  Seven  Censors.  The  well-pub-
lished official  and  semi-official  apprehension  of  a
Bolshevist  offensive  to  be  carried  on  beyond  the
Soviet  frontiers  may  quite  safely  be  set  down  as
an  article  of  statesmanlike  subterfuge.  The
statesmen  know  better.  What  is  feared  in  fact
is  infection  of  the  Bolshevist  spirit  beyond  the
Soviet  frontiers,  to  the  detriment  of  those  Vested
Interests  whose  guardians  these  statesmen  are.


98 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

And  on  this  head  the  apprehensions  of  these
Elder  Statesmen  are  not  altogether  groundless;
for  the  Elder  Statesmen  are  also  in  a  position  to
know,  without  much  inquiry,  that  there  is  no  sin-
gle spot  or  corner  in  civilized  Europe  or  America
where  the  underlying  population  would  have  any-
thing to  lose  by  such  an  overturn  of  the  estab-
lished order  as  would  cancel  the  vested  rights  of
privilege  and  property,  whose  guardians  they  are.
But  commercialized  America  is  not  the  same
thing  as  Soviet  Russia.  By  and  large,  America  is
an  advanced  industrial  country,  bound  in  the  web
of  a  fairly  close-knit  and  inclusive  industrial  sys-
tem. The  industrial  situation,  and  therefore  the
conditions  of  success,  are  radically  different  in  the
two  countries  in  those  respects  that  would  make
the  outcome  in  any  effectual  revolt.  So  that,  for
better  or  worse,  the  main  lines  that  would  neces-
sarily have  to  be  followed  in  working  out  any
practicable  revolutionary  movement  in  this  coun-
try are  already  laid  down  by  the  material  con-
ditions of  its  productive  industry.  On  provoca-
tion there  might  come  a  flare  of  riotous  disorder;
but  it  would  come  to  nothing,  however  substantial
the  provocation  might  be,  so  long  as  the  move-
ment does  not  fall  in  with  those  main  lines  of
management  which  the  state  of  the  industrial  sys-


A REVOLUTIONARY OVERTURN  99

tem  requires  in  order  to  insure  any  sustained  suc-
cess. These  main  lines  of  revolutionary  strategy
are  lines  of  technical  organization  and  industrial
management;  essentially  lines  of  industrial  engi-
neering; such  as  will  fit  the  organization  to  take
care  of  the  highly  technical  industrial  system  that
constitutes  the  indispensable  material  foundation
of  any  modern  civilized  community.  They  will
accordingly  not  only  be  of  a  profoundly  different
order  from  what  may  do  well  enough  in  the  case
of  such  a  loose-knit  and  backward  industrial  re-
gion as  Russia,  but  they  will  necessarily  also  be  of
a  kind  which  has  no  close  parallel  in  the  past  his-
tory of  revolutionary  movements.  Revolutions
in  the  eighteenth  century  were  military  and  po-
litical; and  the  Elder  Statesmen  who  now  believe
themselves  to  be  making  history  still  believe
that  revolutions  can  be  made  and  unmade  by  the
same  ways  and  means  in  the  twentieth  century.
But  any  substantial  or  effectual  overturn  in  the
twentieth  century  will  necessarily  be  an  industrial
overturn;  and  by  the  same  token,  any  twentieth-
century  revolution  can  be  combated  or  neutral-
ized only  by  industrial  ways  and  means.  The
case  of  America,  therefore,  considered  as  a  can-
didate for  Bolshevism,  will  have  to  be  argued  on
its  own  merits,  and  the  argument  will  necessarily


IOO THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

turn  on  the  ways  and  means  of  productive  indus-
try as  conditioned  by  the  later  growth  of  tech-
nology.

It  has  been  argued,  and  it  seems  not  unreason-
able to  believe,  that  the  established  order  of
business  enterprise,  vested  rights,  and  commer-

/  cialized  nationalism,  is  due  presently  to  go  under
in  a  muddle  of  shame  and  confusion,  because  it  is

!  no  longer  a  practicable  system  of  industrial  man-
agement under  the  conditions  created  by  the  later
state  of  the  industrial  arts.  Twentieth-century
technology  has  outgrown  the  eighteenth-century
system  of  vested  rights.  The  experience  of  the
past  few  years  teaches  that  the  usual  manage-
ment of  industry  by  business  methods  has  become
highly  inefficient  and  wasteful,  and  the  indications
are  many  and  obvious  that  any  businesslike  con-
trol of  production  and  distribution  is  bound  to
run  more  and  more  consistently  at  cross  purposes
with  the  community's  livelihood,  the  farther  the
industrial  arts  advance  and  the  wider  the  indus-
trial system  extends.  So  that  it  is  perhaps  not
reasonably  to  be  questioned  that  Vested  Interests
in  business  are  riding  for  a  fall.  But  the  end  is
not  yet;  although  it  is  to  be  admitted,  regretfully
perhaps,  that  with  every  further  advance  in  tech-


A  REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  IOI

nological  knowledge  and  practice  and  with  every
further  increase  in  the  volume  and  complexity  of
the  industrial  system,  any  businesslike  control  is
bound  to  grow  still  more  incompetent,  irrelevant,
and  impertinent.

It  would  be  quite  hazardous  to  guess,  just  yet,
how  far  off  that  consummation  of  commercial  im-
becility may  be.  There  are  those  who  argue  that
the  existing  system  of  business  management  is
plainly  due  to  go  under  within  two  years'  time;
and  there  are  others  who  are  ready,  with  equal
confidence,  to  allow  it  a  probable  duration  of  sev-
eral times  that  interval;  although,  it  is  true,  these
latter  appear,  on  the  whole,  to  be  persons  who  are
less  intimately  acquainted  with  the  facts  in  the
case.  Many  men  experienced  in  the  larger  affairs
of  industrial  business  are  in  doubt  as  to  how  long
things  will  hold  together.  But,  one  with  another,
these  men  who  so  are  looking  into  the  doubtful
future  are,  somewhat  apprehensively,  willing  to
admit  that  there  is  yet  something  of  a  margin  to
go  on;  so  much  so  that,  barring  accident,  there
should  seem  to  be  no  warrant  for  counting  at  all
confidently  on  a  disastrous  breakdown  of  the
business  system  within  anything  like  a  two-year
period.  And,  for  the  reassurance  of  the  appre-
hensive Guardian  of  the  Vested  Interests,  it  is  to


102 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

be  added  that  should  such  a  break  in  the  situation
come  while  things  are  standing  in  their  present
shape,  the  outcome  could  assuredly  not  be  an
effectual  overturn  of  the  established  order;  so
long  as  no  practicable  plan  has  been  provided  for
taking  over  the  management  from  the  dead  hand
of  the  Vested  Interests.  Should  such  a  self-
made  breakdown  come  at  the  present  juncture,  the
outcome  could,  in  fact,  scarcely  be  anything  more
serious  than  an  interval,  essentially  transient
though  more  or  less  protracted,  of  turmoil  and
famine  among  the  underlying  population,  to-
gether with  something  of  a  setback  to  the  indus-
trial system  as  a  whole.  There  seems  no  reason
to  apprehend  any  substantial  disallowance  of  the
vested  rights  of  property  to  follow  from  such  an
essentially  ephemeral  interlude  of  dissension.  In
fact,  the  tenure  of  the  Vested  Interests  in  Amer-
ica should  seem  to  be  reasonably  secure,  just  yet.
Something  in  the  nature  of  riotous  discontent
and  factional  disorder  is  perhaps  to  be  looked  for
in  the  near  future  in  this  country,  and  there  may
even  be  some  rash  gesture  of  revolt  on  the  part
of  ill-advised  malcontents.  Circumstances  would
seem  to  favor  something  of  the  kind.  It  is  con-
servatively estimated  that  there  is  already  a  sea-
son of  privation  and  uncertainty  in  prospect  for


A  REVOLUTIONARY  OVERTURN  IO3

the  underlying  population,  which  could  be  averted
only  at  the  cost  of  some  substantial  interference
with  the  vested  rights  of  the  country's  business
men, —  which  should  seem  a  highly  improbable
alternative,  in  view  of  that  spirit  of  filial  piety
with  which  the  public  officials  guard  the  preroga-
tives of  business  as  usual.  So,  e.  g.,  it  is  now
(September,  19 19)  confidently  expected,  or
rather  computed,  that  a  fuel  famine  is  due  in
America  during  the  approaching  winter,  for  rea-
sons of  sound  business  management;  and  it  is  like-
wise to  be  expected  that  for  the  like  reason  the
American  transportation  system  is  also  due  to  go
into  a  tangle  of  congestion  a*td  idleness  about  the
same  time  —  barring  providential  intervention
in  the  way  of  unexampled  weather  conditions.
But  a  season  of  famine  and  disorderly  conduct
does  not  constitute  a  revolutionary  overturn  of
the  established  order;  and  the  Vested  Interests
are  secure  in  their  continued  usufruct  of  the  coun-
try's industry,  just  yet.

This  hopeful  posture  of  things  may  be  shown
convincingly  enough  and  with  no  great  expendi-
ture of  argument.  To  this  end  it  is  proposed  to
pursue  the  argument  somewhat  further  presently;
by  describing  in  outline  what  are  the  infirmities
of  the  regime  of  the  Vested  Interests,  which  the


104 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

more  sanguine  malcontents  count  on  to  bring  that
regime  to  an  inglorious  finish  in  the  immediate
future;  and  also  to  set  down,  likewise  in  outline,
what  would  have  to  be  the  character  of  any  or-
ganization of  industrial  forces  which  could  be
counted  on  effectually  to  wind  up  the  regime  of
the  Vested  Interests  and  take  over  the  manage-
ment of  the  industrial  system  on  a  deliberate  plan.


V


ON  THE CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MAKE FOR
A CHANGE

The  state  of  industry,  in  America  and  in  the
other  advanced  industrial  countries,  will  impose
certain  exacting  conditions  on  any  movement  that
aims  to  displace  the  Vested  Interests.  These
conditions  lie  in  the  nature  of  things;  that  is  to
say,  in  the  nature  of  the  existing  industrial  sys-
tem; and  until  they  are  met  in  some  passable  fash-
ion, this  industrial  system  can  not  be  taken  over
in  any  effectual  or  enduring  manner.  And  it  is
plain  that  whatever  is  found  to  be  true  in  these
respects  for  America  will  also  hold  true  in  much
the  same  degree  for  the  other  countries  that  are
dominated  by  the  mechanical  industry  and  the
system  of  absentee  ownership.

It  may  also  confidently  be  set  down  at  the  out-
set that  such  an  impartial  review  of  the  evidence
as  is  here  aimed  at  will  make  it  appear  that  there
need  be  no  present  apprehension  of  the  Vested
Interests'  being  unseated  by  any  popular  uprising

105


106 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

in  America,  even  if  the  popular  irritation  should
rise  very  appreciably  above  its  present  pitch,  and
even  if  certain  advocates  of  "  direct  action,"  here
and  there,  should  be  so  ill-advised  as  to  make
some  rash  gesture  of  revolt.  The  only  present
danger  is  that  a  boisterous  campaign  of  repression
and  inquisition  on  the  part  of  the  Guardians  of
the  Vested  Interests  may  stir  up  some  transient
flutter  of  seditious  disturbance.

To  this  end,  then,  it  will  be  necessary  to  recall,
in  a  summary  way,  those  main  facts  of  the  indus-
trial system  and  of  the  present  businesslike  control
of  this  system  which  come  immediately  into  the
case.  By  way  of  general  premise  it  is  to  be  noted
that  the  established  order  of  business  rests  on  ab-
sentee ownership  and  is  managed  with  an  eye
single  to  the  largest  obtainable  net  return  in
terms  of  price;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  system  of
businesslike  management  on  a  commercial  foot-
ing. The  underlying  population  is  dependent  on
the  working  of  this  industrial  system  for  its  live-
lihood; and  their  material  interest  therefore  cen-
ters in  the  output  and  distribution  of  consumable
goods,  not  in  an  increasing  volume  of  earnings
for  the  absentee  owners.  Hence  there  is  a  divi-
sion of  interest  between  the  business  community,


WHAT  MAKES FOR  A CHANGE  107

who  do  business  for  the  absentee  owners,  and  the
underlying  population,  who  work  for  a  living;  and
in  the  nature  of  the  case  this  division  of  interest
between  the  absentee  owners  and  the  underlying
population  is  growing  wider  and  more  evident
from  day  to  day;  which  engenders  a  certain  divi-
sion of  sentiment  and  a  degree  of  mutual  distrust.
With  it  all  the  underlying  population  are  still  in
a  sufficiently  deferential  frame  of  mind  toward
their  absentee  owners,  and  are  quite  conscien-
tiously delicate  about  any  abatement  of  the  free
income  which  their  owners  come  in  for,  accord-
ing to  the  rules  of  the  game  as  it  is  played.

The  business  concerns  which  so  have  the  man-
agement of  industry  on  this  plan  of  absentee  own-
ership are  capitalized  on  their  business  capacity,
not  on  their  industrial  capacity;  that  is  to  say,
they  are  capitalized  on  their  capacity  to  produce
earnings,  not  on  their  capacity  to  produce  goods.
Their  capitalization  has,  in  effect,  been  calculated
and  fixed  on  the  highest  ordinary  rate  of  earn-
ings previously  obtained;  and  on  pain  of  insol-
vency their  businesslike  managers  are  now  re-
quired to  meet  fixed  income-charges  on  this
capitalization.  Therefore,  as  a  proposition  of
safe  and  sane  business  management,  prices  have
to  be  maintained  or  advanced.


1
108 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

From  this  businesslike  requirement  of  meeting
these  fixed  overhead  charges  on  the  capitaliza-
tion there  result  certain  customary  lines  of  waste
and  obstruction,  which  are  unavoidable  so  long
as  industry  is  managed  by  businesslike  methods
and  for  businesslike  ends.  These  ordinary  lines
of  waste  and  obstruction  are  necessarily  (and
blamelessly)  included  in  the  businesslike  conduct
of  production.  They  are  many  and  various  in
detail,  but  they  may  for  convenience  be  classed
under  four  heads:  (a)  Unemployment  of  mate-
rial resources,  equipment  and  manpower,  in  whole
or  in  part,  deliberately  or  through  ignorance;
(b)  Salesmanship  (includes,  e.  g.,  needless  multi-
plication of  merchants  and  shops,  wholesale  and
retail,  newspaper  advertising  and  bill-boards,
sales-exhibits,  sales-agents,  fancy  packages  and
labels,  adulteration,  multiplication  of  brands  and
proprietary  articles)  ;  (c)  Production  (and  sales-
cost)  of  superfluities  and  spurious  goods;  (d)
Systematic  dislocation,  sabotage  and  duplication,
due  in  part  to  businesslike  strategy,  in  part  to
businesslike  ignorance  of  industrial  requirements
(includes,  e.  g.,  such  things  as  cross- freights,
monopolization  of  resources,  withholding  of
facilties  and  information  from  business  rivals
whom  it  is  thought  wise  to  hinder  or  defeat).


WHAT  MAKES FOR  A CHANGE  109

There  is,  of  course,  no  blame,  and  no  sense  of
blame  or  shame  attaching  to  all  this  everyday
waste  and  confusion  that  goes  to  make  up  the
workday  total  of  businesslike  management.  All
of  it  is  a  legitimate  and  necessary  part  of  the  es-
tablished order  of  business  enterprise,  within  the
law  and  within  the  ethics  of  the  trade.

Salesmanship  is  the  most  conspicuous,  and  per^
haps  the  gravest,  of  these  wasteful  and  industri-
ally futile  practices  that  are  involved  in  the  busi-
nesslike conduct  of  industry;  it  bulks  large  both
in  its  immediate  cost  and  in  its  meretricious  conse-
quences. It  also  is  altogether  legitimate  and  in-
dispensable in  any  industrial  business  that  deals
with  customers,  in  buying  or  selling;  which  comes
near  saying,  in  all  business  that  has  to  do  with  the
production  or  distribution  of  goods  or  services.
Indeed,  salesmanship  is,  in  a  way,  the  whole  end
and  substance  of  business  enterprise;  and  except
so  far  as  it  is  managed  with  a  constant  view  to
profitable  bargains,  the  production  of  goods  is  not
a  business  proposition.  It  is  the  elimination  of
profitable  transactions  of  purchase  and  sale  that
is  hoped  for  by  any  current  movement  looking  to
an  overturn;  and  it  is  the  same  elimination  of
profitable  bargaining  that  is  feared,  with  a  nerve-
shattering  fear,  by  the  Guardians  of  the  estab-


IIO THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

lished  order.  Salesmanship  is  also  the  most  in-
dispensable and  most  meritorious  of  those  quali-
ties that  go  to  make  a  safe  and  sane  business  man.
It  is  doubtless  within  the  mark  to  say  that,  at
an  average,  one-half  the  price  paid  for  goods  and
services  by  consumers  is  to  be  set  down  to  the  ac-
count of  salesmanship  —  that  is,  to  sales-cost  and
to  the  net  gains  of  salesmanship.  But  in  many
notable  lines  of  merchandise  the  sales-cost  will
ordinarily  foot  up  to  some  ten  or  twenty  times  the
production-cost  proper,  and  to  not  less  than  one
hundred  times  the  necessary  cost  of  distribution.
All  this  is  not  a  matter  for  shame  or  distaste.  In
fact,  just  now  more  than  ever,  there  is  a  clamorous
and  visibly  growing  insistence  on  the  paramount
merit  and  importance  of  salesmanship  as  the  main
stay  of  commerce  and  industry,  and  a  strenuous
demand  for  more  extensive  and  more  thorough
training  in  salesmanship  of  a  larger  number  of
young  men  —  at  the  public  expense  —  to  enable
a  shrewdly  limited  output  of  goods  to  be  sold  at
more  profitable  prices  —  at  the  public  cost.  So
also  there  is  a  visibly  increasing  expenditure  on
all  manner  of  advertising;  and  the  spokesmen  of
this  enterprise  in  conspicuous  waste  are  "  point-
ing with  pride  "  to  the  fact  that  the  American
business  community  have  already  spent  upward


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  III

of  $600,000,000  on  bill-boards  alone  within  the
past  year,  not  to  speak  of  much  larger  sums  spent
on  newspapers  and  other  printed  matter  for  the
same  purpose  —  and  the  common  man  pays  the
cost.

At  the  same  time  advertising  and  manoeuvres
of  salesmanlike  spell-binding  appear  to  be  the
only  resource  to  which  the  country's  business  men
know  how  to  turn  for  relief  from  that  tangle  of
difficulties  into  which  the  outbreak  of  a  business-
like peace  has  precipitated  the  commercialized
world.  Increased  sales-cost  is  to  remedy  the
evils  of  under-production.  In  this  connection  it
may  be  worth  while  to  recall,  without  heat  or
faultfinding,  that  all  the  costly  publicity  that  goes
into  sales-costs  is  in  the  nature  of  prevarication,
when  it  is  not  good  broad  mendacity;  and  quite
necessarily  so.  And  all  the  while  the  propor-
tion of  sales-costs  to  production-costs  goes  on  in-
creasing, and  the  cost  of  living  grows  continually
greater  for  the  underlying  population,  and  busi-
ness necessities  continue  to  enlarge  the  necessary
expenditure  on  ways  and  means  of  salesmanship.

It  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  this  state  of
things,  which  has  been  coming  on  gradually  for
some  time  past,  will  in  time  come  to  be  under-
stood and  appreciated  by  the  underlying  popula-


112 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

tion,  at  least  in  some  degree.  And  it  is  likewise
reasonable  to  believe  that  so  soon  as  the  underly-
lying  population  come  to  realize  that  all  this
wasteful  traffic  of  salesmanship  is  using  up  their
productive  forces,  with  nothing  better  to  show  for
it  than  an  increased  cost  of  living,  they  will  be
driven  to  make  some  move  to  abate  the  nuisance.
And  just  so  far  as  this  state  of  things  is  now  be-
ginning to  be  understood,  its  logical  outcome  is
a  growing  distrust  of  the  business  men  and  all
their  works  and  words.  But  the  underlying  pop-
ulation is  still  very  credulous  about  anything  that
is  said  or  done  in  the  name  of  Business,  and  there
need  be  no  apprehension  of  a  mutinous  outbreak,
just  yet.  But  at  the  same  time  it  is  evident  that
any  plan  of  management  which  could  contrive  to
dispense  with  all  this  expenditure  on  salesman-
ship, or  that  could  materially  reduce  sales-costs,
would  have  that  much  of  a  free  margin  to  go  on,
and  therefore  that  much  of  an  added  chance  of
success;  and  so  also  it  is  evident  that  any  other
than  a  businesslike  management  could  so  contrive,
inasmuch  as  sales-costs  are  incurred  solely  for
purposes  of  business,  not  for  purposes  of  industry;
they  are  incurred  for  the  sake  of  private  gain,
not  for  the  sake  of  productive  work.

But  there  is  in  fact  no  present  promise  of  a


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  113

breakdown  of  business,  due  to  the  continued  in-
crease of  sales-costs;  although  sales-costs  are
bound  to  go  on  increasing  so  long  as  the  country's
industry  continues  to  be  managed  on  anything
like  the  present  plan.  In  fact,  salesmanship  is
the  chief  factor  in  that  ever-increasing  cost  of
living,  which  is  in  its  turn  the  chief  ground  of
prosperity  among  the  business  community  and  the
chief  source  of  perennial  hardship  and  discontent
among  the  underlying  population.  Still  it  is
worth  noting  that  the  eventual  elimination  of
salesmanship  and  sales-cost  would  lighten  the  bur-
den of  workday  production  for  the  underlying
population  by  some  fifty  per  cent.  There  is  that
much  of  a  visible  inducement  to  disallow  that  sys-
tem of  absentee  ownership  on  which  modern  busi-
ness enterprise  rests ;  and  —  for  what  it  may  be
worth  —  it  is  to  be  admitted  that  there  is  there-
fore that  much  of  a  drift  in  the  existing  state  of
things  toward  a  revolutionary  overturn  looking
to  the  unseating  of  the  Vested  Interests.  But  at
the  same  time  the  elimination  of  salesmanship  and
all  its  voluminous  apparatus  and  traffic  would  also
cut  down  the  capitalized  income  of  the  business
community  by  something  like  one-half;  and  that
contingency  is  not  to  be  contemplated,  not  to  say
with  equanimity,  by  the  Guardians ;  and  it  is  after


114 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

all  in  the  hands  of  these  Guardians  that  the  for-
tunes of  the  community  rest.  Such  a  move  is  a
moral  impossibility,  just  yet.

Closely  related  to  the  wasteful  practices  of
salesmanship  as  commonly  understood,  if  it
should  not  rather  be  counted  in  as  an  extension  of
salesmanship,  is  that  persistent  unemployment  of
men,  equipment,  and  material  resources,  by  which
the  output  of  goods  and  services  is  kept  down  to
the  "  requirements  of  the  market,"  with  a  view  to
maintaining  prices  at  a  "  reasonably  profitable
level."  Such  unemployment,  deliberate  and
habitual,  is  one  of  the  ordinary  expedients  em-
ployed in  the  businesslike  management  of  indus-
try. There  is  always  more  or  less  of  it  in  ordi-
nary times.  "  Reasonable  earnings  "  could  not
be  assured  without  it;  because  "what  the  traffic
will  bear  "  in  the  way  of  an  output  of  goods  is  by
no  means  the  same  as  the  productive  capacity  of
the  industrial  system;  still  less  is  it  the  same  as  the
total  consumptive  needs  of  the  community;  in
fact,  it  does  not  visibly  tend  to  coincide  with
either.  It  is  more  particularly  in  times  of  popu-
lar distress,  such  as  the  present  year,  when  the
current  output  of  goods  is  not  nearly  sufficient  to
cover  the  consumptive  needs  of  the  community,


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  115

that  considerations  of  business  strategy  call  for  a
wise  unemployment  of  the  country's  productive
forces.  At  the  same  time,  such  businesslike  un-
employment of  equipment  and  man  power  is  the
most  obvious  cause  of  popular  distress.

All  this  is  well  known  to  the  Guardians  of  the
Vested  Interests,  and  their  knowledge  of  it  is,
quite  reasonably,  a  source  of  uneasiness  to  them.
But  they  see  no  help  for  it;  and  indeed  there  is  no
help  for  it  within  the  framework  of  "  business  as
usual,"  since  it  is  the  essence  of  business  as  usual.
So  also,  the  Guardians  are  aware  that  this  busi-
nesslike sabotage  on  productive  industry  is  a  fruit-
ful source  of  discontent  and  distrust  among  the
underlying  population  who  suffer  the  inconven-
ience of  it  all;  and  they  are  beset  with  the  abid-
ing fear  that  the  underlying  population  may
shortly  be  provoked  into  disallowing  those
Vested  Interests  for  whose  benefit  this  deliberate
''and  habitual  sabotage  on  production  is  carried
on.  It  is  felt  that  here  again  is  a  sufficient  rea-
son why  the  businesslike  management  of  indus-
try should  be  discontinued;  which  is  the  same  as
saying  that  here  again  is  a  visibly  sufficient  reason
for  such  a  revolutionary  overturn  as  will  close  out
the  Old  Order  of  absentee  ownership  and  capital-
ized income. It  is  aJso  evident  that  any  plan


Il6 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

which  shall  contrive  to  dispense  with  this  deliber-
ate and  habitual  unemployment  of  men  and  equip-
ment will  have  that  much  more  of  a  margin  to  go
on,  both  in  respect  of  practical  efficiency  and  in
respect  of  popular  tolerance;  and  evidently,  too,
any  other  than  a  businesslike  management  of  in-
dustry can  so  contrive,  as  a  matter  of  course;  in-
asmuch as  any  such  unbusinesslike  administration
—  as,  e.  g.,  the  Soviet  —  will  be  relieved  of  the
businesslike  manager's  blackest  bug-bear,  "  a
reasonably  profitable  level  of  prices."

But  for  all  that,  those  shudderingly  sanguine
persons  who  are  looking  for  a  dissolution  of  the
system  of  absentee  ownership  within  two  years'
time  are  not  counting  on  salesmanlike  waste  and
businesslike  sabotage  to  bring  on  the  collapse,  so
much  as  they  count  on  the  item  listed  under  (d)
above  —  the  systematic  dislocation  and  all-round
defeat  of  productive  industry  which  is  due  in  part
to  shrewd  manoeuvres  of  businesslike  strategy,  in
part  to  the  habitual  ignorance  of  business  men
touching  the  systematic  requirements  of  the  in-
dustrial system  as  a  whole.  The  shrewd  worldly
wisdom  of  the  businesslike  managers,  looking  con-
sistently to  the  main  chance,  works  in  harmoni-
ously with  their  trained  ignorance  on  matters  of
technology,  to  bring  about  what  amounts  to  ef-


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  117

fectual  team-work  for  the  defeat  of  the  country's
industrial  system  as  a  going  concern.  Yet  doubt-
less this  sinister  hope  of  a  collapse  within  two
years  is  too  sanguine.  Doubtless  the  underlying
population  can  be  counted  on  stolidly  to  put  up
with  what  they  are  so  well  used  to,  just  yet;  more
particularly  so  long  as  they  are  not  in  the  habit
of  thinking  about  these  things  at  all.  Nor  does  it
seem  reasonable  to  believe  that  this  all-pervading
waste  and  confusion  of  industrial  forces  will  of  it-
self bring  the  business  organization  to  a  collapse
within  so  short  a  time.

It  is  true,  the  industrial  system  is  continually
growing,  in  volume  and  complication;  and  with
every  new  extension  of  its  scope  and  range,  and
with  every  added  increment  of  technological  prac-
tice that  goes  into  effect,  there  comes  a  new  and
urgent  opportunity  for  the  business  men  in  con-
trol to  extend  and  speed  up  their  strategy  of  mu-
tual obstruction  and  defeat;  it  is  all  in  the  day's
work.  As  the  industrial  system  grows  larger  and
more  closely  interwoven  it  offers  continually
larger  and  more  enticing  opportunities  for  such
businesslike  manoeuvres  as  will  effectually  derange
the  system  at  the  same  time  that  they  bring  the
desired  tactical  defeat  on  some  business  rival;
whereby  the  successful  business  strategist  is  en-


Il8 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

abled  to  get  a  little  something  for  nothing  at  a
constantly  increasing  cost  to  the  community  at
large.  With  every  increment  of  growth  and  ma-
turity the  country's  industrial  system  becomes
more  delicately  balanced,  more  intricately  bound
in  a  web  of  industrial  give  and  take,  more  sensi-
tive to  far-reaching  derangement  by  any  local  dis-
location, more  widely  and  instantly  responsive  to
any  failure  of  the  due  correlation  at  any  point;
and  by  the  same  move  the  captains  of  industry,
to  whose  care  the  interests  of  absentee  ownership
are  entrusted,  are  enabled,  or  rather  they  are
driven  by  the  necessities  of  competitive  business,
to  plan  their  strategy  of  mutual  defeat  and  de-
rangement on  larger  and  more  intricate  lines,  with
an  ever  wider  reach  and  a  more  massive  mobiliza-
tion of  forces.  From  which  follows  an  ever  in-
creasing insecurity  of  work  and  output  from  day
to  day  and  an  increased  assurance  of  general  loss
and  disability  in  the  long  run ;  incidentally  coupled
with  increased  hardship  for  the  underlying  popu-
lation, which  comes  in  all  along  as  a  subsidiary
matter  of  course,  unfortunate  but  unavoidable.
It  is  this  visibly  growing  failure  of  the  present
businesslike  management  to  come  up  to  the  in-
dustrial necessities  of  the  case;  its  unfitness  to
take  anything  like  reasonable  care  of  the  needed


WHAT  MAKES FOR A CHANGE  119

correlation  of  industrial  forces  within  the  system ;
its  continual  working  at  cross  purposes  in  the  allo-
cation of  energy  resources,  materials,  and  man
power  —  it  is  this  fact,  that  any  businesslike  man-
agement of  necessity  runs  at  cross  purposes  with
the  larger  technical  realities  of  the  industrial  sys-
tem, that  chiefly  goes  to  persuade  apprehensive
persons  that  the  regime  of  business  enterprise  is
fast  approaching  the  limit  of  tolerance.  So  it  is
held  by  many  that  this  existing  system  of  absentee
ownership  must  presently  break  down  and  precipi-
tate the  abdication  of  the  Vested  Interests,  under
conviction  of  total  imbecility.

The  theory  on  which  these  apprehensive  per-
sons proceed  appears  to  be  substantially  sound,
so  far  as  it  goes,  but  they  reach  an  unguardedly
desperate  conclusion  because  they  overlook  one  of
the  main  facts  of  the  case.  There  is  no  reason-
able exception  to  be  taken  to  the  statement  that
the  country's  industrial  system  is  forever  growing
more  extensive  and  more  complex;  that  it  is  con-
tinually taking  on  more  of  the  character  of  a
close-knit,  interwoven,  systematic  whole;  a  deli-
cately balanced  moving  equilibrium  of  working
parts,  no  one  of  which  can  do  its  work  by  itself
at  all,  and  none  of  which  can  do  its  share  of  the


120 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

work  well  except  in  close  correlation  with  all  the
rest.  At  the  same  time  it  is  also  true  that,  in
the  commercialized  nature  of  things,  the  business-
like management  of  industry  is  forever  playing
fast  and  loose  with  this  delicately  balanced  mov-
ing equilibrium  of  forces,  on  which  the  livelihood
of  the  underlying  population  depends  from  day  to
day;  more  particularly  is  this  true  for  that  large-
scale  business  enterprise  that  rests  on  absentee
ownership  and  makes  up  the  country's  greater
Vested  Interests.  But  to  all  this  it  is  to  be  added,
as  a  corrective  and  a  main  factor  in  the  case,  that
this  system  of  mechanical  industry  is  an  extremely
efficient  contrivance  for  the  production  of  goods
and  services,  even  when,  as  usual,  the  business
men,  for  business  reasons,  will  allow  it  to  work
only  under  a  large  handicap  of  unemployment  and
obstructive  tactics.  Hitherto  the  margin  for
error,  that  is  to  say  for  wasteful  strategy  and  ob-
structive ignorance,  has  been  very  wide;  so  wide
that  it  has  saved  the  life  of  the  Vested  Interests ;
and  it  is  accordingly  by  no  means  confidently  to  be
believed  that  all  these  ampler  opportunities  for
swift  and  wide-reaching  derangement  will  enable
the  strategy  of  business  enterprise  to  bring  on  a
disastrous  collapse,  just  yet.

It  is  true,  if  the  country's  productive  industry


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  121

were  competently  organized  as  a  systematic
whole,  and  were  then  managed  by  competent
technicians  with  an  eye  single  to  maximum  pro-
duction of  goods  and  services ;  instead  of,  as  now,
being  manhandled  by  ignorant  business  men  with
an  eye  single  to  maximum  profits;  the  resulting
output  of  goods  and  services  would  doubtless  ex-
ceed the  current  output  by  several  hundred  per
cent.  But  then,  none  of  all  that  is  necessary  to
save  the  established  order  of  things.  All  that  is
required  is  a  decent  modicum  of  efficiency,  very
far  short  of  the  theoretical  maximum  production.
In  effect,  the  community  is  in  the  habit  of  getting
along  contentedly  on  something  appreciably  less
than  one-half  the  output  which  its  industrial  equip-
ment would  turn  out  if  it  were  working  uninter-
ruptedly at  full  capacity;  even  when,  as  usual,
something  like  one-half  of  the  actual  output  is
consumed  in  wasteful  superfluities.  The  margin
for  waste  and  error  is  very  wide,  fortunately;
and,  in  effect,  a  more  patient  and  more  inclusive
survey  of  the  facts  in  the  case  would  suffice  to
show  that  the  tenure  of  the  Vested  Interests  is
reasonably  secure  just  yet ;  at  least  in  so  far  as  it
turns  on  considerations  of  this  nature.

There  is,  of  course,  the  chance,  and  it  is  by  no
means  a  remote  chance,  that  the  rapidly  increas-


122 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ing  volume  and  complexity  of  the  industrial  sys-
tem may  presently  bring  the  country's  industry
into  such  a  ticklish  state  of  unstable  equilibrium
that  even  a  reasonable  modicum  of  willful  de-
rangement can  no  longer  be  tolerated,  even  for
the  most  urgent  and  most  legitimate  reasons  of
businesslike  strategy  and  vested  rights.  In  time,
such  an  outcome  is  presumably  due  to  be  looked
for.  There  is,  indeed,  no  lack  of  evidence  that
the  advanced  industrial  countries  are  approaching
such  a  state  of  things,  America  among  the  rest.
The  margin  for  error  and  wasteful  strategy  is,
in  effect,  being  continually  narrowed  by  the  fur-
ther advance  of  the  industrial  arts.  With  every
further  advance  in  the  way  of  specialization  and
standardization,  in  point  of  kind,  quantity,  qual-
ity, and  time,  the  tolerance  of  the  system  as  a
whole  under  any  strategic  maladjustment  grows
continually  narrower.

How  soon  the  limit  of  tolerance  for  willful  de-
rangement is  due  to  be  reached,  would  be  a  haz-
ardous topic  of  speculation.  There  is  now  a  fair
prospect  that  the  coming  winter  may  throw  some
light  on  that  dark  question;  but  this  is  not  saying
that  the  end  is  in  sight.  What  is  here  insisted  on
is  that  that  sinister  eventuality  lies  yet  in  the  fu-
ture, although  it  may  be  in  the  calculable  future.


WHAT  MAKES  FOR  A  CHANGE  1 23

So  also  it  is  well  to  keep  in  mind  that  even  a  fairly
disastrous  collapse  of  the  existing  system  of  busi-
nesslike management  need  by  no  means  prove
fatal  to  the  Vested  Interests,  just  yet;  not  so  long
as  there  is  no  competent  organization  ready  to
take  their  place  and  administer  the  country's  in-
dustry on  a  more  reasonable  plan.  It  is  neces-
sarily a  question  of  alternatives.

In  all  this  argument  that  runs  on  perennial  dis-
location and  cross  purposes,  it  is  assumed  that  the
existing  businesslike  management  of  industry  is
of  a  competitive  nature  and  necessarily  moves  on
lines  of  competitive  strategy.  As  a  subsidiary
premise  it  is,  of  course,  also  assumed  that  the  cap-
tains of  industry  who  have  the  direction  of  this
competitive  strategy  are  ordinarily  sufficiently  ill
informed  on  technological  matters  to  go  wrong,
industrially  speaking,  even  with  the  most  pacific
and  benevolent  intentions.  They  are  laymen  in
all  that  concerns  the  technical  demands  of  indus-
trial production.  This  latter,  and  minor,  assump-
tion therefore  need  not  be  argued;  it  is  sufficiently
notorious.  On  the  other  hand,  the  first  assump-
tion spoken  of  above,  that  current  business  enter-
prise is  of  a  competitive  nature,  is  likely  to  be
questioned  by  many  who  believe  themselves  to  be
familiar  with  the  facts  in  the  case. It  is  argued,


124 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

by  one  and  another,  that  the  country's  business
concerns  have  entered  into  consolidations,  coali-
tions, understandings  and  working  arrangements
among  themselves  —  syndicates,  trusts,  pools,
combinations,  interlocking  directorates,  gentle-
men's agreements,  employers'  unions  —  to  such
an  extent  as  virtually  to  cover  the  field  of  that
large-scale  business  that  sets  the  pace  and  governs
the  movements  of  the  rest;  and  that  where  com-
bination takes  effect  in  this  way,  competition
ceases.  So  also  it  will  be  argued  that  where  there
has  been  no  formal  coalition  of  interests  the  busi-
ness men  in  charge  will  still  commonly  act  in  col-
lusion, with  much  the  same  result.  The  sugges-
tion is  also  ready  to  hand  that  in  so  far  as  busi-
nesslike sabotage  of  this  competitive  order  is  still
to  be  met  with,  it  can  all  be  corrected  by  such  a
further  consolidation  of  interests  as  will  do  away
with  all  occasion  for  competitive  cross  purposes
within  the  industrial  system.

It  is  not  easy  to  see  just  how  far  that  line  of
argument  would  lead;  but  to  make  it  effective  and
to  cover  the  case  it  would  plainly  have  to  result  in
so  wide  a  coalition  of  interests  and  pooling  of
management  as  would,  in  effect,  eliminate  all  oc-
casion  for  businesslike management  within the


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  1 25

system,  and  leave  the  underlying  population  quite
unreservedly  at  the  disposal  of  the  resulting  coali-
tion of  interests  —  an  outcome  which  is  presum-
ably not  contemplated.  And  even  so,  the  argu-
ment takes  account  of  only  one  strand  in  that
three-ply  rope  that  goes  to  fashion  the  fatal
noose.  The  remaining  two  are  stout  enough,  and
they  have  not  been  touched.  It  is  true,  econom-
ists and  others  who  have  canvassed  this  matter  of
competition  have  commonly  given  their  attention
to  this  one  line  of  competition  alone  —  between
rival  commercial  interests  —  because  this  compe-
tition is  conceived  to  be  natural  and  normal  and
to  serve  the  common  good.  But  there  remains
(a)  the  competition  between  those  business  men
who  buy  cheap  and  sell  dear  and  the  underlying
population  from  and  to  whom  they  buy  cheap  and
sell  dear,  and  (b)  the  competition  between  the
captains  of  industry  and  those  absentee  owners
in  whose  name  and  with  whose  funds  the  captains
do  business.  In  the  typical  case,  modern  business
enterprise  takes  the  corporate  form,  is  organized
on  credit,  and  therefore  rests  on  absentee  owner-
ship ;  from  which  it  follows  that  in  all  large-scale
business  the  owners  are  not  the  same  persons  as
the  managers,  nor  does  the  interest  of  the  man-


126 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

ager  commonly  coincide  with  that  of  his  absentee
owners,  particularly  in  the  modern  "  big  busi-
ness."

So  it  follows  that  even  a  coalition  of  Vested
Interests  which  should  be  virtually  all-inclusive,
would  still  have  to  make  up  its  account  with
"  what  the  traffic  will  bear,"  that  is  to  say  what
will  bring  the  largest  net  income  in  terms  of  price ;
that  is  to  say,  the  coalition  would  still  be  under
the  competitive  necessity  of  buying  cheap  and
selling  dear,  to  the  best  of  its  ability  and  with  the
use  of  all  the  facilities  which  its  dominant  posi-
tion in  the  market  would  give.  The  coalition,
therefore,  would  still  be  under  the  necessity  of
shrewdly  limiting  the  output  of  goods  and  serv-
ices to  such  a  rate  and  volume  as  will  maintain
or  advance  prices;  and  also  to  vary  its  manipula-
tion of  prices  and  supply  from  place  to  place  and
from  time  to  time,  to  turn  an  honest  penny;
which  leaves  the  case  very  near  the  point  of  begin-
ning. But  then,  such  a  remedy  for  these  infelici-
ties of  the  competitive  system  will  probably  be  ad-
mitted to  be  chimerical,  without  argument.

But  what  is  more  to  the  point  is  the  fact,  known
even  when  it  is  not  avowed,  that  the  consolidations
which  have  been  effected  hitherto  have  not  elim-
inated competition,  nor  have  they  changed  the


WHAT  MAKES FOR A CHANGE  1 27

character  of  the  competitive  strategy  employed,
although  they  have  altered  its  scale  and  methods.
What  can  be  said  is  that  the  underlying  corpora-
tions of  the  holding  companies,  e.  g.,  are  no  longer
competitors  among  themselves  on  the  ancient
footing.  But  strategic  dislocation  and  cross  pur-
poses continue  to  be  the  order  of  the  day  in  the
businesslike  management  of  industry;  and  the  vol-
ume of  habitual  unemployment,  whether  of  equip-
ment or  of  man  power,  continues  undiminished
and  unashamed  —  which  is  after  all  a  major  count
in  the  case.

It  is  well  to  recognize  what  the  business  men
among  themselves  always  recognize  as  a  matter
of  course,  that  business  is  in  the  last  analysis
always  carried  on  for  the  private  advantage  of
the  individual  business  men  who  carry  it  on.  And
these  enterprising  persons,  being  business  men,
will  always  be  competitors  for  gain  among  them-
selves, however  much  and  well  they  may  combine
for  a  common  purpose  as  against  the  rest  of  the
community.  The  end  and  aim  of  any  gainful  en-
terprise carried  through  in  common  is  always  the
division  of  the  joint  gains,  and  in  this  division  the
joint  participants  always  figure  as  competitors.
The  syndicates,  coalitions,  corporations,  consol-
idations of  interests,  so  entered  into  in  the  pur-


128 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

suit  of  gain  are,  in  effect,  in  the  nature  of  con-
spiracies between  business  men  each  seeking  his
own  advantage  at  the  cost  of  any  whom  it  may
concern.  There  is  no  ulterior  solidarity  of  inter-
ests among  the  participants  in  such  a  joint  enter-
prise.

By  way  of  illustration,  what  is  set  forth  in  the
voluminous  testimony  taken  in  the  Colton  case,
before  the  California  courts,  having  to  do  with
the  affairs  of  the  Southern  Pacific  and  its  sub-
sidiaries, will  show  in  what  fashion  the  business-
like incentives  of  associated  individuals  may  be
expected  to  work  out  in  the  partition  of  benefits
within  a  given  coalition.  And  not  only  is  there
no  abiding  solidarity  of  interests  between  the  sev-
eral participants  in  such  a  joint  enterprise,  so  far
as  regards  the  final  division  of  the  spoils,  but  it
is  also  true  that  the  business  interest  of  the  man-
ager in  charge  of  such  a  syndicate  of  absentee
ownership  will  not  coincide  with  the  collective  in-
terest of  the  coalition  as  a  going  concern.  As  an
illustrative  instance  may  be  cited  the  testimony  of
the  great  president  of  the  two  Great  Northern
railways,  taken  before  a  Congressional  commis-
sion, wherein  it  is  explained  somewhat  fully  that
for  something  like  a  quarter-century  the  two  great
roads  under  his  management  had  never  come  in


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  120.

for  reasonable  earnings  on  their  invested  capital.
And  it  is  a  matter  of  common  notoriety,  although
it  was  charitably  not  brought  out  in  the  hearings
of  the  commission,  that  during  his  incumbency  as
manager  of  the  two  great  railway  systems  this
enterprising  railway  president  had  by  thrift  and
management  increased  his  own  private  possessions
from  $20  to  something  variously  estimated  at
$150,000,000  to  $200,000,000;  while  his  two
chief  associates  in  this  adventure  had  retired  from
the  management  on  a  similarly  comfortable  foot-
ing; so  notably  comfortable,  indeed,  as  to  have
merited  a  couple  of  very  decent  peerages  under
the  British  crown.

In  effect,  there  still  is  an  open  call  for  shrewd
personal  strategy  at  the  cost  of  any  whom  it  may
concern ;  all  the  while  that  there  is  also  a  very  ap-
preciable measure  of  collusion  among  the  Vested
Interests,  at  the  cost  of  any  whom  it  may  con-
cern. Business  is  still  competitive  business,  com-
petitive pursuit  of  private  gain;  as  how  should  it
not  be?  seeing  that  the  incentive  to  all  business
is  after  all  private  gain  at  the  cost  of  any  whom
it  may  concern.

By  reason  of  doctrinal  consistency  and  loyalty
to  tradition,  the  certified  economists  have  habitu-


130 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

ally  described  business  enterprise  as  a  rational
arrangement  for  administering  the  country's  in-
dustrial system  and  assuring  a  full  and  equitable
distribution  of  consumable  goods  to  the  consum-
ers. There  need  be  no  quarrel  with  that  view.
But  it  is  only  fair  to  enter  the  reservation  that,
considered  as  an  arrangement  for  administering
the  country's  industrial  system,  business  enterprise
based  on  absentee  ownership  has  the  defects  of  its
qualities;  and  these  defects  of  this  good  old  plan
are  now  calling  attention  to  themselves.  Hith-
erto, and  ever  since  the  mechanical  industry  first
came  into  the  dominant  place  in  this  industrial
system,  the  defects  of  this  businesslike  manage-
ment of  industry  have  continually  been  encroach-
ing more  and  more  on  its  qualities.  It  took  its
rise  as  a  system  of  management  by  the  owners  of
the  industrial  equipment,  and  it  has  in  its  riper
years  grown  into  a  system  of  absentee  ownership
managed  by  quasi-responsible  financial  agents.
Having  begun  as  an  industrial  community  which
centered  about  an  open  market,  it  has  matured
into  a  community  of  Vested  Interests  whose  vested
right  it  is  to  keep  up  prices  by  a  short  supply  in
a  closed  market.  There  is  no  extravagance  in
saying  that,  by  and  large,  this  arrangement  for
controlling the production and distribution of


WHAT  MAKES FOR A CHANGE  131

goods  and  services  through  the  agency  of  absentee
ownership  has  now  come  to  be,  in  the  main,  a
blundering  muddle  of  defects.  For  the  purpose
in  hand,  that  is  to  say  with  a  view  to  the  prob-
able chance  of  any  revolutionary  overturn,  this
may  serve  as  a  fair  characterization  of  the  regime
of  the  Vested  Interests;  whose  continued  rule  is
now  believed  by  their  Guardians  to  be  threatened
by  a  popular  uprising  in  the  nature  of  Bolshevism.
Now,  as  to  the  country's  industrial  system
which  is  manhandled  on  this  businesslike  plan;  it
is  a  comprehensive  and  balanced  scheme  of  tech-
nological administration.  Industry  of  this  mod-
ern sort  —  mechanical,  specialized,  standardized,
running  to  quantity  production,  drawn  on  a  large
scale  —  is  highly  productive;  provided  always
that  the  necessary  conditions  of  its  working  are
met  in  some  passable  fashion.  These  necessary
conditions  of  productive  industry  are  of  a  well-
defined  technical  character,  and  they  are  growing
more  and  more  exacting  with  every  farther  ad-
vance in  the  industrial  arts.  This  mechanical  in-
dustry draws  always  more  and  more  largely  and
urgently  on  the  natural  sources  of  mechanical
power,  and  it  necessarily  makes  use  of  an  ever
increasingly  wide  and  varied  range  of  materials,
drawn  from  all  latitudes  and  all  geographical  re-


132 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

gions,  in  spite  of  obstructive  national  frontiers  and
patriotic  animosities;  for  the  mechanical  technol-
ogy is  impersonal  and  dispassionate,  and  its  end  is
very  simply  to  serve  human  needs,  without  fear  or
favor  or  respect  of  persons,  prerogatives,  or  poli-
tics. It  makes  up  an  industrial  system  of  an  un-
exampled character  —  a  mechanically  balanced
and  interlocking  system  of  work  to  be  done,  the
prime  requisite  of  whose  working  is  a  painstaking
and  intelligent  co-ordination  of  the  processes  at
work,  and  an  equally  painstaking  allocation  of
mechanical  power  and  materials.  The  founda-
tion and  driving  force  of  it  all  is  a  massive  body
by  technological  knowledge,  of  a  highly  imper-
sonal and  altogether  unbusinesslike  nature,  run-
ning in  close  contact  with  the  material  sciences,
on  which  it  draws  freely  at  every  turn  —  exact-
ingly  specialized,  endlessly  detailed,  reaching  out
into  all  domains  of  empirical  fact.

Such  is  the  system  of  productive  work  which
has  grown  out  of  the  Industrial  Revolution,  and
on  the  full  and  free  run  of  which  the  material
welfare  of  all  the  civilized  peoples  now  depends
from  day  to  day.  Any  defect  or  hindrance  in  its
technical  administration,  any  intrusion  of  non-
technical considerations,  any  failure  or  obstruc-
tion at  any  point,  unavoidably  results  in  a  dispro-


WHAT MAKES FOR A CHANGE  1 33

portionate  set-back  to  the  balanced  whole  and
brings  a  disproportionate  burden  of  privation  on
all  these  peoples  whose  productive  industry  has
come  within  the  sweep  of  the  system.

It  follows  that  those  gifted,  trained,  and  ex*
perienced  technicians  who  now  are  in  possession
of  the  requisite  technological  information  and  ex-
perience are  the  first  and  instantly  indispensable
factor  in  the  everyday  work  of  carrying  on  the
country's  productive  industry.  They  now  consti-
tute the  General  Staff  of  the  industrial  system,  in
fact;  whatever  law  and  custom  may  formally  say
in  protest.  The  "  captains  of  industry  "  may  still
vaingloriously  claim  that  distinction,  and  law
and  custom  still  countenance  their  claim;  but
the  captains  have  no  technological  value,  in
fact.

Therefore  any  question  of  a  revolutionary
overturn,  in  America  or  in  any  other  of  the  ad-
vanced industrial  countries,  resolves  itself  in  prac-
tical fact  into  a  question  of  what  the  guild  of
technicians  will  do.  In  effect  it  is  a  question
whether  the  discretion  and  responsibility  in  the
management  of  the  country's  industry  shall  pass
from  the  financiers,  who  speak  for  the  Vested  In-
terests, to  the  technicians,  who  speak  for  the  in-
dustrial system  as  a  going  concern. There  is  no


134 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

third  party  qualified  to  make  a  colorable  bid,  or
able  to  make  good  its  pretensions  if  it  should
make  a  bid.  So  long  as  the  vested  rights  of  ab-
sentee ownership  remain  intact,  the  financial
powers  —  that  is  to  say  the  Vested  Interests  —
will  continue  to  dispose  of  the  country's  industrial
forces  for  their  own  profit;  and  so  soon,  or  so  far,
as  these  vested  rights  give  way,  the  control  of
the  people's  material  welfare  will  pass  into  the
hands  of  the  technicians.  There  is  no  third
party.

The  chances  of  anything  like  a  Soviet  in  Amer-
ica, therefore,  are  the  chances  of  a  Soviet  of
technicians.  And,  to  the  due  comfort  of  the
Guardians  of  the  Vested  Interests  and  the  good
citizens  who  make  up  their  background,  it  can  be
shown  that  anything  like  a  Soviet  of  Technicians
is  at  the  most  a  remote  contingency  in  America.

It  is  true,  so  long  as  no  such  change  of  base  is
made,  what  is  confidently  to  be  looked  for  is  a
regime  of  continued  and  increasing  shame  and
confusion,  hardship  and  dissension,  unemploy-
ment and  privation,  waste  and  insecurity  of  per-
son and  property  —  such  as  the  rule  of  the  Vested
Interests  in  business  has  already  made  increasingly
familiar  to  all  the  civilized  peoples.  But  the
vested  rights  of  absentee  ownership  are  still  em-


WHAT  MAKES FOR A CHANGE  135

bedded  in  the  sentiments  of  the  underlying  popu-
lation, and  still  continue  to  be  the  Palladium  of
the  Republic;  and  the  assertion  is  still  quite  safe
that  anything  like  a  Soviet  of  Technicians  is  not
a  present  menace  to  the  Vested  Interests  in  Amer-
ica.

By  settled  habit  the  technicians,  the  engineers
and  industrial  experts,  are  a  harmless  and  docile
sort,  well  fed  on  the  whole,  and  somewhat  plac-
idly content  with  the  "  full  dinner-pail  "  which  the
lieutenants  of  the  Vested  Interests  habitually
allow  them.  It  is  true,  they  constitute  the  indis-
pensable General  Staff  of  that  industrial  system
which  feeds  the  Vested  Interests;  but  hitherto  at
least,  they  have  had  nothing  to  say  in  the  plan-
ning and  direction  of  this  industrial  system,  ex-
cept as  employees  in  the  pay  of  the  financiers.
They  have,  hitherto,  been  quite  unreflectingly
content  to  work  piecemeal,  without  much  of  an
understanding  among  themselves,  unreservedly
doing  job-work  for  the  Vested  Interests ;  and  they
have  without  much  reflection  lent  themselves  and
their  technical  powers  freely  to  the  obstructive
tactics  of  the  captains  of  industry;  all  the  while
that  the  training  which  makes  them  technicians  is
but  a  specialized  extension  of  that  joint  stock  of
technological  knowledge that  has  been carried


136 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

forward  out  of  the  past  by  the  community  at
large.

But  it  remains  true  that  they  and  their  dear-
bought  knowledge  of  ways  and  means  —  dear-
bought  on  the  part  of  the  underlying  community
—  are  the  pillars  of  that  house  of  industry  in
which  the  Vested  Interests  continue  to  live.
Without  their  continued  and  unremitting  super-
vision and  direction  the  industrial  system  would
cease  to  be  a  working  system  at  all;  whereas  it  is
not  easy  to  see  how  the  elimination  of  the  exist-
ing businesslike  control  could  bring  anything  but
relief  and  heightened  efficiency  to  this  working
system.  The  technicians  are  indispensable  to
productive  industry  of  this  mechanical  sort;  the
Vested  Interests  and  their  absentee  owners  are
not.  The  technicians  are  indispensable  to  the
Vested  Interests  and  their  absentee  owners,  as  a
working  force  without  which  there  would  be  no
industrial  output  to  control  or  divide;  whereas
the  Vested  Interests  and  their  absentee  owners
are  of  no  material  consequence  to  the  technicians
and  their  work,  except  as  an  extraneous  interfer-
ence and  obstruction.

It  follows  that  the  material  welfare  of  all  the
advanced  industrial  peoples  rests  in  the  hands  of
these  technicians,  if  they  will  only  see  it  that  way,


WHAT  MAKES FOR A CHANGE  1 37

take  counsel  together,  constitute  themselves  the
self-directing  General  Staff  of  the  country's  indus-
try, and  dispense  with  the  interference  of  the  lieu-
tenants of  the  absentee  owners.  Already  they  are
strategically  in  a  position  to  take  the  lead  and
impose  their  own  terms  of  leadership,  so  soon  as
they,  or  a  decisive  number  of  them,  shall  reach  a
common  understanding  to  that  effect  and  agree  on
a  plan  of  action.

But  there  is  assuredly  no  present  promise  of
the  technicians'  turning  their  insight  and  common
sense  to  such  a  use.  There  need  be  no  present  ap-
prehension. The  technicians  are  a  "  safe  and
sane  "  lot,  on  the  whole ;  and  they  are  pretty  well
commercialized,  particularly  the  older  generation,
who  speak  with  authority  and  conviction,  and
to  whom  the  younger  generation  of  engineers  de-
fer, on  the  whole,  with  such  a  degree  of  filial  piety
as  should  go  far  to  reassure  all  good  citizens.
And  herein  lies  the  present  security  of  the  Vested
Interests,  as  well  as  the  fatuity  of  any  present
alarm  about  Bolshevism  and  the  like;  for  the
whole-hearted  co-operation  of  the  technicians
would  be  as  indispensable  to  any  effectual  moye-
ment  of  overturn  as  their  unwavering  service,  in
the  employ  of  the  Vested  Interests  is  indispensa-
ble to  the  maintenance  of  the  established  order.


VI

A  MEMORANDUM  ON  A  PRACTICABLE  SOVIET  OF
TECHNICIANS

It  is  the  purpose  of  this  memorandum  to  show,
in  an  objective  way,  that  under  existing  circum-
stances there  need  be  no  fear,  and  no  hope,  of  an
effectual  revolutionary  overturn  in  America,  such
as  would  unsettle  the  established  order  and  un-
seat those  Vested  Interests  that  now  control  the
country's  industrial  system.  In  an  earlier  paper
(The  Dial,  October  4)  it  has  been  argued  that
no  effectual  move  in  the  direction  of  such  an  over-
turn can  be  made  except  on  the  initiative  and
under  the  direction  of  the  country's  technicians,
taking  action  in  common  and  on  a  concerted  plan.
Notoriously,  no  move  of  this  nature  has  been
made  hitherto,  nor  is  there  evidence  that  anything
of  the  kind  has  been  contemplated  by  the  tech-
nicians. They  still  are  consistently  loyal,  with
something  more  than  a  hired-man's  loyalty,  to  the
established  order  of  commercial  profit  and  absen-
tee ownership. And  any  adequate  plan  of  con-

138


A SOVIET  OF TECHNICIANS  1 39

certed  action,  such  as  would  be  required  for  the
enterprise  in  question,  is  not  a  small  matter  that
can  be  arranged  between  two  days.

Any  plan  of  action  tha^  shall  hope  to  meet  the
requirements  of  the  case  in  any  passable  fashion
must  necessarily  have  the  benefit  of  mature  delib-
eration among  the  technicians  who  are  competent
to  initiate  such  an  enterprise;  it  must  engage  the
intelligent  co-operation  of  several  thousand  tech-
nically trained  men  scattered  over  fhe  face  of  the
country,  in  one  industry  and  another;  must  carry
out  a  passably  complete  cadastration  of  the  coun-
try's industrial  forces ;  must  set  up  practicable  or-
ganization tables  covering  the  country's  industry
in  some  detail, —  energy-resources,  materials,  and
man  power;  and  it  must  also  engage  the  aggres-
sive support  of  the  trained  men  at  work  in  trans-
portation, mining,  and  the  greater  mechanical  in-
dustries. These  are  initial  requirements,  indis-
pensable to  the  initiation  of  any  enterprise  of  the
kind  in  such  an  industrial  country  as  America ;  and
so  soon  as  this  is  called  to  mind  it  will  be  realised
that  any  fear  of  an  effectual  move  in  this  direc-
tion at  present  is  quite  chimerical.  So  that,  in
fact,  it  may  be  set  down  without  a  touch  of  am-
biguity that  absentee  ownership  is  secure,  just  yet.

Therefore,  to  show  conclusively  and  in  an  ob-


I40 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

jective  way  how  remote  any  contingency  of  this
nature  still  is,  it  is  here  proposed  to  set  out  in  a
summary  fashion  the  main  lines  which  any  such
concerted  plan  of  action  would  have  to  follow,
and  what  will  of  necessity  be  the  manner  of  or-
ganization which  alone  can  hope  to  take  over  the
industrial  system,  following  the  eventual  abdica-
tion or  dispossession'  of  the  Vested  Interests  and
their  absentee  owners.  And,  by  way  of  paren-
thesis, it  is  always  the  self-made  though  reluctant
abdication  of  the  Vested  Interests  and  their  ab-
sentee owners,  rather  than  their  forcible  dispos-
session, that?  is  to  be  looked  for  as  a  reasonably
probable  event  in  the  calculable  future.  It
should,  in  effect,  cause  no  surprise  to  find  that  they
will,  in  a  sense,  eliminate  themselves,  by  letting
go  quite  involuntarily  after  the  industrial  sit-
uation getsi,  quite  beyond  their  control.  In  fact,
they  have,  in  the  present  difficult  juncture,  already
sufficiently  shown  their  unfitness  to  take  care  of
the  country's  material  welfare, —  which  is  after
all  the  only  ground  on  which  they  can  set  up  a
colorable  claim  to  their  vested  rights.  At  the
same  time  something  like  an  opening  bid  for  a
bargain  of  abdication  has  already  come  in  from
more  than  one  quarter. So  that  a  discontinuance


A SOVIET  OF TECHNICIANS  1 4 1

of  the  existing  system  of  absentee  ownership,  on
one  plan  or  another,  is  no  longer  to  be  considered
a  purely  speculative  novelty;  and  an  objective  can-
vass of  the  manner  of  organization  that  is  to  be
looked  to  to  take  the  place  of  the  control  now
exercised  by  the  Vested  Interests  —  in  the  event
of  their  prospective  abdication  —  should  accord-
ingly have  some  present  interest,  even  apart  from
its  bearing  on  the  moot  question  of  any  forcible
disruption  of  the  established  system  of  absentee
ownership.

As  a  matter  of  course,  the  powers  and  duties
of  the  incoming  directorate  will  be  of  a  technolog-
ical nature,  in  the  main  if  not  altogether;  inas-
much as  the  purpose  of  its  coming  into  control  is
the  care  of  the  community's  material  welfare  by  a
more  competent  management  of  the  country's  in-
dustrial system.  It  may  be  added  that  even  in
the  unexpected  event  that  the  contemplated,  over-
turn should,  in  the  beginning,  meet  with  armed
opposition  from  the  partisans  of  the  old  order,
it  will  still  be  true  that  the  duties  of  the  incom-
ing directorate  will  be  of  a  technological  charac-
ter, in  the  main;  inasmuch  as  warlike  operations
are  also  now  substantially  a  matter  of  technology,


142 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

both  in  the  immediate  conduct  of  hostilities  and  in
the  still  more  urgent  work  of  material  support
and  supply.

The  incoming  industrial  order  is  designed  to
correct  the  shortcomings  of  the  old.  The  duties
and  powers  of  the  incoming  directorate  will  ac-
cordingly converge  on  those  points  in  the  admin-
istration of  industry  where  the  old  order  has
most  signally  fallen  short;  that  is  to  say,  on  the
due  allocation  of  resources  and  a  consequent  full
and  reasonably  proportioned  employment  of  the
available  equipment  and  man  power;  on  the
avoidance  of  waste  and  duplication  of  work;  and
on  an  equitable  and  sufficient  supply  of  goods  and
services  to  consumers.  Evidently  the  most  imme-
diate and  most  urgent  work  to  be  taken  over  by
the  incoming  directorate  is  that  for  want  of  which
under  the  old  order  the  industrial  system  has  been
working  slack  and  at  cross  purposes;  that  is  to
say  the  due  allocation  of  available  resources,  in
power,  equipment,  and  materials,  among  the
greater  primary  industries.  For  this  necessary
work  of  allocation  there  has  been  substantially
no  provision  under  the  old  order.

To  carry  on  this  allocation,  the  country's  trans-
portation system  must  be  placed  at  the  disposal
of  the  same  staff  that  has  the  work  of  allocation


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  1 43

to  do;  since,  under  modern  conditions,  any  such
allocation  will  take  effect  only  by  use  of  the  trans-
portation system.  But,  by  the  same  token,  the
effectual  control  of  the  distribution  of  goods  to
consumers  will  also  necessarily  fall  into  the  same
hands;  since  the  traffic  in  consumable  goods  is  also
a  matter  of  transportation,  in  the  main.

On  these  considerations,  which  would  only  be
reenforced  by  a  more  detailed  inquiry  into  the
work  to  be  done,  the  central  directorate  will  ap-
parently take  the  shape  of  a  loosely  tripartite  ex-
ecutive council,  with  power  to  act  in  matters  of
industrial  administration;  the  council  to  include
technicians  whose  qualifications  enable  them  to  be
called  Resource  Engineers,  together  with  simi-
larly competent  spokesmen  of  the  transportation
system  and  of  the  distributive  traffic  in  finished
products  and  services.  With  a  view  to  efficiency
and  expedition,  the  executive  council  will  presum-
ably not  be  a  numerous  body;  although  its  staff  of
intelligence  and  advice  may  be  expected  to  be
fairly  large,  and  it  will  be  guided  by  current  con-
sultation with  the  accredited  spokesmen  (depu-
ties, commissioners,  executives,  or  whatever  they
may  be  called)  of  the  several  main  subdivisions  of
productive  industry,  transportation,  and  distribu-
tive traffic.


144 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

Armed  with  these  powers  and  working  in  due
consultation  with  a  sufficient  ramification  of  sub-
centers  and  local  councils,  this  industrial  director-
ate should  be  in  a  position  to  avoid  virtually  all
unemployment  of  serviceable  equipment  and  man
power  on  the  one  hand,  and  all  local  or  seasonal
scarcity  on  the  other  hand.  The  main  line  of
duties  indicated  by  the  character  of  the  work  in-
cumbent on  the  directorate,  as  well  as  the  main
line  of  qualifications  in  its  personnel,  both  execu-
tive and  advisory,  is  such  as  will  call  for  the  serv-
ices of  Production  Engineers,  to  use  a  term  which
is  coming  into  use.  But  it  is  also  evident  that  in
its  continued  work  of  planning  and  advisement  the
directorate  will  require  the  services  of  an  appre-
ciable number  of  consulting  economists ;  men  who
are  qualified  to  be  called  Production  Economists.

The  profession  now  includes  men  with  the
requisite  qualifications,  although  it  cannot  be  said
that  the  gild  of  economists  is  made  up  of  such
men  in  the  main.  Quite  blamelessly,  the  econom-
ists have,  by  tradition  and  by  force  of  commer-
cial pressure,  habitually  gone  in  for  a  theoretical
inquiry  into  the  ways  and  means  of  salesmanship,
financial  traffic,  and  the  distribution  of  income  and
property,  rather  than  a  study  of  the  industrial


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  145

system  considered  as  a  ways  and  means  of  pro-
ducing goods  and  services.  Yet  there  now  are,
after  all,  especially  among  the  younger  genera-
tion, an  appreciable  number,  perhaps  an  adequate
number,  of  economists  who  have  learned  that
"  business  "  is  not  "  industry  "  and  that  invest-
ment is  not  production.  And,  here  as  always,  the
best  is  good  enough,  perforce.

"  Consulting  economists  "  of  this  order  are  a
necessary  adjunct  to  the  personnel  of  the  central
directorate,  because  the  technical  training  that
goes  to  make  a  resource  engineer,  or  a  produc-
tion engineer,  or  indeed  a  competent  industrial
expert  in  any  line  of  specialization,  is  not  of  a
kind  to  give  him  the  requisite  sure  and  facile  in-
sight into  the  play  of  economic  forces  at  large;
and  as  a  matter  of  notorious  fact,  very  few  of  the
technicians  have  gone  at  all  far  afield  to  acquaint
themselves  with  anything  more  to  the  point  in
this  connection  than  the  half-forgotten  common-
places of  the  old  order.  The  "  consulting  econ-
omist "  is  accordingly  necessary  to  cover  an  other-
wise uncovered  joint  in  the  new  articulation  of
things.  His  place  in  the  scheme  is  analogous  to
the  part  which  legal  counsel  now  plays  in  the  ma-
noeuvres of  diplomatists  and  statesmen;  and  the


1 46 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

discretionary  personnel  of  the  incoming  director-
ate are  to  be,  in  effect,  something  in  the  way  of  in-
dustrial statesmen  under  the  new  order.

There  is  also  a  certain  general  reservation  to  be
made  with  regard  to  personnel,  which  may  con-
veniently be  spoken  of  at  this  point.  To  avoid
persistent  confusion  and  prospective  defeat,  it  will
be  necessary  to  exclude  from  all  positions  of  trust
and  executive  responsibility  all  persons  who  have
been  trained  for  business  or  who  have  had  experi-
ence in  business  undertakings  of  the  larger  sort.
This  will  apply  generally,  throughout  the  admin-
istrative scheme,  although  it  will  apply  more  im-
peratively as  regards  the  responsible  personnel  of
the  directorate,  central  and  subordinate,  together
with  their  staff  of  intelligence  and  advice,  wher-
ever judgment  and  insight  are  essential.  What  is
wanted  is  training  in  the  ways  and  means  of  pro-
ductive industry,  not  in  the  ways  and  means  of
salesmanship  and  profitable  investment.

By  force  of  habit,  men  trained  to  a  businesslike
view  of  what  is  right  and  real  will  be  irretrievably
biassed  against  any  plan  of  production  and  distri-
bution that  is  not  drawn  in  terms  of  commercial
profit  and  loss  and  does  not  provide  a  margin  of
free  income  to  go  to  absentee  owners.  The  per-
sonal exceptions  to  the  rule  are  apparently  very


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  1 47

few.  But  this  one  point  is  after  all  of  relatively
minor  consequence.  What  is  more  to  the  point
in  the  same  connection  is  that  the  commercial
bias  induced  by  their  training  in  businesslike  ways
of  thinking  leaves  them  incapable  of  anything  like
an  effectual  insight  into  the  use  of  resources  or
the  needs  and  aims  of  productive  industry,  in  any
other  terms  than  those  of  commercial  profit  and
loss.  Their  units  and  standards  of  valuation  and
accountancy  are  units  and  standards  of  price,  and
of  private  gain  in  terms  of  price;  whereas  for  any
scheme  of  productive  industry  which  runs,  not  on
salesmanship  and  earnings,  but  on  tangible  per-
formances and  tangible  benefit  to  the  community
at  large,  the  valuations  and  accountancy  of  sales-
manship and  earnings  are  misleading.  With  the
best  and  most  benevolent  intentions,  men  so
trained  will  unavoidably  make  their  appraisals  of
production  and  their  disposition  of  productive
forces  in  the  only  practical  terms  with  which  they
are  familiar,  the  terms  of  commercial  account-
ancy; which  is  the  same  as  saying,  the  accountancy
of  absentee  ownership  and  free  income;  all  of
which  it  is  the  abiding  purpose  of  the  projected
plan  to  displace.  For  the  purposes  of  this  pro-
jected new  order  of  production,  therefore,  the
experienced  and  capable  business  men  are  at  the


148 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

best  to  be  rated  as  well-intentioned  deaf-mute
blind  men.  Their  wisest  judgment  and  sincerest
endeavors  become  meaningless  and  misguided  so
soon  as  the  controlling  purpose  of  industry  shifts
from  the  footing  of  profits  on  absentee  investment
to  that  of  a  serviceable  output  of  goods.

All  this  abjuration  of  business  principles  and
businesslike  sagacity  may  appear  to  be  a  taking
of  precautions  about  a  vacant  formality;  but  it
is  as  well  to  recall  that  by  trained  propensity  and
tradition  the  business  men,  great  and  small,  are
after  all,  each  in  their  degree,  lieutenants  of  those
Vested  Interests  which  the  projected  organization
of  industry  is  designed  to  displace, —  schooled  in
their  tactics  and  marching  under  their  banners.
The  experience  of  the  war  administration  and  its
management  of  industry  by  help  of  the  business
men  during  the  past  few  years  goes  to  show  what
manner  of  industrial  wisdom  is  to  be  looked  for
where  capable  and  well-intentioned  business  men
are  called  in  to  direct  industry  with  a  view  to
maximum  production  and  economy.  For  its  re-
sponsible personnel  the  administration  has  uni-
formly drawn  on  experienced  business  men,  pref-
erably men  of  successful  experience  in  Big  Busi-
ness ;  that  is  to  say,  trained  men  with  a  shrewd  eye
to  the  main  chance. And  the  tale  of  its  adven-


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  149

tures,  so  far  as  a  businesslike  reticence  has  allowed
them  to  become  known,  is  an  amazing  comedy  of
errors;  which  runs  to  substantially  the  same  issue
whether  it  is  told  of  one  or  another  of  the  many
departments,  boards,  councils,  commissions,  and
administrations,  that  have  had  this  work  to  do.

Notoriously,  this  choice  of  personnel  has  with
singular  uniformity  proved  to  be  of  doubtful  ad-
visability, not  to  choose  a  harsher  epithet.  The
policies  pursued,  doubtless  with  the  best  and  most
sagacious  intentions  of  which  this  businesslike  per-
sonnel have  been  capable,  have  uniformly  resulted
in  the  safeguarding  of  investments  and  the  alloca-
tion of  commercial  profits;  all  the  while  that  the
avowed  aim  of  it  all,  and  doubtless  the  conscien-
tious purpose  of  the  businesslike  administrators,
has  been  quantity  production  of  essential  goods.
The  more  that  comes  to  light,  the  more  visible
becomes  the  difference  between  the  avowed  pur-
pose and  the  tangible  performance.  Tangible
performance  in  the  way  of  productive  industry  is
precisely  what  the  business  men  do  not  know  how
to  propose,  but  it  is  also  that  on  which  the  possi-
ble success  of  any  projected  plan  of  overturn  will
always  rest.  Yet  it  is  also  to  be  remarked  that
even  the  reluctant  and  blindfold  endeavors  of
these  businesslike  administrators  to  break  away


150 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

from  their  life-long  rule  of  reasonable  earnings,
appear  to  have  resulted  in  a  very  appreciably  in-
creased industrial  output  per  unit  of  man  power
and  equipment  employed.  That  such  was  the
outcome  under  the  war  administration  is  presum-
ably due  in  great  part  to  the  fact  that  the  busi-
ness men  in  charge  were  unable  to  exercise  so  strict
a  control  over  the  working  force  of  technicians
and  skilled  operatives  during  that  period  of  stress.
And  here  the  argument  comes  in  touch  with
one  of  the  substantial  reasons  why  there  need  be
no  present  fear  of  a  revolutionary  overturn.  By
settled  habit,  the  American  population  are  quite
unable  to  see  their  way  to  entrust  any  appreciable'
responsibility  to  any  other  than  business  men;  at
the  same  time  that  such  a  move  of  overturn  can
hope  to  succeed  only  if  it  excludes  the  business
men  from  all  positions  of  responsibility.  This
sentimental  deference  of  the  American  people  to
the  sagacity  of  its  business  men  is  massive,  pro-
found, and  alert.  So  much  so  that  it  will  take
harsh  and  protracted  experience  to  remove  it,  or
to  divert  it  sufficiently  for  the  purpose  of  any
revolutionary  diversion.  And  more  particularly,
popular  sentiment  in  this  country  will  not  toler-
ate the  assumption  of  responsibility  by  the  tech-
nicians, who  are  in  the  popular  apprehension  con-


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  151

ceivcd  to  be  a  somewhat  fantastic  brotherhood  of
over-specialized  cranks,  not  to  be  trusted  out  of
sight  except  under  the  restraining  hand  of  safe
and  sane  business  men.  Nor  are  the  technicians
themselves  in  the  habit  of  taking  a  greatly  differ-
ent view  of  their  own  case.  They  still  feel  them-
selves, in  the  nature  of  things,  to  fall  into  place
as  employes  of  those  enterprising  business  men
who  are,  in  the  nature  of  things,  elected  to  get
something  for  nothing.  Absentee  ownership  is
secure,  just  yet.  In  time,  with  sufficient  provoca-
tion, this  popular  frame  of  mind  may  change,  of
course;  but  it  is  in  any  case  a  matter  of  an  appre-
ciable lapse  of  time.

Even  such  a  scant  and  bare  outline  of  generali-
ties as  has  been  hastily  sketched  above  will  serve
to  show  that  any  effectual  overturn  of  the  estab-
lished order  is  not  a  matter  to  be  undertaken  out
of  hand,  or  to  be  manoeuvred  into  shape  by  make-
shifts after  the  initial  move  has  been  made.
There  is  no  chance  without  deliberate  prepara-
tions from  beforehand.  There  are  two  main
lines  of  preparations  that  will  have  to  be  taken
care  of  by  any  body  of  men  who  may  contemplate
such  a  move:  (a)  An  inquiry  into  existing  con-
ditions and  into  the  available  ways  and  means;
and  (b) the  setting  up  of  practicable  organiza-


152 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

tion  tables  and  a  survey  of  the  available  person-
nel. And  bound  up  with  this  work  of  prepara-
tion, and  conditioning  it,  provision  must  also  be
made  for  the  growth  of  such  a  spirit  of  teamwork
as  will  be  ready  to  undertake  and  undergo  this
critical  adventure. All  of  which  will  take  time.

It  will  be  necessary  to  investigate  and  to  set
out  in  a  convincing  way  what  are  the  various  kinds
and  lines  of  waste  that  are  necessarily  involved
in  the  present  businesslike  control  of  industry;
what  are  the  abiding  causes  of  these  wasteful  and
obstructive  practices;  and  what  economies  of
management  and  production  will  become  practi-
cable on  the  elimination  of  the  present  business-
like control.  This  will  call  for  diligent  team-
work on  the  part  of  a  suitable  group  of  econom-
ists and  engineers,  who  will  have  to  be  drawn  to-
gether by  self-selection  on  the  basis  of  a  common
interest  in  productive  efficiency,  economical  use
of  resources,  and  an  equitable  distribution  of  the
consumable  output.  Hitherto  no  such  self-selec-
tion of  competent  persons  has  visibly  taken  place,
and  the  beginnings  of  a  plan  for  team-work  in
carrying  on  such  an  inquiry  are  yet  to  be  made.

In  the  course  of  this  contemplated  inquiry  and
on  the  basis  afforded  by  its  findings  there  is  no
less  serious  work  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  delib-


A SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  1 53

eration  and  advisement,  among  the  members  of
the  group  in  question  and  in  consultation  with
outside  technological  men  who  know  what  can  best
be  done  with  the  means  in  hand,  and  whose  inter-
est in  things  drives  them  to  dip  into  the  same  gain-
less  adventure.  This  will  involve  the  setting  up
of  organization  tables  to  cover  the  efficient  use  of
the  available  resources  and  equipment,  as  well  as
to  re-organize  the  traffic  involved  in  the  distribu-
tion of  the  output.

By  way  of  an  illustrative  instance,  to  show  by
an  example  something  of  what  the  scope  and
method  of  this  inquiry  and  advisement  will  pre-
sumably be  like,  it  may  be  remarked  that  under
the  new  order  the  existing  competitive  commercial
traffic  engaged  in  the  distribution  of  goods  to  con-
sumers will  presumably  fall  away,  in  the  main,
for  want  of  a  commercial  incentive.  It  is  well
known,  in  a  general  way,  that  the  present  organi-
zation of  this  traffic,  by  wholesale  and  retail  mer-
chandising, involves  a  very  large  and  very  costly
duplication  of  work,  equipment,  stock,  and  per-
sonnel,—  several  hundred  per  cent,  more  than
would  be  required  by  an  economically  efficient
management  of  the  traffic  on  a  reasonable  plan.
In  looking  for  a  way  out  of  the  present  extremely
wasteful  merchandising  traffic,  and  in  working  out


154 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

organization  tables  for  an  equitable  and  efficient
distribution  of  goods  to  consumers,  the  experts  in
the  case  will,  it  is  believed,  be  greatly  helped  out
by  detailed  information  on  such  existing  organiza-
tions as,  e.  g.,  the  distributing  system  of  the  Chi-
cago Packers,  the  chain  stores,  and  the  mail-order
houses.  These  are  commercial  organizations,  of
course,  and  as  such  they  are  managed  with  a  view
to  the  commercial  gain  of  their  owners  and  man-
agers ;  but  they  are  at  the  same  time  designed  to
avoid  the  ordinary  wastes  of  the  ordinary  retail
distribution,  for  the  benefit  of  their  absentee  own-
ers. There  are  not  a  few  object-lessons  of  econ-
omy of  this  practical  character  to  be  found  among
the  Vested  Interests;  so  much  so  that  the  econ-
omies which  result  from  them  are  among  the  valu-
able capitalized  assets  of  these  business  concerns.
This  contemplated  inquiry  will,  of  course,  also
be  useful  in  the  way  of  publicity;  to  show,  con-
cretely and  convincingly,  what  are  the  inherent
defects  of  the  present  businesslike  control  of  in-
dustry, why  these  defects  are  inseparable  from
a  businesslike  control  under  existing  circum-
stances, and  what  may  fairly  be  expected  of  an
industrial  management  which  takes  no  account  of
absentee  ownership.  The  ways  and  means  of
publicity  to  be  employed  is  a  question  that  plainly


A  SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  155

cannot  profitably  be  discussed  beforehand,  so  long
as  the  whole  question  of  the  contemplated  inquiry
itself  has  little  more  than  a  speculative  interest;
and  much  the  same  will  have  to  be  said  as  to  the
scope  and  detail  of  the  inquiry,  which  will  have
to  be  determined  in  great  part  by  the  interest  and
qualifications  of  the  men  who  are  to  carry  it  on.
Nothing  but  provisional  generalities  could  at  all
confidently  be  sketched  into  its  program  until  the
work  is  in  hand.

The  contemplated  eventual  shift  to  a  new  and
more  practicable  system  of  industrial  production
and  distribution  has  been  here  spoken  of  as  a
"  revolutionary  overturn "  of  the  established
order.  This  flagitious  form  of  words  is  here
used  chiefly  because  the  Guardians  of  the  estab-
lished order  are  plainly  apprehensive  of  something
sinister  that  can  be  called  by  no  gentler  name,
rather  than  with  the  intention  of  suggesting  that
extreme  and  subversive  measures  alone  can  now
save  the  life  of  the  underlying  population  from
the  increasingly  disserviceable  rule  of  the  Vested
Interests.  The  move  which  is  here  discussed  in  a
speculative  way  under  this  sinister  form  of  words,
as  a  contingency  to  be  guarded  against  by  fair
means  and  foul,  need,  in  effect,  be  nothing  spec-
tacular; assuredly  it  need  involve  no  clash  of  arms


156 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

or  fluttering  of  banners,  unless,  as  is  beginning  to
seem  likely,  the  Guardians  of  the  old  order  should
find  that  sort  of  thing  expedient.  In  its  elements,
the  move  will  be  of  the  simplest  and  most  matter-
of-fact  character;  although  there  will  doubtless
be  many  intricate  adjustments  to  be  made  in  de-
tail. In  principle,  all  that  is  necessarily  involved
is  a  disallowance  of  absentee  ownership;  that  is
to  say,  the  disestablishment  of  an  institution  which
has,  in  the  course  of  time  and  change,  proved  to
be  noxious  to  the  common  good.  The  rest  will
follow  quite  simply  from  the  cancelment  of  this
outworn  and  footless  vested  right.

By  absentee  ownership,  as  the  term  applies  in
this  connection,  is  here  to  be  understood  the  own-
ership of  an  industrially  useful  article  by  any  per-
son or  persons  who  are  not  habitually  employed
in  the  industrial  use  of  it.  In  this  connection,
office  work  of  a  commercial  nature  is  not  rated  as
industrial  employment.  A  corollary  of  some
breadth  follows  immediately,  although  it  is  so
obvious  an  implication  of  the  main  proposition
that  it  should  scarcely  need  explicit  statement:
An  owner  who  is  employed  in  the  industrial  use
of  a  given  parcel  of  property  owned  by  him,  will
still  be  an  "  absentee  owner,"  within  the  meaning
of  the  term,  in  case  he  is  not  the  only  person  habit-


A SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  1 57

ually  employed  in  its  use.  A  further  corollary
follows,  perhaps  less  obvious  at  first  sight,  but  no
less  convincing  on  closer  attention  to  the  sense  of
the  terms  employed:  Collective  ownership,  of
the  corporate  form,  that  is  to  say  ownership  by
a  collectivity  instituted  ad  hoc,  also  falls  away
as  being  unavoidably  absentee  ownership,  within
the  meaning  of  the  term.  It  will  be  noted  that
all  this  does  not  touch  joint  ownership  of  property
held  in  undivided  interest  by  a  household  group
and  made  use  of  by  the  members  of  the  household
conjointly.  It  is  only  in  so  far  as  the  household
is  possessed  of  useful  property  not  made  use  of
by  its  members,  or  not  made  use  of  without
hired  help,  that  its  ownership  of  such  property
falls  within  the  meaning  of  the  term,  absentee
ownership.  To  be  sufficiently  explicit,  it  may  be
added  that  the  cancelment  of  absentee  ownership
as  here  understood  will  apply  indiscriminately  to
all  industrially  useful  objects,  whether  realty  or
personalty,  whether  natural  resources,  equipment,
banking  capital,  or  wrought  goods  in  stock.

As  an  immediate  consequence  of  this  cancel-
ment of  absentee  ownership  it  should  seem  to  be
altogether  probable  that  industrially  useful  articles
will  presently  cease  to  be  used  for  purposes  of
ownership,  that  is  to  say  for  purposes  of  private


158 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

gain;  although  there  might  be  no  administrative
interference  with  such  use.  Under  the  existing
state  of  the  industrial  arts,  neither  the  natural  re-
sources drawn  on  for  power  and  materials  nor
the  equipment  employed  in  the  great  and  control-
ling industries  are  of  a  nature  to  lend  themselves
to  any  other  than  absentee  ownership;  and  these
industries  control  the  situation,  so  that  private  en-
terprise for  gain  on  a  small  scale  would  scarcely
find  a  suitable  market.  At  the  same  time  the  in-
ducement to  private  accumulation  of  wealth  at
the  cost  of  the  community  would  virtually  fall
away,  inasmuch  as  the  inducement  to  such  ac-
cumulation now  is  in  nearly  all  cases  an  ambition
to  come  in  for  something  in  the  way  of  absentee
ownership.  In  effect,  other  incentives  are  a
negligible  quantity.  Evidently,  the  secondary
effects  of  such  cancelment  will  go  far,  in  more  than
one  direction,  but  evidently,  too,  there  could  be
little  profit  in  endeavoring  to  follow  up  these  ulter-
ior contingencies  in  extended  speculations  here.

As  to  the  formalities,  of  a  legal  complexion,
that  would  be  involved  in  such  a  disallowance  of
absentee  ownership,  they  need  also  be  neither
large  nor  intricate ;  at  least  not  in  their  main  inci-
dence. It  will  in  all  probability  take  the  shape
of  a  cancelment  of  all  corporation  securities,  as


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  1 59

an  initial  move.  Articles  of  partnership,  evi-
dences of  debt,  and  other  legal  instruments  which
now  give  title  to  property  not  in  hand  or  not  in
use  by  the  owner,  will  be  voided  by  the  same  act.
In  all  probability  this  will  be  sufficient  for  the
purpose.

This  act  of  disallowance  may  be  called  sub-
versive and  revolutionary;  but  while  there  is  no
intention  here  to  offer  anything  in  the  way  of  ex-
culpation, it  is  necessary  to  an  objective  appraisal
of  the  contemplated  move  to  note  that  the  effect
of  such  disallowance  would  be  subversive  or  revo-
lutionary only  in  a  figurative  sense  of  the  words.
It  would  all  of  it  neither  subvert  nor  derange  any
substantial  mechanical  contrivance  or  relation,  nor
need  it  materially  disturb  the  relations,  either  as
workman  or  as  consumer  of  goods  and  services,  of
any  appreciable  number  of  persons  now  engaged
in  productive  industry.  In  fact,  the  disallowance
will  touch  nothing  more  substantial  than  a  legal
make-believe.  This  would,  of  course,  be  serious
enough  in  its  consequences  to  those  classes  —
called  the  kept  classes  —  whose  livelihood  hangs
on  the  maintenance  of  this  legal  make-believe.
So,  likewise,  it  would  vacate  the  occupation  of  the
"  middleman,"  which  likewise  turns  on  the  main-
tenance of  this  legal  make-believe;  which  gives


l6o THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

"  title  "  to  that  to  which  one  stands  in  no  material
relation.

Doubtless,  hardship  will  follow  thick  and  fast,
among  those  classes  who  are  least  inured  to  priva-
tion; and  doubtless  all  men  will  agree  that  it  is  a
great  pity.  But  this  evil  is,  after  all,  a  side  issue,
as  regards  the  present  argument,  which  has  to  do
with  nothing  else  than  the  practicability  of  the
scheme.  So  it  is  necessary  to  note  that,  however
detrimental  to  the  special  interests  of  the  ab-
sentee owners  this  move  may  be,  yet  it  will  not  in
any  degree  derange  or  diminish  those  material
facts  that  constitute  the  ways  and  means  of  pro-
ductive industry;  nor  will  it  in  any  degree  enfeeble
or  mutilate  that  joint  stock  of  technical  knowledge
and  practice  that  constitutes  the  intellectual  work-
ing force  of  the  industrial  system.  It  does  not
directly  touch  the  material  facts  of  industry,  for
better  or  worse.  In  this  sense  it  is  a  completely
idle  matter,  in  its  immediate  incidence,  whatever
its  secondary  consequences  may  be  believed  to  be.

But  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  proposal  to  disal-
low absentee  ownership  will  shock  the  moral  sen-
sibilities of  many  persons;  more  particularly  the
sensibilities  of  the  absentee  owners.  To  avoid
the  appearance  of  willful  neglect,  therefore,  it  is
necessary  to  speak  also  of  the  "  moral  aspect."


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  l6l

There  is  no  intention  here  to  argue  the  moral
merits  of  this  contemplated  disallowance  of  ab-
sentee ownership ;  or  to  argue  for  or  against  such
a  move,  on  moral  or  other  grounds.  Absentee
ownership  is  legally  sound  today.  Indeed,  as  is
well  known,  the  Constitution  includes  a  clause
which  specially  safeguards  its  security.  If,
and  when,  the  law  is  changed,  in  this  respect,
what  is  so  legal  today  will  of  course  cease  to  be
legal.  There  is,  in  fact,  not  much  more  to  be
said  about  it;  except  that,  in  the  last  resort,  the
economic  moralities  wait  on  the  economic  necessi-
ties. The  economic-moral  sense  of  the  American
community  today  runs  unequivocally  to  the  effect
that  absentee  ownership  is  fundamentally  and
eternally  right  and  good;  and  it  should  seem  rea-
sonable to  believe  that  it  will  continue  to  run  to
that  effect  for  some  time  yet.

There  has  lately  been  some  irritation  and  fault-
finding with  what  is  called  "  profiteering  "  and
there  may  be  more  or  less  uneasy  discontent  with
what  is  felt  to  be  an  unduly  disproportionate  in-
equality in  the  present  distribution  of  income;
but  apprehensive  persons  should  not  lose  sight  of
the  main  fact  that  absentee  ownership  after  all  is
the  idol  of  every  true  American  heart.  It  is  the
substance  of  things  hoped  for  and  the  reality  of


1 62 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

things  not  seen.  To  achieve  (or  to  inherit)  a
competency,  that  is  to  say  to  accumulate  such
wealth  as  will  assure  a  "  decent "  livelihood  in
industrial  absentia,  is  the  universal,  and  univer-
sally laudable,  ambition  of  all  who  have  reached
years  of  discretion ;  but  it  all  means  the  same  thing
—  to  get  something  for  nothing,  at  any  cost.
Similarly  universal  is  the  awestruck  deference  with
which  the  larger  absentee  owners  are  looked  up  to
for  guidance  and  example.  These  substantial
citizens  are  the  ones  who  have  "  made  good,"  in
the  popular  apprehension.  They  are  the  great
and  good  men  whose  lives  "  all  remind  us  we  can
make  our  lives  sublime,  etc."

This  commercialized  frame  of  mind  is  a  sturdy
outgrowth  of  many  generations  of  consistent
training  in  the  pursuit  of  the  main  chance;  it  is
second  nature,  and  there  need  be  no  fear  that  it
will  allow  the  Americans  to  see  workday  facts  in
any  other  than  its  own  perspective,  just  yet.  The
most  tenacious  factor  in  any  civilization  is  a  set-
tled popular  frame  of  mind,  and  to  this  abiding
American  frame  of  mind  absentee  ownership  is
the  controlling  center  of  all  the  economic  realities.

So,  having  made  plain  that  all  this  argument  on
a  practicable  overturn  of  the  established  order  has


A  SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  1 63

none  but  a  speculative  interest,  the  argument  can
go  on  to  consider  what  will  be  the  nature  of  the
initial  move  of  overturn  which  is  to  break  with  the
old  order  of  absentee  ownership  and  set  up  a
regime  of  workmanship  governed  by  the  country's
technicians.

As  has  already  been  called  to  mind,  repeatedly,
the  effective  management  of  the  industrial  system
at  large  is  already  in  the  hands  of  the  technicians,
so  far  as  regards  the  work  actually  done ;  but  it  is
all  under  the  control  of  the  Vested  Interests,  rep-
resenting absentee  owners,  so  far  as  regards  its
failure  to  work.  And  the  failure  is,  quite  reason-
ably, attracting  much  attention  lately.  In  this
two-cleft,  or  bi-cameral,  administration  of  indus-
try, the  technicians  may  be  said  to  represent  the
community  at  large  in  its  industrial  capacity,  or  in
other  words  the  industrial  system  as  a  going  con-
cern; whereas  the  business  men  speak  for  the  com-
mercial interest  of  the  absentee  owners,  as  a  body
which  holds  the  industrial  community  in  usufruct.
It  is  the  part  of  the  technicians,  between  them,  to
know  the  country's  available  resources,  in  mechan-
ical power  and  equipment;  to  know  and  put  in
practice  the  joint  stock  of  technological  knowledge
which  is  indispensable  to  industrial  production;  as
well  as  to  know  and  take  care  of  the  community's


164 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

habitual  need  and  use  of  consumable  goods.
They  are,  in  effect,  the  general  staff  of  produc-
tion engineers,  under  whose  surveillance  the  re-
quired output  of  goods  and  services  is  produced
and  distributed  to  the  consumers.  Whereas  it  is
the  part  of  the  business  men  to  know  what  rate
and  volume  of  production  and  distribution  will
best  serve  the  commercial  interest  of  the  absentee
owners,  and  to  put  this  commercial  knowledge  in
practice  by  nicely  limiting  production  and  distri-
bution of  the  output  to  such  a  rate  and  volume  as
their  commercial  traffic  will  bear  —  that  is  to  say,
what  will  yield  the  largest  net  income  to  the  ab-
sentee owners  in  terms  of  price.  In  this  work  of
sagaciously  retarding  industry  the  captains  of  in-
dustry necessarily  work  at  cross  purposes,  among
themselves,  since  the  traffic  is  of  a  competitive
nature.

Accordingly,  in  this  two-cleft  arrangement  of
administrative  functions,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  tech-
nicians to  plan  the  work  and  to  carry  it  on;  and
it  is  the  duty  of  the  captains  of  industry  to  see
that  the  work  will  benefit  none  but  the  captains
and  their  associated  absentee  owners,  and  that  it
is  not  pushed  beyond  the  salutary  minimum  which
their  commercial  traffic  will  bear.  In  all  that  con-
cerns the  planning  and  execution  of  the  work  done,


A SOVIET OF TECHNICIANS  1 65

the  technicians  necessarily  take  the  initiative  and
exercise  the  necessary  creative  surveillance  and
direction;  that  being  what  they,  and  they  alone,
are  good  for;  whereas  the  businesslike  deputies
of  the  absentee  owners  sagaciously  exercise  a  run-
ning veto  power  over  the  technicians  and  their
productive  industry.  They  are  able  effectually  to
exercise  this  commercially  sagacious  veto  power
by  the  fact  that  the  technicians  are,  in  effect,  their
employes,  hired  to  do  their  bidding  and  fired  if
they  do  not;  and  perhaps  no  less  by  this  other
fact,  that  the  technicians  have  hitherto  been  work-
ing piecemeal,  as  scattered  individuals  under  their
master's  eye;  they  have  hitherto  not  drawn  to-
gether on  their  own  ground  and  taken  counsel  to-
gether as  a  general  staff  of  industry,  to  determine
what  had  best  be  done  and  what  not.  So  that
they  have  hitherto  figured  in  the  conduct  of  the
country's  industrial  enterprise  only  as  a  tech-
nological extension  of  the  business  men's  grasp
on  the  commercial  main  chance.

Yet,  immediately  and  unremittingly,  the  tech-
nicians and  their  advice  and  surveillance  are  essen-
tial to  any  work  whatever  in  those  great  primary
industries  on  which  the  country's  productive  sys-
tems turn,  and  which  set  the  pace  for  all  the  rest.
And  it  is  obvious  that  so  soon  as  they  shall  draw


1 66 THE ENGINEERS AND  THE PRICE SYSTEM

together,  in  a  reasonably  inclusive  way,  and  take
common  counsel  as  to  what  had  best  be  done,  they
are  in  a  position  to  say  what  work  shall  be  done
and  to  fix  the  terms  on  which  it  is  to  be  done.  In
short,  so  far  as  regards  the  technical  requirements
of  the  case,  the  situation  is  ready  for  a  self-se-
lected, but  inclusive,  Soviet  of  technicians  to  take
over  the  economic  affairs  of  the  country  and  to
allow  and  disallow  what  they  may  agree  on;  pro-
vided always  that  they  live  within  the  require-
ments of  that  state  of  the  industrial  arts  whose
keepers  they  are,  and  provided  that  their  preten-
sions continue  to  have  the  support  of  the  indus-
trial rank  and  file;  which  comes  near  saying  that
their  Soviet  must  consistently  and  effectually  take
care  of  the  material  welfare  of  the  underlying
population.

Now,  this  revolutionary  posture  of  the  present
state  of  the  industrial  arts  may  be  undesirable,  in
some  respects,  but  there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  by
denying  the  fact.  So  soon  —  but  only  so  soon  —
as  the  engineers  draw  together,  take  common
counsel,  work  out  a  plan  of  action,  and  decide  to
disallow  absentee  ownership  out  of  hand,  that
move  will  have  been  made.  The  obvious  and
simple  means  of  doing  it  is  a  conscientious  with-
drawal of  efficiency;  that  is  to  say  the  general


A  SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  1 67

strike,  to  include  so  much  of  the  country's  staff  of
technicians  as  will  suffice  to  incapacitate  the  indus-
trial system  at  large  by  their  withdrawal,  for  such
time  as  may  be  required  to  enforce  their  argu-
ment.

In  its  elements,  the  project  is  simple  and
obvious,  but  its  working  out  will  require  much
painstaking  preparation,  much  more  than  appears
on  the  face  of  this  bald  statement;  for  it  also  fol-
lows from  the  present  state  of  the  industrial
arts  and  from  the  character  of  the  industrial  sys-
tem in  which  modern  technology  works  out,  that
even  a  transient  failure  to  make  good  in  the  con-
duct of  productive  industry  will  result  in  a  pre-
cipitate collapse  of  the  enterprise.

By  themselves  alone,  the  technicians  can,  in  a
few  weeks,  effectually  incapacitate  the  country's
productive  industry  sufficiently  for  the  purpose.
No  one  who  will  dispassionately  consider  the
technical  character  of  this  industrial  system  will
fail  to  recognize  that  fact.  But  so  long  as  they
have  not,  at  least,  the  tolerant  consent  of  the
population  at  large,  backed  by  the  aggressive
support  of  the  trained  working  force  engaged  in
transportation  and  in  the  greater  primary  indus-
tries, they  will  be  substantially  helpless  to  set  up
a  practicable  working  organization  on  the  new


1 68 THE ENGINEERS AND THE PRICE SYSTEM

footing;  which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  they  will
in  that  case  accomplish  nothing  more  to  the  pur-
pose than  a  transient  period  of  hardship  and  dis-
sension.

Accordingly,  if  it  be  presumed  that  the  produc-
tion engineers  are  of  a  mind  to  play  their  part,
there  will  be  at  least  two  main  lines  of  subsidiary
preparation  to  be  taken  care  of  before  any  overt
move  can  reasonably  be  undertaken:  (a)  An  ex-
tensive campaign  of  inquiry  and  publicity,  such  as
will  bring  the  underlying  population  to  a  reason-
able understanding  of  what  it  is  all  about;  and
(b)  the  working-out  of  a  common  understanding
and  a  solidarity  of  sentiment  between  the  techni-
cians and  the  working  force  engaged  in  transpor-
tation and  in  the  greater  underlying  industries  of
the  system :  to  which  is  to  be  added  as  being  nearly
indispensable  from  the  outset,  an  active  adher-
ence to  this  plan  on  the  part  of  the  trained  work-
men in  the  great  generality  of  the  mechanical  in-
dustries. Until  these  prerequisites  are  taken
care  of,  any  project  for  the  overturn  of  the  es-
tablished order  of  absentee  ownership  will  be
nugatory.

By  way  of  conclusion  it  may  be  recalled  again
that,  just  yet,  the  production  engineers  are  a  scat-
tering lot  of  fairly  contented  subalterns,  working


A SOVIET  OF  TECHNICIANS  1 69

piecemeal  under  orders  from  the  deputies  of  the
absentee  owners;  the  working  force  of  the  great
mechanical  industries,  including  transportation,
are  still  nearly  out  of  touch  and  out  of  sympathy
with  the  technical  men,  and  are  bound  in  rival
trade  organizations  whose  sole  and  self-seeking
interest  converges  on  the  full  dinner-pail ;  while  the
underlying  population  are  as  nearly  uninformed
on  the  state  of  things  as  the  Guardians  of  the
Vested  Interests,  including  the  commercialized
newspapers,  can  manage  to  keep  them,  and  they
are  consequently  still  in  a  frame  of  mind  to  toler-
ate no  substantial  abatement  of  absentee  owner-
ship; and  the  constituted  authorities  are  compe-
tently occupied  with  maintaining  the  status  quo.
There  is  nothing  in  the  situation  that  should  rea-
sonably flutter  the  sensibilities  of  the  Guardians
or  of  that  massive  body  of  well-to-do  citizens  who
make  up  the  rank  and  file  of  absentee  owners,
just  yet.


THE END


