Compendium of Roman History
Velleius Paterculus (Frederick W. Shipley, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/paterculus-and-deeds-of-augustus-1924-loeb
Edition: Frederick W. Shipley's translation (Loeb Classical Library, 1924), via Internet Archive scan. Latin facing-page text removed; English translation only.
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
AIS
EDITED BY
E. CAPPS, pu.p., i.p). T. E. PAGE, rrrr.».
WwW. H. D. ROUSE, trrt.p.


AND


RES GESTAE DIVI AUGUSTI


TO


MY WIFE


PATERCULUS


RES GESTAE
DIVI AUGUSTI


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
FREDERICK W. SHIPLEY


OF WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN


NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
MCMXXIV


Printed in Great Britain


5-435 Mà VD


o 2-


Grad. \
fec,
2-M-kK3


CONTENTS


VELLEIUS PATERCULUS—
INTRODUCTION .
The Text
Bibliography .
Sigla .


TEXT


RES GESTAE DIVI AUGUSTI—
INTRODUCTION.
The Text ;
The Historical Notes
Bibliography
TExT


INDEX .


PAGE


C. VELLEIUS PATERCULUS


INTRODUCTION


** Dicere enim solebat nullum esse librum tam malum ut
non aliqua parte prodesset."—Pliny, Ep. iii. 5. 10, quoting a
saying of his uncle. i


VELLEIUS PATERCULUS does not rank among the great
Olympians of classical literature either as stylist or
as historian. But, as Pliny the elder says, no book
is so poor that one cannot get some good out of it,
and there is much in this comparatively neglected
author that is worth reading once, at least in transla-
tion. In its aim to include all that is of value and
interest in Greek and Latin literature from the days
of Homer to the Fall of Constantinople the Loeb
Library is performing what is perhaps its most
valuable service in making more generally available
the content of those comparatively unknown authors
who, for stylistic or other reasons, are not to be
reckoned among the great classics or do not deserve
a careful study in the original.

A compendium of Roman history, hastily compiled
by an army officer as a memorial volume to com-
memorate the elevation to the consulship for the year
A.D. 80 of his friend and fellow-Campanian, Marcus
Vinicius, could hardly be expected to rise to the level
either of great history or great literature. And yet,
taken for what it is, a rapid sketch of some ten
viii


INTRODUCTION


centuries of history, it is, in spite of its many defects,
which will duly be pointed out, the most successful
and most readable of all the abridgements of Roman
history which have come down to us. Abridgements
are usually little more than skeletons; but Velleius has
succeeded, in spite of the brief compass of his work,
in clothing the bones with real flesh, and in endowing
his compendium with more than a mere shadow of
vitality, thanks to his own enthusiastic interest in the
human side of the great characters of history. The
work, after the large lacuna in the first book, covers
uninterruptedly the period from the battle of Pydna
to A.D. 30, a period which practically coincides with
that covered by the final 97 books of Livy for which
no manuscript has come down to us, and one which
is but partially treated in the extant portions of the
works of other Roman historians of first rank. It is
therefore valuable, if for nothing else, in that it
furnishes us with a connected account of this period
which is at any rate much more readable than the
bare epitomes of Livy. Besides, it has certain
excellences of its own in the treatment of special
subjects, especially the chapters on literary history,
in which the author has a genuine if not very critical
interest, the chapters on the Roman colonies, and
those on the history of the organization of the .
Roman provinces, and in some of the character
portraits of the great figures of Roman history. Even
in the treatment of Tiberius, in spite of its tone of
adulation which historians have so generally con-
demned, we have a document which must be con-
sidered along with the famous delineation by Tacitus,
as representing the psychological attitude toward
the new empire of the group of administrative officers

ix


of the equestrian order who ardently supported it
without any of the yearnings felt by the senatorial
class for the old régime as it existed in the days
before the empire had shorn them of their former
governmental powers.

As has already been said, the work is a com-
memorative volume as well as an historical abridge-
ment, and under this pardonable pretext the author
feels free to depart from historical objectivity and
give his work a personal note. Thus he honours
Vinicius not merely by the dedication, but by
addressing him frequently in the vocative case, by
bringing the more important dates into chronological
relation with his consulship, and by bringing into
prominence the ancestors of Vinicius who had played
any historical role worthy of consideration. Vinicius,
who like the author himself was an official of the
administration, would also lend sympathetic ears to
his rhapsodic eulogy of his old commander, now the
emperor Tiberius, and of his prime minister Sejanus,
then in the heyday of his power and the virtual
head of the government. In doing the honours, in
this commemorative volume, he also takes occasion
to mention, as something in which his friend would
be interested, the participation of the author’s own
ancestors in the events which he is narrating, and,
when he reaches his own times, like the painters of
the Renaissance he sees no harm in introducing him-
self into the canvas as one of the minor participants
in the historical pageant.

To this naive and innocent egotism we owe all our
information in regard to the author and his family,
since the sparse references in later literature con-
tribute nothing to our knowledge of either. We


X


INTRODUCTION


thus learn that he reckoned among his ancestors on
his mother's side Decius Magius, a distinguished
citizen of Capua who remained loyal to the Romans
when Capua went over to Hannibal, and Minatius
Magius, who raised a legion and fought on the
Roman side in the Social War, for which service he
received Roman citizenship ; that his father served
in Germany as prefect of horse; that his father's
brother Capito supported Agrippa in his indictment
of Cassius for the murder of Caesar ; that his paternal
grandfather C. Velleius Paterculus served as praefectus
fabrum under Pompey, Marcus Brutus, and Tiberius
Nero, the father of the emperor ; that he was chosen
as one of the judges by Pompey in 55 B.c., and that
in 41 B.c. he killed himself because he was physically
unable to follow Nero in his flight from Naples. The
historian himself, C.! Velleius Paterculus, also played
the role of loyal officer, seeing service as military
tribune in Thrace and Macedonia, and accompanying
Caius Caesar in A.D. 1 on his visit to the eastern
provinces. While there he was an eyewitness of the
conference between Caius and the son of the Parthian
king on an island in the Euphrates. Later he served
under Tiberius for eight consecutive years, first as
prefect of horse and then as legatus, participating in
his German and Pannonian campaigns. In A.D. 6
he was elected quaestor, and while still quaestor
designate he led “a body of troops to reinforce
Tiberius in Pannonia on the occasion of the great


1 His praenomen is uncertain. Priscian calls him Marcus.
Publius is the praenomen on the title-page of the ed. princeps,
probably through an error'of Rhenanus in identifying him
with P. Velleius of Tac. Ann. iii. 39. At the beginning and
end of Book I. his praenomen is given as C.


xi


mutiny. As quaestor, in A.D. 7, he gave up the
privilege of a provincial appointment to become a
legatus under Tiberius in Pannonia. In the winter
of A.D. 7-8 he was one of the legati in charge
of winter quarters. His brother, Magius Celer
Velleianus, was also a legatus of Tiberius and dis-
tinguished himself in the Dalmatian campaign.
Both were decorated with military honours at the
triumph of Tiberius in a.p. 18. Both were praetors
for the year a.D. 15 and were proud of the distinction
of having been the last to be nominated to the
^ praetorship by Augustus and the first to be named
^by Tiberius. Here the chapter of his military career
apparently closes. He does not seem to have risen
higher than the praetorship in the fifteen years
which intervened between the holding of that office
and the consulship of Vinicius, though he may have
held provincial appointments. He must have
enjoyed some leisure in these years, since he hints
at having in preparation a more comprehensive
historical work, and his genuine enthusiasm for
literature, and his familiarity with the rhetorical
studies then so much in vogue, must postulate
some time for their development, even though his
literary work still shows many marks of the
novice. |
His compendium! is divided into two chrono-
logically unequal parts. The first book, preserved


1 The title of his work as it appears in the heading of
Book I. in the ed. princeps is: C. Vellei Paterculi historiae
. Romanae ad M. Vinicium Cos. prius volumen mutilum. But,
as the first part of this book was missing from the Murbach
ms., this title may simply be the work of a scribe. Most
modern editors have adopted the title: Vellei Paterculi ad
M. Vinicium libri duo.

xii


INTRODUCTION


in a fragmentary condition,! began with the times
immediately preceding the fall of Troy, dealt rapidly
with the early history of Greece in the first seven
chapters, reached the founding of Rome in chapter
viii., and ended with the fall of Carthage in 146 B.c.
The second book covers the period from the time of
the Gracchi to the consulship of Vinicius in a.p. 30,
and is on a much fuller and more comprehensive
scale, especially from the consulship of Caesar to the
end. This greater fulness as he approaches his own
times is to be explained partly as a traditional
proceeding, and partly because, as he himseif says,
he had in preparation a more comprehensive work
covering the period from the beginning of the Civil
War between Caesar and Pompey down to his own
day, and in consequence he had a larger amount of
material to assimilate. Here and there he checks
the rapidity of his narrative to dwell at greater
length upon topics in which he has a personal interest,
as for example the references to literary history, the
two digressions upon the colonies and provinces of
Rome, the participation of members of his family in
historical events, and his own share in the events of '
the last fifteen years of the reign of Augustus.

Both the virtues and defects of Velleius as an
historical writer can be best explained on the
supposition that until the year a.p. 15, when he was
about thirty-five years of age, all his time had been
absorbed in his military duties, and that it was only
in the period of comparative leisure which followed


1 The beginning, containing the title, the dedication to
Vinicius, and a page or two of text, is missing. There is
also a large lacuna extending from the reign of Romulus to
the battle of Pydna.


xiii


that he discovered a new hobby in literary and
biographical studies. These he approached with all
the fresh interest and naive enthusiasm of the
amateur. His outlook is still the uncritical attitude
of the dilettante. Nil admirari had not become his
motto. He is still, at the time of writing what is
apparently his maiden book, in the stage of apprecia-
tion and admiration, and, while his critical faculties
are still untrained he has at any rate not become
cynical or blasé. He can still find romance in the
phenomena of history about which more mature
writers had ceased to wonder. In the new rhetorical
tendencies of Silver Latin he found a medium well
adapted to give expression to his enthusiasm and
admiration. As an historian he has not learned to
weigh evidence ; he has made no close study of the
sources ;! in giving his chronological references he
unwittingly mixes up the dates of the Catonian and
the Varronian eras ;? in his haste he overlooks events
and is obliged to insert them out of their proper
order. In fact his attitude is rather that of the


! Apart from Cato and Hortensius Velleius does not
specifically mention any of his sources. The others are
purely a matter of conjecture. For his purpose he needed
a chronological table and a collection of biographies. It is
likely that he made use of the abridgement of Atticus and
the chronological data of Cornelius Nepos. For the Civil
Wars he may have used the work of Messala Corvinus. For
the reign of Augustus he probably used the autobiography
of that emperor. For the reign of Tiberius he of course
drew largely on his own experience. If he used Livy, he at
any rate frequently disagrees with him.

* The dates, however, in so far as they are given in
Roman numerals are often hopelessly corrupt. Consequently
the dates which I have given in the notes are those
established by students of chronology.


X1V


cape crai acc e o> Man aem, i «72: *— f n i —09-


INTRODUCTION


journalist than of the historian. There is little
evidence, however, of deliberate falsification. Even
his extravagant eulogy of Tiberius for which he has
been so severely censured may be explained at least
in part as an example of the soldier's uncritical, but
loyal and enthusiastic devotion to his old commander,
which reflects the attitude toward the emperor of
the military and official, as opposed to that of the
senatorial class and of the sympathisers with the old
republic. At the worst it is an interesting example
of court history. His interest in history is biographical
rather than strictly historical. He is particularly
fond of making portraits of the personages of history,
which he does with a considerable degree of success.
The second book, in particular, is one long gallery
of such portraits which are brought into relation to
each other by a slender band of historical data. In
fact the book is a sort of illustrated Who's Who of
Roman history. Nor does he confine himself to the
great figures such as the Gracchi, Marius, Sulla,
Cicero, Pompey, and Caesar; he is equally fond of
portraying the characters of deuteragonists like
Clodius, Curio, Lepidus, and Plancus. Some of
these portraits are among his best. While these
characterizations tend to destroy historical pro-
portion they add greatly to the human interest.

We have said that Velleius gives the impression of
having been an amateur who took to historical
writing as a new hobby somewhat late in life. Signs
of this are not wanting in his style. It has all the
pretentiousness of the novice. He desires to soar
before he has completely learned to fly. Writing
in an age when rhetoric was the vogue, and con-
taminated poetical as well as prose writing, he cannot


XV


refrain from bringing in all the rhetorical figures
and producing all the rhetorical effects. All the
colours of the poet and the rhetorician are applied
with lavish hand where he aspires to fine writing :
rhetorical questions, exclamations, and even
apostrophe ; rhetorical rhythm, laboured antitheses,
glittering epigrams, sometimes far-fetched, and
excessive hyperbole. For this reason his use of
superlatives in his praise of Tiberius has perhaps
been taken too seriously. The superlative is used
with almost as much frequency in eulogizing other
historical personages including Pompey, in spite of
the author’s ardent imperialism. In fact the superla-
tive had already suffered so much rhetorical abuse !
that it had come to have little more value than a
positive. Furthermore his style is lacking in the
clarity, the ease, and the poise of the experienced
writer. This is especially the case in the interminable
periods which crowd his work. Some of them are
veritable labyrinths. The periods of Cicero, no
matter what their length, are architectural units ;
in Velleius the nucleus of the period is often so
overloaded with phrases, clauses, and incidental
parentheses that the period bears much more
resemblance to a stone almost completely hidden by
parasitic barnacles than to a structure developed on
a logical and artistic plan. This is partly due to the
attempt to condense into a single sentence the
content of whole chapters which he finds in his
sources. In consequence these periods are the
despair of the translator, and there is frequently


1 e.g. in Cicero's De imperio Pompei the choice between
positive and superlative is frequently a mere matter of
sonorousness and rhythm,


xvi


INTRODUCTION


nothing for it but to break them up into smaller
units which can be more readily handled in an
uninflected language. And yet, with all his stylistic
faults, Velleius is an author whom, as Norden has
said in his Antike Kunst-Prosa, one reads with
interest from beginning to end; and if readability
is the real test this quality carries with it its own
apology. Were it not for the difficulty of his intricate
periods, his work, by reason of its content, its
biographical trend, and its human interest, would
be the ideal first reading-book for beginners of Latin.
Macaulay, who does not admire his style and
condemns his flattery, says: ‘‘ Velleius seems to
me a remarkably good epitomist. I hardly know of
any work of which the scale is so small and the
subject so extensive," ! a historian’s testimony to
the measure of success which he has achieved in the
task which he undertook, namely, that of writing a
multum in parvo of historical condensation.


1 The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay, by George Otto
Trevelyan. Longmans, Green & Co., 1913, vol. i. p. 475.


xvii


THE TEXT


Tue text of Velleius depends upon a single manuscript
found by Beatus Rhenanus in the Benedictine monastery
of Murbach, in Alsace, in the year 1515. This manuscript
has long since disappeared. Rhenanus in describing it
testifies to the almost hopeless state of corruption of the
text: ‘so monstrously corrupt that no human ingenuity
could restore all of it" ; ** I am ready to swear that the
scribe who copied it did not understand a word" ; ‘‘there
is no portion of it that is not corrupt." Not satisfied with
a copy hastily made by a friend, he resolved to delay
publication until he should have a chance to consult a
better manuscript said to have been found in Milan by
Georgius Merula. Disappointed in this hope, he brought
out the ed. princeps at Basle in 1520. The edition while
still in proof was compared with the Murbach manuscript
by Burer, one of the secretaries of Rhenanus, who also
noted many of its variant readings in an appendix to the
edition. The editio princeps, with Burer's readings
appended, was the sole source of our knowledge of the
text until 1834 when Orelli brought to light in the library
of the Academy at Basle an independent copy of the
Murbach ws. made in 1516 by Bonifacius Amberbach.
From this copy is missing the first fragment of Bk. I.
beginning at tempestate distractus ch. 1 and ending with
raptus virginum Sabinarum ch. 8. The absence of this
fragment would seem to indicate either that in 1516 it
had not yet been found or at any rate that it had not yet
been recognized as part of the text of Velleius. Amber-
bach's copy is of great importance, in conjunction with
the readings of Burer, in enabling the critic to restore
xviii


INTRODUCTION


the original readings of the Murbach ws. But while
modern scholarship has made progress in solving its
enigmas, the text of Velleius, unless some long-hidden
manuscript shall unexpectedly come to light, will always
continue to be one of the most corrupt among the surviv-
ing texts of classical authors.

The text of the present volume is a composite. While
chiefly indebted to the editions of Halm and Ellis, I have
frequently followed older editors, particularly in the
most corrupt passages, where the interpretations of these
scholars seem to be nearer to the tradition of the Murbach
manuscript or to the sense demanded by the context.
The critical nomenclature given in the sigla is that of
Ellis. I have occasionally altered the punctuation, and,
for the convenience of the reader, have made more
frequent use of the paragraph.


xix


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Amon the older editions after the ed. princeps (see chapter
on text) the following are most frequently mentioned in
the notes on the text: J. N. Schegkius, Frankfort, 1589 ;
Acidalius, Padua, 1590; J. Lipsius, Leyden, 1591,
Antwerp, 1627 ; Gruter, Frankfort, 1607 (first systematic
division into chapters) ; Riguez, Paris, 1675 (Delphin ed.
with word index); N. Heinsius, Amsterdam, 1678; P.
Burman, Leyden, 1719 and 1744. More modern editions
are: D. Ruhnken, 2 vols., Leyden, 1779; reprinted by
Frotscher, Leipzig, 1830-9; J. C. H. Krause, Leipzig,
1800; N. E. Lemaire, Paris, 1822; J. C. Orelli, Leipzig,
1835; F. Kritz, Leipzig, 1840. Text editions: Haase,
Leipzig, 1840; Halm, Leipzig, 1863 and 1875; Ellis,
Oxford, 1898. An annotated edition in English by Frank
E. Rockwood, Boston, 1893, will be found useful for the
period of Julius Caesar, Augustus, and Tiberius. There
is an English translation by J. S. Watson in Bohn's
Classical Library. Fora complete bibliography, especially
of monographs and periodical literature concerning the
numerous special problems which arise in Velleius, see
lists in Schanz, Geschichte der römischen Litteratur.


XX


SIGLA


A= Amberbach's copy of the lost Codex Murbachensis
completed in August 1516, now in the library of
the Academy at Basle, A.N. ii. 8.


P= Editio Princeps, printed’ in 1520.
B=Burer’s readings from the Murbach Codex, which


are printed at the end of the Ed. Princeps. Halm
indicates these readings by the letter M.


C. VELLEI PATERCULI
HISTORIAE ROMANAE


AD M. VINICIUM COS.
LIBRI DUO


LIBER . PRIOR


1 I. EPEUS! tempestate distractus a duce suo Nestore
Metapontum condidit. Teucer, non receptus a
patre Telamone ob segnitiam non vindicatae fratris
iniuriae, Cyprum adpulsus cognominem patriae suae
Salamina constituit. Pyrrhus, Achillis filius, Epirum

2 occupavit, Phidippus Ephyram in Thesprotia. At
rex regum Agamemnon tempestate in Cretam
insulam reiectus tres ibi urbes statuit, duas a patriae
nomine, unam a victoriae memoria, Mycenas, Tegeam,
Pergamum.


1 There is an initial lacuna in the text of considerable extent.
The text, as we have it, begins with tempestate. The name of
Epeus was supplied by Lipsius.


a The subject of the sentence has been lost in the lacuna.
He was relating the return of the heroes from Troy. From
Justin xx. 2. 1 it is clear that he is here speaking of Epeus,
the builder of the Trojan horse. Justin's statement is as
follows: ** Metapontini quoque in templo Minervae ferra-


THE ROMAN HISTORY


OF


C. VELLEIUS PATERCULUS
DEDICATED TO M. VINICIUS, CONSUL


BOOK I


I. Epeus, separated by a storm from Nestor, his
chief, founded Metapontum. Teucer, disowned by
his father Telamon because of his laxity in not
avenging the wrong done to his brother,’ was driven
to Cyprus and founded Salamis, named after the
place of his birth. Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles,
established himself in Epirus;  Phidippus* in
Ephyra in Thesprotia. Agamemnon, king of kings,
cast by a tempest upon the island of Crete, founded
there three cities, two of which, Mycenae and Tegea,
were named after towns in his own country, and the
other was called Pergamum in commemoration of his
victory.


> Ajax. |
¢ Phidippus was one of the minor leaders in the Trojan
war. According to Homer, JI. ii. 678, he came from the


islands of Calydnae off the coast of Caria.


Idem mox scelere patruelis fratris Aegisthi, here-
ditarium exercentis in eum odium, et facinore uxoris
3 oppressus occiditur. Regni potitur Aegisthus per
annos septem. Hunc Orestes matremque socia con-
siliorum omnium sorore Electra, virilis animi femina,
obtruncat. Factum eius a diis comprobatum spatio
vitae et felicitate imperii apparuit; quippe vixit
annis nonaginta, regnavit septuaginta. Quin! se
etiam a Pyrrho- Achillis filio virtute vindicavit ; nam
quod pactae eius Menelai atque Helenae filiae Her-
miones nuptias occupaverat, Delphis eum inter-
fecit. |

Post Orestis interitum filii eius Penthilus et Tisa- .
menus regnavere triennio.

1 II. Tumfere anno octogesimo post Troiam captam,
centesimo et vicesimo quam Hercules ad deos exces-
serat, Pelopis progenies, quae omni hoc tempore
pulsis Heraclidis Peloponnesi imperium obtinuerat,
ab Herculis progenie expellitur. Duces recuperandi


1 quin Wopkens ; qui P.


x 4 That is: Tyrrhenia, Tyrrhenians, and Tyrrhenian
ea.

> The traditional date for the fall of Troy was 1183 x.c.
according to the chronology of Eratosthenes; according to
that of Callimachus it was 1127 B.c. But many other dates
are given. See H. Fynes Clinton, Epitome of the Chronology
of Greece, Oxford, 1851.


Agamemnon was soon afterwards struck down
and slain by the infamous crime of Aegisthus, his
cousin, who still kept up against him the feud of
his house, and by the wicked act of his wife.
Aegisthus maintained possession of the kingdom for
seven years. Orestes slew Aegisthus and his own
mother, seconded in all his plans by his sister
Electra, a woman with the courage of a man. That
his deed had the approval of the gods was made
clear by the length of his life and the felicity
of his reign, since he lived ninety years and
reigned seventy. Furthermore, he also took revenge
upon Pyrrhus the son of Achilles in fair fight,
for he slew him at Delphi because he had fore-
stalled him in marrying Hermione, the daughter
of Menelaus and Helen who had been pledged to
himself.

About this time two brothers, Lydus and Tyrrhenus,
. were joint kings in Lydia. Hard pressed by the
. unproductiveness of their crops, they drew lots to
see which should leave his country with part of the
population. The lot fell upon Tyrrhenus. He sailed
to Italy, and from him the place wherein he settled,
its inhabitants, and the sea received their famous
and their lasting names.”

After the death of Orestes his sons Penthilus and
Tisamenus reigned for three years.

II. About eighty years after the capture of Troy,’
and a hundred and twenty after Hercules had
departed to the gods, the descendants of Pelops,
who, during all this time had held sway in the
Peloponnesus after they had driven out the
descendants of Hercules, were again in turn driven
out by them. The leaders in the recovery of the


imperii fuere Temenus, Cresphontes, Aristodemus,
quorum abavus fuerat.

Eodem fere tempore Athenae sub regibus esse
desierunt, quarum ultimus rex fuit Codrus, Melanthi
filius, vir non praetereundus. Quippe cum Lace-
daemonii gravi bello Atticos premerent respondis-
setque Pythius, quorum dux ab hoste esset occisus,
eos futuros superiores, deposita veste regia pasto-
ralem cultum induit, immixtusque castris hostium,
de industria rixam ciens, imprudenter interemptus

3 Ea tempestate et Tyria classis, plurimum pollens
mari, in ultimo Hispaniae tractu, in extremo! nostri
orbis termino, in insula circumfusa Oceano, perexiguo
a continenti divisa freto, Gadis condidit. Ab iisdem
post paucos annos in África Utica condita est.

Exclusi ab Heraclidis Orestis liberi iactatique cum


1 in extremo P ; in bracketed by Ruhnken.


* The death of Codrus, according to the chronology of
Eusebius, is placed in 1068 s.c.

è Not all his successors but only his immediate followers,
thirteen in number.

* According to Eusebius the period of the life archons
was 1068—753 B.C.


sovereignty were Temenus, Cresphontes, and Aristo-
demus, the great-great-grandsons of Hercules.

It was about this time ^ that Athens ceased to be
governed by kings. The last king of Athens was
Codrus the son of Melanthus, a man whose story
cannot be passed over. Athens was hard pressed in
war by the Lacedaemonians, and the Pythian oracle
had given the response that the side whose general
should be killed by the enemy would be victorious.
Codrus, therefore, laying aside his kingly robes and
donning the garb of a shepherd, made his way into
the camp of the enemy, deliberately provoked a
quarrel, and was slain without being recognized. By
his death Codrus gained immortal fame, and the
Athenians the victory. Who could withhold admira-
tion from the man who sought death by the selfsame
artifice by which cowards seek life? His son Medon
was the first archon at Athens. It was after him
that the archons who followed him? were called
Medontidae among the people of Attica. Medon
and all the succeeding archons until Charops con-
tinued to hold that office for life The Pelopon-
nesians, when they withdrew from Attic territory,
founded Megara, a city midway between Corinth and
Athens.

About this time, also, the fleet of Tyre, which
controlled the sea, founded in the farthest district
of Spain, on the remotest confines of our world, the
city of Cadiz, on an island in the ocean separated
from the mainland by a very narrow strait. The
Tyrians a few years later also founded Utica in
Africa.

The sons of Orestes, expelled by the Heraclidae,
were driven about by many vicissitudes and by


variis casibus tum saevitia maris quinto decimo anno
sedem cepere circa Lesbum insulam.


1 disserunt Orelli ; dixerunt P.


a [had i. 570, xiii. 664.


raging storms at sea, and, in the fifteenth year,
finally settled on and about the island of Lesbos.

III. Greece was then shaken by mighty dis-
turbances. The Achaeans, driven from Laconia,
established themselves in those localities which they
occupy to-day. The Pelasgians migrated to Athens,
and a warlike youth named Thessalus, of the race
of the Thesprotians, with a great force of his fellow-
countrymen took armed possession of that region,
which, after his name, is now called Thessaly.
Hitherto it had been called the state of the Myrmi-
dones.

On this account, one has a right to be surprised
that writers who deal with the times of the Trojan
war speak of this region as Thessaly. This is a
common practice, but especially among the tragic
poets, for whom less allowance should be made;
for the poets do not speak in person, but entirely
through the mouths of characters who lived in the
time referred to. But if anyone insists that the
people were named Thessalians from Thessalus the
son of Hercules, he will have to explain why this
people never adopted the name until the time of
this second Thessalus.

Shortly before these events Aletes, the son of
Hippotes, descended from Herculesin the sixth genera-
tion, founded upon the isthmus the city of Corinth,
the key to the Peloponnesus, on the site of the former
Ephyre. There is no need for surprise that Corinth
is mentioned by Homer,’ for it is in his own person
as poet that Homer calls this city and some of the
Ionian colonies by the names which they bore in his
day, although they were founded long after the
capture of Troy.


1 IV. Athenienses in Euboea Chalcida et! Eretriam
colonis occupavere, Lacedaemonii in Asia Mag-
nesiam. Nec multo post Chalcidenses orti, ut prae-
diximus, Atticis Hippocle et Megasthene ducibus
Cumas in Italia condiderunt. Huius classis corsum
esse directum alii columbae antecedentis volatu
ferunt, alii nocturno aeris sono, qualis Cerealibus

2 sacris cieri solet. Pars horum civium magno? post
intervallo Neapolim condidit. Utriusque urbis eximia
semper in Romanos fides facit eas nobilitate atque
amoenitate sua dignissimas. Sed illis diligentior
ritus patrii mansit custodia, Cumanos Osca mutavit
vicinia. Vires autem veteres earum urbium hodieque
magnitudo ostentat moenium.

3  Subsequenti tempore magna vis Graecae iuven-
tutis abundantia virium sedes quaeritans in Asiam
se effudit. Nam et Iones duce Ione profecti Athenis
nobilissimam partem regionis maritimae occupavere,
quae hodieque appellatur Ionia, urbesque constituere
Ephesum, Miletum, Colophona, Prienen, Lebedum,
Myuntem, Erythram, Clazomenas, Phocaeam, mul-
tasque in Aegaeo atque Icario occupavere insulas,
Samum, Chium, Andrum, Tenum, Parum, Delum


! et added by Gelenius.
* magno P; non magno Scriner.


* Lubker, Reullexikon, places the date in the sixth
century.


IV. The Athenians established colonies at Chalcis
and Eretria in Euboea, and the Lacedaemonians the
colony of Magnesia in Asia. Not long afterwards,
the Chalcidians, who, as I have already said, were
of Attic origin, founded Cumae in Italy under the
leadership of Hippocles and Megasthenes. According
to some accounts the voyage of this fleet was guided
by the flight of a dove which flew before it ; according
to others by the sound at night of a bronze instru-
ment like that which is beaten at the rites of Ceres.
At a considerably later period, a portion of the
citizens of Cumae founded Naples.^ The remarkable
and unbroken loyalty to the Romans of both these
cities makes them well worthy of their repute and
of their charming situation. The Neapolitans,
however, continued the careful observance of their
ancestral customs ; the Cumans, on the other hand,
were changed in character by the proximity of their
Oscan neighbours. The extent of their walls at the
present day serves to reveal the greatness of these
cities in the past.

At a slightly later date a great number of young
Greeks, seeking new abodes because of an excess of
population at home, poured into Asia. The Ionians,
setting out from Athens under the leadership of Ion,
occupied the best known portion of the sea-coast,
which is now called Ionia, and established the cities
of Ephesus, Miletus, Colophon, Priene, Lebedus,
Myus, Erythra, Clazomenae, and Phocaea, and
occupied many islands in the Aegaean and Icarian
seas, namely, Samos, Chios, Andros, Tenos, Paros,
Delos, and other islands of lesser note. Not long
afterwards the Aeolians also set out from Greece,
and after long wanderings took possession of places


the revolt of the Medes in 843 B.c., which corresponds fairly
well with the date here given.


no less illustrious and founded the famous cities of
Smyrna, Cyme, Larissa, Myrina, Mytilene, and other
cities on the island of Lesbos.

V. Then the brilliant genius of Homer burst upon
the world, the greatest beyond compare, who by
virtue of the magnitude of his work and the brilliance
of his poetry alone deserves the name of poet. His
highest claim to greatness is that, before his day,
no one was found for him to imitate, nor after his
day has one been found to imitate him. Nor shall
we find any other poet who achieved perfection in
the field in which he was also the pioneer, with the
exception of Homer and Archilochus. Homer lived
at a period more remote than some people think
from the Trojan war of which he wrote; for he
flourished only about nine hundred and fifty years
ago, and it is less than a thousand since his birth.*
It is therefore not surprising that he often uses
the expression oio. viv poroi «eicw, for by it is
denoted the difference, not merely in men, but in ages
as well. If any man holds to the view that Homer
was born blind, he is himself lacking in all his senses.

VI. In the following age—about eight hundred
and seventy years ago —the sovereignty of Asia
passed to the Medes from the Assyrians, who had
held it for ten hundred and seventy years. Indeed,
it was their king Sardanapalus, a man enervated by
luxurious living, whose excess of fortune was his
undoing. Thirty-third,? in direct succession of father


4 Diodorus ii. 21. 25 gives the number of Assyrian kings
as thirty, and the pian hne of their dynasty as 1360 years.
This figure is considerably greater than the 1070 years given
by Velleius, and would place the beginning of the dynasty
in 2203-2204 B.c.


mide, qui Babylona condiderant, natum, ita ut
semper successor regni paterni foret filius, Arbaces
Medus imperio vitaque privavit.

3 Ea aetate clarissimus Grai nominis Lycurgus
Lacedaemonius, vir generis regii, fuit severissimarum
iustissimarumque legum auctor et disciplinae con-
venientissimae viris,! cuius quam diu Sparta diligens
fuit, excelsissime floruit.

6 ditur. Circa quod tempus Caranus, vir generis regii,
undecimus? ab Hercule, profectus Argis regnum
Macedoniae occupavit ; a quo Magnus Alexander
cum fuerit septimus decimus, iure materni generis

1 VII. Huius temporis aequalis Hesiodus fuit, circa

1 viris Lipsius; vir P.

? undecimus Wesseling ; sextus decimus P.

* potitus est ] potitus P.

* Aemilius Sura... intersunt anni mpccccxcv] Del-
benius first recognized that this passage was a gloss.


a The date, according to Timaeus, was 813-814 B.C.
* The overthrow of Carthage took place in 146 s.c. The
date of the founding of the Assyrian kingdom, based on


and son, from Ninus and Semiramis, who had founded
Babylon, he was deprived alike of his empire and of
his life by Arbaces the Mede.

At this time lived Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian,
one of the most illustrious personages of Greece, a
man of royal descent, the author of legislation
most severe and most just, and of a discipline
excellently adapted for the making of men. As
long as Sparta followed it, she flourished in the
highest degree.

In this period, sixty-five years before the founding
of Rome, Carthage was established ^ by the Tyrian
Elissa, by some authors called Dido. About this
time also Caranus, a man of royal race, eleventh in
descent from Hercules, set out from Argos and
seized the kingship of Macedonia. From him
Alexander the Great was descended in the seven-
teenth generation, and could boast that, on his
mother's side, he was descended from Achilles, and,
on his father's side, from Hercules. [Aemilius Sura
says in his book on the chronology of Rome: “ The
Assyrians were the first of all races to hold world
power, then the Medes, and after them the Persians,
and then the Macedonians. Then through the
defeat of Kings Philip and Antiochus, of Macedonian
origin, following closely upon the overthrow of
Carthage, the world power passed to the Roman
people. Between this time and the beginning of the
reign of Ninus king of the Assyrians, who was the
first to hold world power, lies an interval of nineteen
hundred and ninety-five years.” b]

VII. To this period belonged Hesiod, separated
Diodorus, is 2203—2204 s.c. The interval, according to this
calculation, is 2058 years.


2 Dum in externis moror, incidi in rem domesticam
maximique! erroris et multum discrepantem aucto-
rum opinionibus : nam quidam huius temporis tractu
aiunt a Tuscis Capuam Nolamque conditam ante
annos fere octingentos et triginta. Quibus equidem

3 adsenserim : sed M. Cato quantum differt! Qui
dicat Capuam ab eisdem Tuscis conditam ac subinde
Nolam; stetisse autem Capuam, antequam a Romanis

1 VIII. Clarisimum deinde omnium ludicrum cer-
tamen et ad excitandam corporis animique virtutem
efficacissimum Olympiorum initium habuit, auctorem
Iphitum Elium. Is eos ludos mercatumque instituit


1 maximique Rhenanus ; maximeque P.


a Clinton, op. cit. p. 146, gives the period at which Hesiod
flourished as 859-824 s.c. Porphyry gives the interval be-
tween him and Homer as one hundred years.

> The fact that Capua was a city of the plain shows that
its Etruscan foundation dates from the time when the
Etruscan power was supreme in Campania, ?.e. circa 600 B.C.,
and supports Cato's statement. It is not unlikely, however,
that the foundation was on the site of a previous Oscan
settlement.


from the age of Homer by about one hundred and
twenty years.^ A man of an exquisite taste, famous
for the soft charm of his poems, and an ardent lover
of peace and quiet, he ranks next to Homer, not only
in point of time, but also in the reverence in which
his work is held. Avoiding the mistake which Homer
made, he has indeed told us of his country and
parents, but of his country, at whose hands he had
suffered punishment, he speaks in the most dis-
paraging terms.

While dwelling on the history of foreign countries,
I now come to an event pertaining to our own, one
in which there has been much error, and in which
the views of the authorities show great discrepancy.
For some maintain that about this time, eight
hundred and thirty years ago, Capua and Nola were
founded by the Etruscans. With these I myself am
inclined to agree, but the opinion of Marcus Cato is
vastly different. He admits that Capua, and after-
wards Nola, were founded by the Etruscans, but
maintains that Capua had been in existence for only
about two hundred and sixty years before its capture
by the Romans. Ifthis is so, as it is but two hundred
and forty years since Capua was taken, it is but five
hundred years since it was founded. For my own
part, with all due regard for Cato's accuracy, I can
scarcely believe that the city could have had such
growth, such prosperity, or could have fallen and
risen again, in so short a space of time.?

VIII. Soon afterward the Olympic games, the
most celebrated of all contests in sports, and one
which was most effective in developing the qualities
both of body and mind, had their beginning under
the auspices of Iphitus, king of Elis. He instituted


C 17


ante annos, quam tu, M. Vinici, consulatum inires,

2 pcccexxir,. Hoc sacrum eodem loco instituisse fertur
abhinc annos ferme mille ducentos quinquaginta
Atreus, cum Pelopi patri funebres ludos faceret, quo
quidem in ludicro omnisque! generis certaminum
Hercules victor extitit.

3 Tum Athenis perpetui archontes esse desierunt,
cum fuisset ultimus Alemaeon, coeperuntque in
denos annos creari. Quae consuetudo in annos
septuaginta mansit ac deinde annuis commissa est
magistratibus res publica. Ex iis, qui denis annis
praefuerunt, primus fuit Charops, ultimus Eryxias,
ex annuis primus Creon.

4 Sexta olympiade post duo et viginti annos quam
prima constituta fuerat, Romulus, Martis filius, ultus
iniurias avi Romam urbem Parilibus in Palatio con-
didit. A quo tempore ad vos consules anni sunt
septingenti octoginta unus?; id actum post Troiam


! omnisque P ; omnis Gelenius ; cuiusque Gurlitt.


? p.ccc.Lxxx.L P ; corrected hy Laurentius.
5 Latini Orelli; Latinis Lipsius; his P.


a Later chronology reckoned the Olympiads from 776 B.C.,
but the games were in existence long before that date.

? The legendary connexion of the games with Pelops
indicates that they were of pre-Dorian origin. The cult of
Hercules was a later Dorian importation.

* The administration of Athens by decennial archons
began in 752-751 s.c. The annual archons begin in 683-682
B.c., with Creon as the first.

4 753 B.C., according to the Varronian era ; 751, according


the games and the concourse eight hundred and
twenty-three years ^ before your consulship, Marcus
Vinicius. There is a tradition that Atreus began
this sacred observance in the same place about
twelve hundred and fifty years ago, when he held
the funeral games in honour of his father Pelops^
and that at this celebration Hercules was the victor
in every class of contest.

It was about this time * that the archons at Athens
ceased to hold their office for life. Alemaeon was
the last of the life archons. The archons now began
to be elected for terms of ten years. This custom
continued for seventy years, then the government
was entrusted to magistrates elected annually.
Charops was the first and Eryxias the last of those
who held the office for ten years, and Creon was the
first of the annual archons.

In the sixth Olympiad,‘ two and twenty years after
the first establishment of the Olympic games,
Romulus the son of Mars, after avenging the wrongs
of his grandfather, founded the city of Rome on the
Palatine on the day of the festival of the Parilia.
From this time to your consulship seven hundred
and eighty-one years have elapsed. This event took
place four hundred and thirty-seven years after the
capture of Troy. In the founding of Rome Romulus
was assisted by the troops of his grandfather Latinus.
I am glad to range myself with those who have
expressed this view, since with the Veientines and
other Etruscans, as well as the Sabines, in such close
proximity, he could scarcely have established his


to the Catonian. Velleius sometimes follows the Catonian,
but in this case the Catonian date would fall in the Seventh
Olympiad.


pastorali manu vix potuerit, quamquam eam! asylo

6 facto inter duos lucos auxit. Hic centum homines
electos appellatosque patres instar habuit consilii
publici. Hanc originem nomen patriciorum habet.
Raptus virginum Sabinarum * * *?

Nec minus clarus ea tempestate fuit Miltiadis
filius Cimon.

2 Graeciae in societatem suam perduceret. Quin
Rhodii quoque, fidelissimi antea Romanis, tum dubia
fide speculati fortunam proniores regis partibus
fuisse visi sunt ; et rex Eumenes in eo bello medius
fuit animo, neque fratris initiis neque suae respondit

3 consuetudini. Tum senatus populusque Romanus
L. Aemilium Paulum, qui et praetor et. consul
triumphaverat, virum in tantum laudandum, in
quantum intellegi virtus potest, consulem creavit,®

1 eam Heinsius; iam P.

2 Here begins a great lacuna in the text. The missing
chapters covered 582 years of Roman History from the found-
ing of the city to the war with Perses. The fragment Nec .. .
Cimon appended to the present chapter 1s preserved in
Priscian vi. 63.

3 Haase has. completed the sentence as follows: quorum
iniuriarum populus Romanus poenam tardius quam timuerat
hostis expetit (expetiit). But this is nothing more than an
interesting conjecture, and the subject of expetit must remain


in doubt.
4 fuerit P; fuit AB. 5 consulem creavit om. A.


@ See note on text.
dò The subject of expetit is lacking. It is not certain


new city with an unwarlike band of shepherds, even
though he increased their numbers by opening an
asylum between the two hills. As a council to assist
him in administering affairs of state he had one
hundred chosen men called patres. This is the origin
of the name patricians. The rape of the Sabine
maidens . . .4

Nor at this time was Cimon, the son of Miltiades,
less famous.

IX. ... than the enemy had feared.’ For two
years Perses* had kept up the struggle with the
consuls with such varying fortune that he generally
had the advantage in these conflicts, and succeeded
in winning over a large part of Greece to ally itself
with his cause. Even the Rhodians, who in the past
had been most loyal to the Romans, were now
wavering in their fidelity, and, watching his success,
seemed inclined to join the king's side. In this war
King Eumenes? maintained a neutral attitude,
neither following the initiative of his brother nor
his own established custom. Then the senate and
the Roman people chose as consul Lucius Aemilius
Paulus, who had previously triumphed, both in his
praetorship and in his consulship, a man worthy of
the highest praise that can be associated with valour.


whether expetit is the correct reading, and, if it is, the tense
is uncertain. In view of these uncertainties I have refrained
from translating it. i

¢ In 171 B.c. the Romans had declared war on Perses,
King of Macedonia. The Roman commanders thus far had
been P. Licinius Crassus, consul for 171; A. Hostilius
ance consul for 170 ; and Q. Marcius Philippus, consul
or 169.

4 Eumenes IL, King of Pergamum, 197—159 3B.c., the
eldest son of Attalus I.


corrected by Schoepfer who was followed by Thomas; cum
bis m. . . . aerario intulisset Halm.


a Lucius Aemilius Paulus, consul in 216 with Gaius
Terentius Varro. His policy had been that of wearing
Hannibal out by avoiding battle. His more hot-headed
colleague, in command for the day, joined battle with
Hannibal at Cannae, and the Romans suffered the most
disastrous defeat of the war.

> 168 B.C,


He was a son of the Paulus * who had met death at
Cannae with a fortitude only equalled by his
reluctance to begin a battle so disastrous to the
republic. Paulus defeated Perses in a great battle
at a city in Macedonia named Pydna,? put him to
rout, despoiled his camp, destroyed his forces, and
compelled him in his desperate plight to flee from
Macedonia. Abandoning his country, Perses took
refuge in the island of Samothrace, as a suppliant
entrusting himself to the inviolability of the temple.
There Gnaeus Octavius, the praetor in command of
the fleet, reached him and persuaded him by argument
rather than force to give himself up to the good
faith of the Romans. Thus Paulus led in triumph
the greatest and the most illustrious of kings.°
In this year two other triumphs were celebrated :
that of Octavius, the praetor in charge of the fleet,
and that of Anicius, who drove before his triumphal
chariot Gentius, King of the Illyrians. How insepar-
able a companion of great success is jealousy, and
how she attaches herself to the most eminent,
may be gathered from this fact: although no one
raised objections to the triumphs of Octavius and
Anicius, there were those who tried to place
obstacles in the way of that of Paulus. His
triumph so far exceeded all former ones, whether
in the greatness of King Perses himself, or in the
display of statues and the amount of money borne
in the procession, that Paulus contributed to the
treasury two hundred million sesterces, and by
reason of this vast sum eclipsed all previous triumphs
by comparison.
¢ The triumph of Paulus took place in 167. Perses was
kept a prisoner at Alba Fucensis where he subsequently died.


1 £X. Per idem tempus, cum Antiochus Epiphanes,
qui Athenis Olympieum inchoavit, tum rex! Syriae,
Ptolemaeum puerum Alexandriae obsideret, missus
est ad eum legatus M. Popilius Laenas, qui iuberet

2 incepto desistere. Mandataque exposuit et? regem
deliberaturum se dicentem circumscripsit virgula
iussitque prius responsum reddere, quam egrederetur
finito harenae circulo. Sic cogitationem? regiam
Romana disiecit constantia oboeditumque imperio.

3 Lucio autem Paulo Macedonicae* victoriae com-
poti quattuor filii fuere; ex iis duos natu maiores,
unum P. Scipioni P. Africani filio, nihil ex paterna
maiestate praeter speciem nominis vigoremque elo-
quentiae retinenti, in adoptionem dederat, alterum
Fabio Maximo. Duos minores natu praetextatos,


a Ptolemy VI. Philometor.


X. About this time Antiochus Epiphanes, king of
Syria—the Antiochus who began the Olympieum
at Athens—was besieging Ptolemaeus, the boy
king,? at Alexandria. Marcus Popilius Laenas was
dispatched on an embassy to order him to desist.
He delivered his message, and when the king replied
that he would think the matter over, Popilius drew a
circle around the king with his staff and told him that
he must give his answer before he stepped out of the
circle in the sand. In this way the firmness of the
Roman cut short the king's deliberations, and the
order was obeyed.

Now Lucius Paulus, who won the victory in
Macedonia, had four sons. The two oldest he had
given by adoption, the one to Publius Scipio, the son
of Africanus, who resembled his great father in
nothing except in name and in his vigorous eloquence;
the other to Fabius Maximus. The two younger at
the time of his victory had not yet assumed the toga
of manhood. On the day before his triumph, when,
in accordance with ancient custom, he was rendering
an account of his acts before an assembly of the
people outside the city walls, he prayed to the gods
that if any of them envied his achievements or his
fortune they should vent their wrath upon himself
rather than upon the state. This utterance, as
though prophetic, deprived him of a great part of
his family, for a few days before his triumph he lost
one of the two sons whom he had kept in his house-
hold, and the other a still shorter time after it.

About this time occurred the censorship" of Fulvius
Flaccus and Postumius Albinus famed for its severity.

> A triumphant general was obliged to wait outside the
walls until the day of his triumph. ° 174 B.C.


et quidem consors, Cn. Fulvius senatu motus est ab
iis censoribus.

1 XI. Post victum captumque Persen, qui quadrien-
nio post in libera custodia Albae decessit, Pseudo-
philippus a mendacio simulatae originis appellatus,
qui se Philippum regiaeque stirpis ferebat, cum
esset ultimae, armis occupata Macedonia, adsumptis!
regni insignibus brevi temeritatis poenas dedit;

2 quippe Q. Metellus praetor, cui ex virtute Mace-
donici nomen inditum erat,’ praeclara victoria ipsum
gentemque superavit, et immani etiam Achaeos re-
bellare incipientis fudit acie.

4 ornamentum eius loci, ex Macedonia detulit. Cuius
turmae hanc causam referunt, Magnum Alexandrum
impetrasse a Lysippo, singulari talium auctore
operum, ut eorum equitum, qui ex ipsius turma
apud Granicum flumen ceciderant, expressa simili-
tudine figurarum faceret statuas et ipsius quoque iis
interponeret.


1 adsumptis is Burer's conjecture; adsumpti AP.
2 inditum erat AP; erat was bracketed by Gelenius.
3 huius added by Ruhnken.


a 148 B.C.


Even Gnaeus Fulvius, who was the brother of the
censor and co-heir with him in his estate, was
expelled from the senate by these censors.

XI. After the defeat and capture of Perses, who
four years later died at Alba as a prisoner on parole,
a pseudo-Philippus, so called by reason of his false
claim that he was a Philip and of royal race, though
he was actually of the lowest birth, took armed
possession of Macedonia, assumed the insignia of
royalty, but soon paid the penalty for his temerity.
For Quintus Metellus the praetor, who received the
cognomen of Macedonicus by virtue of his valour
in this war, defeated him and the Macedonians in a
celebrated victory.^ He also defeated in a great
battle the Achaeans who had begun an uprising
against Rome.

This is the Metellus Macedonicus who had
previously built the portico about the two temples
without inscriptions which are now surrounded by
the portico of Octavia, and who brought from
Macedonia the group of equestrian statues which
stand facing the temples, and, even at the present
time, are the chief ornament of the place. Tradition
hands down the following story of the origin of the
group: that Alexander the Great prevailed upon
Lysippus, a sculptor unexcelled in works of this sort,
to make portrait-statues of the horsemen in his own
squadron who had fallen at the river Granicus, and
to place his own statue among them.

This same Metellus was the first of all to build
a temple of marble, which he erected in the midst
of these very monuments, thereby becoming the
pioneer in this form of munificence, or shall we call
it luxury ? One will scarcely find a man of any race,


2T


gentis aetatis ordinis hominem inveneris, cuius feli-

1 XII. Universa deinde instincta! in bellum Achaia,
cuius pars magna, ut praediximus, eiusdem Metelli
Macedonici virtute armisque fracta? erat, maxime
Corinthiis in arma cum gravibus etiam in Romanos
contumeliis instigantibus, destinatus ei bello gerendo
consul L. Mummius.

3 Carthaginem exscindere. Ita eodem tempore P.
Scipio Aemilianus, vir avitis P. Africani paternisque

1 deinde ut praediximus instincta 44 P ; Madvig placed ut
praed. after magna.

2 cuius pars . . . fracta Aldus; cum pars . . . tracta AP.

3 diceretur AB; dicebatur P. Burer states that ba was


added in the Murbach ms. in a later hand.
4 excidere AP.


or any age, or any rank, whose happy fortune is
comparable with that of Metellus. For, not to
mention his surpassing triumphs, the great honours
which he held, his supreme position in the state, the
length of his life, and the bitter struggles on behalf
of the state which he waged with his enemies
without damage to his reputation, he reared four
sons, saw them all reach man's estate, left them
all surviving him and held in the highest honour.
These four sons bore the bier of their dead father
to its place in front of the rostra; one was an
ex-consul and ex-censor, the second an ex-consul,
the third was actually consul, and the fourth was
then a candidate for the consulship, an office which
he duly held. This is assuredly not to die, but
rather to pass happily out of life.

XII. Thereafter all Achaia was aroused to war
though the greater part of it had been crushed,
as I have already said, by the valour and arms of.
this same Metellus Macedonicus. The Corinthians,
in particular, were the instigators of it, going so far
as to heap grave insults upon the Romans, and
Mummius, the consul, was appointed to take charge
of the war there.

About the same time the senate resolved to
destroy Carthage, rather because the Romans were
ready to believe any rumour concerning the
Carthaginians, than because the reports were
credible. Accordingly at this same time Scipio
Aemilianus was elected consul, though but a
candidate for the aedileship. He was a man
whose virtues resembled those of his grandfather,
Publius Africanus, and of his father Lucius Paulus
(he was, as has been already said, the son


b


-J


1 pcrxxil Jani; porxvii P ; pcrxvi Á.
? CLXXI Kritz; ctxxvu B; cerxxvir ÁP.
3 ccxcir Laurent. 5 ccxcvi AP. 4 cxx lani; cxv AP.


^ The corona muralis, given for the storming of a wall,
was of gold with embattled ornaments.

> A crown or garland presented to a general by the army
which he had saved from a siege, or from a disgraceful
surrender. It was woven of grasses collected on the spot.


of Paulus, and had been adopted by the son
of Publius Scipio)—endowed with all the qualities
essential to a good soldier and a good citizen, the
most eminent man of his day both in native ability
and acquired knowledge, who in his whole life was
guilty of no act, word, or thought that was not
praiseworthy. He had already received in Spain the
mural crown,’ and in Africa the corona obsidtonalis "
for his bravery, and while in Spain he had challenged
and slain an enemy of great stature though himself
a man of but ordinary physical strength. The war
against Carthage begun by the consuls two years
previously he now waged with greater vigour, and
destroyed to its foundations the city which was
hateful to the Roman name more because of jealousy v/
of its power than because of any offence at that
time. He made Carthage a monument to his valour
—a city which had been a monument to his grand-
father's clemency.^ Carthage, after standing for six
hundred and seventy-two years, was destroyed in the
consulship of Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus and Lucius
Mummius,?^one hundred and seventy-three years from
the present date. This was the end of Carthage, the ^
rival of the power of Rome, with whom our ancestors
began the conflict in the consulship of Claudius and
Fulvius* two hundred and ninety-two years before
you entered upon your consulship, Marcus Vinicius.
Thus for one hundred and twenty years there existed
between these two people either war, or preparations
for war or a treacherous peace. Even after Rome
had conquered the world she could not hope for
security so long as the name of Carthage remained
* Scipio the elder had spared it after the battle of Zama.
4 146 B.c, * 264 B.C.


deponitur neque ante invisum esse desinit quam esse
desiit.

1 XIII. Ante triennium quam Carthago deleretur,
M. Cato, perpetuus diruendae eius auctor, L. Cen-
sorino M’. Manilio consulibus mortem obiit. Eodem
anno, quo Carthago concidit, L. Mummius Corin-
thum post annos nongentos quinquaginta duos,
quam ab Alete Hippotis filio erat condita, funditus

4 Mummius tam rudis fuit, ut capta Corintho cum
maximorum artificum perfectas manibus tabulas ac
statuas in Italiam portandas locaret, iuberet praedici
conducentibus, si eas perdidissent, novas eos red-


1 L. Rhenanus; a D; A AP.


o 146 B.C.
* A man who was the first of his family to hold a curule
office was called a novus homo or ** new man."


as of a city still standing: to such an extent does
hatred begotten of conflict outlast the fear which
caused it; it is not laid aside even when the foe is
vanquished nor does the object of it cease to be
hated until it has ceased to be.

XIII. Cato, the constant advocate of her destruc-
tion, died three years before the fall of Carthage, in
the consulship of Lucius Censorinus and Manius
Manilius. In the same year in which Carthage fell
Lucius Mummius destroyed Corinth^ to her very
foundations, nine hundred and fifty-two years after
her founding by Aletes, son of Hippos. The two
conquerors were honoured by the names of the
conquered races. The one was surnamed Africanus,
the other Achaicus. Before Mummius no new man?
earned for himself a cognomen won by military
glory.

The two commanders differed in their characters
as in their tastes. Scipio was a cultivated patron
and admirer of liberal studies and of every form of
learning, and kept constantly with him, at home and
in the field, two men of eminent genius, Polybius
and Panaetius. No one ever relieved the duties of
active life by a more refined use of his intervals
of leisure than Scipio, or was more constant in
his devotion to the arts either of war or peace.
Ever engaged in the pursuit of arms or his studies,
he was either training his body by exposing it to
dangers or his mind by learning. Mummius was
so uncultivated that when, after the capture of
Corinth, he was contracting for the transportation
to Italy of pictures and statues by the hands of the
greatest artists, he gave instructions that the
contractors should be warned that if they lost them,

D 33


| XIV. Cum facilius cuiusque rei in unam contracta
species quam divisa temporibus oculis animisque
inhaereat, statui priorem huius voluminis posterio-
remque partem non inutili rerum notitia in artum
contracta distinguere atque huic loco inserere, quae
quoque tempore post Romam a Gallis captam deducta
sit colonia iussu senatus ; nam militarium et causae
et auctores ex ipsarum praefulgent nomine. Huic
rei per idem tempus civitates propagatas auctumque
Romanum nomen communione iuris haud intem-
pestive subtexturi videmur.


1 ceperant Madvig ; ceperunt AP.

? Aricini et 4; Orelli supposes that one or more names
have dropped out.

3 cccrx Laurent. ; ccc. AP.


a I am inclined to think that Velleius had in mind the fad
for collecting Corinthian bronze referred to in Petronius,
ch. 50. It is possible that he even means this in Corinthiorum,
in which case he is in error. For the sentiment cf. Plutarch,
Marcellus, ch. 27.


they would have to replace them by new ones. Yet
I do not think, Vinicius, that you would hesitate to
concede that it would have been more useful to the
state for the appreciation of Corinthian works of art
to have remained uncultivated to the present day,
than that they should be appreciated to the extent
to which they now are, and that the ignorance of
those days was more conducive to the public weal
than our present artistic knowledge."

XIV. Inasmuch as related facts make more
impression upon the mind and eye when grouped
together than when they are given separately in
their chronological sequence, I have decided to
separate the first part of this work from the second
by a useful summary, and to insert in this place an
account, with the date, of each colony founded by >
order of the senate since the capture of Rome by
the Gauls ; for, in the case of the military colonies,
their very names reveal their origins and their
founders. And it will perhaps not seem out of place,
if, in this connexion, we weave into our history
the various extensions of the citizenship and the
growth of the Roman name through granting to
others a share in its privileges.

Seven years after the capture of the city by the
Gauls a colony was founded at Sutrium, another a
year later at Setia, and another after an interval of
nine years at Nepe. Thirty-two years later the
Áricians were admitted to the citizenship. Three
hundred and sixty years from the present date, in
the consulship of Spurius Postumius and Veturius
Calvinus, the citizenship without the right of voting
was given to the Campanians and a portion of the
Samnites, and in the same year a colony was


! Tarracina Lipsius; Tarracinam AP.
2 ad quintum fabioque 4 P.
3 Cosa BA ; Cossa P.
* interiectoque Madvig ; interiecto AP.
5 et omitted in D.
8 xvir Aldus; xxi AP.
7 post G'elenius ; anno post AP.


a 334 B.C. b 332 B.C. € 995 B.C.
4 290 B.C. e 270 B.C. ? 266 B.C.


established at Cales. Then, after an interval of
three years, the people of Fundi and of Formiae
were admitted to the citizenship, in the very year
of the founding of Alexandria. In the following
year the citizenship was granted to the inhabitants
of Acerra by the censors Spurius Postumius and Philo
Publilius? Three years later a colony was established
at Tarracina, four years afterwards another at
Luceria; others three years later at Suessa Aurunca
and Saticula, and another two years after these
at Interamna. After that the work of colonization
was suspended for ten years. Then the colonies of
Sora and Alba were founded, and two years later
that of Carseoli. But in the fifth consulship of
Quintus Fabius, and the fourth of Decius Mus,’ the
year in which King Pyrrhus began his reign, colonists
were sent to Minturnae and Sinuessa, and four years
afterwards to Venusia. After an interval of two
years the citizenship without the right of suffrage
was given to the Sabines in the consulship of Manius
Curius and Rufinus Cornelius.^ This event took
place three hundred and twenty years ago. In the
consulship of Fabius Dorso and Claudius Canina,
three hundred years before the present date,
colonies were established* at Cosa and Paestum.
After an interval of five years, in the consulship of
Sempronius Sophus” and Appius, the son of Appius
the Blind, colonists were sent to Ariminum and
Beneventum and the right of suffrage was granted
to the Sabines. At the outbreak of the First Punic
War Firmum and Castrum were occupied by colonies,
a year later Aesernia, Aefulum and Alsium seventeen
years later, and Fregenae two years afterward.
Brundisium was established in the next year in the


2 Cn. autem Manlio Volsone et Fulvio Nobiliore con-
sulibus Bononia deducta colonia abhinc annos ferme
ducentos septendecim, et post quadriennium Pisau-
rum ac Potentia interiectoque triennio Aquileia et

3 Gravisca et post quadriennium Luca. Eodem tem-
porum tractu, quamquam apud quosdam ambigitur,
Puteolos Salernumque et Buxentum missi coloni,
Auximum autem in Picenum abhinc annos ferme
centum octoginta quinque,? ante triennium quam
Cassius censor a Lupercali in Palatium versus thea-
trum facere instituit, cui in eo moliendo? eximia
civitatis severitas et consul Scipio restitere, quod
ego inter clarissima publicae voluntatis argumenta

4 numeraverim. Cassio autem Longino et Sextio
Calvino, qui Sallues apud aquas, quae ab eo Sextiae
appellantur, devicit, consulibus Fabrateria deducta
est abhinc annos ferme centum quinquaginta tris.4

! ducta AP. 2 crxxxv Burman; cuxxxvir AP.
3 in eo moliendo Salmasius ; in demoliendo 4 P.
4 cun Krause; ovi AP; cun Lips.


consulship of Torquatus and Sempronius,” Spoletium
three years afterwards in the year in which the
Floralia were instituted. Two years afterwards a
colony was established at Valentia, and Cremona
and Placentia were established just before Hannibal's
arrival in Italy.

XV. Thereafter, during Hannibal's stay in Italy,
and in the next few years subsequent to his departure,
the Romans had no leisure for the founding of
colonies, since, while the war lasted, they had to find
soldiers, rather than muster them out, and, after it
was over, the strength of the city needed to be
revived and concentrated rather than to be dispersed.
But, about two hundred and seventeen years ago,
in the consulship of Manlius Volso and Fulvius
Nobilior,® a colony was established at Bononia, others
four years later at Pisaurum and Potentia, others
three years later still at Aquileia and Gravisca, and
another four years afterwards at Luca. About the
same time, although the date is questioned by some,
colonists were sent to Puteoli, Salernum, and
Buxentum, and to Auximum in Picenum, one
hundred and eighty-five years ago, three years
before Cassius the censor began the building of a
theatre beginning at the Lupercal and facing the
Palatine. But the remarkable austerity of the state
and Scipio the consul successfully opposed him
in its building, an incident which I regard as one
of the clearest indications of the attitude of the
people of that time. In the consulship of Cassius
Longinus and Sextius Calvinus'—the Sextius who
defeated the Sallues at the waters which are called
Aquae Sextiae from his name—Fabrateria was
founded about one hundred and fifty-three years


b diximus, extra Italiam colonia condita est. De
Dertona ambigitur, Narbo autem Martius in Gallia
Porcio Marcioque consulibus abhinc annos circiter
centum quadraginta sex! deducta colonia est. Post
duodeviginti? annos in Bagiennis Eporedia Mario
sextum? Valerioque Flacco consulibus. Neque facile
memoriae mandaverim quae, nisi militaris, post hoc
tempus deducta sit.

2 liquidum ratione perductam signem stilo. Quis enim
abunde mirari potest, quod eminentissima cuiusque
professionis ingenia in eandem? formam et in idem
artati temporis congruere? spatium, et quemad-
modum clausa capso’ aliove? saepto diversi generis
animalia nihilo minus separata aliems in unum
quodque? corpus congregantur, ita cuiusque clari
operis capacia ingenia in similitudine et temporum
et profectuum semet ipsa ab aliis separaverunt.

1 cxivi Lipsius; cin AP. ? xvii Aldus; xxu1 AP,
3 sextum Cludius; sexiens (-es) BAP.
4 supervacua P ; supervania A ; supervacanea Orelli.
5 in eam AP.
§ congruere Heinsius; congruens AP.
7 capso BA ; capsa P.
8 alioue Lipsius; alioque AP.
? quodque Heinsius; quoque AP.


a 118 B.C. > 100 B.c.


before the present date, and in the next year
Scolacium Minervium, Tarentum Neptunia, and
Carthage in Africa—the first colony founded outside
of Italy, as already stated. In regard to Dertona
the date is in question. A colony was established at
Narbo Martius in Gaul about one hundred and
forty-six years ago in the consulship of Porcius
and Marcius. Eighteen years later Eporedia was
founded in the country of the Bagienni in the consul-
ship of Marius, then consul for the sixth time," and
Valerius Flaccus.

It would be difficult to mention any colony founded
after this date, except the military colonies.

XVI. Although this portion of my work has already,
as it were, outgrown my plan, and although I am
aware that in my headlong haste—which, just like a
revolving wheel or a down-rushing and eddying
stream, never suffers me to stop—I am almost
obliged to omit matters of essential importance
rather than to include unessential details, yet I
cannot refrain from noting a subject which has often
occupied my thoughts but has never been clearly
reasoned out. For who can marvel sufficiently
that the most distinguished minds in each branch
of human achievement have happened to adopt
the same form of effort, and to have fallen within
the same narrow space of time? Just as animals
of different species when shut in the same pen
or other enclosure still segregate themselves from
those which are not of their kind, and gather
together each in its own group, so the minds that
have had the capacity for distinguished achievement
of each kind have set themselves apart from the
rest by doing like things in the same period of


! tragoediam Burman ; tragoedias 4 P.

* novam comicam AP, defended by Thomas; novam
comoediam Gruner.

* Menander 4; Menandrus P.

* Madvig inserts non after eius.

5 adeo quidem AP; adeo id quidem Haase.

ê eum is Purer's conjecture; eorum AP.

7 etiam Vossius; et AP.


a As they do not occur in the extant portion of the work
we must assume that they were mentioned in the portion
which has been lost.

> He is here referring to comedy. One wonders why the
name of Plautus is omitted from the list. Has the name of


time. A single epoch, and that only of a few years’
duration, gave lustre to tragedy through three men
of divine inspiration, Aeschylus, Sophocles, and
Euripides. So, with Comedy, a single age brought to
perfection that early form, the Old Comedy, through
the agency of Cratinus, Aristophanes, and Eupolis ;
while Menander, and Philemon and Diphilus, his
equals in age rather than in performance, within the
space of a very few years invented the New Comedy
and left it to defy imitation. The great philosophers,
too, who received their inspiration from the lips of
Socrates—their names we gave a moment ago*—
how long did they flourish after the death of Plato
and of Aristotle? What distinction was there in
oratory before Isocrates, or after the time of his
disciples and in turn of their pupils? So crowded
were they into a brief epoch that there were no two
worthy of mention who could not have seen each
other.

XVII. This phenomenon occurred among the
Romans as well as among the Greeks. For, unless
one goes back to the rough and crude beginnings,
and to men whose sole claim to praise is that they
were the pioneers, Roman tragedy centres in and
about Accius; and the sweet pleasantry of Latin
humour? reached its zenith in practically the same
age under Caecilius, Terentius, and Afranius. In
the case of the historians also, if one adds Livy to
the period of the older writers, a single epoch,
comprised within the limits of eighty years, produced
them all, with the exception of Cato and some of the


Plautus dropped out of the text or is Velleius following the
Augustan tradition expressed by Horace in the Ars Poetica
210?


octoginta annis circumdatum aevum tulit, ut nec
poétarum in antiquius citeriusve processit ubertas.

4 visum aut qui illum viderit. Hoc idem evenisse
grammaticis, plastis, pictoribus, scalptoribus quisquis
temporum institerit notis, reperiet, eminentiam!
cuiusque operis artissimis temporum claustris circum-
datam.


1 reperiet et eminentiam P ; reperiet eminentia 4B.

2 recedentis in suum quodque saeculum] J have here
adopted the reading of Madvig for this tortured passage.
For the readings of ABP and the various conjectures see
Ellas.

* saepe Madvig; semper AP. 4 quo priores ducimur 4.


` HISTORY OF ROME, I. xvii. 2-7


old and obscure authors. Likewise the period which
was productive of poets does not go back to an
earlier date or continue to a later. Take oratory and
the forensic art at its best, the perfected splendour of
eloquence in prose, if we again except Cato—and
this I say with due respect to Publius Crassus, Scipio,
Laelius, the Gracchi, Fannius, and Servius Galba—
eloquence, I say, in all its branches burst into flower
under Cicero, its chief exponent, so that there are
few before his day whom one can read with pleasure,
and none whom one can admire, except men who
had either seen Cicero or had been seen by him.
One will also find, if he follows up the dates closely,
that the same thing holds true of the grammarians,
the workers in clay, the painters, the sculptors, and
that pre-eminence in each phase of art is confined
within the narrowest limits of time.

Though I frequently search for the reasons why
men of similar talents occur exclusively in certain
epochs and not only flock to one pursuit but also
attain like success, I can never find any of whose
truth I am certain, though I do find some which -
perhaps seem likely, and particularly the following.
Genius is fostered by emulation, and it is now envy,
now admiration, which enkindles imitation, and, in
the nature of things, that which is cultivated with
the highest zeal advances to the highest perfection ;
but it is difficult to continue at the point of per-
fection, and naturally that which cannot advance
must recede. And as in the beginning we are fired
with the ambition to overtake those whom we regard
as leaders, so when we have despaired of being able
either to surpass or even to equal them, our zeal
wanes with our hope; it ceases to follow what it

| 45


3Quae urbes eximiae alias* talium studiorum fuere
steriles, nisi Thebas unum os Pindari inluminaret :
nam Alcmana Lacones falso sibi vindicant.


LIBER POSTERIOR


1 I. Potentiae Romanorum prior Scipio viam aperue-
rat, luxuriae posterior aperuit : quippe remoto Car-
thaginis metu sublataque imperii aemula non gradu,
sed praecipiti cursu a virtute descitum, ad vitia

1 ab condicione Schegk ; ad conditionem 4P.

2 pluribus omnis Froelich; pluribus annis 4P; pluribus
auctoribus Halm.

3 operibus usque Ellis after Acidalius; operibusque 4 P.
For other conjectures see i 19.

4 eximiae alias Faehse and Haupt; et initalia 4B, om. P;
et in alia Halm.


¢ Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus the elder had
brought the Second Punic War to a close by defeating the
Carthaginians at Zama in 202 p.c. The younger Scipio had
Pra Carthage in 146.


cannot overtake, and abandoning the old field as
though pre-empted, it seeks a new one. Passing
over that in which we cannot be pre-eminent, we
seek for some new object of our effort. It follows
that the greatest obstacle in the way of perfection
in any work is our fickle way of passing on at
frequent intervals to something else.

XVIII. From the part played by epochs our
wonder and admiration next passes to that played by
individual cities. A single city of Attica blossomed
with more masterpieces of every kind of eloquence
than all the rest of Greece together—to such a
degree, in fact, that one would think that although
the bodies of the Greek race were distributed among
the other states, their intellects were confined within
the walls of Athens alone. Nor have I more reason
for wonder at this than that not a single Argive or
Theban or Lacedaemonian was esteemed worthy,
as an orator, of commanding influence while he lived,
or of being remembered after his death. These cities,
otherwise distinguished, were barren of such literary
pursuits with the single exception of the lustre which
the voice of Pindar gave to Thebes ; for, in the case
of Aleman, the claim which the Laconians lay to him
is spurious.


BOOK II


I. The first of the Scipios opened the way for the
world power of the Romans ; the second opened the
way for luxury.^ For, when Rome was freed of
the fear of Carthage, and her rival-in empire was
out of her way, the path of virtue was abandoned
for that of corruption, not gradually, but in headlong


4T


transcursum ; vetus disciplina deserta, nova inducta ;
in somnum a vigiliis, ab armis ad voluptates, a negotiis

2in otium conversa civitas. Tum Scipio Nasica in
Capitolio porticus, tum, quas praediximus, Metellus,
tum in circo Cn. Octavius multo amoenissimam moliti
sunt, publicamque magnificentiam secuta privata
luxuria est.


! nunquam x. plura quam propriae AP, corrected by Aldus.
2 poenam Halm; quippe AP.


a The war with Viriathus had already begun in 148 s.c.
It ended in 140 by the treacherous murder of Viriathus.

>’ Quintus Pompeius was consul in 141 p.c. In the next
year he was forced to make the treaty with the enemy which
the senate refused to ratify.

e Caius Hostilius Mancinus was consul in 137 s.c. The
treaty with the Numantines was made in 136.

a These priests were charged with the duty of maintaining
the forms of international relationship and officiated at the
making of treaties.


course. The older discipline was discarded to give
place to the new. The state passed from vigilance
to slumber, from the pursuit of arms to the pursuit
of pleasure, from activity to idleness. It was at this
time that there were built, on the Capitol, the
porticoes of Scipio Nasica, the porticoes of Metellus
already mentioned, and, in the Circus, the portico
of Gnaeus Octavius, the most splendid of them all ;
and private luxury soon followed public extrav-
agance.

Then followed a war that was disastrous and
disgraceful to the Romans, the war in Spain with
Viriathus,? a guerilla chief. The fortunes of this war
during its progress shifted constantly and were, more
frequently than not, adverse to the Romans. On the
death of Viriathus through the perfidy rather than
the valour of Servilius Caepio, there broke out
in Numantia a war that was more serious still.
Numantia city was never able to arm more than ten
thousand men of its own ; but, whether it was owing
to her native valour, or to the inexperience of our
soldiers, or to the mere kindness of fortune, she
compelled first other generals, and then Pompey,
a man of great name (he was the first of his
family to hold the consulship®) to sign disgraceful
treaties, and forced Mancinus Hostilius^ to terms
no less base and hateful. Pompey, however, escaped
punishment through his influence. As for Mancinus
his sense of shame, in that he did not try to evade
the consequences, caused him to be delivered to
the enemy by the fetial priests, naked, and with
his hands bound behind his back. The Numantines,
however, refused to receive him, following the
example of the Samnites at an earlier day at


E 49


sicut quondam Caudini fecerant,! dicentes publicam
violationem fidei non debere unius lui sanguine.

2 proposito sanctissimus, tantis denique adornatus
virtutibus, quantas perfecta et natura et industria
mortalis condicio recipit, P. Mucio Scaevola L. Cal-
purnio consulibus abhinc annos centum sexaginta
duos descivit a bonis, pollicitusque toti Italiae civita-

3 tem,simul etiam promulgatis agrariis legibus, omnibus
statim? concupiscentibus, summa imis miscuit et in
praeruptum atque anceps periculum adduxit rem
publicam. Octavioque collegae pro bono publico
stanti imperium abrogavit, triumviros agris divi-
dendis colonisque deducendis creavit se socerumque
suum, consularem Appium, et Gaium fratrem admo-
dum iuvenem.


1 fecerant Heinsius; fecerunt AP.
3 pactum Kreyssig ; factum AP.
* statum P ; statim Gelenius ; factum A ; ista tum Haupt.


a In the year 321 z.c. the consuls Titus Veturius Calvinus
and Spurius Postumius were trapped by the Samnites in the
Caudine pass and were forced to agree to terms which were
subsequently repudiated by the senate. > 133 B.C.

e Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, consul in 191 m.c.
Livy states that in 204 s.c., although he was not yet of
sufficient age to obtain the quaestorship, he was nevertheless


Caudium,* saying that a national breach of faith
should not be atoned for by the blood of one man.
II. The surrender of Mancinus aroused in the state
a quarrel of vast proportions. Tiberius Gracchus,
the son of Tiberius Gracchus, an illustrious and an
eminent citizen, and the grandson, on his mother's
side, of Scipio Africanus, had been quaestor in the
army of Mancinus and had negotiated the treaty.
Indignant, on the one hand, that any of his acts
should be disavowed, and fearing the danger of a
like trial or a like punishment, he had himself elected ,
tribune of the people. He was a man of otherwise
blameless life, of brilliant intellect, of upright
intentions, and, in a word, endowed with the highest
virtues of which a man is capable when favoured by
nature and by training. In the consulship of Publius
Mucius Scaevola and Lucius Calpurnius? (one
hundred and sixty-two years ago), he split with the
party of the nobles, promised the citizenship to all
Italy, and at the same time, by proposing agrarian
laws which all immediately desired to see in opera-
tion, turned the state topsyturvy, and brought it into a
position of critical and extreme danger. He abrogated
the power of his colleague Octavius, who defended
the interests of the state, and appointed a com-
mission of three to assign lands and to found colonies,
consisting of himself, his father-in-law the ex-consul
Appius, and his brother Gaius, then a very young man.
III. At this crisis Publius Scipio Nasica appeared.
He was the grandson of the Scipio? who had
been adjudged by the senate the best citizen of


adjudged by the senate to be the best citizen in the state
and, as such, was designated to receive the statue of the
Great Mother when it was brought to Rome.


in Capitolio fecerat, filius, pronepos autem Cn.
Scipionis, celeberrimi viri P. Africani patrui, privatus-
que et togatus, cum esset consobrinus Ti. Gracchi,
patriam cognationi praeferens et quidquid publice
salutare non esset, privatim alienum existimans (ob
eas virtutes primus omnium absens pontifex maximus
factus est), circumdata laevo brachio togae lacinia
ex superiore parte Capitolii summis gradibus insistens
hortatus est, qui salvam vellent rem publicam, se
2 sequerentur. Tum optimates, senatus atque eques-
tris ordinis pars melior et maior, et intacta perniciosis
consiliis plebs inruere in Gracchum stantem in area
cum catervis suis et concientem paene totius Italiae
frequentiam. Is fugiens decurrensque clivo Capi-
tolino, fragmine subsellii ictus vitam, quam gloriosis-
3 sime degere potuerat, immatura morte finivit. Hoc
initium in urbe Roma civilis sanguinis gladiorumque
impunitatis fuit. Inde ius vi obrutum potentiorque
habitus prior, discordiaeque civium antea condi-
cionibus sanari solitae ferro diiudicatae bellaque non
causis inita, sed prout eorum merces fuit. Quod


4 haut mirum est: non enim ibi consistunt exempla,


the state, the son of the Scipio who, as censor,
had built the porticoes on the Capitol, and great-
grandson of Gnaeus Scipio, that illustrious man
who was the paternal uncle of Publius Scipio
Africanus. Although he was a cousin of Tiberius
Gracchus, he set his country before all ties of
blood, choosing to regard as contrary to his private
interests everything that was not for the public
weal, a quality which earned for him the distinction
of being the first man to be elected pontifex maximus
in absentia. He held no public office at this time
and was clad in the toga. Wrapping the fold of his
toga about his left forearm he stationed himself on
the topmost steps of the Capitol and summoned all
those who wished for the safety of the state to follow
him. Then the optimates, the senate, the larger
and better part of the equestrian order, and those
of the plebs who were not yet infected by pernicious
theories rushed upon Gracchus as he stood with his
bands in the area of the Capitol and was haranguing
a throng assembled from almost every part of Italy.
As Gracchus fled, and was running down the steps
which led from the Capitol, he was struck by the
fragment of a bench, and ended by an untimely
death the life which he might have made a glorious
one. This was the beginning in Rome of civil blood-
shed, and of the licence of the sword. From this time
on right was crushed by might, the most powerful
now took precedence in the state, the disputes of
the citizens which were once healed by amicable
agreements were now settled by arms, and wars
were now begun not for good cause but for what
profit there was in them. Nor is this to be
wondered at; for precedents do not stop where


1 IV. Interim, dum haec in Italia geruntur, Aris-
tonicus, qui! mortuo rege Attalo, a quo Asia populo
Romano hereditate relicta erat, sicut relicta postea
est a Nicomede Bithynia, mentitus regiae stirpis
originem armis eam occupaverat, is victus a M.
Perpenna ductusque in triumpho, set a M'. Aquilio,
capite poenas dedit, cum initio belli Crassum Mu-
cianum, virum iuris scientissimum, decedentem ex
Asia proconsulem interemisset.

2 At? P. Scipio Africanus Aemilianus, qui Cartha-
ginem deleverat, post tot acceptas cirea Numantiam
clades creatus iterum consul missusque in Hispaniam
fortunae virtutique expertae in Africa respondit in
Hispania, et intra annum ac tris menses, quam eo
venerat, circumdatam operibus Numantiam excisam-

4 alterius vindicavit contumeliis. Hic, eum interro-
gante tribuno Carbone, quid de Ti. Gracchi caede

! qui is bracketed by Gelenius, but may be the result of care-
less writing. ? At Vossius ; et D.


a 133 B.C. ò 131 B.C. ¢ 133 B.C.


they begin, but, however narrow the path upon
which they enter, they create for themselves a
highway whereon they may wander with the
utmost latitude; and when once the path of right
is abandoned, men are hurried into wrong in headlong
haste, nor does anyone think a course is base for
himself which has proven profitable to others.

IV. While these events were taking place in Italy
King Attalus had died,* bequeathing Asia in his
will to the Roman people, as Bithynia was later
bequeathed to them by Nicomedes, and Aristonicus,
falsely claiming to be a scion of the royal house,
had forcibly seized the province.  Aristonicus was
subdued by Marcus Perpenna and was later led in
triumph,but by Manius Aquilius. He paid with his life
the penalty for having put to death at the very out-
set of the war the celebrated jurist Crassus Mucianus,
proconsul of Asia, as he was leaving his province.

After all the defeats experienced at Numantia,
Publius Scipio Africanus Aemilianus, the destroyer
of Carthage, was a second time elected consul?
and then dispatched to Spain, where he confirmed
the reputation for good fortune and for valour which
he had earned in Africa. Within a year and three
months after his arrival in Spain he surrounded
Numantia with his siege works, destroyed the city
and levelled it to the ground. No man of any
nationality before his day had immortalized his name
by a more illustrious feat of destroying cities; for
by the destruction of Carthage and Numantia he
liberated us, in the one case from fear, in the
other from a reproach upon our name. This same
Scipio, when asked by Carbo the tribune what he
thought about the killing of Tiberius Gracchus,


sentiret, respondit, si is occupandae rei publicae
animum habuisset, iure caesum. Et cum omnis
contio adclamasset, hostium, inquit, armatorum
totiens clamore non territus, qui possum vestro

6 moveri, quorum noverca est Italia? Reversus in
urbem intra breve tempus, M'. Aquilio C. Sem-
pronio consulibus abhinc annos centum et sexaginta,!
post duos consulatus duosque triumphos et bis
excisos terrores rei publicae mane in lectulo repertus
est mortuus, ita ut quaedam elisarum faucium in

6 cervice reperirentur notae. De tanti viri morte
nulla habita est quaestio eiusque corpus velato
capite elatum est, cuius opera super totum terrarum
orbem Roma extulerat caput. Seu fatalem, ut
plures, seu conflatam insidiis, ut aliqui prodidere
memoriae, mortem obiit, vitam certe dignissimam
egit, quae nullius ad id temporis praeterquam avito
fulgore vinceretur. Decessit anno ferme sexto et

1 V. Ante tempus excisae Numantiae praeclara in
Hispania militia D. Bruti fuit, qui penetratis omnibus
Hispaniae gentibus ingenti vi hominum urbiumque

1 cix Laurent. ; cL AP; civi Kritz.
? xxxvin Puteanus; xxxvi AP.


a 129 B.C. à

ò There was nothing unusual about wrapping up the head
of a corpse (cf. Aurelius Victor 58 **obvoluto capite elatus
est)." Velleius is apparently striving for the verbal effect,
somewhat forced it is true, of the contrast between velato
capite . . . extulerat caput.


replied that he had been justly slain if his purpose
had been to seize the government. When the
whole assembly cried out at this utterance he said,
" How can I, who have so many times heard the
battle shout of the enemy without feeling fear, be
disturbed by the shouts of men like you, to whom
Italy is only a stepmother?” A short time after
Scipio's return to Rome, in the consulship of Manius
Aquilius and Gaius Sempronius ^—one hundred and
sixty years ago—this man who had held two consul-
ships, had celebrated two triumphs, and had twice
destroyed cities which had brought terror to his
country, was found in the morning dead in his bed
with marks as though of strangulation upon his
throat. Great man though he was, no inquest was
held concerning the manner of his death, and with
covered head’ was borne to the grave the body of
him whose services had enabled Rome to lift her
head above the whole world. Whether his death
was due to natural causes as most people think, or
was the result of a plot, as some historians state,
the life he lived was at any rate so crowded with
honours that up to this time it was surpassed in
brilliance by none, excepting only his grandsire.°
He died in his fifty-sixth year. If anyone questions
this let him call to mind his first consulship, to which
he was elected in his thirty-eighth year, and he will
cease to doubt.

V. In Spain, even before the destruction of
Numantia, Decimus Brutus had conducted a brilliant
campaign in which he penetrated to all the peoples
of the country, took a great number of men and


¢ Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus, the victor of Zama.


potitus numero, aditis quae vix audita erant, Gal-
laeci cognomen meruit.

3 eodem protinus subire iuberet, facientibusque omni-
bus in procinctu testamenta, velut ad certam mortem
eundum foret, non deterritus proposito,! quem mori-
turum miserat militem victorem recepit: tantum
effecit mixtus timori pudor spesque desperatione
quaesita. Hic virtute ac severitate facti, at Fabius
Aemilianus Pauli exemplo disciplina in Hispania
fuit clarissimus.

3 paene usque Alpis, dividebat agros, vetabat quem-


! perseverantia ducis followed proposito in P. It was
bracketed by Davis as a marginal gloss which had crept into
the text. 2 petens Ituhnken; re petens AP.


-a The cognomen was given for his partial subjugation of
the Gallaeci, a people in western Hispania "Tarraconensis
inhabiting what is now Galicia and part of Portugal.

> 123 B.C.


cities and, by extending his operations to regions
which hitherto had scarcely been heard of, earned
for himself the cognomen of Gallaecus.*

A few years before in this same country
Quintus Macedonicus had exercised command as
general with a discipline of remarkable rigour. For
instance, in an assault upon a Spanish town called
Contrebia he ordered five legionary cohorts, which
had been driven down from a steep escarpment,
forthwith to march up it again. Though the soldiers
were making their wills on the battlefield, as though
they were about to march to certain death, he was
not deterred, but afterwards received the men,
whom he sent forth to die, back in camp victorious.
Such was the effect of shame mingled with fear, and
of a hope born of despair. Macedonicus won renown in
Spain by the uncompromising bravery of this exploit ;
Fabius Aemilianus, following the example of Paulus
on the other hand, by the severity of his discipline.

VI. After an interval of ten years the same mad-
ness which had possessed Tiberius Gracchus now
seized upon his brother Gaius, who resembled him
in his general virtues as well as in his mistaken
ambition, but far surpassed him in ability and
eloquence. Gaius might have been the first man in
the state had he held his spirit in repose; but,
whether it was with the object of avenging his
brother's death or of paving the way for kingly
power, he followed the precedent which Tiberius had
set and entered upon the career of a tribune.’ His
aims, however, were far more ambitious and drastic.
He was for giving the citizenship to all Italians,
extending it almost to the Alps, distributing the
public domain, limiting the holdings of each citizen


4 Hunc L. Opimius consul, qui praetor Fregellas `
exciderat, persecutus armis unaque Fulvium Flaccum,
consularem ac triumphalem virum, aeque prava
cupientem, quem C. Gracchus in locum Tiberii fratris
triumvirum nominaverat,? eumque? socium regalis


1 nihil inserted by Haase.
2 nominaverat] Halm conjectured nomine, re autem.
3 eum AP; eumque Gelenius.
* armatos Gelenius ; armatus AP.


a This limitation of the amount of ager publicus which
an individual might hold was one of the many rogationes
proposed by the tribune C. Licinius Stolo in 375 s.c. and
finally carried in 365, after ten years of constant struggle
with the patricians.

> 121 p.c.


to five hundred acres as had once been provided by
the Licinian law,* establishing new customs duties,
filling the provinces with new colonies, transferring
the judicial powers from the senate to the equites,
and began the practice of distributing grain to the
people. He left nothing undisturbed, nothing un-
touched, nothing unmolested, nothing, in short, as
it had been. Furthermore he continued the exercise
of his office for a second term.

The consul, Lucius Opimius, who, as praetor, had
destroyed Fregellae, hunted down Gracchus with
armed men and put him to death,’ slaying with him
Fulvius Flaccus, a man who, though now enter-
taining the same distorted ambitions, had held the
consulship and had won a triumph. Gaius had
named Flaccus triumvir in the place of his brother
Tiberius and had made him his partner in his plans
for assuming kingly power. The conduct of Opimius
was execrable in this one respect, that he had
proposed a reward to be paid for the head, I will
not say of a Gracchus, but of a Roman citizen, and
had promised to pay it in gold. Flaccus, together
with his elder son, was slain upon the Aventine
while summoning to battle his armed supporters.
Gracchus, in his flight, when on the point of being
apprehended by the emissaries of Opimius, offered
his neck to the sword of his slave Euporus. Euporus
then slew himself with the same promptness with
which he had given assistance to his master. On the
same day Pomponius, a Roman knight, gave remark-
able proof of his fidelity to Gracchus; for, after
holding back his enemies upon the bridge, as Cocles*


¢ This is the famous Horatius who defended the bridge
single-handed against the army of Porsenna.


1 VII. Hunc Ti. Gracchi liberi, P. Scipionis Africani
nepotes, viva adhuc matre Cornelia, Africani filia,
viri optimis ingeniis male usi, vitae mortisque habuere
exitum: qui si civilem dignitatis concupissent
modum, quidquid tumultuando adipisci gestierunt,
quietis obtulisset res publica.

2 Huic atrocitati adiectum scelus unicum. Quippe
iuvenis specie excellens necdum duodevicesimum
transgressus annum immunisque delictorum pater-
norum, Fulvii Flacci filius, quem pater legatum de
condicionibus miserat, ab Opimio interemptus est.
Quem cum haruspex Tuscus amicus flentem in
vincula duci vidisset, quin tu hoc potius, inquit,
facis? Protinusque inliso capite in postem lapideum
ianuae carceris effusoque cerebro expiravit.

3  Crudelesque mox quaestiones in amicos clientes-
que Gracchorum habitae sunt. Sed Opimium, virum
alioqui sanctum et gravem, damnatum postea
iudicio publico memoria istius saevitiae nulla civilis

4 prosecuta est misericordia. Eadem Rupilium Popi-
liumque, qui consules asperrime in Tiberii Gracchi


a Consuls 132 B.C.


had done of yore, he threw himself upon his sword.
. The body of Gaius, like that of Tiberius before him,
was thrown into the Tiber by the victors, with the
same strange lack of humanity.

VII. Such were the lives and such the deaths of
the sons of Tiberius Gracchus, and the grandsons of
Publius Scipio Africanus, and their mother
Cornelia, the daughter of Africanus, still lived to
witness their end. An ill use they made of their
excellent talents. Had they but coveted such
honours as citizens might lawfully receive, the state
would have conferred upon them through peaceful
means all that they sought to obtain by unlawful
agitations.

To this atrocity was added a crime without
precedent. The son of Fulvius Flaccus, a youth of
rare beauty who had not yet passed his eighteenth
year and was in no way involved in the acts of
his father, when sent by his father as an envoy
to ask for terms, was put to death by Opimius.
An Etruscan soothsayer, who was his friend, seeing
him dragged weeping to prison, said to him, “‘ Why
not rather do as I do?” At these words he
forthwith dashed out his brains against the stone
portal of the prison and thus ended his life.

Severe investigations, directed against the friends
and followers of the Gracchi, followed. But when
Opimius, who during the rest of his career had been
a man of sterling and upright character, was after-
wards condemned by public trial, his conviction
aroused no sympathy on the part of the citizens
because of the recollection of his cruelty in this
instance. Rupilius and Popilius,* who, as consuls,
had prosecuted the friends of Tiberius Gracchus with


amicos saevierant, postea iudiciorum publicorum
merito oppressit invidia.
Rei tantae parum ad notitiam pertinens inter-

7 In legibus? Gracchi inter perniciosissima nume-
rarim, quod extra Italiam colonias posuit. Id
maiores, cum viderent tanto potentiorem Tyro
Carthaginem, Massiliam Phocaea, Syracusas Corintho,
Cyzicum ac Byzantium Mileto, genitali solo, dili-
genter vitaverant et civis Romanos ad censendum

1 VIII. Mandetur deinde memoriae severitas iudi-
ciorum. Quippe C. Cato consularis, M. Catonis nepos,
Africani sororis filius, repetundarum ex Macedonia


! interponetur AP; interponatur Heinsius.

? quod AP ; quo Hensius and. Bentley.

3 The passage from In legibus to conditi est, $8, is found
in AP before Mors Drusi in chap. xv. In that context, as
the text now stands, the passage is out of place. Cludius
transferred it to its present position. It may, however, be a
fragment of a chapter comparing the legislative activities of
Drusus with those of Gracchus, the first part of which is now
lost. 4 numerarim 4 ; numeraverim P.


* The colony at Carthage was founded 122 s.c. under the
name Colonia Junonia.

> 118 B.c. It was on the site of the modern Narbonne, to
which it gave its name.


the utmost severity, deservedly met at a later date
with the same mark of popular disapproval at their
public trials.

I shall insert here a matter hardly relevant to
these important events. It was this same Opimius
from whose consulship the famous Opimian wine
received its name. That none of this wine is now
in existence can be inferred from the lapse of time,
since it is one hundred and fifty years, Marcus
Vinicius, from his consulship to yours.

The conduct of Opimius met with a greater
degree of disapproval because it was a case of seeking
revenge in a private feud, and this act of revenge
was regarded as having been committed rather in
satisfaction of a personal animosity than in defence
of the rights of the state.

In the legislation of Gracchus I should regard
as the most pernicious his planting of colonies
outside of Italy. This policy the Romans of the
older time had carefully avoided; for they saw
how much more powerful Carthage had been
than Tyre, Massilia than Phocaea, Syracuse than
Corinth, Cyzicus and Byzantium than Miletus,
—all these colonies, in short, than their mother
cities—and had summoned all Roman citizens from
the provinces back to Italy that they might be
enrolled upon the census lists. The first colony to
be founded outside of Italy was Carthage." Shortly
afterwards the colony of Narbo Martius was founded,
in the consulship of Porcius and Marcius."

VIII. I must next record the severity of the law
courts in condemning for extortion in Macedonia
Gaius Cato, an ex-consul, the grandson of Marcus
Cato, and son of the sister of Africanus, though the

F 65


1 IX. Eodem tractu temporum nituerunt oratores
Scipio Aemilianus Laeliusque, Ser. Galba, duo
. Gracchi, C. Fannius, Carbo Papirius; nec praeter-
eundus Metellus Numidicus et Scaurus, et ante

! M. C. Voss; M. AP; Aldus proposed duo.
a Something less than £40, if the text is correct.
> 179 B.c.
¢ What Velleius probably had in mind was the aedileship
in 213 B.c. of Publius and Marcus Scipio, referred to by
Polybius x. 4. Hence some editors have supposed that
aedilibus or in aedilitate have dropped out of the text; but


this is hardly necessary. The author is thinking simply of
brothers who were colleagues in office. 4 108 B.C.


claim against him amounted to but four thousand
sesterces.^ But the judges of that day looked rather
at the purpose of the culprit than at the measure
of the wrong, applying to actions the criterion of
intention and weighing the character of the sin and
not the extent of it.

About the same time the two brothers Marcus
and Gaius Metellus celebrated their triumphs on
one and the same day. A coincidence equally cele-
brated which still remains unique, was the conjunction
in the consulship” of the sons of Fulvius Flaccus,
the general who had conquered Capua, but one of
these sons, however, had passed by adoption into the
family of Acidinus Manlius. As regards the joint
censorship of the two Metelli, they were cousins, not
brothers, a coincidence which had happened to the
family of the Scipios alone.^

At this time the Cimbri and Teutons crossed the
Rhine. These peoples were soon to become famous
by reason of the disasters which they inflicted upon
us and we upon them. About the same time 4 took
place the famous triumph over the Scordisci of
Minucius, the builder of the porticoes which are
famous even in our own day.

IX. At this same period flourished the illustrious
orators Scipio Aemilianus and Laelius, Sergius Galba,
the two Gracchi, Gaius Fannius, and Carbo Papirius.
In this list we must not pass over the names of
Metellus Numidicus and Scaurus, and above all of
Lucius Crassus and Marcus Antonius. They were
followed in time as well as in talents by Gaius
Caesar Strabo and Publius Sulpicius. As for Quintus
Mucius, he was more famous for his knowledge of
jurisprudence than, strictly speaking, for eloquence.


3 Clara etiam per idem aevi spatium fuere ingenia
in togatis Afranii, in tragoediis Pacuvii atque Accii,
usque in Graecorum ingeniorum comparationem
evecti,! magnumque inter hos ipsos facientis operi suo
locum, adeo quidem, ut in illis limae, in hoc paene

6 annos ab eo seniore editum est. Vetustior Sisenna
fuit Caelius, aequalis Sisennae Rutilius Claudiusque
Quadrigarius et Valerius Antias. Sane non ignore-
mus eadem aetate fuisse Pomponium sensibus cele-
brem, verbis rudem et novitate inventi a se operis
commendabilem.

1 X. Prosequamur nota severitatem censorum Cassii
Longini Caepionisque, qui abhinc annos centum
quinquaginta tris? Lepidum Aemilium augurem,
quod sex milibus HS. aedes conduxisset, adesse
iusserunt. At nunc si quis tanti habitet, vix ut
senator agnoscitur : adeo natura a rectis in prava,


1 evecti Gelenius;  evectis B; eius aetatis 4; eius
aetatis P.

? I have substituted a comma after sanguinis for Halm's
period, making Lucilii the substantive with which facientis
agrees. Heinsius supplies Enni after locum.

3 cu Kritz; cLvi AP.


a He is referring to the Jugurthine War.

d The Fabulae Atellanae or Atellan Farce. While not
the inventor he may have been the first to give these farces
literary form.


In the same epoch other men of talent were
illustrious : Afranius in the writing of native comedy,
in tragedy Pacuvius and Accius, a man who rose into
competition even with the genius of the Greeks, and
made a great place for his own work among theirs,
with this distinction, however, that, while they
seemed to have more polish, Accius seemed: to
possess more real blood. The name of Lucilius was
also celebrated ; he had served as a knight in the
Numantine war under Publius Africanus. At the
same time, Jugurtha and Marius, both still young
men, and serving under the same Africanus,
received in the same camp the military training
which they were later destined to employ in
opposing camps.” At this time Sisenna, the author
of the Histories, was still a young man. His works
on the Civil Wars and the Wars of Sulla were
published several years later, when he was a relatively
old man. Caelius was earlier than Sisenna, while
Rutilius, Claudius Quadrigarius and Valerius Antias
were his contemporaries. Let us not forget that at
this period lived Pomponius, famed for his subject
matter, though untutored in style, and noteworthy
for the new kind of composition which he invented.^

X. Let us now go on to note the severity of the
censors Cassius Longinus and Caepio, who sum-
moned before them the augur Lepidus Aemilius for
renting a house at six thousand sesterces.^ This
was a hundred and fifty-three years ago. Nowadays,
if any one takes a residence at so low a rate he is
scarcely recognized as a senator. Thus does nature
pass from the normal to the perverted, from that

e Censors in 125 B.c.
3 A little more than £50.


a pravis in vitia, a vitiis in praecipitia per-
venitur.

1 XI. Bellum deinde Iugurthinum gestum est per
Q. Metellum null secundum saeculi sui. Huius
legatus fuit C. Marius, quem praediximus, natus
agresti* loco, hirtus atque horridus vitaque sanctus,
quantum bello optimus, tantum pace pessimus,
immodicus gloriae, insatiabilis, impotens semperque

2inquietus. Hic per publicanos aliosque in Africa
negotiantis criminatus Metelli lentitudinem, tra-
hentis iam in tertium annum bellum, et naturalem
nobilitatis superbiam morandique in imperiis cupi-
ditatem effecit, ut, cum commeatu petito Romam :
venisset, consul crearetur bellique paene patrati a
Metello, qui bis Iugurtham acie fuderat, summa


1 prava . . . vitia thus transposed by Sterk; a rectis in
vitia a (om. A) vitiis in prava a pravis AP.

? singuli Lipsius and Madvig ; singulis AP.

3 omnes Pluygers; omnino AP. |

* agresti Voss; equestri 4 P.


a 122 p.c. 5 109-8 B.C. * 107 B.C.


to the vicious, and from the vicious to the abyss of
extravagance.

At the same period^ took place the notable
victory of Domitius over the Arverni, and of Fabius
over the Allobroges. Fabius, who was the grandson
of Paulus, received the cognomen of Allobrogicus in
commemoration of his victory. I must also note
the strange fortune which distinguished the family
of the Domitii, the more remarkable in view of the
limited number of the family. Before the present
Gnaeus Domitius, a man of notable simplicity of life,
there have been seven Domitii, all only sons, but
they all attained to the consulate and priesthoods
and almost all to the distinction of a triumph.

XI. Then followed the Jugurthan war waged
under the generalship® of Quintus Metellus, a man
inferior to no one of his time. His second in command
was Gaius Marius, whom we have already mentioned,
a man of rustic birth, rough and uncouth, and austere
in his life, as excellent a general as he was an evil
influence in time of peace, a man of unbounded
ambition, insatiable, without self-control, and always
an element of unrest. Through the agency of the
tax-gatherers and others who were engaged in
business in Africa he criticized the delays of Metellus,
who was now dragging on the war into its third year,
charging him with the haughtiness characteristic of
the nobility and with the desire to maintain himself
in military commands. Having obtained a furlough
he went to Rome, where he succeeded in procuring
his election as consul and had the chief command of
the war placed in his own hands,^ although the war
had already been practically ended by Metellus,
who had twice defeated Jugurtha in battle. The


! meritum et (om. P) virtutique AP.
2 CXXXIII Aldus; cxxxvir AP.


9 Praecaventibus fatis is variously interpreted. Krause
takes it to mean that the fates were seeking to guard against
the future rivalry and discord of these two men; Kritz,
wrongly, I think, that the fates were warning Marius in
advance that Sulla was destined to be his successful
opponent. > 104 B.C. ¢ Bk. ii. ch. 8. 4 105 B.C.


triumph of Metellus was none the less brilliant, and
the cognomen of Numidicus earned by his valour was
bestowed upon him. As I commented, a short time
ago, on the glory of the family of the Domitii, let me
now comment upon that of the Caecilii. Within the
compass of about twelve years during this period, the
Metelli were distinguished by consulships, censor-
ships, or triumph more than twelve times. Thus it
is clear that, as in the case of cities and empires, so
the fortunes of families flourish, wane, and pass away.
XII. Gaius Marius, even at this time, had Lucius
Sulla associated with him as quaestor, as though the
fates were trying to avoid subsequent events. He
sent Sulla to King Bocchus and through him gained
possession of Jugurtha, about one hundred and thirty-
four years before the present time. He returned to
the city as consul designate for the second time,
and on the kalends of January, at the inauguration
of his second consulship, he led Jugurtha in triumph.
Since, as has already* been stated, an immense horde
of the German races called the Cimbri and the
Teutons had defeated and routed the Consuls Caepio
and Manlius? in Gaul, as before them Carbo ^
and Silanus, and had scattered their armies, and
had put to death Scaurus Aurelius an ex-consul,
and other men of renown, the Roman people was :
of the opinion that no general was better qualified
to repel these mighty enemies than Marius. His
consulships then followed each other in succession.
The third was consumed in preparation for this war.
In this year? Gnaeus Domitius, the tribune of the
people, passed a law that the priests, who had
previously been chosen by their colleagues, should
* 113 B.c. f 109 B.c. 9 104 B.C.


4 sufficiebant, populus crearet. Quarto trans Alpis circa
Aquas Sextias cum Teutonis conflixit, amplius cen-
tum quinquaginta milia hostium priore ac postero
die ab eo trucidata! gensque excisa Teutonum.

5 Quinto citra Alpis in campis, quibus nomen erat
Raudiis, ipse consul et proconsul Q. Lutatius Catulus
fortunatissimo decertavere proelio ; caesa aut capta
amplius centum milia? hominum. Hac victoria
videtur meruisse Marius, ne eius nati rem publicam

6 paeniteret, ac mala bonis repensasse. Sextus con-
sulatus veluti praemium ei meritorum datus. Non
tamen huius consulatus fraudetur gloria, quo Servilii
Glauciae Saturninique Apulei furorem continuatis
honoribus rem publicam lacerantium et gladiis
quoque et caede comitia discutientium, consul armis
compescuit hominesque exitiabilis in Hostilia curia
morte multavit.

1 XIII. Deinde interiectis paucis annis tribunatum
iniit M. Livius Drusus, vir nobilissimus, eloquentis-
simus, sanctissimus, meliore in omnia ingenio animo-


: trucidata Ruhnken ; trucidatis 4 P.
2 c AP; cc Puteanus and Lipsius.


a 102 B.C. > 101 B.c. ° 100 B.c.

4 Saturninus was elected tribune for the third time;
Glaucia was praetor and desired the consulship.

* 91 BC f See ch. vi.


now be elected by the people. In his fourth consul-
ship? Marius met the Teutons in battle beyond the
Alps in the vicinity of Aquae Sextiae. More than
a hundred and fifty thousand of the enemy were
slain by him on that day and the day after, and the
race of the Teutons was exterminated. In his fifth
consulship® the consul himself and the proconsul
Quintus Lutatius Catulus fought a most successful
battle on this side of the Alps on the plain called
the Raudian Plain. More than a hundred thousand
of the enemy were taken or slain. By this victory
Marius seems to have earned some claim upon his
country that it should not regret his birth and to
have counterbalanced his bad by his good deeds.
A sixth consulship* was given him in the light of a
reward for his services. He must not, however, be
deprived of the glory of this consulship, for during
this term as consul he restrained by arms the mad
acts of Servilius Glaucia and Saturninus Apuleius
who were shattering the constitution by continuing
in office,^ and were breaking up the elections with
armed violence and bloodshed, and caused these
dangerous men to be put to death in the Curia
Hostilia.

XIII. After an interval of a few years Marcus
Livius Drusus entered the tribunate, a man of noble
birth, of eloquent tongue and of upright life; but
in all his acts, his success was not in keeping with his
talents or his good intentions. It was his aim to
restore to the senate its ancient prestige, and again
to transfer the law courts to that order from the
knights. The knights had acquired this prerogative
through the legislation of Gracchus,” and had treated
with severity many noted men who were quite


2 decessit. Sed cum ultimum redderet spiritum, in-
tuens cireumstantium maerentiumque frequentiam,
effudit vocem convenientissjmam conscientiae suae :
ecquandone, inquit, propinqui amicique, similem
mei civem habebit res publica? Hunc finem claris-
simus iuvenis vitae habuit: cuius morum minime

3 omittatur argumentum. Cum aedificaret domum in


! quam quaevis Froelich; quamvis A; eius quam
Ruhnken followed by Halm.
? modicam AP; inmodicam Halm.


innocent, and, in particular, had brought to trial on
a charge of extortion and had condemned, to the
great sorrow of all the citizens, Publius Rutilius, one
of the best men not only of his age, but of all time.
But in these very measures which Livius undertook
on behalf of the senate he had an opponent in the
senate itself, which failed to see that the proposals
he also urged in the interest of the plebs were made
as a bait and a sop to the populace, that they might,
by receiving lesser concessions, permit the passage
of more important measures. In the end it was the
misfortune of Drusus to find that the senate gave
more approval to the evil measures of his colleagues
than to his own plans, however excellent, and that
it spurned the dignity which he would confer upon
it only to accept tamely the real slights levelled
against it by the others, tolerating the mediocrity
of his colleagues while it looked with jealous eyes
upon his own distinction.

XIV. Since his excellent programme had fared so
badly, Drusus turned his attention to granting the
citizenship to the Italians. While he was engaged
in this effort, and was returning from the forum
surrounded by the large and unorganized crowd
which always attended him, he was stabbed in the
area before his house and died in a few hours, the
assassin leaving the weapon in his side. As he
breathed his last and gazed at the throng of those
who stood weeping about him, he uttered the words,
most expressive of his own feelings: “O my
relatives and friends, will my country ever have
another citizen like me?" Thus ended the life of
this illustrious man. One index of his character
should not be passed over. When he was building


T1


1 XV. Mors Drusi iam pridem tumescens bellum
excitavit Italicum ; quippe L. Caesare et P. Rutilio
consulibus abhinc annos centum viginti, universa
Italia, cum id malum ab Asculanis ortum esset
(quippe Servilium praetorem Fonteiumque legatum
occiderant) ac deinde a Marsis exceptum in omnis
penetrasset regiones, arma adversus Romanos cepit.

3 Id bellum amplius trecenta milia iuventutis Italicae
abstulit. Clarissimi autem imperatores fuerunt
Romani eo bello Cn. Pompeius, Cn. Pompei Magni
pater, C. Marius, de quo praediximus, L. Sulla


1 arbitris B, om. A ; hominibus P, et A above the line.

2 Here followed the paragraph In legibus . . . condita est
which has been transferred, after Cludius, to the end of
Ch. vii. as better fitting the context there. It may, however,
have been the conclusion of a passage in which Velleius compared
the legislation of Livius Drusus with that of Gaius Gracchus,
the first portion of which is now lost.


his house on the Palatine on the site where now
stands the house which once belonged to Cicero,
and later to Censorinus, and which now belongs to
Statilius Sisenna, the architect offered to build it
in such a way that he would be free from the public
gaze, safe from all espionage, and that no one could
look down into it. Livius replied, “ If you possess
the skill you must build my house in such a way
that whatever I do shall be seen by all.”

XV. The long smouldering fires of an Italian war
were now fanned into flame by the death of Drusus.
One hundred and twenty years ago," in the consul-
ship of Lucius Caesar and Publius Rutilius, all Italy
took up arms against the Romans. The rebellion
began with the people of Asculum, who had put to
death the praetor Servilius and Fonteius, his deputy ;
it was then taken up by the Marsi, and from them
it made its ways into all the districts of Italy. The
fortune of the Italians was as cruel as their cause was
just; for they were seeking citizenship in the state
whose power they were defending by their arms;
every year and in every war they were furnishing a
double number of men, both of cavalry and of
infantry, and yet were not admitted to the rights
of citizens in the state which, through their efforts,
had reached so high a position that it could look
down upon men of the same race and blood as
foreigners and aliens.

This war carried off more than three hundred
thousand of the youth of Italy. On the Roman
side in this war the most illustrious commanders
were Gnaeus Pompeius, father of Pompey the
Great, Gaius Marius, already mentioned, Lucius

a 91 BC.


anno ante praetura functus, Q. Metellus, Numidici
filius, qui meritum cognomen Pii consecutus erat:

1 XVI. Italicorum autem fuerunt celeberrimi duces
Silo Popaedius, Herius Asinius, Insteius Cato, C.
Pontidius, Telesinus Pontius, Marius Egnatius,

" rettulit. Cuius illi pietati plenam populus Romanus
gratiam rettulit ipsum viritim civitate donando, duos

1 rei publicae 4P ; populi Romani Puteanus.


? Compsamque Voss; Cosamque AP.
? dilucideque Q. P; dilucideq. que 4, corrected by Lipsius.


a Pius here means ** dutiful towards his father.”
80 i


Sulla, who in the previous year had filled the
praetorship, and Quintus Metellus, son of Metellus
Numidicus, who had deservedly received the
cognomen of Pius," for when his father had been
exiled from the state by Lucius Saturninus, the
tribune of the people, because he alone refused
to observe the laws which the tribune had made,
the son had effected his restoration through his
own devotion, aided by the authority of the senate
and the unanimous sentiment of the whole state.
Numidicus earned no greater renown by his triumphs
and public honours than he earned by the cause
of his exile, his exile, and the manner of his
return.

XVI. On the Italian side the most celebrated
generals were Silo Popaedius, Herius Asinius,
Insteius Cato, Gaius Pontidius, Telesinus Pontius,
Marius Ignatius, and Papius Mutilus ; nor ought I,
through excess of modesty, to deprive my own kin
of glory, especially when that which I record is the
truth; for much credit is due the memory of my
great-grandfather Minatius Magius of Aeculanum,
grandson of Decius Magius, leader of the Campanians,
of proven loyalty and distinction. Such fidelity did
Minatius display towards the Romans in this war
that, with a legion which he himself had enrolled
among the Hirpini, he took Herculaneum in con-
junction with Titus Didius, was associated with
Lucius Sulla in the siege of Pompeii, and occupied
Compsa. Several historians have recorded his
services, but the most extensive and clearest
testimony is that of Quintus Hortensius in his
Annals. The Romans abundantly repaid his loyal
zeal by a special grant of the citizenship to himself,


G 81


filios eius creando praetores, cum seni adhuc crea-
rentur.

Lı XVII. Finito ex maxima parte, nisi quae Nolani
belli manebant reliquiae, Italico bello, quo quidem
Romani victis adflictisque ipsi exarmati quam integri?
universis civitatem dare maluerunt, consulatum
inierunt Q. Pompeius et L. Cornelius Sulla, vir qui
neque ad finem victoriae satis laudari neque post


1 continuum Gelenius ; continuo AP.
2 rem populi Romani Laurent. ; rem P.R. BA; remp. P.
3 integri Heinsius; integris AP.


a The number was increased from four to six in 198 B.c.
It was increased to eight by Sulla.

P The sagum or military cloak symbolized war as the
toga symbolized peace.

e i.e. before the war began. What Velleius had in mind
in using. maluerunt is a little vague. The original
* choice" lay between granting the citizenship and war.
They chose the latter alternative. After the war was
over they granted to their enemies in defeat the citizenship

9 |


and by making his sons praetors at a time when
the number elected was still confined to six.?

So bitter was this Italian war, and such its vicissi-
tudes, that in two successive years two Roman
consuls, first Rutilius and subsequently Cato Porcius,
were slain by the enemy, the armies of the Roman
people were routed in many places, and the Romans
were compelled to resort to military dress? and to
remain long in that garb. The Italians chose
Corfinium as their capital, and named it Italica.
Then little by little the strength of the Romans was
recruited by admitting to the citizenship those who
had not taken arms or had not been slow to lay
them down again, and Pompeius, Sulla, and Marius
restored the tottering power of the Roman people.

XVII. Except for the remnants of hostility which
lingered at Nola the Italian war was now in large
measure ended, the Romans, themselves exhausted,
consenting to grant the citizenship individually to
the conquered and humbled states in preference to
giving it to them as a body when their own strength
was still unimpaired.© This was the year in which
Quintus Pompeius and Lucius Cornelius Sulla entered
upon the consulship. Sulla was a man to whom, up
to the conclusion of his career of victory, sufficient
praise can hardly be given, and for whom, after his
victory, no condemnation can be adequate. He was
sprung of a noble family, the sixth in descent from
the Cornelius Rufinus who had been one of the famous
generals in the war with Pyrrhus. As the renown
of his family had waned, Sulla acted for a long while
as though he had no thought of seeking the consul-
which they might have conferred in the beginning and
so avoided the war. 4 88 B.C.


1 XVIII. Per ea tempora Mithridates, Ponticus rex,
vir neque silendus neque dicendus sine cura, bello
acerrimus, virtute eximius, aliquando fortuna, semper
animo maximus, consiliis dux, miles manu, odio in
Romanos Hannibal, occupata Asia necatisque in ea
omnibus civibus Romanis, quos quidem eadem die

3 tempore neque fortitudine adversus Mithridatem
neque fide in Romanos quisquam Rhodiis par fuit
(horum fidem Mytilenaeorum perfidia inluminavit,
qui M'? Aquilium aliosque Mithridati vinctos tradi-
derunt, quibus libertas in unius Theophanis gratiam
postea a Pompeio restituta est), cum terribilis Italiae
quoque videretur imminere, sorte obvenit Sullae
Asia provincia.

4 Is egressus urbe cum circa Nolam moraretur

1 qua Gelenius ; quae AP.


? M’ Ruhuken ; M. AP.


9 88 BC.


ship. Then, after his praetorship, having earned
distinction not only in the Italian war but also, even
before that, in Gaul, where he was second in com-
mand to Marius, and had routed the most eminent
leaders of the enemy, encouraged by his successes,
he became a candidate for the consulship and was
elected by an almost unanimous vote of the citizens.
But this honour did not come to him until the forty-
ninth year of his age.

XVIII. It was about this time? that Mithridates,
king of Pontus, seized Asia and put to death all
Roman citizens in it. He was a man about whom
one cannot speak except with concern nor yet
pass by in silence; he was ever eager for war, of
exceptional bravery, always great in spirit and some-
times in achievement, in strategy a general, in bodily
prowess a soldier, in hatred to the Romans a Hannibal.
He had sent messages to the various cities of Asia
in which he had held out great promises of reward,
ordering that all Romans should be massacred on
the same day and hour throughout the province.
In this crisis none equalled the Rhodians either in
courageous opposition to Mithridates or in loyalty
to the Romans. Their fidelity gained lustre from
the perfidy of the people of Mytilene, who handed
Manius Aquilius and other Romans over to Mithri-
dates in chains. The Mytilenians subsequently had
their liberty restored by Pompey solely in considera-
tion of his friendship for Theophanes. When
Mithridates was now regarded as a formidable
menace to Italy herself, the province of Asia fell to
the lot of Sulla, as proconsul.

Sulla departed from the city, but was still lingering
in the vicinity of Nola, since that city, as though


6 Punico), P. Sulpicius tribunus plebis, disertus, acer,
opibus gratia amicitiis vigore ingenii atque animi
celeberrimus, cum antea rectissima voluntate apud
populum maxumam quaesisset dignitatem, quasi
pigeret eum virtutum suarum et bene consulta ei

6 male cederent, subito pravus et praeceps se! C. Mario
post septuagesimum annum omnia imperia et omnis
provincias concupiscenti addixit legemque ad popu-
lum tulit, qua Sullae imperium abrogaretur, C. Mario
bellum decerneretur Mithridaticum, aliasque leges
perniciosas et exitiabiles neque tolerandas liberae
civitati tulit. Quin etiam Q. Pompei consulis filium
eundemque Sullae generum per emissarios factionis
suae interfecit.

1 XIX. Tum Sulla contracto exercitu ad urbem rediit
eamque armis occupavit, duodecim auctores novarum
pessimarumque rerum, inter quos Marium cum filio
et P. Sulpicio, urbe exturbavit ac lege lata exules
fecit. Sulpicium etiam? adsecuti equites in Lauren-
tinis paludibus iugulavere, caputque eius erectum
et ostentatum pro rostris velut omen inminentis

2 proscriptionis fuit. Marius post sextum consula-

| ! se addidit Puteanus.
? etiam bracketed by Orelli and Cornelissen.


9 88 B.C.


regretting its exceptional loyalty so sacredly main-
tained in the Punic war, still persisted in maintaining
armed resistance to Rome and was being besieged
by a Roman army. While he was still there Publius
Sulpicius, tribune of the people, a man of eloquence
and energy, who had earned distinction by his
wealth, his influence, his friendships, and by the
vigour of his native ability and his courage, and had
previously won great influence with the people by
honourable means, now, as if regretting his virtues,
and discovering that an honourable course of conduct
brought him only disappointment, made a sudden
plunge into evil ways, and attached himself to
Marius, who, though he had passed his seventieth
year, still coveted every position of power and every
province. Along with other pieces of pernicious
and baleful legislation intolerable in a free state,
he proposed a bill to the assembly of the people
abrogating Sulla's command, and entrusting the
Mithridatic war to Gaius Marius. He even went so
far as to cause, through emissaries of his faction, the
assassination of a man who was not only son of
Quintus Pompeius the consul but also son-in-law of
Sulla.

XIX. Thereupon Sulla assembled his army,
returned to the city, took armed possession of it,
drove from the city the twelve persons responsible
for these revolutionary and vicious measures—among
them Marius, his son, and Publius Sulpicius—and
caused them by formal decree^ to be declared
exiles. Sulpicius was overtaken by horsemen and
slain in the Laurentine marshes, and his head was
raised aloft and exhibited on the front of the rostra
as a presage of the impending proscription. Marius,

0.87
s


tum annumque! septuagesimum nudus ac limo obru-
tus, oculis tantummodo ac naribus eminentibus,
extractus arundineto circa paludem Maricae, in
quam se fugiens consectantis Sullae equites abdiderat,
iniecto in collum loro in carcerem Minturnensium

3 iussu duumviri perductus est. Ad quem interficien-
dum missus cum gladio servus publicus natione
Germanus, qui forte ab imperatore eo bello Cimbrico
captus erat, ut agnovit Marium, magno eiulatu
expromens? indignationem casus tanti viri abiecto

4 gladio profugit e carcere. Tum cives, ab hoste
misereri paulo ante principis viri docti, instructum
eum viatico conlataque veste in navem imposuerunt.
At ille adsecutus circa insulam Aenariam filium cur-
sum in Africam direxit inopemque vitam in tugurio
ruinarum Carthaginiensium toleravit, cum Marius
aspiciens Carthaginem, illa intuens Marium, alter
alteri possent esse solacio.


! annumque Voss; annoque AP.

2 expromens Acidalius and Madvig; expromenti BP; ex-
primenti A.

? ab exercitu 4; ad exercitum P; Burer was in doubt
whether the reading should be ab or ad.


e Duumvir was the title of the chief official in the Roman
colonies. Like the consuls in Rome there were two of them.


who had held six consulships and was now more
than seventy years of age, was dragged, naked and
covered with mud, his eyes and nostrils alone
showing above the water, from a reed-bed near the
marsh of Marica, where he had taken refuge when
pursued by the cavalry of Sulla. A rope was
cast about his neck and he was led to the prison
of Minturnae on the order of its duumvir.?^ A public
slave of German nationality was sent with a sword
to put him to death. It happened that this man had
been taken a prisoner by Marius when he was
commander in the war against the Cimbri; when
he recognized Marius, giving utterance with loud
outcry to his indignation at the plight of this great
man, he threw away his sword and fled from the
prison. Then the citizens, taught by a foreign
enemy to pity one who had so short a time before
been the first man in the state, furnished Marius
with money, brought clothing to cover him, and
put him on board a ship. Marius, overtaking his
son near Aenaria, steered his course for Africa, where
he endured a life of poverty in a hut amid the ruins
of Carthage. There Marius, as he gazed upon
Carthage, and Carthage as she beheld Marius, might
well have offered consolation the one to the other.

XX. In this year the hands of Roman soldiers
were first stained with the blood of a consul. Quintus
Pompeius, the colleague of Sulla, was slain by the
army of Gnaeus Pompeius the proconsul in a mutiny
which their general himself had stirred up.

Cinna was a man as lacking in restraint as Marius
and Sulpicius. Accordingly, although the citizen-
ship had been given to Italy with the proviso that
the new citizens should be enrolled in but eight


et multitudo veterum civium dignitatem frangeret
plusque possent recepti in beneficium quam auctores
beneficii, Cinna in omnibus tribubus eos se distribu-
turum pollicitus est: quo nomine ingentem totius

3 Italiae frequentiam in urbem acciverat. E qua
pulsus collegae optimatiumque viribus cum in Cam-
paniam tenderet, ex auctoritate senatus consulatus
ei abrogatus est suffectusque in eius locum L. Cor-
nelius Merula flamen dialis. Haec iniuria homine

4 quam exemplo dignior fuit. Tum Cinna corruptis
primo centurionibus ac tribunis, mox etiam spe
largitionis militibus, ab eo exercitu, qui circa Nolam
erat, receptus est. Is cum universus in verba eius
iurasset, retinens insignia consulatus patriae bellum
intulit, fretus ingenti numero novorum civium, e
quorum delectu trecentas amplius cohortes conscrip-

6 serat ac triginta legionum instar impleverat. Opus
erat partibus auctoritate, cuius augendae gratia
C. Marium cum filio de exilio revocavit quique cum
iis pulsi erant.

1 XXI. Dum bellum autem infert patriae Cinna, Cn.
Pompeius, Magni pater, cuius praeclara opera bello
Marsico praecipue circa Picenum agrum, ut prae-
scripsimus, usa erat res publica quique Asculum
ceperat, circa quam urbem, cum in multis aliis
regionibus exercitus dispersi forent, quinque et


a 87 Bc.
ò The normal strength of a legion was from 5000 to 6000
men. Each legion was divided into ten cohorts.


tribes, so that their power and numbers might not
weaken the prestige of the older citizens, and that
the beneficiaries might not have greater power than
the benefactors, Cinna now promised to distribute
them throughout all the tribes. With this object
he had brought together into the city a great
multitude from all parts of Italy. But he was driven
from the city by the united strength of his colleague
and the optimates, and set out for Campania. His
consulship was abrogated by the authority of the
senate and Lucius Cornelius Merula, priest of Jupiter,
was chosen consul in his place. This illegal act was
more appropriate in the case of Cinna than it was a
good precedent. Cinna was then received by the
army at Nola, after corrupting first the centurions
and tribunes and then even the private soldiers with
promises of largesse.* When they all had sworn
allegiance to him, while still retaining the insignia
of the consulate he waged war upon his country,
relying upon the enormous number of new citizens, -
from whom he had levied more than three hundred
cohorts, thus raising the number of his troops to the
equivalent of thirty legions.’ But his party lacked
the backing of strong men ; to remedy this defect
he recalled Gaius Marius and his son from exile,

and also those who had been banished with them.
XXI. While Cinna was waging war against his
country, the conduct of Gnaeus Pompeius, the father
of Pompey the Great, was somewhat equivocal. As
I have already told, the state had made use of his
distinguished services in the Marsian war, particu-
larly in the territory of Picenum ; he had taken
Asculum, in the vicinity of which, though armies
were scattered in other regions also, seventy-five


septuaginta milia civium Romanorum, amplius sexa-

2 ginta Italicorum una die conflixerant, frustratus spe
continuandi consulatus ita se! dubium mediumque
partibus praestitit, ut omnia ex proprio usu ageret
temporibusque insidiari videretur, et huc atque illuc,
unde spes maior adfulsisset potentiae, sese? exercitum-

6 Seu duae seu tres Pompeiorum fuere familiae,
primus eius nominis ante annos fere centum sexaginta
septem? Q. Pompeius cum Cn. Servilio consul fuit.

6 Cinna et Marius haud incruentis utrimque cer-
taminibus editis urbem occupaverunt, sed prior
ingressus Cinna de recipiendo Mario legem tulit.

1 XXII. Mox C. Marius pestifero civibus suis reditu


! COS. sulta se 4.

2 potentiae sese Halm; potentia esse A ; potentiae se P.

3 focisque Voss; sociisque AP; oculisque Halm after
Lipsius.

4 Halm marks a lacuna before decessit; Sauppe proposes
to supply de caelo (or fulmine) tactus.


5 cuxvir BA; cuxvin P; cxxi Laurent.


thousand Roman citizens and more than sixty
thousand Italians had met in battle on a single day.
Foiled in his hope of a second term in the consulship,
he maintained a doubtful and neutral attitude as
between the two parties, so that he seemed to be
acting entirely in his own interest and to be watching
his chance, turning with his army now to one side
and now to the other, according as each offered a
greater promise for power for himself. In the end,
however, he fought against Cinna in a great and
bloody battle. Words almost fail to express how
disastrous to combatants and spectators alike was
the issue of this battle, which began and ended
beneath the walls and close to the very hearths of
Rome. Shortly after this battle, while pestilence
was ravaging both armies, as though their strength
had not been sapped enough by the war, Gnaeus
Pompeius died. The joy felt at his death almost
counterbalanced the feeling of loss for the citizens
who had perished bv sword or pestilence, and the
Roman people vented upon his dead body the hatred
it had owed him while he lived.

Whether there were two families of the Pompeii
or three, the first of that name to be consul was
Quintus Pompeius, who was colleague of Gnaeus
Servilius, about one hundred and sixty-seven years
ago.

"Cinna and Marius both seized the city after
conflicts which caused much shedding of blood on
both sides, but Cinna was the first to enter it,
whereupon he proposed a law authorizing the recall
of Marius.

XXII. Then Gaius Marius entered the city, and
his return was fraught with calamity for the citizens.


intravit moenia. Nihil illa victoria fuisset crudelius,
nisi mox Sullana esset secuta ; neque licentia gladio-
rum in mediocris! saevitum, sed excelsissimi quoque
atque eminentissimi? civitatis viri variis suppliciorum

2 generibus adfecti. In iis consul Octavius, vir lenis-
simi animi, iussu Cinnae interfectus est. Merula
autem, qui se sub adventum Cinnae consulatu abdi-
caverat, incisis venis superfusoque altaribus sanguine,
quos saepe pro salute rei publicae flamen dialis
precatus erat deos, eos in execrationem Cinnae
partiumque eius tum precatus optime de re publica

4 belli Cimbrici gloria, quae illi cum Mario communis
fuerat, celeberrimus, cum ad mortem conquireretur,
conclusit se loco nuper calce harenaque perpolito
inlatoque igni, qui vim odoris excitaret, simul exitiali
hausto spiritu, simul incluso suo mortem magis
voto quam arbitrio inimicorum obiit.

! jn mediocris] in mediocri 4 ; immediocri B; in medio-
creis P.


? excelsissimi quaque atque eminentissimi Heinsius ; ex-
celsissimae quoque a. eminentissimae 4 P.


No victory would ever have exceeded his in cruelty
had Sulla's not followed soon afterwards. Nor did
the licence of the sword play havoc among the
obscure alone; the highest and most distinguished
men in the state were made the victims of many
kinds of vengeance Amongst these Octavius the
consul, a man of the mildest temper, was slain by the
command of Cinna. Merula, however, who had abdi-
cated his consulship just before the arrival of Cinna,
opened his veins and, as his blood drenched the altars,
he implored the gods to whom, as priest of Jupiter,
he had formerly prayed for safety of the state, to visit
their wrath upon Cinna and his party. Thus did he
yield up the life which had served the state so well.
Marcus Antonius, the foremost statesman and orator
of Rome, was struck down, at the order of Marius
and Cinna, by the swords of soldiers, though he
caused even these to hesitate by the power of his
eloquence. Then there was Quintus Catulus, re-
nowned for his virtues in general and for the glory,
which he had shared with Marius, of having won the
Cimbrian war ; when he was being hunted down for
death, he shut himself in a room that had lately been
plastered with lime and sand; then he brought fire that
it might cause a powerful vapour to issue from the
plaster, and by breathing the poisonous air and then
holding his breath he died a death which would have
pleased his enemies, though not of their choosing.
The whole state was now plunging headlong into
ruin ; and yet no one had so far appeared who either
dared to offer for pillage the goods of a Roman
citizen, or could bring himself to demand them,
Later, however, even this extreme was reached,
and avarice furnished a motive for ruthlessness ;


praeberet et modus culpae ex pecuniae modo con-
stitueretur et qui fuisset locuples, fieret is nocens,
suique quisque periculi merces foret, nec quidquam
videretur turpe, quod esset quaestuosum.

1 XXIII. Secundum deinde consulatum Cinna et
septimum Marius in priorum dedecus iniit, cuius initio
morbo oppressus decessit, vir in bello hostibus, in
otio civibus infestissimus quietisque impatientissimus.

2 In huius locum suffectus Valerius Flaccus, turpissimae
legis auctor, qua creditoribus quadrantem solvi
iusserat, cuius facti merita eum poena intra bien-

3 nium consecuta est. Dominante in Italia Cinna maior
pars nobilitatis ad Sullam in Achaiam ac deinde post
in Asiam perfugit.


® For this period and its proscriptions see Plutarch, Life
of Sulla. e 86 B.C. 4 87-86 B.C.


the magnitude of one's crime was determined by
the magnitude of his property ; he who possessed
riches became a malefactor and was in each case
the prize* set up for his own murder. In short
nothing was regarded as dishonourable that brought
profit.’

XXIII. Cinna then entered upon his second
consulship, and Marius upon his seventh, only to
bring dishonour upon his former six. An illness
which came upon Marius at the very beginning of
his year of office ended the life of this man, who,
impatient as he was of tranquillity, was as dangerous
to his fellow-citizens in peace as he had been in
war to Rome's enemies. In his place was chosen
as consul suffectus Valerius Flaccus, the author of a
most disgraceful law, by which he had ordained that
one-fourth only of a debt should be paid to the
creditors, an act for which a well-deserved punish-
ment overtook him within two years. During this
time, while Cinna held the reins of power in Italy, a
large proportion of the nobles took refuge with
Sulla in Achaea, and afterwards in Asia.

In the meantime Sulla fought with the generals
of Mithridates at Athens, in Boeotia, and in Macedonia
with such success that he recovered Athens, and,
after surmounting many difficulties in overcoming
the manifold fortifications of Piraeus, slew more than
two hundred thousand of the enemy and made
prisoners of as many more.? If anyone regards this
period of rebellion, during which Athens suffered
siege at the hands of Sulla, as a breach of good faith
on the part of the Athenians, he shows a strange
ignorance of the facts of history ; for so constant
was the loyalty of the Athenians towards the Romans

H 97


in omni re, quidquid sincera fide gereretur, id Romani

6 Attica fieri praedicarent. Ceterum tum oppressi
Mithridatis armis homines miserrimae condicionis
cum ab inimicis tenerentur, oppugnabantur ab amicis
et animos extra moenia, corpora necessitati servientes

6 intra muros habebant. Transgressus deinde in Asiam
Sulla parentem ad! omnia supplicemque Mithridatem
invenit, quem multatum pecunia ac parte navium
Asia omnibusque aliis provinciis, quas armis occu-
paverat, decedere coégit, captivos recepit, in per-
fugas noxiosque animadvertit, paternis, id est
Ponticis finibus contentum esse iussit.

1 XXIV. C. Flavius Fimbria, qui praefectus equitum
ante adventum Sullae Valerium Flaccum consularem
virum interfecerat exercituque occupato imperator
appellatus forti? Mithridatem pepulerat proelio, sub
adventu? Sullae se ipse interemit, adulescens, quae

2 pessime ausus erat, fortiter executus. Eodem anno
P. Laenas tribunus plebis Sex. Lucilium, qui priore
anno tribunus plebis fuerat, saxo Tarpeio deiecit, et
cum collegae eius, quibus diem dixerat, metu ad
Sullam profugissent, aqua ignique iis interdixit.

! ad Ruhnken ; ante AP.
2 forti Puteanus; fonte AP; sponte Halm.


3 sub adventu AP; sub adventum Halm.
+ qui in priore AP.


e i.e. with their Roman besiegers.
è The province of Asia, i.e. Asia Minor.


that always and invariably, whenever the Romans
referred to any act of unqualified loyalty, they
called it an example of “ Attic faith." But at this
time, overwhelmed as they were by the arms of
Mithridates, the Athenians were in a most unhappy
plight. Held in subjection by their enemies and
besieged by their friends, although in obedience to
necessity they kept their bodies within the walls,
their hearts were outside their fortifications.” After
the capture of Athens Sulla crossed into Asia,
where he found Mithridates submissive to all his
demands and in the attitude of a suppliant. He
compelled him, after paying a fine in money and
giving up half his fleet, to evacuate Asia® and all
the other provinces which he had seized; he also
secured the return of all prisoners, inflicted punish-
ment upon deserters and others who had been in
any way culpable, and obliged Mithridates to be
satisfied with the boundaries of his inheritance, that
is to say, with Pontus.

XXIV. Before the arrival of Sulla, Gaius Flavius
Fimbria, prefect of horse, had put to death Valerius
Flaccus, a man of consular rank, had taken command
of his army, by which he was saluted as imperator,
and had succeeded in defeating Mithridates in
battle. Now, on the eve of Sulla's arrival, he took
his own life. He was a young man who, however |
reprehensible his bold designs might be, at any `
rate executed them with bravery. In the same year
Publius Laenas, tribune of the people, threw Sextus
Lucilius, tribune of the previous year, from the
Tarpeian rock. When his colleagues, whom he also
indicted, fled in fear to Sulla, he had a decree of
banishment passed against them.


1 XXV. Putares Sullam venisse in Italiam non belli


1 superaret AP ; Halm regards as a case of careless writ-
ing ; Ellis understands superaret as having in it!an imperative
force.

* ausum esse Orelli; ausum P; aususs with final s sub-
sequently deleted A.

9 83 B.C.


Sulla had now settled affairs across the sea. There
came to him ambassadors of the Parthians—he was
the first of the Romans to be so honoured—and
among them some wise men who, from the marks
on his body, foretold that his life and his fame
would be worthy of a god. Returning to Italy he
landed at Brundisium," having not more than thirty
thousand men to face more than two hundred
thousand of the enemy. Of all the exploits of
Sulla there is nothing that I should consider more
noteworthy than that, during the three years in
which the party of Marius and Cinna were continu-
ously masters of Italy, he never hid from them his
intention to wage war on them, but at the same time
he did not interrupt the war which he then had on
his hands. He considered that his duty was to
crush the enemy before taking vengeance upon
citizens, and that after he had repelled the menace
of the foreigner and won a victory in this war abroad,
he should then prove himself the master in a war at
home. Before Sulla's arrival Cinna was slain in a
mutiny of his army. He was a man who deserved
to die by the sentence of his victorious enemies
rather than at the hands of his angry soldiers. Of
him one can truly say that he formed daring plans,
such as no good citizen would have conceived, and
that he accomplished what none but a most resolute
man could have accomplished, and that he was
foolhardy enough in the formulation of his plans,
but in their execution a man. Carbo remained sole
consul throughout the year without electing a
colleague in the place of Cinna.

XXV. One would think that Sulla had come to
Italy, not as the champion of war but as the


2 poterat pax placere. Crescebat interim in dies Sullae
exercitus confluentibus ad eum optimo quoque et
sanissimo. Felici deinde circa Capuam eventu Sci-
pionem Norbanumque consules superat, quorum Nor-
banus acie victus, Scipio ab exercitu suo desertus

4 diversissimi animi conspiceretur exemplum. Post?
victoriam — namque ascendens* montem Tifata cum
C. Norbano concurrerat — Sulla gratis Dianae, cuius
numini regio illa sacrata est, solvit ; aquas salubri-
tate medendisque corporibus nobiles agrosque omnis
addixit deae. Huius gratae religionis memoriam et
inscriptio templi adfixa posti hodieque et tabula
testatur aerea intra aedem.


1 res supplied by Ruhnken.

2 mitis supplied by Krause; aciustissimo AP; aequissimo
Halm.

$ post Gelenius ; posuit AP.

* namque ascendens Halm; qua demendes AP; qua
descendens Gelenius.


a 83 B.C. ò See Chap. XXX.


establisher of peace, so quietly did he lead his army
through Calabria and Apulia into Campania, taking
unusual care not to inflict damage on crops, fields,
men, or cities, and such efforts did he make to end
the war on just terms and fair conditions. But peace
could not be to the liking of men whose cause was
wicked and whose cupidity was unbounded. In the
meantime Sulla's army was daily growing, for all
the better and saner citizens flocked to his side.
By a fortunate issue of events he overcame the
consuls Scipio and Norbanus near Capua." Norbanus
was defeated in battle, while Scipio, deserted and
betrayed by his army, was allowed by Sulla to go
unharmed. So different was Sulla the warrior from
Sulla the victor that, while his victory was in
progress he was mild and more lenient than was
reasonable, but after it was won his cruelty was
unprecedented. For instance, as we have already
said, he disarmed the consul and let him go, and
after gaining possession of many leaders including
Quintus Sertorius, so soon to become the firebrand
of a great war, he dismissed them unharmed. The
reason, ] suppose, was that we might have a
notable example of a double and utterly contradictory
ersonality in one and the same man.

wi It was while Sulla was ascending Mount Tifata
that he had encountered Gaius Norbanus. After
his victory over him he paid a vow of gratitude to
Diana, to whom that region is sacred, and con-
secrated to the goddess the waters renowned for their
salubrity and power to heal, as well as all the lands in
the vicinity. The record of this pleasing act of piety
is witnessed to this day by an inscription on the door
of the temple, and a bronze tablet within the edifice.


Ne quid usquam malis publicis deesset, in qua
civitate semper virtutibus certatum erat, certabatur
sceleribus, optimusque sibi videbatur, qui fuerat?
pessimus. Quippe dum ad Sacriportum dimicatur,
Damasippus praetor Domitium consularem, Scae-
volam? Mucium, pontificem maximum et divini
humanique iuris auctorem celeberrimum, et C. Car-
bonem praetorium, consulis fratrem, et Antistium
aedilicium velut faventis Sullae partibus in curia


3 Hostilia trucidavit. Non perdat nobilissimi facti


XXVII. At Pontius Telesinus, dux Samnitium, vir
domi bellique fortissimus penitusque Romano nomini


1 suo. Is Orelli; st'lis A (sulis according to Orelli); con-
sulis P.

2 fuerat AP ; foret Halm.

3 Domitium consularem, Scaevolam Mucium Ruhnken ;
Dom. Scaevolam etiam 4P.

* virtute feminae nec propria latet Thomas; virtute
eminet patria latet 4P ; virtute feminae propria patet Haupt
followed by Halm.


XXVI. Carbo now became consul for the third


time, in conjunction with Gaius Marius, now aged
twenty-six, the son of a father who had been seven
times consul. He was a man who showed his father's
spirit, though not destined to reach his years, who
displayed great fortitude in the many enterprises he
undertook, and never belied the name. Defeated
by Sulla at Sacriportus he retired with his army to
Praeneste, which town, thongh already strong by
nature, he had strengthened by a garrison.

In order that nothing should be lacking to the
calamities of the state, in Rome, a city in which there
had already been rivalry in virtues, there was now a
rivalry in crimes, and that man now regarded himself
as the best citizen who had formerly been the worst.
While the battle was being fought at Sacriportus,
within the city the praetor Damasippus murdered
in the Curia Hostilia, as supposed partisans of Sulla,
Domitius, a man of consular rank ; Scaevola Mucius,
pontifex maximus and famous author of works on
religious and civil law; Gaius Carbo, a former
praetor, and brother of the consul, and Antistius, a
former aedile. May Calpurnia, the daughter of
Bestia and wife of Antistius, never lose the glory
of a noble deed ; for, when her husband was put to
death, as I have just said, she pierced her own
breast with the sword. What increment has his
glory and fame received through this brave act of
a woman! and yet his own name is by no means
obscure.

XXVII. While Carbo and Marius were still consuls,
one hundred and nine years ago, on the Kalends of
November, Pontius Telesinus, a Samnite chief, brave
in spirit and in action and hating to the core the


infestissimus, contractis circiter quadraginta milibus
fortissimae pertinacissimaeque in retinendis armis
iuventutis, Carbone ac Mario consulibus abhinc
annos centum et novem! Kal. Novembribus ita ad
portam Collinam cum Sulla dimicavit, ut ad summum

2 discrimen et eum et rem publicam perduceret, quae
non maius periculum adiit Hannibalis intra tertium
miliarium castra conspicata, quam eo die, quo cir-
cumvolans ordines exercitus sui Telesinus dictitansque
adesse Romanis ultimum diem vociferabatur eruen-
dam delendamque urbem, adiiciens numquam defu-
turos raptores Italicae libertatis lupos, nisi silva, in

4 Tum demum desperatis rebus suis C. Marius
adulescens per cuniculos, qui miro opere fabricati
in diversas agrorum partis ferebant,? conatus erum-
pere, cum foramine e terra emersisset, a dispositis in


1 cix Kritz; xı BA; xL P.
2 ferro figi Madvig ; ferri AP.
3 ferebant Burman ; fuerunt AP ; ferunt Gelenius.
3 eius P; civis AB.


very name of Rome, having collected about him
forty thousand of the bravest and most steadfast
outh who still persisted in retaining arms, fought
with Sulla, near the Colline gate, a battle so critical
as to bring both Sulla and the city into the gravest
peril. Rome had not faced a greater danger when
she saw the camp of Hannibal within the third
milestone, than on this day when Telesinus went
about from rank to rank exclaiming: “ The last
day is at hand for the Romans,” and in a loud voice
exhorted his men to overthrow and destroy their
city, adding : '" These wolves that made such ravages
upon Italian liberty will never vanish until we have cut
down the forest that harbours them." It was only
after the first hour of the night that the Roman army
was able to recover its breath, and the enemy retired.
The next day Telesinus was found in a half-dying
condition, but with the expression of a conqueror upon
his face rather than that of a dying man. Sulla
ordered his severed head to be fixed upon a spear
point and carried around the walls of Praeneste.
The young Marius, now at last despairing of his
cause, endeavoured to make his way out of Praeneste
through the tunnels, wrought with great engineering
skill, which led into the fields in different directions ;
but, on emerging from the exit, he was cut off by
men who had been stationed there for that purpose.
Some authorities have asserted that he died by his
own hand, some that he died in company with the
younger brother of Telesinus, who was also besieged
and was endeavouring to escape with him, and that
each ran upon the other’s sword. Whatever the
manner of his death, his memory is not obscured
even to-day by the great figure of his father. Sulla’s


6  Oppugnationi autem Praenestis ac Marii praefuerat
Ofella Lucretius, qui cum ante Marianarum fuisset
partium praetor, ad Sullam transfugerat. Felici-
tatem diei, quo Samnitium Telesinique pulsus est
exercitus, Sulla perpetua ludorum circensium honora-
vit memoria, qui sub eius nomine Sullanae Victoriae
celebrantur. |

1 XXVIII. Paulo ante quam Sulla ad Sacriportum
dimicaret, magnificis proeliis partium eius viri
hostium exercitum fuderant, duo Servilii apud
Clusium, Metellus Pius apud Faventiam, M. Lucullus
circa Fidentiam.

2  Videbantur finita belli civilis mala, cum Sullae
crudelitate aucta sunt. Quippe dictator creatus
(cuius honoris usurpatio per annos centum et viginti
intermissa ; nam proximus post annum quam Han-
nibal Italia excesserat, uti adpareat populum Ro-
manum usum dictatoris haud metu desiderasse tali
quo timuisset potestatem?) imperio, quo priores ad
vindicandam maximis periculis rem publicam olim
usi erant, eo in inmodicae crudelitatis licentiam

1 praetor AP; proditor Voss; fautor Scriner.

x haud . .. potestatem Ellis; aut metu desideras tulio
cotimuis se (Tulio co timuisse P) potestatem AP; ut in
metu desiderasse ita in otio timuisse potestatem Halm.

3 imperio . . . usi erant Ruhnken and Gelenius ; imperio
prores (proh res P) ad vindicandam (-dum P) maximi


periculi spolia musierant 44 P.
4 eo inmodicae crud. licentia 4P ; em. Cludius.


estimate of the young man is manifest ; for it was
only after he was slain that he took the name of
Felix," a name which he would have been completely
justified in assuming had his life ended with his
victory.

The siege of Marius in Praeneste was directed by
Ofella Lucretius, who had been a general on the
Marian side but had deserted to Sulla. Sulla
commemorated the great good fortune which fell
to him on this day by instituting an annual festival
of games held in the circus, which are still celebrated
as the games of Sulla's victory.

XXVIII. Shortly before Sulla's victory at Sacri-
portus, several leaders of his party had routed the
enemy in successful engagements ; the two Servilii
at Clusium, Metellus Pius at Faventia, and Marcus
Lucullus in the vicinity of Fidentia.

The terrors of the civil war seemed nearly at
an end when they received fresh impetus from
the cruelty of Sulla. Being made dictator’ (the
office had been obsolete for one hundred and
twenty years, and had been last employed in
the year after Hannibal’s departure from Italy;
it is therefore clear that the fear which caused
the Roman people to feel the need of a dictator
was outweighed by the fear of his excessive
power) Sulla now wielded with unbridled cruelty
the powers which former dictators had  em-
ployed only to save their country in times of
extreme danger. He was the first to set the
precedent for proscription—would that he had been
the last! The result was that in the very state in

5 The ** fortunate.”
^ 82 B.C.


convicii iudicium histrioni ex albo! redditur, in ea
iugulati civis Romani publice constitueretur auctora-
mentum, plurimumque haberet, qui plurimos inter-
emisset, neque occisi hostis quam civis uberius foret

4 praemium fieretque quisque merces mortis suae. Nec
tantum in eos, qui contra arma tulerant, sed in
multos insontis saevitum. . Adiectum etiam, ut bona
proscriptorum venirent exclusique paternis opibus
liberi etiam petendorum honorum iure prohiberentur
simulque, quod indignissimum est, senatorum filii
et onera ordinis sustinerent et iura perderent.

L XXIX. Sub adventum in Italiam L. Sullae Cn.
Pompeius, eius Cn. Pompei filius, quem magnifi-
centissimas res in consulatu gessisse bello Marsico
praediximus, tris et viginti annos natus, abhinc annos
centum et tredecim? privatis ut opibus, ita consiliis
magna ausus magnificeque conata executus, ad
vindicandam restituendamque dignitatem patriae
firmum ex agro Piceno, qui totus paternis eius


! histrioni ex albo Gronovius et Mommsen ; historiarum
(historiarium P) ex alto ABP.
? cx Kritz.
3 sed ea Burman; sed ex AP.
. * quae added by Aldus.


9 83 B.C.


which an actor who had been hissed from the stage
has legal redress for wilful abuse, a premium for
the murder of a citizen was now publicly announced ;
that the richest man was he who had slain the
greatest number; that the bounty for slaying an
enemy was no greater than that for slaying a citizen ;
and that each man became the prize set up for his
own death. Nor was vengeance wreaked upon
those alone who had borne arms against him, but
on many innocents as well. In addition the goods
of the proscribed were sold, and their children were
not only deprived of their fathers' property but were
also debarred frgm the right of seeking public office,
and to cap the climax of injustice, the sons of senators
were compelled to bear the burdens and yet lose the
rights pertaining to their rank.

XXIX. Just before the arrival of Lucius Sulla in
Italy, Gnaeus Pompeius, the son of the Gnaeus
Pompeius who, as has already been mentioned, won
such brilliant successes in the Marsian war during
his consulship, though but twenty-three years of
age—it was one hundred and thirteen years ago °
—on his own initiative and with his own private
funds conceived and brilliantly executed a daring
plan. To avenge his country and restore her dignity
he raised a strong army from the district of Picenum
which was filled with the retainers of his father. To
do justice to the greatness of this man would require
many volumes, but the brief compass of my work
compels me to limit my description to a few words.

On the side of his mother Lucilia he was of
senatorial stock. He was distinguished by a personal
beauty, not of the sort which gives the bloom of
youth its charm, but stately and unchanging, as


veniens amplitudinem fortunamque eum ad ultimum
vitae comitata est diem ; innocentia eximius, sanc-
3 titate praecipuus, eloquentia medius, potentiae, quae
honoris causa ad eum deferretur, non vi! ab eo occu-
paretur, cupidissimus, dux bello peritissimus, civis
in toga, nisi ubi vereretur ne quem haberet parem,
modestissimus, amicitiarum tenax, in offensis exora-
bilis, in reconcilianda gratia fidelissimus, in acci-
pienda satisfactione facilimus, potentia sua num-
4 quam aut raro ad impotentiam usus, paene omnium
vitiorum expers, nisi numeraretur inter maxima in
civitate libera dominaque gentium indignari, cum
omnes cives iure haberet pares, quemquam aequalem
5 dignitate conspicere. Hic a toga virili adsuetus com-
militio prudentissimi ducis, parentis sui, bonum et
capax recta discendi ingenium singulari rerum
militarium prudentia excoluerat, ut a Sertorio
Metellus laudaretur magis, Pompeius timeretur
validius.?

XXX. Tum M. Perpenna praetorius, e proscriptis,
gentis clarioris quam animi, Sertorium inter cenam
Oscae interemit Romanisque certam victoriam,
partibus suis excidium, sibi turpissimam mortem
pessimo auctoravit facinore. Metellus et Pompeius

1 ui Mommsen; ut AP.


2 Krause believes that there is a hiatus of some length be-
tween this chapter and X X X.


a 72 B.C.
^ After the assassination Perpenna took charge of the
army of Sertorius, was defeated by om. and taken
risoner. He sought to save his life by delivering up to
ompey the papers of Sertorius implicating many of the
leading men of Rome in a conspiracy to change the con-
stitution of Sulla. Pompey commanded that the papers be
burnt, and that Perpenna be put to death.


befitted the distinction and good fortune of his
career, and this beauty attended him to the last
day of his life. He was a man of exceptional purity
of life, of great uprightness of character, of but
moderate oratorical talent, ambitious of such power
as might be conferred upon him as a mark of
honour, but not that which had to be forcibly
usurped. In war a resourceful general, in peace a
citizen of temperate conduct except when he feared
a rival, constant in his friendships, easily placated
when offended, loyal in re-establishing terms of amity,
very ready to accept satisfaction, never or at least
rarely abusing his power, Pompey was free from-
almost every fault, unless it be considered one of
the greatest of faults for a man to chafe at seeing
anyone his equal in dignity in a free state, the
mistress of the world, where he should justly regard
all citizens as his equals. From the day on which
he had assumed the toga he had been trained to
military service on the staff of that sagacious general,
his father, and by a singular insight into military
tactics had so developed his excellent native talent,
which showed great capacity to learn what was
best, that, while Sertorius bestowed the greater
praise upon Metellus, it was Pompey he feared the
more strongly.

XXX. Shortly afterwards Marcus Perpenna, an
ex-praetor, one of those who had been proscribed, a
man more distinguished for his birth than for his char-
acter, assassinated Sertorius at Osca at a banquet.^
By this wicked deed he ensured success to the
Romans, and destruction to his own faction, and
for himself a death of extreme dishonour.’ Metellus
and Pompey won triumphs for their victories in


I 113


5 Dum Sertorianum bellum in Hispania geritur,
quattuor et sexaginta fugitivi e ludo gladiatorio
Capua profugientes duce Spartaco, raptis ex ea
urbe gladiis, primo Vesuvium montem petiere, mox
crescente in dies multitudine gravibus variisque


1 absentis add. Krause.
2 sine re Gelenius ; in iure AP.
3 xc milia Voss; xL a ccc AP.
* omnium FP; omni 4 ; consensu add. Lillis.


a Extraordinary commands: here may be included the
extraordinary title of proconsul conferred upon him though
but a private citizen in the war against Sertorius ; his extra-
ordinary election to the consulship in which the senate
waived legal age and absence from Rome; the power of the
imperium maius over the whole Mediterranean to fifty miles
inland from its coasts, conferred in 67 s.c. by the Gabinian
law ; and the extension of this power by the Manilian law
to cover all the fleets and armies in the east and the whole
of Asia as far as Ármenia. > 70 B.C.


Spain. Pompey, who even at the time of this
triumph was still à Roman knight, entered the city
in his triumphal car on the day before his entrance
upon his consulate. Who is there who does not feel
surprise that this man, who owed his elevation to
the highest position in the state to so many extra-
ordinary commands,” should have taken it ill that
the senate and the Roman people were willing to
consider Gaius Caesar as a candidate for the consul-
ship a second time, though suing for it in absentia?
So common a failing is it for mankind to overlook
every irregularity in their own case, but to make
no concessions to others, and to let their discontent
with conditions be vented upon suspected motives
and upon persons instead of the real cause. In this
consulship? Pompey restored the power of the
tribunes, of which Sulla had left the shadow without
the substance.°

While war was being waged against Sertorius in
Spain sixty-four runaway slaves, under the leadership
of Spartacus, escaping from a gladiatorial school in
Capua, seized swords in that city, and at first took
refuge on Mount Vesuvius ;7 then, as their number
increased daily, they afflicted Italy with many serious
disasters. Their number grew to such an extent
that in the last battle which they fought they
confronted the Roman army with ninety thousand
men. The glory of ending this war belongs to
Marcus Crassus, who was soon by unanimous consent
to be regarded as the first citizen in the state.


e i.e. by depriving the tribunes of the right of initiating
legislation, by reducing the right of intercessio to a simple
ius auxilii ferendi (Cic. De legg. iii. 9), and by disqualifying
tribunes from holding curule offices. 4 73-71 B.C.


1 XXXI. Converterat Cn. Pompei persona totum in
se terrarum orbem et per omnia maior civi! habe-
batur. Qui cum consul perquam laudabiliter iurasset
se in nullam provinciam ex eo magistratu iturum

2 idque servasset, post biennium A. Gabinius tribunus
legem tulit, ut cum belli more, non latrociniorum,
orbem classibus iam, non furtivis expeditionibus
piratae terrerent quasdamque etiam Italiae urbes
diripuissent, Cn. Pompeius ad eos opprimendos mit-
teretur essetque ei imperium aequum in omnibus
provinciis cum proconsulibus usque ad quinquage-
simum miliarium a mari. Quo scito? paene totius


! maior civi Heinsius ; maiore vi AP.
2 quo scito Schegk ; quos c A ; quo senatus Cos. P.
3 septennium Krause; biennium AP.
4 leva 4.


a 67 B.C.

> [n 74 B.c. Marcus Antonius, the father of the triumvir,
who had held the praetorship the previous year, obtained
through the influence of Cethegus and the consul Cotta the
command of the fleet and the coasts of the Mediterranean
in order to clear the sea of pirates.


XXXI. The personality of Pompey had now turned
the eyes of the world upon itself, and in all things
he was now regarded as more than a mere citizen.
As consul he made the laudable promise, which he
also kept, that he would not go from that office to
any province. But, two years afterwards, when the
pirates were terrifying the world, not as heretofore
by furtive marauding expeditions but with fleets of
ships in the manner of regular warfare, and had
already plundered several cities of Italy, Aulus
Gabinius, a tribune, proposed an enactment "^ to the
effect that Gnaeus Pompeius should be sent to crush
them, and that in all the provinces he should have a
power equal with that of the proconsular governors
to a distance of fifty miles from the sea. By this
decree the command of almost the entire world was
being entrusted to one man. Seven years before, it
is true, like power had been decreed to Marcus
Antonius as praetor. But sometimes the personality
of the recipient of such power, just as it renders the
precedent more or less dangerous, increases or
diminishes its invidiousness. In the case of Antonius
people had looked upon his position with no concern.
For it is not often that we begrudge honours to those
whose power we do not fear. On the other hand
men shrink from conferring extraordinary powers
upon those who seem likely to retain them or lay
them aside only as they themselves choose, and
whose inclinations are their only check. The
optimates advised against the grant to Pompey,
but sane advice succumbed to impulse.

XXXII. The sterling character of Quintus Catulus
and his modesty on this occasion are worthy of
record. Opposing the law before the assembled


3 Per idem tempus Cotta iudicandi munus, quod
C. Gracchus ereptum senatui ad equites, Sulla ab
illis ad senatum transtulerant,? aequaliter in utrum-
que ordinem partitus est; Otho Roscius lege sua
equitibus in theatro loca restituit.

4 At Cn. Pompeius multis et praeclaris viris in id
bellum adsumptis discriptoque paene in omnis
recessus maris praesidio navium, brevi inexsupera-
bili manu terrarum orbem liberavit praedonesque
saepe multis iam aliis locis? victos circa Ciliciam classe
adgressus fudit ac fugavit; et quo maturius bellum


! liberae 4 (an erasure after ae); liber aeret deir P)

: 2 transtulerat 4.

3 praedonesque per multa a multis locis AP; alias ac
multis Burer.


a Otho Roscius, tribune in 67 s.c. The law set apart the
first fourteen rows, next to the Senators, who sat in the
orchestra, for those of equestrian rating. Cicero also speaks
of it as a restoration, but we have no information as to when
the distinction was first made.


people he had said that Pompey was without
question a great man, but that he was now becoming
too great for a free republic, and that all powers
ought not to be reposed in one man. “ If anything
happens to Pompey," he added, “ whom will you
put in his place? " The people shouted with one
accord, “ You, Catulus." Then, yielding to the
unanimous desire of the people for the proposed law —
and to this honourable tribute of his fellow-citizens,
he left the assembly. At this point one would fain
express admiration for the modesty of the man and
the fairness of the people; in the case of Catulus,
because he ceased his opposition, and, in the case
of the people, because it was unwilling to withhold
from one who was speaking against the measure in
opposition to them this real evidence of their
esteem.

About the same time Cotta divided service
upon the juries equally between the senatorial and
equestrian orders. Gaius Gracchus had taken this
privilege from the senate and given it to the knights,
while Sulla had again transferred it from the knights
to the senate. Otho Roscius by his law restored to
the knights their places in the theatre."

Meanwhile Gnaeus Pompey enlisted the services
of many illustrious men, distributed detachments
of the fleet to all the recesses of the sea, and
in a short time with an invincible force he freed
the world from the menace of piracy. Near the
Cilician coast he delivered his final attack upon
the pirates, who had already met with frequent
defeats in many other places, and completely routed
them. Then, in order that he might the more
quickly put an end to a war that spread over so wide


5 tam late diffusum conficeret, reliquias eorum con-
tractas in urbibus remotoque mari loco in certa sede

1 XXXIII. Cum esset in fine bellum piraticum et
L. Lucullus, qui ante septem annos ex consulatu
sortitus Asiam Mithridati oppositus erat magnasque
et memorabiles res ibi gesserat, Mithridatem saepe
multis locis fuderat, egregia Cyzicum liberarat
victoria, Tigranem, regum maximum, in Armenia
vicerat ultimamque bello manum paene magis
noluerat imponere quam non potuerat, quia! alioqui
per omnia laudabilis et bello paene invictus pecuniae
pellebatur cupidine, idem bellum adhuc adminis-
traret, Manilius tribunus plebis, semper venalis et
alienae minister potentiae, legem tulit, ut bellum

2 Mithridaticum per Cn. Pompeium administraretur.
Accepta ea magnisque certatum inter imperatores
iurgiis, cum Pompeius Lucullo infamiam pecuniae,
Lucullus Pompeio interminatam cupiditatem obii-
ceret imperii neuterque ab altero quod arguebat?

1 quia Bothe ; qui AP.


? ab altero quod arguebat Burman; ab co quod argue-
batur 4P. i i


a An allusion to Pompey's cognomen ** The Great.”
> 66 B.C.


an area, he collected the remnants of the pirates
and established them in fixed abodes in cities far
from the sea. Some criticize him for this; but
although the plan is sufficiently recommended by
its author, it would have made its author great^
. whoever he might have been; for, by giving the
pirates the opportunity to live without brigandage,
he restrained them from brigandage.

XXXIII. When the war with the pirates was
drawing to a close, Pompey was assigned to the
command against Mithridates in place of Lucius
Lucullus. Seven years before this, Lucullus, at the
conclusion of his consulship, had obtained the pro-
consulship of Asia, and had been placed in command
against Mithridates. In this post he had performed
some great and notable exploits, having defeated
Mithridates several times in different regions, freed
Cyzicus by a brilliant victory, and conquered
Tigranes, the greatest of kings, in Armenia. That
he had not put an end to the war was due, one might
say, to lack of inclination rather than of ability ;
for although in all other respects he was a man of
laudable character and in war had scarcely ever
been defeated, he was a victim to the love of money.
He was still engaged in carrying on the same struggle
when Manilius, tribune of the people, a man of venal
character always, and ready to abet the ambitions
of others, proposed a law that Pompey should be
given the chief command in the Mithridatic war.
The law was passed, and the two commanders began
to vie with each other in recriminations, Pompey
charging Lucullus with his unsavoury greed for
money, and Lucullus taunting Pompey with his
unbounded ambition for military power. Neither


4 sumeret, alieno deponeret) et Lucullus, summus
alioqui vir, profusae huius in aedificiis convictibusque
et apparatibus luxuriae primus auctor fuit, quem ob
iniectas moles mari et receptum suffossis montibus
in terras mare haud infacete Magnus Pompeius
Xerxen togatum vocare adsueverat.

1 XXXIV. Per id tempus a Q. Metello Creta insula
in populi Romani potestatem redacta est, quae
ducibus Panare et Lasthene quattuor et viginti
milibus iuvenum coactis, velocitate pernicibus, armo-
rum laborumque patientissimis, sagittarum usu cele-
berrimis, per triennium Romanos exercitus fati-


1 omnino Acidalius ; animo AP.
2 ne add. Gelenius.
* usura gloriae Rhenanus; usurae gloria 4P.
4 quin Gelenius ; qui AP.


9 Literally, Xerxes in the toga. The reference is to
Xerxes' bridge across the Hellespont and his canal through
the Isthmus at Mount Athos.

> As in the case of Lucullus.


could be convicted of falsehood in his charge against
the other. In fact Pompey, from the time when he
first took part in public life, could not brook an
equal at all. In undertakings in which he should
have been merely the first he wished to be the only
one. No one was ever more indifferent to other
things or possessed a greater craving for glory ; he
knew no restraint in his quest for office, though he
was moderate to a degree in the exercise of his
powers. Entering upon each new office with the
utmost eagerness, he would lay them aside with
unconcern, and, although he consulted his own
wishes in attaining what he desired, he yielded to
the wishes of others in resigning it. As for Lucullus,
who was otherwise a great man, he was the first to
set the example for our present lavish extravagance
in building, in banquets, and in furnishings. Because
of the massive piles which he built in the sea, and
of his letting the sea in upon the land by digging
through mountains, Pompey used to call him, and
not without point, the Roman Xerxes.

XXXIV. During the same period the island of Crete
was brought under the sovereignty of the Roman
people by Quintus Metellus. For three years this
island, under the leadership of Panares and Las-
thenes who had collected a force of twenty-four
thousand men, swift in their movements, hardened
to the toils of war, and famous in their use of the
bow, had worn out the Roman armies. Gnaeus
Pompeius could not refrain from coveting some of
this glory also, and sought to claim a share in his
victory. But the triumphs, both of Lucullus and of
Metellus, were rendered popular in the eyes of all
good citizens not only by the distinguished merits


tum etiam invidia Pompei apud optimum quemque
3 fecit favorabilem.

4 Catilina metu consularis imperi urbe pulsus est ;
Lentulus consularis et praetor iterum Cethegusque
et alii clari nominis viri auctore senatu, iussu consulis
in carcere necati sunt.


! quique Oudendorp ; qui AP.
2 aperuit Gelenius ; eripuit AP.
3 culmine locavit Madvig ; luminavit 4 P.
1 justitiam G'elenius ; iustitiae 4 P.


a 63 B.C.

’ He is referring to the sentiment expressed in the famous
lines of Horace, d ii. 1. 156, ** Graecia capta ferum victorem
cepit et artes Intulit agresti Latio."


of the two generals themselves but also by the
general unpopularity of Pompey.

At this time the conspiracy of Sergius Catiline,*
Lentulus, Cethegus, and other men of both the
equestrian and senatorial orders was detected by
the extraordinary courage, firmness, and careful
vigilance of the consul Marcus Cicero, à man who
owed his elevation wholly to himself, who had
ennobled his lowly birth, who was as distinguished
in his life as he was great in genius, and who saved
us from being vanquished in intellectual accomplish-
ments by those whom we had vanquished in arms.*
Catiline was driven from the city by fear of the
authority of the consul ; Lentulus, a man of consular
rank and twice a praetor, Cethegus, and other men of
illustrious family were put to death in prison on the
order of the consul, supported by the authority of the
senate.

XXXV. The meeting of the senate at which this
action had been taken raised the character of
Marcus Cato, which had already shone forth con-
spicuously in other matters, to a lofty pinnacle.
Descended from Marcus Cato, the first of the
Porcian house, who was his great-grandfather, he
resembled Virtue herself, and in all his acts he
revealed a character nearer to that of gods than
of men. He never did a right action solely for the
sake of seeming to do the right, but because he
could not do otherwise. To him that alone seemed
reasonable which was likewise just. Free from all
the failings of mankind he always kept fortune
subject to his control. At this time, though he was
only tribune elect and still quite a young man, while
others were urging that Lentulus and the other


4 cietate consilii suspectam fecit, sic impendentia ex
ruinis incendiisque urbis et commutatione status
publici pericula exposuit, ita consulis virtutem am-
plificavit, ut universus senatus in eius sententiam
transiret animadvertendumque in eos, quos prae-
diximus, censeret maiorque pars ordinis eius Cice-
ronem! prosequerentur domum.

1 XXXVI. Consulatui Ciceronis non mediocre adiecit
decus natus eo anno divus Augustus abhinc annos
LXXXII, omnibus omnium gentium viris magnitudine
sua inducturus caliginem.

2 Jam paene supervacaneum videri potest emi-
nentium ingeniorum notare tempora. Quis enim
ignorat diremptos gradibus aetatis floruisse hoc
tempore Ciceronem, Hortensium, anteque? Crassum,
Cottam, Sulpicium, moxque Brutum, Calidium,!
Caelium, Calvum et proximum Ciceroni Caesarem
eorumque velut alumnos Corvinum ac Pollionem

1 Ciceronem Hottinger; Catonem AP.
2 ixxxu AP; Lxxx Kritz; t-xxxxm Aldus.


3 anteque ed. Bipont.; saneque AP.
4 Cottam Aldus; Catonem 4 P.


^ His famous speech is reported in Sallust, Catiline,
chap. lii. ò 63 B.C.

¢ He has now come to Rome’s greatest epoch, the
Ciceronian and the Augustan ages, sufficiently indicated by
the mention of Cicero and Augustus. Hence the emphasis
upon iam.


conspirators should be placed in custody in the
Italian towns, Cato," though among the very last
to be asked for his opinion, inveighed against the
conspiracy with such vigour of spirit and intellect
and such earnestness of expression that he caused
those who in their speeches had urged leniency
to be suspected of complicity in the plot. Such
a picture did he present of the dangers which
threatened Rome, by the burning and destruction
of the city and the subversion of the constitution,
and such a eulogy did he give of the consul's firm
stand, that the senate as a body changed to the
support of his motion and voted the imposition of
the death penalty upon the conspirators, and a large
number of the senators escorted Cicero to his home.

As for Catiline, he proceeded to carry out his
criminal undertaking with as much energy as he had
shown in planning it. Fighting with desperate
courage, he gave up in battle the life which he had
forfeited to the executioner.

XXXVI. No slight prestige is added to the consul-
ship of Cicero by the birth in that year’—ninety-
two years ago—of the emperor Augustus, who was
destined by his greatness to overshadow all men of :
all races.

It may now* seem an almost superfluous task to
indicate the period at which men of eminent talent
flourished. For who does not know that at this
epoch, separated only by differences in their ages,
there flourished Cicero and Hortensius; a little
earlier Crassus, Cotta, and Sulpicius; a little later
Brutus, Calidius, Caelius, Calvus, and Caesar, who
ranks next to Cicero; next to them, and, as it
were, their pupils, come Corvinus and Pollio Asinius,


Asinium,aemulumqueThucydidis Sallustium,auctores-
que carminum Varronem ac Lucretium neque ullo
in suscepto carminis sui opere! minorem Catullum.

1 XXXVII. Dum haec in urbe Italiaque geruntur,
Cn. Pompeius memorabile adversus Mithridaten,
qui post Luculli profectionem magnas novi exercitus

2 viris reparaverat, bellum gessit. At rex fusus fugatus-
que et omnibus exutus copiis Ármeniam Tigranem-
que socer generum? petiit? regem eius temporis,
nisi qua Luculli armis erat infractus, potentissimum.

3 Simul itaque duos persecutus Pompeius intravit
Armeniam. Prior filius Tigranis, sed discors patri,


1 in suspecti operis sui carmine AP; for the many
emendations suggested for this vexed passage see Kritz and
Ellis.

2 socer generum Heinsius ; socerum A P.

3 petit AP ; petiit Gelenius.


a The omission of Horace from this list is as noteworthy
as the omission of Plautus from the writers of comedy in
Chap. xvii. of Bk. I.


Sallust, the rival of Thucydides, the poets Varro
and Lucretius, and Catullus, who ranks second to
none in the branch of literature which he under-
took. It is almost folly to proceed to enumerate
men of talent who are almost beneath our eyes,
among whom the most important in our own age
are Virgil, the prince of poets, Rabirius, Livy, who
follows close upon Sallust, Tibullus, and Naso, each
of whom achieved perfection in his own branch of
literature.^ As for living writers, while we admire
them greatly, a critical list is difficult to make.
XXXVII. While these occurrences were taking
place in the city and in Italy, Gnaeus Pompeius
carried on a notable campaign against Mithridates,
who after the departure of Lucullus had again
prepared a new army of great strength. The king
was defeated and routed, and after losing all his
forces sought refuge in Armenia with his son-in-law
Tigranes, the most powerful king of his day, though
his power had been somewhat broken by Lucullus.
Pompey accordingly entered Armenia in pursuit of
both kings at once. First a son of Tigranes, who
was at variance with his father, came to Pompey.
Then the king in person, and, in the guise of a
suppliant, placed himself and his kingdom under
the jurisdiction of Pompey, prefacing this act with
the statement that he would not have submitted
himself to the alliance of any man but Gnaeus
Pompeius, whether Roman or of any other nationality ;
that he would be ready to bear any condition,
favourable or otherwise, upon which Pompey might
decide ; that there was no disgrace in being beaten
by one whom it would be a sin against the gods to
defeat, and that there was no dishonour in sub-


K 129


aliquem summitti huic, quem fortuna super omnis

1 XXXVIII. Haud absurdumvidetur propositi operis
regulae paucis percurrere, quae cuiusque ductu gens
ac natio redacta in formulam provinciae stipendiaria
facta? sit, ut quae partibus notavimus, facilius? simul
universa conspici possint.

2 Primus in Siciliam traiecit exercitum consul
Claudius, set* provinciam eam post annos ferme duos
et quinquaginta captis Syracusis fecit Marcellus
Claudius. Primus Africam Regulus nono ferme
anno primi Punici belli aggressus est5; sed post
centum et novem? annos P. Scipio Aemilianus eruta
Carthagine abhinc annos centum septuaginta? tris
Africam in formulam redegit provinciae. Sardinia
inter primum et secundum bellum Punicum ductu
T. Manlii consulis certum recepit imperi iugum.

3 Immane bellicae civitatis argumentum, quod semel

! regii Heinsius; regi AP.
? stipendiaria facta Amerbach in marg. et Lipsius;
stipen ia facta 4P.
notavimus facilius ut quae partibus d P ; order changed
by Acidelius and Haase.
+ set Sauppe ; et AP.
5 belli aggressus est supplied by Halm.


8 cvm Bipont. ; ccum AP.
7 crxxim Kritz; cLxxxu AP.


a 96] B.C. dò 212 B.C. ¢ 256 B.C.


mitting to one whom fortune had elevated above
al others. The king was permitted to retain the
honours of royalty, but was compelled to pay a
large sum of money, all of which, as was Pompey's
practice, was remitted to the quaestor and listed in
the public accounts. Syria and the other provinces
which Mithridates had seized were wrested from him.
Some were restored to the Roman people, and others
were then for the first time brought under its sway
— Syria, for instance—which first became a tributary
province at this time. The sovereignty of the king
was now limited to Armenia.

XXXVIII. It does not seem out of keeping with the
plan which I have set before me in my work to give a
brief synopsis of the races and nations which were
reduced to provinces and made tributary to Rome,
and by what generals. Thus it will be easier to see
at a glance when grouped together, the facts already
given in detail.

Claudius the consul was the first to cross into Sicily
with an army,* but it was only after the capture of
Syracuse, fifty years later, that it was converted
into a province by Marcellus Claudius. Regulus
was the first to invade Africa, in the ninth year of
the First Punic war. It was one hundred and
nine years later, one hundred and seventy-three
years ago, that Publius Scipio Aemilianus destroyed
Carthage and reduced Africa to the form of a
province. Sardinia finally became subject to the
yoke in the interval between the First and Second
Punic War,’ through the agency of Titus Manlius
the consul. It is a strong proof of the warlike
character of our state that only three times did the

4 146 B.c. * 235 B.c.


sub regibus, iterum hoc T. Manlio consule, tertio
Augusto principe certae pacis argumentum lanus

4 geminus clausus dedit. In Hispaniam primi omnium
duxere exercitus Cn. et P. Scipiones initio secundi
belli Punici abhinc annos ducentos quinquaginta ;
inde varie possessa et saepe amissa partibus, uni-

5 versa ductu Augusti facta stipendiaria est. Mace-
doniam Paulus, Mummius Achaiam, Fulvius Nobilior
subegit Aetoliam, Asiam L. Scipio, Africani frater,
eripuit Antiocho, sed beneficio senatus populique
Romani mox ab Attalis! possessam regibus? M. Per-
penna capto Aristonico fecit tributariam. Cyprus

6 devicta nullius adsignanda gloriae est?; quippe
senatus consulto, ministerio Catonis, regis morte,
quam ille conscientia acciverat, facta provincia est.
Creta Metelli ductu longissimae libertatis fine mul-
tata est. Syria Pontusque Cn. Pompei virtutis
monumenta sunt.


1 ab Attalis Gelenius ; habita lis AP.
? regibus P ; om. A.
3 Cyprus devicta nullius adsignanda gloriae est Laurent. ;
Cypro devicta nullis adsignanda gloria est AP.
a add. Aldus.
5 Fabioque Ursinus; Fabio AP.
ê omisimus Heinsius; amisimus AP.


a 218 B.C. > 167 B.c. ? 146 B.C.


HISTORY OF ROMT, II. xxxviii. 3—xxxix. 1


closing of the temple of the double-faced Janus
give proof of unbroken peace : once under the kings,
a second time in the consulship of the Titus Manlius
just mentioned, and a third time in the reign of
Augustus. The two Scipios, Gnaeus and Publius,
were the first to lead armies into Spain,* at the
beginning of the Second Punic War, two hundred
and fifty years ago; from that time on we alter-
nately acquired and lost portions of it until under
Augustus the whole of it became tributary. Paulus
conquered Macedonia, Mummius Achaea,’ Fulvius
Nobilior Aetolia,? Lucius Scipio, the brother of
Africanus, wrested Asia from Antiochus, but, by
the gift of the senate and the Roman people, it
soon afterwards passed to the ownership of the
Attalids. It was made a tributary province by
Marcus Perpenna after the capture of Aristonicus./
No credit for the conquest of Cyprus can be assigned
to any general, since it was by a decree of the Senate,
carried out by Cato, that it became a province ? on
the death of its king, self-inflicted in consciousness
of guilt. Crete was punished by Metellus by the
termination ^ of the liberty which she had long
enjoyed. Syria and Pontus are monuments to the
valour of Gnaeus Pompeius.*

XXXIX. Domitius and Fabius, son of Paulus,
who was surnamed Allobrogicus, first entered the
Gauls with an army ; later these provinces cost us
much blood in our attempts at conquest alternating
with our loss of them. In all these operations the
work of Caesar is the most brilliant and most con-
spicuous. Reduced under his auspices and general-

4 189 B.C. * 190 B.C. f 130 B.c.

9 57 B.C. ^ 67 B.C. t 62 B.C.


auspiciisque infractae paene! idem, quod totus ter-

2 rarum orbis, in aerarium? conferunt stipendium. Ab
eodem facta * * *3 Numidicus. Ciliciam perdomuit
Isauricus et post bellum Antiochinum Vulso Manlius
Gallograeciam. Bithynia, ut praediximus, testamen-
to Nicomedis relicta hereditaria. Divus Augustus
praeter Hispanias aliasque gentis, quarum titulis
forum eius praenitet, paene idem facta Aegypto
stipendiaria, quantum pater eius Galliis, in aerarium

3 reditus contulit. At Ti. Caesar quam certam His-
panis parendi confessionem extorserat parens, Illyriis
Delmatisque extorsit. Raetiam autem et Vindelicos
ac Noricos Pannoniamque et Scordiscos novas im-
perio nostro subiunxit provincias. Ut has armis,
ita auctoritate Cappadociam populo Romano fecit
stipendiariam. Sed revertamur ad ordinem.

1 pene AP; plane vel plene Burman.
2 in aerarium Aldus; ignauum AP.
8 The lacuna is thus supplied by Haase: facta [Numidia
provincia, e qua iam olim cognomen virtute partum detulerat


Metellus] Numidicus.
4 Albani Hiberi (Hideri 4) ac deinde 4P; em. Burman.


a 58—50 B.C. d 46 B.C.
* The words in brackets are a translation of Haase's con-
jecture. See footnote to text.


4 78 B.c. e i.e. Galatia, 188 B.C.
7 14 B.C. 9 30 B.c. ^ 10 B.C.
$ 16—12 B.C. Í A.D. 17. k 66-63 B.C.


ship,' they pay almost as much tribute into the
treasury as the rest of the world. Caesar also made
[Numidia a province, from which Metellus had
long before won by his valour the cognomen of]
Numidicus.

Isauricus conquered Cilicia, and Vulso Manlius
Gallograecia* after the war with Antiochus. Bithynia,
as has been already said, was bequeathed to the
Romans by the will of Nicomedes/ Besides Spain
and other countries whose names adorn his Forum,
Augustus made Egypt tributary,’ thereby con-
tributing nearly as much revenue to the treasury as
his father had brought to it from the Gauls. Tiberius
Caesar extorted from the Illyrians and Dalmatians a
definite confession of submission^ such as that
which Augustus had wrested from Spain. He also
added to our empire as new provinces Raetia,
Vindelicia, Noricum, Pannonia, and the Scordisci.
These he conquered by arms Cappadocia he made
tributary to the Roman people through the mere
prestige of his nameJ But let us now return to the
order of events.

XL. Then followed the military exploits of Gnaeus
Pompeius,* in regard to which it would be difficult
to say whether the glory they earned or the labour
they cost was the greater. Media, Albania, and
Iberia were invaded with victorious arms. Then he
changed the direction of his march to the regions
of the interior, to the right of the Black Sea—the
Colchians, the Heniochi, and the Achaei. Mithridates
was crushed, the last of the independent kings
except the rulers of the Parthians, through the
treachery of his son Pharnaces, it is true, but
during the period of Pompey's command. Then,


* A general holding the imperium had the title imperator.
He is here referring to the use of the title in the acclama-
tions of the soldiers after a victory. In this sense it was
considered as the preliminary to a triumph.


after conquering all the races in his path, Pompey
returned to Italy, having achieved a greatness
which exceeded both his own hopes and those
of his fellow-citizens, and having, in all his cam-
paigns, surpassed the fortune of a mere mortal. It
was owing to this impression that his return created
such favourable comment ; for the majority of his
countrymen had insisted that he would not enter
the city without his army, and that he would set
a limit upon public liberty according to his own
caprice. The return of so great a general as an
ordinary citizen was all the more welcome because
of the apprehensions which had been entertained.
For, dismissing his whole army at Brundisium, and
retaining none of his former power except the title
of imperator," he returned to the city with only the
retinue which regularly attended him. There he
celebrated, for a period of two days, a most
magnificent triumph over the many kings whom he
had conquered, and from the spoils he contributed
to the treasury a far larger sum of money than any
other general had ever done except Paulus.

In Pompey's absence the tribunes of the people,
Titus Ampius and Titus Labienus, proposed a law
that at the games of the circus Pompey should be
permitted to wear a golden crown and the full dress
of the triumphator, and at the theatre the purple-
bordered toga and the golden crown. But he
forbore to use this honour more than once, and
indeed that was itself too often. This man was
raised by fortune to the pinnacle of his career by
great leaps, first triumphing over Africa, then over
Europe, then over Asia, and the three divisions of
the world thus became so many monuments of


victoriae suae. Numquam eminentia invidia carent.


Cinnae uxor fuerat, in Sullae dimisisset gratiam,
1 The order is that of Ellis; in AP et Metellus Creticus


follows memor . . . iniuriae.
2 antiquitatis studiosos Halm ; antiquissimos 4 P.
« 59 B.c.


his victory. Greatness is never without envy.
Pompey met with opposition from Lucullus and
from Metellus Creticus, who did not forget the
slight he had received (indeed he had just cause
for complaint in that Pompey had robbed him of
the captive generals who were to have adorned his
triumph), and from a section of the optimates who
sought to prevent the fulfilment of Pompey's
promises to the various cities and the payment of
rewards in accordance with his wishes to those who
had been of service to him.

XLI. Then followed the consulship* of Gaius
Caesar, who now lays hold upon my pen and compels
me, whatever my haste, to linger a while upon him.
Sprung from the noble family of the Julii, and tracing
his descent from Venus and Anchises, a claim con-
ceded by all investigators of antiquity, he surpassed
all his fellow-citizens in beauty of person. He was
exceedingly keen and vigorous of mind, lavish in
his generosity, and possessed a courage exceeding
the nature, and even the credence, of man. In
the magnitude of his ambitions, in the rapidity of
his military operations, and in his endurance of
danger, he closely resembled Alexander the Great,
but only when Alexander was free from the influence
of wine and master of his passions; for Caesar, in
a word, never indulged in food or in sleep except
as they ministered, not to pleasure, but to life.
To Gaius Marius he was closely related by blood ;
he was ‘also the son-in-law of Cinna, whose daughter
no consideration of fear would induce him to divorce,
whereas Marcus Piso, a man of consular rank, had
divorced Annia, who had been the wife of Cinna,
in order to win Sulla’s favour. Caesar was only about


1 XLII. Longum est narrare, quid et quotiens ausus
sit,.quanto opere conata eius qui obtinebat Asiam
magistratus populi Romani metu? suo destituerit.
Illud referatur documentum tanti mox evasuri viri :


1 se per B; semper AP.

? metu Gelenius ; motu AP.

3 et privatus et contracta classe Scriner ; contracta classe
et privatus et AP ; Halm adds manu after tumultuaria, re-
taining the Ms. order of the preceding words.


@ Suetonius, Div. Iulius 4, associates the adventure with
the pirates with his visit to Rhodes in 76 B.c., whither he
went to study oratory under Molo. Plutarch, Caes., places


eighteen years of age at the time of Sulla's dictator-
ship ; and when a search was made for him with a
view to putting him to death, not, it is true, by
Sulla himself, but by his minions and partisans, he
escaped from the city at night by assuming a
disguise which effectually concealed his rank.
Later,? but when stil quite a young man, he was
captured by pirates and so conducted himself during
the entire period of his detention as to inspire in them
to an equal degree both fear and respect. Neither
by day nor by night did he remove his shoes or
loosen his girdle—for why should a detail of the
greatest significance be omitted merely because it
cannot be adorned in imposing language ?—lest the
slightest change in his usual garb might cause him
to be suspected by his captors, who guarded him
only with their eyes.

XLII. It would take too long to tell of his many
bold plans for the punishment of the pirates, or how
obstinately the timid governor of Asia refused to
second them. The following story, however, may
be told as a presage of his future greatness. On the
night following the day on which his ransom was
paid by the cities of Asia—he had, however, com-
pelled the pirates before payment to give hostages
to these cities—although he was but a private
citizen without authority, and his fleet had been
collected on the spur of the moment, he directed
his course to the rendezvous of the pirates, put to
flight part of their fleet, sank part, and captured
several ships and many men. Well satisfied with
the success of his night expedition he returned
it earlier, in connexion with his visit to Bithynia in
81-80 B.c.


. 3 ad suos revectus! est, mandatisque custodiae quos
ceperat, in Bithyniam perrexit ad proconsulem
Iuncum? (idem enim Asiam eamque obtinebat)?
petens, ut auctor fieret sumendi de captivis supplicii :
quod ille se facturum negasset venditurumque cap-
tivos dixisset (quippe sequebatur invidia inertiam),
incredibili celeritate revectus ad mare, priusquam
de ea re ulli proconsulis redderentur epistulae,
omnes, quos ceperat, suffixit cruci.

1 XLIII. Idem mox ad sacerdotium ineundum
(quippe absens pontifex factus erat in Cottae con-
sularis locum, cum? paene puer a Mario Cinnaque
flamen dialis creatus victoria Sullae, qui omnia ab
iis acta fecerat irrita, amisisset id sacerdotium)
festinans in Italiam, ne conspiceretur a praedonibus
omnia tunc obtinentibus maria et merito iam" in-
festis sibi, quattuor scalmorum navem una cum duobus
amicis decemque servis ingressus effusissimum Adria-

2 tici maris traiecit sinum. Quo quidem in cursu con-
spectis, ut putabat, piratarum navibus cum exuisset
vestem alligassetque pugionem ad femur alterutri
se fortunae parans, mox intellexit frustratum esse
visum suum arborumque ex longinquo ordinem

3 antemnarum praebuisse imaginem.

Reliqua eius acta in urbe, nobilissima Cn. Dola-


1 revectus Haase; reversus AP.

2 Tuncum Nipperdey ; Iunium cum AP.

epistulae Burer ; epistula 4 BP.

5 cum added by Lipsius.

8 id Gelenius ; ad AP.

7 jam] tam AP.


a 74 B.C.


to his friends and, after handing his prisoners into
custody, went straight to Bithynia to Juncus, the
proconsul—for the same man was governor of
Bithynia as well as of Asia—and demanded his
sanction for the execution of his captives. When
Juncus, whose former inactivity had now given way
to jealousy, refused, and said that he would sell the
captives as slaves, Caesar returned to the coast
with incredible speed and crucified all his prisoners
before anyone had had time to receive a dispatch
from the consul in regard to the matter.

XLIII. Not long afterwards he was hastening to
Italy to enter upon the priestly office of pontifex
maximus to which he had been elected ^ in his
absence in place of the ex-consul Cotta. Indeed,
while still little more than a boy he had already
been made priest of Jupiter by Marius and Cinna, but
all their acts had been annulled in consequence of
Sulla's victory, and Caesar had thus lost this priest-
hood. On the journey just mentioned, wishing to
escape the notice of the pirates who then infested
all the seas and by this time had good reasons for
being hostile to him, he took two friends and ten
slaves and embarked in a four-oared boat, and in
this way crossed the broad expanse of the Adriatic
Sea. During the voyage, sighting, as he thought,
some pirate vessels, he removed his outer garments,
bound a dagger to his thigh, and prepared himself
for any event; but soon he saw that his eyes had
deceived him and that the illusion had been caused
by a row of trees in the distance which looked like
masts and yards.

As for the rest of his acts after his return to the
city, they stand in less need of description, since


1 nobilissima Cn. Dolabellae Haase; nobilissimaque Dolo-
bellae 4P. 2 in added by Halm.


a 77 BC — > 62 B.C. ^ 63 B.C. 4 65 B.C.
* [t was not as praetor and quaestor, but as propraetor

and quaestorius that he served in Spain in 61 n.c. and 67 B.c.
* More probably while Consul elect.


LÀ


they are better known. I refer to his famous
prosecution ^ of Gnaeus Dolabella, to whom the
people showed more favour than is usually exhibited
to men under impeachment; to the well-known
political contests ® with Quintus Catulus and other
eminent men; to his defeat^ of Quintus Catulus,
the acknowledged leader of the Senate, for the
office of pontifex maximus, before he himself had
even been praetor; to the restoration in his
aedileship ^ of the monuments of Gaius Marius in
the teeth of the opposition of the nobles; to the
reinstatement of the children of proscribed persons
in the rights pertaining to their rank ; and to his
praetorship * and quaestorship passed in Spain, in
which he showed wonderful energy and valour. He
was quaestor under Vetus Antistius, the grandfather
of our own Vetus, the consular and pontiff, himself
the father of two sons who have held the consulship
and the priesthood and a man whose excellence

reaches our highest conception of human integrity.
XLIV. But to resume. It was in Caesar's consul-
ship/ that there was formed between himself,
Gnaeus Pompeius and Marcus Crassus the partner-
ship in political power which proved so baleful to
the city, to the world, and, subsequently at different
periods to each of the triumvirs themselves.
Pompey’s motive in the adoption of this policy had
been to secure through Caesar as consul the long
delayed ratification of his acts in the provinces
across the seas, to which, as I have already said,
many still raised objections; Caesar agreed to it
because he realized that in making this concession
to the prestige of Pompey he would increase his
own, and that by throwing on Pompey the odium
L 145


potentiae in illum relegata confirmaturum vires suas,
Crassus, ut quem principatum solus adsequi non
poterat, auctoritate Pompei, viribus teneret Caesaris,

3 adfinitas etiam inter Caesarem Pompeiumque con-
tracta nuptiis, quippe Iuliam, filiam C. Caesaris.
Cn. Magnus duxit uxorem.

4 In hoc consulatu Caesar legem tulit, ut ager
Campanus plebei divideretur, suasore legis Pompeio.
Ita circiter viginti milia civium eo deducta et ius
urbis? restitutum post annos circiter centum quin-
quaginta duos quam bello Punico ab Romanis Capua

1 Iuliam added by Orelli.

? urbis Heinsius ; ab his AP.

? quique neque Halm; qui neque Vascosanus; neque
om. AP.

* Dressed as a woman he had appeared at the sacred rites
of the Bona Dea, at which only women were allowed to
be present. They were presided over by Caesar's wife,


Pompeia, with whom Clodius was suspected of having an
amour. P 58 B.C,


for their joint control he would add to his own
power; while Crassus hoped that by the influence
of Pompey and the power of Caesar he might
achieve a place of pre-eminence in the state which
he had not been able to reach single-handed. Further-
more, a tie of marriage was cemented between
Caesar and Pompey, in that Pompey now wedded
Julia, Caesar's daughter.

In this consulship, Caesar, with Pompey's backing,
passed a law authorizing a distribution to the plebs
of the public domain in Campania. And so about
twenty thousand citizens were established there,
and its rights as a city were restored to Capua one
hundred and fifty-two years after she had been
reduced to a prefecture in the Second Punic War.
Bibulus, Caesar's colleague, with the intent rather
than the power of hindering Caesar's acts, confined
himself to his house for the greater part of the
year. By this conduct, whereby he hoped to increase
his colleague's unpopularity, he only increased his
power. At this time the Gallic provinces were
assigned to Caesar for a period of five years.

XLV. About the same time Publius Clodius, a
man of noble birth, eloquent and reckless, who
recognized no limits either in speech or in act except
his own caprice, energetic in the execution of his
wicked projects, of ill-repute as the debaucher of
his own sister, and guilty of adulterous profanation
of the most sacred rites of the Roman people,"
having conceived a violent hatred against Marcus
Cicero—for what friendship could there be between
men so unlike ?—caused himself to be transferred
from a patrician into a plebeian family and, as
tribune,’ proposed a law that whoever put to death


Idem P. Clodius in tribunatu* sub honorificen-
tissimo ministerii titulo M. Catonem a re publica
relegavit: quippe legem tulit, ut is quaestor cum
iure praetorio, adiecto etiam quaestore, mitteretur in
insulam Cyprum ad spoliandum regno Ptolemaeum,
omnibus morum vitiis eam contumeliam meritum.
5 Sed ille sub adventum Catonis vitae suae vim intulit.
! indemnatum Puteanus; damnatum 4 P.

2 ut coepit Gelenius; et cupit AP.


3 intenta Wopkens ; interita 4 P.
4 tribunatu Heinsius; senatu 4P.


a Literally ** Should be forbidden fire and water."

è By his suppression, in his consulship, of the conspiracy
of Catiline.

^ 57 B.C. 4 58 B.C.


a Roman citizen without trial should be condemned
to exile.^ Although Cicero was not expressly named
in the wording of the bill, it was aimed at him
alone. And so this man, who had earned by his
great services the gratitude of his country," gained
exile as his reward for saving the state. Caesar and
Pompey were not free from the suspicion of having
had a share in the fall of Cicero. Cicero seemed to
have brought upon himself their resentment by
refusing to be a member of the commission of twenty
charged with the distribution of lands in Campania.
Within two years Cicero was restored* to his country
and to his former status, thanks to the interest
of Gnaeus Pompeius—somewhat belated, it is true,
but effective when once exerted—and thanks to
the prayers of Italy, the decrees of the senate, and
the zealous activity of Annius Milo, tribune of the
people. Since the exile and return of Numidicus
no one had been banished amid greater popular
disapproval or welcomed back with greater en-
thusiasm. As for Cicero’s house, the maliciousness
of its destruction by Clodius was now compensated
for by the magnificence of its restoration by the
senate.

Publius Clodius in his tribunate also removed
Marcus Cato from the state, under the pretence
of an honourable mission. For he proposed a law
that Cato should be sent to the island of Cyprus in
the capacity of quaestor, but with the authority of
a praetor and with a quaestor as his subordinate,
with instructions to dethrone Ptolemaeus, who by
reason of his unmitigated viciousness of character
well deserved this humiliation. However, just
before the arrival of Cato, Ptolemy took "Us own


1 XLVI. Cum deinde inmanis res vix multis volumi-
nibus explicandas C. Caesar in Gallia gereret! nec
contentus plurimis ac felicissimis victoriis innume-
rabilibusque caesis et captis hostium milibus etiam
in Britanniam traiecisset exercitum, alterum paene
imperio nostro ac suo quaerens orbem, vetus par?
consulum, Cn. Pompeius et M Crassus, alterum
iniere consulatum, qui neque petitus honeste ab iis

3in Syriam diris cum ominibus tribuni plebis frustra
retinere conati. Quorum execrationes si in ipsum


1 gereret Stanger; ageret AP.
2 vetus par Ursinus; victus pars AP.
3 iam Heinsius; in AP.


a 58-50 B.C.

* 55 B.c. They had been consuls together in 70 B.c.
The unfairness consisted in making use of the tribunician
veto to prevent the holding of the elections until the term
of Cornelius Lentulus and Lucius Marcius Philippus, who
were u pe Dp. ble to their candidacy, had expired.

150 ^


life. Cato brought home from Cyprus a sum of
money which greatly exceeded all expectations. To
praise Cato's integrity would be sacrilege, but he
can almost be charged with eccentricity in the
display of it; for, in spite of the fact that all the
citizens, headed by the consuls and the senate,
poured out of the city to meet him as he ascended
the Tiber, he did not disembark and greet them
until he arrived at the place where the money was
to be put ashore.

XLVI. Meanwhile, in Gaul, Gaius Caesar was
carrying on his gigantic task," which could scarcely
be covered in many volumes. Not content with his
many fortunate victories, and with slaying or taking
as prisoners countless thousands of the enemy, he
even crossed into Britain, as though seeking to add
another world to our empire and to that which he
had himself won. Gnaeus Pompeius and Marcus
Crassus, who had once before been consuls together,
now entered upon their second consulship, which
office they not only won by unfair means, but also
administered without popular approval. In a law
which Pompey proposed in the assembly of the
people, Caesar's tenure of office in his provinces was
continued for another five years, and Syria was
decreed to Crassus, who was now planning to make
war upon Parthia. Although Crassus was, in his
general character, entirely upright and free from
base desires, in his lust for money and his ambition
for glory he knew no limits, and accepted no
bounds. On his departure for Asia the tribunes of
the people made ineffectual efforts to detain him
by the announcement of baleful omens. If the
curses which they called down upon him had


tantummodo valuissent, utile! imperatoris damnum
4salvo exercitu fuisset rei publicae. Transgressum
Euphraten Crassum petentemque Seleuciam circum-
fusus inmanibus copiis equitum rex Orodes una cum
parte maiore Romani exercitus interemit. Reliquias
legionum C. Cassius, atrocissimi mox auctor facinoris,
tum quaestor, conservavit Syriamque adeo in populi
Romani potestate retinuit, ut transgressos in eam
Parthos felici rerum eventu fugaret ac funderet.

1 XLVII. Per haec insequentiaque et quae prae-
diximus tempora amplius quadringenta milia hostium
a C. Caesare caesa sunt, plura capta; pugnatum
saepe derecta acie, saepe in agminibus, saepe erup-
tionibus, bis penetrata Britannia, novem denique
aestatibus vix ulla non iustissimus triumphus emeri-
tus. Circa Alesiam vero tantae res gestae, quantas
audere vix hominis, perficere paene nullius nisi dei
fuerit.

1 utile AP; vile Lipsius.
2 quarto Laurent. ; septimo AP.


3 potentiae et viva illa male Shipley; Ponti et Camiliae
AP; potentiae male Lipsius.


—


a Battle of Carrhae, 53 n.c.
P The assassination of Julius Caesar.
e 59 R.c. Related in Bk. vii. of the Gallic War. — 4 54 »B.c.


affected Crassus alone, the loss of the commander
would not have been without advantage to the
state, had but the army been saved. He had
crossed the Euphrates and was now marching toward
Seleucia when he was surrounded by King Orodes
with his innumerable bands of cavalry and perished
together with the greater part of his army.
Remnants of the legions were saved by Gaius Cassius
—(he was later the perpetrator of a most atrocious
crime, but was at that time quaestor)—who not
only retained Syria in its allegiance to the Roman
people, but succeeded, by a fortunate issue of
events, in defeating and putting to rout the Parthians
when they crossed its borders.

XLVII. During this period, including the years
which immediately followed and those of which
mention has already been made, more than four
hundred thousand of the enemy were slain by Gaius
Caesar and a greater number were taken prisoners.
Many times had he fought in pitched battles, many
times on the march, many times as besieger or
besieged. Twice he penetrated into Britain, and in
all his nine campaigns there was scarcely one which
was not fully deserving of a triumph. His feats
about Alesia^ were of a kind that a mere man
would scarcely venture to undertake, and scarcely
anyone but a god could carry through.

About the fourth year of Caesar's stay in Gaul
occurred the death of Julia,? the wife of Pompey, the
one tie which bound together Pompey and Caesar in
a coalition which, because of each one's jealousy of
the other's power, held together with difficulty even
during her lifetime ; and, as though fortune were
bent upon breaking all the bonds between the two


dirimente fortuna filius quoque parvus Pompei, Iulia
natus, intra breve spatium obiit. Tum in gladios

4 Quo tempore P. Clodius a Milone candidato con-
sulatus exemplo inutili, facto? salutari rei publicae
circa Bovillas contracta ex occursu rixa iugulatus
est. Milonem reum non magis invidia facti quam


1 coercitionem B; coertionem AP; coercitione Cludius.
2 inutili facto Gelenius; inutiliter facto AP; inutili sed
facto Gelenius.


a * Son" is supported by Livy, Epit. 106 and Suet. Caes.
26. Dio xxxix. 64 says ‘‘ daughter.’
b 52 B.C. * 59 B.C. 4 55 B.C.


men destined for so great a conflict, Pompey's little
son? by Julia also died a short time afterwards.
Then, inasmuch as agitation over the elections found
vent in armed conflicts and civil bloodshed, which
continued indefinitely and without check, Pompey
was made consul for the third time, now without a
colleague, with the assent even of those who up to
that time had opposed him for that office. The
tribute paid him by this honour, which seemed to
indicate his reconciliation with the optimates, served
more than anything else to alienate him from
Caesar. Pompey, however, employed his whole
power during this consulship in curbing election
abuses. |

It was at this time that Publius Clodius was slain*
by Milo, who was a candidate for the consulship, in
a quarrel which arose in a chance meeting at Bovillae ;
a bad precedent, but in itself a service to the state.
Milo was brought to trial and convicted quite as
much through the influence of Pompey as on account
of the odium aroused by the deed. Cato, it is true,
declared for his acquittal in an opinion openly
expressed. Had his vote been cast earlier, men
would not have been lacking to follow his example
and approve the slaying of a citizen as pernicious to
the republic and as hostile to all good citizens as any
man who had ever lived.

XLVIII. It was not long after this that the first
sparks of civil war were kindled. All fair-minded men
desired that both Caesar and Pompey should disband
their armies. Now Pompey in his second consulship ?
had caused the provinces of Spain to be assigned to
him, and though he was actually absent from them,
administering the affairs of the city, he continued to


1 primi Vascosanus ; primo 4 P.
? voluptatibus vel libidinibus deleted as a gloss by Gruter.
3 et after saluberrimas deleted by Gelenius.


á a About £100,000 or $500,000.


govern them for three years through his lieutenants,
Afranius and Petreius, the former of consular
and the latter of praetorian rank; and while he
agreed with those who insisted that Caesar should
dismiss his army, he was opposed to those who
urged that he should also dismiss his own Had
Pompey only died two years before the outbreak of
hostilities, after the completion of his theatre and
the other public buildings with which he had
surrounded it, at the time when he was attacked
by a serious illness in Campania and all Italy prayed
for his safety as her foremost citizen, fortune would
have lost the opportunity of overthrowing him and
he would have borne to the grave unimpaired all the


- qualities of greatness that had been his in life. It


was Gaius Curio, however, a tribune of the people,
who, more than anyone else, applied the flaming
torch which kindled the civil war and all the evils
which followed for twenty consecutive years. Curio
was a man of noble birth, eloquent, reckless, prodigal
alike of his own fortune and chastity and of those of
other people, a man of the utmost cleverness in
perversity, who used his gifted tongue for the
subversion of the state. No wealth and no pleasures
sufficed to satiate his appetites. He was at first on
the side of Pompey, that is to say, as it was then
regarded, on the side of the republic. Then he
pretended to be opposed both to Pompey and Caesar,
but in his heart he was for Caesar. Whether his
conversion was spontaneous or due to a bribe of ten
million sesterces,* as is reported, we shall leave un-
determined. Finally, when a truce was on the point
of being concluded on terms of the most salutary
character, terms which were demanded in a spirit of


"VELLEIUS PATERCULUS |


1 justis Gelenius ; iustius AP.

? annis pcci Gelenius; annis (AP) a cca AB;
Accra P.

3 non AP; nomine Gronovius.


9 49 B.c.


the utmost fair-mindedness by Caesar and accepted
by Pompey without protest, it was in the end broken
and shattered by Curio in spite of Cicero's extra-
ordinary efforts to preserve harmony in the state.

As to the order of these events, and of those which
have been mentioned before, the reader is referred
to the special works of other historians, and I myself
hope some day to give them in full. But at the
present time it will be consistent with the general
plan of this briefer narrative if I merely stop to
congratulate Quintus Catulus, the two Luculli,
Metellus, and Hortensius, who, after flourishing in
public life without envy and rising to pre-eminence
without danger to themselves, in the course of
nature died a peaceful or at least a not untimely
death before the outbreak of the civil wars.

XLIX. In the consulship of Lentulus and Mar-
cellus, seven hundred and three years after the
founding of the city and seventy-eight years before
your consulship, Marcus Vinicius, the civil war
burst into flame. The one leader seemed to have
the better cause, the other the stronger; on the
one was the appearance, on the other the reality
of power; Pompey was armed with the authority
of the senate, Caesar with the devotion of his
soldiers. The consuls and the senate conferred the
supreme authority not on Pompey but on his cause.
No effort was omitted by Caesar that could be tried
in the interest of peace, but no offer of his was
accepted by the Pompeians. Of the two consuls,
one showed more bitterness than was fair, the other,
Lentulus, could not save himself from ruin without
bringing ruin upon the state, while Marcus Cato in-
sisted that they should fight to the death rather


4 Ut deinde spretis omnibus quae Caesar postulave-
rat, tantummodo contentus cum una legione titulum
retinere provinciae, privatus? in urbem veniret et se
in petitione consulatus suffragiis populi Romani
committeret decrevere, ratus bellandum Caesar cum
exercitu Rubiconem transiit. Cn. Pompeius consules-
que et maior pars senatus relicta urbe ac deinde Italia
transmisere Dyrrachium.

2 urbem revertit redditaque ratione consiliorum suorum
in senatu et 1n contione ac miserrimae necessitudinis,
cum alienis armis ad arma compulsus esset, Hispa-
nias petere decrevit.

3  Festinationem itineris eius aliquamdiu morata


! gloriosiora Cuperus; gloriosa AP.

* privatus Gelenius; privatusque AP.

3 legionibusque Corfini quae P; legionibusque Corfini
AP.

4 voluerant Gelenius ; venerant AP.


* Probably refers to Caesar's offer (App. B.C. ii. 32) to
be satisfied with Cisalpine Gaul and Illyria, with two legions.
>’ Jan. 12 or 13, 49 B.C.


than allow the republic to accept a single dictate
from a mere citizen. The stern Roman of the old-
fashioned type would praise the cause of Pompey, the
politic would follow the lead of Caesar, recognizing
that while there was on the one side greater prestige,
the other was the more formidable.

When at last, rejecting all the demands of Caesar,
who was content to retain the title to the province,”
with but a single legion, the senate decreed that he
should enter the city as a private citizen and should
as such, submit himself to the votes of the Roman
people in his candidacy for the consulship, Caesar
concluded that war was inevitable and crossed the
Rubicon” with his army. Gnaeus Pompeius, the
consuls, and the majority of the senate abandoned
first the city, then Italy, and crossed the sea to
Dyrrachium.

L. Caesar, on his side, having got into his power
Domitius and the legions that were with him at
Corfinium, immediately released this commander
and all others who so wished, and allowed them to
join Pompey, whom he now followed to Brundisium,
making it clear that he preferred to put an end to
the war while the state was uninjured and negotiation
still possible, rather than to crush his fleeing enemy.
Finding that the consuls had crossed the sea he
returned to the city, and after rendering to the
senate and also to the assembly of the people an
account of his motives and of the deplorable necessity
of his position, in that he had been driven to arms
by others who had themselves resorted to arms, he
resolved to march on Spain.

The rapidity of his march was delayed for some
time by the city of Massilia, which with more

M 161


4 coércere possunt. Exercitus deinde, qui sub Afranio! |
consulari ac Petreio praetorio fuerat, ipsius adventus
vigore ac fulgore occupatus se Caesari tradidit ;
uterque legatorum et quisquis cuiusque ordinis sequi
eos voluerat, remissi ad Pompeium.

1 LI. Proximo anno cum Dyrrachium ac vicina ei
urbi regio castris Pompei obtineretur,? qui accitis
ex omnibus transmarinis provinciis legionibus, equi-
tum ac peditum auxiliis, regumque et? tetrarcharum
simulque dynastarum copiis inmanem exercitum con-
fecerat et mare praesidiis classium, ut rebatur,
saepserat, quo minus Caesar legiones posset trans-

3 Balbus Cornelius excedente humanam fidem temeri-
tate ingressus castra hostium saepiusque cum Lentulo
conlocutus consule, dubitante quanti se venderet,
illis incrementis fecit viam, quibus non in Hispania

! Afranio Burer; Africanio B; Africano AP.
2 obtineretur Heinsius; retinetur BAP.


a At Ilerda, August, 49 s.c.
> 48 B.C.


honesty of intention than with wise discretion assumed
the unseasonable róle of arbiter between the two
armed leaders, an intervention suited only to those
who are in a position to coerce the combatant
refusing obedience. Next, the army, commanded
by Afranius, an ex-consul, and Petreius, an ex-
praetor, taken off its guard by Caesar's energy and
the lightning speed of his arrival, surrendered ^ to
him. Both the commanders and all others, of what-
ever rank, who wished to follow them were allowed
to return to Pompey.

LI. The next year? found Dyrrachium and its
vicinity occupied by the camp of Pompey, who by
summoning legions from all the provinces beyond
the sea, together with auxiliary troops of foot and
horse, and the forces of kings, tetrarchs, and other
subject rulers, had in this way collected a formidable
army, and had with his fleets established, as he
thought, a successful blockade upon the sea to
prevent Caesar from transporting his legions across
the Adriatic. But Caesar, relying upon his usual
rapidity of action and his famous luck, allowed
nothing to prevent him or his army from crossing
and landing at any port he pleased, and at first
pitched his camp almost touching that of Pompey,
and then proceeded to surround the latter by
entrenchments and siege works. But lack of provi-
sions was a more serious matter to the besiegers than
to the besieged. It was at this time that Balbus
Cornelius, at incredible risk, entered the camp of
the enemy and held several conferences with the
consul Lentulus, whose only doubt was what price
to put upon himself. It was by stages such as this
that Balbus, who was not even the son of a Roman


1 LII. Tum Caesar cum exercitu fatalem victoriae
suae Thessaliam petiit. Pompeius, longe diversa

3  Aciem Pharsalicam et illum cruentissimum Romano
nomini diem tantumque utriusque exercitus profusum
sanguinis et conlisa inter se duo rei publicae capita
effossumque alterum Romani imperii lumen et? tot
talesque Pompeianarum partium caesos viros non

5 dii immortales, quod huius voluntatis erga Brutum
suae postea vir tam mitis pretium tulit! Nihil in illa


1 in Hispania ex cive Morgenstern; Hispaniae Asiae 4P.

? et added by Halm.

3 ut added by Gelenius ; in omnes partes AP; incolumes
partes Ellis. This is a vexed passage, and many conjectures
have been made as to which was the military expression.
Ruhnken supposes a lacuna.

4 ex Lipsius; et AP.


^ Described in Caes. Bell. Civ. iii. 62-70.
> August 9, 48 B.C. -
* See note on text. The general sense is supplied from


citizen born in Spain but actually a Spaniard, paved
the way for his later rise to the pontificate and to
a triumph, and from the rank of private citizen to
that of a consul. Conflicts followed, with shifting
fortunes. One^ of these battles was much more
favourable to the Pompeians, and Caesar's troops
were severely repulsed.

LII. Then Caesar marched with his army into
Thessaly, destined to be the scene of his victory.
Pompey, in spite of the contrary advice of others,
followed his own impulse and set out after the
. enemy. Most of his advisers urged him to cross
into Italy—nor indeed was there any course more
expedient for his party—others advised him to
prolong the war, which, by reason of the esteem in
which the party was held, was daily becoming more
favourable to them.

The limits set to a work of this kind will not
permit me to describe in detail the battle of
Pharsalia, that day of carnage so fatal to the Roman
name, when so much blood was shed on either side,
the clash of arms between the two heads of the
state, the extinction of one of the two luminaries of
the Roman world, and the slaughter of so many
noble men on Pompey's side. One detail, however,
I cannot refrain from noting. When Gaius Caesar
saw that Pompey's army was defeated he made it
his first and foremost concern to send out orders to
grant quarter °—if I may use the habitual military
expression. Ye immortal gods! What a reward
did this merciful man afterwards receive for his
kindness to Brutus! There is nothing more mar-


the account in Suet. Caes. 75 and Appian, Bellum Civile
ii. 80.


1 LIII. Pompeius profugiens cum duobus Lentulis
consularibus Sextoque filio et .Favonio praetorio,
quos comites ei fortuna adgregaverat, aliis, ut
Parthos, aliis, ut Africam peteret, in qua fidelis-
simum partium suarum haberet regem Iubam, sua-
dentibus, Aegyptum petere proposuit memor bene-
ficiorum, quae in patrem eius Ptolemaei, qui tum
puero quam iuveni propior regnabat Alexandriae,

3 post tres consulatus et totidem triumphos domitum-


! in illa . . . quam quod Haase; illa . . . quando AP.


a Caesar, Bell. Civ. 104, says it was a ** navicula parvula."


b 48 B.C.


vellous about that victory, nothing more magnificent,
nothing more glorious, than that our country did
not mourn the loss of any citizen save those who had
fallen in battle. But his offer of clemency was set .
at nought by the stubbornness of his opponents,
since the victor was more ready to grant life than
the vanquished to accept it.

LIII. Pompey fled with the two Lentuli, both
ex-consuls, his own son Sextus, and Favonius, a
former praetor, friends whom chance had gathered
about him as his companions. Some advised him
to take refuge with the Parthians, others in Africa,
where he had in King Juba a most loyal partisan ;
but, remembering the favours which he had con-
ferred upon the father of Ptolemy, who, though
still between boyhood and manhood, was now
reigning at Alexandria, he decided to repair to
Egypt. But, in adversity who remembers past
services? Who considers that any gratitude is
due to those who have met disaster? When does
change of fortune fail to shift allegiance ? Envoys
were sent by the king at the instance of Theodotus
and Achillas to receive Pompey on his arrival—he
was now accompanied in his flight by his wife
Cornelia, who had been taken on board at Mytilene
—and to urge him to change from the merchant
ship to the vessel^ which had come out to meet
him. Having accepted the invitation, the first of
the citizens of Rome was stabbed to death by the
order and dictation of an Egyptian vassal, the year
of his death being the consulship of Gaius Caesar
and Publius Servilius? So died in his fifty-eighth
year, on the very eve of his birthday, that upright
and illustrious man, after holding three consulships,


3 gueretur Pompeius, lectus ab eo socer, eorumque
copias auxerat M. Cato, ingenti cum difficultate
itinerum locorumque inopia perductis ad eos legioni-


1 facilis Gelenius; felix (foelix A) AP.

2 summorum imperatorum Mommsen; summo impera-
torum AP.

3 alteri mortuo Lipsius.

4 vivebat Heinsius; Iubae AP.


celebrating three triumphs, conquering the whole
world, and attaining to a pinnacle of fame beyond
which it is impossible to rise. Such was the incon-
sistency of fortune in his case, that he who but a
short time before had found no more lands to conquer
now found none for his burial.

As regards Pompey's age, what excuse, other
than that of excessive preoccupation, shall I make
for those who have made an error of five years in
the age of one who was not only a great man but
who almost belongs to our century, especially as it
is so easy to reckon from the consulship of Caius
Atilius and Quintus Servilius "^? I have added this
remark not for the sake of criticizing others, but to
avoid criticism of myself.

LIV. The loyalty of the king, and of those by
whose influence he was controlled, was no greater
towards Caesar than it had been toward Pompey.
For, upon Caesar's arrival in Egypt, they assailed
him with plots and subsequently dared to challenge
him in open warfare. By suffering death they paid
to both of these great commanders, the living and
the dead, a well-deserved atonement.

Pompey the man was no more, but his name still
lived everywhere. For the strong support his party
had in Africa had stirred up in that country a war
in which the moving spirits were King Juba and
Scipio, a man of consular rank, whom Pompey had
chosen for his father-in-law two years before his
death. Their forces were augmented by Marcus
Cato, who, in spite of the great difficulty of the
march, and the lack of supplies in the regions
traversed, succeeded in conducting his legions to

^ Consuls 106 B.c.


bus. Qui vir cum summum ei a militibus deferretur
imperium, honoratiori parere! maluit.

1 LV. Admonet promissae brevitatis fides, quanto
omnia transcursu dicenda sint. Sequens fortunam
suam Caesar pervectus in Áfricam est, quam occiso
C.? Curione, Iulianarum duce partium, Pompeiani
obtinebant exercitus. Ibi primo varia fortuna, mox

2 pugnavit sua, inclinataeque hostium copiae : nec dis-
similis ibi adversus victos quam in priores clementia
Caesaris fuit.

Victorem Africani belli Caesarem gravius excepit
Hispaniense (nam victus ab eo Pharnaces vix quid-
quam gloriae eius adstruxit), quod Cn. Pompeius,
Magni filius, adulescens impetus ad bella maximi,
ingens ac terribile conflaverat, undique ad eum
adhuc paterni nominis magnitudinem sequentium

4 imperatorem deserturi forent.  Verecundia magis


1 parere Burer; parare P; parari A.

? C. added by Stanger.

3 fortuna mox pugnavit sua Acidalius and Lipsius ;
fortunam expugnavit uia dP.


a Cato had held the praetorship only.

> At Thapsus, April 6, 46.

* At Zela, in 47 Bc. It is here mentioned out of its
proper order.


them. Cato, although offered the supreme command
by the soldiers, preferred to take orders from Scipio,
his superior in rank.^

LV. Fidelity to my promise of brevity reminds
me how rapidly I must pass over the details of my
narrative. Caesar, following up his success, passed
over to Africa, of which the Pompeian armies now
held possession since the death of Gaius Curio,
the leader there of the Caesarian party. At first
his armies were attended by a varying fortune, but
later by his usual luck the forces of the enemy
wererouted Here again he showed no less clemency
toward the vanquished than to those whom he had
defeated in the previous war.

Caesar, victorious in Africa, was now confronted
by a more serious war in Spain (for the defeat of
Pharnaces ^ may be passed over, since it added but
little to his renown). This great and formidable war
had been stirred up by Gnaeus Pompeius, the son
of Pompey the Great, a young man of great energy
in war, and reinforcements flowed in from all parts
of the world from among those who still followed
his father's great name. Caesar's usual fortune
followed him to Spain; but no battle in which he
ever engaged was more bitterly fought or more
dangerous to his cause. Once, indeed, when the
fight was now more than doubtful, he leapt from
his horse, placed himself before his lines, now
beginning to give way, and, after upbraiding fortune
for saving him for such an end, announced to his
soldiers that he would not retreat a step. He asked
them to consider who their commander was and in
what a pass they were about to desert him. It was

4 Battle of Munda, March 17, 45 s.c. `


d


1 LVI. Caesar omnium victor regressus in urbem,
quod humanam excedat fidem, omnibus, qui contra
se arma tulerant, ignovit, magnificentissimisque?
gladiatorii muneris, naumachiae et equitum peditum-
que, simul elephantorum certaminis spectaculis
epulique per multos dies dati celebratione replevit

2eam. Quinque egit triumphos : Gallici apparatus
ex citro, Pontici ex acantho, Alexandrini testudine,
Africi ebore, Hispaniensis argento rasili constitit.
Pecunia ex manubiis lata paulo amplius sexiens
miliens sestertium.

4 clari nominis viris, interemptus est. Cui magnam
invidiam conciliarat M. Antonius, omnibus audendis


1 restituta et a Orelli; restitutae C. A. B; restitutae
sunt a AP.

? magnificentissimisque AB; que om. P; et magnifi-
centissimis //alm and Ruhnken.


a The first four in 46 n.c., the Spanish triumph in 45 s.c.
* About £5,500,000 or $27,000,000.
e March 15, 44 s.c.


shame rather than valour that restored their wavering
line, and the commander showed more courage than
his men. Gnaeus Pompeius, badly wounded, was
discovered on a pathless waste and put to death.
Labienus and Varus met their death in battle.

LVI. Caesar, victorious over all his enemies,
returned to the city, and pardoned all who had borne
arms against him, an act of generosity almost passing
belief. He entertained the city to repletion with
the magnificent spectacle of a gladiatorial show, a
sham battle of ships, mock battles of cavalry, infantry,
and even mounted elephants, and the celebration of
a public banquet which was continued through
several days. He celebrated five triumphs.* The
emblems in his Gallic triumph were of citrus wood ;
in his Pontic of acanthus ; in his Alexandrian triumph
of tortoise-shell, in his African of ivory, and in his
Spanish of polished silver. The money borne in his
triumphs, realized from the sale of spoils, amounted
to a little more than six hundred million sesterces.^

But it was the lot of this great man, who behaved
with such clemency in all his victories, that his
peaceful enjoyment of supreme power should last but
five months. For, returning to the city in October,
he was slain on the ides of March.’ Brutus and
Cassius were the leaders of the conspiracy. He had
failed to win the former by the promise of the
consulship, and had offended the latter by the
postponement of his candidacy. There were also
in the plot to compass his death some of the most
intimate of all his friends, who owed their elevation
to the success of his party, namely Decimus Brutus,
Gaius Trebonius, and others of illustrious name.
Marcus Antonius, his colleague in the consulship,


lita... offensus Rhenanus; id... offensum AP.

2 timere corrected to timeri A; timere is more in keeping
with Plut. Caes. 57 and Suet. Div. Iul. 86.

3 plurima ei Orelli; plurimi BA ; plurima P.

4 orabat AP; orarat Halm.

5 tum Haase; cum AP.


a Usually of Etruscan origin, who professed ability to
foretell the future from the examination of the entrails of
sacrificial animals.


ever ready for acts of daring, had brought great
odium upon Caesar by placing a royal crown upon
his head as he sat on the rostra at the Lupercalia.
Caesar put the crown from him, but in such a way
that he did not seem to be displeased.

LVII. In the light of experience due credit
should be given to the counsel of Pansa and Hirtius,
who had always warned Caesar that he must hold
by arms the position which he had won by arms.
But Caesar kept reiterating that he would rather
die than live in fear, and while he looked for a return
for the clemency he had shown, he was taken off his
guard by men devoid of gratitude, although the gods
gave many signs and presages of the threatened
danger. Forthe soothsayers * had warned him before-
hand carefully to beware the Ides of March ; his
wife Calpurnia, terrified by a dream, kept begging
him to remain at home on that day; and notes
warning him of the conspiracy were handed him,
but he neglected to read them at the time. But
verily the power of destiny is inevitable; it con-
founds the judgement of him whose fortune it has
determined to reverse.

LVIII. Brutus and Cassius were praetors, and
Decimus Brutus was consul designate in the year
in which they perpetrated this deed. These three,
with the remainder of the group of conspirators,
escorted by a band of gladiators belonging to
Decimus Brutus, seized the capitol. Thereupon
Antonius, as consul, summoned the senate. Cassius
had been in favour of slaying Antony as well as
Caesar, and of destroying Caesar’s will, but Brutus
had opposed him, insisting that citizens ought not
to seek the blood of any but the “ tyrant "—for to


3 pediebat — petendum esse sanguinem) convocato
senatu, cum iam Dolabella, quem substituturus sibi
Caesar designaverat consulem, fasces atque insignia
corripuisset consulis, velut pacis auctor liberos suos
obsides in Capitolium misit fidemque descendendi

4 tuto interfectoribus Caesaris dedit. Et illud decreti
Atheniensium celeberrimi exemplum, relatum a
"Cicerone, oblivionis praeteritarum rerum decreto
patrum comprobatum est.

2 ita admodum speciosa equestri genitus familia, gravis,
sanctus, innocens, dives. Hic praetor inter nobilis-
simos viros creatus primo loco, cum ei dignatio Iulia
genitam Atiam conciliasset uxorem, ex eo honore
sortitus Macedoniam appellatusque in ea? imperator,
decedens ad petitionem consulatus obiit praetextato
relicto filio. Quem C. Caesar, maior eius avunculus,

3 educatum apud Philippum vitricum dilexit ut suum,
natumque annos duodeviginti Hispaniensis militiae
adsecutum se postea comitem habuit, numquam aut


a ie. on his contemplated departure for the Parthian
expedition.

ò [t may be that Velleius means simply **son" as was
indeed the fact, and that liberos is a rhetorical plural like
that in Cic. Phil. i. 1.1. Itis clear from Phil. i. 13. 31 that
Cicero is referring to but one.

* When the Thirty Tyrants were overthrown and de-
mocracy was restored under Thrasybulus.


call Caesar “ tyrant ” placed his deed in a better
light. Dolabella, whom Caesar had named for the
consulship, with the intention of putting him in
his own place," had already seized the fasces and
the insignia of that office. Having summoned the
senate, Antonius, acting as the guarantor of peace,
sent his own sons’ to the capitol as hostages and
thus gave his assurance to the slayers of Caesar that
they might come down in safety. On the motion
of Cicero the famous precedent of the Athenians *
granting amnesty for past acts was approved by
decree of the senate.

LIX. Caesar's will was then opened, by which he
adopted Gaius Octavius, the grandson of his sister
Julia. Of the origin of Octavius I must say a few
words, even if the account comes before its proper
place. Gaius Octavius, his father, though not of
patrician birth, was descended from a very prominent
equestrian family, and was himself a man of dignity,
of upright and blameless life, and of great wealth.
Chosen praetor at the head of the poll among a list
of candidates of noble birth, this distinction won
for him a marriage alliance with Atia, a daughter
of Julia. After he had filled the office of praetor,
the province of Macedonia fell to his lot, where he
was honoured with the title of imperator. He was
returning thence to sue for the consulship when he
died on the way, leaving a son still in his early teens.?
Though he had been reared in the house of his step-
father, Philippus, Gaius Caesar, his great-uncle, loved
this boy as his own son. At the age of eighteen
Octavius followed Caesar to Spain in his campaign
there, and Caesar kept him with him thereafter as his

4 Literally **still wearing the praetexta."
N 177


alio usum hospitio quam suo aut alio vectum vehiculo,

4 pontificatusque sacerdotio puerum honoravit. Et
patratis bellis civilibus ad erudiendam liberalibus
disciplinis singularis indolem iuvenis Apolloniam eum
in studia miserat, mox belli Getici ac deinde Parthici

6 Brundusii comperit. Cui adventanti Romam inmanis
amicorum occurrit frequentia, et cum intraret urbem, |
solis orbis super caput eius curvatus aequaliter rotun-
datusque in colorem arcus velut coronam? tanti mox
viri capiti imponens conspectus est.

1 LX. Non placebat Atiae matri Philippoque vitrico
adiri nomen invidiosae fortunae Caesaris, sed ad-
serebant salutaria rei publicae terrarumque orbis
fata conditorem conservatoremque Romani nominis.


1 ordinem ac rationem AMuncker ; ordinationem 4 P.

2 The passage is corrupt as it stands. The general sense is,
however, clear from the following passage in Seneca, Nat.
Quaest. I. 2. 1; memoriae proditum est, quo die Divus
Augustus . . . intravit, circa solem visum coloris varii
circulum, qualis esse in arcu solet; hunc Graeci halo vocant,
nos dicere coronam aptissime possimus.

3 credere Gelenius ; cedere AP.


5 See note on text.


companion, allowing him to share the same roof and
ride in the samecarriage, and though he was still a boy,
honoured him with the pontificate. When the civil
war was over, with a view to training his remarkable
talents by liberal studies, he sent him to Apollonia
to study, with the intention of taking him with
him as his companion in his contemplated wars with
the Getae and the Parthians. At the first announce-
ment of his uncle's death, although the centurions
of the neighbouring legions at once proffered their
own services and those of their men, and Salvidienus
and Agrippa advised him to accept the offer, he
made such haste to arrive in the city that he was
already at Brundisium when he learned the details
of the assassination and the terms of his uncle’s will. /
As he approached Rome an enormous crowd of his
friends went out to meet him, and at the moment
of his entering the city, men saw above his head the
orb of the sun with a circle about it, coloured like
the rainbow," seeming thereby to place a crown upon
the head of one destined soon to greatness.

LX. His mother Atia and Philippus his stepfather
disliked the thought of his assuming the name of
Caesar, whose fortune had aroused such jealousy,
but the fates that preside over the welfare of the
commonwealth and of the world took into their own
keeping the second founder and preserver of the
Roman name. His divine soul therefore spurned
the counsels of human wisdom, and he determined to
pursue the highest goal with danger rather than
a lowly estate and safety. He preferred to trust
the judgement concerning himself of a great-uncle
who was Caesar, rather than that of a stepfather,
saying that he had no right to think himself


nomine Caesari dignus esset visus, semet ipsum sibi!

3 videri indignum. Hunc protinus Antonius consul
superbe excepit (neque is erat contemptus, sed metus)
vixque admisso in Pompeianos hortos loquendi secum
tempus dedit, mox etiam velut insidiis eius petitus
sceleste insimulare coepit, in quo turpiter depre-

4 hensa eius vanitas est. Aperte deinde Antonii ac
Dolabellae consulum ad nefandam dominationem
erupit furor. Sestertium septiens miliens, deposi-
tum a C. Caesare ad aedem Opis, occupatum ab
Antonio, actorum eiusdem insertis falsis civitatibus
inmunitatibusque? corrupti commentarii atque omnia
pretio temperata, vendente rem publicam consule.

5 Idem provinciam D. Bruto designato consuli decretam
Galliam occupare statuit, Dolabella transmarinas
decrevit sibi; interque naturaliter dissimillimos ac
diversa volentis crescebat odium, eoque C. Caesar
iuvenis cotidianis Antonii petebatur insidiis.

1 LXI. Torpebat oppressa dominatione Antonii
civitas. Indignatio et dolor omnibus, vis ad resis-
tendum nulli aderat, cum C. Caesar undevicesimum
annum ingressus, mira ausus ac summa consecutus
privato consilio maiorem senatu pro re publica ani-


1 sibi added by Lipsius.
? civitatibus inmunitatibusque Ellis; civitatibusque AP.


* From the period of his adoption Octavius is regularly
spoken of as Gaius Caesar, and Julius Caesar, who was
really his great-uncle, as his father.


unworthy of the name of which Caesar had thought
him worthy. On his arrival, Antony, the consul,
received him haughtily—out of fear, however,
rather than contempt—and grudgingly gave him,
after he had secured admission to Pompey's gardens,
a few moments' conversation with himself; and it
was not long before Antony began wickedly to
insinuate that an attempt had been made upon his
life through plots fostered by Octavius. In this
matter, however, the untrustworthiness of the
character of Antony was disclosed, to his discredit.
Later the mad ambition of Antony and Dolabella,
the consuls, for the attainment of an unholy despotism,
burst into view. The seven hundred thousand
sestertia deposited by Gaius Caesar in the temple
of Ops were seized by Antony; the records of his
acts were tampered with by the insertion of forged
grants of citizenship and immunity ; and all his
documents were garbled for money considerations,
the consul bartering away the public interests.
Antony resolved to seize the province of Gaul,
which had been assigned by decree to Decimus
Brutus, the consul designate, while Dolabella had the
provinces beyond the sea assigned to himself.
Between men by nature so unlike and with such
different aims there grew up a feeling of hatred,
and in consequence, the young Gaius Caesar was

the object of daily plots on the part of Antony.
LXI. The state languished, oppressed by the
tyranny of Antony. All felt resentment and indigna-
tion, but no one had the power to resist, until Gaius
Caesar, who had just entered his nineteenth year,
with marvellous daring and supreme success, showed
by his individual sagacity a courage in the state's


2 mum habuit primumque a Calatia, mox a Casilino
veteranos excivit paternos ; quorum exemplum secuti
alii brevi in formam iusti coiere exercitus. Mox cum
Antonius occurrisset exercitui, quem ex transmarinis
provinciis Brundusium venire iusserat, legio Martia
et quarta cognita et senatus voluntate et tanti iuvenis
indole sublatis signis ad Caesarem se contulerunt.

4ab eo annum agente vicesimum fortissime circa
Mutinam administratum est et D. Brutus obsidione
liberatus. Antonius turpi ac nuda fuga coactus
deserere Italiam, consulum autem alter in acie, alter
post paucos dies ex volnere mortem obiit.


! id added by Gelenius.


a March 43 p.c. Pansa was mortally wounded at Forum
Gallorum. Hirtius fell a few days later in an assault upon
Antony's camp.


behalf which exceeded that of the senate. He
summoned his father's veterans first from Calatia
then from Casilinum ; other veterans followed their
example, and in a short time they united to form a
regular army. Not long afterwards, when Antony
had met the army which he had ordered to assemble
at Brundisium from the provinces beyond the sea,
two legions, the Martian and the fourth, learning
of the feeling of the senate and the spirit shown
by this courageous youth, took up their standards
and went over to Caesar. The senate honoured
him with an equestrian statue, which is still
standing upon the rostra and testifies to his years
by its inscription. This is an honour which in three
hundred years had fallen to the lot of Lucius Sulla,
Gnaeus Pompeius, and Gaius Caesar, and to these
alone. The senate commissioned him, with the
rank of propraetor, to carry on the war against
Antony in conjunction with Hirtius and Pansa, the
consuls designate. Now in his twentieth year, he
conducted the war at Mutina with great bravery,
and the siege of Decimus Brutus there was raised.
Antony was compelled to abandon Italy in undis-
guised and disgraceful flight. Of the two consuls,
the one died upon the field of battle, and the other
of his wound a few days afterwards."

LXII. Before the defeat of Antony the senate,
chiefly on the motion of Cicero, passed all manner
of resolutions complimentary to Caesar and his army.
But, now that their fears had vanished, their real
feelings broke through their disguise, and the
Pompeian party once more took heart. By vote
of the senate, Brutus and Cassius were now con-
firmed in possession of the provinces which they


had seized upon their own authority without any
decree of the senate; the armies which had gone
over to them were formally commended ; and Brutus
and Cassius were given all authority and jurisdiction
beyond the sea. It is true that these two men had
issued manifestoes—at first in real fear of armed
violence at the hands of Antony, and later to
increase Antony's unpopularity, with the pretence
of fear— manifestos in which they declared that
for the sake of ensuring harmony in the republic
they were even ready to live in perpetual exile, that
they would furnish no grounds for civil war, and that
the consciousness of the service they had rendered
by their act was ample reward. But, when they had
once left Rome and Italy behind them, by deliberate
agreement and without government sanction they
had taken possession of provinces and armies, and
under the pretence that the republic existed wherever
they were, they had gone so far as to receive from
the quaestors, with their own consent, it is true, the
moneys which these men were conveying to Rome
from the provinces across the sea. All these acts
were now included in the decrees of the senate and
formally ratified. Decimus Brutus was voted a
triumph, presumably because, thanks to another's
services, he had escaped with his life. Hirtius and
Pansa were honoured with a public funeral. Of
Caesar not a word was said. The senate even went
so far as to instruct its envoys, who had been sent
to Caesar's army, to confer with the soldiers alone,
without the presence of their general. But the
ingratitude of the senate was not shared by the
army ; for, though Caesar himself pretended not
to see the slight, the soldiers refused to listen to


1 LXIII. Interim Antonius fuga transgressus Alpes,
primo per conloquia repulsus a M. Lepido, qui pontifex
maximus in C. Caesaris locum furto creatus decreta
sibi Hispania adhuc in Gallia morabatur, mox saepius
in conspectum veniens militum (cum et Lepido
omnes imperatores forent meliores et multis Antonius,
dum erat sobrius), per aversa castrorum proruto vallo
al militibus receptus est. Qui titulo imperii cedebat


1 a added by Heinsius.


a The equivocation is on the verb tollere which means, on
the one haud, to **lift up" or **extol," and on the other to
* remove."


any orders without the presence of their commander.
It was at this time that Cicero, with his deep-seated
attachment for the Pompeian party, expressed the
opinion, which said one thing and meant another,
to the effect that Caesar '' should be commended
and then—elevated." "

LXIII. Meanwhile Antony in his flight had crossed
the Alps, and at first made overtures to Marcus
Lepidus which were rejected. Now Lepidus had
surreptitiously been made pontifex in Caesar's place,
and, though the province of Spain had been assigned
to him, was still lingering in Gaul. Later, however,
Antony showed himself several times to the soldiers
of Lepidus, and being, when sober, better than most
commanders, whereas none could be worse than
Lepidus, he was admitted by the soldiers through
a breach which they made in the fortifications in the
rear of the camp. Antony still permitted Lepidus
to hold the nominal command, while he himself held
the real authority. At the time when Antony
entered the camp, Juventius Laterensis, who had
strongly urged Lepidus not to ally himself with
Antony now that he had been declared an enemy of
the state, finding his advice of no avail ran himself
through with his own sword, consistent unto death.
Later Plancus and Pollio both handed over their
armies to Antony. Plancus, with his usual loose
ideas of loyalty, after a long debate with himself as
to which party to follow, and much difficulty in
sticking to his resolutions when formed, now pre-
tended to co-operate with his colleague, Decimus
Brutus, the consul designate, thus seeking to in-
gratiate himself with the senate in his dispatches,
and again betrayed him. But Asinius Pollio, stead-


posito et Iulianis partibus fidus, Pompeianis adversns;
uterque exercitus tradidere Antonio.

1 LXIV. D. Brutus desertus primo a Planco, postea
etiam insidiis eiusdem petitus, paulatim relinquente
eum exercitu fugiens in hospitis cuiusdam nobilis
viri, nomine Cameli, domo ab iis, quos miserat
Antonius, iugulatus est iustissimasque optime de se
merito viro C. Caesari poenas dedit, cuius cum primus

2 omnium amicorum fuisset, interfector fuit et fortunae,
ex qua fructum tulerat, invidiam in auctorem rele-
gabat censebatque aequum, quae acceperat a Caesare
retinere, Caesarem, qui illa dederat, perire.

4 que vindicta libertatis morte stetit ; sed tribuni san-
guine commissa proscriptio, Ciceronis velut? satiato
Antonio paene finita. Lepidus deinde a senatu hostis
iudicatus est, ut ante fuerat Antonius.


fast in his resolution, remained loyal to the Julian
party and continued to be an adversary of the
Pompeians.

LXIV. Decimus Brutus, first abandoned by
Plancus, and later actually the object of his plots,
deserted little by little by his army,and now a fugitive,
was slain by the emissaries of Antony in the house
of a noble named Camelus with whom he had taken
refuge. He thus met his just deserts and paid the
penalty of his treason to Gaius Caesar by whom
he had been treated so well. He who had been the
foremost of all Caesar's friends became his assassin,
and while he threw upon Caesar the odious responsi-
bility for the fortune of which he himself had reaped
the benefits, he thought it fair to retain what he
had received at Caesar's hands, and for Caesar, who
had given it all, to perish.

This is the period when Cicero in a series of speeches
branded the memory of Antony for all time to come.
Cicero assailed Antony with his brilliant and god-
given tongue, whereas Cannutius the tribune tore
him to pieces with the ravening of a mad dog. Each
paid with his life for his defence of liberty. The
proscription was ushered in by the slaying of the
tribune; it practically ended with the death of
Cicero, as though Antony were now sated with
blood. Lepidus was now declared by the senate
an enemy of the state, as Antony had been before
him.

LXV. Then began an interchange of letters
between Lepidus, Caesar, and Antony, and terms
of agreement were suggested. Antony reminded
Caesar how hostile to him the Pompeian party was,
to what a height they had now risen, and how


! tum or tunc Burer; tur AP ; tum igitur Halm.
2 abhinc after conditam deleted by Gelenius.
3 pccvimi Gelenius; Accvini AP; pecx: Aldus.


! cum . . . essent] the passage is clearly corrupt, but as
yet no satisfactory emendation has been offered.


9 43 B.C.

> Consul suffectus in 43 z.c., after Octavianus resigned
the office.  Ventidius and his mother had been made
prisoners in the Social War, and had been led in triumph by


zealously Cicero was extolling Brutus and Cassius.
Antony threatened to join forces with Brutus and
Cassius, who had now control of seventeen legions,
if Caesar rejected this friendly overture, and said
that Caesar was under greater obligations to avenge
a father than he to avenge a friend. Then began
their partnership in political power, and, on the
urgent advice and entreaty of the armies, a marriage
alliance was also made between Antony and Caesar,
in which Antony's stepdaughter was betrothed to
Caesar. Caesar, with Quintus Pedius as colleague,
entered on the consulship^ one day before the
completion of his twentieth year on the twenty-
second of September, seven hundred and nine
years after the founding of the city and seventy-two,
Marcus Vinicius, before the beginning of your
consulship.

This year saw Ventidius " joining the robes of the
consular office to those of praetor in the very city
in which he had been led in triumph among the
Picentine captives. He also lived to celebrate a
triumph of his own.

LXVI. Then the vengeful resentment of Antony
and Lepidus—for each of them had been declared
public enemies, as has already been stated, and
both preferred to hear accounts of what they had
suffered, rather than of what they had deserved, at
the hands of the senate—renewed the horror of the
Sullan proscription. Caesar protested, but without
avail, being but one against two. The climax of
the shame of this time was that Caesar should be
forced to proscribe any one, or that any one should


Pompeius Strabo in 89 s.c. Ventidius celebrated his own
triumph in 38 s.c.


1 tu M. Gelenius; tum AP.
? Ciceronis nomen supplied by Laurent.


proscribe the name of Cicero. By the crime of
Antony, when Cicero was beheaded the voice of
the people was severed, nor did anyone raise a
hand in defence of the man who for so many years
had protected the interests both of the state and of
the private citizen. But you accomplished nothing,
Mark Antony—for the indignation that surges in
my breast compels me to exceed the bounds I have
set for my narrative—you accomplished nothing, I
say, by offering a reward for the sealing of those
divine lips and the severing of that illustrious head,
and by encompassing with a death-fee the murder
of so great a consul and of the man who once
had saved the state. You took from Marcus
Cicero a few anxious days, a few senile years, a life
which would have been more wretched under your
domination than was his death in your triumvirate ;
but you did not rob him of his fame, the glory of his
deeds and words, nay you but enhanced them. He
lives and will continue to live in the memory of the
ages, and so long as this universe shall endure—this
universe which, whether created by chance, or by
divine providence, or by whatever cause, he, almost
alone of all the Romans, saw with the eye of his
mind, grasped with his intellect, illumined with his
eloquence—so long shall it be accompanied through-
out the ages by the fame of Cicero. All posterity
will admire the speeches that he wrote against you,
while your deed to him will call forth their execra-
tions, and the race of man shall sooner pass from the

world than the name of Cicero be forgotten
LXVII. No one has even been able to deplore the
fortunes of this whole period with such tears as the
theme deserves, much less can one now describe it
o 193


exprimere verbis potest. Id tamen notandum est,

2 fuisse in proscriptos uxorum fidem summam, liber-
torum mediam, servorum aliquam, filiorum nullam ;
adeo difficilis est hominibus utcumque conceptae

3 spei mora. Ne quid ulli sanctum relinqueretur,
velut! in dotem invitamentumque sceleris Antonius
L. Caesarem avunculum, Lepidus Paulum fratrem
proscripserant; nec Planco gratia defuit ad im-
petrandum, ut frater eius Plancus Plotius pro-

4 scriberetur. Eoque inter iocos militaris, qui currum
Lepidi Plancique secuti erant, inter execrationem
civium usurpabant hunc versum :

De germanis, non de Gallis duo triumphant
consules.

2 erat), in praetura novarum tabularum auctor extitit
nequiitque senatus et consulis auctoritate* deterreri ;


1 velut Gelenius; vel AP; ut Halm.

2 acriter Haupt; Africaque AP.

3 ne modica quidem solvere ac servari posset Ellis; im-
modica (in modica P) quidem servari posset AP; ne
modica quidem re servari posset Halm.

* et. consulis (after Lipsius) auctoritate Cludius; et
auctoritate COSS. AP.


a Germanus means **'full-brother" as opposed to half-


in words. One thing, however, demands comment,
that toward the proscribed their wives showed the .
greatest loyalty, their freedmen not a little, their .
slaves some, their sons none. So hard is it for men
to brook delays in the realization of their ambitions,
whatever they may be. That no sacred tie might
escape inviolate, and, as it were, as an inducement
and invitation to such atrocities, Antony had
Lucius Caesar, his uncle, placed upon the list, and
Lepidus his own brother Paulus. Plancus also had
sufficient influence to cause his brother Plancus
Plotius to be enrolled among the proscribed. And
so the troops who followed the triumphal car of
Lepidus and Plancus kept repeating among the
soldiers’ jests, but amid the execrations of the
citizens, the following line:

Brothers-german our two consuls triumph over, not
the Gauls.

LXVIII. Let me now relate a matter which I
omitted in its proper place, for the person involved
does not permit the deed to rest in obscurity. This
person is Marcus Caelius, a man closely resembling
Curio in eloquence and in spirit, though more than
his peer in either, and quite as clever in his worth-
lessness. Being quite as bankrupt in property as in
character and unable to save himself by paying even
a reasonable proportion of his debts, he came for-
ward in his praetorship, at the time when Caesar
was fighting for the control of affairs on the field of
Pharsalus,® as the author of a law for the cancellation
of debts, nor could he be deterred from his course
by the authority of either the senate or the consul.


brother. ; The same pun is found in Quint. iii. 8. 29
'* Germanum Cimber occidit." 5 48 B.C.


accito etiam Milone Annio, qui non impetrato reditu
Iulianis partibus infestus erat, in urbe seditionem,
in agris haud! occulte bellicum tumultum movens,
primo summotus a re publica, mox consularibus

3 armis auctore senatu circa Thurios oppressus est. In?
incepto pari similis fortuna Milonis fuit, qui Comp-
sam in Hirpinis oppugnans ictusque lapide cum?
P. Clodio, tum patriae, quam armis petebat, poenas
dedit, vir inquies et ultra fortem temerarius.

4 Quatenus autem aliquid ex omissis peto, notetur
immodica et intempestiva libertate usos adversus
C. Caesarem Marullum Epidium Flavumque Caese-
tium tribunos plebis, dum arguunt in eo regni
voluntatem, paene vim dominationis expertos. In

1 LXIX. Iam et Dolabella in Asia C. Trebonium
consularem, cui succedebat, fraude deceptum Zmyr-
nae occiderat, virum adversus merita Caesaris
ingratissimum  participemque caedis eius, a quo

2ipse in consulare provectus fastigium fuerat; et


1 in agris haud Mommsen ; haud magis AP; at in agris
Lipsius.


2 in added by Madvig. * cum Orelli; tum AP.
a For his conviction for the slaying of Clodius see
Chap. XLVII. d 44 B.C.


Calling to his aid Milo Annius," who was hostile to
the Caesarian party because he had failed to secure
from them his recall, he stirred up a sedition in the
city, and openly raised armed bands in the country.
He was first banished from the state and was later
overcome at Thurii by the army of the consul, on
the order of the senate. A like fortune attended
a similar attempt by Milo. While besieging Compsa,
a city of the Hirpini, he was struck by a stone, and
thus the restless man, too reckless to be called
brave, paid the penalty he owed to Publius Clodius
and to his country, against which he was bearing arms.

While engaged in supplying omissions I should
note the intemperate and untimely display of
independence shown towards Caesar by Marullus
Epidius and Flavus Caesetius, tribunes of the
people, who in charging him with the desire for
the kingship, came near feeling the effects of his
absolute power. Though Caesar was constantly
provoked by them, the only outcome of his wrath
was that he was satisfied to brand them through the
employment of his power as censor, and refrained
from punishing them as dictator by banishing them
from the state; and he expressed his great regret
that he had no alternative but to depart from his
customary clemency or suffer loss of dignity. But
I must now return to the regular order of my
narrative.

LXIX. Meanwhile in Asia, Dolabella, who suc-
ceeded Gaius Trebonius as governor, had surprised
the latter at Smyrna and put him to death, a man
who had showed the basest ingratitude in return
for Caesar's kindness, and had shared in the
murder of him to whom he owed his advancement


C. Cassius acceptis a Statio Murco et Crispo Marcio,
praetoriis viris imperatoribusque, praevalidis in’
Syria legionibus, inclusum Dolabellam, qui praeoccu-
pata Asia in Syriam pervenerat, Laodiciae expugnata
ea urbe interfecerat! (ita tamen, ut ad ictum? servi
sui Dolabella non segniter cervicem daret) et decem
legiones in eo tractu sui iuris fecerat ; et M. Brutus
3 C. Antonio, fratri M. Antonii, in Macedonia Vatinio-
que circa Dyrrachium volentis legiones extorserat
(sed Antonium bello lacessierat, Vatinium dignatione
obruerat, cum et Brutus cuilibet ducum praeferendus
videretur et Vatinius nulli non esset postferendus,
4 in quo deformitas corporis cum turpitudine certebat
ingenii, adeo ut animus eius dignissimo domicilio
inclusus videretur) eratque septem legionibus validus.
5 At lege Pedia, quam consul Pedius collega
Caesaris tulerat, omnibus, qui Caesarem patrem
interfecerant, aqua ignique* interdictum erat. Quo
tempore Capito, patruus meus, vir ordinis senatorii,
6 Agrippae subscripsit in C. Cassium. Dumque ea in
Italia geruntur, acri atque prosperrimo bello Cassius
Rhodum, rem inmanis operis, ceperat, Brutus Lycios
devicerat, et inde in Macedoniam exercitus tra-
iecerant, cum per omnia repugnans naturae suae
Cassius etiam Bruti clementiam vinceret. Neque re-
1 interfecerat Rhenanus (or confecerat) ; fecerat AP.
2 ad ictum Rhenanus; adiectum AP.
3 at Lipsius; et AP; sed Kreyssig.
4 damnatis after ignique deleted by Delbenius.


to the consulship. Dolabella had already occupied
Asia and had passed over into Syria when Gaius
Cassius, taking over their strong legions from Statius
Murcus and Crispus Marcius, both praetorians who
had been saluted as imperator by their troops, shut
him up in Laodicea and by taking that city had
caused his death; for Dolabella had promptly
offered his neck to the sword of his own slave.
Cassius also gained control of ten legions in that
part of the empire. Marcus Brutus had raised his
strength to seven legions by wresting their troops,
by voluntary transfer of allegiance, from Gaius
Antonius, the brother of Marcus Antonius, in
Macedonia, and from Vatinius in the vicinity of
Dyrrachium. Brutus had been obliged to offer
battle to Antony, but Vatinius he had overwhelmed
by the weight of his own reputation, since Brutus
was preferable to any general, while no man could
rank lower than Vatinius, whose deformity of body
was rivalled to such an extent by the baseness
of his character, that his spirit seemed to be housed
in an abode that was thoroughly worthy of it.

By the Pedian law, proposed by Pedius, Caesar's
colleague in the consulship, a decree of banishment


was passed upon all the assassins of Caesar. At


this time Capito, my uncle, a man of senatorial rank,
assisted Agrippa in securing the condemnation of
Gaius Cassius. While all this was taking place in
Italy, Cassius in a vigorous and successful campaign
had taken Rhodes, an undertaking of great difficulty.
Brutus had meanwhile conquered the Lycians. The
armies of both then crossed into Macedonia, where
Cassius, contrary to his nature, uniformly outdid
even Brutus in clemency. One will hardly find men


1 LXX. Tum Caesar et Antonius traiecerunt exer-
citus in Macedoniam et apud urbem Philippos cum
Bruto Cassioque acie concurrerunt. Cornu, cui
Brutus praeerat, impulsis hostibus castra Caesaris
cepit (nam ipse Caesar, etiamsi infirmissimus vale-
tudine erat, obibat munia ducis, oratus etiam ab
Artorio medico, ne in castris remaneret, manifesta
denuntiatione quietis territo), id autem, in quo
Cassius fuerat, fugatum ac male mulcatum in altiora


! se added by Gelenius.


9 42 p.c.


who were ever attended by a more favourable fortune
than Brutus and Cassius, or who were more quickly
deserted by her, as though she were weary.

LXX. Then Caesar and Antonius transported
their armies to Macedonia, and met Brutus and
Cassius in battle^ near the city of Philippi. The
wing under the command of Brutus, after defeating
the enemy, captured Caesar's camp; for Caesar was
performing his duties as commander although he was
in the poorest of health, and had been urged not to re-
main in camp by Artorius his physician, who had been
frightened by a warning which had appeared to him
in hissleep. On the other hand, the wing commanded
by Cassius had been routed and roughly handled,
and had retreated with much loss to higher ground.
Then Cassius, judging his colleague's success by his
own fortune, sent a veteran with instructions to
report to him what was the large force of men
which was now bearing down in his direction. As
the orderly was slow in reporting, and the force
approaching at a run was now close, while their
identity and their standards could not be recognized
for the dust, imagining that the troops rushing on
him were those of the enemy, he covered his head
with his military cloak and undismayed presented -
his neck to the sword of his freedman. The head of
Cassius had scarcely fallen when the orderly arrived
with the report that Brutus was victorious. But
when he saw his commander lying prostrate, he
uttered the words, “ I shall follow him whose death
my tardiness has caused,” and fell upon his sword.

A few days later Brutus met the enemy, and was
beaten in battle. In retreat he withdrew at nightfall
to a hill, and there prevailed upon Strato of Aegaeae,


familiari suo, ut manum morituro commodaret sibi ;

5 reiectoque laevo super caput brachio, cum mucro-
nem gladii eius dextera tenens sinistrae admovisset
mammillae ad eum ipsum locum, qua cor emicat,
impellens se in vulnus uno ictu transfixus expiravit
protinus.

2 virtutes unius temeritate facti* abstulit. Fuit autem


! Halm supplied Corvinus before Messalla.
2 Corvinus AP; Corvini Bothe and Halm.
3 incorrupto Tollius; corrupto 4P.
* facti Rhenanus: fecit AP.


one of his household, to lend him his hand in his
resolve to die. Raising his left arm above his head,
and with his right holding the point of Strato's sword
he brought it close to the left nipple, at the place
where the heart beats, and throwing himself upon
the sword he died at once, transfixed by the stroke.

LXXI. Messalla, a young man of brilliant parts,
was next in authority to Brutus and Cassius in their
camp. Although there were those who urged him
to take command, he preferred to owe his safety to
the kindness of Caesar than to try once again the
doubtful hope of arms. Caesar, on his side, found
no greater pleasure in his victories than in granting
life to Corvinus, nor was there ever a better example
of loyal gratitude than that shown by Corvinus to
Caesar. No other war cost the blood of so many
illustrious men. In that battle the son of Cato fell ;
the same fortune carried off Lucullus and Hortensius,
the sons of eminent citizens. Varro, when about
to die, in mockery of Antony, with the utmost
freedom of speech prophesied for Antony the death
he deserved, a prophecy which came true. Drusus
Livius, the father of Julia Augusta, and Quintilius
Varus, without making any appeal for mercy, ended
their lives. Livius died by his own hand in his
tent; Varus first covered himself with the insignia
of his offices and then forced his freedman to commit
the deed.

LXXII. This was the end reserved by fortune for
the party of Marcus Brutus. He was in his thirty-
seventh year, and had kept his soul free from
corruption until this day, which, through the rashness
of a single act, bereft him, together with his life, of
all his virtuous qualities. Cassius was as much the


dux Cassius melior, quanto vir Brutus: e quibus
Brutum amicum habere malles, inimicum magis
timeres Cassium ; in altero maior vis, in altero
virtus : qui si vicissent, quantum rei publicae inter-
fuit Caesarem potius habere quam Antonium prin-
cipem, tantum retulisset habere Brutum quam Cas-
sium.

3 Cn. Domitius, pater L. Domitii nuper a nobis visi,
eminentissimae ac nobilissimae simplicitatis viri,
avus huius Cn. Domitii, clarissimi iuvenis, occupatis
navibus cum magno sequentium consilia sua comitatu
fugae fortunaeque se commisit, semet ipso contentus

4 duce partium. Statius Murcus, qui classi et custodiae
maris praefuerat, cum omni commissa sibi parte
exercitus naviumque Sex. Pompeium, Cn. Magni
filium, qui ex Hispania revertens Siciliam armis

1 LXXIII. Hic adulescens erat studiis rudis, sermone
barbarus, impetu strenuus, manu promptus, cogi-
tatu? celer, fide patri dissimillimus, libertorum
suorum libertus servorumque servus, speciosis in-


1 sed added by Gelenius.
2 cogitatu Scheffer; cogitator AP.


@ Literally ** whom we lately saw."


better general as Brutus was the better man. Of
the two, one would rather have Brutus as a friend,
but would stand more in fear of Cassius as an enemy.
The one had more vigour, the other more virtue.
As it was better for the state to have Caesar rather
than Antony as emperor, so, had Brutus and Cassius
been the conquerors, it would have been better for
it to be ruled by Brutus rather than by Cassius.

Gnaeus Domitius, father of Lucius Domitius our
late contemporary, a man of eminent and noble
simplicity, and grandfather of Gnaeus Domitius, a
young man of distinction in our own day, seized a
number of ships, and relying on himself to lead his
party, accompanied by a large number of companions
who followed his lead, entrusted himself to the
fortunes of flight. Statius Murcus, who had had
charge of the fleet and the patrolling of the seas,
sought Sextus Pompey, son of Pompey the Great,
with that portion of the army and of the fleet which
had been entrusted to him. Pompey had returned
from Spain and seized Sicily. The proscribed whom
fortune had spared, at least from immediate peril,
now flocked to him from the camp of Brutus, from
Italy, and from other parts of the world. For men
who had now no legal status any leader would do,
since fortune gave them no choice, but held out a
place of refuge, and as they fled from the storm of
death any shelter served as a harbour.

LXXIII. Sextus was a young man without educa-
tion, barbarous in his speech, vigorous in initiative,
energetic and prompt in action as he was swift in
expedients, in loyalty a marked contrast to his
father, the freedman of his own freedmen and slave
of his own slaves, envying those in high places only


2 videns, ut pareret humillimis. Quem senatus paene
totus adhuc e Pompeianis constans partibus post
Antonii a Mutina fugam eodem illo tempore, quo
Bruto Cassioque transmarinas provincias decreverat,
revocatum ex Hispania, ubi adversus eum clarissimum
bellum Pollio Asinius praetorius gesserat, in paterna
bona restituerat et orae maritimae praefecerat.

3Is tum, ut praediximus, occupata Sicilia servitia
fugitivosque in numerum exercitus sui recipiens
magnum modum legionum effecerat perque Menam
et Menecraten paternos libertos, praefectos classium,
latrociniis ac praedationibus infestato mari ad se
exercitumque tuendum rapto utebatur, cum eum
non depuderet vindicatum armis ac ductu patris sui
mare infestare piraticis sceleribus.

1 LXXIV. Fractis Brutianis Cassianisque partibus
Antonius transmarinas obiturus provincias substitit.
Caesar in Italiam se recepit eamque longe quam
speraverat tumultuosiorem repperit. Quippe L.

2 Antonius consul, vitiorum fratris sui consors, sed
virtutum, quae interdum in illo erant, expers, modo
apud veteranos criminatus Caesarem, modo eos, qui
iussa! divisione praediorum nominatisque coloniis
agros amiserant, ad arma conciens magnum exer-
citum conflaverat. Ex altera parte uxor Antonii


1 jussa Heinsius ; iuste AP; iniusta (or iniuste) Lipsius.


to obey those in the lowest. The senate, which
still consisted almost entirely of Pompeians, in the
period which followed the flight of Antony from
Mutina, and at the very time at which it had


assigned to Brutus and Cassius the provinces across


the sea, had recalled Sextus from Spain—where
Pollio Asinius the praetorian had distinguished
himself in his campaigns against him—restored him
to his father's property, and had entrusted to him
the guarding of the coast. Seizing Sicily, as we
have said, and admitting into his army slaves and
runaways, he had raised his legions to their full
complement. He supported himself and his army
on plunder, and through the agency of Menas and
Menecrates, his father's freedmen, who were in
charge of his fleet, he infested the seas by predatory
and piratical expeditions ; nor was he ashamed thus
to infest with piracy and its atrocities the sea which
had been freed from it by his father's arms and
leadership.

LXXIV. After the defeat of the party of Brutus
and Cassius, Antony remained behind with the
intention of visiting the provinces beyond the sea.
Caesar returned to Italy, which he found in a much
more troubled condition than he had expected.
Lucius Antonius, the consul, who shared the faults
of his brother but possessed none of the virtues
which he occasionall showed, by making charges
against Caesar before the veterans at one moment,
and at the next inciting to arms those who had lost
their farms when the division of lands was ordered
and colonists assigned, had collected a large army."
In another quarter Fulvia, the wife of Antony, who

9 41 Bc.


/


Fulvia, nihil muliebre praeter corpus gerens, omnia

3 armis tumultuque miscebat. Haec belli sedem Prae-
neste ceperat; Antonius pulsus undique viribus
Caesaris Perusiam se contulerat : Plancus, Antoniana-
rum adiutor partium, spem magis ostenderat auxilii,

4 quam opem ferebat Antonio. Usus Caesar virtute
et fortuna sua Perusiam expugnavit. Antonium
inviolatum dimisit, in Perusinos magis ira militum
quam voluntate saevitum ducis : urbs incensa, cuius
initium incendii princeps eius loci fecit Macedonicus,
qui subiecto rebus ac penatibus suis igni transfixum
se gladio flammae intulit.

1 LXXV. Per eadem tempora exarserat in Cam-
pania bellum, quod professus eorum, qui perdiderant
agros, patrocinium ciebat T. Claudius Nero prae-
torius et pontifex, Ti. Caesaris pater, magni vir!
animi doctissimique? et ingenii. Id quoque adventu
Caesaris sepultum atque discussum est.

2 Quis fortunae mutationes, quis dubios rerum
humanarum casus satis mirari queat? Quis non
diversa praesentibus contrariaque expectatis aut

3 speret aut timeat? Livia, nobilissimi et fortissimi
viri Drusi Claudiani filia, genere, probitate, forma
Romanarum eminentissima, quam postea coniugem
Augusti vidimus, quam transgressi ad deos sacer-


1 vir P; viri B A.
? doctissimique AP; rectissimique Madvig; promptis-
simique Ruhnken.


»


had nothing of the woman in her except her sex,
was creating general confusion by armed violence.
She had taken Praeneste as her base of operations ;
Antonius, beaten on all sides by the forces of Caesar,
had taken refuge in Perusia ; Plancus, who abetted
the faction of Antony, offered the hope of assist-
ance, rather than gave actual help. Thanks to


his own valour and his usual good fortune, Caesar .


succeeded in storming Perusia. He released Antonius
unharmed ; and the cruel treatment of the people
of Perusia was due rather to the fury of the soldiery
than to the wish of their commander. The city was
burned. The fire was begun by Macedonicus, a
leading man of the place who, after setting fire to
his hous ontents, ran himself through with
his sword and threw himself into the flames.

LXXV. At the same period war broke out in
Campania at the instigation of the ex-praetor and
pontiff, Tiberius Claudius Nero, father of Tiberius
Caesar, and a man of noble character and high
intellectual training, who now came forward as the
protector of those who had lost their lands. This
war also was quickly extinguished and its embers
scattered by the arrival of Caesar.

Who can adequately express his astonishment at
the changes of fortune, and the mysterious vicissi-
tudes in human affairs ? Who can refrain from hoping
for a lot different from that which he now has, or
from dreading one that is the opposite of what he
expects? Take for example Livia. She, the
daughter of the brave and noble Drusus Claudianus,
most eminent of Roman women in birth, in sincerity,
and in beauty, she, whom we later saw as the
wife of Augustus, and as his priestess and daughter


P 209


dotem ac filiam, tum fugiens mox futuri sui Caesaris
arma ac manus! bimum hunc Tiberium Caesarem,
vindicem Romani imperii futurumque eiusdem
Caesaris filium, gestans sinu, per avia itinerum vitatis
militum gladiis uno comitante, quo facilius occul-
taretur fuga, pervenit ad mare et cum viro Nerone
pervecta in Siciliam est.

1 LXXVI. Quod alieno testimonium redderem, eo
non fraudabo avum meum. Quippe C. Velleius,
honoratissimo inter illos trecentos et sexaginta
iudices loco a Cn. Pompeio lectus, eiusdem Marcique
Bruti ac Ti. Neronis? praefectus fabrum, vir nulli
secundus, in Campania digressu Neronis a Neapoli,
cuius ob singularem cum eo amicitiam partium
adiutor fuerat, gravis iam aetate et corpore cum

2 comes? esse non posset, gladio se ipse transfixit.

Inviolatam excedere Italia Caesar passus est
Fulviam Plancumque, muliebris fugae comitem.
Nam Pollio Asinius cum septem legionibus, diu
retenta in potestate Antonii Venetia, magnis spe-
ciosisque rebus circa Altinum aliasque eius regionis
urbes editis, Antonium petens, vagum adhuc Domi-
tium, quem digressum e Brutianis castris post caedem


1 arma ac manus Ells; arma A; arma nus P; arma
minus Voss followed by Halm.

2 Ti. Neronis Aldus; Tironis 4; Tyronis P.

3 cum comes Aldus; comes B; cum AP.

* est added by Cludius.


o By legal adoption.

> In Pompey's time the iudices were chosen from the
senators, knights, and tribuni aerarii, in equal proportion.


after his deification, was then a fugitive before the
arms and forces of the very Caesar who was soon
to be her husband, carrying in her bosom her infant
of two years, the present emperor Tiberius Caesar,
destined to be the defender of the Roman empire
and the son? of this same Caesar. Pursuing by-paths
that she might avoid the swords of the soldiers, and
accompanied by but one attendant, so as the more
readily to escape detection in her flight, she finally
reached the sea, and with her husband Nero made
her escape by ship to Sicily.

LXXVI. I shall not deprive my own grandfather
of the honourable mention which I should give to a
stranger. Gaius Velleius, chosen to a most honourable
position among the three hundred and sixty judges *
by Gnaeus Pompey, prefect of engineers under
Pompey, Marcus Brutus, and Tiberius Nero, and a
man second to none, on the departure from Naples
of Nero, whose partisan he had been on account of
his close friendship, finding himself unable to
accompany him on account of his age and infirmities,
ran himself through with his sword in Campania.

Caesar allowed Fulvia to depart from Italy un-
harmed, and with her Plancus who accompanied the
woman in her flight. As for Pollio Asinius, after he
with his seven legions had long kept Venetia under the
control of Antony, and after he had accomplished
several brilliant exploits in the vicinity of Altinum
and other cities of that region, when he was on his
way to join Antony with these legions he won
Domitius over to the cause of Antony by his counsel
and by the pledge of immunity. Up to this time
Domitius, who, as we have already said, had quitted
the camp of Brutus after that leader's death and


eius praediximus et propriae classis factum ducem,
consiliis suis inlectum! ac fide data iunxit Antonio:

1 LXXVII. Tum expostulante consensu populi,
quem gravis urebat infesto mari annona, cum Pom-
peio quoque circa Misenum pax inita, qui haud
absurde, cum in navi Caesaremque et Antonium
cena exciperet, dixit in carinis suis se cenam dare,
referens hoc dictum ad loci nomen, in quo paterna
domus ab Antonio possidebatur. In hoc pacis

2 foedere placuit Siciliam Achaiamque Pompeio con-
cedere, in quo tamen animus inquies manere non
potuit. Id unum tantummodo salutare adventu suo
patriae attulit, quod omnibus proscriptis aliisque,
qui ad eum ex diversis causis fugerant, reditum


l inlectum Gelenius; electum AP.


? apparatusque Sylburg ; praeparatusque 44 P; paratusque
Gelenius.


3 in id Puteanus; in is B.A ; simul P.


a 10 p.c. > i.e. Octavianus. ¢ 39 p.c.

4 Carinae, which also means ** keels,” was a residential
quarter in Rome between the Caelian and Esquiline Hills,
now S. Pietro in Vincoli.


had established himself in command of a fleet of his
own, had remained at large. In view of this act of
Pollio any fair judge will see that he rendered as
great a service to Antony as Antony rendered to
him. The return of Antony to Italy and Caesar’s
preparations against him gave rise to fears of war,
but a peace was arranged at Brundisium.*

It was at this time that the criminal designs of
Rufus Salvidienus were revealed. This man, sprung
from the most obscure origin, was not satisfied with
having received the highest honours in the state,
and to have been the first man of equestrian rank
after Gnaeus Pompey and Caesar’ himself to be
elected consul, but aspired to mount to a height
where he might see both Caesar and the republic
at his feet. |

LXXVII. Thenin response to a unanimous demand
on the part of the people, who were now pinched by
the high price of grain because the sea was infested
by pirates, a peace was arranged * with Pompey also,
in the neighbourhood of Misenum. Pompey enter- |
tained Caesar and Antony at dinner on board his
ship, on which occasion he remarked, not without
point, that he was giving the dinner on “ his own
keels," 4 thereby recalling the name of the quarter
in which stood his father’s house, now in the
possession of Antony. By the terms of this treaty
it was agreed that Sicily and Achaea should be con-
ceded to Pompey, but his restless soul would not
let him abide by the agreement. There was only
one benefit which he rendered to his country by
attending the conference, namely, the stipulation
that all those who had been proscribed, or who
for any other reason had taken refuge with him,


1 LXXVIII. Hoc tractu temporum Octaviam, soro-
rem Caesaris, M. Antonius duxit uxorem. Redierat
Pompeius in Siciliam, Antonius in transmarinas
provincias, quas magnis momentis! Labienus, ex
Brutianis castris profectus ad Parthos, perducto
eorum exercitu in Syriam interfectoque legato
Antonii concusserat ; qui virtute et ductu Ventidii
una cum Parthorum copiis celeberrimoque iuvenum
Pacoro, regis filio, extinctus est.

2 Caesar? per haec tempora, ne res disciplinae ini-
micissima, otium, corrumperet militem, crebris in
Illyrico Delmatiaque expeditionibus patientia peri-
culorum bellique experientia durabat exercitum.

3 Eadem tempestate Calvinus Domitius, cum ex con-
sulatu obtineret Hispaniam, gravissimi comparandi-
que antiquis exempli auctor fuit: quippe primi pili

1 molimentis Ruhnken; momentis 4P.
? interim before Caesar deleted by Ellis as a gloss.


a Statius Murcus had been made prefect of the fleet by
" Cassius. After the defeat of the republicans at Philippi, he
carried his fleet-over to Sextus Pompey in Sicily. — -


should be granted a safe return. Among other
illustrious men, Nero Claudius, Marcus Silanus,
Sentius Saturninus, Arruntius and Titius were
thereby restored to the state. As to Statius
Murcus, however, who had doubled Pompey's
forces by joining him with his strong fleet,
Pompey had already put him to death in Sicily
as the result of false accusations which had been
brought against him, Menas and Menecrates
having expressed a distaste for such a man as
their colleague.

LXXVIII. It was during this period that Marcus
Antonius espoused Octavia, the sister of Caesar.
Pompey had now returned to Sicily, and Antony to
the provinces across the sea, which Labienus had
thrown into a panic in consequence of the great
movements he had set on foot; for he had gone
from the camp of Brutus to the Parthians, had led
a Parthian army into Syria, and had slain a lieutenant
of Antony. Thanks to the courageous generalship
of Ventidius, Labienus perished in the battle" and
with him the forces of the Parthians, including the
most distinguished of their young men, Pacorus, son
of the Parthian king.

During this time Caesar, wishing to keep his soldiers
from being spoiled by idleness, the great enemy of
discipline, was making frequent expeditions in
Illyricum and Dalmatia and thus hardening his army
by endurance of danger and experience in warfare.
At this time also Calvinus Domitius, who, after
filling the consulship, was now governor of Spain,
executed a rigorous act of discipline comparable
with the severity of the older days, in that he caused

è 38 B.C.


centurionem nomine Vibilium ob turpem ex acie
fugam fusti percussit.

1 LXXIX. Crescente in dies et classe et fama
Pompei Caesar molem belli eius suscipere statuit.
Aedificandis navibus contrahendoque militi ac remigi
navalibusque adsuescendo certaminibus atque exer-
citationibus praefectus est M. Agrippa, virtutis
nobilissimae, labore, vigilia, periculo invictus paren-
dique, sed uni, scientissimus, aliis sane imperandi
cupidus et per omnia extra dilationes positus con-

2 sultisque facta coniungens. Hic in Averno ac Lucrino
lacu speciosissima classe fabricata cotidianis exer-
citationibus militem remigemque ad summam et
militaris et maritimae rei perduxit scientiam. Hac
classi Caesar, cum prius despondente ei Nerone, cui
ante nupta fuerat Liviam, auspicatis rei publicae
ominibus duxisset eam uxorem, Pompeio Siciliaeque

3 bellum intulit. Sed virum humana ope invictum
graviter eo tempore fortuna concussit : quippe longe

. maiorem partem classis circa Veliam Palinurique
promontorium adorta vis Africi laceravit ac distulit.
Ea patrando bello mora fuit, quod postea dubia et


a This punishment was called fustuarium and was inflicted
on Roman soldiers for desertion. When a soldier was con-
demned, the tribune touched him slightly with a stick, upon
which all the soldiers of the legion fell upon him with sticks
and stones and generally killed him on the spot (Smith,
Dict. Ant.). > 38 B.C.


a chief centurion by the name of Vibillius to be
beaten to death? for cowardly flight from the line
of battle.

LXXIX. As Pompey's fleet was growing daily, .
and his reputation as well, Caesar resolved to take '
up the burden of this new war. Marcus Agrippa
was charged with constructing the ships, collecting
soldiers and rowers, and familiarizing them with
naval contests and manceuvres. He was a man of
distinguished character, unconquerable by toil, loss
of sleep or danger, well disciplined in obedience,
but to one man alone, yet eager to command others ;
in whatever he did he knew no such thing as delay,
but with him action went hand in hand with concep-
tion. Building an imposing fleet in lakes Avernus
and Lucrinus, by daily drills he brought the soldiers
and the oarsmen to a thorough knowledge of fight-
ing on land and at sea. With this fleet Caesar
made war on Pompey in Sicily after he had
espoused Livia, who was given to him in marriage
by her former husband * under circumstances which
augured well for the state. But this man, uncon-
querable by human power, received at this time a
heavy blow at the hands of fortune, since the greater
part of his fleet was wrecked and scattered in the
vicinity of Velia and Cape Palinurus by a violent
scirocco. This delayed finishing the war, which,
however, was subsequently carried on with shifting
and sometimes doubtful fortune. For Caesar's
fleet was again buffeted by a storm in the same
locality, and although the issue was favourable
in the first naval battle, at Mylae, under the leader-

* Tiberius Claudius Nero, to whom she had already borne
a son, the future Emperor Tiberius.

: 217


pugnatum prospere, ita inopinato Pompeianae!
classis adventu gravis sub ipsius Caesaris oculis circa
Tauromenium accepta clades ; neque ab ipso peri-
culum abfuit. Legiones, quae cum Cornificio erant,
legato Caesaris, expositae in terram paene a Pom-

6 precatur, a Titio iugulatus est. Cui in tantum duravit
hoc facinore contractum odium, ut mox ludos in
theatro Pompei faciens execratione populi specta-
culo, quod praebebat, pelleretur.

2 iunxerat inflatusque amplius viginti legionum numero
in id furoris processerat, ut inutilis alienae victoriae?
comes, quam diu moratus erat, dissidendo in consiliis
Caesari* et semper diversa iis, quae aliis placebant,
dicendo, totam victoriam ut suam interpretabatur


| ! Pompeianae added by Heinsius.
2 mature Ruhnken; matura AP.


3 alienae victoriae P; in alienae victoriae 4B; in aliena
victoria Burer.
* Caesari Acidalius; Caesaris AP.


a Battle of Naulochus, 36 n.c.


ship of Agrippa, a serious defeat was received near
Tauromenium beneath the very eyes of Caesar, in
consequence of the unexpected arrival of Pompey's
fleet, and Caesar's own person was endangered.
The legions which were with Cornificius, Caesar's
lieutenant, came near being crushed by Pompey as
soon as they landed. But fortune's caprice at this
critical period was soon amended by bravery in action;
when the fleets on both sides had been drawn up for
battle,” Pompey lost almost all his ships, and fled to
Asia, where, wavering between the róle of general
and suppliant, now endeavouring to retain his dignity
and now pleading for his life, he was slain by Titius
on the orders of Marcus Antonius, whose aid he had
sought. The hatred which Titius brought upon him-
self by this act lasted for a long time ; indeed, after-
wards, when he was celebrating games in Pompey's
theatre, he was driven amid the execrations of the
people from the spectacle which he himself was giving.
LXXX. While engaged in his war with Pompey,
Caesar had summoned Lepidus from Africa with
twelve legions of half the usual strength. This man,
the most fickle of mankind, who had not earned the
long-continued kindness of fortune through any
qualities of his own, being nearer to the army of
Pompey, annexed it to his own, though it was
following not his orders but Caesar's, and owned
loyalty to him. His numbers now swollen to twenty
legions, he went to such lengths of madness that,
though but a useless partner in another's victory, a
victory which he had long delayed by refusing to
agree to Caesar's plans and always insisting upon
something different from that which suited others,
he claimed the victory as entirely his own and had


2 discussa principis, speciosumque per idem tempus
adiectum supplementum Campanae coloniae * *4


1 jnterpretabatur audebatque AP; interpretaretur aude-
batque Gelenius ; interpretaretur auderetque Ruhnken.

2 telis added by Orelli.

3 indignissimam Ruhnken ; in dissimillimam 4P.

* Halm suggests to fill the lacuna: veteranis in agros
deductis qui coloniae.


a Octavianus was not princeps formally until 27 s.c.

ò The statement of Dio xlix. 14 is the basis for supplying
the missing words: ** In this way Caesar calmed the soldiers
temporarily. The money he gave them at once and the
lands not much later. And since what was still held by
the government at the time did not suffice he bought more
in addition, especially considerable from the Campanians
dwelling in Capua since their city needed a number of


the effrontery to order Caesar out of Sicily. The
Scipios and the other Roman generals of the olden
time never dared or carried out a braver act than
did Caesar at this juncture. For although he was
unarmed and dressed in his travelling cloak, carrying
nothing except his name, he entered the camp of
Lepidus, and, avoiding the weapons which were
hurled at him by the orders of that scoundrel,
though his cloak was pierced by a lance, he had
the courage to carry off the eagle of a legion. Then
could one know the difference between the two com-
manders. Though armed, the soldiers followed Caesar
who was unarméd, while Lepidus, in the tenth year
after arriving at a position of power which his life had
done nothing to deserve, now deserted both by his
soldiers and by fortune, wrapping himself in a dark
cloak and lurking in the rear of the crowd that
thronged to Caesar, thus threw himself at Caesar's
feet. He was granted his life and the control of his
own property, but was shorn of the high position
which he had shown himself unable to maintain.
LXXXI. There followed a sudden mutiny of the
army ; for it happens not infrequently that when
soldiers observe their own numbers they break
discipline and do not endure to ask for what they
think they can exact. The mutiny was broken up
partly by severity, partly by liberality on the part
of the emperor," and considerable additions were
at the same time made to the Campanian colony
[by placing veterans on the lands of that colony]


settlers. To them he also gave in return the so-called
Julian supply of water, one of their chief sources of pride at
all times, and the Gnosian territory from which they still
gather harvests." (Tr. by H. B. Foster.)


1 instrumentum Cludius; instar AP. "
2 sepelivit in Sicilia bellum Ruhnken; libium in Sicilia Bn

(bene A) AP.

et in 4; in P.

mitis saeviit Haupt; militavit 4P.

egressus AP; ingressus G'elenius.

a added by Ireyssig.

desperaret Haupt; desperaverat 4P.


40 0 »O


¢ At Gnosos. See previous note.
* About £10,000 or $50,000.
* Corona classica or navalis: & chaplet of gold with


which had been left public. Lands in Crete ^ were
given in return for these, which yielded a richer
revenue of a million two hundred thousand sesterces,^
and an aqueduct was promised which is to-day a
remarkable agency of health as well as an ornament
to the landscape.

In this war Agrippa by his remarkable services
earned the distinction of a naval crown, ^ with which
no Roman had as yet been decorated. Caesar, on
his victorious return to the city, made the announce-
ment that he meant to set apart for public use
certain houses which he had secured by purchase
through his agents in order that there might be a
free area about his own residence. He further
promised to build a temple of Apollo with a portico
about it, a work which he constructed with rare
munificence.

LXXXII. In the summer in which Caesar so
successfully ended the war in Sicily, fortune, though
kind in the case of Caesar and the republic, vented
her anger in the east. For Antony with thirteen
legions after passing through Armenia and then
through Media, in an endeavour to reach Parthia
by this route, found himself confronted by their
king.4 First of all he lost two legions with all their
baggage and engines, and Statianus his lieutenant ;
later he himself with the greatest risk to his entire
army, on several occasions encountered perils from
which he dared not hope that escape was possible.
After losing not less than a fourth part of his soldiers,


beaks of ships worked into the design, presented to the
admiral who had destroyed a hostile fleet. Agrippa is
represented on a bronze medallion wearing such a chaplet.

4 36-35 B.C,


quarta parte militum captivi cuiusdam, sed Romani,
consilio ac fide servatus est,! qui clade Crassiani exer-
citus captus, cum fortuna non animum mutasset,
accessit nocte ad stationem Romanam praedixitque,
ne destinatum iter peterent, sed diverso silvestrique

4 amoris in Cleopatram incendio et vitiorum, quae
semper facultatibus licentiaque et adsentationibus
aluntur, magnitudine, bellum patriae inferre con-
stituit, cum ante novum se Liberum Patrem appellari
iussisset, cum redimitus hederis crocotaque* velatus
aurea et thyrsum tenens cothurnisque succinctus
curru velut Liber Pater vectus esset Alexandriae.

! est added by Orelli.
? ac tot Salmasius and Lipsius ; acto AP.


3 illius Voss; illis AP.
4 crocota Ruhnken; corona AP.


@ 34 B.c.


he was saved through the fidelity and by the
suggestion of a captive, who was nevertheless a
Roman. This man had been made prisoner in the
disaster to the army of Crassus, but had not changed
his allegiance with his fortune. He came by night
to a Roman outpost and warned them not to pursue
their intended course but to proceed by a detour
through the forest. It was this that saved Marcus
Antonius and his many legions; and yet, even so,
not less than a fourth part of these soldiers and of his
entire army was lost, as we have already stated,
and of the camp-followers and slaves a third, while
hardly anything of the baggage was saved. Yet
Antonius called this flight of his a victory, because
he had escaped with his life ! Three summers later *
he returned to Armenia, obtained possession of the
person of Artavasdes its king by deceit, and bound
him with chains, which, however, out of regard for
the station of his captive, were of gold. Then as
his love for Cleopatra became more ardent and his
vices grew upon him—for these are always nourished
by power and licence and flattery—he resolved to
make war upon his country. He had previously
given orders that he should be called the new Father
Liber, and indeed in a procession at Alexandria he
had impersonated Father Liber, his head bound
with the ivy wreath, his person enveloped in the
saffron robe of gold, holding in his hand the thyrsus,
wearing the buskins, and riding in the Bacchic
chariot.

LXXXIII. In the midst of these preparations for
war Plancus went over to Caesar, not through any
conviction that he was choosing the right, nor from
any love of the republic or of Caesar, for he was

Q 225


2 cum in omnia et omnibus venalis, cum caeruleatus


et nudus caputque redimitus arundine et caudam
trahens, genibus innixus Glaucum saltasset in con-
vivio, refrigeratus ab Antonio ob manifestarum
rapinarum indicia transfugit ad Caesarem. Et idem
postea clementiam victoris pro sua virtute inter-
pretabatur, dictitans id probatum a Caesare, cui
ille ignoverat; mox autem hunc avunculum Titius


3 imitatus est. Haud absurde Coponius, vir e prae-


—_


toriis gravissimus, P. Silii! socer, cum recens transfuga
multa ac nefanda Plancus absenti Antonio in senatu
obiceret, multa, inquit, mehercules fecit Antonius
pridie quam tu illum relinqueres.

1 P. Silii Gelenius; Patersilii 4; pater Silii 4.
2 in (before illa) added by Vascosanus.
3 remiges Lipsius; reges AP.


a Clients were freemen who were nevertheless dependent
upon the rich or powerful. Velleius’ point seems to be that
the only difference between the status of Plancus and that
of the slave is that Plancus was born free.

> See note on Chap. LXXIX.

¢ 31 B.C.


always hostile to both, but because treachery was a.
disease with him. He had been the most grovelling
flatterer of the queen, a client? with less self-respect
than a slave ; he had also been secretary to Antony
and was the author or the abettor of his vilest acts ;
for money he was ready to do all things for all men ;
and at a banquet he had played the role of Glaucus
the Nereid, performing a dance in which his naked
body was painted blue, his head encircled with reeds,
at the same time wearing a fish's tail and crawling
upon his knees. Now, inasmuch as he had been
coldly treated by Antony because of unmistakable
evidence of his venal rapacity, he deserted to Caesar.
Afterwards he even went so far as to interpret the
victor's clemency as a proof of his own merit, claim-
ing that Caesar had approved that which he had
merely pardoned. It was the example of this man,
his uncle, that Titius soon afterwards followed.^
The retort of Coponius, who was the father-in-law of
Publius Silius and a dignified praetorian, was not
so far from the mark when he said, as Plancus in
the senate fresh from his desertion was heaping
upon the absent Antony many unspeakable charges,
" By Hercules, Antony must have done a great
many things before you left him."

LXXXIV. Then, in the consulship of Caesar and
Messala Corvinus, the decisive battle took place
at Actium. The victory of the Caesarian party was `
a certainty long before the battle. On the one side
commander and soldiers alike were full of ardour,
on the other was general dejection; on the one
side the rowers were strong and sturdy, on the other
weakened by privations; on the one side ships of
moderate size, not too large for speed, on the other


2 aliquis? transfugiebat ; rex? Amyntas meliora et
utiliora secutus ; nam Dellius* exempli sui tenax
ut a» Dolabella ad Cassium, a Cassio ad Antonium,
ita ab Antonio transiit? ad Caesarem ; virque cla-
rissimus Cn. Domitius, qui solus Antonianarum
partium numquam reginam nisi nomine salutavit,
maximo et praecipiti periculo transmisit ad Caesarem.
Denique in ore atque oculis Antonianae classis per
M. Agrippam Leucas expugnata, Patrae captae,
Corinthus occupata, bis ante ultimum discrimen
classis hostium superata.

2cavere. Dextrum navium Iulianarum cornu M.
Lurio commissum, laevum Arruntio, Agrippae omne
classici certaminis arbitrium ; Caesar ei parti des-
tinatus, in quam a fortuna vocaretur, ubique aderat.
Classis Antonii regimen Publicolae Sosioque commis-
sum. At in terra locatum exercitum Taurus Caesaris,

3 Antonii regebat Canidius. Ubi initum certamen est,
omnia in altera parte fuere, dux, remiges, milites,
in altera nihil praeter milites. Prima occupat fugam
Cleopatra. Antonius fugientis reginae quam pug-


1 specie Gelenius; specie et 4P.

2 aliquis Heinsius ; aliquid 4B; qu transfugiebant P.

8 The clause rex . . . transmisit Caesarem found in
AP after superata, a£ the end y the paragraph, was trans-
posed to its present position by Haase.

4 Dellius Kritz; de illius AP.

5 exempli sui tenax ut a Lipsius; exemplis uitae naxuta


* ad Cassium . . . transiit supplied by Ruhnken.


vessels of a size that made them more formidable
in appearance only; no one was deserting from
Caesar to Antony, while from Antony to Caesar |
someone or other was deserting daily ; and King
Amyntas had embraced the better and more
advantageous side. As for Dellius, consistent to
his habit, he now went over from Antony to Caesar
as he had deserted from Dolabella to Cassius and
from Cassius to Antony. The illustrious Gnaeus
Domitius, who was the only one of the party of
Antony who refused to salute the queen except by
name, went over to Caesar at great and imminent
risk to himself. Finally, before the eyes of Antony
and his fleet, Marcus Agrippa had stormed Leucas,
had captured Patrae, had seized Corinth, and before
the final conflict had twice defeated the fleet of the
enemy.

LXXXV. Then came the day of the great conflict,
on which Caesar and Antony led out their fleets and
fought, the one for the safety, the other for the ruin,
of the world. The command of the right wing of
Caesar's fleet was entrusted to Marcus Lurius, of
the left to Arruntius, while Agrippa had full charge
of the entire conflict at sea. Caesar, reserving
himself for that part of the battle to which fortune
might summon him, was present everywhere. The
command of Antony's fleet was entrusted to Publicola
and Sosius. On the land, moreover, the army of
Caesar was commanded by Taurus, that of Antony
by Canidius. When the conflict began, on the
one side was everything—commander, rowers, and
soldiers; on the other, soldiers alone. Cleopatra
took the initiative in the flight; Antony chose
to be the companion of the fleeing queen rather


4 longum fortissime pugnandi duravit constantia et
desperata victoria in mortem dimicabatur. Caesar,
quos ferro poterat interimere, verbis mulcere cupiens
clamitansque et ostendens fugisse Antonium, quae-

6 tum officio, ut dubites, suone? an Cleopatrae arbitrio
victoriam temperaturus fuerit, qui ad eius arbitrium
direxerit? fugam. Idem locatus in terra fecit exer-
citus, cum se Canidius praecipiti fuga rapuisset ad
Antonium.  .

1 LXXXVI. Quid ille dies terrarum orbi praestiterit,
ex quo in quem statum pervenerit fortuna publica,
quis in hoc transcursu tam artati operis exprimere


1 detracto Vascosanus; detrectato AP.

2 x dubites, suone Burer; videbites ne .4; videbit e
suo P.

3 direxerit Halm ; direxit 4P.

4 paucissimi summoti Baiter; paucissimi et hi 4P.

$ si ei Halm; sic 4; si sic P; si Burer.


than of his fighting soldiers, and the commander
whose duty it would have been to deal severely with
deserters, now became a deserter from his own army.
Even without their chief his men long continued to
fight bravely, and despairing of victory they fought
to the death. Caesar, desiring to win over by words
those whom he might have slain with the sword,
kept shouting and pointing out to them that Antony
had fled, and kept asking them for whom and with
whom they were fighting. But they, after fighting
long for their truant commander, reluctantly
surrendered their arms and yielded the victory,
Caesar having promised them pardon and their lives
before they could bring themselves to sue for them.
It was evident that the soldiers had played the part
of the good commander while the commander had
played that of the cowardly soldier, so that one
might question whether in case of victory he would
have acted according to Cleopatra’s will or his own,
since it was by her will that he had resorted to flight.
The land army likewise surrendered when Canidius

had hurried after Antony in precipitate flight.
LXXXVI. Who is there who, in the compass of
so brief a work, would attempt to state what
blessings this day conferred upon the world, or to
describe the change which took place in the fortunes
of the state? Great clemency was shown in the :
victory; no one was put to death, and but few
banished who could not bring themselves even to
become suppliants. From this display of mercy on
the part of the commander it may be inferred how
moderate a use Caesar would have made of his
victory, had he been allowed to do so, whether at
the beginning of his triumvirate or on the plain of


victoriae suae facturus fuerit modum.! At Sosium
L. Arruntii prisca gravitate celeberrimi fides, mox,
diu cum clementia luctatus? sua, Caesar servavit


1 modum added by Rhenanus.

? diu... luctatus 4P; odium . . . eluctatus Madvig
and Halm.

3 aspide in B; aspidem 4; aspide P.

5 est added by Orelli.

ê ab eo devictum Acidalius; ab (ob P) eodem victum
BAP.


a 30 B.C.


Philippi. But, in the case of Sosius, it was the
pledged word of Lucius Arruntius, a man famous
for his old-time dignity, that saved him; later,
Caesar preserved him unharmed, but only after
long resisting his general inclination to clemency.
The remarkable conduct of Asinius Pollio should not
be passed by nor the words which he uttered. For
although he had remained in Italy after the peace
of Brundisium, and had never seen the queen nor
taken any active part in Antony’s faction after this
leader had become demoralized by his passion for
her, when Caesar asked him to go with him to
the war at Actium he replied: '" My services to
Antony are too great, and his kindness to me
too well known; accordingly I shall hold aloof
from your quarrel and shall be the prize of the
victor."


LXXXVII. The following year Caesar followed


Cleopatra and Antony to Alexandria and there put -


the finishing touch upon the civil wars. Antony
promptly ended his life, thus by his death
redeeming himself from the many charges of lack
of manhood. As for Cleopatra, baffling the vigilance
of her guards she caused an asp to be smuggled
in to her, and ended her life by its venomous
sting untouched by a woman’s fears. It was in


.-


" keeping with Caesar's fortune and his clemency -'


that not one of those who had borne arms against
him was put to death by him, or by his order. It
was the cruelty of Antony that ended the life of
Decimus Brutus. In the case of Sextus Pompey,
though Caesar was his conqueror, it was likewise
Antony who deprived him of his life, even though
he had given his word that he would not degrade


3 dedisset fidem, etiam spiritu privavit. Brutus et
Cassius ante, quam victorum experirentur animum,
voluntaria morte obierunt. Antonii Cleopatraeque
quis fuisset exitus narravimus. Canidius timidius
decessit, quam professioni ei! qua semper usus
erat, congruebat. Ultimus autem ex interfectoribus
Caesaris Parmensis Cassius morte poenas dedit, ut
dederat Trebonius primus.’

1 LXXXVIII. Dum ultimam bello Actiaco Alexan-
drinoque Caesar imponit manum, M. Lepidus. iuvenis
forma quam mente melior, Lepidi eius, qui triumvir
fuerat rei publicae constituendae, filius, Iunia Bruti
sorore natus, interficiendi, simul in urbem revertisset,


1 ei Cludius ; eius AP.

2 primus added by Aldus, but before Trebonius.

* erat added by Madvig.

t paene A; pene P; the most satisfactory emendation is
that of Salmasius angusticlavio plene contentus.


a His boasts that he did not fear death.

> With Antony and Octavian.

¢ As contrasted with the broad purple band of the
senatorial order.


him from his rank. Brutus and Cassius, without
waiting to discover the attitude of their conquerors,
died voluntary deaths. Of the end of Antony and
Cleopatra we have already told. As for Canidius,
he showed more fear in the face of death than was
consistent with his lifelong utterances. The last —
of Caesar's assassins to pay the penalty of death
was Cassius of Parma, as Trebonius had been the
first.

LXXXVIII. While Caesar was engaged in giving
the finishing touch to the war at Actium and Alex-
andria, Marcus Lepidus, a young man whose good
looks exceeded his prudence—son of the Lepidus who
had been one of the triumvirs® for the re-establish-
ment of order in the state and of Junia the sister
of Brutus—had formed plans for the assassination
of Caesar as soon as he should return to the city.
The guards of the city were at that time under the
charge of Gaius Maecenas, of equestrian rank, but
none the less of illustrious lineage, a man who was
literally sleepless when occasion demanded, and
quick to foresee what was to be done and skilful
in doing it, but when any relaxation was allowed
him from business cares would almost outdo a woman :
in giving himself up to indolence and soft luxury.
He was not less loved by Caesar than Agrippa,
though he had fewer honours heaped upon him,
since he lived thoroughly content with the narrow
stripe of the equestrian order^ He might have
achieved a position no less high than Agrippa, but
had not the same ambition for it. Quietly and
carefully concealing his activity he unearthed the
plans of the hot-headed youth, and by crushing
Lepidus with wonderful swiftness and without


3 taverit. Finita vicesimo anno bella civilia, sepulta
externa, revocata pax, sopitus ubique armorum
furor, restituta vis legibus, iudiciis auctoritas, senatui
maiestas, imperium magistratuum ad pristinum
redactum modum, tantummodo octo praetoribus
adlecti duo. Prisca illa et antiqua rei publicae

4forma revocata. Rediit cultus agris, sacris honos,
securitas hominibus, certa cuique rerum suarum
possessio ; leges emendatae utiliter, latae salubriter ;


1 Antistii Vossius ; Antistiae AP.

? praematura morte Burer; praematuram mortem AB.

3 que occursu Lipsius; occursus AP.

4 favore omnium hominum aetatium AP; generum
added by Halm.
, P ne in operis quidem Gelenius ; nedum in operis siquidem


a Chap. XXVI.


causing disturbance to either men or things he
extinguished the portentous beginnings of a new
and reviving civil war. Lepidus himself paid the
penalty for his ill-advised plot. Servilia his wife
must be placed on a parity with the wife of Antistius
already mentioned,’ for by swallowing live coals
she compensated for her untimely death by the
lasting memory of her name.

LXXXIX. As for Caesar's return to Italy and to
Rome—the procession which met him, the enthusiasm
of his reception by men of all classes, ages, and ranks,
and the magnificence of his triumphs and of the
spectacles which he gave—all this it would be
impossible adequately to describe even within the
compass of a formal history, to say nothing of a
work so circumscribed as this. There is nothing that
man can desire from the gods, nothing that the
gods can grant to a man, nothing that wish can
conceive or good fortune bring to pass, which
Augustus on his return to thé city did not bestow
upon the republic, the Roman people, and the world.
The civil wars were ended after twenty years,
foreign wars suppressed, peace restored, the frenzy
of arms everywhere lulled to rest; validity was
restored to the laws, authority to the courts, and
dignity to the senate ; the power of the magistrates
was reduced to its former limits, with the sole
exception that two were added to the eight existing
praetors. The old traditional form of the republic .
was restored. Agriculture returned to the fields,
respect to religion, to mankind freedom from
anxiety, and to each citizen his property rights were
now assured; old laws were usefully emended,
and new laws passed for the general good ; the


6 victoriis terrarum orbis et tot extra Italiam domique
opera omne aevi sui spatium impensurum in id
solum opus scriptorem fatigarent? : nos memores
professionis universam imaginem principatus eius
oculis animisque subiecimus.

! quin Madvig; quem AP.
2 non added by Madvig.
3 fatigarent Vossius; fatigant AP.
* et (or etiam) coaluere Bergk ; et coram aliero AP.


5 annos added by Orelli.
$ incultisque Heinsius ; multisque AP.


revision of the senate, while not too drastic, was ,
not lacking in severity. The chief men of the state |


who had won triumphs and had held high office were
at the invitation of Augustus induced to adorn the
city. In the case of the consulship only, Caesar was
not able to have his way, but was obliged to hold
that office consecutively until the eleventh time in
spite of his frequent efforts to prevent it; but the


dictatorship which the people persistently offered ,


him, he as stubbornly refused. To tell of the wars
waged under his command, of the pacification of the
world by his victories, of his many works at home
and outside of Italy would weary a writer intending
to devote his whole life to this one task. As for
myself, remembering the proposed scope of my work,
I have confined myself to setting before the eyes
and minds of my readers a general picture of his
principate.

XC. When the civil wars had been extinguished,
as we have already told, and the rent limbs of the
state itself began to heal, the provinces, also,
torn asunder by the long series of wars began to
knit together. Dalmatia, in rebellion for one
hundred and twenty years, was pacified to the
extent of definitely recognizing the sovereignty of
Rome. The Alps, filled with wild and barbarous
tribes, were subdued. The provinces of Spain were
pacified after heavy campaigns conducted with
varied success now by Caesar in person, now by
Agrippa, whom the friendship of the emperor had
raised to a third consulship and soon afterwards to
a share in the emperor's tribunician power. Roman
armies had been sent into these provinces for the
first time in the consulship of Scipio and Sempronius


-—


secundi belli! Punici abhinc annos quinquaginta et
ducentos Romani exercitus missi essent duce Cn.
Scipione, Africani patruo, per annos ducentos in iis
multo mutuoque ita certatum est sanguine, ut
amissis populi Romani imperatoribus exercitibusque
saepe contumelia, nonnumquam etiam periculum

3 Romano inferretur imperio. Illae enim provinciae
Scipiones consumpserunt ; illae contumelioso decem?
annorum bello sub duce Viriatho maiores nostros
exercuerunt ; illae terrore Numantini belli populum
Romanum concusserunt; in illis turpe Q. Pompei
foedus turpiusque Mancini senatus cum ignominia
dediti imperatoris rescidit ; illa tot consulares, tot
praetorios absumpsit duces, patrumque aetate in
tantum Sertorium armis extulit, ut per quinquennium
diiudicari non potuerit, Hispanis Romanisne in armis
plus esset roboris et uter populus alteri pariturus

1 XCI. Dum pacatur occidens, ab oriente ac rege
Parthorum signa Romana, quae Crasso oppresso?


! belli added by Heinsius.
2 X Lipsius; XX AP.
* oppresso Gelenius ; presso P ; praesso A.


a 218 B.C.


Longus,* in the first year of the Second Punic war,
two hundred and fifty years ago, under the command
of Gnaeus Scipio, the uncle of Africanus. For a period
of two hundred years the struggle was kept up with
so much bloodshed on both sides that the Roman
people, by the loss of its commanders and armies,
often suffered disgrace, and sometimes its empire
was really endangered. These, namely, were the
provinces that brought death to the Scipios ; that
taxed the endurance of our ancestors in the dis-
graceful ten years' war under Viriathus ; that shook
the Roman people with the panic of the Numantine
war; here occurred the disgraceful surrender of
Quintus Pompeius, whose terms the senate disavowed,
and the more shameful capitulation of Mancinus,
which was also disavowed, and its maker ignomini-
ously handed over to the enemy ; it was Spain that
destroyed so many commanders who were consulars
or praetorians, and which in the days of our fathers
raised Sertorius to such a height of power that for a
period of five years it was not possible to decide
whether there was greater strength in the arms of
the Spaniard or the Roman, and which of the two
peoples was destined to obey the other. These,
then, were the provinces, so extensive, so populous,
and so warlike, which Caesar Augustus, about
fifty years ago, brought to such a condition of
peace, that whereas they had never before been
free from serious wars, they were now, under the
governorship of Gaius Antistius and then of Publius
Silius and of their successors, exempt even from

brigandage.
XCI. While the pacification of the west was going
on, in the east the Parthian king restored to
R 241


2 ut added by Burer.
3 et om. A.


a Referred to in Chap. XLVI.
b 27 p.c. v 22 p.c. 4 19 p.c.


Augustus the Roman standards which Orodes had
taken at the time of Crassus’ disaster, and those
which his son Phraates had captured on the defeat
of Antony. This title of Augustus was deservedly
given him’ on the motion of Plancus with the
unanimous acclaim of the entire senate and the
Roman people. Yet there were those who did not
like this prosperous state of affairs. For example,
Lucius Murena and Fannius Caepio had entered
into a plot to assassinate Caesar, but were seized by


P sd


state authority and themselves suffered by law what .


they had wished to accomplish by violence They <


were two men quite diverse in character, for Murena,
apart from this act, might have passed as a man of
good character, while Caepio, even before this, had
been of the worst. Shortly afterwards a similar
attempt was made by Rufus Egnatius, a man who
in all respects resembled a gladiator rather than a
senator. Securing the favour of the people in his
aedileship by putting out fires with his own gang
of slaves, he increased it daily to such an extent that
the people gave him the praetorship immediately
after the aedileship. It was not long before he
dared to become a candidate for the consulship, but
he was overwhelmed by the general knowledge of


his shameless deeds and crimes, and the state of


his property came to be as desperate as his mind.
Therefore, collecting about him men of his own kind,
he resolved to assassinate Caesar in order that he
might die after getting rid of him whose existence
was not compatible with his own. Such men.are
so constituted that each would prefer to fall in
a general cataclysm than to perish alone, and,
though suffering the same fate in the end, to be


1 XCII. Praeclarum excellentis viri factum C. Sentii
Saturnini circa ea tempora consulis ne fraudetur
memoria. Aberat! ordinandis Asiae Orientisque

2 rebus Caesar, circumferens terrarum orbi praesentia
sua pacis suae bona. Tum Sentius, forte et solus et
absente Caesare consul, cum alia prisca severitate,
summaque constantia, vetere consulum more ac
severitate, gessisset, protraxisset publicanorum
fraudes, punisset avaritiam, regessisset in aerarium
pecunias publicas, tum in comitiis habendis prae-

6 seeum non renuntiaturum. Quod ego factum cuilibet
veterum consulum gloriae comparandum reor, nisi

1 in after aberat deleted by Krause.


a Consul 19 n.c.
> Where the elections took place.


less conspicuous in dying. He, however, was not
more successful than the rest in concealing his
designs, and after being thrust into prison with
his fellow conspirators, died the death his life
richly deserved. |

XCII. The remarkable conduct of an excellent
man, Gaius Sentius Saturninus, who was consul about
this time,^ must not be cheated of its due record.
Caesar was absent from the city engaged in regulating
the affairs of Asia and of the orient, and in bringing
to the countries of the world by his personal presence
the blessings of Augustan peace. On this occasion
Sentius, chancing thus to be sole consul with Caesar
absent, adopting the rigorous regime of the older
consuls, pursued a general policy of old-fashioned
severity and great firmness, bringing to light the
fraudulent tricks of the tax-collectors, punishing
their avarice, and getting the public moneys into
the treasury. But it was particularly in holding the
elections that he played the consul. For in the case
of candidates for the quaestorship whom he thought
unworthy, he forbade them to offer their names, -
and when they insisted upon doing so, he threatened
them with the exercise of his consular authority if
they came down to the Campus Martius.’ Egnatius,
who was now at the height of popular favour, and was
expecting to have his consulship follow his praetor-
ship as his praetorship had followed his aedileship, he
forbade to become a candidate, and failing in this, he
‘swore that, even if Egnatius were elected consul by
the votes of the people, he would refuse to report
his election. This conduct I consider as comparable
with any of the celebrated acts of the consuls of the
olden days. But we are naturally more inclined to


1 XCIII. Ante triennium fere, quam Egnatianum
scelus erumperet, circa Murenae Caepionisque coniu-
rationis tempus, abhinc annos quinquaginta, M. Mar-
cellus, sororis Augusti Octaviae filius, quem homines
ita, si quid accidisset Caesari, successorem potentiae
eius arbitrabantur futurum, ut tamen id per M.
Agrippam securo ei posse contingere non existi-
marent, magnificentissimo munere aedilitatis edito
decessit admodum iuvenis, sane, ut aiunt, ingenua-
rum virtutum laetusque animi et ingenii fortunae-

1 trimo Aldus; primo AP. |


a 23 B.C.

* Daughter of Augustus and his first wife Scribonia.

¢ The children of Julia and Agrippa were: Julia, who
became the wife of Aemilius Paullus, banished by Augustus,
her grandfather, to the island of Tremerus for adulterous
intercourse with C. Silanus; Agrippina, the wife of
Germanicus, banished by Tiberius to the island of Panda-
teria; Gaius and Lucius, adopted by Augustus, with the
intention that they should succeed him (their untimely
deaths are narrated in Chap. CII.); and Agrippa Postumus,
adopted by Augustus in A.D. 4, but later banished by him to


praise what we have heard than what has occurred
before our eyes ; we regard the present with envy,
the past with veneration, and believe that we are
eclipsed by the former, but derive instruction from
the latter.

XCIII. Some three years before the plot of
Egnatius was exposed, about the time of the con-
spiracy of Murena and Caepio, fifty years from the
present date, Marcus Marcellus died,? the son of
Octavia, sister of Augustus, after giving a magnificent
spectacle to commemorate his aedileship and while
still quite a youth. People thought that, if anything
should happen to Caesar, Marcellus would be his
successor in power, at the same time believing, -
however, that this would not fall to his lot without
opposition from Marcus Agrippa. He was, we are
told, a young man of noble qualities, cheerful in
mind and disposition, and equal to the station for
which he was being reared. After his death Agrippa,
who had set out for Asia on the pretext of com-
missions from the emperor, but who, according to
current gossip, had withdrawn, for the time being,
on account of his secret animosity for Marcellus, now
returned from Asia and married Julia the daughter
of Caesar, who had been the wife of Marcellus, a
woman whose many children? were to be blessings
neither to herself nor to the state.

XCIV. At this period Tiberius Claudius Nero, in
his nineteenth year, began his public life as quaestor.
I have already told how, when he was three years of
age, his mother Livia, the daughter of Drusus
Claudianus, had become the wife of Caesar, her
the island of Planasia where he was murdered by a centurion
on the succession of Tiberius.


filia, despondente! Ti. Nerone, cui ante nupta fuerat,
2 Caesari nupserat, innutritus caelestium praeceptorum
disciplinis, iuvenis genere, forma, celsitudine cor-
poris, optimis studiis maximoque ingenio instructis-
simus, qui protinus quantus est, sperari potuerat
3 visuque praetulerat principem, quaestor undevice-
simum annum agens capessere coepit rem publicam
maximamque difficultatem annonae ac rei frumen-
tariae inopiam ita Ostiae atque? in urbe mandatu
vitrici moderatus est, ut per id, quod agebat, quantus
4 evasurus esset, eluceret. Nec multo post missus ab
eodem vitrico cum exercitu ad visendas ordinandas-
que, quae sub Oriente sunt, provincias, praecipuis
omnium virtutum experimentis in eo tractu? editis,
cum legionibus ingressus Armeniam, redacta ea in
potestatem populi Romani regnum eius Artavasdi
dedit. Quin* rex quoque Parthorum tanti nominis
fama territus liberos suos ad Caesarem misit obsides.
1 XCV. Reversum inde Neronem Caesar haud medio-
cris belli mole* experiri statuit, adiutore operis dato
fratre ipsius Druso Claudio, quem intra Caesaris
penates enixa erat Livia. Quippe uterque e diversis$
2 partibus Raetos Vindelicosque adgressi, multis urbium
et castellorum oppugnationibus nec non derecta
quoque acie feliciter functi gentes locis tutissimas,


1 despondente Gelentus ; respondente AP.
? ostiae atque Rhenanus ; ostia eratque AP.
3 tractu Gelenius; tractatu AP.

4 quin Ituhnken; cuius AP.

5 mole //einsius ; molem P ; morem A.

ê e diversis Stanger; divisis AP.


a See Chap. LXXI. 19.


former husband, Tiberius Nero, himself giving her
in marriage to him.^ Nurtured by the teaching of
eminent praeceptors, a youth equipped in the :
highest degree with the advantages of birth, personal
beauty, commanding presence, an excellent educa-
tion combined with native talents, Tiberius gave
early promise of becoming the great man he now
is, and already by his look revealed the prince.
Now, acting on the orders of his stepfather, he so
skilfully regulated the difficulties of the grain supply
and relieved the scarcity of corn at Ostia and in the
city that it was apparent from his execution of this
commission how great he was destined to become.
Shortly afterwards he was sent by his stepfather
with an army to visit the eastern provinces and
restore them to order, and in that part of the world
gave splendid illustration of all his strong qualities.
Entering Armenia with his legions, he brought it
once more under the sovereignty of the Roman
people, and gave the kingship to Artavasdes. Even
the king of the Parthians, awed by the reputation
of so great a name, sent his own children as hostages
to Caesar.

XCV. On Nero's return Caesar resolved to test
his powers in a war of no slight magnitude. In this
work he gave him as a collaborator his own brother
Drusus Claudius, to whom Livia gave birth when
already in.the house of Caesar. The two brothers
attacked the Raeti and Vindelici from different
directions, and after storming many towns and
strongholds, as well as engaging successfully in
pitched battles, with more danger than real loss to
the Roman army, though with much bloodshed on
the part of the enemy, they thoroughly subdued


1 XCVI. Mors deinde Agrippae, qui novitatem suam
multis rebus nobilitaveret atque in hoc perduxerat,
ut et Neronis esset socer, cuiusque liberos nepotes
suos divus Augustus praepositis Gai ac Lucii nomini-
bus adoptaverat, admovit propius Neronem Caesari :
quippe filia Iulia? eius, quae fuerat Agrippae nupta,
Neroni nupsit.

2 Subinde bellum Pannonicum, quod inchoatum ab?
Agrippa, Marco Vinicio, avo tuo consule,* magnum
atroxque et perquam vicinum imminebat Italiae, per
Neronem gestum est. Gentes Pannoniorum Delma-
tarumque nationes situmque regionum ac flumi-

3 num numerumque et modum virium excelsissimasque
et multiplices eo bello victorias tanti imperatoris


1 fuerat Orelli; foret AP.

? [ulia filia Haase.

3 ab added by Lipsius.

* consule Lipsius; COS. A; consulari Kritz followed by


Halm.


a 15 p.c. > 12 p.c.
e Tiberius had married Agrippina, daughter of Agrippa
and Pomponia.


these races," protected as they were by the nature
of the country, difficult of access, strong in numbers,
and fiercely warlike. |

Before this had occurred the censorship of Plancus
and Paulus, which, exercised as it was with mutual
discord, was little credit to themselves or little
benefit to the state, for the one lacked the force,
the other the character, in keeping with the office ;
Paulus was scarcely capable of filling the censor's office,
while Plancus had only too much reason to fear it,
nor was there any charge which he could make against
young men, or hear others make, of which he, old
though he was, could not recognize himself as guilty.

XCVI. Then occurred the death of Agrippa.’
Though a “ new man " he had by his many achieve-
ments brought distinction upon his obscure birth,
even to the extent of becoming the father-in-law *
of Nero? ; and his sons, the grandsons of the emperor,
had been adopted by Augustus under the names of
Gaius and Lucius. His death brought Nero closer
to Caesar, since his daughter Julia, who had been
the wife of Agrippa, now married Nero.

Shortly after, the Pannonian war, which had been
begun by Agrippa in the consulate of your grand-
father, Marcus Vinicius, was conducted by Nero, a
war which was important and formidable enough,
and on account of its proximity a menace to Italy.
In another place I shall describe the tribes of the
Pannonians and the races of Dalmatians, the situa-
tion of their country and its rivers, the number and
extent of their forces, and the many glorious
victories won in the course of this war by this great

4 Nero is throughout these chapters the later emperor
Tiberius.


alio loco explicabimus: hoc opus servet formam
suam. Huius victoriae compos Nero ovans trium-
phavit.

1 XCVII. Sed dum in hac parte imperii omnia
geruntur prosperrime, accepta in Germania clades
sub legato M. Lollio, homine in omnia pecuniae quam
recte faciendi cupidiore et inter summam vitiorum
dissimulationem vitiosissimo, amissaque legionis quin-
tae aquila vocavit ab urbe in Gallias Caesarem.

3 adversus amicos aequa ac par sui aestimatio inimita-
bilis fuisse dicitur ; nam pulchritudo corporis proxima
fraternae fuit. Sed illum magna ex parte domitorem
Germaniae, plurimo eius gentis variis in locis profuso
sanguine, fatorum iniquitas consulem, agentem annum


1 perficit Lipsius; percipit AP.


* An ovation was a lesser triumph. This distinction
between ovation and triumph is given by Gell. v. 6.
> 12-9 B.C.


commander; my present work must keep to its
design. After achieving this victory Nero cele-
brated an ovation.*

XCVII. But while everything was being success-
fully managed in this quarter of the empire, a
disaster received in Germany under Marcus Lollius
the legate—he was a man who was ever more eager
for money than for honest action, and of vicious
babits in spite of his excessive efforts at conceal-
ment—and the loss of the eagle of the fifth legion,
summoned Caesar from the city to the provinces
of Gaul. The burden of responsibility for this war*
was then entrusted to Drusus Claudius, the brother
of Nero, a young man endowed with as many great
qualities as men's nature is capable of receiving or
application developing. It would be hard to say
whether his talents were the better adapted to a
military career or the duties of civil life; at any
rate, the charm and the sweetness of his character
are said to have been inimitable, and also his modest
attitude of equality towards his friends. As for his
personal beauty, it was second only to that of his
brother. But, after accomplishing to a great extent
the subjection of Germany, in which much blood
of that people was shed on various battle-fields, an
unkind fate carried him off during his consulship,
in his thirtieth year. The burden of responsibility
for this war was then transferred to Nero. He
carried it on with his customary valour and good
fortune, and after traversing every part of Germany
in a victorious campaign, without any loss of the
army entrusted to him—for he made this one of
his chief concerns—he so subdued the country
as to reduce it almost to the status of a tributary


redigeret provinciae. Tum alter triumphus cum
altero consulatu ei oblatus est.

1 XCVIII. Dum ea, quae diximus,! in Pannonia Ger-
maniaque geruntur, atrox in Thracia bellum ortum,
omnibus eius gentis nationibus in arma accensis,
L. Pisonis, quem hodieque diligentissimum atque
eundem lenissimum securitatis urbanae custodem

1 XCIX. Brevi interiecto spatio Ti. Nero duobus
gonsulatibus totidemque triumphis actis tribuniciae
potestatis consortione aequatus Augusto, civium
post unum, et hoc, quia volebat, eminentissimus,
ducum maximus, fama fortunaque celeberrimus et


1 diximus 4 ; praediximus P.


4 6 B.C.


province. He then received a second triumph, and
a second consulship.

XCVIII. While the events of which we have spoken
were taking place in Pannonia and in Germany, a
fierce rebellion arose in Thrace, and all its clans were
aroused to arms. It was terminated by the valour
of Lucius Piso, whom we still have with us to-day
as the most vigilant and at the same time the
gentlest guardian of the security of the city. As
lieutenant of Caesar he fought the Thracians for
three years, and by a succession of battles and sieges,
with great loss of life to the Thracians, he brought
these fiercest of races to their former state of peaceful
subjection. By putting an end to this war he restored |
security to Asia and peace to Macedonia. Of Piso
all must think and say that his character is an
excellent blend of firmness and gentleness, and that
it would be hard to find anyone possessing a stronger
love of leisure, or, on the other hand, more capable
of action, and of taking the necessary measures
without thrusting his activity upon our notice.

XCIX. Soon afterwards Tiberius Nero, who had
now held two consulships and celebrated two
triumphs; who had been made the equal of
Augustus by sharing with him the tribunician power ;
the most eminent of all Roman citizens save one
(and that because he wished it so); the greatest of
generals, attended alike by fame and fortune;
veritably the second luminary and the second head
of the state—this man, moved by some strangely
incredible and inexpressible feeling of affection for
Augustus, sought leave from him who was both
his father-in-law and stepfather to rest from the
unbroken succession of his labours.* The real


cuius causae mox detectae sunt, cum Gaius Caesar
sumpsisset iam virilem togam, Lucius item maturus
esset viribus,! ne fulgor suus orientium iuvenum
obstaret initiis, dissimulata causa consili sui, com-
meatum ab socero atque eodem vitrico adquiescendi

3 a continuatione laborum petiit. Quis fuerit eo tem-
pore civitatis habitus, qui singulorum animi, quae
digredientium a tanto viro omnium lacrimae, quam
paene ei patria manum iniecerit, iusto servemus

1 C. Sensit terrarum orbis digressum a custodia
Neronem urbis : nam et Parthus desciscens a societate
Romana adiecit Armeniae manum et Germania
aversis domitoris sui oculis rebellavit.

2 At in urbe eo ipso anno, quo magnificentissimis®
gladiatorii muneris naumachiaeque spectaculis divus
Augustus abhinc annos triginta se et Gallo Caninio
consulibus, dedicato Martis templo animos oculosque
populi Romani repleverat, foeda dictu memoriaque


! viribus Bipont.; viris AP; curis Heinsius.
2 sunt added by Halm.
3 Rhodum deverterint add. Halm.
* atque eum Halm; ad quem AP.
5 magnificentissimis Cuperus; magnificentissimi 4P,


s 2 p.c.
è The Temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum of Augustus.


reasons for this were soon made plain. Inasmuch as
Gaius Caesar had already assumed the toga of
manhood, and Lucius was reaching maturity, he
concealed his reason in order that his own glory
might not stand in the way of the young men at the:
beginning of their careers. I must reserve for my
regular history a description of the attitude of the
state at this juncture, of the feelings of the individual
citizens, of the tears of all at taking leave of such a
man, and how nearly the state came to laying upon
him its staying hand. Even in this brief epitome I
ought to say that his stay of seven years in Rhodes
was such that all who departed for the provinces
across the sea, whether proconsuls or governors
appointed by the emperor, went out of their way
to see him at Rhodes, and on meeting him they
lowered their fasces to him though he was but a
private citizen—if such majesty could ever belong
to a private citizen—thereby confessing that his
retirement was more worthy of honour than their
official position.

C. The whole world felt the departure of Nero from -
his post as protector of the city. The Parthian, break-
ing away from his alliance with us, laid hold of
Armenia, and Germany revolted when the eyes of
its conqueror were no longer upon it.

But in the city, in the very year in which Augustus,
then consul with Gallus Caninius @ (thirty years ago),
had sated to repletion the minds and eyes of the
Roman people with the magnificent spectacle of a
gladiatorial show and a sham naval battle on the
occasion of the dedication of the temple of Mars,"
a calamity broke out in the emperor's own house-
hold which is shameful to narrate and dreadful to

S 257


CI. Breve ab hoc intercesserat spatium, cum C.
Caesar ante aliis provinciis ad visendum® obitis in
Syriam missus, convento prius Ti. Nerone, cui

! libidineve Halm ; libidine AP.
2 [ulus Schegk; Iulius AP. ? quas Orelli ; quasi AP.
* pependissent £; om. P.


5 voluntaria Lipsius ; voluntarii AP.
ê ad visendum Lipsius; sidendum BA; ad sedandum 4.


a UY committing suicide.

> Marcella, daughter of Octavia by her first husband,
C. Marcellus.

¢ Pandataria, off the coast of Campania.

4 He means Augustus and Livia. Her own mother was
of course Scribonia.


recall. For his daughter Julia, utterly regardless 4
of her great father and her husband, left untried
no disgraceful deed untainted with either extra-
vagance or lust of which a woman could be guilty,
either as the doer or as the object, and was in the
habit of measuring the magnitude of her fortune
only in the terms of licence to sin, setting up
her own caprice as a law unto itself. Iulus
Antonius, who had been a remarkable example of
Caesar's clemency, only to become the violator of
his household, avenged with his own hand? the
crime he had committed. After the defeat of Marcus
Antonius, his father, Augustus had not only granted
him his life, but after honouring him with the priest-
hood, the praetorship, the consulship, and the
governorship of provinces, had admitted him to the
closest ties of relationship through a marriage with
his sister's daughter Quintius Crispinus also, who
hid his extraordinary depravity behind a stern brow,
Appius Claudius, Sempronius Gracchus, Scipio, and
other men of both orders but of less illustrious name,
suffered the penalty which they would have paid
had it been the wife of an ordinary citizen they had
debauched instead of the daughter of Caesar and
the wife of Nero. Julia was banished to an island °
and removed from the eyes of her country and her
parents, though her mother Scribonia accompanied
her and remained with her as a voluntary companion
of her exile.

CI. Shortly after this Gaius Caesar, who had
previously made a tour of other provinces, but only
as a visitor, was dispatched to Syria. On his way
he first paid his respects to Tiberius Nero, whom


3 stipendiorum meorum tribuno militum mihi visere
contigit : quem militiae gradum ante sub patre tuo,
M. Vinici, et P. Silio auspicatus in Thracia Mace-
doniaque, mox Achaia Asiaque et omnibus ad Orien-
tem visis provinciis et ore atque utroque maris
Pontici latere, haud iniucunda tot rerum, locorum,
gentium, urbium recordatione perfruor. Prior Par-
thus apud Gaium in nostra ripa, posterior hic apud
regem in hostili epulatus est.

! excelsissimo in insula Gelenius; excelsissimae insulae


2 Caesari fama vulgavit Lipsius; Caesaris iam avulgavit


P,
3 after dies Halm adds secuta.


he treated with all honour as his superior. In his
province he conducted himself with such versatility
as to furnish much material for the panegyrist and
not a little for the critic. On an island in the
Euphrates, with an equal retinue on each side,
Gaius had a meeting with the king of the Parthians, a
young man of distinguished presence. This spectacle
of the Roman army arrayed on one side, the Parthian
on the other, while these two eminent leaders not
only of the empires they represented but also of
mankind thus met in conference—truly a notable
and a memorable sight—it was my fortunate lot
to see early in my career as a soldier, when I held
the rank of tribune. I had already entered upon this
grade of the service under your father, Marcus
Vinicius, and Publius Silius in Thrace and Macedonia ;
later I visited Achaia and Asia and all the eastern
provinces, the outlet of the Black Sea and both its
coasts, and it is not without feelings of pleasure that
I recall the many events, places, peoples, and cities.
As for the meeting, first the Parthian dined with
Gaius upon the Roman bank, and later Gaius supped
with the king on the soil of the enemy.

CII. It was at this time that there were revealed
to Caesar, through the Parthian king, the traitorous
designs, revealing a crafty and deceitful mind, of
Marcus Lollius, whom Augustus bad desired to be
the adviser of his still youthful son; and gossip
spread the report abroad. In regard to his death,
which occurred within a few days, I do not know
whether it was accidental or voluntary. But the
joy which people felt at this death was equalled
by the sorrow which the state felt long afterwards
at the decease in the same province of Censorinus,


2 nibus genitum. Armeniam deinde Gaius! ingressus
prima parte introitus prospere rem? gessit; mox in
conloquio, cui se temere crediderat, circa Artageram
graviter a quodam, nomine Adduo, vulneratus, ex
eo ut corpus minus habile, ita animum minus utilem

3 rei publicae habere coepit. Nec defuit conversatio
hominum vitia eius adsentatione alentium (etenim
semper magnae fortunae comes adest adulatio), per
quae eo ductus erat, ut in ultimo ac remotissimo
terrarum orbis angulo consenescere quam Romam
regredi mallet Diu deinde reluctatus? invitusque
revertens in Italiam in urbe Lyciae (Limyra nominant)
morbo obiit, cum ante annum ferme L.* Caesar
frater eius Hispanias petens Massiliae decessisset.


1 Gaius added by Krause.

? rem added by Heinsius.

? diu deinde reluctatus Ruhnken; diu de reluctatus A;
deinde reluctatus P.

t L. Gelenius ; quinquagesimum AP,


9 A.D. 4. b A.D. 2.


a man born to win the affections of men. Then
Gaius entered Armenia and at first conducted his
campaign with success; but later, in a parley near
Artagera, to which he rashly entrusted his person,
he was seriously wounded by à man named Adduus,
so that, in consequence, his body became less active,
and his mind of less service to the state. Nor was
there lacking the companionship of persons who
encouraged his defects by flattery —for flattery
always goes hand in hand with high position—as a
result of which he wished to spend his life in a remote
and distant corner of the world rather than return
to Rome. Then, in the act of returning to Italy,
after long resistance and still against his will, he
died" in a city of Lycia which they call Limyra, his
brother Lucius having died about a year before’ at
Massilia on his way to Spain.

CIII. But fortune, which had removed the hope
of the great name of Caesar, had already restored
to the state her real protector; for the return of
Tiberius Nero from Rhodes in the consulship of
Publius Vinicius, your father, and before the death
of either of these youths, had filled his country with
joy- Caesar Augustus did not long hesitate, for he
had no need to search for one to choose as his
successor but merely to choose the one who
towered .above the others. Accordingly, what he
had wished to do after the death of Lucius but
while Gaius was still living, and had been prevented
from doing by the strong opposition of Nero himself,
he now insisted upon carrying out after the death .
of both young men, namely, to make Nero his

* i.e. Gaius and Lucius who were grandsons of Augustus.
Tiberius was merely a step-son.


4 et vota paene inserentium caelo manus spemque
conceptam perpetuae securitatis aeternitatisque
Romani imperii vix in illo iusto opere abunde per-
sequi poterimus, nedum hic implere temptemus,

5 contenti! id unum dixisse quam ille omnibus faustus?
fuerit. Tum refulsit certa spes liberorum parentibus,
viris matrimoniorum, dominis patrimonii, omnibus
hominibus salutis, quietis, pacis, tranquillitatis, adeo
ut nec plus sperari potuerit nec spei responderi
felicius.

1 CIV. Adoptatus eadem die etiam M. Agrippa,
quem post mortem Agrippae Iulia enixa erat, sed
in Neronis adoptione illud adiectum his ipsis Caesaris

2 verbis: hoc, inquit, rei publicae causa facio. Non
diu vindicem custodemque imperii sui morata in
urbe patria protinus in Germaniam misit, ubi ante
triennium sub M. Vinicio, avo tuo, clarissimo viro,
immensum exarserat bellum. Erat id? ab eo qui-


! contenti added by Rhenanus ; contenti simus Burer.
? faustus added by Halm.
3 id Lipsius; et AP.


9 A.D. 4.


associate in the tribunician power, in spite of his
continued objection both in private and in the
senate ; and in the consulship of Aelius Catus
and Gaius Sentius,? on the twenty-seventh of June,


he adopted him, seven hundred and fifty-four years —


after the founding of the city, and twenty-seven
years ago. The rejoicing of that day, the concourse
of the citizens, their vows as they stretched their
hands almost to the very heavens, and the hopes
which they entertained for the perpetual security
and the eternal existence of the Roman empire, I
shall hardly be able to describe to the full even in
my comprehensive work, much less try to do it
justice here. I shall simply content myself with
stating what a day of good omen it was for all. On
that day there sprang up once more in parents the
assurance of safety for their children, in husbands
for the sanctity of marriage, in owners for the
safety of their property, and in all men tbe assurance
of safety, order, peace, and tranquillity ; indeed, it


would have been hard to entertain larger hopes, or :


to have them more happily fulfilled.

CIV. On the same day Marcus Agrippa, to whom
Julia had given birth after the death of Agrippa,
was also adopted by Augustus; but, in the case of
Nero, an addition was made to the formula of
adoption in Caesar's own words: ''This I do for
reasons of state." His country did not long detain
at Rome the champion and the guardian of her
empire, but forthwith dispatched him to Germany,
where, three years before, an extensive war had
broken out in the governorship of that illustrious
man, Marcus Vinicius, your grandfather. Vinicius
had carried on this war with success in some quarters,


———


busdam in locis gestum, quibusdam sustentatum
feliciter, eoque nomine decreta ei cum speciossisima
inscriptione operum ornamenta triumphalia.

4 illi gratularentur plenius. At vero militum conspectu
eius elicitae gaudio lacrimae alacritasque et saluta-
tionis nova quaedam exultatio et contingendi manum
cupiditas non continentium protinus quin adiicerent,
** videmus te, imperator? Salvum recepimus?" Ac
deinde * ego tecum, imperator, in Ármenia, ego in
Raetia fui, ego a te in Vindelicis, ego in Pannonia,
ego in Germania donatus sum ” neque verbis exprimi
et fortasse vix mereri fidem potest.


! VIIII. P; VIII. A.

2 spectator tum Thomas; spectatum 4; spectatus P;
spectator et Gelenius followed by Halm.

3 virtutibus Lipsius; viribus AP.


a Inasmuch as, under the empire, the emperor was
technically commander-in-chief, he alone had a legitimate
claim to a triumph. After 14 s.c. triumphs were rarely con-
ceded to any but members of the imperial family. But in
lieu of a triumph the victorious general was given titles
bestowed upon the imperator of republican times, the per-
mission to wear the triumphal robe and the right to bequeath
Pr statues to his descendants.


and in others had made a successful defence, and
on this account there had been decreed to him the
ornaments of a triumph ° with an honorary inscription
recording his deeds.

It was at this time that I became a soldier in the
camp of Tiberius Caesar, after having previously ^
filled the duties of the tribunate. For, immediately
after the adoption of Tiberius, I was sent with him
to Germany as prefect of cavalry, succeeding my
father in that position, and for nine continuous years
as prefect of cavalry or as commander of a legion I
was a spectator of his superhuman achievements,
and further assisted in them to the extent of my
modest ability. I do not think that mortal man
will be permitted to behold again a sight like that
which I enjoyed, when, throughout the most
populous parts of Italy and the full extent of the
provinces of Gaul, the people as they beheld once
more their old commander, who by virtue of his
services had long been a Caesar before he was such
in name, congratulated themselves in even heartier
terms than they congratulated him. Indeed, words
cannot express the feelings of the soldiers at their
meeting, and perhaps my account will scarcely be
believed—the tears which sprang to their eyes in
their joy at the sight of him, their eagerness, their
strange transports in saluting him, their longing to
touch his hand, and their inability to restrain such
cries as “ Is it really you that we see, commander ? ”
“ Have we received you safely back among us?" “I
served with you, general, in Armenia!" “ And I
in Raetia!" “ I received my decoration from you
in Vindelicia! " “ And I mine in Pannonia!” “ And
I in Germany! "


1 CV, Intrata protinus Germania, subacti Cannine-
fates, Attuarii, Bructeri, recepti Cherusci (gentis eius
Arminius! mox nostra clade nobilis),transitus Visurgis,
penetrata ulteriora, cum omnem partem asperrimi
et periculosissimi belli Caesar vindicaret sibi,? iis,
quae minoris erant discriminis, Sentium Saturninum,
qui iam? legatus patris eius in Germania fuerat,

3 Anni eius aestiva usque in mensem Decembrem pro-
ducta inmanis emolumentum fecere victoriae. Pietas
sua Caesarem paene obstructis? hieme Alpibus in
urbem traxit, at tutela$ imperii eum veris initio re-
duxit in Germaniam, in cuius mediis finibus ad caput
Lupiae’ fluminis hiberna digrediens princeps locaverat.

1 CVI. Pro dii boni, quanti voluminis opera inse-
quenti aestate sub duce Tiberio Caesare gessimus !
Perlustrata armis tota Germania est, victae gentes


! gentis eius Arminius Fr. Jacob; gentis (-tes P) et
inamninus (inamminus B.A) AP.

2 sibi Cludius; in AP.

3 jam Gruner; tum AP.

4 multiplicem virtutibus Raphelengius; multiplicem in
virtutibus 4P.

5 obstructis Gelenius; extructis AP.

ê at tutela Lipsius; ad tutelam AP.

7 Lupiae Lipsius; Iuliae AP.


9 A.D. 4. è Bk. II. Chap. XCII.
* The position of princeps before the verb seems to justify
this interpretation in preference to taking it as a substantive.


OV. He at once entered Germany. The Cannine-
fates, the Attuarii, and Bructeri were subdued, the
Cherusci (Arminius, a member of this race, was soon
to become famous for the disaster inflicted upon us)
were again subjugated, the Weser crossed, and the
regions beyond it penetrated. Caesar claimed for
himself every part of the war that was difficult or
dangerous, placing Sentius Saturninus, who had
already served as legate under his father in Germany,
in charge of expeditions of a less dangerous character :
a man many-sided in his virtues, a man of energy
of action, and of foresight, alike able to endure the
duties of a soldier as he was well trained in them,
but who, likewise, when his labours left room for
leisure, made a liberal and elegant use of it, but with
this reservation, that one would call him sumptuous
and jovial rather than extravagant or indolent.
About the distinguished ability of this illustrious
man and his famous consulship I have already
spoken. The prolonging of the campaign of that
year into the month of December increased the
benefits derived from the great victory. Caesar
was drawn to the city by his filial affection, though
the Alps were almost blocked by winter’s snows ;
but the defence of the empire brought him at the
beginning of spring back to Germany, where he had
on his departure pitched his winter camp at the
source of the river Lippe, in the very heart of the
country, the first^ Roman to winter there.

CVI. Ye Heavens, how large a volume could be
filled with the tale of our achievements in the
following summer 4 under the generalship of Tiberius
Caesar! All Germany was traversed by our armies,

4 A.D. 5.


-


paene nominibus incognitae, receptae Cauchorum
nationes: omnis eorum iuventus infinita numero,
immensa corporibus, situ lócorum tutissima, traditis
armis una cum ducibus suis saepta fulgenti armato-
que militum nostrorum agmine ante imperatoris

2 procubuit tribunal. Fracti Langobardi, gens etiam
Germana feritate ferocior ; denique quod numquam
antea spe conceptum, nedum opere temptatum erat,
ad quadringentesimum miliarium a Rheno usque ad
flumen Albim, qui Semnonum Hermundurorumque
fines praeterfluit, Romanus cum signis perductus

1 CVII. Non tempero mihi quin tantae rerum magni-
tudini hoc, qualecumque est, inseram. Cum citerio-
rem ripam praedicti fluminis castris occupassemus
et ulterior armata hostium virtute? fulgeret, sub
omnem motum conatumque* nostrarum navium pro-
tinus refugientium, unus e barbaris aetate senior,
corpore excellens, dignitate, quantum ostendebat
cultus, eminens, cavatum, ut illis mos est, ex materia


! eadem Kritz ; eodem AP. 2 parta added by Halm.
3 virtute 4; iuventute P.
4 motum conatumque Halm; motumque BA ; motum P.
a [f he means simply the North Sea, it had been already
navigated by Drusus but not so far to the eastward.


races were conquered hitherto almost unknown, even
by name; and the tribes of the Cauchi were again
subjugated. All the flower of their youth, infinite
in number though they were, huge of stature and
protected by the ground they held, surrendered
their arms, and, flanked by a gleaming line of our
soldiers, fell with their generals upon their knees
before the tribunal of the commander. The power
of the Langobardi was broken, a race surpassing
even the Germans in savagery ; and finally—and
this is something which had never before been
entertained even as a hope, much less actually
attempted—a Roman army with its standards was
led four hundred miles beyond the Rhine as far as
tbe river Elbe, which flows past the territories of
the Semnones and the Hermunduri. And with the
same wonderful combination of careful planning and
good fortune on the part of the general, and a close
watch upon the seasons, the fleet which had skirted
the windings of the sea coast sailed up the Elbe
from a sea hitherto unheard of and unknown,’ and
after proving victorious over many tribes effected a
junction with Caesar and the army, bringing with
it à great abundance of supplies of all kinds.

CVII. Even in the midst of these great events I
cannot refrain from inserting this little incident. We
were encamped on the nearer bank of the aforesaid
river, while on the farther bank glittered the arms
of the enemies' troops, who showed an inclination
to flee at every movement and manœuvre of our
vessels, when one of the barbarians, advanced in
years, tall of stature, of high rank, to judge by his
dress, embarked in a canoe, made as is usual with


3 quos adierat Caesar,! incolumi inviolatoque et semel
tantummodo magna cum clade hostium fraude
eorum temptato exercitu in hiberna legiones re-
duxit, eadem qua priore anno festinatione urbem
petens.


! cum after Caesar deleted by Herelius.
2 Hercinia silva Heinsius; Herciniae silvae AP.


them of a hollowed log, and guiding this strange craft
he advanced alone to the middle of the stream and
asked permission to land without harm to himself
on the bank occupied by our troops, and to see
Caesar. Permission was granted. Then he beached
his canoe, and, after gazing upon Caesar for a long
time in silence, exclaimed: “ Our young men are
insane, for though they worship you as divine when
absent, when you are present they fear your armies
instead of trusting to your protection. But I, by
your kind permission, Caesar, have to-day seen the
gods of whom I merely used to hear; and in my
life have never hoped for or experienced a happier
day." After asking for and receiving permission to
touch Caesar’s hand, he again entered his canoe,
and continued to gaze back upon him until he landed
upon his own bank. Victorious over all the nations
and countries which he approached, his army safe
and unimpaired, having been attacked but once,
and that too through deceit on the part of the enemy
and with great loss on their side, Caesar led his
legions back to winter quarters, and sought the city
with the same haste as in the previous year.

CVIII. Nothing remained to be conquered in
Germany except the people of the Marcomanni,
which, leaving its settlements at the summons of
its leader Maroboduus, had retired into the interior
and now dwelt in the plains surrounded by the
Hercynian forest. No considerations of haste should
lead us to pass over this man Maroboduus without
mention. A man of noble family, strong in body and
courageous in mind, a barbarian by birth but not in
intelligence, he achieved among his countrymen no
mere chief’s position gained as the result of internal

T 273


2 voluntatem resistendi ostenderet! Legati, quos
mittebat ad Caesares, interdum ut supplicem com-
mendabant, interdum ut pro pari loquebantur. Gen-
tibus hominibusque a nobis desciscentibus erat apud
eum perfugium, in? totumque ex male dissimulato
agebat aemulum ; exercitumque, quem septuaginta
milium peditum, quattuor equitum fecerat, adsiduis
adversus finitimos bellis exercendo maiori quam,

3 quod habebat, operi praeparabat: eratque etiam eo
timendus, quod cum Germaniam ad laevam et in
fronte, Pannoniam ad dextram, a tergo sedium suarum
haberet Noricos, tamquam in omnes semper venturus

1 quos P; quis BA.
2 custodientium Madvig ; custodia tum AP,
3 lacesseret, at si added by Rhenanus.


4 ostenderet added by Burman.
5 in added by Acidalius.


a The region was that of Bohemia. By **in front" he
means **to the north." The ‘‘rear’’ is to the south, the
** left” to the west, and the **right" to the east, although
Pannonia really lay south-east,


disorders or chance or liable to change and dependent
upon the caprice of his subjects, but, conceiving in
his mind the idea of a definite empire and royal
powers, he resolved to remove his own race far
away from the Romans and to migrate to a place
where, inasmuch as he had fled before the strength
of more powerful arms, he might make his own all
powerful. Accordingly, after occupying the region
we have mentioned, he proceeded to reduce all the
neighbouring races by war, or to bring them under
his sovereignty by treaty.

CIX. The body of guards protecting the kingdom
of Maroboduus, which by constant drill had been
brought almost to the Roman standard of discipline,
soon placed him in a position of power that was
dreaded even by our empire. His policy toward
Rome was to avoid provoking us by war, but at the
same time to let us understand that, if he were
provoked by us he had in reserve the power and the
will to resist. The envoys whom he sent to the
Caesars sometimes commended him to them as a
suppliant and sometimes spoke as though they
represented an equal. Races and individuals who
revolted from us found in him a refuge, and in all
respects, with but little concealment, he played the
part of a rival. His army, which he had brought up
to the number of seventy thousand foot and four
thousand horse, he was steadily preparing, by
exercising it in constant wars against his neighbours,
for some greater task than that which he had in
hand. He was also to be feared on this account, that,
having Germany at the left and in front of his
settlements, Pannonia on the right, and Noricum in
the rear“ of them, he was dreaded by all as one who


5 abesset. Hunc virum et hanc regionem proximo
anno diversis e partibus Ti. Caesar adgredi statuit.
Sentio Saturnino mandatum, ut per Cattos excisis
continentibus Hercyniae silvis legiones Boiohaemum
(id regioni, quam incolebat Maroboduus, nomen est)
duceret,? ipse a Carnunto, qui locus Norici regni
proximus ab hac parte erat, exercitum, qui in
Illyrico merebat, ducere in Marcomannos orsus est.

1 CX. Rumpit interdum, interdum? moratur pro-
posita hominum fortuna. Praeparaverat iam hiberna
Caesar ad Danubium admotoque exercitu non plus
quam quinque dierum iter a primis hostium aberat,

2 legionesque quas* Saturninum admovere placuerat,
paene aequali divisae intervallo ab hoste intra paucos
dies in praedicto loco cum Caesare se? iuncturae erant,
cum universa Pannonia, insolens longae pacis bonis,
adulta viribus, Delmatia omnibusque tractus eius genti-
bus in societatem adductis consilii arma corripuit.

3 Tum necessaria gloriosis praeposita neque tutum
visum abdito in interiora exercitu vacuam tam
vicino hosti relinquere Italiam. Gentium nationum-


1 eius P; cuius BA.
? duceret supplied by Lipsius.
3 The second interdum added by Heinsius; iter dum AP.
* aberat legionesque quas supplied by Haupt.
5 se added by Krause.
6 consilii Fröhlich; constitit AP.


5 Pannonian War, a.n. 6-9.


might at any moment descend upon all. Nor did
he permit Italy to be free from concern as regards
his growing power, since the summits of the Alps
which mark her boundary were not more than two
hundred miles distant from his boundary line. Such
was the man and such the region that Tiberius Caesar
resolved to attack from opposite directions in the
course of the coming year. Sentius Saturninus had
instructions to lead his legions through the country
of the Catti into Boiohaemum, for that is the name
of the region occupied by Maroboduus, cutting a
passage through the Hercynian forest which bounded
the region, while from Carnuntum, the nearest point of
the kingdom of Noricum in this direction, he himself
undertook to lead against the Marcomanni the army
which was serving in Illyricum.

CX. Fortune sometimes breaks off completely,
sometimes merely delays, the execution of men's
plans. Caesar had already arranged his winter
quarters on the Danube, and had brought up his
army to within five days' march of the advanced
posts of the enemy ; and the legions which he had
ordered Saturninus to bring up, separated from the
enemy by an almost equal distance, were on the point
of effecting a junction with Caesar at a predetermined
rendezvous within a few days, when all Pannonia,
grown arrogant through the blessings of a long peace
and now at the maturity of her power, suddenly took
up arms, bringing Dalmatia and all the races of
that region into her alliance. Thereupon glory was
sacrificed to necessity ; and it did not seem to
Tiberius a safe course to keep his army buried in
the interior of the country and thus leave Italy
unprotected from an enemy so near at hand. The


2TT


que, quae rebellaverant, omnis numerus amplius
octingentis milibus explebat ; ducenta fere peditum
colligebantur armis habilia, equitum novem. Cuius
4immensae multitudinis, parentis acerrimis ac peri-
tissimis ducibus, pars petere Italiam decreverat
iunctam sibi Nauporti ac Tergestis confinio, pars in
Macedoniam se effuderat, | pars suis sedibus prae-
sidium esse destinaverat. Maxima? duobus Batoni-
6 bus? ac Pinneti ducibus auctoritas erat. Omnibus
autem Pannoniis non disciplinae tantummodo, sed
linguae quoque notitia Romanae, plerisque etiam
litterarum usus et familiaris animorum? erat exer-
citatio. Itaque hercules nulla umquam natio tam
6 mature consilio belli bellum iunxit ac decreta patravit.
Oppressi cives Romani, trucidati negotiatores, magnus
vexillariorum numerus ad internecionem ea in
regione, quae plurimum ab imperatore aberat,
caesus, occupata armis Macedonia, omnia et in
omnibus locis igni ferroque vastata. Quin? etiam
tantus huius belli metus fuit, ut stabilem illum et
firmatum"? tantorum bellorum experientia Caesaris

Augusti animum quateret atque terreret.
1 CXI. Habiti itaque dilectus, revocati undique et
omnes veterani, viri feminaeque ex censu libertinum

1 se effuderat Ursinus; effugerat AP.
2 maxima Heinsius; proxima AP.
3 duobus Batonibus 4P; Batoni Halm.
+ in after erat deleted by Heinsius.
5 animorum AP; armorum Bothe followed by Halm.


$ quin Vascosanus ; quia AP.
7 firmatum Burer; formatum BA; fortunatum P.


full number of the races and tribes which had
rebelled reached a total of more than eight hundred
thousand. About two hundred thousand infantry
trained to arms, and nine thousand cavalry were
being assembled. Of this immense number, which
acted under the orders of energetic and capable
generals, one portion had decided to make Italy its
goal, which was connected with them by the line of
Nauportum and Tergeste, a second had already
poured into Macedonia, while a third had set itself
the task of protecting their own territories. The
chief authority rested with the two Batones and
Pinnes as generals. Now all the Pannonians possessed
not only a knowledge of Roman discipline but also
of the Roman tongue, many also had some measure
of literary culture, and the exercise of the intellect
was not uncommon among them. And so it came
to pass, by Hercules, that no nation ever displayed
such swiftness in following up with war its own
plans for war, and in putting its resolves into execu-
tion, Roman citizens were overpowered, traders were
massacred, a considerable detachment of veterans,
stationed in the region which was most remote from
the commander, was exterminated to a man, Mace- .
donia was seized by armed forces, everywhere was
wholesale devastation by fire and sword. Moreover,
such a panic did this war inspire that even the
courage of Caesar Augustus, rendered steady and
firm by experience in so many wars, was shaken
with fear.

CXI. Accordingly levies were held, from every
quarter all the veterans were recalled to the
standards, men and women were compelled, in
proportion to their income, to furnish freedmen as


coactae dare militem. Audita in senatu vox prin-
cipis, decimo die, ni caveretur, posse hostem in urbis
Romae venire conspectum. Senatorum equitumque
2 Romanorum exactae ad id bellum operae, pollicitati.!
Omnia haec frustra praeparassemus, nisi qui illa rege-
ret fuisset. Itaque ut praesidium ultimum? res pub-
lica ab Augusto ducem in bellum poposcit Tiberium.
3 Habuit in hoc quoque bello mediocritas nostra
Speciosi ministerii? locum. Finita equestri militia
designatus quaestor necdum senator aequatus sena-
toribus, etiam designatis tribunis plebei, partem
exercitus ab urbe traditi ab Augusto perduxi ad
4 filium eius. In quaestura deinde remissa sorte pro-
vinciae legatus eiusdem ad eundem missus sum.*
Quas nos primo anno acies hostium vidimus!
Quantis prudentia ducis opportunitatibus furentes?
eorum vires universas elusimus,9 fudimus" partibus !
Quanto cum temperamento simul civilitatis® res
auctoritate imperatoria? agi vidimus ! Qua prudentia
hiberna disposita sunt! Quanto opere inclusus
custodiis exercitus nostri, ne qua posset erumpere
inopsque copiarum et intra se furens viribus hostis
elanguesceret !
1 CXII. Felix eventu, forte conatu prima aestate
1 Before pollicitati Halm supplies prompte.
2 ultimum Japsius; militum AP.
3 ministerii Lipsius ; ministri AP.
4 missus sum Halm ; missum A; missus P.
5 furentes BAP; fruentes Orelli.
, © elusimus suggested by a reviewer in Bibl. phil. i. 42,
eius imus |
euasimus 4; evasimus P. 1 fudimus added by Haase.


3 civilitatis Madvig after Ruhnken ; utilitatis AP.
? imperatoria Madvig ; imperatoris AP.


* Legatus Augusti: as staff officer appointed by Augustus
and attached to the army of Tiberius.


soldiers. Men heard Augustus say in the senate,
that, unless precautions were taken, the enemy
might appear in sight of Rome within ten days.
The services of senators and knights were demanded
for this war, and promised. All these our prepara-
tions would have been vain had we not had the man
to take command. And so, as a final measure of
protection, the state demanded from Augustus that
Tiberius should conduct the war.

In this war also my modest abilities had an op-
portunity for glorious service. I was now, at the
end of my service in the cavalry, quaestor designate,
and though not yet a senator I was placed upon a
parity with senators and even tribunes elect, and
led from the city to Tiberius a portion of the army
which was entrusted to me by Augustus. Then
in my quaestorship, giving up my right to have a
province allotted me, I was sent to Tiberius as legatus
Augusti.’

What armies of the enemy did we see drawn up
for battle in that first year! What opportunities did
we avail ourselves of through the foresight of the
general to evade their united forces and rout them
in separate divisions! With what moderation and
kindness did we see all the business of warfare
conducted, though under the authority of a military
commander! With what judgement did he place
our winter camps! How carefully was the enemy
so blockaded by the outposts of our army that he
could nowhere break through, and that, through
lack of supplies and by disaffection within his own
ranks, he might gradually be weakened in strength !

CXII. An exploit of Messalinus in the first summer
of the war, fortunate in its issue as it was bold in


2 belli Messalini opus mandandum est memoriae. Qui
vir animo etiam quam gente nobilior dignissimusque,!
qui et patrem Corvinum habuisset et cognomen suum
Cottae fratri relinqueret, praepositus Illyrico subita
rebellione cum semiplena legione vicesima circum-
datus hostili exercitu amplius viginti milia? fudit
fugavitque et ob id ornamentis triumphalibus hono-
ratus est.

4 Claudio munitione se defendit. At ea pars, quae
obviam se effuderat exercitui, quem A. Caecina et
Silvanus Plautius consulares ex transmarinis adduce-
bant provinciis, circumfusa quinque legionibus nostris
auxiliaribusque et equitatui regio (quippe magnam
Thracum manum iunctus praedictis ducibus Rhoe-
metalces,* Thraciae rex, in adiutorium eius belli
secum trahebat) paene exitiabilem omnibus cladem

6 intulit: fusa? regiorum equestris acies, fugatae alae,

! que added by Heinsius.
? hostium after milia deleted by Orelli.
3 cum Ruhnken; ut AP.


4 Rhoemetalces Rhenanus ; Rhomo et Alces BAP.
5 fusa Voss. ; fuga BA; fugata P.


a A mountain range in Pannonia near the modern
Warasdin on the river Drave.


undertaking, must here be recorded for posterity.
This man, who was even more noble in heart than in
birth, and thoroughly worthy of having had Corvinus
as his father, and of leaving his cognomen to
his brother Cotta, was in command in Illyricum,
and, at the sudden outbreak of the rebellion, finding
himself surrounded by the army of the enemy and
supported by only the twentieth legion, and that
at but half its normal strength, he routed and put
to flight more than twenty thousand, and for this
was honoured with the ornaments of a triumph.
The barbarians were so little satisfied with their
numbers and had so little confidence in their own
strength that they had no faith in themselves where
Caesar was. The part of their army which faced
the commander himself, worn down according as it
suited our pleasure or advantage, and reduced to
the verge of destruction by famine, not daring to
withstand him when he took the offensive, nor, to
meet our men when they gave them an opportunity
for fighting and drew up their line of battle,
occupied the Claudian mountain * and defended itself
behind fortifications. But the division of their forces
which had swarmed out to meet the army which
the consulars Aulus Caecina and Silvanus Plautius
were bringing up from the provinces across the sea,
surrounded five of our legions, together with the
troops of our allies and the cavalry of the king (for
Rhoemetalces, king of Thrace, in conjunction with
the aforesaid generals was bringing with him a
large body of Thracians as reinforcements for the
war), and inflicted a disaster that came near being
fatal to all. The horsemen of the king were routed,
the cavalry of the allies put to flight, the cohorts


6 rebus semet ipsae legiones adhortatae, iugulatis ab
hoste quibusdam tribunis militum, interempto prae-
fecto castrorum praefectisque cohortium, non incru-
entis centurionibus, e quibus! etiam primi ordinis?
cecidere, invasere hostes nec sustinuisse contenti
perrupta eorum acie ex insperato victoriam vindi-
caverunt.

1 CXIII. Accipe nunc, M. Vinici, tantum in bello
ducem, quantum in pace vides principem.  Iunctis
exercitibus, quique sub Caesare fuerant quique ad
eum venerant, contractisque in una castra decem
legionibus, septuaginta amplius cohortibus, decem


le quibus Boecler ; qui P; quibus BA.
ordinis Gelenius; ordines AP.


a ie. Augustus who was his grandfather and adopted
father.


turned their backs to the enemy, and the panic
extended even to the standards of the legion. But
in this crisis the valour of the Roman soldier claimed
for itself a greater share of glory than it left to the
generals, who, departing far from the policy of their
commander, had allowed themselves to come into
contact with the enemy before they had learned
through their scouts where the enemy was. At
this critical moment, when some tribunes of the
soldiers had been slain by the enemy, the prefect
of the camp and several prefects of cohorts had been
cut off, à number of centurions had been wounded,
and even some of the centurions of the first rank
had fallen, the legions, shouting encouragement to
each other, fell upon the enemy, and not con-
tent with sustaining their onslaught, broke through
their line and wrested a victory from a desperate
plight.

About this time Agrippa, who had been adopted
by his natural grandfather on the same day as
Tiberius, and had already, two years before, begun
to reveal his true character, alienated from himself
the affection of his father and grandfather," falling
into reckless ways by a strange depravity of mind
and disposition ; and soon, as his vices increased
daily, he met the end which his madness deserved.

CXIII. Listen now, Marcus Vinicius, to the proof
that Caesar was no less great in war as a general
than you now see him in peace as an emperor.
When the two armies were united, that is to say
the troops which had served under Caesar and
those which had come to reinforce him, and there
were now gathered together in one camp ten legions,
more than seventy cohorts, fourteen troops of cavalry


alis et! pluribus quam decem veteranorum milibus,
ad hoc magno voluntariorum numero frequentique
equite regio, tanto denique exercitu, quantus nullo
umquam loco post bella fuerat civilia, omnes eo
ipso laeti erant maximamque fiduciam victoriae in

1 X alis et Laurent. ; XIIII sed PA; XIIII alis et
Lipsius.


and more than ten thousand veterans, and in addition
a large number of volunteers and the numerous
cavalry of the king—in a word a greater army than
had ever been assembled in one place since the
civil wars—all were finding satisfaction in this fact
and reposed their greatest hope of victory in their
numbers. But the general, who was the best judge
of the course he pursued, preferring efficiency to
show, and, as we have so often seen him doing in
all his wars, following the course which deserved
approval rather than that which was currently
approved, after keeping the army which had newly
arrived for only a few days in order to allow it
to recover from the march, decided to send it
away, since he saw that it was too large to be
managed and was not well adapted to effective
control. And so he sent it back whence it came,
escorting it with his own army a long and exceedingly
laborious march, whose difficulty can hardly be
described. His purpose in this was, on the one
hand, that no one might dare to attack his united
forces, and, on the other, to prevent the united forces
of the enemy from falling upon the departing division,
through the apprehension of each nation for its own
territory. Then returning himself to Siscia, at the
beginning of a very hard winter, he placed his
lieutenants, of whom I was one, in charge of the
divisions of his winter quarters.

CXIV. And now for a detail which in the telling
may lack grandeur, but is most important by reason
of the true and substantial personal qualities it
reveals and also of its practical service—a thing
most pleasant as an experience and remarkable for
the. kindness it displayed. Throughout the whole


4 Hiems emolumentum patrati belli contulit, sed
insequenti aestate omnis Pannonia reliquiis totius


l distractissimus Rhenanus; distraximus AP.

? negotio Gelenius; genitio BA, om. P.

3 usum added by Lipsius.

5 uni portatum 4; after erasing um, importatum P ; una
portatum Orelli followed by Halm.

5 interdum an anonymous scholar ; inerat AP.

6 tamen rarissima Halm; amarissima AP.

7 dissimulantis . . . inhibentis 4P; dissimulans . . .
inhibens Acidalius.


a At formal dinners the Romans reclined on couches.


period of the German and Pannonian war there was
not one of us, or of those either above or below our
rank, who fell ill without having his health and
welfare looked after by Caesar with as much
solicitude indeed as though this were the chief
occupation of his mind, preoccupied though he
was by his heavy responsibilities. There was a
horsed vehicle ready for those who needed it, his
own litter was at the disposal of all, and I, among
others, have enjoyed its use. Now his physicians,
now his kitchen, and now his bathing equipment,
brought for this one purpose for himself alone,
ministered to the comfort of all who were sick.
All they lacked was their home and domestic
servants, but nothing else that friends at home
could furnish or desire for them. Let me also add
the following trait, which, like the others I have
described, will be immediately recognized as true
by anyone who participated in that campaign.
Caesar alone of commanders was in the habit of
always travelling in the saddle, and, throughout the
greater portion of the summer campaign, of sitting ^
at the table when dining with invited guests. Of
those who did not imitate his own stern discipline
he took no notice, in so far as no harmful precedent
was thereby created. He often admonished, some-
times gave verbal reproof, but rarely punishment,
and pursued the moderate course of pretending in
most cases not to see things, and of administering
only occasionally a reprimand.

The winter brought the reward of our efforts
in the termination of the war, though it was
not until the following summer that all Pannonia
sought peace, the remnants of the war as a whole


U 280


belli in Delmatia manentibus pacem petiit. Ferocem
illam tot milium iuventutem, paulo ante servitutem
minatam Italiae, conferentem arma, quibus usa erat,
apud flumen nomine Bathinum prosternentemque se
universam genibus imperatoris, Batonemque et
Pinnetem  excelsissimos duces, captum. alterum,
alterum! a se deditum iustis voluminibus ordine nar-
rabimus, ut spero.

5  Autumno? victor in hiberna reducitur exercitus,
cuius omnibus copiis a Caesare? M. Lepidus prae-
fectus est, vir nomini* ac fortunae Caesarum? proxi-
mus, quem in quantum quisque aut cognoscere aut
intellegere potuit, in tantum miratur ac diligit tan-
torumque nominum, quibus ortus est, ornamentum
iudicat.

1 CXV. Caesar ad alteram, belli Delmatici molem
animum atque arma contulit. In qua regione quali
adiutore legatoque fratre meo Magio Celere Velleiano
usus sit, ipsius patrisque eius praedicatione testatum
est et amplissimorum donorum, quibus triumphans
eum Caesar donavit, signat memoria: Initio aestatis


! alterum alterum Rhenanus ; alterum AP.
? autumno Gelenius ; autumni AP.
3 a Caesare Rhenanus ; Caesarem AP.
* nomini Acidalius; nominis AP.
> Caesarum Scheffer; eorum AP.


being confined to Dalmatia. In my complete work
I hope to describe in detail how those fierce warriors,
many thousand in number, who had but a short
time before threatened Italy with slavery, now
brought the arms they had used in rebellion and
laid them down, at a river called the Bathinus,
prostrating themselves one and all before the knees
of the commander ; and how of their two supreme
commanders, Bato and Pinnes, the one was made a
prisoner and the other gave himself up.

In the autumn the victorious army was led back
to winter quarters. Caesar gave the chief command
of all the forces to Marcus Lepidus, a man who in
name and in fortune approaches the Caesars, whom
one admires and loves the more in proportion to his
opportunities to know and understand him, and
whom one regards as an ornament to the great
names from whom he springs.

CXV. Caesar then devoted his attention and his
arms to his second task, the war in Dalmatia. What
assistance he had in this quarter from his aide and
lieutenant Magius Celer Velleianus, my brother, is
attested by the words of Tiberius himself and of
his father, and signalized by the record of the high
decorations conferred upon him by Caesar on the
occasion of his triumph. In the beginning of summer
Lepidus led his army out of winter quarters, in an
effort to make his way to Tiberius the commander,
through the midst of races that Vere as yet unaffected
and untouched by the disasters of war and therefore
still fierce and warlike ; after a struggle in which he
had to contend with the difficulties of the country
as well as the attacks of the enemy, and after
inflicting great loss on those who barred his way,


clade obsistentium excisis agris, exustis aedificiis,
caesis viris, laetus victoria praedaque onustus per-

3 venit ad Caesarem, et ob ea, quae si propriis gessisset
auspiciis, triumphare debuerat, ornamentis trium-
phalibus consentiente cum iudicio principum voluntate
senatus donatus! est.

1 CXVI. Magna in9bello Delmatico experimenta
virtutis in incultos? ac difficilis locos praemissus


! donatus added by Rhenanus.
_® gloriosissimum Halm; gloriosum AP.
? incultos Heinsius ; multos AP.


by the devastation of fields, burning of houses,
and slaying of the inhabitants, he succeeded in
reaching Caesar, rejoicing in victory and laden with
booty. For these feats, for which, if they had been
performed under his own auspices he would pro-
perly have received a triumph, he was granted the
ornaments of a triumph, the wish of the senate
endorsing the recommendation of the Caesars.

This campaign brought the momentous war
to a successful conclusion ; for the Perustae and
Desiadates, Dalmatian tribes, who were almost
unconquerable on account of the position of their
strongholds in the mountains, their warlike temper,
their wonderful knowledge of fighting, and, above
all, the narrow passes in which they lived, were
then at last pacified, not now under the mere
generalship, but by the armed prowess of Caesar
himself, and then only when they were almost
entirely exterminated.

Nothing in the course of this great war, nothing
in the campaigns in Germany, came under my
observation that was greater, or that aroused my
admiration more, than these traits of its general; no
chance of winning a victory ever seemed to him
timely, which he would have to purchase by the
sacrifice of his soldiers; the safest course was always
regarded by him as the best; he consulted his
conscience first and then his reputation, and, finally,
the plans of the commander were never governed
by the opinion of the army, but rather the army by
the wisdom of its leader.

CXVI. In the Dalmatian war Germanicus, who had
been dispatched in advance of the commander to
regions both wild and difficult, gave great proof of


Germanicus dedit; celebri etiam opera diligenti-
2que Vibius Postumus vir consularis, praepositus
Delmatiae, ornamenta meruit triumphalia : quem
honorem ante paucos annos Passienus et Cossus,
viri quamquam! diversis virtutibus celebres, in Africa
meruerant. Sed Cossus victoriae testimonium etiam
in cognomen filii contulit, adulescentis in omnium
3 virtutum exempla geniti. At Postumi operum L.
Apronius particeps illa quoque militia eos, quos mox
consecutus est, honores excellenti virtute meruit.
Utinam non maioribus experimentis testatum
esset, quantum in omni re fortuna posset! Sed in
hoc? quoque genere abunde agnosci vis eius potest.
Nam et Aelius Lamia,’ vir antiquissimi moris et
priscam gravitatem semper humanitate temperans,
in Germania lIllyricoque et mox in Africa splendi-
dissimis functus ministeriis, non merito, sed materia
4 adipiscendi triumphalia defectus est, et A. Licinius
Nerva Silianus, P. Silii filius, quem virum ne qui
intellexit quidem abunde miratus est, in eo nihil
non optimo civi simplicissimo duci superesse* prae-
ferens, inmatura morte? et fructu amplissimae prin-
cipis amicitiae et consummatione evectae in altissi-
mum paternumque fastigium imaginis defectus est.
5 Horum virorum mentioni si quis quaesisse me dicet
! quamquam Halm ; quibusdem AP.
? hoc Gelenius ; loco AP.
3 Aelius Lamia Ruhnken ; etiam AP.
4 jn eo nihil . . . superesse Ellis; ne (me A) nihil (om.
P) optimo civi (civis A) . . . perisset BAP.
5 morte added by Orelli.


his valour. By his repeated services and careful
vigilance the governor of Dalmatia, Vibius Postumus,
the consular, also earned the ornaments of a triumph.
A few years before this honour had been earned in
Africa by Passienus and Cossus, both celebrated
men, though not alike in merit. Cossus passed on
to his son, a young man born to exhibit every
variety of excellence, a cognomen that still testifies
to his victory. And Lucius Apronius, who shared
in the achievements of Postumus, earned by the
distinguished valour which he displayed in this
campaign also, the honours which he actually won
shortly afterwards.

Would that it had not been demonstrated, by
greater proofs, how mighty an influence fortune
wields in all things; yet even here her power can
be recognized by abundant examples. For instance,
Aelius Lamia, a man of the older type, who always
tempered his old-fashioned dignity -by a spirit of
kindliness, had performed splendid service in Ger-
many and Illyricum, and was soon to do so in África,
but failed to receive triumphal honours, not through
any fault of his, but through lack of opportunity ;
and Aulus Licinius Nerva Silianus, the son of Publius
Silius, a man who was not adequately praised even
by the friend who knew him best, when he declared
that there were no qualities which he did not possess
in the highest degree, whether as an excellent
citizen or as an honest commander, through his un-
timely death failed not only to reap the fruit of his
close friendship with the emperor but also to realize
that lofty conception of his powers which had been
inspired by his father's eminence. lf anyone shall
say that I have gone out of my way to mention these


1 CXVII. Tantum quod ultimam imposuerat Pan-
nonico ac Delmatico bello Caesar manum, cum
intra quinque consummati tanti operis dies funestae
ex Germania epistulae nuntium attulere! caesi Vari
trucidatarumque legionum trium totidemque alarum
et sex cohortium, velut in hoc saltem tantummodo
indulgente nobis fortuna, ne occupato duce tanta
clades inferretur.? Sed et causa et persona? moram
exigit.

4 posito mediam ingressus Germaniam velut inter
viros pacis gaudentes dulcedine iurisdictionibus
agendoque pro tribunali ordine trahebat aestiva.

! nuntium attulere supplied here by Halm, by other editors
after cohortium.
? tanta clades inferretur supplied by Halm.


9 A.D. 9.


men, his criticism will meet no denial. In the sight
of honest men fair-minded candour without mis-
representation is no crime.

CXVII. Scarcely had Caesar put the finishing
touch upon the Pannonian and Dalmatian war,
when, within five days of the completion of this
task, dispatches from Germany brought the baleful
news of the death of Varus,* and of the slaughter of
three legions, of as many divisions of cavalry, and
of six cohorts—as though fortune were granting us
this indulgence at least, that such a disaster should
not be brought upon us when our commander was
occupi&d by other wars. The cause of this defeat
and the personality of the general require of me a
brief digression.

Varus Quintilius, descended from a famous rather
than a high-born family, was a man of mild character
and of a quiet disposition, somewhat slow in mind
as he was in body, and more accustomed to the
leisure of the camp than to actual service in war.
That he was no despiser of money is demonstrated
by his governorship of Syria: he entered the rich
province a poor man, but left it a rich man and the
province poor. When placed in charge of the army
in Germany, he entertained the notion that the
Germans were a people who were men only in
limbs and voice, and that they, who could not be
subdued by the sword, could be soothed by the
law. With this purpose in mind he entered the heart
of Germany as though he were going among a people
enjoying the blessings of peace, and sitting on his
tribunal he wasted the time of a summer campaign
in holding court and observing the proper details of
legal procedure.


2 finibus exercitui praeesse crederet. Tum iuvenis
genere nobilis, manu fortis, sensu celer, ultra bar-
barum promptus ingenio, nomine Arminius, Sigimeri
principis gentis eius filius, ardorem animi vultu
oculisque praeferens, adsiduus militiae nostrae prioris
comes, iure etiam civitatis Romanae decus? equestris
consecutus* gradus, segnitia ducis in occasionem
sceleris usus est, haud imprudenter speculatus nemi-
nem celerius opprimi, quam qui nihil timeret, et
frequentissimum initium esse calamitatis securitatem.

3 Primo igitur paucos, mox pluris in societatem con-
silii recepti ; opprimi posse Romanos et dicit et per-
suadet, decretis facta iungit, tempus insidiarum

1 credat Lipsius; credebat AP.
2 jn iurgia Madvig; in iuria AP.


3 Romanae decus Burman; Romae eius (ius P) AP.
* consecutus Heinsius ; consequens AP.


CXVIII. But the Germans, who with their great
ferocity combine great craft, to an extent scarcely
credible to one who has had no experience with
them, and are a race to lying born, by trumping up
a series of fictitious lawsuits, now provoking one
another to disputes, and now expressing their
gratitude that Roman justice was settling these
disputes, that their own barbarous nature was being
softened down by this new and hitherto unknown
method, and that quarrels which were usually settled
by arms were now being ended by law, brought
Quintilius to such a complete degree of negligence,
that he came to look upon himself as a city praetor
administering justice in the forum, and not a general
in command of an army in the heart of Germany.
Thereupon appeared a young man of noble birth,
brave in action and alert in mind, possessing an
intelligence quite beyond the ordinary barbarian ;
he was, namely, Arminius, the son of Sigimer, a
prince of that nation, and he showed in his counten-
ance and in his eyes the fire of the mind within.
He had been associated with us constantly on previous
campaigns, had been granted the right of Roman
citizenship, and had even attained the dignity
of equestrian rank. This young man made use of
the negligence of the general as an opportunity for
treachery, sagaciously seeing that no one could be
more quickly overpowered than the man who feared
nothing, and that the most common beginning of
disaster was a sense of security. At first, then, he
admitted but a few, later a large number, to a share
in his design ; he told them, and convinced them too,
that the Romans could be crushed, added execution
to resolve, and named a day for carrying out the


2 est. Exercitus omnium fortissimus, disciplina, manu
experientiaque bellorum inter Romanos milites prin-
ceps, marcore ducis, perfidia hostis, iniquitate for-
tunae circumventus, cum ne pugnandi quidem
egrediendive? occasio nisi inique, nec in quantum?
voluerant, data esset immunis, castigatis etiam qui-
busdam gravi poena, quia Romanis et armis et
animis usi fuissent, inclusus silvis, paludibus, insidiis
ab eo hoste ad internecionem trucidatus est, quem


! vinciri socios. sed praevalebant iam supplied by Ellis
from Tac. Ann. i. 58.

? praestrinxerant Gelenius; praestrinxerat AP.

? cuius fortunam mutaturus est ed. Bipont.; qui fortunam
mutaturus (imitaturus 4) AP.

4 speciemque Burman; spemque AP.

5 egrediendive Voss.; egredié (egredie with ad written
above the g A, egregie P) aut BAP.


plot. This was disclosed to Varus through Segestes,
a loyal man of that race and of illustrious name,
who also demanded that the conspirators be put in
chains. But fate now dominated the plans of Varus
and had blindfolded the eyes of his mind. Indeed,
it is usually the case that heaven perverts the
judgement of the man whose fortune it means to
reverse, and brings it to pass—and this is the
wretched part of it—that that which happens by
chance seems to be deserved, and accident passes
over into culpability. And so Quintilius refused to
believe the story, and insisted upon judging the
apparent friendship of the Germans toward him by
the standard of his merit. And, after this first
warning, there was no time left for a second.

CXIX. The details of this terrible calamity, the
heaviest that had befallen the Romans on foreign
soil since the disaster of Crassus in Parthia, I shall
endeavour to set forth, as others have done, in my
larger work. Here I can merely lament the disaster
as a whole. An army unexcelled in bravery, the
first of Roman armies in discipline, in energy, and
in experience in the field, through the negligence
of its general, the perfidy of the enemy, and the
unkindness of fortune was surrounded, nor was as
much opportunity as they had wished given to the
soldiers either of fighting or of extricating themselves,
except against heavy odds; nay, some were even
heavily chastised for using the arms and showing the
spirit of Romans. Hemmed in by forests and marshes
and ambuscades, it was exterminated almost to a
man by the very enemy whom it had always

6 occasio nisi inique, nec in quantum Lillis ; occasionis in
quantum APB,


5 desertor occidit. Vari corpus semiustum hostilis?
laceraverat feritas; caput eius abscisum latumque
ad Maroboduum et ab eo missum ad Caesarem
gentilicii tamen tumuli sepultura honoratum est.

1 CXX. His auditis revolat ad patrem Caesar ; per-
petuus patronus Romani imperii adsuetam sibi causam
suscipit. Mittitur ad Germaniam, Gallias confirmat,
disponit exercitus, praesidia munit et se magnitudine
sua, non fiducia hostis? metiens, qui Cimbricam
Teutonicamque militiam Italiae minabatur, ultro

2 Rhenum cum exercitu transgreditur. Arma infert


1 equite peditem relinquens fuga cum alis Gelenius;
equitem peditem relinquens fugatum (fuga cum P) aliis BAP.

2 hostilis Burer ; hosti BA ; hostium P.

? hostis Haupt; hostium AP; om. B.


a His father Sextus Quintilius Varus fought on the
side of Brutus and Cassius at Philippi. After the loss of
the battle he was slain, at his own request, by one of his
freedmen, see Bk. II. Chap. LXXI. Information is lacking
concerning his grandfather and the manner of his death.


slaughtered like cattle, whose life or death had
depended solely upon the wrath or the pity of the
Romans. The general had more courage to die than
to fight, for, following the example of his father ^ and
grandfather, he ran himself through with his sword.
Of the two prefects of the camp, Lucius Eggius
furnished a precedent as noble as that of Ceionius
was base, who, after the greater part of the army
had perished, proposed its surrender, preferring to
die by torture at the hands of the enemy than in
battle. Vala Numonius, lieutenant of Varus, who,
in the rest of his life, had been an inoffensive and
an honourable man, also set a fearful example in
that he left the infantry unprotected by the cavalry
and in flight tried to reach the Rhine with his
squadrons of horse. But fortune avenged his act,
for he did not survive those whom he had abandoned,
but died in the act of deserting them. The body
of Varus, partially burned, was mangled by the enemy
in their barbarity ; his head was cut off and taken
to Maroboduus and was sent by him to Caesar;
but in spite of the disaster it was honoured by burial
in the tomb of his family.

CXX. On hearing of this disaster, Caesar flew to
his father's side. The constant protector of the
Roman empire again took up his accustomed part.
Dispatched to Germany, he reassured the provinces
of Gaul, distributed his armies, strengthened the
garrison towns, and then, measuring himself by the
standard of his own greatness, and not by the
presumption of an enemy who threatened Italy
with a war like that of the Cimbri and Teutones,
he took the offensive and crossed the Rhine with
his army, He thus made aggressive war upon the


hosti quem arcuisse! pater et patria contenti erant ;

penetrat interius, aperit limites, vastat agros, urit

domos, fundit obvios maximaque cum gloria, inco-

lumi omnium, quos transduxerat, numero in hiberna
3 revertitur.

Reddatur verum L. Asprenati testimonium, qui
legatus sub avunculo suo Varo militans gnava
virilique opera duarum legionum, quibus praeerat,
exercitum immunem tanta calamitate servavit
matureque ad inferiora hiberna descendendo
vacillantium etiam cis Rhenum sitarum gentium
animos confirmavit. Sunt tamen, qui ut vivos ab
eo vindicatos, ita iugulatorum sub Varo occupata
crediderint patrimonia hereditatemque occisi exer-

4 citus, in quantum voluerit, ab eo aditam. L. etiam
Caedicii praefecti castrorum eorumque, qui una
circumdati Alisone immensis Germanorum copiis
obsidebantur, laudanda virtus est, qui omnibus diffi-
cultatibus superatis, quas inopia rerum intolerabilis,
vis hostium faciebat inexsuperabilis, nec temerario
consilio nec segni providentia usi speculatique oppor-
tunitatem ferro sibi ad suos peperere reditum.


1 arma infert (hosti Voss.) quem arcuisse AeA arma
interfecti qui arguisse AP.


enemy when his father and his country would have
been content to let him hold them in check, he
penetrated into the heart of the country, opened
up military roads, devastated fields, burned houses,
routed those who came against him, and, without
loss to the troops with which he had crossed, he

returned, covered with glory, to winter quarters.
Due tribute should be paid to Lucius Asprenas,
who was serving as lieutenant under Varus his uncle,
and who, backed by the brave and energetic support
of the two legions under his command, saved his
army from this great disaster, and by a quick
descent to the quarters of the army in Lower Ger-
many strengthened the allegiance of the races even
on the hither side of the Rhine who were beginning
to waver. There are those, however, who believed
that, though he had saved the lives of the living,
he had appropriated to his own use the property
of the dead who were slain with Varus, and that
inheritances of the slaughtered army were claimed
by him at pleasure. The valour of Lucius Caedicius,
prefect of the camp, also deserves praise, and of
those who, pent up with him at Aliso, were besieged
by an immense force of Germans. For, overcoming
all their difficulties which want rendered unendurable
and the forces of the enemy almost insurmountable,
following a design that was carefully considered,
and using a vigilance that was ever on the alert,
they watched their chance, and with the sword won
their way back to their friends. From all this it is
evident that Varus, who was, it must be confessed,
a man of character and of good intentions, lost his
life and his magnificent army more through lack of
judgement in the commander than of valour in his
x 305


6 simumque perdidisse exercitum. Cum in captivos
saeviretur a Germanis, praeclari facinoris auctor fuit
Caldus Caelius, adulescens! vetustate familiae suae
dignissimus, qui complexus catenarum, quibus vinctus
erat, seriem, ita illas inlisit capiti suo, ut protinus
pariter sanguinis cerebrique effluvio? expiraret.


1 adulescens Ruhnken; ad AP.

2 effluvio Lipsius ; influvio AP.

3 ingressi Cernana Bardili ; ingressa anima (animum
P) BAP.

* Rhenanus supplied et after mollisset.

5 aequum ei ius Rhenanus; equum eius AP.

ê est Fllis; esset AP.

7 mihi Burer; militi AP,


soldiers. When the Germans were venting their
rage upon their captives, an heroic act was performed
by Caldus Caelius, à young man worthy in every
way of his long line of ancestors, who, seizing a
section of the chain with which he was bound,
brought it down with such force upon his own head
as to cause his instant death, both his brains and
his blood gushing from the wound.

CXXI. Tiberius showed the same valour, and was
attended by the same fortune, when he entered
Germany on his later campaigns as in his first.
After he had broken the force of the enemy by
his expeditions on sea and land, had completed his
difficult task in Gaul, and had settled by restraint
rather than by punishment the dissensions that had
broken out among the Viennenses, at the request
of his father that he should have in all the provinces
and armies a power equal to his own, the senate
and Roman people so decreed. For indeed it was
incongruous that the provinces which were being
defended by him should not be under his jurisdiction,
and that he who was foremost in bearing aid
should not be considered an equal in the honour
to be won. On his return to the city he celebrated
the triumph over the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
long since due him, but postponed by reason of a
succession of wars. Who can be surprised at its
magnificence, since it was the triumph of Caesar?
Yet who can fail to wonder at the kindness of fortune
to him? For the most eminent leaders of the
enemy were not slain in battle, that report should
tell thereof, but were taken captive, so that in his
triumph he exhibited them in chains. It was my
lot and that of my brother to participate in this


meo inter praecipuos praecipuisque donis adornatos
viros comitari contigit.

1 CXXIII. Venitur ad tempus, in quo fuit plurimum
metus. Quippe Caesar Augustus cum Germanicum
nepotem suum reliqua belli patraturum misisset in
Germaniam, Tiberium autem filium missurus esset
in Illyricum ad firmanda pace quae bello subegerat,

! fuit Haase; fuerit AP.
? praeposito ei Heinsius; praepositi (pro- P) BAP.
3 expectato added by Halm. 4 ocius P; totius BA.


triumph among the men of distinguished rank and
those who were decorated with distinguished honours.

CXXII. Among the other acts of Tiberius Caesar,
wherein his remarkable moderation shines forth
conspicuously, who does not wonder at this also,
that, although he unquestionably earned seven
triumphs, he was satisfied with three? For who
can doubt that, when he had recovered Armenia,
had placed over it a king upon whose head he had
with his own hand set the mark of royalty, and
had put in order the affairs of the east, he ought
to have received an ovation; and that after his
conquest of the Vindelici and the Raeti he should
have entered the city as victor,in a triumphal
chariot ? Or that, after his adoption, when he had
broken the power of the Germans in three consecutive
campaigns, the same honour should have been
bestowed upon him and should have been accepted
by him? And that, after the disaster received
under Varus, when this same Germany was crushed
by a course of events which, sooner than was
expected, came to a happy issue, the honour of a
triumph should have been awarded to this con-
summate general? But, in the case of this man,
one does not know which to admire the more, that
in courting toils and danger he went beyond all
bounds or that in accepting honours he kept within
them.

CXXIII. We now come to the crisis which was
awaited with the greatest foreboding. Augustus
Caesar had dispatched his grandson Germanicus
to Germany to put an end to such traces of the war
as still remained, and was on the point of sending his
son Tiberius to Illyricum to strengthen by peace the


1 satis added by Ruhnken.


9 A.D. 14.


regions he had subjugated in war. With the double
purpose of escorting him on his way, and of being
present at an athletic contest which the Neapolitans
had established in his honour, he set out for
Campania. Although he had already experienced
symptoms of growing weakness and of a change in
his health for the worse, his strong will resisted his
infirmity and he accompanied his son. Parting from
him at Beneventum he went to Nola. As his health
grew daily worse, and he knew full well for whom
he must send if he wished to leave everything
secure behind him, he sent in haste for his son to
return. Tiberius hurried back and reached the
side of the father of his country before he was
even expected. Then Augustus, asserting that his
mind was now at ease, and, with the arms of his
beloved Tiberius about him, commending to him
the continuation of their joint work, expressed his
readiness to meet the end if the fates should call
him. He revived a little at seeing Tiberius and at
hearing the voice of one so dear to him, but, ere
long, since no care could withstand the fates, in his
.seventy-sixth year, in the consulship of Pompeius and _
Apuleius * he was resolved into the elements from
which he sprang and yielded up to heaven his
divine soul.

CXXIV. Of the misgivings of mankind at this
time, the trepidation of the senate, the confusion
of the people, the fears of the city, of the narrow
margin between safety and ruin on which we then
found ourselves, I have no time to tell as I hasten
on my way, nor could he tell who had the time.
Suffice it for me to voice the common utterance :
“The world whose ruin we had feared we found


1 pro added by Ellis; Halm suggests nec bonis votis.
2 sacerdotalibus Scheffer ; sacerdotibus AP.
3 consecutis quidem Ellis; consecutisque 4; consecutis


a This refers to his official deification. He was given the
title of Divus, a temple was erected in his honour, a special
class of priests was created to conduct the rites, and a special
festival, the Augustalia, was established in his memory.

> i.e. among the candidates nominated by Caesar. The
emperor nominated part of the candidates, allowing the
people to nominate the rest, reserving, however, the right


not even disturbed, and such was the majesty of
one man that there was no need of arms either to
defend the good or to restrain the bad." There was,
however, in one respect what might be called a


struggle in the state, as, namely, the senate and ^,


the Roman people wrestled with Caesar to induce


him to succeed to the position of his father, while -


he on his side strove for permission to play the part
of a citizen on a parity with the rest rather than
that of an emperor over all. At last he was prevailed
upon rather by reason than by the honour, since
he saw that whatever he did not undertake to
protect was likely to perish. He is the only man
to whose lot it has fallen to refuse the principate
for a longer time, almost, than others had fought
to secure it.

After heaven had claimed his father, and human
honours had been paid to his body as divine honours
were paid to his soul,” the first of his tasks as emperor


oe
"


was the regulation of the comitia, instructions for -


which Augustus had left in his own handwriting.
On this occasion it was my lot and that of my
brother, as Caesar's candidates, to be named for
the praetorship immediately after those of noble
families and those who had held the priesthoods,
and indeed to have had the distinction of being the
last to be recommended by Augustus and the first
to be named by Tiberius Caesar.


CXXV. The state soon reaped the fruit of its :


wise course in desiring Tiberius, nor was it long
before it was apparent what we should have had
to endure had our request been refused, and what
of veto in the case of candidates whom he deemed un-
worthy.


profecissemus. Quippe exercitus, qui in Germania
militabat praesentisque Germanici imperio rege-
batur, simulque legiones, quae in Illyrico erant,
rabie quadam et profunda confundendi omnia
cupiditate novum ducem, novum statum, novam
quaerebant rem publicam ; quin etiam ausi sunt

2 minari daturos se! senatui, daturos principi leges ;
modum stipendii, finem militiae sibi ipsi constituere
conati sunt. Processum etiam in arma ferrumque
strictum est et paene in ultima? gladiorum erupit
impunitas, defuitque, qui contra rem publicam

5 obsessus erat, obsidentes coércuit, singulari adiutore
in eo negotio usus Iunio Blaeso, viro nescias utiliore
in castris an meliore in toga : qui post paucos annos


! se added by Orelli.

2 ultima Voss ; ultimam B4; ultimum P.

3 et added by Krause.

4 noxiorum Gronovius; nostrorum AP.

5 non ignave Ellis; ignave P ; ignovit Bipont. edition.

6 Drusus Gelenius ; Brutus AP.

7 in id ipsum plurimo quidem AP; in diversum plurimo-
que idem Madvig.


we had gained in having it granted. For the army
serving in Germany, commanded by Germanicus
in person, and the legions in Illyricum, seized at
the same moment by a form of madness and a deep
desire to throw everything into confusion, wanted a
new leader, a new order of things, and a new re-
public. Nay, they even dared to threaten to dictate
terms to the senate and to the emperor. They tried
to fix for themselves the amount of their pay and
their period of service. They even resorted to arms ;
the sword was drawn; their conviction that they
would not be punished came near to breaking out
into the worst excesses of arms. All they needed was
someone to lead them against the state ; there was
no lack of followers. But all this disturbance was
soon quelled and suppressed by the ripe experience of
the veteran commander, who used coercion in many
cases, made promises where he could do so with
dignity, and by the combination of severe punish-
ment of the most guilty with milder chastisement of
the others.

In this crisis, while in many respects the conduct
of Germanicus was not lacking in rigour, Drusus
employed the severity of the Romans of old. Sent
by his father into the very midst of the conflagration,
when the flames of mutiny were. already bursting
forth, he preferred to hold to a course which
involved danger to himself than one which might
prove a ruinous precedent, and used the very swords
of those by whom he had been besieged to coerce
his besiegers. In this task he had in Junius Blaesus
no ordinary helper, a man whom one does not know
whether to consider more useful in the camp or
better in the toga. A few years later, as proconsul


proconsul in Africa ornamenta triumphalia cum
appellatione imperatoria meruit.

2 deum. Revocata in forum fides, summota e foro
seditio, ambitio campo, discordia curia, sepultaeque
ac situ obsitae? iustitia, aequitas, industria civitati
redditae ; accessit magistratibus? auctoritas, senatui
maiestas, iudiciis gravitas; compressa theatralis
seditio, recte faciendi omnibus aut incussa voluntas

liniis . ij cuius supplied by M
? et added t Onell iid
3 ingerantur Ellis ; insera B.A ; inserta sint P.
4 partibus Voss; in partibus 4P.


5 obsitae Burer ; oppositae BAP.
€ magistratibus Gelenius ; militibus 4P.


9 Par augusta, * Augustan peace." The expression,
used to characterize the contrast between n the tranquillity of
his reign and the turmoil of the Civil Wars, which preceded
it, had become proverbial.


in Africa, he earned the ornaments ot a triumph, with
the title of imperator.

The two provinces of Spain, however, and the
army in them were held in peace and tranquillity,
since Marcus Lepidus, of whose virtues and dis-
tinguished service in Illyricum I have already spoken,
was there in command, and since he had in the
highest degree the quality of instinctively knowing
the best course and the firmness to hold to his views.
On the coast of Illyricum his vigilance and fidelity
was emulated in detail by Dolabella, a man of noble-
minded candour.

CXXVI. Who would undertake to tell in detail
the accomplishments of the past sixteen years, since
they are borne in upon the eyes and hearts of all?
Caesar deified his father, not by exercise of his
imperial authority, but by his attitude of reverence ;
he did not call him a god, but made him one. Credit
has been restored in the forum, strife has been
banished from the forum, canvassing for office from
the Campus Martius, discord from the senate-house ;
justice, equity, and industry, long buried in oblivion,
have been restored to the state; the magistrates
have regained their authority, the senate its majesty,
the courts their dignity ; rioting in the theatre has
been suppressed ; all citizens have either been im-
pressed with the wish to do right, or have been forced
to do so by necessity. Right is now honoured, evil
is punished ; the humble man respects the great
but does not fear him, the great has precedence
over the lowly but does not despise him. When was
the price of grain more reasonable, or when were the
blessings of peace greater? The pax augusta, which
has spread to the regions of the east and of the


aut septentrione finitur, pax augusta omnis! terrarum
orbis angulos a latrociniorum metu servat immunes.

4 Fortuita non civium tantummodo, sed urbium damna
principis munificentia vindicat. Restitutae urbes
Asiae, vindicatae ab iniuriis magistratuum pro-
vinciae : honor dignis paratissimus, poena in malos
sera, sed aliqua : superatur aequitate gratia, ambitio
virtute ; nam facere recte civis suos princeps optimus
faciendo docet, cumque sit imperio maximus, exemplo
maior est.

2 negotia magnis adiutoribus egent* interestque rei
publicae quod usu necessarium est,° dignitate eminere

3 utilitatemque auctoritate muniri. Sub his exemplis
Ti. Caesar Seianum Aelium, principe equestris ordinis
patre natum, materno vero genere clarissimas veteres-
que et insignes honoribus complexum familias, haben-


1 MSS. have per before omnis.

2 proxime Scheffer; maxime AP.

3 complura eveherentur Vascosanus; complura enume-
rentur (complurae numerentur A) BA; complura enume-
rarentur P.

1 after egent the words neque in parvo paucitas ministeria
defecit are deleted by Halm after Vossius and Boecler.

5 est Ruhnken ; e A; et P.


west and to the bounds of the north and of the
south, preserves every corner of the world safe from
the fear of brigandage. The munificence of the
emperor claims for its province the losses inflicted
by fortune not merely on private citizens, but on
whole cities. The cities of Asia have been restored,
the provinces have been freed from the oppression
of their magistrates. Honour ever awaits the
worthy ; for the wicked punishment is slow but
sure ; fair play has now precedence over influence,
and merit over ambition, for the best of emperors
teaches his citizens to do right by doing it, and
though he is greatest among us in authority, he is
still greater in the example which he sets.

CXXVII. It is but rarely that men of eminence
have failed to employ great men to aid them in direct-
ing their fortune, as the two Scipios employed the
two Laelii, whom in all things they treated as equal
to themselves, or as the deified Augustus employed
Marcus Agrippa, and after him Statilius Taurus. In
the case of these men their lack of lineage was no
obstacle to their elevation to successive consulships,
triumphs, and numerous priesthoods. For great
tasks require great helpers, and it is important to
the state that those who are necessary to her service
should be given prominence in rank, and that their
usefulness should be fortified by official authority.
With these examples before him, Tiberius Caesar
has had and still has as his incomparable associate _
in all the burdens of the principate Sejanus Aelius,
son of a father who was among the foremost in the
equestrian order, but connected, on his mother's
side, with old and illustrious families and families
distinguished by public honours, while he had


tem consularis fratres, consobrinos, avunculum,
ipsum vero laboris ac fidei capacissimum, sufficiente
etiam vigori animi compage corporis, singularem
principalium onerum adiutorem in omnia habuit

4 atque habet, virum severitatis laetissimae, hilaritatis
priscae, actu otiosis simillimum, nihil sibi vindican-
tem eoque adsequentem omnia, semperque infra
aliorum aestimationes se metientem, vultu vitaque
tranquillum, animo exsomnem.

2 Carvilium et mox M. Catonem, novum etiam Tusculo
urbis inquilinum, Mummiumque Achaicum in con-
sulatus, censuras et triumphos provexere, et qui C.

2 qui Fröhlich; eque A; om. P.

3 Tullio Lipsius ; Fulvio AP.


a Tacitus, Annals iv. 1, has a very different description.


brothers, cousins, and an uncle who had reached the
consulship. He himself combined with loyalty to
his master great capacity for labour, and possessed .
a well-knit body to match the energy of his mind; -
stern but yet gay, cheerful but yet strict ; busy, yet
always seeming to be at leisure. He is one who
claims no honours for himself and so acquires all
honours, whose estimate of himself is always below
the estimate of others, calm in expression and in his
life, though his mind is sleeplessly alert.?

CXXVIII. In the value set upon the character
of this man, the judgement of the whole state has
long vied with that of the emperor. Nor is it a new
fashion on the part of the senate and the Roman
people to regard as most noble that which is best.
For the Romans who, three centuries ago, in the
days before the Punic war, raised Tiberius
Coruncanius, a “ new man," to the first position in
the state, not only bestowing on him all the other
honours but the office of pontifex maximus as well;
and those who elevated to consulships, censorships,
and triumphs Spurius Carvilius, though born of
equestrian rank, and soon afterwards Marcus Cato,
though a new man and not a native of the city
but from Tusculum, and Mummius, who triumphed
over Achaia ; and those who regarded Gaius Marius,
though of obscure origin, as unquestionably the
first man of the Roman name until his sixth
consulship ; and those who yielded such honours to
Marcus Tullius that on his recommendation he
could secure positions of importance almost for any-
one he chose; and those who refused no honour
to Asinius Pollio, honours which could only be
earned, even by the noblest, by sweat and toil—


Y 321


4 exempli imitatio ad experiendum — Seianum
Caesarem, ad iuvanda vero onera principis Seianum
propulit! senatumque et populum Romanum eo
perduxit, ut, quod usu optimum intellegit, id in
tutelam securitatis suae libenter advocet.

1 CXXIX. Sed proposita quasi universa principatus
Ti. Caesaris forma? singula recenseamus. Qua ille
prudentia Rhascupolim, interemptorem fratris sui
filii Cotyis consortisque eiusdem imperii, Romam?
evocavit! Singulari in eo negotio usus opera Flacci
Pomponii consularis viri, nati ad omnia, quae recte
facienda sunt, simplicique virtute merentis semper,

1 propulit Acidalius ; protulit AP.
? forma added by Rhenanus.

3 Romam Ursinus; formam BAP.
* numquam Orelli ; quam AP.


5 causam Drusi Libonis audivit Madvig; et causas pressius
audit AP.


a n the death of Rhoemetalces, King of Thrace,
Augustus divided the kingdom between tys, son of
Rhoemetalces, and Rhascupolis, the king's brother. On
the death of Augustus, Rhascupolis had invaded his
nephew's kingdom, and subsequently, on the pretext of an
amicable adjustment, invited him to a conference, seized his
person, and later put him to death. When Tiberius
summoned him to Rome he began to collect an army. He


all these assuredly felt that the highest honours
should be paid to the man of merit. It was but the
natural following of precedent that impelled Caesar
to put Sejanus to the test, and that Sejanus was
induced to assist the emperor with his burdens, and
that brought the senate and the Roman people to
the point where they were ready to summon for
the preservation of its security the man whom they
regarded as the most useful instrument.

CXXIX. But having set before the reader a sort
of general outline of the principate of Caesar, let
us now review some of the details. With what
sagacity did he draw to Rome Rhascupolis,* the
slayer of his brother's son Cotys who shared the
throne with him; in this transaction Tiberius
employed the rare services of Flaccus Pomponius,
a consular, and a man born to carry out tasks
requiring accurate discrimination, and who by his
straightforward character always deserved glory
though he never sought it. With what dignity did
he listen to the trial of Drusus Libo, not in the
capacity of emperor, but as a senator and a judge!
How swiftly did he suppress that ingrate in his plot
for revolution! How well had Germanicus been
trained under his instructions, having so thoroughly
learned the rudiments of military science under
him that he was later to welcome him home as
conqueror of Germany ! What honours did he heap
upon him, young though he was, making the
magnificence of his triumph to correspond to the
was enticed into the Roman camp by Pomponius Flaccus,
propraetor of Illyria and sent to Rome. He was condemned


to exile at Alexandria, where an excuse was found for put-
ting him to death,


3 Quotiens populum congiariis honoravit senatorumque
censum, cum id senatu auctore facere potuit, quam
libenter explevit, ut neque luxuriam invitaret neque
honestam paupertatem pateretur dignitate destitui !
Quanto cum honore Germanicum suum in trans-
marinas misit provincias! Qua vi consiliorum suorum,
ministro et adiutore usus Druso filio suo, Marobo-
duum inhaerentem occupati regni finibus, pace
maiestatis eius dixerim, velut serpentem abstrusam
terrae salubribus! medicamentis coégit egredi!
Quam illum ut honorate, sic? secure continet!
Quantae molis bellum principe Galliarum ciente
Sacroviro Floroque Iulio mira celeritate ac virtute
compressit, ut ante populus Romanus vicisse se
quam bellare cognosceret nuntiosque periculi victoriae

4 praecederet nuntius! Magni etiam terroris bellum
Africum et cotidiano auctu maius auspiciis consiliisque
eius brevi sepultum est.

1 CXXX. Quanta suo suorumque nomine exstruxit
opera! Quam pia munificentia superque humanam
evecta fidem templum patri molitur! Quam magnifico
animi temperamento Cn. quoque Pompei munera
absumpta igni restituit! Quidquid enim umquam?
claritudine eminuit, id veluti cognatum censet
tuendum. Qua liberalitate cum alias, tum proxime
! consiliorum suorum after salubribus bracketed by Ruhnken.


9 A.D. 2l.


greatness of his deeds! How often did he honour
the people with largesses, and how gladly, whenever
he could do so with the senate's sanction, did he
raise to the required rating the fortunes of senators,
but in such a way as not to encourage extravagant
living, nor yet to allow senators to lose their rank
because of honest poverty! With what honours
did he send his beloved Germanicus to the provinces
across the seas! With what effective diplomacy,
carried out through the help and agency of his son
Drusus, did he force Maroboduus, who clung to the
limits of the territories he had seized as a serpent
to his hole, to come forth like the serpent under the
spell of his salutary charms—a simile which I use
with no disrespect to Caesar. With what honour
does he treat him while at the same time he holds
him securely ! With what wonderful swiftness and
courage did he repress the formidable war, stirred
up at the instigation of Sacrovir and Florus Julius,?
so that the Roman people learned that he had con-
quered before they knew he was engaged in war,
and the news of victory preceded the news of the
danger! The African war alscid tic. caused great
consternation and grew more fgdaughble every day,
was soon extinguished under his huspices and in
accordance with his plans.

CXXX. What public buildings did he construct
in his own name or that of his family ! With what
pious munificence, exceeding human belief, does he
now rear the temple to his father! With what a
magnificent control of personal feeling did he restore
the works of Gnaeus Pompey when destroyed by
fire! For a feeling of kinship leads him to protect
every famous monument. With what generosity at


2incenso monte Caelio omnis ordinis hominum
iacturae patrimonio succurrit suo! Quanta cum
quiete hominum rem perpetui praecipuique timoris,
supplementum, sine trepidatione dilectus providet !

| CXXXI. `= P^? '*5dum volumen est* Iuppiter
Capitoline S'$mplv"t ac stator Romani nominis
Gradive ? $ 3 ".rpetuorumque custos Vesta ignium


! audeo C .£. deis Heinsius ; auro deo cum de his AP.
? infestos haberet quorum supplied by Burman.
3 duxit Rhenanus ; dixit AP.
4 est Orelli ; sit AP.


a Agrippina, the wife of Germanicus, adopted son of
Tiberius, banished to Pandataria in a.p. 30, where she died,
in a.D. 33, of voluntary starvation; and Nero, the son of
to BADIUS and Agrippina, who was banished to the island
of Pontia.


the time of the recent fire on the Caelian Hill, as
well as on other occasions, did he use his private
fortune to make good the losses of people of all
ranks in life! And the recruiting of the army, a
thing ordinarily looked upon with great and constant
dread, with what calm on the part of the people does
he provide for it, and without any of the usual panic
attending conscription! If either nature permits,
or man’s weak faculties allow, I may dare to make
this plaint to the gods: How has this man deserved,
in the first place, to have Drusus Libo enter upon a
traitorous conspiracy against him, or later to earn
the hostility of Silius and Piso, though in the one
ease he created his rank, and in the other he in-
creased it? Passing on to greater trials—although
he regarded these as great enough—how did he
deserve the loss of his sons in their prime or of his
grandson, the son of Drusus? Thus far I have told
of sorrows only, we must now come to the shame.
With what pain, Marcus Vinicius, have the past
three years rent his heart! With what fire, the more
cruel because pent up, was his soul consumed because
of the grief, the indignation, and the shame he was
forced to suffer through his daughter-in-law and
his grandson!* His sorrow at this time was crowned
by the loss of his mother, a woman pre-eminent
among women, and who in all things resembled the
gods more than mankind, whose power no one felt
except for the alleviation of trouble or the promotion
of rank.

CXXXI. Let me end my volume with a prayer.
O Jupiter Capitolinus, and Mars Gradivus, author
and stay of the Roman name, Vesta, guardian of
the eternal fire, and all other divinities who have


et quidquid numinum hanc Romani imperii molem

in amplissimum terrarum orbis fastigium extulit, vos

publica voce obtestor atque precor: custodite,

servate, protegite hunc statum, hanc pacem, hunc
2 principem,! eique functo longissima statione mortali

destinate successores quam serissimos, sed eos,

quorum cervices tam fortiter sustinendo terrarum

orbis imperio sufficiant, quam huius suffecisse

sensimus, consiliaque omnium civium aut pia fovete

aut impia opprimite.?

! hunc principem added by Lipsius.
? fovete . . . opprimite supplied by Voss.


exalted this great empire of Rome to the highest
point yet reached on earth! On you I call, and to
you I pray in the name of this people: guard,
preserve, protect the present state of things, the
peace which we enjoy, the present emperor, and .
when he has filled his post of duty—and may it
be the longest granted to mortals—grant him
successors until the latest time, but successors whose
shoulders may be as capable of sustaining bravely
the empire of the world as we have found his to be:
foster the pious plans of all good citizens and crush ~
